A 68-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital due to an incidental finding of a right renal mass during a hospital stay in the orthopedic department 10 days ago. The patient reports no discomfort, fever, pain, or hematuria. She has well-controlled hypertension for 20 years with metoprolol. No history of chronic illnesses or elevated blood glucose treatment.

Enhanced CT showed a right renal mass with associated hydronephrosis, located at the renal hilum, measuring approximately 63.30 × 52.07 mm, with clear margins and heterogeneous enhancement during the contrast phase. Imaging findings were consistent with a malignant renal tumor, staged as T1bN0M0. Multiple small cysts were observed in the left kidney, without any obvious masses. Angiography revealed that the inferior vena cava (IVC) was located to the left of the aorta, and the right renal vein was significantly longer than the left renal vein. The right ovarian vein drained into the right renal vein and then into the IVC. Preoperative renal function was good, with an eGFR-epi of 94.27 ml/min/1.73 m2, right kidney GFR of 16.81 ml/min/1.73 m2, and serum creatinine of 51.01 μmol/L. Cardiopulmonary function was normal, and after evaluation, a right nephrectomy was planned.

During operation, the right renal mass was found at the renal hilum, with dense adhesions to the surrounding fat and tissues. The IVC was located to the left, and the right renal vein was notably longer. The right ovarian vein traveled alongside the ureter and drained into the right renal vein before flowing into the IVC. Intraoperative blood loss was estimated at 220 ml, and the surgery lasted approximately 100 minutes. The resected specimen measured 10 x 6 × 5 cm, and the tumor was approximately 5 cm in diameter, located at the renal hilum. On postoperative day 5, the retroperitoneal drain was removed without any incidents.

On postoperative day 7, routine blood tests were normal, with an eGFR-epi of 83.93 ml/min/1.73 m2 and serum creatinine of 64.98 μmol/L, the patient has been discharged following a successful course of treatment. After the three-months follow-up, both eGFR-epi and serum creatinine were within normal ranges.