It is a seven-year-old male patient, native and from Popayán (Cauca). The parents denied consanguinity and exposure to teratogens. The father was a healthy 32-year-old man and the mother a healthy 23-year-old woman with a history of two pregnancies and two births; her first daughter was born healthy.

The patient was a product of a second pregnancy, unplanned, with no history of preconception care. She received early prenatal care from the fourth week, six check-ups in total; her micronutrient intake was adequate. She had four obstetric ultrasounds, with no abnormal findings.

The patient was born at 38 weeks of pregnancy by vaginal delivery in a health institution; his birth weight was 3,340 g, his height was 51 cm and the Apgar score was adequate. He presented non-haemolytic neonatal jaundice lasting 45 days, with bilirubin values between 5.4 and 12.8 mg/dl, for which he received phototherapy. However, he presented neonatal hypoglycaemia, cyanosis and hypotonia; and, in addition, respiratory difficulty due to pneumonia and early neonatal sepsis.

On the other hand, at 14 days of age, she presented dystonic movements in both hands, four to five times a day, without loss of consciousness, which were diagnosed as convulsive episodes. At the beginning of lactation, severe and frequent episodes of sleep apnoea were observed; there was also persistence of generalised hypotonia, several episodes of aspiration pneumonia and swallowing disorders.

Clinical findings
At the 6-year physical examination, anthropometric measures were: weight, 21 kg; height, 116 cm; height-for-age, 0 to -1 SD; BMI-for-age, 0 + 1 SD; arm span, 108 cm; expected minus total (E-T) score = -8; pubic-to-head segment, 58 cm; pubic-to-toe segment, 59 cm; SS/SI, 0.98; and head circumference, 52 cm.

The following morphological characteristics were observed: brachycephaly, right occipital plagiocephaly, low-set auricles, oval face, bilateral endoforia, pseudo-strabismus, bilateral epicanthal fold, ocular hypertelorism, intercanal distance of 40 mm, intercanal distance of 140 mm, photoreactive isochoric pupils, nose without deviation of the nasal septum, normal nasal bridge, 20 mm nasolabial filter or groove, tongue and uvula without alterations, high palate, dental diastema and dental enamel of regular quality. In addition, he presented: pectus excavatum, normal abdomen and right lumbar scoliosis; redundant foreskin and descended testicles; mobile, symmetrical and hypotonic limbs; right hand with single flexion fold, and bilateral flat foot.

On neurologic examination, the patient was alert with motor aphasia (speaking in gibberish); there was no evidence of hearing impairment and most cranial nerves were normal except for bilateral cranial nerve VI. There was convergent psuedostrabismus and axial predominant hypotonia with reflexes present (++); he required assistance with ambulation, had 3/5 strength in all limbs, had preserved sensation and had no urinary incontinence.

Molecular diagnosis
At the age of five, the full exome was sequenced and a heterozygous, probably pathogenic variant was identified in exon 1 of the PURA gene: c.692T>C (p.Phe231Ser).
