A 43-year-old man who began to have episodes of generalized weakness in relation to intense emotions and certain physical activities, such as walking on tiptoes, jumping or turning suddenly. He also developed excessive daytime sleepiness and the need to take naps, which were only occasionally restorative.

The excessive daytime sleepiness and nighttime sleep quality scales showed pathological daytime sleepiness and poor nighttime sleep quality, and the ESS score was 19 and the total PSQI score was 7. Neuroimaging and EEG with wake and sleep activity did not show pathological findings. Blood and urine tests, including autoimmunity and anti-neuronal antibodies, were normal. The cerebrospinal fluid showed orexin levels of less than 50 pg/mL. The integrated video-recorded polysomnographic study did not show findings of interest. The next day, the multiple sleep latency test was performed with four 20-minute daytime naps separated by two hours, and a mean latency of 1.52 minutes and two REM sleep entries were obtained.

After the diagnosis of narcolepsy type 1 with severe hypersomnolence was made, he was prescribed increasing doses of venlafaxine and modafinil. In addition, he was given a guide with sleep hygiene guidelines adapted to his needs. Despite these measures, the patient did not perceive adequate control of the symptoms and was inevitably forced to abandon certain sports and social habits. In the following months, excessive daytime sleepiness worsened and cataplexy attacks became more frequent and occurred in response to emotionally neutral stimuli. Therefore, the dose of both medicines was increased and sodium oxybate was associated. Nevertheless, the response to treatment was still insufficient. Subsequently, venlafaxine was discontinued due to adverse effects (nausea, tiredness, episodes of confusion and altered memory and attention) and was replaced with clomipramine, of which a daily dose of 75 mg was reached. With this therapeutic scheme, adequate control was achieved for 19 months. From that moment on, the symptoms began to exacerbate and parasomnias appeared as a side effect of sodium oxybate.

Given the refractoriness of the disease to treatment, it was decided to associate pitolisant. To avoid drug interactions, a dose of 4.5 mg was started and a slow progressive increase was made until 18 mg per day. From that moment a frank improvement was evident, both of excessive daytime sleepiness and cataplexy, and a decrease in the score on the ESS and PSQI scales was observed (12 and 6, respectively). The patient returned to his previous lifestyle and recovered abandoned sports and social activities. After a few months of stability, the dose of clomipramine and modafinil could be reduced without clinical worsening.
