A 68-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital on January 10, 2022 owing to a history of progressive weakness and numbness of the limbs for over 7 years. The patient had initially presented with numbness and swelling pain in his toes 7 years prior, followed by the development of glove and stocking-like changes in the limbs, limb weakness, and instability when walking. Despite the successive administration of neurotrophic and immunoregulatory treatments, his condition continued to progress. Two years ago, he presented with bradycardia and gastrointestinal dysfunction. One month ago, he developed paresthesia below T10, urinary retention, and orthostatic hypotension occurred 1 month ago. He presented to our hospital after the development of pulmonary embolism, heart failure, renal insufficiency, respiratory and urinary system infections, and other symptoms. He reported having no history of heavy metal or poison exposure, and his past and family history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed a supine blood pressure of 130/70 mmHg and a standing blood pressure of 80/47 mmHg. The proximal muscle strength of his bilateral upper limbs was grade IV, his distal muscle strength was grade III, and the muscle strength of both lower limbs was grade III. Numbness at the distal end of both elbow joints and below chest 10 was evident together with hypoesthesia. Cardiac color Doppler ultrasonography revealed a rough myocardial ecco with some spot-like changes potentially consistent with amyloidosis. Biopsy samples of skin from the abdominal wall and lower right extremity did not reveal any deposition of an apple-green substance under polarized light. Genetic testing revealed a heterozygous mutation in exon 2 of TTR c.148G > A (p.Val30Met). As related examinations excluded other diseases, the patient was diagnosed with TTR-FAP with spinal cord damage. The patient’s condition gradually worsened, and he had malignant arrhythmia. After being transferred to the intracardiac intensive care unit, he was treated with drugs and a pacemaker and was discharged. Oral clofenadifen soft capsules were provided for treatment after discharge. The patient ultimately died of heart failure 7.5 years after initial symptom onset.