The patient was a 75-year-old Chinese woman who was a farmer from Yongzhou City, Hunan Province, China. A total of 2 months prior, the patient presented with symptoms of dizziness, poor appetite, poor sleep, and weakness in the limbs without any obvious cause. The patient gradually worsened and was diagnosed with chronic atrophic gastritis with Helicobacter pylori (Hp) positivity, hypoproteinemia, and IDA. Moreover, left atrial enlargement and left ventricular diastolic dysfunction were diagnosed via echocardiography.

The results of routine blood tests were as follows: a red blood cell (RBC) count of 1.84 × 1012/L, hematocrit level of 13%, platelet count of 500 × 109/L, hemoglobin level of 35 g/L (critical value), mean corpuscular volume of 70.7 fL, total protein level of 44.6 g/L, eosinophil ratio of 5.3%, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 25 mm/h, immunoglobulin (Ig)E level of 1282.2 IU/ml, serum Fe level of 3.85 μmol/L, and positive fecal occult blood test result. Her bone marrow cytomorphologic examination revealed active proliferation of the granulocyte, megakaryocyte, and myeloid cell series. A flow cytometry examination did not indicate the abnormal immunophenotypes indicative of acute leukemia, MDS, lymphoma, or myeloid tumors. Gastrointestinal endoscopy showed live nematodes in the descending portion of the patient’s duodenum. The patient was treated with leukocyte-reduced red blood cells to correct severe anemia and the antihelminthic albendazole. After treatment, her hemoglobin level was confirmed to be 77 g/L. During follow-up visits, the patient successfully underwent antihelminthic treatment, and her anemia was cured.

Imaging and morphological examination
To rule out gastrointestinal disease, the patient underwent gastrointestinal endoscopy. Live nematodes were discovered feeding on the mucosa of the descending portion of the patient’s duodenum. Hookworm eggs were found in the stool via saturated brine flotation. Therefore, the patient ultimately was diagnosed with severe IDA caused by hookworm infection.