A 10-month-old Sudanese male infant was brought to our pediatric immunology department with a history of fever and recurrent chest infections for the past six months. His parents are 1st degree consanguineous. There is a family history of recurrent chest infections requiring hospitalizations and intravenous antibiotics, along with recurrent oral thrush. The family reported three infantile deaths due to undiagnosed febrile illness as well as recurrent febrile illness with convulsions. The proband had received all vaccinations recommended for his age. On physical examination, he appeared very ill with respiratory distress, and he required oxygen therapy at five liters/minute via face mask to maintain normal oxygen saturation. The patient’s weight was below the 3rd percentile, while his height and head circumference were on the 10th and 25th percentiles, respectively. His abdomen was slightly distended, and hepatomegaly was noted, with a palpable liver at two centimeters below the costal margin. Bilateral wheezing with poor air entry was noted during chest examination. Examination of the BCG vaccine site revealed a discharging sinus with an enlarged axillary lymph node on the same side, measuring 3 × 2.5 cm; chest X-ray showed bilateral pneumonic infiltrates, while abdominal ultrasound was normal apart from an enlarged liver.

Investigations
The possibility of disseminated BCG infection with probable immunodeficiency was discussed as a potential diagnosis for this patient. Smears from gastric lavage fluid were collected over two consecutive days, were negative for acid-fast bacilli. However, the fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) tissue (lymph-node) displayed caseating granuloma, and both blood and sputum polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using two primers (IS6110 & mtp40) were positive to M. tuberculosis complex, most likely M. bovis based on the patient’s history and examination findings. Further workup revealed a normocytic-normochromic red blood cell count of 8.9 g/dL, and Immunophenotyping analysis.

Materials and Methods
A blood sample from the patient was sent for the INVITAE platform to test for 429 genes in the primary immunodeficiency (PID) panel using Illumina technology. This comprehensive genetic testing panel was used to identify various genetic variants associated with SCIDs. Protein functions were predicted in response to missense variants using the SIFT, PolyPhen-2, and Align-GVGD algorithms. After the result emerged, we mutated the normal-human ZAP70 protein obtained from uniport with the ZAP70 variants identified in the patient’s result, here, we created a comparative bioinformatic analysis, and 3D homology modeling of ZAP70 protein structures using SWISS-MODEL, while Chimera 1.16 software was used to visualize the protein and its affected domain, and the mutated protein sequence was illustrated and compared to wild type using Jalview 2.11 software.

Genetic Results
The panel test result reported 17 gene variants of uncertain significance (VUS), including compound heterozygous (trans) missense variants in exons 7 and 8 of ZAP70 (c.833C > T, p.Thr278Ile, and c.871G > A, p.Gly291Arg, respectively), both are affecting interdomain B region of the protein. These ZAP70 variants are on opposite chromatids and are associated with autosomal recessive SCID (MedGen UID: 376544). Accordingly, we proposed a diagnosis of ZAP70 deficiency based on compound biallelic variants affecting the ZAP70 gene, which was confirmed by platform-targeted exome sequencing and computational analysis of the gene.

The first sequence change replaces threonine, which is a small polar, neutral side chain, with isoleucine: a non-polar, large, aliphatic, and hydrophobic amino acid (p.Thr278Ile). This variant is exceedingly rare in population databases. The second variant causes a replacement of glycine, which is a non-polar tiny amino acid with no side chain, with arginine: a basic, polar, large amino acid with a positively charged side chain, at codon 291 of the ZAP70 protein. This variant is unavailable in population databases (gnomAD AF 0) and may disrupt the consensus splice site.

The American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) verdicts for both variants are uncertain significance, since no ZAP70 deficiency patients have been reported with them, and there is no functional evidence of pathogenicity; however, the patient’s clinical phenotype is consistent with ZAP70 deficiency. Moreover, the panel identified other heterozygous genetic mutations in several genes including C8B, CD59, CR2, CTC1, DEF6, DOCK8, DUOX2, LYST, MCM4, PARN, UNC13D, and ZNF341, also, the patient has hemizygous G6PD and TLR7 variants. However, aside from the ZAP70 variants, the remaining genetic variations are VUS and do not align with the patient’s clinical phenotypes.

Treatment
The patient was initiated on a combination therapy of Isoniazid, Rifampicin, and Ethambutol with Levofloxacin, as well as on regular intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) replacement and Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis, which led to excellent response and good weight gain. The patient now is free from infections and is planned for 36 months of BCG-related infection treatments.