A 37-year-old Caucasian woman, 35 weeks pregnant with a history of two previous miscarriages, began to have profuse epistaxis from the left nostril. She was brought to the emergency room of the local hospital, and the patient was hemodynamically unstable, and the monitoring was consistent with severe fetal distress, which led to an emergency cesarean section. During the induction of anesthesia, a focal convulsion (attributed to the induction of anesthesia in the context of severe hypovolemic shock with cerebral hypoperfusion) occurred. The patient continued to epistaxis, receiving five units of packed red blood cells and one unit of fresh frozen plasma over 2 days. Due to failure to control the epistaxis with a local hemostatic balloon, she was transferred to a tertiary hospital for angiography and possible embolization. During this period, she did not show any change in mental status and maintained hemodynamic stability, with the hemostatic balloon in place.

The first angiography was performed using 50mL of low-osmolarity, organic non-ionic contrast medium, administered into the internal and external carotid arteries. Abnormal vascular flushing was observed in the left nasal cavity, dependent on branches of the sphenopalatine artery, and embolisation was performed. However, epistaxis returned shortly afterwards, and 2 hours later, a new angiography was performed, in which the existence of residual vascular flushing was excluded, confirming the success of the first embolisation. The total non-ionic contrast used in both angiographies was 90mL. Local tamponade in the left nasal cavity was maintained.

Shortly after the second angiography, in the post-anaesthetic recovery room, the patient began to show signs of disorientation, with sleepy speech, but without formal visual complaints or motor deficits. Within 2 hours of the second procedure, the patient was awake, but crying continuously, developed hyperventilation, could not obey orders, could not fix her gaze and had repetitive, unintelligible speech, without the ability to formulate sentences. She was hemodynamically stable, afebrile and without meningeal signs. She was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) due to clinical evolution and the possible need for airway protection, in a context of acute confusional state without known cause.

The patient's agitation and lack of cooperation made it impossible to adequately assess language, thought content, or mood, so that a possible aphasia could not be ruled out at that time. A formal psychiatric evaluation within a few hours of the onset ruled out these possibilities, as well as the more common postpartum psychosis (PPP). There were no motor deficits, changes in cranial nerves, or other focal signs suggestive of extensive focal neurologic injury. Given the acute presentation, an MRI was performed to assess possible complications of the angiography, and a lumbar puncture was performed to exclude infectious or inflammatory disease of the central nervous system. An electroencephalogram was also performed.

The MRI examination showed a small hyperintense focus on the diffusion-weighted image at the level of the white matter of the left corona radiata, with hypointensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient map and discrete hypointensity on the fluid attenuated inversion recovery. There was also edema in the posterior temporal-occipital-parietal cortex bilaterally with discrete hyperintensity on the fluid attenuated recovery but without diffusion restriction suggesting vasogenic edema. The cerebrospinal fluid was clear with normal opening pressure and had four cells per field, glucose of 72 mg/dL, protein of 53 mg/dL and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of < 30 IU/L. The polymerase chain reaction was negative for an extensive panel of neurotropic viruses; all bacterial cultures were negative. There were no electrolyte disturbances, and the systemic tests for autoimmunity were negative.

The EEG had predominantly theta activity in the posterior projection, beta in the anterior and infrequent theta-delta in the frontotemporal region, with left-sided dominance, sometimes with rhythmic morphology followed by baseline suppression. The EEG revealed diffuse slowing of basal electrogenesis to a moderate degree. There was slow activity in the left frontotemporal hemisphere with a few associated paroxysmal components, but mild and non-continuous.

Sedative analgesia and mechanical ventilation were maintained for 2 days, with withdrawal after clinical stabilisation as well as MRI and EEG results to exclude additional brain damage, which might require a different treatment.

The patient was extubated and had a very poor vocabulary (maximum 40 words), without focal deficits. In less than 24 hours, a progressive improvement in speech and rational content was observed, without other changes in the examinations. Renal function always remained normal.

A new MRI was performed 48 hours after the first one, showing few millimetric and diffuse bilateral cortical/subcortical lesions, probably related to the previous angiography. There was a complete resolution of the posterior cortical oedema. The rest of the brain parenchyma was without other relevant changes in the evolution of the signs.

The patient did very well clinically with a rapid recovery of speech and all neurological deficits. The tamponade was removed on day 3 and the patient was discharged 5 days after the cesarean.
