A 31-year-old primigravida with an uncomplicated pregnancy presented in spontaneous labour at full-term. She has a history of recovered eating disorder and secondary amenorrhoea because of low body weight, necessitating conception through in vitro fertilization. Her family history revealed no predisposition to thrombotic events.

Following the delivery of a healthy daughter through assisted forceps vaginal delivery, she immediately developed haemorrhagic shock due to retained placenta. This required a massive transfusion protocol comprising 5 L of intravenous fluids, six units of packed red cell concentrates, two units of fresh frozen plasma, one pool of platelets, and 2 g of tranexamic acid. Additionally, she was given intramuscular ergometrine and intrauterine carboprost. As she became more haemodynamically unstable with an arterial lactate of 8 mmol/L (0.4–1.3 mmol/L) and haemoglobin of 7.3 g/dL (12–16 g/dL), she was urgently intubated and transferred to theatre for delivery of the retained placenta.

She was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit for multi-organ support following the development of disseminated intravascular coagulation characterized by thrombocytopaenia [59 × 109/L (150–450 × 109/L)], decreased fibrinogen levels of 1.3 g/L (1.7–4.1 g/L), increased prothrombin time of 17.2 s (9.8–11.3 s), and activated partial thromboplastin time of 117 s (21–29 s) with a significantly raised d-dimer of 35 mg/L (normal < 0.5 mg/L). Two days later, upon extubation, she exhibited difficulties in following commands and was diagnosed with speech apraxia by the stroke team. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed acute extensive ischaemia involving both cerebral hemispheres and the cerebellum. There was a large area of cortical infarction in the right parietal lobe and additional infarcts in the frontal lobes, caudate nuclei, and left thalamus. The pattern of cortical involvement with subcortical sparring raised the possibility of a reversible vasoconstriction syndrome.

Her electrocardiogram became noticeably abnormal with diffuse T-wave inversions. A high-sensitivity troponin-I was recorded at 37 000 ng/L (normal < 16 ng/L). Transthoracic echocardiography showed severe left ventricular (LV) systolic impairment, apical akinesia, and visible mobile echogenicity suggestive of thrombi. Therapeutic low-molecular weight heparin was initiated alongside heart failure (HF) therapy. One week later, she suffered from a second stroke due an acute middle cerebral artery (MCA) occlusion, resulting in aphasia and right-sided hemiparesis which required an emergency thrombectomy. Focused contrast-echocardiography revealed only small residual apical thrombus. Cardiovascular MRI showed late-gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the inferior and inferoseptal segments of the akinetic LV apex, consistent with infarction. LV ejection fraction was 35%–40%.

Cardiac catheterization excluded spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD) and confirmed the presence of normal coronary arteries. Despite the established safety of provocative testing, the patient expressed significant concerns about the risks and potential complications of inducing coronary vasospasm. Therefore, we decided to perform only a diagnostic coronary angiogram on that day, prioritizing patient’s wishes while still achieving diagnostic objectives.

After three weeks of hospitalization with extensive multi-disciplinary input, her speech and motor abilities significantly improved. Her thrombophilia profile was unremarkable, including normal levels of antithrombin, protein C, and protein S along with a negative antiphospholipid screen. Additionally, there was no evidence of Factor V Leiden or prothrombin G20210A gene mutations. She was discharged on isosorbide mononitrate, oral anticoagulation, and maximum-tolerated HF therapy including ramipril 1.25 mg, spironolactone 12.5 mg, dapagliflozin 10 mg, and bisoprolol 2.5 mg once daily. A clinic review two months later confirmed full recovery of motor function. Follow-up echocardiography revealed a significant improvement in LV ejection fraction (45%–50%) with complete resolution of the LV thrombus.