We describe the case of a 52-year-old Caucasian female patient. Her cardiovascular risk factors were dyslipidemia and that she was overweight. She had no previous surgeries. She reported two full-term pregnancies and one abortion and had a negative family history of thrombophilia.

She had suffered an ischemic stroke three years prior to the admission, due to atrial fibrillation. On that occasion, transthoracic echocardiography revealed moderate/severe mitral regurgitation. Amiodarone-induced hyperthyroidism also occurred. In the following months, while presenting progressive and complete neurologic recovery she had a rapid progression of mitral regurgitation and dyspnea such that surgery was indicated.

Medications prior to admission included warfarin, tapazole, furosemide, potassium canrenoate and bisoprolol.

The surgical procedure consisted of mitral valve repair with a Carpentier-Edwards Physio II annuloplasty ring, tricuspid valve repair with a Medtronic Contour 3D annuloplasty ring and left atrial appendage exclusion with atriclip pro device, performed via right mini-thoracotomy access.

The immediate postoperative course was regular. The patient was discharged from the intensive care unit on postoperative day (POD) 2 in excellent clinical condition.

In accordance with our anticoagulation protocol, 5000 IU of subcutaneous UFH three times a day was reintroduced on POD 1, while oral warfarin was also started on POD 2 aiming for a target international normalized ratio (INR) between 2 and 3.

On POD 6, subcutaneous heparin was discontinued because the INR was already within the therapeutic range (2.5). On the same day a fever occurred. Consequently, the central venous catheter was removed, and the tip and blood samples were collected for culture. A transthoracic echo ruled out endocarditis. A few days later, two blood cultures tested positive for staphylococcus epidermidis.

On POD 7, the patient had thrombocytopenia (34 × 109/L from 267 × 109/L on POD 5), and a 1 mg/dl decrease in her Hb level. Therefore, since the INR was already 2.6, warfarin was suspended, and vitamin K was administered (5 mg).

On POD 9, a floating mass on the mitral annulus became visible on both transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography while PLT count reached the nadir of 21 × 109/L.

The urgent indication for redo surgery was decided upon. While antibiotics were started (piperacillin/tazobactam and vancomycin), HIT suspicion also arose because of a 4T score of 5.

Therefore, an immunoglobulin (Ig)G-specific anti-PF4–heparin chemiluminescent immunoassay (CLIA) was ordered, and the alternative anticoagulant fondaparinux (7.5 mg once a day) was initiated and maintained until the day before surgery. CLIA test resulted positive for PF4/heparin antibodies (8.9 U/mL), and the heparin-induced platelet activation assay (HIPA) confirmed HIT diagnosis on POD 10.

Redo operation was performed on POD 12. Bivalirudin was the anticoagulant of choice for cardiopulmonary bypass, as had been successfully done in the past in similar cases. Unexpectedly, a voluminous thrombotic mass was removed from the patient’s left atrium (further confirmed as a thrombus by histologic examination and by a negative culture exam). The diagnosis of HIT with thrombosis (HITT) was therefore clear, and alternative anticoagulation therapy with bivalirudin at therapeutic dose was resumed in the postoperative period as soon as bleeding became negligible.

The patient was weaned from the ventilator on POD 2. On POD 4, after removal of the chest tubes, bivalirudin was discontinued, and danaparoid was initiated. Two subcutaneous (750 U) doses were administered first; thereafter, endovenous infusion was started at 396 U/h for the first 4 hours, 297 U/h for the next 4 hours and then 198 U/h. Danaparoid was monitored daily through its plasmatic anti-Xa activity.

On POD 15, a right pleural effusion occurred, which was drained in the following days. Therefore, planning thoracentesis, danaparoid was temporarily discontinued. Danaparoid anti-Xa activity was monitored every 12 hours until it reached the prophylactic range target (0.1–0.2 U/mL).

Thoracentesis was performed on POD 17, 38 hours after danaparoid suspension when anti-Xa activity was 0.14 U/mL. The drug was resumed 2 hours after the uncomplicated procedure (180 U/h and 162 U/h the following day) once procedural complications were excluded. The anti-Xa activity target was then set at the lowest level of the therapeutic range (0.45 U/mL).

On POD 18, when the anti-Xa activity was 0.39 U/mL, and the platelet (PLT) count had substantially recovered (160 × 109/L), the switch from danaparoid to vitamin K antagonist (VKA) was initiated. The first warfarin dose (5 mg) was administered starting from an INR 1.1. Over the next five days, the INR and the administered warfarin dose were as follows: 1.2 and 6.25 mg, 1.4 and 6.25 mg, 1.9 and 6.25 mg, 2.1 and 6.25 mg, and 2.8 and 3.75 mg, respectively.

On POD 20, after 66 hours from warfarin initiation, danaparoid infusion was stopped while plasma anti-Xa activity was 0.54 U/mL. Two days after discontinuation, the measured danaparoid activity was 0.09, while INR was 2.8.

The patient was successfully discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 35 (POD 48 from the first operation) in good clinical condition. The PLT count was then 173 × 109/L. The INR was 3.2. The serum creatinine concentration was 0.64 mg/dl.