This is a case of a 23-year-old male with an unremarkable medical history who was referred with unexplained dyspnea. Prior to his current illness, he was in good health and had no difficulty performing daily activities. Both of his parents had diabetes, and his grandfather passed away from a heart attack at the age of 74. Additionally, upon further review of his family history, we discovered that the patient’s uncle has a history of acromegaly.

The patient’s condition started 2 weeks prior to admission when he started complaining of fever, nasal congestion, and rhinorrhea. Three days later, he started complaining of vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. After being admitted to the internal medicine ward, we were consulted for marked palpitations, dyspnea, and orthopnea.

During the examination, his temperature was slightly elevated at 37.9°C, blood pressure of 150/90 mmHg, heart rate was 110/min, and respiratory rate was 22/min. Auscultation revealed fine basal lung crepitations with bilateral mild expiratory rhonchi. Additionally, an early diastolic murmur was detected. His neck veins were congested, yet not pulsating, and there was no lower limb edema or ascites.

Laboratory findings were notable for an elevated level of Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP) (340 pg/mL). Additional findings included bilateral mild pleural effusion and cardiomegaly observed in the chest X-ray. The ECG revealed sinus tachycardia with inverted T waves in leads V3 and V4. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a mildly dilated and hypertrophied left ventricle (LV), slightly impaired LV systolic function with an ejection fraction of 48% by M-mode, impaired diastolic function, moderate mitral valve regurgitation, and severe aortic valve regurgitation. The aortic root was markedly dilated, with diameters of 3.2 cm at the annulus, 4.9 cm at the sinus of Valsalva, and 7.5 cm at the Sino tubular junction (STJ).

Consequently, CT aortography was performed, confirming the echocardiographic measurements of the aortic root diameters. Moreover, it revealed dilation of the ascending aorta with a diameter of 10 cm and the descending aorta with a diameter of 2.5 cm. The patient was initiated on the following medications: Furosemide (20 mg every 8 hours), Ramipril (1.25 mg once daily), and Empagliflozin (10 mg once daily). Within 10 days, the patient experienced slight improvement in symptoms, particularly dyspnea, and reported better sleep. A follow-up chest X-ray showed partial resolution of the pleural effusion.

Initially, we considered connective tissue disease like Marfan or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. However, the patient lacked the typical physical features and associated signs of these conditions. Additionally, his pulmonary function test was normal, which would likely be abnormal in a multisystem connective tissue disorder. Laboratory results showed normal ESR and C-reactive protein levels, reducing the likelihood of vasculitis as a cause of the aortic root dilatation. The autoimmune panel, including ANA and RF tests, was also negative.

Acromegaly was then considered as the potential cause of LV hypertrophy and aortic root dilation, especially considering his family history of the condition. Therefore, insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) level was ordered and was elevated (320 ng/ml), and the GH level remained above normal (1.1 ng/ml) after an oral glucose tolerance test confirming the diagnosis of acromegaly. A T2-weighted brain MRI image showed a 7 × 4 mm hyperintense mass in the Sella turcica, consistent with a pituitary microadenoma.

Subsequently, the surgery decision was taken after obtaining consent from the patient. Following a normal coronary angiography, the patient underwent a composite graft replacement procedure, involving the aortic valve, aortic root, and ascending aorta (Bentall Procedure). A mechanical valve was utilized, and the patient began taking Warfarin at a daily dose of 3 mg, with close monitoring to achieve a target INR of 2 to 3.

Following consultation with the endocrinologist, the patient began receiving monthly injections of Octreotide acetate. A comprehensive follow-up plan was established, which included monitoring the functioning of the valve, assessing LV function, ensuring medication compliance, and checking IGF-1 and INR values. Apart from mild exertional dyspnea, he remained asymptomatic for 8 weeks after the surgery. During this period, follow-up echocardiograms showed the replaced aortic valve functioning normally without any leakage or dysfunction. The aortic root and ascending aorta were also stable, with no signs of dilation, aneurysm, or other complications. There was no progression of his LV hypertrophy either. His most recent IGF-1 level was 290 ng/ml which is mildly reduced than the first, and he has been maintained on Octreotide without significant adverse effects.