A 55-year-old Asian man, who was taking treatment irregularly (patient was non-compliant) for DCMP for last 6 months came with complaints of dyspnoea on exertion for 1 week and decreased urine output for 2 days. The patient was apparently well 1 week ago when he started to develop shortness of breath, insidious onset, gradually progressive, initially New York Heart Association (NYHA) grade II but progressed to NYHA grade IV associated with heaviness of chest. History of orthopnoea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea was present. This was associated with cough with a moderate amount of frothy, non-purulent expectoration. The patient also complained of swelling of bilateral lower limbs. No history of periorbital puffiness, frothy urine or haematuria. There was no history of palpitation, syncope, chest pain or haemoptysis. The patient also gave a history of a tingling sensation of both hands and feet for 1 month.

The patient had similar episode 6 months ago for which he was hospitalised and managed conservatively as a case of DCMP. He had cataract surgery both eyes 15 years ago.

On general physical examination, the patient was conscious and oriented to time, place and person and afebrile with a blood pressure of 90/60 mm Hg in the right arm in supine position and pulse rate 110/min which was low volume and all peripheral pulses were palpable. He was tachypnoeic with a respiratory rate of 28/min and pallor was present. He had B/L pedal oedema which was slow pitting type with raised jugular venous pressure (JVP). No icterus, cyanosis, clubbing, lymphadenopathy was seen. While measuring blood pressure, the patient started having carpal spasm which gave us a clue to examine further revealing a positive Chvostek sign. Trousseau’s sign was also positive at 10 s.

Cardiovascular system (CVS) examination revealed Apex beat localised in left sixth intercostal space 1 cm outside the mid-clavicular line, hyperdynamic in character. S1 and S2 were heard normally in all the areas.

Respiratory system examination revealed reduced air entry in bilateral lung bases with fine end-inspiratory crepitation bilaterally. Abdominal and central nervous system examination was unremarkable.


Investigations

At the time of admission, ECG showed complete left bundle branch block (LBBB) with a prolonged QT interval. Haemoglobin was 58 g/L (133–162) with dimorphic picture. Mean corpuscular volume was 110 fL (80.0–100.0 fL), mean corpuscular haemoglobin was 34 pg (27.0–32.0 pg), mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration was 36.2 g/dL (32.0–35.0 g/dL). Further workup revealed serum vitamin B12 levels of 135 pg/mL (211–911 pg/mL). Serum folic acid was 5.40 ng/mL (>5.38 ng/mL). Blood urea was 53 mg/dL (10–50) with creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL (0.7–1.3). Liver function tests (LFTs) were within normal limits. Calcium profile showed S.calcium 4.3 mg/dL (8.5–10.5), phosphate 7.1 mg/dL (2.5–4.5), S.albumin 3.06 g/dL (3.5–5.5). In view of hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia, intact parathyroid hormone level was done, which came out to be <0.23 pg/mL (14–72). S.magnesium was 2.0 mg/dL (1.7–2.2). Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis was suggestive of mild metabolic acidosis. Thyroid profile and IgAtTG levels were within normal limits. Serum ferritin and ceruloplasmin levels were within normal limits. Ultrasound abdomen and chest showed B/L pleural effusion in the supine position. Inferior venacava (IVC) and hepatic veins were prominent. Rest within normal limits. Chest X-ray showed blunting of bilateral costophrenic angles suggestive of bilateral pleural effusion. Echocardiography revealed dilated left ventricle (LV) with l eft ventricle ejection fraction of 15% which was suggestive of DCMP with severe LV dysfunction. A baseline coronary arteriogram was performed which was normal. Non-contrast CT of head showed bilateral (B/L) symmetric calcification in B/L cerebellar hemisphere, B/L basal ganglia and cortical/subcortical calcification in B/L fronto-parieto-occipital region. Rest was within normal limits.


Treatment

For CHF, the patient was started on dobutamine intravenous injection at the dose of 6 µg/kg and furosemide intravenous injection 20 mg BD for decongestion. However, patient did not show significant improvement with the above treatment. In view of hypocalcemia with hyperphosphataemia and low parathyroid hormone levels, a diagnosis of hypocalcemic cardiomyopathy with hypoparathyroidism was considered and patient was started on calcium gluconate injection 1 g (90 mg of elemental calcium) given stat followed by calcium gluconate infusion in 500 mL of 5% dextrose at the rate of 37.5 mg/hour of elemental calcium. The patient showed significant improvement after starting calcium gluconate. The patient was discharged in stable condition on oral calcium tablets 3 g/day along with calcitriol 0.5 µg/day. Tablet benzthiazide with triamterene (25/50 mg) OD, tablet ramipril 5 mg once daily, and carvedilol 3.125 mg twice daily was also started. For megaloblastic anaemia, cyanocobalamin injections were given as per protocol.


Outcome and follow-up

On follow-up at 3 months, patient was improved markedly.

Investigations showed S.calcium 7.7, S.phosphate 6.0 and albumin 3.6. Haemoglobin was 10.1 g/dL. Echo showed an improvement in LV function with ejection fraction being 25%. Endomyocardial biopsy was planned but the patient denied so, could not be performed.