A 27-year-old female patient, without notable medical history, was diagnosed with Graves’ disease (GD) in December 2020. The diagnosis was confirmed based on suggestive clinical signs including chronic fatigue accompanied by paroxysmal palpitations persisting for approximately 2 months. Physical examination revealed sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 102 beats per minute, associated with exophthalmos. Biological investigations demonstrated markedly reduced Thyroid Stimulating Hormone (TSH) levels and elevated Free Thyroxine 4 (FT4) levels in laboratory tests (TSH = 0.002 mU/L, FT4 = 30.08 pmol/L). She was subsequently admitted to the endocrinology department of La Rabta Hospital in Tunis. The pre-therapeutic assessment, including liver function tests, revealed no abnormalities. Thus, she was put on propranolol and methimazole at a daily dose of 120 and 20 mg, respectively. Thirteen days post-initiation of treatment, she manifested severe pruritus along with cutaneous-mucosal jaundice. Hepatic assessment revealed cytolysis (Aspartate Transaminase (AST) = 95 U/L, Alanine Transaminase (ALT) = 117 U/L), cholestasis (Gamma-glutamyl Transpeptidase (GGT) = 103 U/L, Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) = 759 U/L), and predominantly conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (total bilirubin/direct bilirubin = 412/400 μmol/L). Methimazole was consequently discontinued, and the patient was initiated on ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) at a dosage of 13 mg/kg/day, along with oral corticosteroid therapy using prednisone at a dosage of 1 mg/kg/day. She was, then, referred to the Gastroenterology Department “B” at La Rabta Hospital in Tunis for further care. The clinical course was characterized by a marked reduction in pruritus and jaundice, accompanied by a regression of cytolysis in laboratory parameters and a gradual exacerbation of cholestasis. A follow-up thyroid assessment revealed a slight increase in TSH levels alongside a decrease in FT4 levels, which remain above the laboratory’s biological reference ranges (TSH = 0.01 mU/L, FT4 = 25 pmol/L). A comprehensive etiological assessment, including viral serologies, immunological profiling, and biliary magnetic resonance imaging (Bili-MRI), yielded negative results. An associated seronegative primary biliary cholangitis was suspected at this juncture due to the persistence of cholestasis, but it was subsequently ruled out by liver biopsy. However, liver biopsy specimen demonstrated portal and periportal fibrosis, characterized by infrequent septa with portal spaces containing a lymphocytic and plasmocytic infiltrate. This infiltrate induces hepatocyte necrosis with the limiting plate forming an interface hepatitis. This histological presentation may correspond to autoimmune hepatitis or drug-induced liver injury. In collaboration with endocrinologists, the corticosteroid therapy was gradually discontinued. Hydrocortisone treatment was initiated at a dosage of 30 mg/day, and a regimen of radioactive iodine sessions commenced in February 2021. Biochemically, the progression was characterized by a transition to hypothyroidism (TSH = 3.01 mU/L, FT4 <0.42 pmol/L), requiring the initiation of hormonal substitutive treatment (Levothyroxine) at a daily dose of 75 µg. Cholestatic parameters remained stable over a 12-month period, followed by a gradual regression, ultimately leading to the liver tests complete normalization by January 2023.