21-year-old Brazilian national, resident in Portugal for two years, mason, admitted to the emergency department with polyarthralgia of an additive and symmetrical character involving large and medium joints, namely tibio-tarsi, knees, elbows and metacarpo-phalangeal, with two weeks of evolution. He reported fever with chills, asthenia, anorexia and night sweats. He denied headaches, odynophagia, abdominal pain, changes in urine or faeces characteristics, recent travel, risky sexual behaviours, consumption of handmade products, contact with wild animals, insect or tick bites. He denied a history of illness or usual therapy, reporting smoking habits and occasional consumption of cannabis. On admission he presented oriented, febrile, normotensive, eupnoeic, showing inflammatory signs and intense pain of the tibio-tarsi, knees, elbows and metacarpo-phalangeal joints, fluctuation of the interligamentous knee joint and signs of bilateral Aquilian enthesopathy. On neurological examination, the left foot was hanging down with asymmetrical decrease of muscular strength in dorsiflexion (grade 4/5), without other focal deficits, hypesthesia or peripheral nerve engorgement. There were prominent erythematous papules and plaques of circular conformation and well defined border, painful, with bubbles and central necrosis, without epidermal detachment (Nikolsky's sign), symmetrically distributed on the affected articular surfaces, namely knees and elbows. There were no ophthalmological changes, adenopathies or changes in anorectal examination. The study highlighted a sinus rhythm electrocardiogram, chest radiograph and abdominal ultrasound without changes and a transthoracic echocardiogram negative for endocarditis. Analytically, he presented leukocytosis 15.4 x 109 with neutrophilia 12,400 /mm3, elevated PCR (31.9 mg/dL) and hepatic cholestasis without hyperbilirubinaemia.

The viral serologies, autoimmunity, ACE and IGRA levels were only slightly elevated (73.47 mcg/L; N < 40 mcg/L) and rheumatoid factor (16U/mL; N < 14 U/mL). Dermatology was requested to collaborate, and a skin biopsy was performed for histopathological, immunofluorescence and microbiological studies. After taking blood cultures and urine cultures, empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone 2 g/day was initiated. After eight days of antibiotic therapy without significant clinical response, and considering the hypothesis of neutrophilic dermatosis (Sweet's syndrome), prednisolone 40 mg/day PO was initiated with favorable evolution, resolution of joint complaints and fever, significant improvement of inflammatory skin signs and residual scars and sustained reduction of inflammatory parameters. The biopsies performed on the tenth day of admission revealed intense inflammatory lymphohistiocytic infiltrate with non-caseous granulomas of perineural distribution and presence of acid-alcohol-resistant bacilli (ARAB). Nasal and auricular lymph exudate was examined by smear microscopy, which confirmed the presence of ARAB, establishing the diagnosis of leprosy, multibacillary form with immunological reaction type 2 (erythema nodosum leprosum). The patient was discharged on the seventeenth day of admission under oral corticosteroid therapy, and was referred to a specific dermatology consultation, and did not initiate antibacillary therapy due to abandonment of that consultation.
