A 53-year-old African man with a medical history of hypertension diagnosed in his mid-20s, systolic CHF and non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy presented with worsening exertional dyspnoea, lower extremity oedema, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea and orthopnoea for approximately 1 week. The patient was on six hypertensive agents as an outpatient including clonidine, hydralazine, isosorbide mononitrate, valsartan and furosemide. Despite compliance with medications, he had frequent admissions for CHF exacerbations. He denied tobacco, drug or alcohol use. Although he was diagnosed with hypertension at a young age, the patient did not recall having additional testing for secondary causes of HTN at the time of diagnosis. He did recall a diagnosis of chronic hypokalaemia, which had been attributed to furosemide use, and he had been prescribed potassium supplements intermittently in the past. He denied any known family history of PA or uncontrolled HTN. Vital signs revealed a blood pressure of 163/103 mm Hg, heart rate of 74 beats per minute, respiration rate of 17 and 95% oxygen saturation on 3 L nasal cannula. Pertinent findings on physical examination included jugular venous distention, bilateral lower extremity pitting oedema, bilateral rales and a prominent S3 gallop.


Investigations

EKG showed no acute ischaemic changes, sinus rhythm with chronic left bundle branch block. Troponins were negative on three consecutive occasions. Chest X-ray revealed bilateral pulmonary vascular congestion. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed moderate left ventricular hypertrophy and dilatation with global hypokinesis and an ejection fraction of 10%–15%. No valvular abnormalities were noted. Cardiac MRI showed areas of myocardial fibrosis likely related to hypertrophy, atypical for ischaemic disease and atypical for previous infarct or amyloidosis. Laboratory studies showed serum potassium of 2.6 mmol/L and bicarbonate of 34 mmol/L. PA was suspected, and further testing revealed an elevated plasma aldosterone level of 154 ng/dL (normal less than 39.2 ng/dL), a decreased plasma renin activity (RA) of less than 2.1 ng/mL/hour and a plasma aldosterone concentration/plasma RA (PAC/PRA) ratio of 73.3 (ng/dL)/(ng/mL/hour).

Results of an overnight dexamethasone suppression test, thyroid function testing and plasma and urine metanephrines were normal. An oral salt loading suppression test was not performed for fear that it would exacerbate his pulmonary oedema and heart failure. CT of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast showed a 1.2×2.4 cm well-defined, homogeneous adenoma of the left adrenal gland. Subsequent adrenal vein sampling confirmed unilateral PA with lateralisation to the left adrenal gland (table 1.) The adrenal vein cortisol to inferior vena cava cortisol ratio for both the left and right adrenal vein was greater than 3, consistent with successful adrenal vein cannulation. The left and right adrenal vein aldosterone to adrenal vein cortisol ratio were 14.8 and 2.2, respectively. A lateralisation ratio greater than 4 is consistent with unilateral disease, whereas a lateralisation ratio less than 3 is consistent with bilateral disease. Our patient’s lateralisation ratio of left to right was 6.7, consistent with unilateral disease. The patient was started on spironolactone treatment with improvement of his blood pressure, and hypokalaemia and was referred for left adrenalectomy.