A 32-year-old male presented with complaints of right wrist pain and swelling along with open fracture of the right both bone leg, following a road traffic accident. Primary splintage was given to the lower limb and on examination of the wrist there was significant swelling which was confined to right wrist. He was unable to actively flex or extend his wrist and complained of pain on passive movement of the wrist. Radiographs revealed volar scaphoid dislocation with increase in scapho-lunate space (Terry Thomas sign) and increase in scapholunate angle to 97° [Normal scapholunate angle varies between 30° and 60°].


Treatment and follow up
The patient underwent primary debridement and external fixation for the right both bone leg fracture and single stage fixation of the wrist under regional anesthesia in supine position in the same sitting. A dorsal approach was performed to access the radiocarpal joint, the scapholunate ligament was found to torn and scapholunate diastasis was also visualized. The scaphoid was found to be unstable and hence fixed with one 2 mm K-wire to the lunate and scapholunate ligament was repaired using 1 suture anchor. Carpel alignment was achieved and the reduction was confirmed under c-arm guidance and splintage was provided using below elbow scaphoid slab.

Immediate postoperative radiographs were satisfactory and the scapholunate angle was found to be 58° postoperatively. Patient's wrist was immobilized for 4 weeks with POP slab. 4 weeks post-surgery splintage and K-wire was removed and physiotherapy was started. After 6 month follow up patient complained of no pain and returned to work without any limitations. The clinical outcomes were assessed according to the modified Mayo wrist score score, which was found to be excellent. The outcome was established using the DASH (Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand) and PRWE score (Patient-Rated Wrist Evaluation), which was found to be 13 and 16 respectively. The Flexion/Extension/Pronation/Supination of the injured right wrist was 80°/80°/90°/90° respectively, which was comparable to the contralateral side. Grip strength of the affected side was 60 kg compared with 70 kg on the contralateral side. After a close follow up of 12 months patient had achieved complete range of motion and no complaints. The follow up radiographs at 12 months did not show any avascular necrosis or diastasis. 