A 29-year-old man (height = 180 cm, weight = 60 kg) was admitted to our hospital due to sudden onset of palpitation, chest tightness, mild fever, and night sweats, accompanied with bilateral double lower extremities adynamia and paralysis for 5 days, but no obvious syncope and edema. Examination on admission revealed a normal heart rate of 96 beats/minute (bpm) and blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg. On cardiac auscultation, 3/6 grade systolic murmur (Levine Scale) was heard between the third and fourth ribs at the left margin of sternum. The sensory below the sternum was dysfunctional. Muscle strength on both legs was at 1/6 levels (Lovett Scale), and tendon reflex diminished. Electrocardiography showed a sinus rhythm with pulmonary P-wave. An X-ray image of the chest showed discrete and scattered miliary nodules over both lungs, and cardiac silhouette was enlarged. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an erosive space-occupying lesion located between the first and third thoracic vertebrae, which resulted in stenosis of the spinal canal and thinning of the spinal cord. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a huge mobile mass (72 × 58 mm) in the RA and myxoma was considered. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 60%. The remaining physical examination findings were unremarkable, and laboratory tests were normal, except for the accelerating erythrocyte sedimentation rate. There was no family history of heart disease, including tumors and other cardiovascular problems. The preliminary diagnosis was thoracic vertebra tumor and cardiac myxoma. To treat the incomplete paraplegia caused by thoracic vertebra tumor erosion, the operation including resection of thoracic vertebral lesions, decompression, and internal fixation with nail-rod must be carried out immediately. A multiple disciplinary team consisting of cardiologist, orthopedist, sonologist, and anesthesiologists, was created. Fatal complications of cardiac myxoma, such as intracardiac obstruction and pulmonary embolism, were assessed. Informed consent of critical illness was signed by the patient's legal representative.

The patient did not receive premedication before anesthesia. On arrival in the operating room, peripheral venous access was established on the dorsum of the hand, and continuous electrocardiogram and pulse oximetry monitoring were instituted. Invasive arterial blood pressure (IBP) was measured in the left radial artery, and the central venous pressure (CVP) was measured in the right femoral vein. Anesthesia induction was carried out with intravenous injection of midazolam 4 mg, penehyclidine hydrochloride 1 mg, etomidate 16 mg, and sufentanil 50 μg. Cisatracurium 12 mg was used to facilitate tracheal intubation. Maintenance of compound anesthesia consisted of 2% sevoflurane in an air–oxygen mixture, and remifentanil was continuously injected intravenously at 0.2 μg/kg/min. Intermittent bolus dose of 5 mg cisatracurium was administered for muscle relaxation. After anesthesia induction, hemodynamic parameters were stable at the supine position: heart rate of 80 bpm, IBP of 110/65 mmHg, and CVP of 8 mmHg. However, after the patient was turned to the prone position on the level of the standard operating table (lying on a pair of bolsters, unpressurized abdomen), the patient's heart rate increased gradually to 130 bpm, IBP dropped to 70/45 mmHg, and CVP increased to 22 mmHg. Moreover, the jugular vein was filled observably. Emergency treatment was carried out immediately against the symptoms of right heart failure. Fluid infusion was restricted and vasoactive drugs were used to maintain appropriate arterial blood pressure. Dopamine at 5 to 10 μg/kg/min and norepinephrine at 0.03 to 0.05 μg/kg/min were continuously injected intravenously, keeping the mean arterial pressure above 70 mmHg during the operation. During the 3 hours of surgery, blood volume supplementation totally consisted of sodium chloride 500 mL, hydroxyethyl starch 500 mL, fresh-frozen plasma 600 mL, and suspended red blood cells 2 U. Total blood volume loss was 600 mL, and urine output was 500 mL. After the operation, anesthetic drugs were stopped, and the patient was returned to the supine position. At this moment, his hemodynamic status was stabilized gradually with a heart rate of 84 bpm, IBP of 130/88 mmHg, and CVP of 10 mmHg. Dopamine and norepinephrine intravenous titration was suspended. When the patient recovered spontaneous respiration and responded to verbal commands, tracheal extubation was performed. After ventilated with 100% oxygen via a facemask in 5 min, the patient was transferred to the post-anesthesia care unit. Evaluation of spinal function was performed on the second postoperative. The muscle strength of the left leg was 4/6 levels, and the right leg was 3/6 levels; meanwhile, the superficial sensibility was considered dysesthesia. Furthermore, hemodynamic parameters were stable at the ward.