A 35-year-old female Ethiopian patient presented to Yekatitit 12 Hospital Medical College’s emergency department with complaints of shortness of breath at rest, orthopnoea, significant paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, chest pain, a blood-tinged productive cough, and vomiting of ingested matter (2–3 episodes per day) for 2 weeks. She had progressive body swelling that started in the lower extremities and later involved the whole body, easy fatigability, a loss of appetite, a high-grade intermittent fever, and an epigastric burning sensation for the same duration for the same duration of the same week. The patient also experienced an unspecified amount of weight loss and fatigue for the past 2 months. Otherwise, she had no known comorbidities, no risky behavior, such as smoking or alcohol drinking, medications, or a family history of malignancy. She was married, had four children, and had no bad obstetrics history. Her occupation was farming, and she had been living in a rural area. She had never been admitted for a similar complaint.

The patient’s Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 15 out of 15, and there were no memory, power, or tone abnormalities. The patient was in severe respiratory distress with oxygen saturation of 70% with atmospheric air, respiratory rate of 30–35 beats/minute, and pulse rate of 120 per minute. She had high-grade fever records up to the level of 39.5 0C and can maintain her blood pressure. The breast examination with ultrasound and mammography was reportedly normal. Lymphadenopathy was not detected in reachable areas.

The chest examination revealed signs of pleural effusion that were also revealed in the imaging and were analyzed. A chest computed tomography (CT) with contrast showed pericardial effusion and multifocal pneumonia. CT angiography showed a lower lobe segmental pulmonary arterial filling defect on both sides, which suggests pulmonary emboli and pleural effusion on both sides. The cytologic smears were reported with sheets of mesothelial cells, neutrophils, and scattered single clusters of large atypical cells with prominent nucleoli suggestive of malignant effusion. The plural fluid analysis had lymphocytic predominant fluid with normal glucose (82 mg/dl), protein (2.2 g/dl), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of 592 mg/dl.

Jugular venous pressure was raised by muffled heart sounds. The echocardiography showed massive pericardial effusion with cardiac tamponade features, preserved ejection fraction (EF 65%), and tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) greater than 18 mm. An electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed only sinus tachycardia and axis deviation. An immediate pericardiocentesis was done, a drain of about 250 ml of hemorrhagic fluid was removed, and the pericardial window was secured. Repeated echocardiography imaging revealed a size reduction. The cytology report from the pericardial fluid had numerous lymphocytes together with atypical malignant cells having prominent nucleoli suggestive of malignant effusion.

On the abdominal examination, she had positive signs of fluid collection with no ballotable organ. The abdominopelvic CT scan showed an increment in the size of the liver with multiple hypointense hepatic lesions suggestive of metastasis. The pelvic organs, including the ovaries and uterus, had no identified lesions. A core needle biopsy was performed on the liver lesion, and the results revealed secondary adenocarcinoma.

A diagnosis of heart failure caused by malignant massive pericardial effusion secondary to disseminated adenocarcinoma and carcinoma of unknown primary origin involving the lung, pleura, pericardium, and gastrointestinal tract was made. The patient was diagnosed with left upper exterminate extensive deep vein, bilateral segmental pulmonary embolism possible owing to the disseminated CUP. The findings also showed superimposed multifocal pneumonia and mild anemia of chronic disease.

The initial complete blood cell count revealed leucocytosis with a white blood cell count of 24 × 103 per mL, neutrophil predominant (91%), red blood cell count of 3.7 × 106 per µL, mild normocytic anemia [hemoglobin (Hgb) 11.2 mg/dl], mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 81.2 fl, and severe thrombocytopenia (66 × 103/µL). After antibiotic treatment for pneumonia, the total blood cell count returned to normal (except for Hgb). With normal bilirubin levels, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) increased by more than seven times (263 U/L), while Alanine transaminase (ALT) increased by more than nine times (332 U/L). Serum electrolytes (except for Na + with mild hyponatremia, 129 mEq/L) and renal function tests were normal. Albumin was low (2.12 g/dl). Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels increased almost twofold from the baseline (592 U/L). The human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C viruses were not reactive. Blood and culture of pleural fluid had no growth. A carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) increased over 400 times (1000 µg/L) of the baseline.

The patient was admitted to the general ward. A pericardial window and right-side chest tube insertion were done with a cardiothoracic surgeon along with a cardiologist (see the amount aspirated above). Intermittent therapeutic pleural aspiration was done for the malignant pleural effusion. Once the loading dose (60 mg) of frusemide produced sufficient urine output, this dose was maintained three times (TID) a day. This was then de-escalated, and she was discharged with an oral dose of 20 mg twice a day (BID). A standard dose of enoxaparin was started for pulmonary thromboembolism and left upper extremity acute extensive deep vein thrombosis. Enoxaparin at 40 mg subcutaneous BID was given during hospitalization, which was changed to 5 mg of oral warfarin daily during discharge because of financial issues. The multifocal pneumonia was treated with ceftazidime (1 gm intravenously TID) and vancomycin (1 gm intravenously BID) as per the national standard treatment protocol. The pain was controlled by a potent anti-pain medication (morphine 5 mg intravenously TID) and deescalated and discontinued. She was also on ulcer prophylaxis. The patient was discharged from the medical ward with significant improvement after 14 days of hospitalization and appointed to the oncology unit of the hospital. Thus, for cancer of unknown primary origin, she was given one cycle of chemotherapy (carboplatin/paclitaxel). She was lost on follow-up owing to financial issues, and the patient died at home within 4 months of discharge.