A 17-year-old female inpatient was referred from the Pediatrics Department to the Oral Medicine Department at Hasan Sadikin Hospital with complaints of painful mouth ulcers, dryness of the lips and difficulties in swallowing. This condition made it difficult for the patient to eat and drink, resulting in the patient’s physical condition becoming weak and debilitated. The ulcer has been present for 3 days, has not improved and tends to bleed. However, the bleeding has stopped since the previous day. The Pediatrics Department administered Kenalog in Orabase® in response to this patient’s oral condition.

The patient complained of body aches, rashes and hair loss 2 months ago. This condition was examined at Kebon Jati Hospital, and the diagnosis of SLE was confirmed. Approximately 2 weeks ago, the patient complained of the same condition and finally decided to be treated at Hasan Sadikin Hospital. Comprehensive and multidisciplinary examinations established that, in addition to SLE, the patient was also diagnosed with hepatosplenomegaly, during the third week of hospitalisation. Enlargement of the liver and spleen were found during abdominal CT scan.

During this two-week period, the patient took a diverse drug regimen that administered by the Pediatrics Department, which includes Levofloxacin, Amikacin, Ampicillin-Sulbactam and Ethambutol for the antibiotics. Fluconazole was given intravenously. Steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were given IV Methylprednisolone and Triamcinolone Acetonide topically. Omeprazole and Ca. Carbonate as antacid and PPI. Vitamin D and Curcuma as dietary supplements and Paracetamol were also given.

On extraoral examination, the patient’s conjunctiva was anemic, and there was dryness and exfoliation of the lips that tends to bleed along with hemorrhagic crusts with serous sanguinolenta. During intraoral examination, there were lesions covering on almost all areas of the oral mucosa. Multiple ulceration on the upper and lower labial mucosa. A painful ulceration on the left buccal mucosa measuring 5 × 6 mm with erythema border. Central palatal erythema was seen on the palatum durum. Candidiasis pseudomembrane was also seen on the dorsum of the tongue, accompanied by papillae elongation.

Case Management
NaCl 0.9% was administered and used to perform several instructions related to the patient’s oral condition. Cleaning the teeth using a saline-moistened gauze was the most important thing because during the 2 weeks of hospitalisation, the patient neglected her oral hygiene. Hemorrhagic crusts on the lips and labial mucosa were also instructed to be dressed using moist gauze (NaCl 0.9%) as often as possible. This was done five times a day, with the aim of moistening lips and removing the crusts.

The condition of multiple and widespread ulcerations on the upper and lower labial mucosa, a topical steroid ointment mixture, was administered to the patient. A mixture containing Dexamethasone 0.5 mg mixed with Lanolin 2.5 mg and petroleum jelly added up to 25 mg was instructed for the patient to use it three times a day, after applying saline dressing. Considering other ulcerations, one of which was on the left buccal mucosa and also other ulcers that were difficult to reach by hand, 0.025% hyaluronic acid was administered to relieve inflammation locally.

During the second visit, on 22 November 2022, it was seen that the general condition of the patient’s oral cavity had improved. The patient’s tongue still showed whitish plaque, which was finally given Nystatin® oral suspension, but had to be stopped after 2 days of administration regarding the hepatosplenomegaly condition. The ointment was stopped and replaced with petroleum jelly. The other medication was continued until the next evaluation, for the next 6 days. On 28 November 2022, the patient had no complaints about his oral cavity, but clinically there was still a presence of exfoliative cheilitis, coated tongue and ulcer in the left buccal mucosa, which had subsided.

The patient was discharged 2 days later and continued outpatient care. The last visit was conducted on 16 December 2022. The patient had no complaints, could follow oral hygiene instructions and gave advice to the patient to extract radix of deciduous teeth 55 and 65.