This is a 32-year-old patient, a baker, from Bamako, who was admitted to the Infectious and Tropical Diseases department of the CHU du Point G (Bamako, Mali) on 27 April 2023 for chronic productive cough, otalgia and a chronic right-sided purulent otorrhea.

The symptomatology would be of progressive installation in 1 month, initially treated in a medical center with artésunate, paracetamol and unspecified antibiotics for confirmed malaria and acute otitis media, without success. He is immunosuppressed by a HIV1 infection, diagnosed and put on a tritherapy antiretroviral (TARV) Tenofovir/Lamivudine/Dolutégravir 7 months ago, not observed due to denial of his illness.

The general physical examination found a fever (38.2 °C), altered general condition, otalgia, purulent right foul-smelling otorrhea, a right basal pulmonary condensation syndrome, a normal neurological examination, without the involvement of the cranial nerves, mainly the facial nerve VII and the VIII cochleovestibular nerve.

In the ENT examination, the otoscopy of the right ear showed an inflammatory external auditory canal with purulent secretions and the presence of a single tympanic perforation in the anterior-inferior quadrant. The left ear is normal. The Rinne and Weber test is in favor of a right conductive hearing loss.

Immuno-virological evaluation shows a CD4 count of 118 cells/pl and a viral load of 12,370 copies/ml at the time of diagnosis of HIV infection, compared to a viral load of 9,460 copies/ml and a CD4 lymphocyte count of 193 cells/pl at the 6th month of antiretroviral treatment. At the time of diagnosis of tuberculosis at the 7th month, the immuno-virological evaluation shows a CD4 count of 89 cells/pl and a viral load of 10,230 copies/ml.

The Ziehl Neelsen bacilloscopy was positive with a cross in the gastric washings on admission and 19 days later in the right ear swab because of the persistent otorrhea. The Xpert-MTB/GeneXpert test did not detect rifampicin-resistant Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

The frontal chest radiograph shows a more accentuated bronchovascular network at the base of the right lung.

The diagnosis of tuberculosis of the middle ear concomitant to a pulmonary localization in the field of immunosuppression by HIV1 is therefore retained.

The patient is put on oral first-line anti-tuberculosis for 6 months, a fixed dose of a quadra-therapy in the intensive phase of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol for 2 months (2RHZE), followed by a bi-therapy in the maintenance phase of isoniazid and rifampicin for 4 months (4RH) at a dose of 3 tablets/day in the morning on an empty stomach, associated with vitamin B6 (1 tablet/day). He benefits from two sessions of therapeutic reinforcement with anti-retroviral drugs. The ART is restarted on 4 May 2023 with his consent, given the good tolerance of the anti-tuberculosis drugs, with the combination of tenofovir/lamivudine/dolutegravir at a dose of 1 tablet/day associated with dolutegravir 50 mg as a supplement (1 tablet/day) according to the protocol for the management of HIV/AIDS. A chemoprophylaxis with cotrimoxazole 960 mg (1 tablet/day) is undertaken as well as a cleaning of the external auditory canal by aspiration and the instillation of ciprofloxacin ear drops (2 drops 3 times a day) for 14 days.

The evolution is favorable after 14 days of treatment, marked by a pyrexia, a good general state, the amendment of the cough and otorrhea with the negativation of the bacilloscopy in the gastric tube liquid and the swab of the pus of the right ear. At the end of the maintenance anti-tuberculosis treatment, the clinical healing is complete with a normal ENT and neurological examination. The bacilloscopy associated with the Xpert-MTB/GeneXpert test at the end of the 2nd month of the intensive phase, during the 5th month and at the end of the 6th month of the maintenance phase were negative. The HIV viral load performed after 3 months of ART is 329 copies/ml.
