A male born at 38 weeks of gestation and without prenatal obstetric controls, product of an eutoxic delivery without complications with a weight of 2,678 g and Apgar 7 and 8 at the minute and at 5 minutes of life, respectively; derived by suspicion of necrotizing enterocolitis at 7 days of life. At birth, in his hospital of origin, congenital malformations were ruled out and an orogastric probe was placed to verify the esophageal permeability, obtaining 200 ml of amniotic fluid. Subsequently, he initiated oral feeding but due to weak suction and biliary vomiting he was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit. At 4 hours of life a abdominal radiography was performed observing a double bubble atypical image, for which they performed a radiological control 48 hours later identifying intestinal gas apparently distal, and presented meconiorexis at 50 hours of life. Two days later he restarted oral feeding, after which he presented again biliary vomiting and abdominal distension that improved with fasting and orogastric probe; for which necrotizing enterocolitis was suspected indicating absolute diet, total parenteral nutrition and antibiotherapy with ampicillin and amikacin. At seven days of life and due to the persistence of symptoms despite the treatment initiated, he was referred to our center. On his arrival he presented abdominal distension, without intestinal noises or signs of peritoneal irritation, for which an intestinal transit was performed without distal progression and colon by enema with finding of microcolon, all suggestive of intestinal atresia and jejunoileal atresia. After the imaging studies and with the suspicion of intestinal atresia, a laparotomy was performed by transverse supraumbilical approach, observing hepatoileal adhesions, an internal hernia through a mesenteric defect with incarceration of a jejunal loop and jejunoileal atresia type IV. Two sites of atresia were identified at 56 cm from the Treitz angle and 36 cm from the ileocecal valve, with an inter-atresic segment of 10 cm with intraluminal meconium and changes in colouration with a violet appearance but without perforation; the difference in intestinal diameters proximal to distal had a 3:1 ratio. It was decided to dissect the mesentery and resect the blind loop (10 cm) to perform a term-oblique jejunoileal anastomosis, corroborating the distal permeability with intraluminal probe and administration of physiological solution until it presented rectal evacuation. The histopathology report confirmed a jejunoileal atresia type IV with mild chronic enteritis. The patient evolved favourably and at the 5th day postoperatively initiated oral feeding with adequate progressive tolerance and gradual decrease of total parenteral nutrition with withdrawal at the 8th day postoperatively. At the 6th day of the intervention he presented spontaneous depositions and at 20 days of life was discharged without complications. Twelve months later the patient continues asymptomatic with adequate weight gain and tolerance to complementary feeding with daily depositions of normal characteristics.
