An elderly 78-year-old patient from the Amhara region of Ethiopia, who has had a permanent cardiac pacemaker for 7 years, was scheduled for retropubic prostatectomy due to benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH). This condition developed following a previous transurethral resection of the prostate 3 months earlier. The patient in the preoperative anesthesia evaluation was fully evaluated, and all the routine investigations required for the proposed surgery, which were within normal limits, were investigated. The patient presented with a history of frequency, urgency, nocturia, and dribbling for the past 2 months. Additionally, the patient had been known to have hypertension for the past 16 years and was taking amlodipine 5 mg orally daily, enalapril 10 mg orally twice daily (BID), and atorvastatin 10 mg orally daily. He had also been known to have type II diabetes mellitus for the past 25 years and was on metformin 500 mg orally BID and neutral protamine Hagedorn (NPH) 20 IU and 10 IU. He was admitted to a hospital for further evaluation, and complete bundle branch block (BBB) was detected via electrocardiogram (ECG). In an electrophysiology study, the patient was diagnosed with left ventricular hypertrophy secondary to hypertensive heart disease, mild diastolic dysfunction, and an ejection fraction of 62%. Abdominal ultrasound revealed an enlarged prostate size of 82 ml; anterior–posterior (AP) chest X-ray revealed a normal chest region with a left-side pacemaker in situ, and all the other blood parameters, including electrolytes and serum troponin levels, were within normal limits.

A cardiologist was involved preoperatively as a multidisciplinary approach and risk determination tool for cardiac risk assessment. The patient had a frailty score of 5.5 with a poor functional cardiopulmonary reserve of metabolic equivalent (MET) = 3.4 and Revised Cardiac Risk Index (RCRI) class III, which accounts for 10.1% of major cardiac adverse events (myocardial infarction [MI], cardiac arrest, or death) within 30 days of the postoperative period, and intermediate risk on the basis of surgery type and patient risk factors. After preoperative evaluation and risk disclosure regarding the un-reprogrammed pacemaker and the associated complications during anesthesia and surgery, the patient was unable to afford the necessary health coverage for pacemaker reprogramming. This is because the cardiac surgery was performed in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, which has a long waiting list with few cardiac surgeons for millions of people and is a considerable distance from the patient’s home institution, and there is a period of monitoring after pacemaker reprogramming for considerable post-reprogramming complication. As a result, the patient chose to proceed with the surgery, accepting the potential risks and harm associated with the situation. Continuous cardiac monitoring during the intraoperative period is highly advocated. Despite these factors, the patient did not experience cardiorespiratory failure, and he was stable. The patient continued on medication until the day of surgery, which included amlodipine, enalapril, atorvastatin, and a morning lower dose of two-thirds of the NPH. He also took 5 mg of diazepam orally for anxiolytics at midnight before the day of surgery.

On the day of surgery, the patient’s random blood sugar (RBS) was measured, and sliding scale glycemic control was implemented. Communication among the anesthetist, surgeon, and nurses was emphasized, ensuring that the cautery pad was placed away from the pacemaker, and that emergency drugs and a defibrillator were ready. The patient was premedicated with dexamethasone for nausea prophylaxis and paracetamol for pain relief as preemptive analgesia. American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) standard monitoring was applied, and baseline parameters were recorded. Combined epidural–spinal anesthesia was administered via 0.5% isobaric bupivacaine (12.5 mg) and 50 µg fentanyl at the L3–L4 interspace. The block achieved anesthesia up to the umbilicus, and the sensory block was performed at T7. The surgery involved a midline incision below the umbilicus, with monopolar cautery used at low voltage (20 mA). Hemostasis was achieved through bipolar low-voltage cautery. Throughout the procedure, the patient’s vital signs remained stable. The patient’s vital signs did not change by more than 10% from the baseline vital signs. The intravenous fluid was resuscitated intraoperatively. During the postoperative period, the patient was transferred to the postanesthesia care unit (PACU) with vigilant monitoring, and 10 ml of 0.125% epidural top-up analgesia was given. Postop investigations were within normal limits. The patient was observed in the PACU for 12 hours and later transferred to the ward in stable condition with regular follow-up with the cardiology team. After 88th day of postsurgery the patient was discharged and advised to have regular checkups for pacemaker’s in situ status.