27-year-old woman with a history of uncontrolled asthma, mild SARS-CoV-2 infection. In March 2021, she consulted a doctor for pain in the left hemicara and trismus. She reported having completed 48 hours before the antibiotic treatment with phenoxymethyl penicillin 1,000,000 IU daily orally for five days for a peritonsillar abscess. She was hemodynamically stable at the physical examination, without the need for supplemental oxygen, and without relevant findings in respiratory symptoms. The head and neck examination showed a soft, painful, cervical adenopathy, palpable and painful, predominantly homolateral and trismus. Complementary studies were performed. The admission laboratory reported leukocytosis, platelopenia, increased acute phase reactants and the rest of the parameters within normal values. An angiotomy of the craniofacial mass was performed, where a large thrombus was found in the internal and external carotid arteries. Studies were completed with a chest tomography and arterial Doppler ultrasound of neck vessels with no relevant findings. Early intravenous antibiotic treatment was initiated with ceftriaxone 1 g every 12 hours, clindamycin 300 mg every 6 hours and anticoagulation with enoxaparin adjusted to body weight and renal function, 60 mg subcutaneously every 12 hours. The patient evolved 72 hours after initiating the directed treatment with a fever of 38.5 °C and increased leukocytosis, so new complementary studies were performed, including a Doppler ultrasound of the heart without finding cardiac vegetations and a chest tomography where bilateral pulmonary septic emboli were found. With the admission hemocultures negative, a new admission of 3 units, culture of pharyngeal exudate and rotation of ceftriaxone to piperacillin tazobactam 4.5 g every 6 hours intravenous was decided. The patient evolved favorably, without rescue of germs in cultures. After 14 days of initiating the new therapeutic scheme, and with a control chest tomography without pulmonary lesions, it was decided to continue antibiotic treatment with oral clindamycin 300 mg every 6 hours, anticoagulation with acenocumarol adjusted to body weight and hospital discharge.
