73-year-old man of Latin American origin, with a mother with a diagnosis of Alzheimer's-type dementia with a negative genetic panel; brother with a diagnosis of ALS; sister with a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease. The progressive symptomatology began in 2016 and was characterized by progressive symptoms of hyposmia, hypoacusis, constipation and insomnia, which required evaluation by otorhinolaryngology and audiology, without a diagnostic conclusion. In 2020, relatives noticed that the patient had problems with episodic memory, forgetting objects of daily life, problems with earnings in his business (commerce). These symptoms were progressive until the patient began to have limitations in daily tasks, such as driving and changing gears, as well as leaving his home. At the end of that year, the patient began to have distal muscle weakness, manifested by opening bottles, brushing his teeth, which progressed insidiously, non-fluctuating, without a predominant time.

In January 2021, the patient began to have gait disturbances, which led to frequent falls of more than 6 times a week, due to postural instability. The patient came for evaluation in May. He was given a 16-point MoCA test with alterations in language fluency and repetition of sentences; in abstraction, delayed recall and visuospatial and executive problems. The Luria test was positive. The patient presented a hypomimetic face, spoke with hypophonia, was intermittent and slow, and had a decreased gag reflex, generalized left-sided stiffness, generalized hypotrophy, left-sided bradykinesia, generalized strength of 4/5, 3/4 muscle stretch reflexes, abolished abdominal-cutaneous reflexes, bilateral Hoffmann and Trömner signs, bilateral plantar extensor response, tactile evoked lower limb fasciculations, short steps, freezing of gait when turning, positive pull test (postural instability). He was treated with levodopa carbidopa in a gradual dose. After 3 months of follow-up, the patient had shown no improvement in Parkinson's symptoms, increased muscle weakness and lower and upper motor neurone data persisted. With these findings, a magnetic resonance (MR) of the brain was performed. The nerve conduction velocity (NCV) showed axonal motor neuropathy of thoracic limbs in relation to atrophy and sensory nerve conduction without alterations. Electromyography (EMG) showed active denervation (increased insertional activity, fibrillation potentials, fasciculation) and chronic reinnervation (polifasic motor unit action potentials, and low recruitment to maximum contraction) in all 5 body segments, which is consistent with motor neurone disease.


EMG showed increased insertional activity in the deltoid, biceps, triceps, bilateral common digital extensor and bilateral tongue muscles. There were abundant fibrillation potentials and fasciculation was predominant in the thoracic limb muscles. During contraction, a polyphasic, large amplitude motor unit action potential (MAUP) was observed. At maximal contraction, a decrease in recruitment was observed in most of the muscles tested.

The patient was lost to follow-up one year. When he returned for evaluation, he was bedridden, aphasic, with increased parkinsonism and motor neuron syndrome. A genetic panel was performed, which was negative for C9ORF72, as well as 143 other genes involved in neuromuscular and neurodegenerative diseases, including the VCP, MAT3, ALS-associated, NOTCH3, frontotemporal dementia-associated genes, without alterations. A pathogenic variant for the POLG gene was reported: C.2209G>C, p. Gly737Arg, related to autosomal dominant and recessive mitochondrial depletion syndrome. A genetic counselling session was performed and the patient was informed. In May 2022, the patient presented with dysphagia and was wheelchair-bound, so he was sent to have a gastrostomy performed.
