A 34-year-old patient with a disease duration of four weeks. Two months earlier, she had a cesarean section in the 37th week of pregnancy and had persistent bleeding from the surgical wound. She denied a history of bleeding in childhood or adolescence. Three years earlier, she had given birth to her first child (also by cesarean section), who died due to a chromosome disorder (referred to by the patient). She also stated that she was allergic to tramadol.

The clinical picture began with lower back pain due to bilateral renal lithiasis. Subsequently, he managed to expel a stone and after that he presented haematuria for three days, for which he received tranexamic acid c/12 h. Three weeks later, he presented pain in the lower region of the left thigh that increased in intensity, with hardening of the area. Due to persistence of the symptoms, he was given diclofenac intramuscularly, which caused ecchymosis and bleeding in the gluteal area and persists despite the compression with gauze.

The patient underwent a particular Doppler ultrasound that revealed deep venous thrombosis of the left lower limb, and went to the hospital in her locality with these results. She was given anticoagulation with enoxaparin 30 mg/24 h subcutaneously, in addition to morphine for pain management and was hospitalized. The next day, she presented epigastralgia, blurred vision, heart rate of 117 beats/min, blood pressure of 113/85 mmHg and saturation of 93%. It was decided to discontinue enoxaparin. The blood count revealed a hemoglobin of 6.4 g/dl, which represented a difference of 4 g/dl from the result one day before admission, which was 10.4 g/dl. Because of the above, two blood transfusions were given. Due to the suspicion of vasculitis, methylprednisolone was indicated and she was referred to our hospital for further study.

On admission, the physical examination revealed severe pallor, extensive ecchymosis on the left thigh and lateral knee, and a haematoma on the right thigh. The haemogram showed moderate anaemia (Hb = 9.8 g/dl), normocytic and normochromic. The biochemical examination showed glucose values of 160 mg/dl. The liver enzymes AST and ALT were at 52 U/L and 86 U/L, respectively. The coagulation profile showed a prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 91.2 s. The rest of the haemogram, biochemical, electrolyte, liver profile and coagulation profile were normal. The ultrasound of soft parts of the right gluteal region revealed a collection at the level of the subcutaneous cellular tissue (TCSC) and oedema up to the upper third of the thigh. The Doppler ultrasound in the left lower limb showed adequate flowometry without signs of thrombosis in the common femoral vein, superficial and deep.

Symptomatic treatment was initiated and blood and urine cultures were requested and were negative. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) values, complement C3 and C4 and ferritin were within the reference range.

In the face of suspected acquired haemophilia, studies were requested for confirmation, where a partial correction of aPTT was found in the mixing test. Factor VIII was measured and its activity was found to be decreased (<1.0 U/dl) and the presence of a factor VIII inhibitor was demonstrated: 8.64 Bethesda units/ml. The above allowed the diagnosis of acquired haemophilia to be confirmed, which was related to the postpartum period due to the onset of symptoms.

Prednisone 50 mg orally at breakfast and 10 mg orally at lunch, cyclophosphamide 50 mg 2 tablets orally every 24 hours and anti-inhibitor coagulant complex for haemophilia (FEIBA) were initiated. Five days later, the latter was discontinued due to chest tightness, dyspnoea and nausea (possible adverse drug reaction) and replaced with activated recombinant factor VII (NovoSeven).

The patient's clinical evolution was favorable, with a decrease in ecchymosis and no other symptoms, so she was discharged from the hospital.
