The patient was a 42-year-old woman with a history of menstrual migraine, Hashimoto Thyroiditis, Familial Mediterian Fever (FMF), and dyspepsia. She was taking 75 mg of levothyroxine, 30 mg of lansoprazole, and 1.5 mg of colchicine daily. In February of 2023, she was diagnosed with acute bronchitis, which was treated with antibiotics and bronchodilators. She developed a daily headache after two weeks, manifesting as more than ten short-lasting attacks per day provoked by coughing, straining, and lifting. The duration of each attack was 30 minutes, and the pain was bilaterally distributed from the neck to the top of the head. The headache was sharp and severe. She described the attack as a sensation of storm-like fluid movement in the head. She did not suffer any of the symptoms associated with previous migraine attacks, such as phonophobia, photophobia, vomiting, or throbbing. The severity of the attack was determined using a numeric rating scale (NRS) with a score of 9 out of 10. These attacks typically necessitated a visit to the emergency room. The results of her physical and neurological exams were unremarkable. The laboratory tests, including those for thyroid hormones, electrolytes, liver and kidney function, and serology, were negative. Brain and cervical spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with and without contrast, magnetic resonance venography (MRV), and angiography (MRA) were all normal. She did not give consent for a lumbar puncture. When we first encountered her in the clinic, she was taking 25 mg of indomethacin per day. Her attacks stopped after putting her on 60 mg of lansoprazole and increasing her daily dose of indomethacin to 150 mg. However, she encountered gastrointestinal side effects, so the indomethacin was discontinued on day three. Due to the adverse effects, she was unable to take topiramate and propranolol.

She came to the clinic 15 days after her initial visit with an NRS score of 9/10. She was taken to the local operating room. We used a GE Healthcare, Voluson™ E6, ultrasonography system with a linear 13–5 MHz probe for unilateral PGONB. The patient’s neck was prone to flexion. The linear probe was initially transversely positioned on the occipital protuberance and then advanced caudally, demonstrating that the C2 spinous process resembled the two horns. Through lateral probe movement, the inferior muscles of the obliquus capitis and semispinalis capitis were located. Here, the superior to the inferior oblique capitis muscle and beneath the semispinalis capitis muscle were identified to be the greater occipital neuron (GON). From this location, a 22-gauge spinal needle and 3 ccs of bupivacaine at a concentration of 0.5% were used to perform GON blocking. The intensity of her attack decreased from 9/10 to 2/10 after the first 20 minutes of the block. Throughout a month, the blocks were repeated once a week. In the second month, the frequency of her attacks decreased to two per month, with an intensity of 4/10. She did not encounter any attacks in the sixth month.

