A 70-year-old man was referred to our hospital after a jaundice was reported by another physician. Blood examination revealed elevated hepatobiliary enzymes and increased levels of tumor markers (CA19-9, 444.3 U/mL; carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 15.5 ng/mL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed Bismuth classification II13) bile duct wall thickening from the confluence of the right and left hepatic ducts to the confluence of the choledochal ducts, with intrahepatic bile duct dilation. The tumor had partially reached the intrapancreatic bile duct. Hilar lymph node enlargement was observed, and lymph node metastasis was suspected. No distant metastases were observed. A biopsy of the common bile duct stenosis revealed adenocarcinoma, and the patient was diagnosed with hilar CC (cT3N1M0, Stage III C). Subtotal stomach-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy with right lobe hepatectomy was planned as radical resection. CT volumetry revealed the following: total liver volume (TLV) = 1350 mL, standard liver volume (SLV) = 1118.2 mL, remnant liver volume (RLV) = 483 mL, RLV/TLV = 35.8%, and RLV/SLV = 43.2%. Trans-ileocolic right portal vein embolization was performed14) because of concerns about an insufficient remaining liver volume.

However, a CT performed 1 month after trans-ileocolic right portal vein embolization revealed enlarged para-aortic lymph nodes that were considered metastatic, and radical resection was judged to be unsuitable. Therefore, the decision was made to administer systemic chemotherapy. Following the treatment protocol of the TOPAZ-1 study,5) cisplatin (25 mg/m2) and gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) were administered on days 1 and 8 of each 21-day cycle for 8 cycles, and durvalumab (1500 mg) was administered on day 1 of each cycle. The patient was followed up with monthly tumor marker measurements and CT scans every 3 months. At the end of the 4th course, the CA19-9 and CEA levels decreased to the normal range. Positron emission tomography-CT revealed vanishing fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation in the para-aortic lymph nodes. Systemic chemotherapy was deemed to be significantly effective, and radical resection was considered. Then, when the chemotherapy response was confirmed, the possibility of surgery was explained to the patient. The patient strongly preferred radical surgery over continued chemotherapy, and the decision was made to proceed with radical surgery.


Second CT volumetry before surgery showed the following: TLV = 1231 mL, SLV = 1167.6 mL, RLV = 745 mL, RVL/TLV = 60.5%, and RLV/SLV = 63.8%. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography biopsies of the original left hepatic duct and the cephalic portion of the intrapancreatic bile duct were negative for malignancy. An open right lobe hepatectomy and extrahepatic biliary reconstruction were also performed. The operative time was 10 h 40 min, blood loss was 460 g, and the weight of the resected liver was 474 g. Visually, a well-defined white sclerotic lesion proliferating along the right hepatic duct was observed. Histologically, there was no evidence of carcinoma, fibrous stroma-rich fibrotic scarring associated with treatment, or lymph node metastasis. The final TNM classification (UICC-8th) was ypT0N0. One month after surgery, a Grade 3 skin disorder appeared, and the patient was treated by the dermatology department. The patient showed no recurrence 10 months after surgery.