Male, 33 years old, with asthma and allergic rhinitis, on treatment with inhaled and nasal corticosteroids and with known allergy to Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus and Dermatophagoides farinae .

He had an anaphylactic reaction at the age of 25 with angioedema of the face and lips, dyspnoea, cough and dysphagia a few minutes after eating a mushroom pizza. There was no other trigger present, such as drugs or insect bites. The patient also denied exercise or alcohol in the hours leading up to the episode. Since then, the patient has avoided mushrooms or any food containing mushrooms.

The patient reported two subsequent episodes of labial angioedema, without any other symptoms, following accidental contact with mushroom sauce.

Serum total IgE (ImmunoCAP™, Phadia, ThermoFisher Scientific, Uppsala, Sweden) and specific IgE (ImmunoCAP™, Phadia, ThermoFisher Scientific, Uppsala, Sweden) were measured for aeroallergens (Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus , D. farinae , Lepidoglyphus destructor , cat and dog dander), moulds (Aspergillus fumigatus and Alternaria alternata ) and fungi.

We also performed skin tests with commercial extracts (LETI Laboratories, Madrid, Spain) of D. pteronyssinus (100HEP/mL); D. farinae (100HEP/mL); L. destructor (10HEP/mL); Olea europaea pollen (30HEP/mL), Corylus avellana (30HEP/mL) and Platanus occidentalis (30HEP/mL); cat and dog dander (30HEP/mL); A. fumigatus (150ug protein/mL); A. alternata (30HEP/mL); Cladosporium herbarum (150ug protein/mL); Candida albicans (125ug protein/mL); grass pollen (30HEP/mL); cow's milk (1,600ug protein/mL); eggs (1,400ug protein/mL); wheat flour (1,900ug protein/mL); tomato (10HEP/mL) and mushrooms (10HEP/mL). Histamine was used as a positive control (10mg/mL).

In addition to skin tests with commercially available extracts, a prick-to-prick test was performed with A. bisporus raw and cooked.

Immunoblotting was performed by sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) to assess the molecular mass of the IgE-binding proteins of A. bisporus .

RESULTS
Total IgE was 240kU/L and specific IgE was positive for mushrooms (0.76kUA/L), Dermatophagoides peteronyssinus (30.90kUA/L) and L. destructor (2.33kUA/L).

Skin tests were positive for extract of mushrooms (7 mm), D. pteronyssinus (10 mm), D. farinae (8 mm) and L. destructor (7 mm).

The prick-prick test was positive for A. bisporus white raw (9mm) and cooked (11mm) and A. bisporus brown raw (14mm) and cooked (11mm).

Immunoblotting of A. bisporus extract revealed two major bands of IgE binding of approximately 10kDa and 27kDa.
