After written informed consent was achieved by the patient the following data is given: An 18-year-old man with an unknown cause of end stage renal disease started HD 3 years prior to this report. Initially, he had had an upper arm AVF on the left side. This AVF had to be closed due to a local invasive infection. Thus, an upper arm fistula was placed in the right arm and was thereafter used for HD. When arriving at our unit in March 2018, he suffered from intermittent pulmonary congestion that was clinically interpreted to be related to a high degree of IDWG caused by excessive fluid intake and water retention in conjunction with anuria. Body weight was estimated to be 60 kg. The IDWG was approximately 5%. Intermittently, he had to perform additional acute ultrafiltration procedures since pre-dialysis NT-proBNP was above 70,000 ng/L, and blood pressure around 160/105 mmHg. He was prescribed angiotensin receptor blockers and was told to strongly restrict fluid intake with the aim of IDWG towards 2%. He managed to limit IDWG to some extent, resulting in a transient lowering of NT-proBNP. After 5 months NT-proBNP surpassed 70,000 ng/L again. Chest X-ray showed pulmonary fluid retention and the heart size was extensively increased. The patient suffered from progressive breathlessness during activity and was forced to access the dialysis ward by wheelchair; this corresponded to class III-IV of the NYHA functional classification. From October 2018 until March 2019, NT-proBNP levels were above the upper limit of detection and considered a reflection of a severe cardiac strain. Ultrafiltration was increasingly difficult due to intradialytic hypotensive episodes. Blood pressure rose and doses of antihypertensives that included angiotensin receptor blockers, calcium-blockers and alpha-1 receptor antagonists had to be increased.

The vascular conditions and flow measurements in the brachial artery as well as the flow through cephalic and basilic vein over time. While the patient had an upper arm fistula the flow in the cephalic vein was periodically surpassed by the flow through the basilica vein. In June 2018, the Doppler showed a flow of 2780 ml/min measured in the brachial artery representing 43% of the cardiac output.

Echocardiography showed a dilated left ventricle with reduced systolic function but a maintained stroke volume with an ejection fraction of 45%. A non-significant small pericardial effusion was seen. The extended QRS duration further emphasised the presence of dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure. The echocardiography showed structural changes, an atrial septum defect, and minor regurgitation of the mitral, tricuspid and pulmonary valves.

In September 2018, a surgical correction according to Miller et al. was performed. One month later partial ligation of the basilic vein was done. Within 1 month postoperatively brachial artery flow was back at 3023 ml/min despite a reduced diameter of 4 mm of the basilic vein (local flow 760 ml/min. Therefore, a temporary central venous catheter was placed, the upper AVF closed, and a new distal radiocephalic AV-fistula was successfully placed in the right arm in December 2018. Under the new radiocephalic AVF blood flow in the brachial artery decreased to approximately 1344 mL/minute when measured by ultrasound in February 2019. AVF flow measured by Transonic® was in the range of 550–880 ml/min. In March 2019, the dialysis sessions were increased from 3 to 4/week to limit the IDWG. In April 2019, echocardiography showed a slightly improved systolic function of the left ventricle but retained pericardial effusion. The NT-proBNP levels had dropped to 9358 ng/L. The patient still experienced breathlessness during activity, but it was less than before. No grading of the symptoms were registered. The echocardiographic findings and QRS duration improved at follow-up 8 months later (January 2020) and his clinical condition corresponded to NYHA I. Since then he felt well. After changing from upper arm to lower arm AVF, the AVF fistula flow (data by Transonic®) decreased as well as the NT-proBNP levels.