A 71-year-old patient with a history of untreated vitiligo presented with visual loss in the right eye 6 months prior to admission accompanied by bilateral hearing loss with a predominance in the right ear. Chronic headaches and intermittent fever were also reported, although the patient denied a history of drug use or prior infections. He was evaluated by our department due to the presence of significant and unintentional weight loss, generalized weakness and thickening of the skin. On initial ophthalmologic examination, visual acuity in the right eye (RO) was reduced to light perception and color discrimination, and visual acuity in the left eye (LO) was 20/200 with afferent pupillary defect in both eyes with hyperemic margins of the eyelid. On examination of the RO, it was found to have a hyperemic bulbar conjunctiva, ciliary injection, cornea with peripheral, nummular, subepithelial infiltrates, aqueous anterior chamber (AAC) without cellularity, normal iris and lens with nuclear opacities. On examination of the left eye, it was found to have a hyperemic bulbar conjunctiva, ciliary injection, cornea with peripheral, nummular, subepithelial infiltrates, AAC, aqueous without cellularity, normal iris and lens with nuclear opacities. On examination of the right fundus, a round, pale ++ papilla was found with a 50% excavation, slightly blunt nasal border, with a raised and thinned vascular pattern, with macular area and scattered pigment. On the left fundus, a vitreous haze 2+ was found with edematous papilla, blurred borders, hyperemic, peripapillary, streaked hemorrhages, and an unevaluable excavation with a thinned vascular pattern and macular area with scattered pigment, with right optic atrophy and left anterior optic neuritis.

Due to ocular involvement, weight loss and neurological symptoms, additional testing was performed to rule out causes such as tuberculosis, herpes, ANCA and non-ANCA vasculitis, and sarcoidosis. As for the management of the neurological condition, a lumbar puncture was performed and an opening pressure within normal limits and a proteinocracy of 54 mg/dL was found. Due to distal symmetric polyneuropathy, nerve conduction velocities (NCV) were performed, which showed a pattern of polyradiculoneuropathy with moderate to severe axonal degeneration, involving all 4 extremities with a predominance of the lower extremities; the contrasted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the skull and orbit did not show enhancement of the optic nerve or brain tumors; however, it did show sinusitis and meningeal enhancement. Within the management, sarcoidosis was ruled out, with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) within normal parameters, as well as a whole body gamma scan, without enhancement or boosting. After all the study and clinical evaluation of the patient, a second ophthalmological assessment was performed in which persistence and progression of the ocular condition was found, with optic atrophy in the right eye and anterior optic neuritis in the left eye. Because of this, high dose pulse steroid treatment was initiated, followed by a gradual reduction of the dose and the patient was referred for follow-up in the Outpatient Department. A clinical and functional improvement was observed, mainly at the neurological and ophthalmological level.
