This is a case of a 12-year-old male adolescent who was referred to HUCSH from the Oromia region’s Guji zone with complaints of bloody diarrhea lasting for one week and occurring 8–10 times per day, which had intensified in the days leading up to his presentation to our hospital. He also had a 2-week history of vomiting of ingested matter 3–5 times per day, which became bilious and more frequent over the last two days prior to his admission to our hospital. He also had a history of high-grade intermittent fever, chills, rigors, arthralgia, and a significant but unquantified weight loss during the two-week period.

Further questioning revealed that he had previously swum in a pond and had a self-limited itchy skin condition. The family said that similar cases had occurred in their town that resolved with medications provided at a local health center; however, their child’s situation was unusual and more serious despite the fact that he was treated likewise.

He was started on metronidazole, ceftriaxone, cimetidine, Vit B complex, and Vit K with the impression of fulminant viral hepatitis, schistosomiasis and acute kidney injury (AKI), and was referred to Hawassa University Comprehensive Specialized Hospital (HUCSH) for inpatient care and further workup for the above complaints.

Physical examination: General appearance: acute sick looking; Vital signs: all were within normal limits with the exception of the temperature, which was 37.8 degree Celsius.

Abdominal examination revealed tenderness in the epigastrium area and hepatomegaly, with a total liver span of 11 cm. The rectal examination was normal. There was no evidence of lymphadenopathy. The rest of the exam was also unremarkable.

The investigation results for malaria (Rapid Diagnostic Test/blood film), antinuclear antibody (ANA), serology for hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), and HIV were all negative.

The total and direct serum bilirubin were 2.33 mg/dL and 1.69 mg/d, respectively (elevated), and subsequently dropped to 1.84 mg/dL and 1.53mg/dL after 3 days, respectively. The serum albumin was in the normal range,3.9 g/dl.

Stool Examination revealed ova of S. mansoni and Trophozoite stages of E. histolytica.But the stool antigen examination for H. pylori infection was negative.

Abdominal ultrasound revealed hepatomegaly with hypodense hepatic nodules likely due to acute hepatitis, and also significant wall thickening and edema of the colon and the small bowel loops likely due to enterocolitis.

The results of complete blood count (CBC) were as follows: WBC = 12 *103(elevated), Neutrophil = 67.8%, Lymphocyte = 22.5%, Eosinophil = 9.7%, Platelet = 92 *103(Low), other parameters were all normal.

Aspartate transaminase (AST) was 137 U/L on the day of admission (elevated 2.5 times) and 35U/L on the 3rd days, whereas the alanine transaminase (ALT) was 110 U/L on the day of admission (elevated 2.5 times) 41U/L on the 3rd days.

Coagulation profile (all were elevated): PTT=68.2.4 seconds, PT = 21.1seconds, INR = 2.41, after 1 week PT = 16.4 seconds =1.17 (normal).

The renal function test revealed creatinine of 1.5 mg/dL and urea of 85 mg/dL, with BUN/Cr ratio of 26.5, suggestive of prerenal azotemia (from the vomiting and poor intake he had).

Urine analysis: Leucocyte = +1, WBC = 7-10/HPF, Protein = +2, Ketone = +1, and the rest of the urinalysis results were unremarkable. It suggests urinary tract infection, and perhaps kidney insults from Schistosoma mansoni.

The serum electrolytes and random blood sugar were all in the normal ranges.

Fecal Calprotectin (CLIA)=7.68 microgram/g [less than 50 is normal (negative)]. It helps to differentiate irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), monitor the effectiveness of IBD therapy, and detect IBD relapse.

Colonoscopy: After informed consent, video pan colonoscopy was done smoothly up to the cecum and revealed diffuse colon mucosal inflammation with intense rectal inflammation with extensive ulceration and exudates and loss of vascular patterns. Rectal biopsy was taken with the impression of ulcerative colitis r/o IBD with the recommendation of fluid and electrolyte and antibiotics with follow histology and laboratory tests for differential diagnosis and treatment.

The macroscopic examination (gross description): multiple gray white to gray brown soft tissue fragments,0.5 cm, in aggregate. Note: Due to the loss of elastic tension and to formalin shrinkage, the measurements in the gross description may be less than those taken at the time of surgical removal.

Microscopic description of biopsy: Section show colonic type mucosal fragments with diffuse lymphoplasmacytic and eosinophilic infiltrates in the lamina propria associated with mild crypt distortion, fibrosis, areas of hemorrhage and foci of neutrophilic infiltrates. There are few Schistosoma eggs and focus of giant cell reaction.

The final biopsy diagnosis was colon and rectum schistosomiasis.

He was admitted to our hospital for two weeks and was given prednisolone 2 mg/kg (ie, 30 mg po bid) and Praziquantel (40 mg/kg/day, ie, 2 tablets of 600 mg po/day). Serial determinations of liver and renal function tests and coagulation profiles were done. He also had repeated abdominal ultrasound exams, which all showed improvements over the previous results. He was then referred to a gastroenterologist for evaluation, where a colonoscopy and biopsy were performed, and schistosomiasis induced ulcerative colitis was confirmed, and he continued prednisolone 2 mg/kg (30 mg po bid) for another one month, and stopped being tapered over 2 months and the second dose of praziquantel (1200 mg) was also given within 1 month interval. Now, his clinical condition is apparently okay, and he is attending his school without any symptoms.