Patient information: This is Mr. RL, 27 years old, a welder by profession, single, of low socioeconomic level and with no particular medical history.

Clinical findings: the patient was confused (Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 13/15th), agitated pupils in mydriasis, had tremors with tachypnea and tachycardia, a hyperreflexia associated with spontaneous myoclonies more marked at the level of the lower limbs with a hypersudation and chills.

Timeline: the history of the disease goes back to a week before his consultation with a neurologist in the private sector, by the installation of persecution delusions, denial of filiation, a bizarre behaviour and hallucinatory attitudes and the picture was complicated by psychomotor agitation and an initial diagnosis of an acute psychotic episode was retained and the patient was put on haloperidol 5 mg daily.

Two months later, the evolution was marked by a bad compliance with the therapy with persistence of the psychotic symptomatology associated with negative symptoms such as loss of pleasure, isolation and abolition with a disturbed sleep, motivating the patient to make another appointment with the same treating doctor who added paroxetine 20 mg per day and amitriptyline 25 mg per day.

Several hours (6 to 8 hours) after taking the two antidepressants, the patient presented with a loss of consciousness and psychomotor agitation, which required admission to the intensive care unit.

Diagnostic approach: the patient underwent a complete biochemical evaluation, which showed electrolyte imbalances with metabolic acidosis and creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels of 100 IU/L. The cytobacteriological examination of urine, the study of cerebrospinal fluid and blood cultures were negative. The plasma concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP) and the blood count were normal.

The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed an arrhythmia of atrial fibrillation, and the chest radiograph and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain were unremarkable. The diagnosis of serotonergic syndrome was made after the infectious, metabolic or neurological etiology was ruled out.

Therapeutic intervention: the patient was placed on mechanical ventilation, gavage 500cc/8H, rehydration with plain water 500cc/8H, basic ration SG 5% + 2g Nacl + 2g Kcl +1g ca 2+ / 8h, and SS 0.9% 500cc/4H, sedation with midazolam 8mg/H, IPP 40mg/j, with an anticoagulant for preventive purposes and insulin according to dextro.

Follow-up and results: the patient's clinical, haemodynamic and neurological condition stabilised after 24 hours, after which he was transferred to the psychiatric department where the treating doctor found a patient who was calm in terms of motor function, well oriented in time and space, who had had a mystical religious and persecution delirium, some inappropriate responses, a disturbed judgement without the presence of a depressive, manic or confused syndrome. The evolution of the psychiatric symptomatology was marked by a good improvement with a good return to the pre-morbid condition, stabilised under atypical neuroleptic type olanzapine with an initial dose of 5 mg per day.
