A healthy 18 kg 4-year-old girl of Northern European descent [American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) Physical Status Classification I] presented for laser tonsillotomy, adenoidectomy, and tympanocentesis. Premedication included oral midazolam (0.1 mg/kg) and ibuprofen (10 mg/kg). Following attachment of standard monitoring devices [electrocardiogram (ECG), non-invasive blood pressure, pulse oximetry], anesthesia was induced with intravenous fentanyl 20 µg, propofol 70 mg, and mivacurium 6 mg. Dexamethasone 2.5 mg and ondansetrone 2 mg were given for prophylaxis of post-operative nausea and vomiting. General anesthesia was maintained with remifentanil (0.5 µg/kg/minute) and propofol (10 mg/kg/hour) under continuous processed electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring (Narcotrend, Narcotrend-Group, Hannover, Germany; target range 40–60).

The immediate postoperative course was notable for a lack of spontaneous ventilation and delayed emergence, despite Narcotrend indices of B1–B2 (80–89)—indicating light residual sedation—approximately 25 minutes after discontinuation of anesthetics. Interestingly, Narcotrend indices subsequently decreased again, providing readings of C1–C2 (70–79) over the following 40 minutes. A sudden spike to A (94), despite sustained apnea, prompted evaluation of her neuromuscular status and immediate re-initiation of sedation [remifentanil (0.2 µg/kg/minute) and propofol (4 mg/kg/hour)].

Recovery from neuromuscular blockade was evaluated using a peripheral nerve stimulator. Train-of-four testing (TOF, 2 Hz) did not elicit a response (TOF 0/4), indicating residual paralysis. A clinical diagnosis of suspected pseudocholinesterase deficiency was made after brief consideration of possible—but less likely—differential diagnoses (that is, narcotic overdose and central anticholinergic syndrome). Transfer to our pediatric intensive care unit was arranged for continued mechanical ventilation and monitoring.

The subsequent postoperative course was unremarkable. The patient could be safely extubated 8 hours after the administration of mivacurium (TOF 4/4), and was transferred back to the department of otorhinolaryngology. She was issued a medical alert card and discharged home after 2 days of observation.

The clinical diagnosis was confirmed using laboratory tests. Serum pseudocholinesterase activity was 940 kU/L (normal range 3200–6600 IU/L). Genetic testing identified compound heterozygosity in the BChE gene, and a diagnosis of autosomal recessive hereditary pseudocholinesterase deficiency was made. Compound heterozygosity is characterized by the presence of two different pathogenic alleles of a particular gene. Indeed, her non-consanguineous, phenotypically unremarkable parents were both found to be heterozygous carriers of different pathogenic variants of the BChE gene. Specifically, DNA sequencing identified a complex allele carrying the K and A variant of the BChE gene in the father (NM_000055.2: c. [293A > G; 1699G > A] p. (Asp98Gly; Ala567Thr); previously p. (Asp7OGIv:Ala539Thr)), while the mother was found to have the following variant: NM_000055.2:c. [428G > A; 1685-14 T > C] p. (Gly143Asp); previously p. (Gly115Asp) in).