A four-day old male infant born at 39 4/7 weeks’ gestation presents to an emergency department (ED) with worsening respiratory distress and stridor exacerbated by feeding and supine positioning.

He was born to a 31-year-old G2P2 mother with serologies significant for positive indirect Coomb’s test via an uncomplicated vaginal delivery with APGARs of eight and nine at one and 5 min, respectively. His birth weight was 3,050 g. Fetal ultrasound demonstrated concern for intracardiac focus, with an otherwise uncomplicated pregnancy. Nursery course was significant only for a failed hearing screen bilaterally and normal echocardiogram. The infant was discharged home on day of life two. He was noted to have nasal congestion at time of discharge. Family was instructed to suction his nose and use saline drops as needed.

On day of life four, the infant’s mother noted stridor associated with difficulty feeding and is directed to the ED by the pediatrician. Examination in the ED is significant for high-pitched, inspiratory stridor with tracheal tugging and subcostal retractions. Additionally, he is noted to have pectus excavatum. The stridor and increased work of breathing improve with prone or side lying positioning. Laboratory evaluation is significant for respiratory acidosis on venous blood gas [pH 7.18 and CO2 73 mmHg (9,732 Pa)] and urinalysis that reveals moderate bacteria and 11–20 white blood cells without the presence of urine nitrite or leukocyte esterase. A complete blood count is reassuring. He is placed on high flow nasal cannula and initiated on ampicillin and gentamicin after obtaining blood cultures.

He is escalated to continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) and transferred to a level III neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for further management and otolaryngology evaluation. A nasogastric tube was passed through bilateral nares without difficulty. Flexible laryngoscopy showed an immobile left vocal cord and narrow nasal cavities with edema of nasal turbinates, bilateral arytenoids, and vocal cords. Bronchoscopy did not reveal any further abnormalities. Further physical exam was notable for subtle dysmorphic features including low set ears, retromicrognathia, microphthalmia, and clinodactyly of toes. Empiric antibiotics were discontinued following reassuring infectious work-up. A multidisciplinary team was consulted.

The patient eventually required intubation at two weeks of life due to worsening respiratory failure. Nasal Ciprofloxacin and Dexamethasone were administered for upper airway edema. An MRI of the brain, neck, and chest showed a normal course of the recurrent laryngeal nerves. Genetics evaluation included a normal chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA). Further gene panel testing was positive for pathogenic variant in CHD7 gene, consistent with CHARGE syndrome. In this case, VFP was attributed to known association with CHARGE syndrome. Continued evaluation revealed further features consistent with CHARGE syndrome including bilateral colobomas, glaucoma, confirmed hearing loss, and genital abnormalities.

Repeat bronchoscopy on day of life 42 demonstrated improvement in overall laryngeal edema but continued mild edema of bilateral vocal cords. The patient was extubated post-bronchoscopy in the setting of improved airway edema. However, he was subsequently reintubated on day of life 46 due to worsening respiratory failure. Repeat laryngoscopy that day had shown continued edema. At this point, the patient had already received multiple short courses of Dexamethasone in an attempt to decrease the airway edema. Due to the need for reintubation, he was treated with topical Tobramycin and Dexamethasone applied directly to vocal cords via direct laryngoscopy for five days. Following this treatment, he was successfully extubated at two months old and underwent gastrostomy tube placement at three months.

At the time of gastrotomy tube placement, he underwent an additional bronchoscopy and microlaryngoscopy which demonstrated the originally affected left vocal cord was fully mobile but showed new immobility of right cord; the etiology of this is unclear. Both vocal folds were mildly edematous still but much improved from prior evaluation. Patient was discharged in room air at age four months and continues to follow closely with otolaryngology. On repeat outpatient laryngoscopy at four months of age, both cords appeared mobile with continued airway edema.

