We describe a 25-year-old woman diagnosed with AD since childhood and subsequent onset of slowly progressive vitiligo at the age of 16. At baseline examination, the patient presented diffuse cutaneous xerosis, excoriated papules and plaques on the back, and lichenified erythematous lesions on the upper limbs and dorsum of the hands with an Eczema Area and Severity Index (EASI) of 18. The patient reported intense itching (Number Rating Scale [NRS] = 10). Confluent achromic macules suggestive of vitiligo were also present on the elbows and on the face, predominantly on the eyelid region, bilaterally. The patient also showed multiple irregularly shaped achromic macules on the neck, trunk and dorsum of the hands, and initial hypopigmented manifestations on the left axillary region and left knee with a Vitiligo Area Scoring Index (VASI) of 0.45. Both skin conditions had an impact on her quality of life, resulting in a Dermatology Life Quality Index (DLQI) of 17.

Previous treatments for AD included topical and systemic corticosteroids, topical calcineurin inhibitors, antihistamines, and a short course of cyclosporine, which was discontinued due to intolerance. Previous treatment for vitiligo included short-term treatment with topical and systemic corticosteroids at disease onset and, for the first 2 years, without results. Subsequently, tacrolimus, a topical calcineurin inhibitor, was used for several years following a proactive pulsed maintenance regimen after an initial induction period, yielding minimal therapeutic benefits. Antioxidants and vitamin-based products were also used as adjuvant therapies. Due to logistical reasons, the patient refused phototherapy.

Given the coexistence of AD and vitiligo, and considering the potential additional benefits, systemic therapy with upadacitinib 15 mg daily was initiated after medical and laboratory evaluations to exclude pregnancy and other contraindications. Based on the approved indication of upadacitinib for AD, we opted to start treatment with a view to achieving the lowest effective dose.

Progressive improvement of AD was observed after the first weeks of treatment with clinical remission at week 16 (EASI 0; NRS 0) associated with improved quality of life (DLQI 0). At the same time, clear improvement of vitiligo was observed with complete repigmentation of the achromic areas on the neck, trunk, back of the hands, and elbows (Fig. 1b), and partial but significant repigmentation of the achromic patches of the eyelid region (Fig. 2b) (VASI = 0.25). An almost complete remission of vitiligo was achieved at week 28 of treatment and was maintained up to 1 year of follow-up, with no side effects except for a slight worsening of acne, easily controlled with topical therapies.