75-year-old woman, self-sufficient, with a history of arterial hypertension under treatment with losartan, presents a one-day history of generalized myalgia associated with weakness in the lower extremities (LEE) and a holocranial headache. She goes to emergency in an extra-system, is found to be hypertensive and is hospitalized; a CT scan and a magnetic resonance of the brain (MRI) are requested, which describe a non-compressive meningioma, without signs of posterior reversible encephalopathy. Symptomatic treatment is prescribed and she is discharged 48 hours later. However, the weakness progresses compromising bipedalism and affecting the upper extremities (UEE), along with increased pain in the extremities and a recurrence of headaches. On the fifth day of evolution, she consults in the emergency department of the Hospital Clínico de la Universidad de Chile.

He reports urinary and faecal retention two days ago. He denies episodes of loss of consciousness, dizziness, palpitations, hyperhidrosis or other indicative of dysautonomia. He also does not present respiratory difficulty, dysphonia or dysphagia. He denies recent respiratory or digestive infectious pictures or having received vaccinations in the last month.

Physical examination describes patient alert, oriented, hypertensive (172/86 mmHg), heart rate 90 bpm and resting vital signs normal. Neurological examination by specialist describes:

Visual acuity and fields are preserved.

Isochoric pupils, direct consensual photomotor reflex preserved, no nystagmus.

Right nasolabial fold obliterated, ipsilateral labial commissure droop.

Bilateral decreased gag reflex, no uvula deviation or palatal paresis.

Esternocleidomastoid and trapezius with M3 force.

Preserved tongue mobility, without atrophy or fasciculations.

EESS: Right: Global M2. Left: Proximal M2 and Distal M3.

EEII: Right: Global M2 force. Left: Global M3 force.

Cranial nerves without alterations; no pain or stiffness to neck movement.

Sensitivity preserved.

Osteotendinous reflexes (ROT) diminished in EESS and abolished in EEII.

Plantar flexor reflex (-).

Meningeal signs (-).

Laboratory tests showed leukocytosis (12,750/mL) and thrombocytosis (505,000/mL), normal range C-reactive protein, moderate hyponatraemia and hypocalcaemia. The lumbar puncture revealed a clear, colourless fluid with glucose of 80 mg/dL, protein of 232 mg/dL, no erythrocytes or leukocytes, Gram stain negative and culture negative.

A diagnosis of progressive flaccid arrhythmic tetraparesis with an albumin/citologic dissociation in the CSF compatible with GBS was made. In the context of a high risk of ventilatory failure due to early cephaloparesis and an EGRIS score of 5 points, admission to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) was decided.

The study was extended with electromyography revealing mixed polyradiculoneuropathic alteration with demyelinating and axonal components, in addition to active denervating elements in EESS. Treatment with IVIg was initiated for 5 days (0.4 g/kg/day), monitoring and supportive measures (including urinary catheter), in addition to assistance from kinesiology and occupational therapy.

The patient was admitted to the ICU with a urinary septic shock due to E. coli MS, and was started on antibiotics. She then developed a C. difficile infection without haemodynamic compromise, which was treated with oral metronidazole.

He is doing well, without respiratory difficulty, with gradual recovery of strength. However, he continues to have intense, burning, intermittent pain in his extremities that increases with movement. He was initially managed with a continuous infusion pump of fentanyl, which was later changed to SOS and paracetamol was added orally, pregabalin orally and metamizole intravenously at regular intervals. During his hospitalisation, there were 2 failed attempts to remove the urinary catheter.

She is transferred to the internal medicine department due to clinical stability.

Evolution and management of pain

Given the persistence of the pain, paracetamol was administered orally, pregabalin was administered orally (150 mg), was changed to metamizol IV SOS and it was suggested to initiate tramadol orally SOS which the patient rejected, indicating a fentanyl patch (6.25 mcg/hour). Possible pharmacological interactions between fentanyl and pregabalin were evaluated (increased risk of depressing the CNS), deciding to maintain and monitor.

He is progressing favorably, with intermittent pain persisting at a lower intensity that increases with active mobilization, so fentanyl 25 mcg IV is indicated prior to rehabilitation.

Discharge after 5 weeks of hospitalisation, maintaining transdermal fentanyl at the same dose every 72 hours and paracetamol 1 g po as needed; discontinuation of pregabalin.

Evolution and management of urinary retention

Given the persistence of urinary retention, urology suggested initiating tamsulosin 0.4 mg/day prior to discharge for relaxation of the bladder neck and catheter removal was scheduled one week post discharge, which was successful.
