This is a case of a 38 year right-handed newly diagnosed HIV + male patient with no history of medications or hospitalizations. He presented with a sudden paresis of the right upper and lower extremities, along with facial deviation to the left and demonstrated low verbal output, limitation in constructing sentences, and conveying thoughts or ideas effectively. He otherwise had no loss of consciousness or abnormal body movements. There was no fever or history of head trauma. The patient had no prior history of hypertension, diabetes, or hyperlipidemia. He denied any high-risk sexual contact.

Upon admission, the patient’s neurological examination revealed a FOUR coma scale of 16.3 He exhibited motor aphasia, right facial paralysis sparing the forehead, and right upper and lower extremity spastic hemiparesis with a strength of 3 out of 5 on the Medical Research Council scale. The plantar reflex was positive on the right, and Kerning’s sign, Brudzinski’s sign and Neck rigidity were all negative. The rest of the physical examination was within the normal range.


Diagnostic Assessment
Given the acute presentation of focal neurological deficit, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed. The results revealed left middle cerebral artery infarction (fronto-temporo-parieto-insular) and lenticulostriate territory (acute infarction). A week after his initial presentation, the patient exhibited new-onset visual disturbance and headache, promoting the decision to conduct a follow-up imaging CT scan. A new focus of hypodensity is noted involving the medial part of the right occipitotemporal lobe suggestive of right PCA territory acute infarction. The middle cerebral artery segments and its branches showed normal caliber, smooth wall, and patent lumen.

A complete blood count (CBC) was conducted, showing a normal white blood cell count (4.8 *10^3). Further investigation of conventional cardiovascular risk factors yielded unremarkable results. Trans thoracic echocardiography did not reveal any embolic source, and routine ECG did not detect any arrhythmia. Due to the atypical stroke presentation without traditional risk factors, further investigation was pursued.

Serological testing for infectious etiologies, including syphilis and HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), was ordered. Serum RPR (Rapid plasma regain) and subsequent TPPA (Treponema Pallidum Particle Agglutination) tests were reactive; however, the titer was not reported. There was a reactive HIV antibody test, and the absolute CD4+ lymphocyte count was 451 cells/mm3. This led to the decision to perform a lumbar puncture, a lumbar puncture detected cerebrospinal fluid positive for VDRL (Venereal Disease Research Laboratory). There is no CSF pleocytosis, and all other CSF parameters were within normal limits.


Treatment and Outcome
The patient was prescribed a daily dose of 81mg aspirin and 80 mg atorvastatin, assuming that it was an ischemic stroke. In the context of the reactive syphilis and HIV serology, antimicrobial therapy of ceftriaxone 2 g intravenously (i.v.) daily for 14 days was administered, followed by benzathine penicillin intramuscularly (i.m.) at a dose of 2.4 million International Units once a week for an additional three weeks. Dolutegravir based regimen (DTG/3TC/TDF) Antiretroviral treatment was also intiated, and later, the patient was discharged for rehabilitation.

Currently, he is under long-term follow-up for HIV and neurosyphilis. The patient was regularly followed up in the outpatient clinic. A recent follow-up showed partial recovery from aphasia, and he has regained the ability to walk. The CD4 cell count remains stable.