4-year-old boy with no relevant antecedents, who began with atonic focal crises from 16 months of age, characterized by hypotonia of the left upper limb, associated with disconnection and hypertonia of the lower jaw in wake and nighttime weakness, adding sporadic clonic spasms of the ipsilateral shoulder. He received multiple anti-seizure regimens (carbamazepine, clobazam, levetiracetam, topiramate, oxcarbazepine and sultimate) with no improvement. Physical examination evidenced mild left brachial plexus hemiparesis. Psycho-pedagogical evaluation reported a mild neurodevelopmental delay (mainly in the areas of language and fine motor skills). Assuming the case as a pharmacoresistant focal epilepsy with atonic crises, a video EEG was performed to determine the electroclinical pattern, monitored for 72 hours, while the treatment with oxcarbazepine and topiramate was maintained. Eight crises were recorded, seven in wake and one under sleep, characterized by a feeling of discomfort in the left upper limb, followed by immobility with hypotonia of the same limb, followed by mild clonic spasms of the ipsilateral shoulder. The interictal tracing evidenced left hemispheric slowing and brief waves of slow waves, with sharp waves generalized, sometimes with a generalized wave of the left. The crises appeared to be simple focal epilepsy with sensory aura, consistent with the right parietal area. After determining the electrical pattern, a brain MRI was performed with EV contrast, showing a perirolandic posterior right lesion, with loss of definition between white and grey matter, consistent with focal cortical dysplasia. Assuming the case as a pharmacoresistant structural focal epilepsy, a video EEG was performed with deep electrodes and cortical stimulation, in order to determine the relationship of the epileptogenic area with the lesion and the neighbouring eloquent areas, as well as its extension. The deep electrodes were located in the lesion antero-superior and posterior to the lesion. Then in the primary motor and sensory areas at the superior, middle and inferior levels. The ictal EEG revealed repetitive activity of sharp waves in corresponding electrodes to the lesion and superior to the lesion, then diffuse disorganisation of the basal activity and, later, activity of rapid waves in corresponding electrodes to the lesion and superior to the lesion. For cortical stimulation, an Integra type Ojeman Stimulation System was used. Parameters: Frequency 50 Hz, pulse duration 0.5 msec, intensity 0.5 to 10 mA, in trains of 5 to 10 seconds, in progressive increases of 1 mA. When stimulating the anterior electrode of the lesion at 3.62 mA, negative motor phenomena of the left upper limb were triggered. With the latter, the epileptogenic area was defined with exactitude and surgical treatment was planned, avoiding compromising eloquent areas. The lesion, of displasic appearance and firm consistency, peri-primary sensory area, was resected under optical microscopy. Isolated dysmorphic neurons were recognized, with loss of polarity, alteration of the nucleus/ cytoplasm, irregular distribution of the Nissl substance and bulky cells, of irregular large vesicular nucleus and eosinophilic cytoplasm, of the balloon type, spread in the thickness of the cortex and white matter. Diagnosis: Developmental cortical malformation. Focal cortical dysplasia type IIb (presence of balloon cells).
