This is a case of a 12-year-old male child from Yirgalem city in southern Ethiopia who presented to Yirgalem General Hospital pediatric emergency with right upper quadrant pain of 3 days duration which was severe, colicky, and lasted around 10 minutes per episode with no aggravating or relieving factors. The pain was followed by nausea and non-bilious vomiting. He had a history of passing Ascaris worm one month back for which he was treated with oral albendazole at the local health center. Otherwise, the patient had an unremarkable history. Physical examination revealed that the vital signs were within the normal range and there was a slightly icteric sclera. The liver was slightly tender with a total liver span of 11cm.

Initial laboratory investigation revealed a normal complete blood count and ova of Ascaris lumbricoides on stool examination. Liver enzyme Aspartate transaminase (AST) was 86U/L, and alanine transaminase (ALT) was 141U/L. The total and direct bilirubin was 1.84 and 1.31 mg/dl, respectively. Abdominal ultrasound done on the same day showed two adjacent, well-defined, tubular, and hyperechoic structure with a central lucency on subcostal axial view seen within the common bile duct (CBD) and right intrahepatic duct. The CBD was dilated to 1 cm, and the proximal intrahepatic duct is slightly dilated. The report concluded that there were two Ascaris worms within the biliary tree.

The patient was admitted to the wards with the assessment of obstructive jaundice secondary to intrabiliary ascariasis for conservative management. He was kept nil per mouth and was put on maintenance fluid. The pain subsided on the second day of admission and the icterus disappeared on the third day of admission. The direct bilirubin had also dropped to 0.54 mg/dl on the third day of admission. A follow-up ultrasound on his fifth post-admission day showed that the duct was empty and the worm had moved out of the biliary system. Liver function test done on the Sixth day showed that ALT has returned to 36 U/L and AST was 48 U/L. Subsequently, he was dewormed with albendazole 400mg single dose and was discharged home on his seventh admission day. Currently, he is doing well with no symptoms, and he has returned to his school.