Patient, 15 months old, female, first daughter of healthy parents, not consanguineous. Her pregnancy was monitored and passed without complications. She was born by vaginal delivery at 40 weeks of gestational age, weighing 2635 grams (2 percentile), height of 48 cm (8 percentile) and head circumference of 33 cm (5 percentile), according to the curves of Alarcón and Pittaluga4 with an APGAR score of 9-10.

She had normal psychomotor development and no intercurrent illnesses. At 4 months of age, she was auscultated for a heart murmur during a pediatric check-up and was referred to cardiology. An echocardiogram revealed pulmonary artery stenosis, which, together with a prominent forehead on physical examination, led to a referral to clinical genetics.

In the genetic evaluation, characteristics such as high anterior implantation of hair, straight eyebrows, sunken eyes, prominent auricular pavilions, low nasal bridge, convex nasal profile with bulbous tip, short columella and pointed chin were observed. In addition, a systolic murmur was detected in the pulmonary focus during auscultation. There were no alterations in the abdomen, genitals or extremities.

In the presence of suspected SALG, additional examinations were performed. Spinal radiographs showed morphologically butterfly-like D4 and D6 vertebrae and an incomplete ossification of the posterior arch of L5. Radiographs of the extremities and pelvis, as well as abdominal and renal ultrasound, showed no abnormalities. In the analyses of hormonal, biochemical parameters, liver and renal function, only a slight elevation of LDH was observed.

The main diagnostic hypothesis was a commercial panel for congenital heart defects and heterotaxy, which included the two genes associated with SALG (JAG1 and NOTCH2), allowing the study of point variants and copy number variants (CNVs) of the genes analyzed, an aspect relevant to the pathology under study. This analysis identified a pathogenic microdeletion in heterozygosity that covered the entire coding sequence of the JAG1 gene, in addition to three heterozygous variants of uncertain significance in the DNAH11, NME8 and NEK8 genes (associated with primary ciliary dyskinesia and nephronopthisis, both of autosomal recessive inheritance).

As a complete deletion of the JAG1 gene was identified, and considering reports of contiguous genes associated with pathologies that could require additional interventions in the patient, a more exhaustive study was decided to be performed by a molecular karyotype (Affymetrix CytoScan 750K). The array confirmed the presence of a pathogenic microdeletion, arr[GRCh37] 20p12.2(10414643_10792802)x1, of approximately 378 kb, that included 5 genes: MKKS, SLX4IP, JAG1, MIR6870, LINC01752. This confirmed molecularly the SALG due to the complete deletion of the JAG1 gene.

The patient fulfilled three of the seven clinical criteria for the diagnosis of SALG, with pulmonary artery branch stenosis, butterfly-shaped thoracic vertebrae, and typical facial features including sunken eyes, bulbous nasal tip, and pointed chin. In subsequent check-ups, no alterations in liver or renal function tests, ophthalmologic anomalies, or xanthomas were observed. Her neurodevelopment is age-appropriate.

The parents were suggested to undergo a molecular karyotype study to determine the possibility of being carriers of CNVs, which would put them at a 50% risk of having another child with the condition. However, due to financial reasons, this study was not performed.

