The patient was a 0-day-old newborn female of Han Chinese ethnicity, born at 36 weeks of gestation to a gravida 3, para 2 woman, weighing 2650 g. She was delivered by emergent cesarean section owing to fetal distress, with Apgar scores of 6 at 1 min and 5 min. Her blood type was O, and RhD was positive. At birth, she presented with pallor, scattered ecchymosis across multiple areas of the body, mucosal bleeding, and respiratory failure, with minor hemorrhagic oozing also observed at venipuncture sites. Umbilical artery blood gas analysis showed a hematocrit of 0.08 and hemoglobin of 23 g/L. The patient required endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. After red blood cell suspension transfusion, initial blood counts revealed severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count of 12 × 109/L), anemia (hemoglobin of 46 g/L), and leukopenia (leukocyte count of 1.11 × 109/L).

The patient was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit at 3 hours of life for further treatment. During hospitalization, she was diagnosed with disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), with activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 73.10 seconds, prothrombin time (PT) 25.4 seconds, fibrinogen (FIB) 1.01 g/L, international normalized ratio (INR) 2.26, and D-dimer > 20 mg/L. She was supported with mechanical ventilation, correction of acidosis, and transfusion of fresh frozen plasma. Despite multiple transfusions of red blood cells and platelets, hemoglobin and platelet levels remained below normal (hemoglobin 106 g/L and platelets 11 × 109/L on day 3). She also received anti-infective treatment, cardiotonic therapy, vasopressors, and other symptomatic treatment. A peripheral smear showed enlarged pale staining areas of red blood cells, with a reticulocyte proportion of 1.5% and a negative direct Coombs test. Bone marrow aspiration was not performed owing to her severe condition. There was no clinical or laboratory evidence of neonatal sepsis, and tests for toxoplasma, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus (TORCH); hepatitis virus; and Treponema pallidum were negative. Physical examination on admission revealed poor mental status, decreased muscle tone in the extremities, and sluggish pupillary reflex to light. All other findings were normal. Bedside cranial ultrasound and electroencephalogram revealed severe intracranial hemorrhage and low voltage, respectively. Echocardiogram findings were suggestive of patent ductus arteriosus, patent foramen ovale, and pulmonary hypertension. Abdominal ultrasound indicated gastrointestinal hemorrhage. Despite all efforts, the patient died on the third day of life due to multiple organ failure and massive intracranial hemorrhage (detailed information can be found in the Supplementary Report).

The patient’s parents were non-consanguineous and both had thalassemia. The mother, who shared the same blood type as the patient, had mild anemia during pregnancy (hemoglobin level of 97 g/L) and a history of induced abortion. Prenatal examinations showed no abnormalities, including no fetal hydrops, and she did not receive any medications during pregnancy that could lead to early-onset hemorrhagic disease in the newborn. The patient also had a 1-year-old brother who was in good health. Her grandfather had a history of mild anemia (specifics unknown).

Informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents, and Sanger sequencing was performed to discover the cause of the disease. A novel heterozygous MECOM frameshift mutation [NM_001105078: c.157_158del (p.Met53Glyfs*2)] was detected in the proband. This variant changed the 53rd amino acid from methionine (codon ATG) to glycine (codon GGT), followed by an early termination. The mutation was not found in the parents or elder brother. The variant was classified as pathogenic according to American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) guidelines [14]. The “AutoPVS1” algorithm provided strong support for the PVS1 interpretation of p.Met53Glyfs*2, indicating pathogenicity. The variant has not been previously reported in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) or Clinvar. Conservation analysis showed that the Met53 residue is highly conserved across mammalian species (including human, mouse, rat, chimpanzee, and bovine) using Clustal Omega. Three-dimensional protein structure models of the wild type and mutant MECOM proteins were generated using SWISS-MODEL, indicating that the frameshift mutation caused early termination of amino acid synthesis, significantly altering the protein structure.