A 9-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital with recurrent fever over 3 months despite receiving intermittent antibiotic therapy at a local hospital. She had a history of patent ductus arteriosus ligation and aortic valvuloplasty at age 3. Routine follow-up echocardiography indicated progressive aortic regurgitation, with the latest scan before admission showing severe aortic regurgitation accompanied by left ventricular dilation. However, the patient remained asymptomatic.

A detailed workup was carried out to clarify the cause of fever. While blood culture results were negative, mNGS on blood samples identified Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, a gram-negative bacillus commonly found in oral flora, also a member of the HACEK group (Haemophilus, Aggregatibacter, Cardiobacterium, Eikenella, and Kingella)—a significant cause of blood culture-negative IE. Additionally, transthoracic echocardiology (TTE) revealed vegetations on the aortic valve, with the largest measured 8 mm in length, leading to the diagnosis of IE. Empirical antimicrobial therapy with intravenous ceftriaxone 80 mg/kg/day was initiated, and dental caries were removed as a potential source of infection.

As part of routine screening for neurological complications, a cerebral magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) revealed the presence of an IIA on the right parietal lobe, measuring 8 × 6 mm. Unfortunately, the patient experienced an acute ICH 2 days after the examination, before any intervention could take place. An emergency cerebral CT scan confirmed haemorrhage on the right parietal-temporal lobe, measuring up to 48 × 40 mm, resulting from the rupture of the IIA. The patient was promptly referred to neurosurgeons, and an emergency craniotomy was performed for haematoma removal and aneurysm resection.

The patient experienced a full recovery without major neurological impairment after 4 weeks of neurological rehabilitation and antimicrobial therapy. As follow-up TTE revealed significant enlargement of the aortic valvular vegetation, measuring over 10 mm in length, cardiac surgery was rescheduled due to the lack of response to antimicrobial therapy and the increasing size of the vegetation, which posed a high risk of embolism.

However, a repeat cerebral computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a recurrent aneurysm (7 × 7 mm) with haemorrhage at the previously operated site, adding further complexity to the condition. Despite the indication for early surgery due to enlarging vegetation and severe aortic regurgitation, the recurrent IIA and concurrent haemorrhage posed a significant challenge to performing cardiac surgery.

Following a multidisciplinary consultation, a consensus was reached to perform a one-stage procedure. This operation was carried out in a hybrid theatre and involved the combination of transcatheter aneurysm embolization with sequential aortic vegetation removal and mechanical valve replacement. The procedure proved to be a resounding success, and postoperative recovery progressed without complications. Postoperative work-up showed good aortic prosthesis function and complete isolation of the aneurysm without further haemorrhage before discharge. Although both preoperative and postoperative blood cultures were negative, antimicrobial therapy was continued for another 4 weeks following cardiac surgery. Follow-up assessments indicated that the patient maintained good cardiac and neurological function 3 years after discharge.