A 67-year-old man presented to our center with a history of gait instability with right lateral thrust and urinary incontinence of three weeks' evolution. Notable antecedents included type 2 diabetes under treatment with oral metformin and arterial hypertension; possible excessive consumption of alcohol in the past. At the time of admission, the examination highlighted the impossibility of maintaining bipedalism, with a fall backwards and to the right; as well as difficulty in postural control in sedentary position. The examination of motor balance in extremities and cranial nerves was normal. At the cognitive level, the temporal disorientation, difficulty in calculation and the impairment of delayed memory were notable.

A head CT scan performed in the emergency department showed a tetraventricular dilation with transudation. A subsequent MRI scan performed 48 hours after admission showed the same hydrocephalus, with no contrast-enhancing lesions and areas of gliosis affecting the middle and lower cerebellar peduncles and vermis.

The usual preoperative study was performed at admission with no significant findings in the chest radiograph or in the analytical study with blood count, basic biochemistry and coagulation.

In view of these imaging findings, endoscopic treatment of hydrocephalus was decided, which was performed 72 hours later, with intraoperative collection of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Endoscopic fenestration of the floor of the third ventricle was performed. It is worth noting that the opening pressure of the CSF was 22 mm Hg measured when the procedure was performed. The immediate postoperative course was without incident. The analytical and microbiological studies of peripheral blood showed no data of note. In the CSF study, pleocytosis was demonstrated with 335 cells/µL (normal range, RN: 0-5), predominantly monomorphonuclear (71%), with glucorrache of 47 mg/dL (RN: 40-80, with simultaneous glycemia of 96 mg/dL) and proteinorrache of 189 mg/dL (RN: 15-60). In the culture of CSF, growth of Cryptococcus neoformans was detected.

This microbiological diagnosis was completed with a chest and abdominal CT scan, with no findings of involvement in other locations. Screening for immunosuppression was performed, including HIV, HBV and HCV serologies, which were negative, with lymphocyte counts of 2,250/mm3 (RN: 1,300-4,000) and IgG immunoglobulin counts of 1,000 mg/dL (RN: 650-1,600), IgM of 200 mg/dL (RN: 54-300) and IgA of 180 mg/dL (RN: 40-350). Glycosylated haemoglobin values: 5% (RN: <5.7%) and liver function were also normal; albumin: 5 g/dL (RN: 3.4-5.4), alkaline phosphatase: 100 IU/L (RN: 44 to 147), alkaline transaminase (ALT): 50 IU/L (RN:5-60), aspartate aminotransferase (AST): 33 IU/L (RN: 10-34), gamma-glutamyl transaminase (GGT): 45 IU/L (RN: 5-80) and total bilirubin: 1 mg/dL (RN: 0.1-1.2).

In view of the findings of C. neoformans infection, and as our center did not have flucytosine, intravenous treatment with liposomal amphotericin B (5 mg/kg/day) and fluconazole (800 mg/day) was initiated for two weeks. After that time, a lumbar puncture was performed to study the CSF, with normalization of the biochemical parameters and of the opening pressure, and absence of C. neoformans observed. Intravenous treatment with oral fluconazole (800 mg/day) was continued for eight more weeks.

The patient's evolution was favorable, with progressive neurological recovery. In the first week after surgery, the patient's walking and instability improved, and the rest of the neurological symptoms improved after finishing the antifungal treatment. The MRI control performed two weeks later verified the resolution of the hydrocephalus.
