A 4-month-old girl was admitted to our institution for evaluation and management of poor growth. She was the fourth baby of consanguineous parents; one of her brothers died at the age of 2 months due to sudden infant death syndrome with the other brothers being normal. She was delivered by cesarean section at 38 weeks gestation due to intrauterine growth retardation. Her birth weight was 1240 g, her length was 37.3 cm and her head circumference was 30.5 cm. At the age of 12 days, she was admitted to the neonatal ward for suspected sepsis for a week and discharged in good general condition. On examination, she was found to be severely growth retarded with normal mentality, her weight was 2.5 kg, her length was 47 cm while the head circumference was 36 cm (all growth parameters below the 3rd centile). Clinical examination revealed abnormalities of the craniofacial region with elfin facies, protruding, deformed ears, big widely placed eyes, depressed nasal bridge, overgrown gum, prominent nipples, umbilical hernia, abdominal distension, dark skin (acanthosis nigricans), lipodystrophy, wrinkled hairy loose skin, and wrinkled loose skin and abnormal body proportions with very big feet and palm. Examination of the genitalia showed a big clitoris without palpable gonads. Cardiac auscultation revealed a murmur suggestive of ventricular septal defect (VSD) which was confirmed by echocardiography. The rest of the systemic examination was within normal limits. Investigations revealed hypoglycemia with fasting blood glucose ranging between 33 mg% to 46 mg%, and high levels of postprandial glucose ranging between 299 mg% and 476 mg% in repeated measurement, insulin level was high (345 uIU/ml, N: 2–25 uIU/ml) and C-peptide levels (22 ng/mL). FT4 level was 1.4 ng/dL (normal range:0.7 to 2.0), TSH level was 3.2 uIU/mL (normal range: 0.4 to 5.0), ACTH, cortisol, and 17 hydroxyprogesterone levels were normal. The assay of basal GH level was high (29.4 ng/mL), on the other hand, the level of IGF‐1 was low (30 μg/L), normal level (82–166 μg/L), and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein three was 0.15 mg/L (N: 0.81–1.9). MRI of the abdomen was normal. An echocardiographic study revealed a VSD with no evidence of cardiomyopathy. The chromosomal study was normal [46, XX]. A molecular genetics study revealed IR gene mutation responsible for the occurrence of DS. The parents were heterozygous carriers of this mutation. According to the above-mentioned data, a diagnosis of DS was made. Our patient accomplished control of blood glucose that was maintained between 78 and 146 mg/dl and glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) of 7.8% on insulin glargine 1.6 unit/kg divided into two doses per day,with frequent nasogastric formula milk feeding. She was discharged from the hospital with the recommendation of follow-up in the outpatient clinic for repeating echocardiography and arranging the schedule for treatment by rhIGF-1.