52-year-old male patient with no medical history, transferred from a lower-level hospital to our institution due to a tonic-clonic seizure secondary to alcohol withdrawal and non-reduced right LFGHP. He was evaluated by a traumatologist 24 hours after admission, and was found to be conscious, with bilateral ecchymosis of the shoulders and severe limitation of passive external rotation on both sides. In addition, the patient was restrained physically at this point, with both feet and his left hand held down by intermittent psychomotor agitation.

The initial evaluation included a thorough review of the patient's admission radiographs, which showed a right LFGHP and a left simple posterior dislocation. This second injury (simple posterior dislocation of the left shoulder) was not diagnosed at the referring facility, and took approximately 48 hours to be diagnosed at our facility.

Computed tomography (CT) of both shoulders was requested to better characterize the injuries. These images showed a marked worsening of the left shoulder injury since the time of the first radiographic study, possibly secondary to the physical restraint of the patient. This evidence of progression from a simple left posterior glenohumeral dislocation on admission radiographs to a LFGHP on the CT taken 48 hours later.


Planning

The preoperative study of the right shoulder showed bone indemnity of the glenoid and 40% involvement of the articular surface of the humerus, but with a large fragment with the possibility of osteosynthesis in continuity with the lesser tuberosity, so it was planned to fix this fragment by spongeous screw 4.0 mm partial thread and high strength sutures. In the left shoulder, no significant bone defect was evidenced in the glenoid and the defect of the articular surface of the humerus was 20%, so it was planned to fill the defect with the fragment of the lesser tuberosity at the time of osteosynthesis (imitating the surgery of McLaughlin).


Surgical technique

Open reduction and internal fixation with bilateral locked-plate is decided. The patient is placed in a beach chair position and the surgical fields are prepared in the usual way for the right shoulder. The fracture focus is accessed by a classic deltopectoral approach. A digital maneuver is performed to reduce the posterior fragment of the humeral head with a posterior mini-open incision of the size of a standard diagnostic arthroscopy portal. A provisional reduction of the fracture is achieved using high-strength sutures and needles. A partial 4.0 mm spongy screw and high-strength sutures are used to fix both fragments of the humeral head. Definitive fixation of the fracture with a Philos (Depuy Synthes®) plate achieves adequate reduction and stability of fragments. Fixation is increased with high-strength sutures to the tendons of the rotator cuff that are tied to the plate. Closure by planes of the right shoulder, healing and immobilization of the extremity with a universal shoulder immobilizer.
The surgical field of the left shoulder is immediately prepared. Classic deltopectoral approach is performed again to reach the fracture focus using an accessory posterior portal for digital manipulation and reduction of the humeral head. Fixation and osteosynthesis are performed in the same way as described for the right shoulder with the exception of the spongiosa screw, as the anterior fragment could be adequately fixed only with the use of high strength sutures.
Postoperative management consisted of the use of bilateral shoulder immobilizer for four weeks. A pendular exercise of flexion-extension of the elbow and exercises of the fist were given to be performed from the second postoperative week to tolerance (according to the level of pain). In the radiographic control of the first month, loss of reduction of the greater left tuberosity was observed. It was decided to perform revision surgery achieving adequate fixation of the fragment with high-strength sutures.
The patient is left with a shoulder immobilizer for an additional four weeks on the left shoulder. The self-administered exercise regimen is restarted as described previously from the second postoperative week on a bilateral basis. At the sixth week after the revision surgery, face-to-face kinesiological therapy is initiated twice a week. After 30 sessions of kinesiological rehabilitation, the patient is able to return to work five months after the initial injury.
Follow-up one year after the initial surgery shows that the patient has recovered strength and mobility in the right shoulder. The left shoulder still has severe limitations in the range of motion, especially in external rotation. At this point, it is decided to perform arthroscopic joint release surgery and remove the osteosynthesis in the left shoulder.
In his last check-up two years after the trauma, the patient showed a favorable evolution, consistent with the functional scales evaluated.
