A 64-year-old male pig farmer presented to our hospital an hour after the jaws of a farm forklift hit his face, including his left eye. His chief complaint was loss of vision in the left eye. He had been regularly followed up at our hospital for fundus examination for diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and dyslipidemia after cataract surgery. On admission, the patient was conscious, afebrile, and in a stable condition. His blood pressure was 164/98 mmHg, heart rate was 68 beats/min, and oxygen saturation was 98 %. On initial examination, an open globe injury was noted, and the left eye was shrunken with a scleral laceration. The intraocular pressure was unmeasurable. A slit-lamp examination revealed that the anterior chamber was deep; however, cells and blood were observed. The intraocular lens was lost. Fundus examination was difficult because of the edematous cornea and blood in the anterior chamber. B-scan ultrasonography revealed a hypotonic, antero-posteriorly shrunken eyeball. The Ocular Trauma Score raw point was calculated to be 26, based on a previous report. The right eye was intact, with a best-corrected visual acuity of 20/20 and an intraocular pressure of 13 mmHg.

On the same day, we performed scleral suturing with irrigation of the anterior chamber with vancomycin and ceftazidime to prevent endophthalmitis under local anesthesia. The ruptured sclera on the superior temporal side was accessed after temporary disinsertion of the lateral rectus muscle. Postoperatively, meropenem (3 g/day) was administered intravenously, along with topical instillation of 1.5 % levofloxacin six times daily, 0.1 % betamethasone six times daily, and tropicamide/phenylephrine once daily. Computed tomography of the head revealed no bone fractures around the eyes. Postoperatively, the ocular shape was maintained; however, bleeding in the anterior chamber continued, and prominent vitreous hemorrhage was observed on B-scan ultrasonography. Prominent folds in the Descemet's membrane were also observed. Two days later, there was no leakage from the sutured wound, and the intraocular pressure improved to 7.1 mmHg; however, the fundus could not be observed. An electroretinogram obtained 10 days postoperatively showed poor response to light in the left eye. Visual acuity was limited to light perception. Subsequently, intravenous antibiotics were discontinued, and the patient was discharged.

Although vitreous surgery was planned to remove vitreous hemorrhage and observe the fundus, the patient was undecided on undergoing further surgery because the visual prognosis was uncertain. However, he requested surgery 3 weeks later, and vitrectomy of the left eye was performed under topical anesthesia. Owing to severe corneal edema and poor visibility, the surgery was performed with the 25-gauge Constellation Vision System (Alcon) after debriding the corneal epithelium. The proliferative membranes were treated, the retina was reinstated with perfluorocarbon, and retinal photocoagulation was performed (200 mW, 0.2 s, 400 shots). The surgery was completed with intraocular silicone oil replacement and suturing of the sclera and conjunctiva with 8–0 Vicryl, followed by ofloxacin eye ointment application. Postoperatively, the patient was treated with 1.5 % levofloxacin four times daily, 0.1 % betamethasone four times daily, and 0.1 % bromfenac twice daily.

One month after vitrectomy, postoperative inflammation gradually subsided, and only light perception was noted. A wide-field fundus camera revealed retinal hemorrhage. The intraocular pressure was 3 mmHg. Levofloxacin and betamethasone were discontinued; however, bromfenac was continued. Two months after vitrectomy, inflammation in the anterior chamber stabilized, and there was no intraocular bleeding. However, proliferative vitreoretinopathy recurred, and tractional retinal detachment progressed. As visual function could not be maintained, the patient chose to avoid additional surgery, and a follow-up plan was decided. Topical 0.1 % bromfenac was discontinued 5 months postoperatively. Two years postoperatively, the left eye showed no light perception, and the intraocular pressure was 4.7 mmHg with severe proliferative vitreoretinopathy. No sympathetic ophthalmitis was observed in the right eye for 2.5 years postoperatively without additional immunosuppressant use.