27-year-old woman from the province of Buenos Aires with no personal or family history of significance, consulted for vaginal bleeding. Colposcopic study showed a pedicled polypoid formation that protruded through the external cervical os. A biopsy sample was taken for evaluation. With the diagnosis of sarcoma, chemotherapy was initiated to reduce the lesion mass. After the lesion was reduced in size, the woman was referred to our institution for surgical treatment. A total hysterectomy with adnexa was received, fixed in 10% formalin. Body 5 × 5 × 3.2 cm, neck 3.5 × 3 × 2 cm, both tubes 4.5 × 0.7 cm and ovaries 4 × 2.5 × 2.5 cm. When the piece was opened, a pedicled polypoid formation of 8.5 cm in diameter was observed at the level of the cervical-isthmic junction, which emerged into the endocervical canal and externalized through the external cervical os. The outer surface was brown, lobed, with reddish sectors. When cut, it was white, soft, with gelatinous-looking sectors and cystic formations of up to 0.6 cm in maximum dimension. After routine processing, histological sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H-E), which showed alternating cell sectors with lax, myxoid areas, along with typical isthmic-endometrial glands. The predominantly fusocellular atypical proliferation was arranged in nests, consisting of cells with wide eosinophilic cytoplasm and eccentric nuclei with homogeneous chromatin, some pleomorphic. Transverse cytoplasmic striations were observed in these cells. The stroma was largely myxoid and richly vascularized. Distinct areas of densely condensed cells immediately and closely adjacent to the intact epithelial lining, but separated from it by a thin layer of lax stroma, were noted. This is known as the cambium layer. Immunohistochemical techniques were performed for desmin, actin-specific muscle (ASM) and myogenin (MYF4), which were positive, while actin of the smooth muscle was negative. This immunolabelling allowed the striated muscle lineage to be identified and, ultimately, the diagnosis, along with the morphological picture, of embryonic RMS. Also, the presence of grouped rhabdomoblasts constituting the cambium layer at the subepithelial level was essential and necessary to typify embryonic RMS as botryoid, independently of the macroscopic presentation in the form of polypoid clusters.
