22-year-old male from Dolores, Buenos Aires, Argentina, who consulted the Otorhinolaryngology Service of our institution for a three-week old case, characterized by a right nasal cavity tumour, which caused homolateral nasal respiratory insufficiency, rhinorrhea and intermittent epistaxis. On examination, the patient denied relevant antecedents, such as underlying diseases, similar lesions and regular medication. As antecedent occupational activity, he worked in rural areas, in close contact with dogs and farm animals (sheep, horses and cattle), which drink from a nearby water source. On physical examination, with relevant anterior rhinoscopy, a friable, bleeding, polypoid mass was evident, which occupied the entire right nasal cavity, with implantation at the level of the septum. The patient came with a computed tomography scan performed two weeks earlier (few cuts), in which a right nasal tumour, posterior septal deviation to the right and free paranasal sinuses were observed. It should be noted that, although the tomography was not too old, it did not allow the size of the lesion to be determined with accuracy at the time of the consultation, given the rapid growth of the lesion. Surgical treatment was opted for, and the total resection of the tumour from the septum was performed by endoscopic surgery. The same was sent to the Pathology Service for subsequent evaluation. The total material was received, fixed in 10% formol. On macroscopic inspection, a brown-red, scaly fragment was identified, with whitish areas, 2.3 × 2.2 × 1.1 cm. The sample was processed routinely and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Histologically, the polyp presented respiratory and squamous epithelial lining, marked chronic granulomatous inflammatory process at the stromal level, with the presence of abundant thick-walled cystic structures between 100 and 500 µm (sporangios), which contained abundant endospores in different evolutionary stages. In view of the findings described, techniques of periodic acid Schiff (PAS) and Grocott were performed in a second time, which were positive, allowing the diagnosis of nasal cavity rhinosporidiosis. 100 mg of dapsone was indicated three times a week for three weeks. The patient, almost two years after the onset of the case, did not present recurrences or other complications.
