A 70-year-old man with chronic renal disease due to diabetic nephropathy started hemodialysis in June 2013. He underwent a deceased-donor transplant with expanded criteria (93% kidney donor profile index [KDPI], one HLA-A, one HLA-B, and zero HLA-DR incompatibilities; and calculated antibody reactivity panel [PRAC] of 20% in class I and 0% in class II, with no donor-specific antibodies [DSA]) in August 2014. He had a positive CMV IgG serology and the donor's serology was unknown. The patient received induction therapy with a single dose of 3 mg/kg antithymocyte globulin and maintenance therapy with tacrolimus (TAC), mycophenolate sodium (MPS), and prednisone. No CMV prophylaxis was given. He had a favorable clinical course with a serum creatinine of 1.2 mg/dL after five years of transplant (eGFR CKD-EPI 61mL/min/1.73m2), without CMV infection or episodes of acute rejection.

One year after transplant, he was diagnosed with clear cell carcinoma of the native left kidney and underwent a curative nephrectomy. At this time, the dose of MFS was reduced to 360 mg BID and blood concentrations of TAC were maintained between 7 to 12 ng/mL.

He was admitted in December 2019 with a complaint of decreased visual acuity of the left eye with a seven day history, associated with local hyperaemia, but without any exudate. The patient had no complaints of the right eye. He underwent a complete ophthalmologic evaluation, which resulted in a diagnosis of suspected retinitis associated with herpes infection. Immediate empirical treatment with intravenous acyclovir was initiated and MFS was discontinued. A complete investigation for other immunodeficiency states was negative, including negative serologies for HIV, syphilis, bartonellosis and toxoplasmosis. The blood viral load for Herpes simplex and Varicella Zoster by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was undetectable, but was positive for CMV (49 IU/mL - the lower limit of quantification is <31 IU/mL). At that time, we could not perform a quantitative nucleic acid amplification testing (QNAT) using ocular fluids. The hypothesis of tumor recurrence or possible neoplastic lesions was excluded by computed tomography. Six days later, the patient progressed with progressive worsening of visual acuity, involving also the right eye. A follow-up ophthalmologic evaluation revealed superior conical retinitis with significant artery sheath enlargement, microhaemorrhages, vitreous inflammation and temporal pigmentary alteration. Antiviral therapy was changed to ganciclovir, in order to cover both possible agents involved, Herpes and CMV. At that time, CMV DNAemia was undetectable. There was a progressive improvement in visual complaints, and another ophthalmologic evaluation showed a progressive healing of the retinal lesions 21 days after the initiation of ganciclovir. The treatment was extended for 28 days based on a follow-up ophthalmologic evaluation of the complete healing of the retinal lesions. He was discharged from the hospital with an improvement of his visual acuity, and no secondary prophylaxis was instituted.
