69-year-old woman with a history of essential thrombocythemia (ET) JAK-2 (+) t (9;22) (-) diagnosed in 2008, on treatment with hydroxyurea and acetylsalicylic acid. Her father, an Italian, had a polyneuropathy of undetermined etiology that began in adulthood. In 2011, she presented with distal numbness and paresthesia, associated with neuropathic pain in both lower limbs (LLB), without autonomic compromise or loss of strength. At the same time, she presented with a bilateral decrease in visual acuity (VA) that was not painful and slowly progressive. On physical examination, she was emaciated, with a decrease in VA (0.3 and 0.3) and a fundus with bilateral vitreitis. Mental and cranial nerve examination was normal, strength was preserved but with a decrease in distal osteotendinous reflexes in the LLB and multimodal hypoesthesia in all four limbs in glove and sock, with no signs of autonomic compromise. Initial laboratory studies showed a hemoglobin of 11.7 g/dL, a mean corpuscular volume of 106.9 fL, platelets of 1,056,000 mm3 and a white blood cell count of 15 mm/h, with normal renal, hepatic, thyroid and coagulation function. Electromyography (EMG) showed a sensory-motor, axonal and demyelinating polyneuropathy. She was treated with pregabalin and vitamin B12.

In 2014, an ophthalmologic ultrasound documented bilateral occlusive vasculopathy with symmetrical papilar hyperfluorescence in relation to vitreous occupation, with a negative infectious study. The vitreous biopsy identified deposits of amyloid substance (congo red positive), which was complemented with a superficial peroneal nerve biopsy. The electrocardiogram and echocardiography (with measurement of longitudinal strain) ruled out cardiac involvement. Gastrointestinal and renal involvement were also ruled out. In a control with haematology (2016), an increase in the Kappa/Lambda index (K/L; 2.55 mg/L) was documented, which led to suspicion of light chain amyloidosis (AL), indicating a chemotherapy with melphalan and dexamethasone without response.

In 2019, the multidisciplinary amyloidosis study group of the Hospital del Salvador considered a diagnosis of ATTRv. A new EMG showed a severe polyneuropathic sensory-motor, axonal and demyelinating compromise, with signs of active axonal degeneration (not present in 2011), and the quantitative thermal somatosensory analysis identified a severe dysfunction of small diameter afferent fibers (A-delta and C), of polyneuropathic distribution. Finally, the TTR gene sequencing study confirmed the pathogenic Val50Met mutation, compatible with polyneuropathic ATTRv.
