A 65-year-old Indian man presented to the medical emergency department with complaints of sudden onset weakness of right upper extremity.

The patient reports progressive exertional dyspnoea of 2 months duration (New York Heart Association II to IV) with associated orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, palpitations, chest discomfort and cough (productive) with scanty mucoid expectoration. It was associated with pitting oedema of bilateral lower extremities. No associated complaints of chest pain/diaphoresis/presyncope/syncopal attacks and altered mentation. Also there is no history of associated sensory deficit/headache, vomiting, vertigo/diplopia, blurred or loss of vision/dysarthria, dysphagia/facial weakness or deviation/ear pain or discharge/convulsions/loss of consciousness/bladder–bowel disturbances/trauma. No complaint of reduced urine output.

On examination, blood pressure was 150/90 mm Hg in left arm supine position. The pulse rate of 72 beats/min regular good volume without any radio-radial/radio-femoral delay; with all the peripheral pulses equally palpable. He was afebrile with a respiratory rate of 16/min (thoracoabdominal) with an oxygen saturation of 96% on ambient air. Pitting oedema was present over bilateral lower limbs (slow pitting; grade II) with jugular venous distension (Juglular Venous Pressure (JVP) 13 cm of water). Cardio Vascular System (CVS) examination reveals normal precordium, an apical impulse in left sixth intercostal space lateral to midclavicular line with no palpable thrill over precordium, S1 and S2 were heard normally. On chest auscultation bilateral breath sounds were heard equally with bilateral fine inspiratory basal crepitations. Per abdomen, examination reveals bimanually palpable bilateral kidneys with no other organomegaly/tender hepatomegaly/shifting dullness appreciable. Central Nervous System (CNS) examination reveals normal cranial nerves and sensory system. Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was E4V5M6 (15/15). Muscle power was 3/5 in right upper extremity with normal power in other limbs. The motor deficit was more in distal group of muscles. The tone of affected limb was increased, and the deep tendon reflexes were exaggerated suggesting upper motor neuron pattern of weakness. Plantar was bilateral flexor response.

There was no reported history of similar complaints in the past and any family member. There was no history of diabetes mellitus, systemic hypertension, cerebrovascular accidents. He is a chronic tobacco abuser (hookah smoker). The patient denies alcohol or any other substance abuse. There was no information available pertaining to history of familial renal disease and genetic analysis of family members. Also, there was no history of sudden cardiac death in any family member.


Investigations

Complete haemogram, serum electrolytes, routine urine examination were within normal limits. ECG shows heart rate of 67 beats/min in sinus rhythm with left axis deviation with complete left bundle branch block pattern with no dynamicity on serial tracings and no evidence of atrial fibrillation. Serial Creatine Kinase-MB (Muscle Brain isoenzyme) values were within normal limits with negative serial troponins. Blood urea 67 mg/dL, serial creatinine 1.2 mg/dL with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 65 mL/min/1.73 m2. Fasting serum lipid profile was within normal limits. Prothrombin time was 11.9 s (reference range 9.5–13.5 s) with international normalisation ratio value of 0.99 (reference range <1.1). Serum ACE levels were within normal limits.

Chest roentgenogram shows cardiomegaly (cardiothoracic ratio >60%) with no evidence of hilar lymphadenopathy. Abdominal ultrasonography and contrast-enhanced CT revealed multiple cysts in each kidney and hepatic cysts. MR brain imaging reveals acute infarcts in left frontal, parietal, posterior temporal and right high frontoparietal regions with ischaemic gliotic changes in bilateral frontal and parietal regions with senile cerebral atrophy. CT cerebral angiography reveals mildly attenuated calibre of the left middle cerebral artery with no other significant vascular abnormality/aneurysm. Trasn Thoracic Echo(TTE) reveals severely reduced left ventricular function (LV ejection fraction (LVEF) 15%–20%) with global hypokinesia; LV enlargement (51 mm at end diastole and 46 mm at end systole); E>A; e<a with diastolic dysfunction grade II (moderate) with prominent trabeculations and deep recesses in mid LV cavity and LV apex with non-compaction (NC 16.4 mm) to compaction (C 5.2 mm) ratio of 3.1 at (NC:C>2 according to Jenni’s criteria), mild left atrial (LA) enlargement (45 mm) with mild to moderate mitral regurgitation with slight prolapse of anterior leaflet, with trace tricuspid regurgitation with Right Ventricular Systolic Pressure (RVSP) 32 mm Hg. LV end-diastolic volume (LV-EDV) was ~120 mL with LV end-systolic volume (LV-ESV) ~99 mL. Interatrial and interventricular septum and pericardium were normal, with no evidence of patent ductus arteriosus/coarctation of aorta/intracardiac clots/vegetations. CT coronary angiography reveals no significant coronary artery disease. CMR imaging reveals thinned LV myocardium, cavitary portion appears trabeculated and measures 18.9 mm with a compacted portion measuring 5.5 mm. There was markedly depressed LV systolic function with LVEF of 18%–22% with no regional wall motion abnormality; with measured LV-EDV value ~124 mL and LV-ESV ~101 mL. Ratio between N/C layers was 3.43 (NC:C>2.3 according to Peterson’s CMR criteria). No evidence of intracavitary contents/thrombus with outflow tracts appearing normal with findings suggestive of LV non-compaction myopathy and is consistent with echocardiographic findings. There was no evidence of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) indicative of cardiac inflammation or fibrosis on T2-weighted images on CMR study.


Differential diagnosis

In our case, NVM cardiomyopathy, among the rare causes of cardiomyopathy with associated LV dysfunction and cardioembolic stroke along with its rare association with ADPKD was found. The key to suspicion of stroke as a primary aetiology to ‘brachial monoparesis’ was acute onset of weakness; which was confirmed on diffusion-weighted MRI of brain. Also for stroke to present as isolated upper limb weakness is very uncommon. There was no history of trauma. Also, there was no evidence of arm/shoulder pain, sensory disturbance, muscle wasting; making ‘brachial plexopathy’ and cervical nerve root compression (peripheral nervous system lesion) as less likely aetiology to explain the motor weakness. There was no history of stressor and no inconsistency in examination findings was reported during his hospital stay; which tends to be the case in functional/psychogenic causes of motor weakness. There was no evidence of coronary artery disease evidenced by normal CT coronary angiography study. Pulse rate was regular with sinus rhythm on ECG and no evidence of LA clot on echocardiography (TTE) study thereby ruling out atrial fibrillation as a likely aetiology of cardioembolic stroke. Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) could not be performed due to non-availability at our centre, which was a limitation of our case. Also the patient did not agree for referral to higher centre for TEE. Cardiac sarcoidosis was less likely in our case as there was no evidence of hilar lymphadenopathy, normal serum ACE levels and no evidence of cardiac inflammation or fibrosis (LGE mapping) on T2-weighted images on CMR study.


Treatment

There was marked symptomatic improvement after treatment with diuretics (intravenous furosemide). Later, he was started on oral treatment comprising of furosemide, spironolactone, carvedilol1 and sacubitril /valsartan; and oral anticoagulation for secondary stroke prevention and systemic embolism. The patient was advised to stop tobacco abuse. Active physiotherapy exercises for brachial monoparesis were advised. The patient was discharged with outpatient clinic follow-up at Post Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Rohtak.


Outcome and follow-up

The patient has been followed up at the outpatient clinic regularly. His brachial monoparesis was improving, and the patient has been doing fine on pharmacotherapy. Clinical family screening of first-degree relatives was advised for both Left Ventricular Non Compaction (LVNC) and ADPKD. After cardiology consult, the patient was counselled regarding the need for implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) in view of reduced LVEF in case of non-improvement of EF with guideline-directed pharmacotherapy. Considering the role of tolvaptan (oral V2R antagonist) in halting the progressive reduction in eGFR in cases of ADPKD; nephrology consult was planned.