We present the case of a 39 year-old healthy patient with a history of infertility and no consanguinity. The patient was overweight (BMI 28.9) and this was her second pregnancy after a previous miscarriage. This pregnancy was achieved by embryo transfer after two failed in vitro fertilizations.

The first trimester aneuploidy screening ultrasound at week 12 + 3 was normal with CRL 55.6 mm and nuchal translucency 1.6 mm (59 centile). The results of the first trimester combined screening were: MoM PaPP-A 1.42, MoM HCG-Beta 1.46, trisomy 21 risk 1/1544.

Routine ultrasound scan at 22 week gestation showed small cavum septum pellucidum (2.3 mm; −2 SD for gestational age), as well as parallel anterior frontal ventricular horns. Hypoplasia of corpus callosum was suspected and reevaluation took place in a week. At 22 weeks gestation corpus callosum was 15 mm and posterior ventricular horns measurement was 8 mm. Once informed, the couple opted for invasive testing and molecular karyotype.

At 26 weeks fetal growth was within normal percentiles, corpus callosum was normal and posterior ventricular horns measured 12.8 mm. Array could not be assessed due to contamination but conventional karyotype was normal. New array and maternal serologic TORCH analyses were offered and performed.

At 30–32 weeks fetal growth remained normal and asymmetric ventriculomegaly developed, the right ventricle posterior horn reached 14 mm and there were signs of germinal matrix hemorrhage along with a secondary periventricular cyst. There was periventricular echogenicity and a complicated periventricular cyst. Medium cerebral artery Doppler showed no signs of anemia. Thrombophilia, infectious diseases screening (toxoplasmosis, parvovirus, cytomegalovirus, listeria), and antiplatelet antibodies studies were negative. CGH Array demonstrated a microdeletion in the short arm of chromosome 16, 16p11.2 (28682192_29076269)x1.

Magnetic resonance imaging at week 32 showed severe dilatation of the left cerebral ventricle up to 20 mm and altered subcortical sign in the left hemisphere suggestive of ischemical, toxic vs. infectious insult.

Parents underwent counseling by a multidisciplinary team including ann a neurology pediatrician and a geneticist. The patient opted for pregnancy termination and refused necropsy. Fetal specimen showed normal phenotype. Severe postpartum hemorrhage occurred due to uterine atony and resolved after medical treatment and uterine tamponade.

Carrier status study was offered to the couple and the mother was found to be a carrier of the same deletion. This copy number variant implies a 50% risk of recurrence.

The patient opted for embryo donation and two years later gave birth to a healthy newborn after an uneventful pregnancy which ended in labor induction for prolonged pregnancy. Severe postpartum hemorrhage recurred again in absence of placental abnormalities and was controlled with conservative management.