This case was developed following the guidelines of The CARE Guidelines: Consensus-based Clinical Case Reporting Guideline Development4. It presents the case of a 38-week-old male, born by caesarean section with Apgar 8/10, 2,950 g of weight and 50 cm of height, with prenatal diagnosis of gastroschisis. During the exploration, the exposure of loops of the large and small intestine with a violet and dilated appearance, and a clear abdominal-visceral disproportion were observed. A prognostic score (Gastroschisis Prognostic Score) of 1 was calculated. Defect of abdominal wall to the right of the umbilical cord. In the hospital of birth, the defect was enlarged on the first day of life and a surgical silo was placed with a plastic bag of physiological saline sutured to the aponeurosis. At 11 days of life, and without the intestine having been reduced, meconium was observed in the silo, so reintervention was indicated, during which a intestinal perforation was observed 70 cm from the ileocecal valve, with resection and end-to-end anastomosis. At 14 days of life, a new surgical exploration was required due to dehiscence of the anastomosis, observing an intestinal defect in the anastomosis of 1 cm in diameter, with friable loops; resection and anastomosis were performed again. Subsequently, at 22 days of life, new meconium was observed in the surgical silo, so it was decided to transfer the patient to our hospital due to lack of therapeutic options in his hospital of reference. The patient was admitted to our institution at 28 days of life, with severe malnutrition, with loss of 470 grams compared to birth and septic shock with multiple organ failure, so mechanical ventilation and vasopressor support were required. Physical examination presented a silo detached from the abdominal wall, liver included in the defect, frozen abdomen, severe peritonitis and five enteroatmospheric fistulas. Due to the severity of the patient, his respiratory and haemodynamic stabilisation was prioritised on admission, broad spectrum antibiotics and total parenteral nutrition were initiated.

At 29 days of life, the exposed intestinal loops were washed, Foley tube was used for fistulectomy and mild circumferential adhesive was used to place a preformed silo (Alexis XS®; Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA, USA), achieving stabilisation of the patient. At 36 days of life, 20 IU of botulinum toxin (Botox® AbbVie Spain, S.L.U. Madrid, Spain) was applied under ultrasound control in five different points of the oblique muscles of each lateral wall of the abdomen, as part of the preparation for the closure of the complex ventral hernia. At 38 days of life, the first surgical intervention was indicated in our institution, seeking a high shunt to avoid abdominal contamination, performing adhesive resection of the proximal jejunum, two-way jejunostomy 20 cm from the duodenum, resection of two enteroatmospheric fistulas and closure of a third in two planes. Due to the impossibility of closing the abdominal wall, an Alexis® surgical retractor was repositioned. At 43 days of life, a lesion was identified at the distal end of the jejunostomy, secondary to the Alexis® device ring, requiring reintervention. This surgical act was used to resect the remaining fistulas and perform a term-terminal anastomosis. After discarding the presence of intestinal atresia, a Ladd procedure was performed, remodelling the distal stoma of the jejunostomy and intubation using a Pezzer® 10 Fr. tube. For the closure of the abdominal wall, a surgical silo was made with polypropylene mesh, which was sutured circumferentially to the fascia with two lines of suture to ensure its fastening. Prior to the preparation of the polypropylene silo, the intestinal loops were protected with a plastic bag. At 44 days of life, serial reductions of the silo were initiated by continuous anchored surjete, achieving reduction of abdominal content at 52 days of life with subsequent removal of the mesh and closure of the abdominal wall without prosthetic material.

The hospital stay in our center lasted four months, requiring mechanical ventilation support for 48 days. Nutritional recovery was carried out in a mixed form, with parenteral nutrition for 88 days. Oral feeding was initiated seven days after the abdominal wall was closed, requiring 23 days to reach total enteral intake. Due to the high flow rate of the jejunostomy, it was decided to provide main feeding through the distal stoma (intubated jejunostomy) and a minimum volume orally. Finally, the elective closure of the jejunostomy was performed at four months of life, with discharge at five months of life. Currently, with 2 years of life, the patient has evolved favorably, the abdominal wall is intact, with intestinal sufficiency, adequate weight gain and developmental milestones according to his chronological age.