We report the case of a male newborn from an investigated high-risk pregnancy. The birth was natural, with a birth weight of 2980 g and an Apgar score of 9 and 10 at 1 and 5 min, respectively, with a good postnatal transition. He was readmitted to the hospital at ten days of life with severe general status. The echocardiography revealed critical stenosis of the aortic valve, severe systolic biventricular dysfunction, and pulmonary hypertension. Prostaglandin E1 was initiated in high-dosage continuous infusion (0.15 mcg/kg/min). He was transferred to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit of the MS Curie Children’s Hospital at 13 days of age with a severe general condition and hemodynamic instability. The patient was immediately intubated and mechanically ventilated due to respiratory distress. Intravenous central venous lines were placed for nutrition and medication administration. Central arterial lines were inserted for continuous invasive blood pressure monitoring and femoral artery cannulation for cardiac catheterization.

After five hours of admission, we performed diagnostic cardiac catheterization using 2 mL/kg iohexol 300 for iodinated contrast, which was subsequently followed by balloon aortic valvuloplasty (4.3 mm aortic ring, Tyshak II balloon size 4/20 mm, inflated to nominal pressure 4. 5 atm, twice), which improved hemodynamic parameters (preprocedural femoral blood pressure 17/10/12 mmHg/postprocedural left ventricular pressure 74/19/24 mmHg, ascending aortic pressure 68/40/50 mmHg). Post-procedure, the patient experienced mild hypotension, metabolic acidosis, and decreased urine output despite inotropic-vasoactive support (epinephrine and dopamine) and diuretic support (furosemide, and aminophylline). The next day, cardiac ultrasound showed a unicuspid aortic valve with a severely restricted opening, an abdominal aortic velocity of 0.2 m/s, severe biventricular systolic dysfunction, and severe pulmonary hypertension.

The following day after the aortic balloon valvuloplasty, the multidisciplinary team decided that a reintervention through open heart surgery was necessary for the residual severe aortic valvular stenosis. The surgery lasted 5 h (55 min of cardiopulmonary bypass and 40 min of aortic clamping). After the procedure, the patient remained hemodynamically unstable with low cardiac output syndrome despite increased vasoactive-inotropic support and presented heavy active bleeding on the chest tubes, requiring several transfusions with blood products and tranexamic acid administration. Postoperative echocardiography revealed moderate residual aortic valvular stenosis, severe biventricular systolic dysfunction, and pulmonary hypertension.

On the second postoperative day (day four after cardiac catheterization), the patient became oligo-anuric despite increased diuretic support in continuous infusion (furosemide, aminophylline, and ethacrynic acid), with generalized edema and significant positive fluid balance. Serial renal function tests revealed a rising trend in creatinine and urea levels. As the patient presented stage 3 AKI according to the neonatal KDIGO (Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes) classification, continuous renal replacement therapy was initiated the following day, and diuretic medication was discontinued. Vascular access for the CRRT procedure was obtained through a double-lumen 6Fr catheter inserted by the Seldinger technique at the patient’s bedside under ultrasound guidance into the right femoral vein. Anticoagulation therapy for the circuit was initiated with heparin in a continuous infusion, and the activated clotting time was maintained between 180 and 200 s. Continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration was well tolerated, and the patient remained hemodynamically stable, allowing the increase in the fluid removal and the decrease in the vasoactive support. There was a serial fall in creatinine levels, and urine output was re-established after 4 h. Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was maintained for 75 h. Sternal closure was performed on site in the NICU on postoperative day 5, while the patient was on CRRT, without major hemodynamic impact.

Several complications developed during hospitalization have been reported for the patient despite solving AKI: the prolonged need for inotropic and vasoactive support (77 days), initial extubating failure and prolonged need for invasive mechanical ventilation (71 days), pulmonary edema due to sustained mitral regurgitation, and three episodes of pulmonary hemorrhage due to coagulopathy and high capillary hydrostatic pressure. In addition, he developed acute liver failure after heart failure exacerbation two weeks after surgery. Persistent conjugated hyperbilirubinemia recovered after two months of treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid, alpha lipoic acid, phenobarbital, cholestyramine and serial albumin administration, vitamin K, and fresh frozen plasma. The day after cardiac surgery, a 2-grade intraventricular hemorrhage was noted, but without any apparent clinical significance. He was discharged from the hospital at 3 months and 25 days with mild residual aortic valve stenosis and grade 2 aortic regurgitation. At hospital discharge, renal function tests and blood pressure were normal for age.