A 53-year-old male, who initiated dialysis for end-stage renal dysfunction due to diabetic nephropathy or nephrosclerosis at our nephrology department 10 years prior, underwent annual follow-up echocardiography for progressive aortic valve stenosis (AVS) and moderate regurgitation with normal left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (LVEF). One year before, calcifications suggesting MAC were observed in the posterior mitral annulus, which were not seen two years before. At the latest follow-up, echocardiography revealed a round, smooth-surfaced 22 × 17-mm mass with high echogenicity in the surrounding area and slightly decreased internal brightness on the posterior mitral annular ring of the left atrial side. The patient had no significant symptoms and physical findings, except for systolic murmur.

Echocardiography also revealed moderate AVS with a transaortic valvular peak flow of 3.76 m/s and moderate aortic valve regurgitation. Mild mitral valve regurgitation but no stenosis was observed. The LV inflow velocity pattern showed a pseudo-normal pattern with 47-mm diameter left atrial enlargement. Serial echocardiography over two years revealed LV enlargement and decreasing LVEF. The LV end-diastolic/end-systolic diameter and LVEF were 50/33 mm and 64%, respectively, 2 years ago; 57/41 mm and 52% 1 year ago; and 59/47 mm and 42% at the latest follow-up.

Considering haemodialysis status, we predicted progression to near-severe AVS, with worsening LV systolic dysfunction, becoming an indication for aortic valve replacement (AVR) in the near future.

Computed tomography (CT) revealed a high-density mass with no contrast enhancement. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-defined mass of high intensity at the centre, with a hypointense rim on T1 imaging and a devoid signal on T2. Neoplasms, including myxomas and papillary fibroelastomas, were excluded based on their imaging features. Laboratory findings did not indicate infection, and vegetation with infectious endocarditis was not suspected. Considering end-stage renal dysfunction on haemodialysis and imaging findings, CCMA was suspected. The rapid mass enlargement raised concerns about potential embolism. Consequently, the mass was resected with AVR.

Incision of the left atrium revealed a mass beneath the atrial endocardium in the mitral valve ring (P1–2); creamy substances were observed on the incision of the mass, suggesting CCMA. After thorough tissue removal and debridement, the incision site was sutured by proline. Aortic valve replacement was performed using a 21-mm SJM valve. The weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass was relatively smooth. At discharge, warfarin and aspirin were prescribed, along with bisoprolol for the paroxysmal atrial fibrillation after surgery.

No embolic events were observed before or after the surgery.

Histopathological examination revealed scattered granular and nodular calcifications, mostly consisting of inflammatory cell infiltration and vascular proliferation of neutrophils, lymphocytes, foam cells, tissue macrophages, and plasma cells, with partial ossification compatible with CAT. LV myocardial biopsy to rule out secondary cardiomyopathy and resected aortic valve showed inflammatory cells similar to those observed in CAT. Therefore, CICMP was diagnosed based on decreased wall motion and myocardial fibrosis, with inflammatory cell infiltration > 14 mm2, CD3-positive T cells > 7/mm2, and tenascin C (4C8) negativity.7 However, the cause of CICMP could not be determined.

Echocardiography 6 months after resection showed no tumour recurrence (see Supplementary material online), no progression of mitral regurgitation, normal function of aortic prosthetic valve, and no improvement of LVEF (41%)

