A 31-year-old Vietnamese female who presented with seizures was transported to our hospital by ambulance. The patient had been in her usual state until a week before the current presentation when she developed fever, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Two days before her first visit, a nasopharyngeal swab performed at a clinic returned a positive result for COVID-19. She had been vaccinated twice against COVID-19, and this was her first infection. On the day of the first visit, she experienced two episodes of generalized tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS) and was transported to our hospital in a coma. Her past medical history was unremarkable, and she had never experienced GTCS and severe gastrointestinal symptoms before. Her family history was marked by episodes of vomiting, seizures, and abdominal pain in her mother that lasted several months at the age of 31. This information was carefully collected at the time of admission. She had persistent hypertension and tachycardia. Her physical examination was unremarkable and she had no dermatologic abnormalities. Laboratory tests revealed severe hyponatremia (121 mEq/L) and mild hypomagnesemia (1.7 mg/dL). Her chest X-ray and head CT scans revealed no abnormalities. Despite her hyponatremia being resistant to hypertonic saline, she regained consciousness on the second day of hospitalization. On her 10th day of hospitalization, she had another episode of GTCS and transient mild left hemiparesis despite her hyponatremia having been corrected to 128 mEq/L. She became mildly agitated and depressed after the GTCS episode, and she still had hypertension (177/99 mmHg), tachycardia (141 bpm), and generalized myalgia. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a T2 shine-through lesion in the bilateral parietal and right occipital lobes, encompassing both subcortical and cortical regions, indicative of PRES. Her hypertension was successfully managed with a maximum dosage of 10 mg of amlodipine, and the follow-up MRI showed improvements in the abnormal findings. Given her female sex, young age, high blood pressure, tachycardia, and prior COVID-19 infection, we considered COVID-19-associated PRES, AHP, systemic lupus erythematosus, and pheochromocytoma as possible etiologies of PRES. Among these, we considered AHP the most likely diagnosis based on a constellation of characteristic manifestations including PRES, neuropsychiatric symptoms (agitation, depression), and gastrointestinal symptoms (vomiting, abdominal pain). First, we exposed the patient’s urine to sunlight and observed its discoloration. Second, urinalysis demonstrated elevated delta-aminolaevulinic acid (158.4 mg/g·Cre), coproporphyrin (1,170 mcg/g·Cre), and uroporphyrin (10,168 mcg/g·Cre). Her antinuclear antibody titer was 1:160; however, both anti-dsDNA antibodies and anti-Sm antibodies tested negative. Plasma epinephrine (196 pg/mL [< 100]), norepinephrine (823 pg/mL [100–450]), and dopamine (48 pg/mL [< 20]) levels were elevated. Catecholamine levels were measured using a standard protocol after 30 min of supine rest. The 24-hour urinary excretion assay revealed that her metanephrine (0.66 mg/day [0.04–0.19]) level was markedly elevated. The patient had not consumed any foods, beverages, or medications known to elevate catecholamine or its metabolite levels in plasma and urine samples. However, a torso CT scan did not reveal pheochromocytoma or extraadrenal paraganglioma. Furthermore, genetic analyses demonstrated a heterozygous missense mutation of c.517 C > T in HMBS, confirming the diagnosis of AIP. She received hemin from day 30 to day 33 of hospitalization. Following hemin administration, all her symptoms (e.g., depression, agitation, myalgia, and tachycardia), as well as electrolyte disturbances including hyponatremia, showed significant improvement. Simultaneously, her amlodipine was tapered off without any recurrence of hypertension.