60-year-old man with a history of Gleason 8 (4+4) prostatic adenocarcinoma involving both prostate lobes, treated with radical prostatectomy and ilio-obturator lymphadenectomy (pT3b-N0-Mx). After 2 years of control, he presented a biochemical relapse (prostate-specific antigen of 1.9 ng/mL) and a small, subcentimetric, hypermetabolic, hypogastric adenopathy (S.U.V.: 3.8) visible on a fluorocholine-enhanced PET-CT.

Multidisciplinary ateneo decided to perform salvage lymphadenectomy with preoperative marking with activated carbon guided by imaging. Due to the depth of the lymph node, preoperative marking with local anesthesia by computed tomography was performed prior to surgery. The adenopathy was surrounded by the hypogastric artery and vein in the front and the side, respectively, and by the L5 nerve root in the back. Its medial margin was free. Due to the arrangement of these structures around the target, marking was performed with a contralateral approach using a trans-sacral access with a T-Lok Bone Marrow Biopsy Standard 4" needle, 11 gauge (Argon Medical). Anesthesia was performed by planes until the periosteum of the sacrum was reached with 2% lidocaine (10 cm3). However, once the procedure began, intestinal peristalsis mobilized the sigmoid colon in the path of the needle. To avoid transgression of hollow viscera, hydrodissection was performed using diluted contrast solution to displace it. Instrumental progression was performed under tomographic supervision to ensure colon displacement and finally the marking was carried out coaxially with 1 ml of 4% activated carbon (Temis Lostaló) using a Chiba needle of 15 cm, 20 gauge (Argon Medical).

After the marking was completed, the needles were removed and a final tomographic control was performed, where the absence of complications related to the procedure was verified. After a brief observation period in the diagnostic imaging department, the patient was transferred to the operating room without pain or haemodynamic disorders. The surgery was performed without complications and the marked lymph node was removed. The pathological anatomy confirmed a lymph node with infiltration by carcinoma.
