On 12 March 2022, a 10-year-old boy of Arab-Asian ethnicity from Mosul, Iraq, fell from the stairs and got a nosebleed. His condition deteriorated, with headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting, and altered consciousness. He was seen at the emergency department of a general hospital in Erbil with the suspicion of a head injury. Providing that the patient’s family gave a history of fever, headache, vomiting, and diarrhea for 2 days before admission, another pathology was considered, and dizziness could be the cause of falling. Upon admission, the boy was looking toxic with impaired consciousness, his oxygen saturation (SPO2) was 92%, he was febrile (38.3 °C), had tachycardia (130 beats/min), tachypnea (36 breaths/min), and hypotension as his blood pressure was less than the 5th percentile (<90/50 mmHg). In addition, his face was edematous, with bruises over the nose and bleeding from the nose. He was unconscious with flexion to pain, and his Glasgow coma scale (GCS) scored 8/15 (Eye, 3; Verbal, 2; and Motor, 3). Supportive care was given to maintain oxygenation, ventilation, and circulation, with head elevation to 15 degrees, and cardiorespiratory monitoring was set. However, the ventilator was not required. Crystalloid intravenous (iv) fluid, antipyretics, and empiric antibiotics (vancomycin and ceftriaxone) were given while obtaining samples for laboratory tests. Urgent computed tomography (CT) of the head was arranged to exclude the fracture at the base of the skull and to determine if there is bleeding inside or around the brain or other serious brain injuries. A neurosurgeon was consulted, and the patient was referred to the intensive care unit (ICU). The CT was normal. The baseline investigations were conducted, including random blood sugar, blood gas analysis and electrolytes, c-reactive protein (CRP), complete blood count (CBC), blood culture, renal function test, and liver function test (LFT). LFT included lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT), in addition to alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST). Also, coagulation markers were evaluated to assess prothrombin time, international normalization ratio, activated thromboplastin time, and D-dimer.

Further investigations, such as troponin T and procalcitonin, were conducted later. Ultrasound (US) of the abdomen, portable chest X-ray (CXR), electrocardiography (ECG), and echocardiography were also performed.

The patient also had bilateral non-purulent conjunctivitis, and his pupils were dilated, reacting to light with normal fundoscopy. He had inflamed oral mucosa with swollen, dried, cracked lips, a strawberry tongue, and a skin rash. He also had red edematous hands and feet. His abdomen was tender, and there was a soft palpable liver. The patient developed seizure and apnea on the second day of admission; however, neck stiffness and Kernig’s sign were challenging to be assessed. After excluding the contraindications, a lumbar puncture was performed with a normal cerebrospinal fluid examination (CSF) and negative culture. The chest examination was shown to be normal, with normal CXR, and the ECG showed sinus tachycardia. The patient weighed 25 kg (on the 5th percentile), and his height was 140 cm (above the 50th percentile). He was kept in an isolated room with consideration of the possible diagnosis of SARS-CoV-2. Likewise, MIS-C was among the differential diagnosis. Therefore, SARS-CoV-2 IgG, and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) COVID-19 were also performed.

Since the patient had a skin rash, vancomycin was rapidly switched to meropenem to avoid confusion with vancomycin-related rash, which is still common in our practice, in addition to ceftriaxone (50 mg/kg/dose) iv, every 12 h. Dexamethasone (0.15 mg/kg/dose) iv, every 6 h, and acyclovir (60 mg/kg/day) were started from the first day concerning the suspicion of meningitis or encephalitis. Diazepam and phenobarbital were administered due to the occurrence of seizures. A nasogastric tube was inserted for oral feeding to be resumed by the next day. Thus, he was kept on iv fluid, dexamethasone, antibiotics, acyclovir, and anticonvulsants. On the third day, with close monitoring, the multidisciplinary team concluded that MIS-C criteria were fulfilled according to the CDC/WHO definitions. Therefore, iv methylprednisolone (M-PRD) was given in a dose of 25 mg twice a day (1 mg/kg/12 h) for 5 days, along with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) infusion using (2 g/kg/day) given over 12 h for 2 days. Subsequently, the patient showed striking improvement. The next day he regained consciousness, vital signs started to be stabilized, and the edema and redness were decreasing. Esomeprazole (10 mg once daily) was added on day three to avoid steroid-induced stomach irritation. Sinus tachycardia was detected since admission, and on the third day, mild dilation of the left ventricle and mild pericardial effusion were noticed through sequential ECG and echocardiography monitoring. Antithrombotic treatment with aspirin 81 mg orally was added on day six, and he carried on with oral prednisolone. Significant improvement was noticed after ambulation within a few days. Physiotherapy was part of his management. We continued alternate-day oral prednisolone for four weeks and aspirin for eight weeks with continuous monitoring until a normal quality of life was regained.

In summary, during the 10-day period of the patient’s stay in the hospital, he was deteriorating over the first three days in terms of fever, impaired level of consciousness, and the occurrence of seizure and apnea. Similarly, the laboratory data related to liver and renal function were deteriorating.

He was treated empirically as a case of toxic shock syndrome with antibiotics, and a glucocorticoid was given with consideration of central nervous system infection. But soon after receiving IVIG and M-PRD, he showed a substantial response. His consciousness improved by day 4, and GCS became (13/15), with less edema and good oral intake. Rising levels of (CRP, LDH, D-dimer, GGT, ALT, AST, s. ferritin, troponin T, and procalcitonin) were observed until the fifth day of admission. However, D-dimer and GGT did not stop increasing until the eight day. Meanwhile, according to the CBC, the blood parameters were gradually improving. Serial echocardiography revealed mild left-ventricular dysfunction. On day 9, he was back to normal clinically, and his liver enzymes, including GGT, were starting to decrease. By day 10, he had normal heart rates and echocardiography. D-dimer returned to normal in 1 month.

Of note, and perhaps from a social point of view, the parents hid the information that COVID-19 was confirmed in more than one family member four weeks before the onset of symptoms in the patient. Additionally, no one in the family, including the child, had received COVID-19 vaccination.