We wish to report a case of a 94-year-old woman, operated for Fuchs’ endothelial corneal dystrophy (FECD) with DMEK in the right eye 20 months previously and in the left eye 24 months previously, who showed acute signs of bilateral graft rejection following routine vaccination with a single dose of BNT162b2 mRNA COVID-19 Vaccine (Pfizer-BioNTech).

The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable, and her only regular medications were for arterial hypertension. Past ocular history included a cataract operation in the left eye 20 years earlier and in the right eye three years earlier. The cornea became edematous after the phacoemulsification procedure in the right eye. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) expressed as a decimal and corneal thickness (CT) expressed in micrometers (µm) were 0.3 and 679µm in the right eye and 0.2 and 668µm in the left eye. Three months after cataract surgery, DMEK was performed in the right eye and the patient underwent a re-bubbling procedure due to partial graft detachment one week later. Six months later DMEK was performed in the left eye; however, full detachment of the graft was noted postoperatively, for which the patient underwent successful re-operation after one week. In accordance with hospital guidelines, the patient received the standard post-transplantation treatment regimen: combined dexamethasone/tobramycin and ketorolac, four times daily. After one month, the treatment was changed to one drop dexamethasone 0.1% four times daily and tapered to one drop daily after three months.

Results
Post-operative BCVA and CT were 0.7 and 559µm in the right eye and 0.4 and 590µm in the left eye after nine and three months, respectively. At two-year DMEK follow-up of the right eye, both corneas were clear, the grafts were described as well-functioning in both eyes and BCVA was 0.4 in the right eye and 0.6 in the left eye. The reduced visual acuity was thought to be due to posterior capsule opacification and the patient underwent posterior capsulotomy with neodymium-doped yttrium aluminum garnet laser (Nd:YAG) in the right eye.

Six months after the posterior capsulotomy, the patient attended two-year follow-up of the left eye complaining of a sudden painless worsening of vision in both eyes. BCVA had reduced to 0.2 in the right eye and to 0.3 in the left eye. Intraocular pressures were normal. Both corneas were increased in thickness, with a CT of 710µm in both eyes, and swept-source optical coherence tomography (SS-OCT) showed bilateral Descemet's membrane folds with moderate intraocular reaction, categorized as Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) grade 3. The patient was diagnosed with bilateral graft rejection. Further enquiry revealed that the visual deterioration started after she had been given her first dose of COVID-19 vaccine two weeks earlier.

The patient was treated with dexamethasone/tobramycin six times a day and with hypertonic saline four times a day in both eyes. In the meantime, she received her second dose of COVID-19 vaccine as planned. The dexamethasone/tobramycin was tapered to four times daily after one week, but when the corneal edema failed to resolve after one month, the hypertonic saline was discontinued and hourly dexamethasone 0.1% was added, tapering to eight drops daily after five days.

Having failed to respond to medical treatment, the patient was given re-DMEK transplantation first in the left eye and then in the right eye four months later. The right eye required a re-bubbling procedure due to partial graft detachment after one week. The patient received the standard postoperative treatment regimen: dexamethasone/tobramycin and ketorolac four times daily. After one month, both preparations were discontinued, and the patient received dexamethasone 0.1% four times daily. After three months, this was tapered down to one drop daily.

During the recovery period following re-DMEK transplantation, an improvement in overall corneal clarity was noted and the BCVA and CT were 0.5 and 538µm and 0.63 and 504µm in the right eye and the left eye, respectively.