The authors have read the case report (CARE) Checklist (2016), and the manuscript was prepared and revised according to the CARE Checklist (2016). An Asian woman in her early 80s presented with a palpable and painless mass in the distal phalanx of the left thumb. The patient noticed that mass 2 years ago, and the mass swelled progressively in the 2 years and its growth accelerated in the past 6 months, which prompted the woman to go to the hospital for medical assessment. Upon physical examination, the patient had a swollen left hand thumb, giving it a drumstick appearance. The patient claimed a history of type 2 diabetes and hypothyroidism with no known trauma or any masses elsewhere. Our patient did not have Ollier’s disease, Maffucci syndrome, or hereditary exostosis and had no evidence of prior enchondroma. The results of routine blood tests and biochemical tests were normal. To further clarify the diagnosis, the patient received medical imaging examinations. The radiograph showed a mass in the distal phalanx of the left thumb with osteolytic bone destruction. In computed tomography (CT) images, osteolytic destruction of the distal phalanx of the thumb with a local soft tissue density mass was observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed cortical destruction of the distal phalanx of the thumb and a local soft tissue signal mass of approximately 20 mm × 19 mm × 26 mm with isosignal intensity in the T1-weighted image (T1WI) and heterogeneously high signal intensity in the T2-weighted image (T2WI). The mass invaded the interphalangeal joint. In addition, the patient underwent ultrasound examination. Ultrasound imaging demonstrated a hypoechoic mass (25 mm × 18 mm × 22 mm) with patchy calcification in the distal phalanx of the left thumb. The mass had a clear margin and irregular shape. The bone cortex around the mass is discontinuous and not smooth. Color Doppler showed a dot blood flow signal within the mass. Subsequent chest radiography and bone scans did not reveal any metastatic lesions.

With the above imaging findings, the patient received amputation of the left thumb distal phalanx to achieve radical excision of the mass. The lesion tissues were stained with hematoxylin-eosin (HE). Microscopically, blue-stained cartilaginous matrix was found, and chondrocytes showed obvious heteromorphism. The caryocinesia was observed, with invasive growth accompanied by a few bone trabeculae. Pathologic findings are consistent with a chondrogenic tumor, showing intermediate-locally aggressive behavior. Combined with tumor location (appendicular skeleton, not the axial skeleton), imaging findings (a mass with osteolytic bone destruction), and an aggressive clinical behavior (rapid growth in the last 6 months), the tumor was diagnosed as an ACT. The postoperative x-ray examination showed a good surgical outcome. After the surgery, the patient experienced an improvement in her symptoms and reported a better quality of life. During the 3-year follow-up, there was no evidence of recurrence detected by MRI or CT scans. Informed consent was obtained from the subject described in this report.