A 30-year-old woman presented to the emergency department on 10 September 2020 with chief complaint of worsening shortness of breath for the past 2 months.

Patient also had dry cough and fatigue. She had lost around 20 kg weight in the past 5 months. She denied any symptoms of fever, angina, changes in bowels habit, and tremor. The patient denied any contact with positive COVID-19 patient, history of diabetes, heart failure, kidney disease, and liver disease. The patient was tested negative for COVID-19 PCR on 29 Augustus 2020. No similar symptoms were observed in her family.

She previously visited another hospital because she had right pleural effusion and then suspected of abdominal cancer. Pleural puncture was conducted 1 week before for cytology examination at the previous hospital but the procedure failed to gain adequate sample. The patient also denied family history of malignancies.

Physical examination on 10 September 2020 showed normal vital signs with blood pressure 132/90 mmHg, respiratory rate 23x per minute, heart rate 119 beats per minute, and temperature of 36.3 Celsius. Additionally, oxygen saturation was 93%. There was no altered mental status. Lung auscultation revealed decreased vesicular sound on the right pulmonary area. Rales and wheezing were not present during auscultation. Cardiac auscultation revealed distant heart sound. Abdominal examination showed presence of minimal ascites. No peripheral edema was observed. The rest of the physical examinations were normal.

Complete blood count and other laboratory examinations were performed on 10 September 2020. The patient’s lab revealed that she had anemia with 8.1 g/dL of hemoglobin, slightly elevated Aspartate transaminase (AST), normal alanine transaminase (ALT), and reduced albumin level. SARS‐CoV‐2 PCR swab test was negative and other laboratory tests were normal. The cancer biomarker results which was available 2 days later showed elevated CA-125 (121.07 U/mL). Due to the presence of severe anemia, the patient received packed red cell transfusion of 600 mL.

Her initial chest radiograph (CXR) on 10 September 2020 showed bilateral pleural effusion, mild right lung infiltrate/pneumonia, and cardiomegaly due to pericardial effusion.

Her non-contrast chest CT scan taken on the same day also showed bilateral pleural effusion and pericardial effusion. Lymph node enlargement on anterior mediastinum, paratracheal, tracheobronchial, and right hilum were observed. The lymph node enlargement was initially suspected due to metastasis. Further information obtained from the chest CT scan was the presence of lytic lesion on sternal bone, head of right humerus, and thoracal vertebrae. Finally, the CT scan indicated presence of pneumonia on left lower lung. Due to the presence of non-COVID-19 pneumonia, the patient was then treated with Cefixime 200 mg 2x1, Ceftriaxone 2g injection, Omeprazole 20 mg 2x1, and supportive therapies.

On 11 September 2020, a cardiac echocardiography was taken showing normal ventricles volumes, systolic function, diastolic function, and valves, tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) of 2 cm, ejection fraction (EF) of 75%, inferior vena cava collapsibility of more than 50%, and pericardial effusion of 3.8 cm on plax view.

Arterial blood gas analysis was performed on 11 September 2020. Based on the results, the patient had acute uncompensated respiratory alkalosis with high likelihood caused by pneumonia.

On 12 September 2020, further laboratory examinations were conducted. Results showed bleeding time 2.5 seconds; clotting time 4 seconds; prothrombin time 12.2 seconds (control 10.6 seconds); partial thromboplastin time 33.9s seconds (control 35.2 seconds); and CA 15–3 level 14.7 U/mL.

Positron emission tomography (PET) scan was conducted on 14 September 2020. The PET scan was conducted 50 minutes after injection of F-18 Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG). The PET scan showed non-metabolic (non FDG avid) thickening on the region of bilateral adnexa. The radiologist suspected primary malignancy originating from thickening of bilateral adnexa which could be in the form of ovarian cancer. Scan also revealed multiple osteolytic hypermetabolic metastases located in bone marrow of right humerus head, sternal bone region, several bilateral ribs, pelvic bone, and most of cervical/sacral vertebra bone. There were also multiple hypermetabolic metastases at lymph nodes of cervical, right mediastinal, and right axilla. Cardiomegaly was observed with hypermetabolic pericardial effusion which suggested pericarditis or pericardial metastasis. Hypermetabolic pleural effusion with suspicion of pleural metastasis was also visible. Finally, there was presence of non-metabolic bleakness at the area of upper omentum with suspicion of metastatic seeding in the form of carcinomatosis omental and there was presence of non-metabolic asymmetrical thickening of ascending colon suggestive of inflammation or cancer mass.

CXR on 15 September 2020 showed no improvement in pericardial effusion. However, pigtail catheter was implemented. Similarly, there was no improvement in pleural effusion. The lung infiltrate was no longer present. In concordance to the resolution of lung infiltrate on CXR, the patient’s dyspnea was improved. The cefixime antibiotic was still continued based on pneumonia guideline.

On 16 September 2020, obstetrician gynecologist was consulted for evaluation of possible ovarian cancer based on the elevated CA-125 and results from PET-scan. The obstetrician gynecologist reported that there were no signs of abnormalities such as cancer or cysts on gynecological organs based on the USG. These findings were in contrast with the PET-scan.

On 17 September 2020, the patient had improved hemoglobin level to 10.6 mg/dL. Cyfra 21–1, a biomarker for lung cancer was tested with result of 0.68 (reference <3.3).

Analysis of pleural and pericardial effusion were completed by pathologist on 18 September 2020. A total of 450 mL of xerohemorrhagic fluid was taken from pleural aspiration. Cytologic examination of pleural fluid showed lymphocytes, leukocytes, and mesothelial cells with no presence of malignant cells. Pericardial effusion aspiration showed color of xerohemorrhagic with a total of 200 mL aspirated. Samples of pericardial fluid were sent for cytologic examination which showed presence of leukocytes and no presence of malignant cells.

On 18 September 2020, lymph nodes biopsy was taken with results came on 21 September 2020. Based on the pathological anatomy examination, the biopsy showed tubercles surrounded by lymphocytes. The tubercles contained epithelioid cells, datia Langhans (giant multinucleated) cells, and necrosis. No malignant cells were observed. Based on these findings, the pathological anatomy report concluded the diagnosis as tuberculous lymphadenitis. A meeting with attending physicians at that time concluded that the patient’s symptoms did not match pathology report and thus further differential diagnosis should be considered.

Due to improvement of the patient’s dyspnea, on 19 September 2020 the patient was discharged and scheduled for outpatient visit for further examinations.

On 30 September 2020, another pleurocentesis was conducted. A total of 400 mL of xerohemorrhagic fluid was aspirated from the pleura. Microscopic examination showed no presence of malignant cells. The pleural fluid was then examined for ADA (Adenosine Deaminase) and the result was 31.6 (Tuberculosis if ADA > 40), which indicated that the cause of pleural effusion was other than TB. However, due to lack of specific etiologies found other than possible ovarian cancer, it was decided that the patient should receive anti-tuberculosis drug starting on 1 October 2020 with monitoring of symptoms.

On 2 October 2020, another CXR was taken. When compared with CXR on 15 September 2020, no change in volume of pleural effusion and pericardial effusion was observed. Patient was given bondronate 6 mg through normal saline infusion for 90 minutes.

Colonoscopy on 6 October 2020 revealed no abnormal findings other than Peyer's patches hyperplasia at the terminal ileum. A total of 3 biopsies of the Peyer's patches was taken and examined for pathology. Microscopic examination by the pathologist on 8 October 2020 showed mild to moderate infiltration of lamina propria by inflammatory cells, indicating chronic ileitis. No malignant cells were found during microscopic examination.

Despite receiving tuberculosis drugs, initially the patient had worsening ascites and increasing level of CA-125. Another consultation was made to obstetrician gynecologist on 10 November 2020. Based on examinations and ultrasound by the obstetrician gynecologist, it was concluded that both left and right ovarium was normal with no signs of malignancy. Transvaginal ultrasonography conducted by the obstetrician gynecologist showed normal size uterus retroflexion, normal size of both ovarium, and ascites on pouch of Douglas. The obstetrician gynecologist also recommended diagnostic laparoscopy and biopsy to differentiate between peritoneal cancer and peritoneal tuberculosis. Furthermore, the obstetrician gynecologist revealed that the patient told her that the patient’s IGRA test was positive previously on 5 September 2020. This IGRA test was not previously told to other physicians.

On 24 November 2020 the patient came to the outpatient clinic due to bloating and abdominal enlargement for the last 7 days. The patient was then suggested to be hospitalized. Abdominal paracentesis was then conducted. Result of paracentesis showed that neither malignant cell or tuberculosis cells were detected. A chest radiograph and non-contrast chest CT scan were also performed. Her CXR showed pleural effusion higher than last month and pericardial effusion with same size compared to 2 October 2020. No lung infiltrates and metastatic nodes were observed on CXR. The non-contrast chest CT scan revealed slightly elevated bilateral pleural effusion, decreased pericardial effusion, and bone metastasis compared with 1 month before.

On 25 November 2020, pleural puncture was conducted and 1.320 mL of yellow fluid was taken. No malignant cells were observed. Ascites fluid had ADA of < 5. Analysis of CA-125 laboratory test on 26 November 2020 showed the highest level which was 769.18 units per mL.

Diagnostic laparoscopy was conducted on 28 November 2020. The liver appeared very large and the surface is full of white patches. Omentum looked thickened. Biopsies were taken from liver and omentum to be analyzed by pathologist.

Biopsies results were obtained on 30 November 2020. Liver biopsy revealed fatty infiltration of liver and granuloma containing inflammatory cells. Omentum biopsy revealed granuloma containing epithelioid cells and Langhans-type cells. These results suggested tuberculosis infection of omentum and liver.

Patient reported improvement after approximately two months of anti-TB treatment. Furthermore, CA-125 level decreased to 244.57 units per mL. No side effects of tuberculosis drugs such as jaundice, liver enzymes elevation, peripheral neuropathy, and vision changes were found during the intensive phase of tuberculosis treatment regiment. CA-125 level decreased further into 13.81 units per mL after approximately 3 months of antituberculosis treatment, and 4.45 units per mL after approximately 9 months of treatment.

The patient was still alive and well on August 24th 2021. She did not feel any clinical symptoms and felt much better compared to last year. She underwent thoracic CT-scan and whole abdomen CT-scan on the same day.

Thoracic CT scan revealed lessened pleural effusion when compared with previous CT-scan with minimal right pleural effusion observed. There was fibrosis on lower region of both lungs. Lymph nodes of axillary region, anterior region, and paratracheal region were no longer enlarged. Pericardial effusion was no longer observed but there was thickening of pericardium. Lytic sclerotic lesions were observed on right humerus head, several thoracal vertebrae body, several lumbar vertebrae body, several ribs, and sternal bone.

Whole abdominal CT scan showed lytic sclerotic lesions on whole lumbar vertebral body and several sacral vertebrae. CT scan also revealed lumbar spondyloarthrosis with mild narrowing of intervertebral disc of lumbar vertebra 4–5 and bulging disk on lumbar vertebra 3–4 and lumbar vertebra 4–5. No enlargement of paraaortic and pelvic lymph nodes was observed. Thickening of colon was no longer observed. Liver showed regular surface, normal left lobe size, slightly enlarged right lobe size, and homogeneous parenchymal density. After contrast injection, no pathological lesions were observed. Liver vascularization was within normal range. Biliary system was normal. Gynecological organs also showed no pathologies other than Nabothian cyst on cervix and follicular cyst on both ovarium after contrast injection.