12-month-old male who presented to the paediatric neurology outpatient department due to developmental delay. He was a term newborn with an uncomplicated pregnancy, with healthy non-consanguineous parents and two healthy older siblings. He had a history of two lower respiratory viral infections since 6 months of age with two hospital admissions, without the need for ventilatory support, and was followed in the paediatric neurology outpatient department for recurrent wheezing. On physical examination, he presented with brachycephaly, mild hypotonia, normal tendon reflexes, and bilateral syndactyly of 2-3 fingers. His head circumference was between the 85th and 97th percentiles. His height and weight were above the 97th percentile. He did not have ptosis or ophthalmoplegia. At 12 months, he was able to sit without support but was unable to reach the sitting position. He appeared to understand simple commands but was unable to vocalize. The parents were also concerned about feeding; although they reported no problems with liquids, they reported apparent difficulty with chewing. Speech therapy, occupational therapy and physiotherapy were initiated with significant improvement. From birth to 4 years of age, he had slow but positive psychomotor development. He began walking independently at 18 months, while expressive language was significantly delayed with words starting at 3 years and sentences at 4 years. Social skills were always preserved; however, communication was affected. Developmental evaluation revealed a global developmental delay (global developmental delay 70) and a sensory processing disorder. He had no respiratory problems since 3 years and 6 months of age. Cardiological evaluation revealed no structural cardiac abnormalities. ENT examinations, including auditory evoked potentials, were normal. A brain MRI at 2 years of age revealed brachycephaly, normal brain parenchyma, myelination adequate for age, enlargement of the subarachnoid spaces in the frontal-parietal brain with reduction of the parenchymal volume, a wide posterior fossa with slight rotation of the vermis in the anti-clockwise direction, and an arachnoid cyst that compressed the left hemisphere of the cerebellum. A comparative genomic hybridisation array showed no relevant variants and metabolic testing was normal. Exome clinical sequencing identified the hemizygous c.722G>A p.(Arg241His) variant in exon 9 of the MTM1 gene (NM_000252.2) associated with myotubular myopathy. This variant was classified as probably pathogenic according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics variant classification guidelines and, to the best of our knowledge, has never been reported before. The muscle biopsy revealed atrophic myofibres, some rounded myofibres with nuclei located internally and, although infrequent, localised central staining with oxidative stains, some with central nucleation, commonly associated with MTM1 gene myopathies. Genetic testing in the mother showed that she was a heterozygous carrier of the same MTM1 gene variant, which is not unexpected as only 10-20% of patients are de novo mutation carriers. In addition, we found that he had mild neuromuscular symptoms since young that were previously not appreciated.
