A 25-year-old female presented to the emergency department with thermalgia in the left palm accompanied by upper limb tingling, and generalized asthenia accompany low-grade fever that started 3 days prior to presentation. Originally, orthopedic physician who diagnosed her as peripheral nerve compression syndrome and treated her with supportive measures(ibuprofen and aescuven forte). On the following day, her left palm developed extremely itchy and burning pain in her left palm accompanied by significant scattered pulsation, including palm, interphalangeal, and fingertip areas, especially where there is a noticeable sense of vascular pulsation at the fingertip which seriously affects normal life and work. Therefore, she immediately presented to the emergency department to exclude drug allergies or poisoning reactions due to her allergic constitution.

Upon examination, there were no obvious abnormalities in vital signs. Her left upper limb skin showed no abnormalities such as erythema or rash, and the stinging sensation disappeared. However, integumentary examination revealed visible scattered erythema and clustered blisters on the palmar surface, finger surface, and distal of the index finger in the left hand, with thick blister walls, clear blister fluid, and basal erythema. Those with large blisters are like soybean, while those with small blisters are like millet grain meanwhile itching and burning pain gradually worsen.

Inspection results showed that there are no significant abnormalities in the complete blood count test are normal as well as routine urinalysis (‐), liver and kidney function tests (‐), blood glucose (‐), human immunodeficiency virus (‐). Her symptoms were ruled out as drug-related issues in the emergency department, and a professional dermatologist was invited to provide consultation support. The dermatologist gave a preliminary diagnosis was hand eczema thus recommended applying triamcinolone acetonide econazole cream to the affected area, once in the morning and once in the evening. And take loratadine orally once a day, 1 tablet at a time (10 mg).

After 2 days, there was no improvement in symptoms in the left hand, and clustered blisters became more prominent and gradually fused. Dermatologists found that the clinical characteristics of herpes zoster were more pronounced and verified by local biopsy on the lesion. At the same time, the doctor suggested that she has to take medication such as acyclovir tablets for treatment, while the patient refused and sought for the Traditional Chinese Medicine treatment to relieve her pain and anxiety as soon as possible. Therefore, she sought further treatment in the acupuncture and moxibustion department.

The patient was first assessed by the acupuncture and moxibustion doctor before treatment, including subjective symptoms evaluated by visual analog scale such as itching, pain and vascular pulsation, as well as objective symptoms by Eczema Area and Severity Index scores such as the size of erythema and the number of papules.

According to the patient’s description, the patient’s left hand had the highest pain score of 7.5 points, itching score of 8.5 points, and blood vessel pulsation score of 5 points. After understanding the specific situation of this patient, we gave her treatment with TFM. The specific operation process is as follows. First, prepare a traditional Chinese medicine incense stick. Then, the doctor pinches one end of the incense stick with his right thumb and index finger, exposing one end about 1 cm for ignition. Finally, shake off the burning flame, and when it forms a bead shaped spark, quickly press the bead shaped charcoal spark head directly onto the blister. Once pressed, immediately leave which is called one zhuang. Generally, large blisters should be treated 5 to 7 zhuang, and small rash spots should be treated 2 to 3 zhuang. Treatment should be given once a day, with 10 times serving as a course of treatment.

Therefore, she received TFM treatment once a day in the acupuncture and moxibustion department, and assessed the changes of symptoms before and after treatment every 2 days, and made records. On the 4th day of TFM treatment, she told that the burning sensation and itching in her palms had significantly decreased, and the pulsatility of her finger blood vessels had basically disappeared, with the visual analog scale scores significantly decreased. After 6th treatments, the tissue fluid inside the blister is gradually absorbed, and the skin covering the blister has separated from the bottom of the palm skin. After sixth treatments, the skin covering the blisters has peeled off from the bottom of the palm skin. Meanwhile, the top of the large blisters gradually turns yellow, scabs and hardens, and the peripheral redness and halo of all blisters increase. At this point, all subjective discomfort has basically disappeared. Four more TFM treatments were given, as a result, the patient’s herpes gradually falls off, and pink new skin appears at the base of the herpes, slightly shallower than the surrounding normal skin without any discomfort. We shown off the symptom changes during her entire TMF treatment period based on her symptom rating. No adverse events occurred throughout the entire treatment period. After a course of treatment, the patient received a follow-up from the doctor who treated her with TFM. Currently, there are no discomfort symptoms and returned to normal in her left hand, and took photos to gave feedback.