A 25-year-old Ethiopian girl presented to the Emergency Department of St. Paul's Hospital Millennium Medical College, Addis Ababa, with a history of progressive dyspnea, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, palpitation, and easy fatigabilityof two weeks duration. She had no history of fever, loss of appetite, weight loss or sweating. There was no history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, kidney disease, smokingor any cardiac illness in the family.

On general examination, she was acutely sick-looking, and had blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg and regular heart rate of 96 beats per minute. On respiratory examination, there was bilateral fine crepitation and reduced air entry on both the lower one-third lung fields. The cardiovascular evaluation revealed elevated jugular venous pressure,displaced apical impulse, soft S1, and grade 4/6holo-systolic murmur at the apex that radiated to the left axilla. There was also grade 2 pan-systolic murmur at the left lower sternal border which increased in intensity during inspiration.

Laboratory examination showed white cell count 13,500/ µL, hemoglobin 12.5 g/dl, and ESR 15mm/1sthr. Liver, renal and thyroid function tests were normal. Abdominal ultrasound study was also normal. Chest x-ray showed cardiomegaly, grade 2 pulmonary edema, and bilateral pleural effusion. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm and trans-thoracic echocardiogram revealed 4.0 cm by 3.9 cm single submitral aneurysm on the posterolateral wall of the left ventricle. The patient also had severe eccentric mitral valve regurgitationand dilated left atrium and left ventricle. There was also mild left ventricular systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction of about 40%, organized thrombus inside the aneurysm and mild tricuspid regurgitation. Due to lack of other diagnostic facilities and definitive surgical treatment in the country, the patient was managed with furosemide, enalapril, metoprolol, and warfarin. Moreover, she could not afford treatment abroad. After three months of medical management with the above medications, she had improvement of heart failure symptoms and resolution of the left ventricular thrombus. However, there was persistent severe mitral regurgitation and submitral aneurysm.