Male patient, 25 years old, Sundanese, presented at the Dental Hospital of the Faculty of Dentistry Universitas Padjadjaran with the chief complaint of mouth sores, which are painful on the upper and lower lips and exacerbated when eating and talking. Initially, four days ago, canker sores started in the oral cavity, then appeared on the lips two days later. The patient tried to self-medicate by applying petroleum jelly which he used to relieve his symptoms, but it did not improve. The patient replaced the drug with triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% in orabase ointment purchased at the pharmacy and applied it once a day. Canker sores were getting better but did not cure.

The patient had history a of fever for about a week before the canker sores appeared and there were no lesions on other parts of the body. He stated that the workload was quite heavy and he had not consumed a balanced nutritional diet for about one and a half months. He had no medical history, history of food allergies, or history of taking medication. He had no history of alcohol consumption or smoking, but he had a frequent habit of licking his lips. He also had a history of chickenpox when he was a child.

The patient had no fever with all vital signs within normal limits on general examination. Extra-oral examination showed no abnormalities in the lymph nodes. There were serosanguineous crusts that felt painful and bleed easily on the lips. Intra-oral examination revealed erythematous lesions, irregular in shape, and had diffuse borders, accompanied by pain in the upper and lower labial mucosa. Hyperkeratotic white plaque that could not be scraped off, irregular in shape, has diffuse borders, without pain in the region of tooth 38 left buccal mucosa. Yellowish-white plaques were seen on 1/3 of the posterior surface of the dorsal tongue, which could be scraped off without leaving an erythematous area, and there were indentations in the form of dental impressions without pain on the lateral right and left sides of the tongue. A painless hard nodule about 2×1 x 0.5 cm in size was seen in the midline of the hard palate. Several teeth were found in caries, radix, and edentulous conditions in all regions. The oral hygiene was poor.

Examination of psychological conditions was evaluated using the DASS-21 questionnaire and showed normal depression level (score 0), normal anxiety level (score 6), and normal stress level (score 6). Based on history and clinical examination, the working diagnosis was suspected HAEM, accompanied by the coated tongue, frictional keratosis, crenated tongue, torus palatinus, reversible pulpitis of tooth 18, irreversible pulpitis of tooth 47, chronic apical periodontitis et causa radix of tooth 15, and edentulous teeth 28, 37, 36, and 46. The differential diagnosis of suspected HAEM lesions on the lips was exfoliative cheilitis. However, exfoliative cheilitis did not have herpes virus involvement. The patient was indicated for serological testing (IgG anti-HSV-1) to confirm the diagnosis. Oral health-related quality of life was measured, and the results of the OHIP-14 examination at the first visit were 35 (moderate OHRQol).

The non-pharmacological therapy included instruction to maintain oral hygiene by brushing the teeth and tongue using a soft-bristled toothbrush two times a day and using non-detergent toothpaste. Education was given such as increasing the intake of water by at least two liters per day, consuming a balanced nutritional diet, avoiding acidic, spicy, hard, and monosodium glutamate-containing foods, and stopping the bad habit of licking and peeling the skin of the lips. The pharmacological therapy included topical and systemic medications. The topical medications included instructions to compress the lips with gauze moistened with 0.9% NaCl solution at least three times a day and to apply a thin layer of triamcinolone acetonide 0.1% in orabase to the lips three times a day. The systemic medications included instruction to take a multivitamin once a day.

The progress of improvement was visible in the first follow-up, two days after the initial visit. The pain in the lips was reduced, but the canker sores have not healed. Extra-oral examination revealed serosanguinous crusts on the lips which were still painful and bled easily. The serological test result (IgG anti-HSV-1) was positive with a ratio of: 6.32 (positive: ratio > 1.1). The definitive diagnosis was established based on the history, clinical examination, and serological tests as HAEM. The non-pharmacological and pharmacological therapy was continued, and systemic medication was added in the form of instructions to consume acyclovir 200 mg tablets five times a day for one week.

Significant improvement was visible in the second follow-up, five days after the previous visit, showing excellent healing in all of the patient’s oral lesions. The OHIP-14 result at the last visit was 4 (good OHRQoL). The patient’s physical, psychological, and social conditions showed improvement and returned to normal after 7 days of treatment. Patient was referred to continue dental and oral care in the periodontics, dental conservation, oral surgery, and prosthodontics departments. The patient has approved and written informed consent for the case details to be published included publication of the images, and the institution has also approved for publication. This case had complied with the Declaration of Helsinki.