31-year-old male with a history of alcohol, tobacco, cocaine inhalation, pulmonary tuberculosis treated, left nephrectomy and post-traumatic splenectomy. He consulted the emergency department for a week-old condition that began immediately after intramuscular administration of penicillin for sexual contact with a partner with syphilis, characterized by pain in the right gluteal region that radiated to the foot, with subsequent appearance of purpuric dermatosis related to the injection site, being a plaque-like lesion configured in a ring-like shape, with irregular borders and a racemose distribution measuring 15 centimeters (cm), with healthy skin inside. He also presented a small scrotal scar and a large right plantar lesion of livedoid appearance from the talar region to the tip of the toes that did not respect a strict margin. An ultrasound of the greater gluteus was performed, which showed loss of the heterogeneous fibril pattern, an increase in the thickness of the fibril at the mid-section of the fibril, which appeared edematous, as well as edema of the subcutaneous cellular tissue (SCT); in the homolateral plantar region and in the scrotum, an SCT edema. In the laboratory, he presented leukocytosis of 13.7 × 109/L, C-reactive protein of 3.2 mg/dL (normal up to 0.5 mg/dL), which was interpreted as acute phase reactants, also increased transaminases with aspartate aminotransferase of 175 IU/L (normal up to 32), alanine aminotransferase of 245 IU/L (normal up to 33), creatine kinase with a value of 2741 IU/L (normal up to 170) and lactate dehydrogenase of 2499 IU/L (normal up to 250) representing muscle involvement. Complete serologies for syphilis were performed, with venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL and treponemal antibodies), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) hepatitis B, hepatitis C, with negative results. The chronology, clinical manifestations and subsequent biopsy supported the diagnosis of Nicolau syndrome, for which anticoagulation was initiated with 1 mg/kg c/12 hs subcutaneously, cilostazol 100 mg every 12 hours and tramadol, for 10 days. A skin biopsy of the gluteus was performed that evidenced epidermal necrosis and extension to follicular epithelium, with formation of a secondary blister due to reepithelization, without vasculitis or vascular thrombosis, linked to acute cutaneous embolism. There was frank improvement with decrease in transaminases, with aspartate aminotransferase of 39 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase of 77 IU/L and creatine kinase of 167 IU/L. No immunological profile was requested, based on the fact that our presumptive diagnosis did not justify the search for other etiologies. A discharge was granted with cilostazol and analgesics, ambulatory control at 3 months with improvement of pain and lesions, remaining a discromatic scar in the right gluteus with presence of fine desquamation and a discromatic scar in the right foot with thick desquamation in the support area of the tarsometatarsus associated with minimal livedoid lesions in the same foot.
