A 23-year-old female presented to the emergency department with loss of consciousness and excess oral secretions 2 hours after ingestion of an unspecified poison. She had no abnormal body movement, fever, diarrhea, vomiting, or sweating. She had been initially been taken to a nearby primary hospital, where she was treated for possible OP poisoning with atropine and cimetidine for 3 days, before she was transferred to Saint Peter’s hospital. After thorough questioning, it was found that the patient had consumed about 30 mL of 2,4-D in a suicide attempt, precipitated by financial problems. She did not have any known history of psychiatric illness, suicidal attempts, depressive episodes, or substance abuse. No prior cardiac, renal, or metabolic disorders were noted.

On arrival at the emergency department, the patient was unconscious. Her vitals were PR 110/min, BP 120/70 mmHg, RR 21/min, and SPO2 96% on room air. Physical examination results were remarkable: a GCS of 6 out of 15, dilated and reactive pupils, hypertonic and hyperreflexic lower extremities, and upgoing plantar reflex. Upon initial investigation, complete blood-cell count, renal function test, liver-function test, and random blood glucose were normal. Her electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, while chest X-ray was unremarkable. Arterial blood-gas analysis and serum level of the toxin could not be determined, as neither means of testing was available at the hospital.

The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), intubated for airway protection, and started immediately on forced alkaline diuresis. Her ICU course was remarkable for the development of renal failure (creatinine 3.1 mL/dL [reference range 0.5–1.2 mg/dL], BUN 133 mg/dL [reference range 16.6–48.5 mg/dL], urinalysis 3+ hemoglobin, and many red blood cells), due to toxin-induced rhabdomyolysis (creatine phosphokinase level of 1,330 µg/L). Subsequently, the patient became hypotensive, and vasopressor support was started. Echocardiography and abdominal ultrasonography were both unremarkable. Despite these efforts, she died of circulatory collapse on the third ICU day.