Patient information
A 24-year-old man residing in Yopougon, a popular commune in the city of Abidjan, single, having stopped his studies in the final year, unemployed, suffering from undocumented psychiatric disorders was accompanied by his parents to the emergency department of our hospital for epigastric pain and swelling that had been developing for 15 days following the voluntary ingestion of a knife. No other signs (dysphagia, vomiting, intestinal disorders, cough, gastrointestinal haemorrhage) were found during the examination. The parents informed us of the presence of a mental disorder in the patient that had been diagnosed and was not being treated by psychiatrists or traditional therapists.

Clinical results
The physical examination revealed an ulcerated inflammatory mass measuring 3 x 4 cm, with the emergent tip of a blade in its center. The rest of the abdomen was soft and undistended, with no umbilical cry, and the rectal examination was normal. The patient had a body temperature of 37.5 °C.

Diagnostic evaluation
An unprepared abdominal X-ray shows a linear, sharp-edged, knife-blade-shaped, radiopaque image.

Laboratory tests revealed a haemoglobin level of 10 g/dl, a hyperleucocytosis of 16 600/mm3.

Treatment and follow-up
Surgical intervention under general anaesthesia was performed.

The intraoperative findings showed a healthy abdominal cavity, an adhesion of the anterior face of the gastric body with the abdominal wall, the release of which showed a gastric perforation, with a blade inside it, the tip of which passed through the entire anterior abdominal wall, the handle remaining in the gastric lumen.

Intragastric foreign body extraction was performed: it was a whole knife of local craftsmanship with a sharp blade at one end, 6 cm long, 1.5 cm wide at its base, and a round carved wooden handle 2 cm in diameter and 7 cm long. The knife measured 13 cm. For gastric perforation, a superior wedge resection was performed. This sample did not show any histological abnormality. A gastric suture was then performed. The hospital stay lasted eight days, the consequences were simple. The one-year follow-up is excellent, the patient has a psychiatric follow-up.
