Three days prior to admission, a 11-year-old girl complained about pain on the upper back her neck after her father accidentally fell on her neck during play. No specific pain location was noted, but the patient reported no radiating pain to her extremities. The pain was accompanied with weakness on the right upper and right lower limbs immediately after the accident. Although mobility on all extremities was preserved, there was a decrease in strength observed specifically on the right side, along with numbness and tingling on her right leg. There were no further complaints and she was still able to control her micturition and defecation. The patient was immediately brought to a local private hospital, where she was treated by a pediatrician and underwent Brain CT scan with normal result. Her injury was then managed as Guillain-Barre Syndrome (GBS) and received antibiotic, anticonvulsant, and neuroprotectant as medication. However, her condition did not improve after 2 days and she was finally referred to a tertiary hospital for further treatment. There was no remarkable past medical history.
No visible deformities were noted upon physical examination, but there was a midline tenderness on the back of her upper neck and paraspinal muscle spasm on the right side. ASIA Score showed decreased both sensory and motor function on the right side, but reflexes and autonomic function were within normal. Plain radiography did not show any abnormalities. However, CT-Scan revealed retrolisthesis of C2, causing canal stenosis on level VC1–2. MRI confirmed severe spinal stenosis on C2 level with spinal cord edema.

Patient was finally diagnosed with incomplete spinal cord injury at the level of C2 AIS C with suspected anterior cord syndrome and odontoid fracture on C2 spine Anderson D'Alonzo type II. She then underwent posterior C1-C2 fusion using Modified Gallie Procedure and decompression. Patient was put in prone position and the exact location of the incision is identified using a C-arm. The dissection is carried down the midline through the subcutaneous tissue and the fascia to the tips of the spinous processes to decrease bleeding. The vertebra level was confirmed intra-operatively with fluoroscopy as soon as bony structures are visible, which was done prior to any further dissection. Self-retaining retractors are used to maintain tension on soft tissues during exposure. The paraspinal muscles are elevated subperiosteally from the underlying laminae, using a Cobb elevator. Dissection is performed along the spinous processes, lamina, and lateral mass (bilaterally), which functions to minimize bleeding and muscle damage. After we identified the fracture site, two 1.0 mm SS-wires were inserted from the inferior posterior arch of C1 and the superior posterior arch of C2. Both wires were then secured to ensure symmetrical position of external occipital protuberance dan the spinous process. After stabilization was achieved, decompression was done by hemilaminectomy of the right C1 and hemilaminotomy of the right C2, which resected axis was utilized as the onlay bone graft and inserted between arch of C1 and lamina of the C2. The graft was secured by sublaminar wires and the wound was closed. These procedures were done by an orthopaedic surgeon specializing in spine surgery.

Her condition was stable postoperatively and immobilization was done using soft collar neck measured from the angle of the mandible up to the jugular notch for 12 weeks. Upon 3 months follow-up, ASIA Score showed both motor and sensory improvement. Patient no longer complained of numbness, weak right-hand grip has returned, and mobilization was recovered with assistance from a walker. The parent also reported that the patient had returned to school to continue her studies.