A three-year-old girl, bedridden with a chronic neurological condition (congenital Zika virus syndrome), was admitted for treatment of a tracheitis episode. She had undergone tracheostomy and gastrostomy two years earlier for treatment of chronic pulmonary aspiration, recurrent episodes of pneumonia, and swallowing disorders. A low-pressure, continuously inflated plastic balloon cannula was prescribed because the child required intermittent positive pressure ventilation.

The patient presented with two episodes of self-limited bleeding to the tracheostomy with an interval of 48 hours, initially attributed to aspirative trauma. A new episode 48 hours after the initial report with bright blood projectile, suggestive of arterial bleeding, was then described by the mother, requiring surgical evaluation. The patient did not have physiological instability or severe anaemia.

A provisional diagnosis of TIF was given by the pediatric surgical team. Immediate angiography confirmed the diagnosis and revealed TIF affecting the bifurcation of the innominate artery (IA) and the right tracheal wall with a small amount of contrast near the fistula.

The patient was treated with the endovascular placement of four expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)/nitinol (Viabhan®) stents in the right carotid artery (5×50 and 6×100 mm) and right subclavian artery (5×25 and 5×100 mm), crossing the transition to the AI in the Y configuration. One stent (5×25 mm) migrated accidentally, becoming close to the iliac bifurcation. This dislodged stent was not retrieved, as the team considered that attempts to remove it would entail an unfavorable risk-benefit ratio. No neurological worsening, right arm ischemia or complications related to the dislodged stent were detected after surgery. Angiographic control, including new angiotomography four months after surgery, showed normal blood flow in the right carotid artery and right subclavian artery.

Anticoagulants were prescribed for two months (enoxaparin 20 mg bid subcutaneously). Five months after surgery, the patient remains asymptomatic, with no new bleeding episodes or infectious, thrombotic, or ischemic complications related to the stents.
