A 73-year-old man was operated on 5 years ago in another health center for a diagnosis of a left gluteal tumor. The lesion was removed and the biopsies were compatible with a high-grade epithelioid sarcoma (pT1b-N0M0). Given a close surgical margin (< 0.5 mm), a margin extension was performed. The histopathology was negative for residual neoplasia. Nevertheless, the patient received radiotherapy with 50 Gy in 25 fractions and 10 Gy of reinforcement in 5 fractions.

At 4 years of follow-up, the patient presented with mild pain, induration and retraction of the skin around the scar. On rectal examination and endoscopic evaluation, the anal canal and rectal mucosa were normal. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a soft tissue mass in the left ischiorectal fossa infiltrating the gluteus maximus muscle and close to, but not contacting the levator ani muscle or coccyx. The positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan showed a hypermetabolic lesion at the same site with no evidence of distant spread. The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary committee, where the lesion was determined to be non-pelvic floor threatening, and resection of the lesion with preservation of the anal canal and pelvic floor was decided with intraoperative biopsy as a safety measure to ensure the margin. Subsequently, a CT angiography and ultrasound doppler was performed to plan reconstruction. During surgery, the patient underwent a laparoscopic ileostomy and a complete resection of the lesion and tissue from the ischiorectal fossa in lithotomy, preserving the pelvic floor and the levator ani muscle. Intraoperative biopsies showed margins free of neoplasia towards the levator ani muscle. The patient was changed to prone position and the plastic surgery team performed the soft tissue coverage using a superior gluteal artery perforator artery (SGAP) flap along with a partial rotation of the gluteus maximus muscle for obliteration of the dead space. Blood loss was 150 ml and the operation time was 6 h. The patient was discharged uneventfully 25 days later due to the management of the flap. Final histopathology confirmed a recurrent epithelioid sarcoma with actinic changes and negative surgical margins (the closest margin was the medial, towards the levator ani, 2 mm). In addition, immunohistochemistry was positive for EMA (epithelial membrane antigen), CD34 (transmembrane glycoprotein) and total cytokeratins, and negative for INI-1 (Integrase Interactor-1). Follow-up was decided and the closure of the ileostomy was scheduled 3 months postoperatively, which was performed without complications. The patient then underwent pelviperineal rehabilitation with excellent results, reporting good continence, minimal and infrequent episodes of faecal leakage and high satisfaction with their functional defecatory and scar quality.
