A 35-year-old, Japanese, 42.7-kg (dry weight, 41.1 kg before pregnancy), 147-cm-tall woman was scheduled for cesarean section. She had renal failure due to chronic glomerulonephritis. Before she became pregnant, she had been undergoing hemodialysis three times per week. The hemodialysis access (arteriovenous fistula) was in her left upper arm. The symptoms and course of treatment up to cesarean section are described in Table 1. When the pregnancy was identified, she received hemodialysis five times per week. Although she had not shown any symptoms before the pregnancy, she reported dyspnea at 12 weeks of gestation and subsequently developed severe cough. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a cardiac left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40% and mild pulmonary hypertension. After hospitalization, hemodialysis was increased to six times per week to prevent heart failure. LVEF improved to almost 50% and symptoms also improved, so the plan was to postpone delivery as long as possible. However, she again developed cough and dyspnea at 22 weeks of gestation.

Chest X-ray showed significant congestion. TTE showed an LVEF of 20%, mild to moderate mitral regurgitation, and left ventricular dilatation. She was therefore admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 92% on room air, so supplemental oxygen was provided at 1 l/minute through nasal cannula. After oxygen administration, SpO2 was 98%. In addition, water volume was removed using extracorporeal ultrafiltration. Although respiratory status and cardiac function improved slightly with intensive care, a clinical conference of obstetricians, pediatricians, urologists, cardiologists, and anesthesiologists decided that cesarean section should be performed at 24 weeks 0 days of gestation. The anticoagulant used for dialysis was changed from heparin to nafamostat mesylate (nafamostat) at 23 weeks of gestation for the cesarean section. Blood tests showed hemoglobin 10.1 g/dl and platelets 12.1 × 104/μl. The prothrombin time international normalized ratio was 0.85, and the activated partial thromboplastin time was 25.6 seconds.

When the patient arrived in the operation room, two intravenous peripheral vein lines were inserted with a 22-gauge cannula and an 18-gauge cannula in the right forearm to use for fluid resuscitation. An arterial line was inserted via the right radial artery with a 22-gauge cannula. Central venous lines were inserted via the jugular vein. We inserted the central venous lines, using the echography while carefully monitoring the arterial line blood pressure. The echography showed the jugular vein clear, and we made sure that putting her in the mild Trendelenburg position did not affect circulatory dynamics. Overall, the procedure was completed without any significant changes in hemodynamics. Spinal and epidural anesthetic agents were administered in the right lateral position at the L3–L4 and Th10–Th11 interspaces, respectively. After local infiltration of 1% mepivacaine, an epidural catheter was placed with an 18-gauge Tuohy needle. The epidural space was confirmed using the conventional loss-off-resistance method. After aspiration testing confirmed a negative result, a test dose of 1% mepivacaine (3 ml) was administered via the catheter. Lumbar puncture was successfully performed, and 5 mg of 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine and 10 μg of fentanyl were administered intrathecally with a 25-gauge Quincke spinal needle. The amount and the type of anesthetic agents were decided by the anesthesiologists and the surgeons. Continuous administration of phenylephrine was immediately started at 1 mg/hour to avoid hypotension due to anesthesia. Five milliliters of 0.25% ropivacaine was administered via the epidural catheter.

After confirming sensory block at the Th4 level, the operation was started. Before delivery, 0.1 mg of nitroglycerin was administered to relax the uterus. The neonate was delivered 4 minutes after starting the cesarean section. Central venous and peripheral blood pressures were maintained during cesarean delivery. The patient did not report any nausea, pain, or dyspnea intraoperatively. After the delivery, 600 mg of acetaminophen was administered. Once the operation was finished without complications, 2 mg of morphine was administered via the epidural catheter, which was then removed. Operation and anesthesia times were 49 minutes and 88 minutes, respectively. Total infusion and blood loss volumes were 1050 ml and 1029 ml, respectively. Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the ICU and hemodialysis was performed. She was transferred to the gynecology ward on postoperative day (POD) 5 and discharged on POD 10. Cardiac function improved after the cesarean section. As of the time of writing, both mother and child were doing well.