A 22-year-old pregnant woman, gravida 5, para 1, three miscarriages in the 5th week of gestation was admitted to the Department of Endocrinology for the evaluation of severe hypokalemia detected during pregnancy testing in the gynecology department. 16 years prior, at the age of 6 years, she began to have cramps after crying or losing her temper, without dizziness, seizures, or other symptoms. Laboratory tests revealed hypokalemia (data missing), and the symptoms were relieved after potassium supplementation. Subsequently, she experienced recurring cramps after crying, losing her temper, or fatigue. The symptoms were relieved without any treatment and had no effect on her daily life; therefore, she did not pay attention to these symptoms. Two days prior to admission, she underwent a laboratory test for pregnancy. Her blood test result showed severe electrolyte disturbances: her serum potassium level was 2.42 mmol/L and magnesium level was 0.65 mmol/L, but she had no symptoms. After intravenous and oral potassium chloride supplementation in the emergency department, the patient was admitted to the Department of Endocrinology for investigation of hypokalemia.

At presentation, the patient had no sweating, vomiting, diarrhea, or anorexia. She denied laxative or diuretic abuse, hypokalemia, or cramps in other family members. Physical examination revealed a height of 149 cm, weight of 46.3 kg and blood pressure of 97/71 mmHg. There were no positive signs on physical examination, except for the Trousseau sign. Detailed laboratory examinations were performed for further diagnosis and treatment. Laboratory analysis revealed hypokalemia, metabolic alkalosis, renal potassium wasting, hypomagnesemia, hypocalciuria, hyperreninemia, and hyperaldosteronism with normal blood pressure, which indicated a clinical diagnosis of GS. The diagnosis was confirmed when a heterozygous mutation c.1077C>G (p.Asn359Lys) and c.965-1_976delGCGGACATTTTTGinsACCGAAAATTTT in SLC12A3 was identified by whole exome sequencing. After the electrolyte levels were maintained within a relatively optimal range, the intravenous treatment was changed to oral supplementation.