A 67-year-old Lebanese male patient presented to the emergency department at the American University of Beirut Medical Center, Lebanon, with a 10-day history of dysuria, urinary frequency, and urgency. The patient’s medical history was notable for hypertension, benign prostate hypertrophy, hyperuricemia, and dyslipidemia. The patient was not on immunosuppressive treatment and did not have a history suggestive of immunologic problem. He was on amlodipine, valsartan, and bisoprolol for hypertension, as well as a statin for hyperlipidemia, and allopurinol. The patient did not have a significant surgical history. He does not smoke or consume alcohol. His father had coronary heart disease, and his mother had Parkinson disease. Personal and family histories were otherwise unremarkable, without testicular torsion or trauma. He has an administrative job and is married with children.

Timeline showing pertinent procedures and findings

July 03, 2012: US of the kidneys and pelvis revealed left kidney heterogeneous hyperechoic lesion. Further evaluation (18 July 2012) by triphasic CT showed a Bosniak type 2 renal cyst.
10 May 2014: Admitted for urinary symptoms, enlarged scrotal sac.
12 May 2014: US of the testicles revealed right epididymo-orchitis with reactive inflammatory hydrocele. Lesion containing calcifications within the tail of the right epididymis possibly representing an adenomatoid tumor.
14 May 2014: US of the abdomen and pelvis revealed hyperechoic lesion within the superior aspect of the left kidney slightly increased in size. Further evaluation via a dedicated MRI examination recommended.
17 May 2014: MRI of the abdomen showed multiloculated cystic mass within the midpole of the left kidney. Cystic renal cell carcinoma was the most likely diagnosis.
6 June 2014: PET scan showed a well-defined hypodense lesion involving the anterior aspect of the left kidney measuring 4.3 × 3.3 cm and showing diffusely low activity (SUVmax 2.2) with a focus of increased activity along its superior anterior aspect with an SUVmax of 2.9 on the early phase and an SUVmax of 3.2 on the delayed phase.
19 November 2014: MRI the abdomen with gadolinium showed an interval increase in the size of the left kidney lesion measuring 4.7 × 5.2 cm (previously 3.9 × 4.7 cm). The mass again showed extension to the renal hilum.
21 November 2014: US of the testicles showed a decrease in the lesion in the right epididymal tail, showing some calcifications. This lesion can represent an adenomatoid tumor
Reactive right hydrocele and right small spermatocele or epididymal head cyst were noted.
2 April 2015: Partial left nephrectomy.
16 April 2015: Immunohistochemistry and microscopic findings revealed tubulo-cystic renal carcinoma with free surgical margins.
15 October 2024: Patient functional, assuming an advisorship position in a university.


On physical examination, the right scrotum was found to be three times larger than the left one, and the scrotal sac was erythematous. The exam also revealed a firm, non-tender intrascrotal mass, distinct from the testis. The mass looked to be arising directly from the right epididymis. The exam was otherwise normal.

Given his dysuria and other urinary symptoms, a urine culture was obtained. The culture revealed extended-spectrum beta-lactamase Escherichia coli. Ultrasonography showed a slightly disturbed echotexture of the right testicle with increased blood flow, and an associated septate reactive hydrocele with inflammatory changes. The US also revealed a 1.6 cm lesion within the right epididymal tail with some calcifications; this was reported as a possible adenomatoid tumor by the radiologist and the urology team. Since adenomatoid tumor is a benign neoplasm with no malignant potential, no surgical intervention was taken.


Ultrasound of the abdomen revealed a hyperechoic mass within the superior aspect of the left kidney. This mass was seen on a CT 2 years prior to presentation and was reported by the radiologist to be consistent with a Bosniak type 2 cyst. MRI of the abdomen in May 2014 showed a multiloculated cystic mass within the midpole of the left kidney that may represent RCC.

The patient was diagnosed with prostatitis and epididymo-orchitis. He was treated with piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g three times daily for 5 days and was discharged on trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole double strength two tablets twice daily for 3 weeks.

Positron emission tomography (PET) scan, done 3 weeks after the MRI on an outside basis did not report an epididymal lesion; however, a hypodense solid left kidney mass with a worrisome focal area of increased activity was noted.

MRI was repeated 6 months after discharge (November 2014) revealing an interval increase in the size of the left kidney lesion from 3.9 × 4.7 cm to 4.7 × 5.2 cm. A decision for surgery was made, and the patient underwent left partial nephrectomy in April 2015. Histology confirmed the diagnosis of TRCC. Laboratory studies including a complete blood count (CBC) and prostate-specific antigen (PSA) were repeated and were normal. Repeat testicular US (November 2014) showed complete regression of the right orchitis with partial regression of the epididymitis and a decrease in the right epididymal tail lesion with some calcifications. A total of 9 years after the surgery (October 2024), the patient is functional, with good health.

