41-year-old male patient who was admitted to the emergency department in 2016 with polytrauma as a result of a traffic accident; with trauma to the lower limbs, the X-ray shows a fracture of the left tibial plates and a fracture of the right subtrochanter, thoracoabdominal trauma and mild cranioencephalic trauma.
Osteosynthesis of femur with long cephalomedullary nail with closed focus was performed to correct the subtrochanter fracture and an external transarticular knee tutor was applied as a provisional measure to control local damage; 15 days later, definitive osteosynthesis of his tibial fracture was performed. Adequate and satisfactory evolution of tibial plates.
Between 2016 and 2019 he had sporadic episodes of pain in the right hip that subsided easily with anti-inflammatory and analgesic treatment without limiting his daily activities. X-ray examination showed fatigue of the distal blocks with doubts about the consolidation of the fracture.
In 2020, the pain in the hip increased and did not respond to medical treatment and was accompanied by functional limitations. The control X-ray showed a rupture of the cephalomedullary nail in its proximal third and a fracture of the subtrochanteric fracture.
In February 2020, there was a failed attempt to remove osteosynthesis material (extra-institutional), so he was referred to our institution. He was taken to surgery on February 8, osteosynthesis material was removed, curettage was performed and a culture of non-union focus was taken. Culture was positive for Klebsiella pneumoniae and he received intravenous meropenem treatment for 10 days. Subsequently, he underwent a surgical wash with drainage of the haematoma on February 20 to carry out new osteosynthesis with cephalomedullary nail + autologous bone graft (taken from both iliac crests) in the non-union focus.
Reactivation of infection in March 2020, requiring new surgery for washes and surgical debridement (#5). New Enterobacter bacteria is isolated and is managed with vancomycin and meropenem. At the end of April, she completes medical treatment and is discharged in stable conditions.
In May 2020, the osteosynthesis material was removed due to persistence of the infection, and a TENS endomedular nail covered with cement with antibiotics (gentamycin) was left.
At the end of May, after two surgical washes, the TENS nail was removed, resection of fracture edges (up to healthy bone), endomedular bone graft with a 10 cm segment of non-vascularised fibula (autologous) and fracture fixation with a distal femoral condylar support plate; VAC system placement and definitive wound closure in a second time on 28 May 2020. The patient evolved adequately, the surgical wound healed completely to the present day with infection in remission and radiological evidence of fracture consolidation, as well as asymptomatic patient with preserved function of the limb.
