34-year-old male with a history of bilateral retinal detachment and David surgery (aortic root replacement and aortic valve re-suspension) 12 years prior to this admission; presented to the emergency department with dyspnoea and angina. Physical examination with vital signs within normal parameters; diastolic murmur consistent with aortic insufficiency and 12-lead electrocardiogram with evidence of left ventricular overload. The transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed left ventricular dilation with an ejection fraction (EF) of 60% and severe aortic insufficiency. Angiotomography of the thoracic aorta showed dilation of up to 76 mm, dilation of the right coronary artery, with no evidence of aortic dissection. Based on the above, he was evaluated by the local Heart Team who decided to perform Bentall and de Bono surgery in addition to reconstruction of the right coronary artery.

Upon admission to the Cardiovascular Intensive Care Unit after the planned surgery, elevation of the ST segment was identified in the DII, DIII and AVF leads. The transesophageal echocardiogram (ECOTE) showed akinesia in the inferior, inferoseptal and inferolateral faces in their three thirds, suggestive of myocardial infarction associated with cardiac surgery (type V infarction). For this reason, urgent diagnostic coronary angiography was performed, showing adequate flow in the coronary arteries. However, the evolution was slow with increased use of inotropic and vasopressor agents without improvement in clinical or biochemical parameters of tissue perfusion and the diagnosis of CCBGP was established. Peripheral V-A ECMO was connected with intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation (BIAC) ventricular decompression.

Three days after the start of mechanical circulatory support (MCS), hypoxia was detected in the trunk with normal oxygenation values in the lower extremities. Bacterial pneumonia was suspected and confirmed by a chest X-ray (presence of left basal consolidation), which led to the diagnosis of north-south syndrome. Ventilatory parameters were adjusted without resolution of the hypoxemia, so a new configuration of ECMO V-A to venoarteriovenous ECMO (ECMO V-AV) was performed; that is, extraction of a vein and return to the right heart and aortic arterial cavities. Antimicrobial treatment based on meropenem and vancomycin was also initiated.

48 hours after the start of the new circulatory and venous support configuration, an improvement in the hemodynamic and cardiovascular function was documented, so that 72 hours after the start of assistance it was withdrawn without complications. The patient was discharged alive to his home after 25 days of hospital stay.
