61-year-old male patient who attended the emergency department of a high-complexity hospital in Santa Marta, Colombia, with the query "my face hurts a lot", who was referred from the oral and maxillofacial surgery department. with initial diagnosis of acute ethmoidal sinusitis. The patient reported a systemic history of high blood pressure under prescription with metoprolol 100 mg twice a day, uncontrolled type II diabetes mellitus managed by food compensation and a history of severe COVID-19 two months ago, which required management in the intensive care unit with anti-inflammatory therapy with two doses of IV tocilizumab.

The patient had had pain for two weeks and it had worsened two days before admission. The pain was described as a localized, throbbing, high intensity pain in the frontal skull and right ethmoidal region, associated with nasal drainage after rhinoscopy performed prior to the appointment with a report of left ethmoidal sinusitis (scheduled for anterior and posterior ethmoidectomy) and periorbital cellulitis.

On admission to hospital, paraclinical tests were requested that revealed leukocytes of 15,100/mm3 and blood glucose of 290mg/dl. Antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory and analgesic treatment was instituted with ampicillin/sulbactam 3 g IV every 6 h, dexamethasone 8 mg IV every 8 h, diluted dipyrone 3 mg IV every 8 h, and the pharmacological treatment was supplemented with insulin glargine 15 u pm and omeprazole 40 mg IV every 24 hours.

The oral examination performed by the department of maxillofacial surgery revealed the presence of necrotic-looking segments of the upper jaw, ill-fitting metal-porcelain restorations, multiple foci of infections in dental organs and the presence of a right oropharyngeal antral communication. The patient was treated with parenteral antibiotic therapy (cefepime, meropenem 2 g IV every 8 h), vancomycin (1.5 g IV every 12 h), and parenteral antifungal therapy (fluconazole 400 mg IV every 12 h) was used.

Physical examination revealed edema, erythema and nodulation in the right eyelid. The tomographic images described changes in the cranial bone table, suggesting the exclusion of multiple myeloma. In the cranial bone table, multiple saline-like lytic lesions were observed. Thickening of the mucoperiosteum of the right maxillary sinus was also observed. An MRI was performed where cerebral abscesses were observed in the left frontal region (MRI section: 37/60) in late capsular phase, with discrete peripheral vasogenic cerebral edema, correlating with the results of the microbiological analyses.

Surgical procedure
Under general anaesthesia, after asepsis, antisepsis, surgical drapes and with the patient in supine position with the head at zero degrees, following the fold of expression. A transverse frontal incision was performed, dissection was performed by planes to the bone and the procedure was performed. A surgical motor and 5 mm burr was used, a trepanation of the anterior wall of the frontal sinus was performed where thickened mucosa with purulent material was observed, which was aspirated, curetted and irrigated with abundant saline solution and hydrogen peroxide. Finally, a sterile absorbable sponge was placed and the pedicled galea flap was repositioned. Subsequently, a cranialization of the frontal sinus was performed by trepanation with burr and aspiration of the abscess without complications by catheter no. 14. The galea flap was sutured with vicryl 2/0 and the skin, with simple sutures of nylon 4/0. In the area of maxillofacial surgery, surgical extirpation of the bone sequestrum, drainage, curettage and subsequent washing of the area with aspiration of secretions was performed.

Sinuses secretions, frontal brain abscesses and sinus mucosa were sent for study and reported as labelled culture no. 1 intracerebral abscess secretion: negative for aerobic germs; culture no. 2 frontal sinus (liquid syringe sample): isolated germ: Klebsiella pneumoniae, ssp pneumoniae and culture of frontal sinus no. 3: (tissue sample) positive, isolated germ: Enterobacter cloacae complex.

The definitive diagnoses were bacterial meningoencephalitis, frontal cerebral abscess and pansinusitis with frontal and maxillary osteomyelitis with primary infectious focus: maxillary osteonecrosis-osteomyelitis derived from the oro-antral communication after a tooth extraction due to COVID-19; as a precipitating factor of the infectious process, the application of the corticoid tocilizumab for severe pneumonia due to COVID-19. Likewise, the right oro-antral communication was established as a conditioning factor of the unfavorable evolution of the patient, which continued active until the patient was treated.

The patient was hospitalized with parenteral medication and orders for serial hematological tests every 5 days, complete blood count, BUM, creatinine, ionogram, OCT, TGP, VSG and PCR. As an adjunctive to improve the clinical picture, 20 sessions of hyperbaric chamber of 1.5 ATA (absolute atmospheres) were ordered for 2 hours/day to oxygenate the tissues and improve their biological response to healing. A reevaluation consultation was scheduled for 5 months in which there was no evidence of secretions in the operated areas. The patient reported pain in the maxillofacial area treated with levofloxacin 750 mg orally. In general, from the hyperbaric chamber therapies the improvement was quite noticeable. The current state of the patient is appreciated, with a coral pink mucosa, well moisturized, which shows the clinical health of the patient and the healing of the frontal fistula. We can also observe that, despite the loss of cortical, there is no perforation of the Schneider membrane, which is something positive if we compare it with the initial state in which the patient arrived.

The patient's latest MRI scans show a favorable evolution of the osteomyelitis process. Compared to previous MRI scans, there is a significant decrease in edema and infiltration of the bone marrow at the level of the upper jaw, as well as a reduction in the area of bone destruction and the extent of the lesion. In addition, the findings reveal a better definition of the bone margins, with less involvement of the paranasal sinuses and a lower inflammatory reaction of the adjacent soft tissues. These positive changes in the MRI image support the clinical improvement of the patient and the effectiveness of the antibiotic and surgical treatment. The detailed evaluation of the MRI studies has been fundamental to monitor the progression of the osteomyelitis and guide the therapeutic decision-making in this case.
