We present the clinical case of a 15-year-old male with no medical history or previous interventions, who presented to the paediatric emergency department with a history of vomiting and epigastric abdominal pain of four days' duration, remaining afebrile during the course of the illness.

Initially treated as gastroenteritis, but with no improvement, and with persistence of epigastric abdominal pain and biliary vomiting, he was admitted to the emergency department for further evaluation.

On physical examination, the patient was in acceptable general condition, afebrile, with mild signs of dehydration. The abdomen was distended, without signs of peritonism and with decreased hydroaerolic sounds. The laboratory tests did not present significant findings, and an abdominal radiograph was performed with findings suggestive of intestinal obstruction.

Given the evolution, an urgent computed tomography was performed, which showed the presence of ascites and significant dilation of small intestine loops, suggesting the interposition of a small intestine loop at the beginning of the transcavity of the epiplons, with a change in caliber at the level of the hiatus of Winslow.

Urgent surgical intervention was performed, initially by exploratory laparoscopy. Dilated loops of small intestine and terminal ileum, cecum and ascending colon of normal calibre but located in the right hypochondrium, with the cecum very mobile and without presenting adhesions to the right parietocolic space, were observed. Following the terminal ileum proximally, loops of small intestine of different calibre were observed from the depth of the theoretical location of the hiatus of Winslow. It was possible to pull the cecum and terminal ileum until they were displaced to the right iliac fossa, but without correctly identifying the point of change of calibre, since the interposition of the lower edge of the liver and the distension of loops of small intestine hampered the technique. An attempt was made to improve visualization by percutaneous puncture of a dilated loop to empty the gas, without improvement. To ensure the resolution of the obstructive picture, a supraumbilical mid-laparotomy was decided. When accessing the cavity, the change of calibre in the ileum was evident, about 40 centimetres from the ileocecal valve, with signs compatible with hernia of a section of about five centimetres of the ileum through the hiatus of Winslow. In both ends of the herniated loop, we observed the congestive imprint of the hiatus on the loop (Fig. 3). The normal calibre of the hiatus of Winslow was identified, so no preventive technique was performed to reduce the risk of recurrence.

During the first days of the postoperative period, the patient presented a paralytic ileus, and the nasogastric tube could be removed five days after surgery and oral tolerance was initiated with a good response. Simultaneously, he developed a pelvic collection that was managed conservatively with antibiotics, with a good evolution. Finally, the patient was discharged ten days after the intervention, with preserved transit, remaining afebrile and with a good general state.

The patient is currently being followed up in the outpatient department of paediatric surgery.
