A 30-year-old gravida 3, para 3 woman presented with decreased urination, left flank pain, and fever for 2 days after an emergency C-section for the first time, indicated due to fetal and maternal distress secondary to prolonged labor and prolonged vaginal bleeding in Al-Thora hospital, Ibb, Yemen. Despite resuscitative efforts, her newborn expired after 45 minutes. During the C-section, severe uterine adhesions were identified (As there were lesions of endometriosis, and adhesions between the posterior wall of the uterus and the sigmoid colon), and an estimated blood loss of 1500 cc, according to the gynecologist report. The patient did not receive any prenatal care during her pregnancy. She is a nonsmoker and denied chronic medical conditions, drug abuse, accidental poisoning, or previous surgical history.

On physical examination, the patient appeared pale, ill, and febrile during the initial evaluation, with an oral temperature of 38 °C, pulse rate of 80 beats per minute, and blood pressure of 95/70 mm Hg. The patient’s abdomen was mildly distended, with moderate tenderness, primarily in the left lower quadrant.

The laboratory data were as follows: White blood cell (WBC) count was 15.3 × 103/mL, with 90% polymorph neutrophils (Leukocytosis with neutrophilic predominance), hemoglobin was 7.5 g/dL, platelets count was 200×103/µL, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 23 mg/dl, and creatinine was 3.8 mg/dl. Other blood tests, such as liver function and coagulation tests, were within normal ranges. Ultrasonography (US) showed severe left hydronephrosis and moderate free fluid in the abdominal cavity. The abdominal tap aspiration was performed, and the spot creatinine was 52 mg/dL indicating that the fluid was urine.

The patient was resuscitated with packed red blood cells and broad antibiotic coverage. Thereafter, she urgently underwent a ureteroscopy that showed a total occlusion of the left ureter. Subsequently, a decision to surgical exploration was made, given the hemodynamic instability, lack of percutaneous nephrostomy equipment, and the evidence of intra-abdominal contamination. Intra-operatively, we found moderate free fluid in the abdominal cavity. The left ureter was crushed and ligated with a Vicryl suture (5 sticks) at around 5 cm of its distal part. After fluid evacuation, the injured segment of the ureter was excised and ureteroneocystostomy in a refluxing manner was performed after bladder distention with saline through the catheter. Additionally, we dissected the ureter, carefully, from the surrounding tissues in the cephalad direction, spatulated the distal ureteral end, and inserted a double j stent. The ureter was implanted in the posterior dome of the urinary bladder with tension-free anastomosis and sutured with 4–0 Vicryl through the full-thickness ureter, then the bladder mucosal and detrusor layer. A Jackson–Pratt (JP) drain near the anastomosis was inserted, and the abdominal wall was closed after evaluating the intraperitoneal content.


Follow-Up and Outcome
Clear fluids were started on the second postoperative day. The patient had mild abdominal distension, pain, and nausea. On the third postoperative day, she had increasing abdominal distension and stopped passing flatus. The abdominal US showed a large amount of collection in the peritoneal cavity. The blood laboratory data showed a leukocytosis (WBC of 22×103/mL with a left shift).

A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast revealed a significant amount of free air and fluid throughout the abdomen and pelvis adjacent to the anterior abdominal wall. Multiple free gas locules were also seen in the mesentery, with contrast enhancement of multiple small bowel loops, with no evidence of contrast extravasation. The findings suggested a perforated viscus. After consulting the general surgery team, the patient was immediately taken to the operating room for an exploratory laparotomy, which revealed a small perforation in the rectosigmoid part with some spillage, peritonitis with bowel loop edema, and ureteral anastomosis disruption. The complexity of this case forced us to perform multi-staged interventions in a multidisciplinary fashion. Firstly, the gynecologist performed a hysterectomy due to endometritis (confirmed histopathologically), severe oozing, and suture disruption of the uterus. Secondly, the ureterocutaneous diversion of the left ureter was performed by a urologist, and the ureterostomy was created on the left side. Lastly, the general surgeon performed the colostomy procedure after the repair of the colonic injury, and the colostomy was created on the left side. On the fifth postoperative day, colostomy retraction occurred with wound infection, and communication between colostomy and ureterostomy was observed. Re-exploration was decided to relocate the sigmoid colostomy, and a transverse right-side end colostomy was done. One week postoperatively, the patient experienced a superficial skin abdominal wall infection complicated with wound dehiscence and hypoalbuminemia (albumin: 2 g/dL) that required treatment with several debridement, wound irrigation, antibiotics, and supportive therapy. The recommended antibiotics were linezolid (600 mg IV every 12 hours for 7 days), then changed to ceftriaxone (1g IV every 12 hours for 5 days) plus metronidazole (500 mg IV every 12 hours for 5 days) and changed to oral ciprofloxacin (500mg every 12 hours orally for 7 days). She gradually resumed her normal diet and was discharged 30 days later in stable condition. She required home care to assist with her colostomy, ureterostomy, and ambulation.

Six months later, the colostomy was closed, and the ureter was anastomosed via the Boari tabularized bladder flap procedure (the bladder was opened on its anterior surface, and a full-thickness bladder flap was flipped caudally and tabularized for anastomosis to the proximal ureteral segment after double j stent insertion). After an uneventful postoperative recovery, the patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day. One-month follow-up by US and voiding cystourethrography showed a normal appearance of the bladder with adequate bladder capacity and normal upper urinary tract system. Three months later, retrograde ureteroscopy showed an adequate caliber of the ureter. The patient was regularly followed up with the US for 3 months for a year. The patient had no irritative or gastrointestinal symptoms within 2 years of follow-up.