65-year-old woman, native of Mérida, Venezuela, with a history of open appendectomy, who presents a current illness of 4 months of evolution characterized by abdominal pain of insidious onset, mild intensity, stabbing, initially generalized, but after 3 months it is localized in the right iliac fossa, which is why she goes to the doctor, who prescribes medical treatment, with partial improvement of the condition. In view of the persistence of the symptoms and the appearance of a palpable mass in the right iliac fossa, she goes to the gastroenterology department of our institution, where a colonoscopy is performed that reports a subepithelial tumour in the cecal region.

She also has altered bowel patterns, alternating between constipation and diarrhea, a recent fever (15 days), and an intolerance to oral (solid) food, which is why she was referred to the general surgery department.

The physical examination found her in stable clinical condition, afebrile, hydrated, with adequate skin and mucous colouration; abdominal examination, flat abdomen, hydroaerolic noises present, soft, depressible, with a palpable mass in the right iliac fossa of 5 × 5 cm, mobile, painful to the touch and without signs of peritoneal irritation; rectal examination, anus without alterations, sphincter with preserved tonicity, rectal ampoule with smooth walls in which no tumors were palpable, and with scanty soft faeces inside; gynecological examination, without alterations; rest of the physical examination, without alterations.

A computed tomography with double contrast (oral and intravenous) was requested, in which the loss of the usual configuration in the ileocecal region with an important increase in the volume of the cecum was evident, and the incursion of the ileum into the right colon was observed in a long pathway that extends from the transverse colon to the splenic angle, where a saccular formation filled with oral contrast was observed. During the arterial phase, the cecal region did not show changes in its density and vascular pathways were observed throughout the interior of the colon accompanied by adipose tissue, but a double enhancement was evident in the region of the splenic angle of the transverse colon. It was concluded that the findings were suggestive of intestinal intussusception secondary to neoplasia.

In view of the tomographic findings and the physical examination, the patient was taken to the operating table, where there was a small amount of free yellow liquid in the abdominal cavity. Intestinal ileus-colic intussusception was observed up to the hepatic angle of the transverse colon. When the intussusception was reduced, a 10 cm tumour was observed in the ileo-caecal valve and a 10 cm tumour in the small intestine that invaded the serosa, was hardened and compromised the intestinal lumen, and multiple adenopathies of various sizes (no > 2 cm) were observed in the mesentery of the right colon, with no evidence of liver lesions. The Cattell-Braasch manoeuvre, right hemicolectomy up to the emergence of the right colic artery, closure of the transverse colon stump and formation of an ileo-transverse anastomosis, was performed. The cavity was washed and drained, and the abdominal cavity was closed by planes. The surgical procedure was completed without complications and the patient had a favourable clinical evolution. She began to eat by mouth 48 hours after the operation. She was discharged 5 days after the operation, the drain was removed 10 days later and the patient was monitored by the general surgery department, without any complications in her evolution.

The sample studied showed a neoplastic lesion characterized by the proliferation of tubular structures with endothelial-type lining that shows eosinophilic cytoplasm, vesicular nuclei without nucleoli, intracytoplasmic vacuoles, which present endothelial lumens, some with erythrocytes, and isolated mitoses (three in 40 high-power fields). This area shows an increase in fibrous connective tissue. In the periphery, there is a significant neutrophilic and lymphocytic polymorphonuclear inflammatory infiltrate with areas of necrosis, cellular debris and extravasated erythrocytes. Special PAS (Periodic Acid-Schiff) and Gomori trichrome stains were performed, which showed the presence of fibrous connective tissue around the neoplastic lesion areas described; the thick intestine sections with mucous lining were unchanged, as was the mesentery. Findings in the small intestine consistent with HE of intermediate malignancy.
