59-year-old male patient with a history of hemochromatosis, transient ischemic attack, and glaucoma. He had a family history of death at age 60 from an unspecified neurological disease. He presented with dysarthria and facial paresis of sudden onset, with improvement within a few days. After one week he developed involuntary movements of the left upper limb (LUL) associated with dysarthria, mild anomia (difficulty in naming people and objects), and dyscalculia (difficulty in calculating). He did not have fever or other symptoms. On neurological examination, he had no significant change in the higher nervous functions, with mild dysarthria, right central facial paresis, myoclonic movements of the LUL, and left hemiface. The MRI-CE showed changes in T2 and diffusion (DWI) in the right caudate and putamen, without involvement of the contralateral striatum. Due to the worsening, he repeated the MRI-CE after five days, and there was additional hyper signal in the diffusion of the medial fronto-parieto-cingular cortex. The investigation for autoimmune, infectious, and paraneoplastic causes was negative. The CSF showed increased tau protein and normal protein 14.3.3. The EEG revealed slow activity in the right parietal and bilateral frontotemporal regions. In the following two weeks, the dysarthria worsened and gait ataxia appeared. The possibility of autoimmune encephalitis was considered, and intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g for five days) was administered, without improvement. In the following months, neurological deterioration progressed, with the development of anarthria (inability to articulate words) and dysphagia, left hemiparesis, urinary incontinence, and cognitive deterioration with impairment of recent memory, disorientation, and executive dysfunction. A new MRI-CE was performed, which showed bilateral restriction of the diffusion of the basal ganglia and multiple cortical areas, predominantly in the frontal and parietal cortex. The EEG identified periodic generalized spike wave activity with reactivity to stimulation. The patient died four months into the disease. Genetic testing was performed later and was positive for the c.598G > A (E200K) mutation.
