The patient was a female, 73 years old, admitted to hospital owing to dizziness and fatigue with shortness of breath for 3 hours. Three hours before admission, the patient began to show symptoms including dizziness, fatigue, shortness of breath, vomiting stomach contents once, acid reflux, and heartburn. The patient was exposed to indoor stove heating during the onset, with poor ventilation. The other occupants of the same room showed identical symptoms and attended the emergency department of the hospital. This patient had a history of hypertension for 12 years with systolic blood pressure up to 170 mmHg and no specified diastolic pressure record. The patient routinely takes Norvasc to control her blood pressure when it is 130/80 mmHg. The patient has had diabetes for 14 years. Metformin is regularly used for treatment. Before-meal blood glucose was controlled at 7 mmol/L, and postprandial blood glucose was not monitored. Physical examination: blood pressure 120/80 mmHg, conscious, precise speech, shortness of breath, respiratory frequency at 30 beats per minute, pupils equal and equally reactive to light, rough breath sounds in bilateral lungs, audible wet and dry rales, heart rate 110 beats/minute, arrhythmia, class 4 limb muscle strength, normal muscle tone. Emergent examination showed carboxyhemoglobin 17%, electrocardiogram with the wild range ST-segment depression, emergent cardiac troponin I (CTNI) 4.75 ng/mL, creatine kinase MB (CKMB) 1494 ng/mL, monitored oxygen saturation 90%. After giving oxygen via oxygen mask (oxygen flow 10L/min), emergent blood analysis showed: lactic acid 8.7 mmol/L, pH 7.196, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 34.6 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen 82.4 mmHg, oxygen saturation 93.5%, actual bicarbonate 13.5 mmol/L, blood glucose 22.89 mmol/L, urine ketone bodies (–). Chest radiography suggested pulmonary edema. According to the above characteristics, the patient was diagnosed with acute carbon monoxide poisoning (ACOP), acute coronary syndrome, acute left heart failure, lactic acidosis, high-risk grade 3 hypertension, and type II diabetes. The patient was admitted as an inpatient for further treatment.

After admission, the re-examination results showed that myocardial enzymes CKMB and CTNI were becoming progressively elevated. Twenty-four hours after the onset, CTNI had increased to 69.42 ng/mL, and brain natriuretic peptide had reached 1113 pg/mL. The echocardiography results indicated segmental wall motion abnormalities (reduced amplitude of motion of lower left ventricular wall, and posterior wall basal and apical segments), reduced left ventricular function, and ejection fraction 50%. The patient was diagnosed with NSTEMI and acute left heart failure. She was treated with a high concentration of oxygen, an inhibitor of platelet aggregation (aspirin plus clopidogrel), an anticoagulant (low molecular weight heparin), an antimicrobial (ceftizoxime), an expectorant (mucosolvan), diuresis (furosemide and spironolactone), and myocardial support (Metoprolol). On the second day after the onset, the wheezing symptoms began to be relieved, and troponin I decreased to 39 ng/mL with a continuous decrease afterward. After 8 days, the CTNI had decreased to 0.2 ng/mL, and symptoms of wheezing, dizziness, and fatigue were relieved. The patient was transferred to the department of cardiology to undergo coronary arteriography. The result indicated that the coronary blood supply was right dominant. The right canal opening had developed normally, as had the left coronary opening. The left main coronary artery showed 50% localized stenosis, and the thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) blood flow was grade III. In the near-middle segment of the left anterior descending artery, 80% diffuse stenosis was observed, and the TIMI flow was grade III. A 90% stenosis was seen in the opening-near segment of the diagonal branch 1, with grade III flow in the TIMI. The obtuse marginal branch I showed 90% localized stenosis with a TIMI grade III . An 80% localized stenosis was observed at the right main coronary artery opening, and 70% diffuse stenosis was observed in the proximal right coronary artery. A 70% to 95% diffuse stenosis was seen in the right and middle right coronary arteries, with a grade III TIMI. The conclusion from angiography was: Coronary heart disease in the left main artery + 3 branch lesions (afflicting the left anterior descending artery + left circumflex + right coronary artery).

During the surgical operation, the right coronary artery was treated and 3 stents were implanted. The rest of the blood vessels were not treated temporarily. On the 10th day after onset of the condition, echocardiography was performed, which showed that cardiac function was improved. Mild segmental wall motion abnormality was observed on echocardiography. After 14 days, the patient had recovered well and was discharged without chest tightness, chest pain, dizziness, headache, or unresponsiveness.