Chief Complaints
A 35-year-old pregnant woman was admitted due to abdominal discomfort 3 hours before admission.

History of Present Illness
She initially came to the midwife with labor pain that was getting more frequent one day before admission. After an overnight observation, she felt the labor pain getting more frequent and stronger until she felt an abdominal discomfort, no fetal movement felt, and the fetal heart rate was hard to find by the midwife. Later she was referred to Otto Iskandar Dinata Hospital due to suspicion of intrauterine fetal death. After an in-depth interview, she gained the water from boiled herbal medicine that her neighbor gave, who suggested she drink the extracted herbal water to help her when the labor comes, which is believed to help for better labor progress. She said the water was made from boiled water of rumput Fatimah from her neighbor. During hospital admission, she complained about abdominal discomfort that felt like a muscle cramp and being torn apart.

Personal History and Family History
Her obstetrical history stated that she was G2P1A0, her last menstruation cycle was on 31 September 2022, and current gestation age was 41 weeks. There was no complication in her previous pregnancy; local delivery taker assisted her labor, and the baby weighed 2600 grams. She was married when she was 21 with her current husband, who was eight years older than her. During her pregnancy, she had routine control with the midwife every month. There was no relevant family history.

Physical Examination
The patient’s blood pressure was 80/60 mmHg, heart rate was 128 bpm, respiratory rate was 20 times per minute, body height was 152 cm, body weight was 58 kg, and prior to pregnancy her body weight was 58 kg. The obstetric examination found that her abdomen was stiff and tense, the contraction was hard to access, fetal heart sound was negative, no sign of a ring of bundle, and fundus height was 32 cm. From VT, the membrane was positive, and cervix opening was 3 cm.

Final Diagnosis
Final diagnosis of this case was G2P1A0 parturient aterm latent phase; acute abdomen due to suspicion of placentae abruption dd/ ruptur uteri; and Intrauterine Fetal Death.

Treatment
Exploratory laparotomy was decided due to the acute abdominal pain state. During the procedure, there were no signs of life from the baby, the baby was female, her weight was 2350 grams, and her length was 44 cm. The operator also found that placentae was located outside and her uterus was already ruptured, approximately 15–18 cm. The operator decided to do subtotal hysterectomy on the patient due to the remote setting and a blood transfusion was not available, so it is risky to perform hysterorrhaphy.

Outcome and Follow-Up
The baby could not be saved due to stillbirth. Her final diagnosis was spontaneous uterine rupture >15 cm in P2A0 post-term; stillbirth. Later she was hospitalized for few days, and then her condition getting better. The patient was sad about the birth result, but thankful to the doctor because the team were able to rescue her. She said she will become more careful about what she consumes, especially traditional medicine.