A 25 years old primigravida woman presented to Daaru-Xannaan Hospital for cesarean delivery after she was informed to have placenta previa. Her last normal menstrual period (LNMP) was unknown but from early ultrasound done at a gestational age of 15+4 weeks, the gestational age at current admission became 37 + 3 weeks. At admission, her complaint was dull aching intermittent abdominal pain, which worsens with fetal movement and abdominal palpation, and the symptom was incriminated for labor and intraamniotic infection. During the course of the pregnancy, she had frequent antenatal visits to nearby health facilities with the complaint of non-specific abdominal pain, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting and spotty vaginal bleeding throughout the pregnancy. For these complaints, she was frequently admitted and treated for acute pyelonephritis and serial obstetric ultrasound scans revealed normal intrauterine pregnancy.

On physical examination, she was chronically ill looking with the following vital signs; Blood Pressure: 130/80, Pulse Rate: 116, Temperature: 36.7°C. On abdominal examination, she had mild-to-moderate abdominal tenderness, and fetal heart beat (FHB) of 140–156/min. With the diagnosis of Term pregnancy + Placenta Previa + Chorioamnionitis, she was worked-up with Complete Blood Count (CBC), Renal Function Test (RFT), Liver Function Test (LFT) and Urine analysis. She was resuscitated with 1000mL of crystalloid, started broad spectrum IV antibiotics, 2 units of blood typed and cross-matched and was taken for an emergency Cesarean delivery (CD).

Through a Pfannenstiel abdominal incision abdominal cavity was entered. Immediately after the peritoneum was bluntly entered, the fetal hand appeared in the surgical field, and the diagnosis of abdominal pregnancy was made. A 3.5kg healthy female neonate was delivered with an Apgar score of 8 and 9 in the 1st and 5th minute. The cord clamped and abdominal cavity explored after converting the abdominal incision to a vertical midline incision (inverted T incision) for a better visualization and accessibility. The abdominal cavity cautiously explored and the placenta was attached mainly to the infracolic omentum, left adnexa, and the left pelvic side wall. The left fallopian tube and ovary were embedded within the placental tissue. The uterus was normal non-pregnant sized and pushed towards the right pelvic wall. The right fallopian tube and ovary appear adhered to the pelvic side wall with fibrinous adhesions. After a thorough examination of the placental insertion sites, infracolic omentectomy and left adnexectomy was done to successfully remove the major part of the placenta. Small nodes of placental tissue, which have been attached to the large bowel and small bowel were left in situ. After placental removal, there were multiple oozing sites from the bowel surface, left pelvic side wall, and posterior cul-de-sac. Bowel loops and bladder were evaluated for inadvertent injury. Abdominal cavity lavaged with 1 liter of warm normal saline, drainage tube inserted, and tight gauze pack left in the peritoneal cavity before abdominal wall closure.

Immediately after delivery the neonate was evaluated and the external findings include facial deformity, which is prominent on the right mandible, bilateral club foot, multiple finger pressure deformities and scoliosis. The neonate vital signs remained stable and feeding well.

During the 1st 24hrs of postoperative course the patient was transfused with 03 units of fresh whole blood, vital signs remained within normal range and the drainage output was 400mL. After 48 hours, the patient was then transferred to the operation theatre for re-laparotomy to remove the abdominal gauze pack. The abdominal gauze pack, remaining placental tissue that was attached to the left adnexa and pelvic side wall, and blood clots in the peritoneal cavity removed. There were no sites of bleeding, peritoneal cavity lavaged with 1 liter of normal saline and abdominal wall closed in layers with abdominal drainage in situ.

The patient hemodynamic condition was stable, tolerated feeding and then discharged with her neonate on the 10th post-operative day.