Patient information: Mr. B.C, 58 years old, of Afro-Caribbean origin with untreated hypertension as a cardiovascular risk factor and active smoking of 40 packs per year. He is being treated for psoriasis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) with digital hypocratism, and a nodule in the upper left lobe that raises the suspicion of lung cancer. He is hospitalized for malaise without loss of consciousness or chest pain.

Clinical findings: initial neurological examination found right hemiplegia with facial paralysis, phasic disorders and temporo-spatial disorientation with a NIHSS score of 21.

Diagnostic evaluation: brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple infarctions in different territories: left superficial sylvian with occlusion of a branch of the M2 trifurcation, left anterior and right posterior junction. He was thrombolysed with Actilyse 1.5 hours after the onset of symptoms, allowing neurological recovery with a NIHSS score of 2 (a lack of speech and intelligible dysarthria at 24 hours) despite the occurrence of a haemorrhagic remodelling.

Transthoracic echocardiography (ETT) found a mass intra atrial left (OG), on sessile pedicle inserting on the inter atrial septum. This mass prolabated in the mitral orifice in diastole, causing an obstacle with a mean gradient OG-VG of 6 mmHg. The other cardiac cavities were normal. Trans esophageal echocardiography (ETO) and thoraco-abdomino-pelvic scanner found the same conclusions. The hypothesis of a myxoma of the left atrium was emitted.

Therapeutic intervention: an indication of surgical resection of the mass was retained. The intervention was performed a month later to mitigate any risk of hemorrhagic transformation induced by the extracorporeal circulation (ECV). The intervention found a voluminous gelatinous mass whose base of insertion was resected. No other lesion was found.

Follow-up and results: the postoperative results are simple. The histological analysis confirms the complete excision of a polypoid pedicled lesion, with few non-atypical cells, ovoid or stellate, arranged in nests or cords, with a regular nucleus, rounded or oval, surrounded by a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm. These cells stand out against a fibromyxoid background, dissociated in places by hemorrhagic suffusions and punctuated by a slight polymorphic inflammatory infiltrate. The lesion contains a large number of non-atypical vessels, sometimes surrounded by myxoid material and by the cells previously described. At the base of the implantation, there were hemorrhagic and inflammatory changes. The axis of the lesion was the site of necrotic-hemorrhagic changes. In immunohistochemistry, calretinin is positive, confirming the diagnosis of myxoma.
