An eight-year-old female of South Indian descent was presented to the emergency department for evaluation of headaches. She had headaches for several days, which were managed with acetaminophen at home. She denied history of blurry vision, dizziness, sleep apnea, syncope, and head trauma. There was no history of recent sore throat, skin infection, vomiting, and diarrhea. In the past, she had headaches of similar nature on an intermittent basis for about a year. There was no history of worsening of headaches with light or sound. Urine output was normal and there was no history of swelling of feet or abdomen or facial puffiness. There were no other known significant past medical problems including congenital heart disease. There was no history of administration of erythropoietin stimulating agents or recent travel to high altitude. She was born full term with no perinatal complications. Family history was significant for parental consanguinity, who were the first cousins. There was no family history of migraine headaches and erythrocytosis.

Upon examination, the vital signs showed an afebrile child with heart rate of 90 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 per minute, and manual blood pressure of 190/100 mm Hg, which remained persistently elevated upon repeat examinations. Her oxygen saturation was found to be low at 90–92% consistently, but did not require oxygen supplementation. The height was at the 75th centile and weight was at the 55th centile. Physical examination was remarkable only for strabismus. There was no periorbital puffiness, ascites, or pedal edema. She continued to have headaches. A non-contrast computed tomography scan of the brain showed no evidence of hemorrhage, infarction, or thrombosis. Hypertension was managed with intravenous hydralazine and labetalol. She was admitted for further evaluation of hypertension. Renal function test showed blood urea nitrogen of 14 mg/dL and serum creatinine of 1.6 mg/dL. Serum albumin was 3.1 gm/dL. The rest of the electrolytes were normal. Complete blood count showed hemoglobin 17 gm/dL, hematocrit 51%, white blood cell count of 7.2 × 109/L, and platelet count of 247 × 109/L (normal: 150–300 × 109/L). Serum iron saturation was 18% (normal: 20–55%), iron was 45 µg/dL (35−150 µg/dL), transferrin was 176 mg/dL (200–360 mg/dL), total iron binding capacity (TIBC) was 246 µg/dL (225–430 µg/dL), and ferritin was 98 ng/mL. Serum vitamin B12 and folate levels were normal. Bone marrow biopsy was not obtained. Urinalysis showed 4 + proteinuria without microscopic hematuria. Random urine protein to creatinine ratio was 14.6. There was hypercholesterolemia. Serum complements were normal. Antinuclear, antineutrophil cytoplasmic, anti-glomerular basement membrane, and anti-double stranded DNA antibodies were negative. Hepatitis panel, human immunodeficiency virus, and tuberculin test were all negative. Thyroid function tests, serum catecholamines, plasma renin activity, and serum aldosterone were normal. Renal bladder sonogram showed bilateral echogenic kidneys with right kidney of 8.2 cm and left kidney of 8.7 cm in length with no hydronephrosis. Renal artery duplex study showed no evidence of renal artery stenosis. Chest X-ray showed no radiographic evidence of consolidation, pneumothorax, or effusion. Abdominal sonogram was normal. Nasopharyngeal swacnb for respiratory viruses were negative. Her oxygen saturation remained low for few days. Echocardiogram showed evidence of mild left ventricular hypertrophy, but no other abnormalities. Treatment consisted of intravenous hydration and initiation of antihypertensive agents, amlodipine, and labetalol. Blood pressures stabilized, but polycythemia was persistent (hemoglobin 15–16 gm/dL). Work-up for polycythemia included normal serum EPO (11 mU/mL; normal: 4–27 mU/mL) and normal gene sequence analysis of nine gene variants associated with erythrocytosis (genes tested: BPGM, EGLN1, EPAS1, EPOR, HBA1, HBA2, HBB, JAK2, and VHL).

Serum creatinine over the next few days increased to 1.8 mg/dL (Schwartz estimated glomerular filtration rate 32 mL/1.73 m2/min). Serum intact parathyroid hormone was 217 pg/mL (normal: 12–88 pg/mL). Nephrotic range proteinuria persisted, but the spot urine protein to creatinine ratio decreased to values ranging from 5 to 7 after addition of lisinopril. A percutaneous renal biopsy performed a week after the initial presentation showed evidence of FSGS with severe tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis. There was partial foot process effacement. Genetic testing for FSGS showed heterozygous mutations in ACTN4, INF2, and KANK1 and homozygous mutation in NUP93 by next generation sequencing. Owing to inherited gene mutations and the likelihood of steroid resistance, she was not treated with steroid or immunosuppressive agents. Hypertension was managed with lisinopril, amlodipine, and labetalol with stabilization of blood pressures. Antiplatelet agent was added. Iron therapy was started for mild iron deficiency anemia (IDA). Her oxygen saturation returned to normal at the time of discharge and polycythemia resolved without the need for phlebotomy. She subsequently progressed to end stage renal disease (ESRD) ten months after the initial presentation and was started initially on chronic hemodialysis followed by peritoneal dialysis. She received a deceased donor renal transplant four months after being on dialysis with no occurrence of recurrent FSGS during her most recent follow-up two months post-transplant. Her maintenance immunosuppression consisted of tacrolimus, mycophenolate, and prednisone.