A 31-year-old pregnant woman who had previously undergone a Cesarean section was referred to our department‘s ultrasound unit for a second-trimester morphological ultrasound screening. The patient had an unremarkable family history and did not use any drugs and without previous exposure to teratogens during the first trimester of pregnancy. Serological tests for various infectious diseases were negative, and a previous ultrasound exam at 14 weeks was normal. The triple test for fetal abnormalities was also negative at 16 weeks.

During the 20th-week ultrasound scan, a male singleton fetus with a composite sonographic age of 20 weeks and 2 days was observed to have significant edema of the lower limbs, and normal amniotic fluid. A follow-up exam in 2 weeks was recommended, along with tests for TORCH and indirect Coombs testing.

However subcutaneous edema on both lower limbs was again observed during the 23-week morphology ultrasound scan, suggesting a possible diagnosis of MS. Due to the persisted lymphedema in the lower limbs an amniocentesis was performed.

Subsequent testing revealed that the male karyotype was normal (46, XY), and molecular analysis for Noonan‘s syndrome was negative. Nucleotide sequencing of the amniotic fluid was performed with Illumina sequencing by 150 bases. Bioinformatics system was applied ((North-Oehler Aligarh, GATX) while additionally checking for the existence of deletions/duplications/CNVs) (Copy Number Variations) in the FLT4 gene was performed. The analysis identified a c.3116C>A p. (Ala1039Asp) mutation, that is a not known pathogenic variant in the FLT4 gene, confirming the diagnosis of hereditary lymphedema type 1A – Milroy disease. Maternal blood analysis confirmed maternal mutation and genetic counseling followed.

Cesarean section was performed at 38 weeks and 6 days of gestational age, and a male neonate weighing 3,850 g and measuring 46 cm with an Apgar score of 9/10 was born. Both lower limb edema was recognized after delivery. Histopathological examination of the placenta, umbilical cord, and amniotic sac showed no signs of chorionamnionitis or other pathology.