A 40-year-old female underwent routine fetal echocardiographic screening at the 22nd week of gestation. The pregnancy was normal without any maternal complications, such as hypertension, diabetes, eclampsia, or infections during gestation. In addition, screening for Down syndrome revealed a low risk that did not indicate a need to conduct amniocentesis for a chromosomal abnormality test. However, the fetal ultrasound demonstrated severe TR, based on Vmax = 3.8 m/s, with estimated diameters of the cardiac chambers of LV = 11 × 19 mm, RV = 19 × 24 mm, LA = 12 × 10 mm, and RA = 13 × 16 mm. Subsequently, the female was referred to a pediatric cardiologist for advice. Because the age of the female was 40, which is a high-risk factor for birth defects, and since TR is quite commonly observed in fetal ultrasound screening, the cardiologist suggested genomic sequencing analysis of free fetal DNA in maternal blood. However, the parents refused this analysis.

The baby was born safely in our institute, and the first echocardiography examination postnatally demonstrated good heart function and normal structure as well as normal sizes of the 4 chambers. However, 6 months later, the baby was brought to our department due to excessive sweating and decreased milk consumption. The physical examination showed that the body temperature of the girl was 36.8°C, her heart rate was 150 beats per minute, and her respiration rate was 42 beats per minute. The blood pressure of the four limbs was as follows: 92/44 mmHg at the right upper limb, 96/58 mmHg at the left upper limb, 101/60 mmHg at the right lower limb, and 103/54 mmHg at the left lower limb. In addition, she presented a critically ill face, her lips and complexion were pale, excessive perspiration, and coarse breath were noted, but there were no rales. On auscultation, her heart boundaries were enlarged, the apex was shifted, and grade I systolic murmur was heard in the 2nd intercostal space on the left-sternal border. Routine blood examination, liver and kidney function tests, electrolytes, routine examination of urine and stool, blood gas analysis, blood ammonia analysis, pyruvate analysis, thyroid function analysis and metabolic disease detection showed no obvious abnormalities. The chest X-ray showed signs of pulmonary infiltration, and the heart size was significantly increased. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia, axis deviation, and ST-T wave changes (II, III, AVF, decrease in current at the V5 lead not less than 0.05 mV, short T wave). Moreover, the echocardiography presented a dramatic phenotype of severe TR, an extremely enlarged left ventricle, and reduced density of the interventricular septum and left ventricular posterior wall. The LVEF dropped to 22%, and FS decreased to 10%. We excluded the possibility of myocarditis based on a series of negative blood test results and history of collections. After administration of digoxin, hydrochlorothiazide, spironolactone diuresis, captopril, and L-carnitine, the symptoms of heart failure were controlled. The genomic sequence was determined, and 3 pathogenic gene mutations located in 2 genes, cardiac troponin T (TNNT2) c.548G>A:p.Arg183Gln, desmoplakin (DSP) c.3146C>T: p.Ser1049 Leu, and DSP c.5213G>A: p.Arg1738Gln, were identified, all of which are very important for cardiomyocyte development and maturation postnatally. This result could explain why this kind of DCM progressed so rapidly.

During the follow-up, the patient still suffered from poor heart function and an enlarged left ventricle. The latest echocardiography report (1 year and 6 months old) showed the 4 chamber sizes to be LV = 40 mm, RV = 8 mm, LA = 18 mm, and RA = 28 mm and low cardiac pump function of EF = 28% and FS = 13%. Concomitantly, the parents placed the patient on the waiting list for heart transplantation. The patient provided informed consent for publication of the case.