27-year-old male with a history of HIV infection on antiretroviral therapy, recurrent genital herpes and late latent syphilis treated with benzatin penicillin 2.4 million weekly IM for three times 10 months ago, with good serological response during follow-up. In the last four months he started with a firm increase in volume in the right inguinal region of approximately 4 cm, sensitive to palpation, partially adhered to deep planes, associated with a herpetiform ulcerated lesion on the body of the penis of 1 cm size, on an erythematous, painful and scarcely indurated base, without superficial secretion. The patient did not refer to anorectal or systemic symptoms. The patient did not refer to other mucous involvement. He was evaluated in the emergency department, where he was prescribed acyclovir and amoxicillin for two weeks, with no clinical response. The right inguinal lesion evolved with two fistulous tracts on the skin surface, with abundant seropurulent secretion. He also received cefadroxil and amoxicillin-clavulanic acid for four weeks, with no improvement. Among the laboratory examinations, a normocytic, normochromic anaemia with a haemoglobin of 11.9 g/dl, a haematocrit of 35.1%, a leukocytes of 10810 cells/mm3 and a VHS of 83 mm/h stood out. The study of hepatitis B (HbsAg) and hepatitis C (Ac VHC) was negative. The VDRL was weakly reactive and MHA-TP reactive. The HIV viral load was undetectable, with CD4 lymphocytes of 911 cells/mm3. In the directed anamnesis he referred to three male sexual partners in the last year, of Chilean nationality, with insertive and receptive oral and anal sexual relations, with occasional use of condom. In addition, he consumed marijuana and cocaine occasionally.

Given the clinical suspicion of LGV and active genital herpes, PCR was requested for C. trachomatis (commercial kit, LightMix Kit Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Chlamydia trachomatis 3.0; TIB Molbiol, Roche) in the secretion of the inguinal fistulas in the reference center, which was positive. Treatment with doxycycline 100 mg every 12 h orally, for three weeks, and acyclovir 400 mg every 8 h orally for five days, with progressive decrease in the size of the inguinal lesions, and disappearance of both the fistulous tracts and the genital ulcerated lesion, was indicated. Treatment with doxycycline was maintained for three additional weeks given the persistence of the adenopathies, evolving without alterations or signs of local or systemic complications. The control examinations showed improvement of the anaemia, with haemoglobin of 12.3 g/dl, haematocrit 38.9%, without leukocytosis and decrease of the VHS (30 mm/h). A clinical evaluation and treatment of sexual contacts was performed, without presenting symptoms suggestive of genital or anorectal infection at the time of the evaluation.
