It is a case study, approved by the Research Ethics Committee (CEP) under number 1.012.635. The prior authorization of the relatives and the participant was requested from the signature of the Free and Informed Consent (TCLE) and the Free and Informed Consent (TALE).

The participant in this study is a female student in the 3rd year of elementary school. In the first evaluation, in 2018, the child was 8 years and 2 months old, while in the second evaluation, in 2019, she was 9 years and 6 months old. The interval between the evaluations occurred due to the fact that it is a public service. Thus, the laboratory was absent from activities during the holidays. In addition, it is important to consider that the appointments were only made once a week and, during that period, the participant was absent, which also prolonged the process. As for her history, she was born at term and presented adequate neuropsychomotor and linguistic development. The child was born and lived in a French-speaking country until the age of 2 years, but had exposure to another language at home, since her parents are Brazilian Portuguese speakers. However, her first words were in French. When she returned to Brazil, she went through two private schools. In the first school, she was unable to communicate, as she only expressed herself in French. After that experience, at the age of 3, she began studying in a French school, still in Brazil. Over the years, she presented difficulty in acquiring reading and writing; for that reason, she repeated the 1st year of elementary school, at the request of her mother. At the age of 6, she began studying in a bilingual Portuguese-English school. At the age of 8 years old, she underwent evaluation by an interdisciplinary team in the areas of speech therapy and neuropsychology, finding the diagnosis of developmental dyslexia (DD) and high abilities/giftedness (AH/S). Soon after, she was referred to the evaluation of reading and writing in the Laboratory of Written Language, Interdisciplinarity and Learning - LEIA/UFRN.

Phases of the study: four assessment sessions for each moment - pre and post intervention (T1 and T2, respectively) - and 20 sessions of phonological remediation, once a week for 60 minutes. The intervention took place in the second semester of 2018, where parents were not very engaged due to work demands.

Assessments were conducted individually over a one-hour period. They included tasks to assess performance in phonological processing - phonological working memory, phonological awareness and mental lexical access - reading and writing.

The following protocols were used to evaluate the child:

Phonological awareness: to evaluate this ability, the Consciência Fonológica Instrumento de Avaliação Sequencial - CONFIAS (11) was used. This protocol proposes tasks of synthesis, segmentation, rhyme, alliteration, initial and final syllable identification, exclusion and transposition. First, syllabic awareness, formed by nine items, is analyzed, followed by phonemic awareness, formed by seven items. Each hit is equivalent to one point, with 40 for syllabic awareness and 30 for phonemic awareness, totaling 70 points. Its results should be compared with the expected writing hypotheses based on Ferreiro and Teberosky (12). In this way, the following normal values were used: for the syllabic-alphabetic writing hypothesis, 27, 12 and 39 for the syllabic, phonemic and total score, respectively; for the alphabetic writing hypothesis, 31, 15 and 46.

Phonological working memory: The Phonological Working Memory Test was used (13). In the application of this protocol, the assessor should begin with the non-word test, which consists of 40 invented words. The assessor should then say each word in the list, asking the child to repeat it immediately. The child has two attempts to repeat the words correctly. In the first attempt, each correct answer is worth two points, in the second attempt, the child is awarded one point, and in the third attempt, the child is awarded zero points. After this, the assessor should move on to the test of digits in direct and reverse order, which is scored in the same way as the pseudo-words. Depending on the age of the participant at the time of the assessments, the normal values of 69, 13 and 6 were used for pseudo-words, direct and reverse digits, respectively.

Access to the mental lexicon: the Rapid Automatic Naming Test (RAN)(14) was used in the evaluation and the Automatic Naming Test (TENA)(15) in the re-evaluation. Both tests aim to estimate the individual's ability to name a sequence of stimuli, that is, to measure the speed at which the child can verbalize a visual stimulus quickly. Two protocols were used, since the TENA had not yet been published at the time of the first evaluation. In addition, the TENA is a current and more complete protocol for the verification of normality, as it allows analysis according to age and months. The two tests used have similar application and are divided into four boards, where the child must name colors, objects, letters and digits. The naming must be done with the same movement that is used for reading - from left to right and from top to bottom. For T1, which used the RAN, the normality values correspond to children aged between 8 years and 8 years and 11 months, due to the age of the participant in that period, thus, it should have a score of 28, 29, 52 and 46 seconds for the subtests of digits, letters, objects and colors, respectively. For T2, the normality values of the age of 9 years and 6 months of the protocol (TENA) were used, with an expected score of 35, 32, 50, 53 seconds for the subtests of digits, letters, objects and colors, respectively.

Reading: First, the Protocol for the Assessment of Reading of Words/Pseudowords Isolated – LPI(16) was used, in which the child is asked to read aloud words and pseudowords, which are scored. 19 regular words, 20 irregular words and 20 pseudowords are arranged in black Arial font, size 24 and white background. The child may obtain a total of 59 points, since each correct reading is worth one point. After this, the Protocol for the Assessment of Reading of Expository Texts was used(17). This instrument aims to assess reading comprehension through directed questions about texts compatible with the subject's school year. It assesses and times patterns of silent and oral reading. This allows the reading level to be verified and compared. In addition, the number of words read per minute is averaged, allowing the reading speed to be verified and compared.

Writing: To evaluate the writing, the child was asked to produce a text on a topic of their interest. After finishing the story, the professional asked the child to read out loud what was written. Furthermore, the child was asked to write the target words of the LPI(16) on a separate sheet, in order to carry out a dictation of words and pseudo-words. With this, a qualitative investigation of the writing was carried out, based on the orthographic analysis of Zorzi and Ciasca(18).

The remediation was based on a program used for children with dyslexia(19) and included activities that aimed to improve phonological abilities, such as: identification of graphemes and phonemes, phoneme pairs, syllable pairs, word pairs, addition and subtraction of phonemes, syllabic and phonemic manipulation, rhymes, alliteration, access to mental lexicon, visual working memory, auditory working memory and reading training. In all sessions, these activities were explored in a playful way, mainly directed to the metalinguistic aspects of phonological awareness. In reading training, the child was exposed to children's books from the Mico Maneco collection. This collection has various stories that increase the level of complexity of words, so it is possible to follow the child's progress. The activities performed and the child's evolution were described in his/her medical record at the end of each session.

Analysing the results found, with regard to performance in phonological awareness, in both assessments the child presented performance consistent with the hypotheses of writing presented in each period. In the first assessment, he received the syllabic-alphabetic writing hypothesis and in the second, the alphabetic one, demonstrating progress. The performance score progressed in both categories of the skill, syllabic (T1 = 35; T2 = 37) and phonemic (T1 = 14; T2 = 20) (Table 1). The progress of 4 successes in the phonemic level is highlighted, which can be explained due to the phonological remediation having been performed with focus on the phonemic level.

The results of phonological working memory at the time prior to phonological remediation expressed below-expected performance for the pseudo-word category, with 66 points in T1, with expected performance for T1 (ET1) of 69, and for the reverse-order digits category (T1 = 04; ET1 = 06) (Table 1). Despite this, it presented results within the expected range for the reverse-order digits category (T1 = 20; ET1 = 13). In the post-intervention evaluation (T2), the results are adequate for the age. It is also possible to notice advances in this skill in all categories, pseudo-word (T1 = 66; T2 = 69), reverse-order digits (T1 = 04; T2 = 12) (Table 1), which requires aspects of executive functions that assist in the rapid storage of the response, a differential aspect in high abilities.

As for the automatic rapid naming, it is noted that in T1, the performance is inadequate for the standards of normality in all subtests. It is also possible to say that, in T2, the performance was below the expected for the categories of digits (T2 = 41; ET2 = 35), objects (T2 = 59; ET2 = 50) and colors (T2 = 56; ET2 = 53). Only the category of letters presented results within the expected (T2 = 29; ET2 = 32). On the other hand, the advance in the speed of naming is visible for the subtests of letters (T1 = 37; T2 = 29), objects (T1 = 62; T2 = 59) and colors (T1 = 60; T2 = 56), with the exception of digits (T1 = 37; T2 = 41) (Table 1). With the decrease of the time of naming of the stimuli, it is possible to say that the child becomes more effective to access the mental lexicon at the level of the phonological and visual representation, which is also not usual in isolated dyslexia.

As for reading, in T1 she presented an alphabetic level and in T2 an orthographic level. In the first test, it was noted that there was difficulty mainly with visually similar letters and phonologically close. In addition, the student used sub-vocal support to decode and had an average reading of 20 words per minute, which demonstrates extremely slow decoding and is far below what is expected for her schooling. In the reassessment, she had an average of 94.4 words per minute in oral reading, which is considered adequate for her schooling. She demonstrated presence of prosody, rhythm, global reading, interest and adequate understanding. Qualitatively, it is observed that the child, even with adequate performance, read with a low intensity of speech, still demonstrating insecurity in carrying out the task.

In writing, it can be observed that in T1 the child had inadequate pencil grip, imprecise writing, with letter changes, omissions, hyper and hyposegments, repetition of words and low use of cohesive elements. In this period, it was shown with writing in the transition from the syllabic-alphabetic phase to the alphabetic phase. In T2 no significant change was observed, since his writing continued to be imprecise, with little intelligibility of the content, visual similarities between letters (such as “d” and “b”) and lack of punctuation. According to the sample collected, it was shown in the alphabetic phase of writing, although difficulties not expected for his age persisted. Despite this, it is noted that he used a greater repertoire in the use of vocabulary for the lexicon of visual input.

After the analysis of the results in their entirety, it can be observed that the written language skills advanced during the interval between the evaluations, despite the persistence of consonant characteristics with dyslexia, as it still presents performance below the expected in the access to the mental lexicon and in writing - with the presence of exchanges between phonemes that are audibly and visually similar in a persistent way, omission of letters and hypersegmentation.
