73-year-old patient, diagnosed with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), arterial hypertension (HTA), bipolar disorder, anxiety, depression, hypothyroidism and rheumatoid arthritis, conditions for which she is prescribed the treatment reflected in Annex I.

You call the community pharmacy to ask about a new medication prescribed for a urinary tract infection and vitamin D deficiency diagnosed after a full blood count in the emergency department of a private hospital.

The patient is totally dependent and does not leave the house. Her carer is the person who always takes her medication and makes the weekly pillboxes.

The drugs prescribed for the treatment of the urinary infection were cefuroxima 250 mg (1 tablet every 12 hours for 5 days) and butylscopolamine 10 mg (1 tablet in the morning if uncomfortable).

For vitamin D deficiency, he was prescribed cholecalciferol 50,000 IU (1 capsule once a month for two months) and cholecalciferol 25,000 IU (1 capsule once a month after finishing the 50,000 IU package).

STUDY AND EVALUATION
The dispensing service (SD) is carried out without incident, following the methodology set out in the Practical Guide for the Professional Pharmaceutical Assistance Services in the Community Pharmacy. Subsequently, the patient contacts the community pharmacy, concerned that the new medication has generated confusion, since she was taking some orange capsules for her vitamin D deficiency prescribed by her primary care doctor a few months ago and in the part of the emergency report in which the treatment appears, a new medication for the same health problem was reflected. In addition, it coincided with the fact that her usual carer will no longer be able to work with her and will not be able to help her with her medication. Therefore, the patient is offered the service of Review of the Use of the Medication (RUM) with the aim of assessing the degree of knowledge that the patient has regarding her pathologies and her treatment, as well as being able to resolve possible errors in the administration of the different drugs that are part of it. She is explained what the whole procedure consists of and decides to accept.

After this, the carer was summoned to the pharmacy with the patient’s health card, her medication bag to carry out a thorough check of her medicine cabinet and the latest emergency report in order to gather all the necessary information to carry out the care service by telephone. During the call with the patient, the RUM form was completed, which was subsequently entered into the SEFAC e_XPERT ® platform. In addition, tools such as CIMA (where the technical sheets of the medicines were consulted) and BotPlus (where the possible pharmacological interactions were consulted) were used to correctly evaluate all the pharmacological treatment.

INTERVENTION
Following the initial contact via the telephone interview and a review of the medicine cabinet, it was detected that the patient and her carer were not managing the medication properly. Following a review of her medicine cabinet, expired packs were found with incorrect notes on their use, blisters with broken tablets that should not have been broken and accumulation of several packs of the same medicine. As the patient was dependent, was taking many medicines and had problems in managing her treatment correctly before and during the absence of her usual carer, it was decided, in order to guarantee pharmaceutical safety and improve adherence to the treatment, to refer the patient to the personalised dosage system (PDS) service. Through the SEFAC e_XPERT® platform, a referral report was drawn up for her primary care doctor (MAP) in the National Health System (SNS) (see Annex II), detailing the inclusion of the patient in the medicine use review service and her subsequent referral to the PDS service. In addition, the following proposals for intervention were recorded:

Revision of the dosage schedule of tramadol 50 mg delayed release due to a possible error in the prescription.

Review of the prescribed treatment for vitamin D deficiency due to the existence of a therapeutic duplication.

Change of the absorbent of incontinence of type pants to elastic alleging the situation of dependency of the patient and the difficulties to make a correct placement by the carer when she is in bed most of the time. The corresponding National Codes (CN) were provided.

Review of treatment for COPD due to inhaler difficulties and lack of adherence to therapy.

RESULTS
During the appointment, the primary care physician received the referral report given to the nurse and requested contact with the community pharmacy to properly initiate the SPD service. After speaking with the nurse by phone, the following changes were made to her treatment:

Vitamin D deficiency: Calcifediol cancellation and replacement with cholecalciferol prescribed in the emergency department.

Rheumatoid arthritis: Modification of the tramadol extended release schedule to 1-0-1 and use of 1000 mg paracetamol 1-1-1 if necessary.

Urinary incontinence: replacement of absorbent pants with elastic.

COPD: No change in treatment was made. The primary care physician considered daily supervision by the caregiver at each inhaler dose appropriate.
