We present the case of the management of a giant omphalocele, in a patient with prenatal diagnosis in week 14. After the initial diagnosis, chromosomal anomalies were ruled out. The service of prenatal diagnosis of the Gynecology and Obstetrics department contacted the service of Pediatric Surgery for prenatal evaluation and the infiltration of botulinum toxin was considered. In week 37, the infiltration of botulinum toxin was scheduled in the transverse plane of the abdomen (TAP) of the foetus. This process was performed by a multidisciplinary team formed by gynecologists, pediatric surgeons, neonatologists and anesthetists, with the pregnant woman under sedation. Fetal sedation was performed with an intramuscular injection of atropine, fentanyl and rocuronium. Given the position of the foetus intrauterine, only the transverse plane of the abdomen on the right side of the foetus could be infiltrated. Through a single placental infiltration, botulinum toxin was infiltrated (dose 12 IU/kg) at the subcostal level, 10th rib and right iliac fossa. During the process and in the following days, no complications were evidenced. The caesarean section was scheduled in week 39. At birth, a silo was placed with a plastic bag over the defect and once the patient was relaxed and intubated, botulinum toxin was infiltrated on the left side and the relaxation test was performed, achieving total reduction of the eviscerated content and inversion of the amnion on the first day of life. The intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) was monitored at all times by bladder catheterisation and by control of renal flow by INVOS system. A hydrocolloid dressing (Varihesive Gel ControlTM) was placed over the defect, which was changed every 48 hours. On the third day of life, trophic feeding was initiated and on the fourth day, the patient was extubated without observing incidences, and breast feeding was initiated. On the eighth day of life, the definitive wall closure was scheduled and the separation of components technique (Ramírez technique) was performed, by which the semilunar line is incised to separate the rectus muscle from the external oblique muscle. At the end of the intervention, intra-abdominal pressure was 10 and good renal flow was observed. The patient remained intubated for the first 24 hours postoperatively. Tolerance was initiated on the first postoperative day, and the evolution was favourable, with the patient being discharged home on the 14th day of life.
