History of Presentation
An 88-year-old man presented with generalized weakness and recurrent episodes of dizziness over recent weeks, in the context of de novo atrial fibrillation. At the time of presentation, he was hemodynamically stable with a blood pressure of 113/66 mm Hg, a heart rate of 68 beats/min, and an oxygen saturation of 96%. Physical examination revealed no acute abnormalities; however, findings were consistent with severe symptomatic aortic stenosis (AS).

Past Medical History
The patient’s medical history was notable for significant coronary artery disease requiring coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) 3 decades earlier. He also had a documented first-degree atrioventricular block with incomplete right bundle branch block.

Differential Diagnosis
The clinical presentation raised the possibility of several underlying causes, with decompensated heart failure secondary to severe AS being the primary consideration. Arrhythmia-related symptoms due to atrial fibrillation, including potential hemodynamic compromise, also were evaluated. Noncardiac etiologies, such as neurogenic or metabolic disturbances contributing to dizziness, were considered in the comprehensive differential diagnosis, although with a lower degree of clinical probability.

Investigations
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a normal left ventricular ejection fraction with severe calcified AS (aortic valve area: 0.86 cm2; mean pressure gradient: 45 mm Hg), and moderate tricuspid regurgitation. There was no evidence of aortic dilation at the level of the sinuses of Valsalva or in the proximal ascending aorta. Preprocedural computed tomography (CT) demonstrated severe calcified AS (area: 410 mm2; perimeter: 73 mm) in a horizontal aortic root (52°), with patent bilateral transfemoral access, as well as incidental findings of an infrarenal saccular abdominal aortic aneurysm (37 × 26 mm). The patient was referred to our institution’s heart team and was deemed eligible for a transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI).

Management
A transfemoral TAVI procedure was performed with a 29-mm Evolut FX valve (Medtronic). Primary access was established at the right common femoral artery with an 18-F Gore Dryseal introducer owing to severe atherosclerotic disease in the abdominal aorta. The aortic valve was crossed with the use of an AL-1 catheter and a straight 0.035-inch guidewire, followed by the placement of an extra-small Safari guidewire (Boston Scientific) in the left ventricle. The initial deployment attempt resulted in valve embolization at 80% deployment owing to the patient’s horizontal aortic root anatomy, but a second deployment was successful and deemed to be stable. The procedure resulted in a marked reduction in the pressure gradient from 41 to 7 mm Hg, with no evidence of paravalvular leak on the final aortogram. However, during the procedure, a possible aortic root dissection and probable contained aortic laceration was noted in the noncoronary sinus. The patient remained hemodynamically stable throughout the entire procedure, with intraprocedural “quick look” transthoracic echocardiography confirming the absence of pericardial effusion. Closure of the primary access was performed with a Manta (Teleflex) device, and a 6-F AngioSeal (Terumo) was used for the secondary femoral access.

Immediate postprocedural CT confirmed an aortic root dissection of the noncoronary sinus of Valsalva and acute mediastinal hematoma surrounding the aortic root, extending along the right atrioventricular groove and the right coronary artery. The patient was not considered to be a suitable surgical candidate for aortic dissection repair owing to extensive aortic calcifications. Despite the presence of an aortic dissection and mediastinal hematoma, he remained hemodynamically stable after the procedure. Initial blood pressure management included intravenous nitroglycerine to maintain systolic blood pressure under 110 mm Hg, aiming to reduce stress on the aortic wall and prevent expansion of the dissection. On postoperative day (POD) 1, 7.25 mg daily oral amlodipine was started for continued blood pressure management, aimed at mitigating further aortic complications. Transthoracic echocardiography performed 24 hours after the procedure revealed a mild paravalvular leak localized at the 3 o’clock position. On POD 2, CT revealed a well defined pseudoaneurysm (16 × 19 × 20 mm) with a small neck (1 mm), with a surrounding hematoma or acute thrombus (11 mm), communicating with the noncoronary sinus of Valsalva at the site of dissection. In addition, the patient developed a new-onset left bundle branch block accompanied by a prolonged PR interval in sinus rhythm and slow-rate atrial fibrillation, leading to the decision to implant a permanent pacemaker. Nitroglycerine was tapered and discontinued by POD 2 as blood pressure stabilized, allowing for the initiation of low-dose carvedilol. On the fourth day after TAVI, CT confirmed a decrease in the size of the pseudoaneurysm and associated hematoma, and the patient was deemed to be stable for discharge with a scheduled outpatient follow-up at the transcatheter valve therapy clinic.

Outcome and Follow-Up
At the first outpatient follow-up, 7 days after discharge, there was complete thrombosis of the dissection’s false lumen; however, the patient experienced a recurrence of atrial fibrillation, and a low dose of direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs) was resumed. At the most recent follow-up, 2 months after procedure, the patient exhibited complete resolution of the focal dissection flap, with no evidence of ongoing aortic dissection despite the DOACs.