Technique
Information about the procedure of TFD.
The patient receives intravenous photosensitizer (Photogen®, King of Prussia, PA, USA - 1.5 mg/kg) 24 h before the procedure. Its peak light absorption is at the wavelength of 630 nm. The procedure begins with standard duodenoscopy (Olympus TJF-180) under general anesthesia. After the identification of the greater duodenal papilla and the retrograde cannulation, the digital cholangioscope (SpyGlassTM DS, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) is introduced into the common bile duct. Then the cholangioscopic examination helps to identify the neoplastic stenosis. Under direct visualization, the illumination catheter (Medlight S.A., RD10-323, Switzerland) is advanced through the cholangioscope. This consists of a typical three-way cannula. The first port has a 1 cm long cylindrical light diffuser at the end. Two black radiopaque marks demarcate the limits of the diffuser. The second port accommodates a 0.025 inch guidewire and the third is a portal for injection. After positioning under cholangioscopic guidance, illumination is initiated. The dose is 90 J/cm², with a power of 70 mW/cm². Repositioning is recommended every centimeter to cover the entire stenosed area. At the end of the procedure, new cholangioscopy evaluates the bile duct for immediate outcome and adverse events.

Post-procedure care
The patient is fasted for the next 24 h. If no adverse event is detected, oral diet is initiated. Discharge from hospital is done under strict guidance on photoprotection (prevention of exposure to light and use of sunglasses), especially during the first week after the session of TFD.

RESULTS
This procedure was performed in an 82-year-old man who presented to our tertiary center with obstructive jaundice and weight loss over the previous two months. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) revealed severe dilation of the common bile duct associated with choledocholithiasis. ERCP confirmed these findings but was unable to remove the stones due to the disproportionate dilation of the common bile duct. Therefore, a plastic biliary stent was chosen. The patient showed improvement in his clinical condition, but the cholestasis returned 45 days after the first procedure. Two other ERCPs failed to remove the stones. During the third procedure, a long irregular stenosis of the common hepatic duct was apparent and he was referred for another echoendoscopic evaluation.

In addition to the choledocholithiasis, the new EUS revealed a dilated common hepatic duct with a well-circumscribed hypoechoic solid mass measuring 1.8x2 cm, which was compressing the common hepatic duct. The mass appeared to also involve the common hepatic artery. An ultrasound-guided needle biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of moderately differentiated cholangiocarcinoma (Bismuth I).

After staging, the mass was considered inoperable and the patient was referred for palliative treatment. After a multidisciplinary meeting with the oncology team, adjunctive PDT was proposed to treat the recurrent biliary obstruction. The procedure went without complications and lasted 150 minutes. At the end, a biliary drainage was performed with a 10 Fr plastic stent, since a self-expanding metal stent was not available at that time.

The patient showed no signs or symptoms of photosensitivity in the following week. There was, however, early recurrence of cholestasis complicated with cholangitis. ERCP revealed obstruction of the stent with debris and biliary sludge secondary to tumor necrosis. A biliary scan followed by new drainage resolved the patient's acute condition. Subsequently, he remained asymptomatic for three months, the longest period since the onset of the disease. At his next recurrence, he was drained with a self-expanding metal stent. He continued with systemic treatment and eventually required a duodenal stent for palliation of dysphagia. He died due to complications of pulmonary metastases two years after the onset of symptoms and 15 months after the session of TFD.
