A 28-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to the obstetric department with PPROM at a gestational age (GA) of 32 weeks and six days. At admission the amniotic fluid was clear, there were no uterine contractions and the cardiotocography (CTG) was normal. The ultrasound (US) revealed a diagnosis of anhydramnios, with the fetus in a transverse position with the back in a caudal position, and a cervical length of 43 mm. Screening for Group B Streptococcus was negative. The white blood cell count was 12.5 × 109 mmol/L and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was found to be 36 mg/L.

Prior to the admission, the pregnancy had been uneventful. Ultrasounds at 12 and 20 weeks GA and the first trimester non-invasive prenatal test (NIPT) showed no abnormalities. Fetal biometry at 30 weeks GA showed normal fetal growth, with fetal abdominal circumference (FAC) at the 69th and estimated fetal weight (EFW) at the 48th percentile.

When admitted to the ward, betamethasone and nifedipine were prescribed for lung maturation and tocolysis was administered during the first two days of admission according the local protocol. At 33 weeks GA, fetal biometry was repeated, which showed reduced growth velocity; with a stable FAC, yet an EFW at the 23th percentile. The pulsatility index of the umbilical artery was normal. While performing the biometry, there were no signs of fetal abnormalities.

On day six of admission, the patient started to have increasing irregular contractions. The fetus became tachycardic without the presence of maternal fever. Tachycardia persisted the next day, with an increase in white blood cell count to 14.6 × 109 mmol/L and CRP 70 mg/L. With the suspicion of chorioamnionitis the next day, a caesarean section was performed at GA 33 weeks and 6 days.

The C-section was complicated by the anhydramnios, the fetus being in transverse position and an unknown large mass on fetus’ back, which was the presenting part in the uterotomy. Assessing the fetus’ exact position was challenging due to the mass. An internal version to either a cephalic or a breech presentation was not possible without expanding the laparotomy and uterotomy. After the extension, the fetus was delivered in a cephalic position.

A female infant, weighing 2945 g (>P97) was born with a moderate start with APGAR scores of one and seven at one and five minutes of life, respectively. The umbilical blood gas showed a venous pH of 7.06 with a base excess of −8.3 mmol/L. The child received five inflation breaths with consequent ventilation for four minutes before sufficient respiratory drive. Despite non-invasive respiratory support, endotracheal intubation was performed due to respiratory insufficiency and intratracheal surfactant (150 mg/kg body weight) was administered due to infant respiratory distress syndrome.

Directly after birth, a prominent dorsal mass of solid-elastic consistence with a diameter of about 12 cm was noticed at the thoracic level. Multiple skin lesions were present around the swelling.

A few hours after birth, a complete blood count and inflammatory parameters showed no abnormalities. Tumor markers were determined and showed a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) of 1.59 μg/L (<5 μg/L), cancer antigen (CA) 125 of 12 kU/L (<35 kU/L), beta human chorionic gonadotropin (beta- HCG) of 32.5 IU/L (<1 IU/L), AFP (alpha-fetoprotein) of 1,100,964 ng/mL (5,000–105000 ng/mL). At day 5, beta HCG and AFP were not detectable anymore. Differential diagnosis included a vascular malformation, congenital malignancy, benign tumoral masses like teratoma and hemangioma, and spina bifida occulta.

Due to the noticeable mass, further imaging was performed on day two, including chest radiograph (CR), US and MRI. The CR revealed a significant soft tissue asymmetry in the left posterior chest wall. The US indicated diffuse edema in the subcutaneous fat tissue of the left chest wall and an asymmetrical thickening of the thorax wall muscles. The MRI revealed that the soft tissue mass was comprised of asymmetrically thickened dorsal thorax wall muscles, particularly the serratus anterior and latissimus dorsi. Additionally, several fluid collections were found in various layers of the subcutis, extending to the left upper limb and to the gluteal muscles. The post-contrast MRI series did not show any enhancing soft tissue masses. The spontaneous decrease of the mass by the time of imaging was noteworthy and supported the diagnosis of a traumatic origin for the lesion.

On day six, a significant reduction in soft tissue edema, fluid collections, and chest wall musculature thickening was seen, as confirmed by US. By day eight, the swelling had disappeared clinically.

The infant was extubated after three days and remained on high flow respiratory support. The weight decreased significantly to 2200 g (P50-90) after a few days, in part due to the decrease in swelling.

Empiric antimicrobial therapy was started at birth because of prematurity and suspected chorioamnionitis and could be stopped after 48 h. At day eight, the child was transferred to a level two hospital for further care because of prematurity.

