Patient information
A 20-year-old male Arabic martial artist (weight 91.5 kg, height 180 cm, and body mas index (BMI) 28.24) presented with pain in the back of the left thigh for the past 5 weeks and underwent pharmacological and physiotherapeutic intervention; however, he did not responded well to symptomatic treatment. He reported that the symptoms first appeared during a short sprint while playing soccer and heard a pop in the back of his thigh. The pain was so bad that he withdrew from the game soon after his injury and noted no bruising on the back of his thigh or significant swelling in that area. However, he reported progressive loss of flexibility in the left knee and inability to flex and extend the knee joint while the knee remained flexed at a 15° angle, whether standing or having the leg in the air. He denied any previous history of lower back pain but could barely support the weight of the affected limb. There was no history of alcohol, smoking, diabetes, high blood pressure, or other serious genetic diseases.

Clinical findings and diagnostic assessment
The patient reported having received icing and elevation of the affected leg while lying down following the injury as therapeutic interventions. He had a crepe bandage applied to his affected thigh to support him while standing and walking. He used crutches for ambulation and to go for a little longer distance. To climb the stairs, he had to use one step at a time, relying on his right lower extremity. He also reported adopting a sitting position at the edge of the chair as direct pressure on the thigh from the chair caused him discomfort. He denied ever hurting his legs or back in sports. As a result, the patient withdrew from all activities, such as playing sports, owing to the pain, and his knee was mildly bent most of the time. Despite taking medication (nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)), the pain worsened over time. Since the patient did not respond well to cryotherapy, compression bandages, and medications, he decided to see a doctor for further diagnosis and treatment before meeting with us.

On further evaluation, he presented with limited knee extension and flexion and exhibited an analgesic gait with a reduced heel strike phase. Active range of motion (AROM) of the left knee was 10–15° compared with 0–130°degrees in the right knee. Palpation revealed tenderness and firmness in the middle third of the semimembranosus and semitendinosus muscles.

Manual muscle testing and isometrics could not be performed owing to persistent discomfort. The patient reported pain at rest, rated 5/10, and during activity it was rated 7/10. Further, clinical evaluation rule out lumbar disc involvement or gluteal and ischial tunnel syndrome [4, 6].

The best way to screen nerve tension for peripheral pain in the lower extremities is with a slump test [17]. However, the result of the slump test in this patient was negative.

Therapeutic interventions
Despite the patient’s current clinical presentation, which was suggestive of HSI, the authors decided to treat him with neural glide technique on the basis of the structural and functional proximity of nerve to the lower limb flexibility through a novel neurodynamic tension technique [18, 19]. The scientific rationale for this neural approach was detailed to the patient and consent was obtained.

The patient was directed to sit with arms folded behind his back and knees and ankles held in extension and dorsiflexion, respectively, while a therapist guided the patient to flex his thoracic and cervical spine and extend his knee joint to the maximum tolerable limit. Next, the patient was instructed to move his neck forward and backward as much as possible while also moving his ankle up and down 15 times to help with nerve glide.

This was done in three sets each day. The therapist then helped the patient bend their middle and upper back as much as possible until the patient felt pain in the knee area. Then, the process was repeated. By the 3rd day, the patient’s active knee extension improved from 5° to 10° and then to a 15° degree bent position. In addition, the standing posture also got better.

Subsequently, the patient was instructed in executing a set of posture re-education workouts, which involved doing active chin flexion, engaging in passive stretching of the cervical extensors while lying down in prone, and building up the shoulder retractors, arm from positions T to Y, then from Y to W with the limb’s weight while lying down.

To address the kyphotic posture, active chest stretches were taught at wall corners. The patient was instructed to increase the duration of the exercises from 5 to 10 seconds, doing 10 reps and 3 sets daily.

Outcomes and follow-up
The results were assessed using a numeric pain rating scale (NPRS) and Knee Society score (KSS). Substantial enhancement in clinical outcome measures such as pain and function were achieved within 3 successive days of therapy. The use of pain medication was discontinued.

The patient continued his self-neural glides and postural reduction exercises at home and was advised for a follow-up after 4 weeks or to contact us if symptoms worsened. On the 3rd follow-up day, the patient’s NPRS from 5 at rest and 7 with activity to 2 at rest and 4 with activity. The KSS increased from 22 to 61 and from 30 to 80 in the functional domain. At the end of the 2-week home program, the patient reported to have full active straight leg raise (SLR). The patient had fully recovered from his knee dysfunction and pain at the 2-month follow-up.