Patient and observation
Patient information: This was a 67-year-old patient with no medical history who presented with dysphagia, dysphonia and altered general condition.

Clinical findings: initial clinical examination found a conscious patient with a Glasgow score of 15/15, apyrexia, blood pressure of 12/07 cmHg, oxygen saturation of 100%, heart rate of 80/min, conjunctivae of normal colour with a large mass in the cavum. There was no hepatomegaly or splenomegaly, the lymph node areas were free, the rest of the physical examination was normal.

Chronology: the patient had been experiencing difficulty swallowing with dysphonia for 6 months, the clinical picture worsened with the development of dysphagia for solids with a deterioration in general condition (weight loss of 15kg/6 months).

Diagnostic approach: cervico-thoraco-abdomino-pelvic CT scan showed a 70 mm x 40 mm nasopharyngeal mass extending to 60 mm. The patient's blood work was normal (white blood cell count, renal and hepatic function, lactate dehydrogenase and HIV, HCV and HBV serologies). The histological and immunohistochemical study of the nasopharyngeal biopsy was in favour of a grade 1,2 CD20+; CD19+; CD79a+; CD10+ follicular B-cell NHL in 2 readings in 2 different laboratories. The bone marrow biopsy was normal as was the pre-therapeutic work-up.

Therapeutic intervention: the patient received 4 RCHOP 21 cures (rituximab 375mg/m2 intravenous (iv), cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2 iv, oncovin 2 mg iv, prednisolone 100 mg orally, and doxorubicin 50 mg/m2 (iv) with no response and then 3 RDHAOX cures (rituximab 375 mg/m2 intravenous (iv) on day 1, high dose aracytine 2 g/m2 x 2 iv on day 2, dexamethasone 40 mg from day 1 to day 4, and oxalipatine 100 mg/m2 on day 1) with no clinical response.

Follow-up and results of therapeutic interventions: the persistence and increase of the nasopharyngeal mass led to the realization of the tracheotomy, the biopsy of the nasopharyngeal mass objectified the disappearance of the lymphoid B infiltration with presence of the amyloid deposits AL type kappa.

Immune electrophoresis of plasma proteins showed the presence of immunoglobulin M kappa, the dosage of light chains was not performed due to lack of resources, the myelogram and a second bone marrow biopsy were normal, the TEP scan objectified a hypermetabolic nasopharyngeal process without other anomalies, the cardiac evaluation (ECG, natriuretic peptides, troponin, echocore) and renal were without particularities, the patient is currently under protocol bortezomib, prednisone and bendamustine with good clinical evolution after the first treatment.
