An 85-year-old man living alone was referred to our department for the management of his DM treatment, which had become complicated by dietary issues. He had a history of gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) in his 30s and angina pectoris requiring stent placement in his 70s. The patient was diagnosed with DM in his 40s and commenced insulin therapy in his 60s. He had been treated with multiple daily insulin injections and oral glucose-lowering agents, including empagliflozin, which had maintained his glycated haemoglobin in the 7% range over the past year until three months before his initial visit to our department. There was no history of gastroesophageal surgery or radiation therapy. He had abstained from alcohol and cigarettes throughout his life.

Two months earlier, the patient underwent craniotomy for a meningioma in the parasphenoid region. Postoperatively, he developed moderate cognitive impairment (the revised Hasegawa dementia scale: 15/30 points) and was admitted to a nursing home. According to his patient’s caregiver, he was dissatisfied with life in the facility, refused meals, and left to return home of his own volition two days prior to his initial consultation. A representative from the comprehensive community support centre urged him to seek medical attention as he had not eaten anything and suspended all DM treatment regimens since leaving the nursing home.

Upon arrival, his vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 116/50 mmHg, pulse rate 90 beats/min, and respiratory rate 20 breaths/min. Laboratory tests revealed hypoalbuminaemia and elevated serum urea nitrogen, creatinine, and uric acid levels. The anion gap, serum β-hydroxybutyric acid, and glucose levels imply euglycaemic ketoacidosis. A compensatory mechanism by respiratory alkalosis prevented the development of acidaemia despite the underlying metabolic acidosis. Anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody titre and serum C-peptide level indicated a non-insulin-dependent state of type 2 DM.

The patient experienced several days of dietary deficit, leading to a diagnosis of SKA rather than DKA. After admission, SKA and dehydration were corrected with an infusion of dextrose-containing balanced crystalloid solutions, resolving the acid–base imbalance by the second hospital day. Oral intake was then attempted; however, food-refluxing noises came from the throat during food ingestion. A barium meal study revealed that a tapered narrowing in the mid-oesophagus prevented solid objects from passing despite excellent swallowing function. A computed tomography scan showed circumferential oesophageal wall thickening at the site of the stricture and a hiatus hernia. Neither mediastinal mass lesion nor lymph node enlargement was observed. The gastroesophageal endoscopy confirmed the stricture 30 cm from the incisors. Oesophageal biopsy specimens revealed a non-specific chronic oesophagitis. Mucosal cultures showed no evidence of aerobic bacteria or fungi.

Oral intake was restricted, and a high-calorie infusion was implemented to calm oesophageal inflammation and restore nutritional status. The patient subsequently underwent endoscopic bougienage, which enabled the resumption of oral intake. His DM was managed with metformin, sitagliptin, repaglinide, and voglibose, achieving adequate glycaemic control without the need for insulin therapy.