History
A 27-year-old male patient presented to the emergency room with a complaint of progressive Right gluteal swelling of 1-day duration after he sustained a road traffic accident (RTA) while he was traveling with a wheeled vehicle. He had associated pain, lightheadedness, and heavy sensation around his buttocks. He states he had small swelling over the buttock since childhood which remained stable in size over the years. Otherwise, he has no abdominal pain, chest pain, shortness of breath, or loss of consciousness. No history of bleeding diathesis, antiplatelet or anticoagulant drug use, family history of bleeding disorder, or other known chronic medical illness.

Physical exam
Up on arrival at emergency, he was acutely sick looking and in pain. Vital signs were: Pulse rate: 122 beats per minute, Respiratory rate: 24 per minute; blood pressure: 90/50 mmHg. He had pale conjunctivae, dry lips and buccal mucosa, a nodular mucosal lesion over the tongue, and huge tender, ecchymotic, pendulous swelling over the right buttock. Further skin exam revealed numerous skin-colored fleshy nodules (neurofibromas) of variable size, and multiple hyperpigmented macules (café au lait spots) over the trunk and lower extremities. The rest of the examination was unremarkable.

Investigations
The lab showed hemoglobin of 6.1 g/dl, Platelets of 344,000/mm3, and INR of 1.78. Imaging with gluteal ultrasound and computerized tomography (CT) scan was done. Ultrasound findings were extensive intramural collection with intra-echo debris and thick septa suggestive of hematoma measuring around 1500 ml. CT scan reading states predominantly cystic infiltrative mass lesion with solid components and locally aggressive features including skin thickening.

With the preoperative diagnosis, NF1 (new diagnosis at the emergency room) with intratumor bleeding and expanding hematoma the patient was resuscitated with 2 units of NS blood prepared, an ICU bed reserved and the patient was taken to the operating room (OR) within 3 h of arrival to ER. Under general anesthesia (GA) and endotracheal intubation (ETT) in the prone position.
Intraoperatively, there was a 15 cm ∗ 20 cm firm mass at the right gluteal area which infiltrated the skin and underlying glues maximus muscle with 2000 ml of hemolyzed blood within the tumor.
Through an elliptical skin incision, the hemolyzed blood evacuated, the tumor excised en bloc with overlying skin, and soft tissue and involved part of the underlying gluteus maximus muscle, weighting 1.6 kg.

Hemostasis secured drain left in situ and the wound closed. Tissue sent for pathology Patient was transfused with 4 units of whole blood intraoperatively and transferred to the Post Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU) with stable vital signs. There were no intraoperative complications.
Ten hours postoperative hemoglobin was 10.6 g/dl, the wound dressing changed and the drain was minimal and removed on the second postoperative day. On subsequent days wound was healing well, and there was no hematoma or signs of infection. The patient was discharged on 4th postoperative day. With appointment.

Outcome and follow-up
Up on 2 weeks postop follow-up – the patient had no complaint, and the wound was healing with no signs of infection or swelling. The biopsy result showed plexiform neurofibroma, an abdominal ultrasound was done, and showed liver hemangioma and splenomegaly, the patient was linked to medical and ophthalmology clinics for further evaluation. Upon 6 months' follow-up, the patient had no complaints and the wound site had healed completely.