A 50-year-old Filipino female working as a domestic help presented to the outpatient department of the hospital in March 2022 with abdominal pain, a history of weight loss, and irregular vaginal bleeding for 2 months. On further questioning, she revealed fatigue, and on-and-off diarrhea for the past month. There were no other complaints.

Her menstrual history showed that she had menarche at the age of 12 years and had regular cycles of 28–30 days with 4–5 days of bleeding, without any intermenstrual or postcoital bleeding. Her last normal menstrual cycle was 2 months back. She had had irregular vaginal bleeding for the preceding 2 months since then. She was married with two children born vaginally. She is not known to have any gynecological illnesses such as fibroids and had not received any treatment for any gynecological problems. She had not received the human papillomavirus vaccine and had been following her cervical cancer screening with normal results. She did not report any chronic medical illnesses, surgery, or allergies. Her family history was negative for any gynecological or familial cancers. She denied any long-term medication, habituations, or addictions. She had not been sexually active for the last 14 years after separation from her husband.

On examination, she was conscious, cooperative, alert, and well-oriented to person, place, and time with normal mood and behavior. She had mild conjunctival pallor, but no icterus, cyanosis, or clubbing. There was no pedal edema or enlarged lymph nodes. The thyroid gland was normal to palpation. The respiratory system examination showed a respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute and evidence of free fluid in the right pleural cavity. The abdomen was distended and soft to palpation, with a large non-tender cystic mass arising from the pelvis. The bowel sounds were normally heard. Speculum examination showed cervicitis and revealed a large adnexal mass on the left side and a bulky uterus with restricted mobility. The examination of other systems revealed no abnormality. Imaging and other investigations were ordered, as the symptoms suggested a possible malignant etiology. The imaging revealed pleural effusion. Further imaging revealed a possible ovarian malignancy with suspicion of pulmonary metastasis. A thoracocentesis was done, but the fluid was negative for malignant cells.

A staging laparotomy was done by total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy on 22 March 2022. Intraoperative findings showed an enlarged left ovary with a large complex multicystic mass containing mucinous and serous fluid. The size was 20 cm × 20 cm, and it was adherent to the left ureter, fallopian tube, and the small intestine posteriorly, weighing approximately 2245 g. Slightly hemorrhagic ascitic fluid around 600 mL. Her enlarged right ovary measured 5 × 5 cm, with a endometriotic cyst adherent to the posterior peritoneum and cecum. She had an enlarged 10-week size uterus with multiple fibroids. The appendix, omentum, and other visceral surfaces looked normal.

The histopathology report showed chronic cervicitis, an enlarged uterus, proliferative endometrium, and a benign endometrial polyp. There were multiple intramural leiomyomas with focal degenerative changes. The right ovary showed a hemorrhagic cystic corpus luteum and an unremarkable right tube. The left ovarian capsule had ruptured in two areas, but the surface was not involved. There were solid and cystic areas in the left ovary. The solid area showed an NEC of 6.5 × 4.2 cm, and the cystic area revealed a large mucinous borderline tumor of 23.0 × 18.0 cm, without any evidence of stromal invasion.

The left fallopian tubal surface involvement was not identified. The immunohistochemistry and tumor markers further confirmed the tumor to be NEN. There was no evidence of malignancy in the omental biopsy, and the regional lymph nodes were not involved. The pleural effusion resolved after drainage and did not recur. The report stated the high-grade tumor showed an organoid pattern of mild pleomorphic cells with vesicular nuclei, coarse chromatin (salt and pepper type), and many mitotic figures. Differential diagnosis includes NEN or sex cord stromal tumor or high-grade epithelial carcinoma. Cancer staging is presented below:

Cancer staged: staging form: ovary; AJCC V7-clinical; FIGO Stage IA (T1a, N0, M0)

Cancer staged: staging form: ovary; AJCC V7-pathologic; FIGO Stage IA (T1a, N0, cM0)

Cancer staged: staging form: Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) Summary Staging—SEER Summary: localized (localized)


Oncology multidisciplinary meeting was done, and the pathologic tumor stage was changed from pT1a to pT1c1 and the FIGO stage from IA to IC1 (surgical spill present) for the left ovarian NEC. The case was discussed in the multidisciplinary team, and she was referred to oncology for systemic chemotherapy. However, the patient did not report for chemotherapy and was lost to follow-up.

The patient again presented in February 2023 to the emergency department with abdominal pain. She was diagnosed with recurrent metastatic NEC, given the previous diagnosis and imaging findings. The patient was started on chemotherapy with cisplatin/etoposide and continued eight cycles until Sept 2023. There was an inadequate response to the chemotherapy, so second-line treatment with leucovorin calcium (folinic acid), fluorouracil, and irinotecan hydrochloride (FOLFIRI) was started. From the time of follow-up until December 2023, she had responded to five cycles of treatment with evidence of remission and symptomatic improvement.