6-year-old boy referred for medical genetics consultation for intellectual disability, microcephaly, behavioural disorder and particular features.

He is the son of a mother with learning difficulties and subtle particular features (epicanthus, bulbous nose, hypoplastic nostrils, small mouth and microretrognatia). A maternal uncle with intellectual disability was evaluated in consultation, without associating other medical-surgical problems or significant morphological anomalies.

The patient's personal history was that the pregnancy was achieved naturally and was uneventful. No pathological ultrasound findings were detected. The delivery was by emergency cesarean section due to the risk of loss of fetal well-being, with Apgar 9/10. The somatometry at birth was: weight, 3,000 g (p16); length, 51 cm (p64); and head circumference, 33.5 cm (p16). In the perinatal period and the first months of life there were no incidents, with regular feeding, without swallowing or chewing problems.

Follow-up started at 28 months by neuropediatrics for postnatal microcephaly, and mild psychomotor and language delay. The development index was 71 on the Baley scale at 30 months (equivalent to 22 months of development). There was greater impairment of the receptive language area. Evolutionary behavioural disorder was evident, and he was diagnosed with aggressive/obsessive hyperactivity disorder, with a good relationship with peers.

He is currently receiving mental health care and is being treated with risperidone and methylphenidate. He has had a favourable evolution and improvement after the start of treatment. He is enrolled in an ordinary school with support in hearing, language and speech therapy. He has not had crises or problems with sleep.

On physical examination, he had no neurologic focalities and microcephaly (head circumference p<1, -2.5 standard deviations), subtle particular features (triangular face, sparsely-medially-placed eyebrows, slanted eye fissures and long eyelashes, prominent auricles, prominent chin, bulbous nasal tip, and small mouth), mild brachydactyly, hypoplasia of distal phalanges, and deep-based nails.

Possible associated anomalies were ruled out during follow-up (normal abdominal ultrasound and cardiac evaluation), hearing was normal and an EEG was performed, which showed no pathological findings.

At the genetic level, the molecular study of the X-fragile syndrome was normal and the 60 K comparative genomic hybridisation array showed a 14q24.3 duplication of uncertain significance of maternal origin, not present in the maternal uncle, classified after the segregation study as probably benign.

A clinical exome was requested, which identified the maternal-line, likely pathogenic frameshift c.692delT (p.Leu231Trpfs*13) variant in the USP27X gene. The maternal uncle also carried the alteration.
