47-year-old female with cirrhosis of the liver of alcoholic etiology, Child-Pugh B (7 points), without regular medication due to non-compliance. The patient reported a recent episode of hemorrhage with a starting point in isolated duodenal varices, instability of hemodynamics and the need for sclerotherapy with cyanoacrylate (1 mg of Hystoacril® and 1 mg of Lipiodol®), without immediate complications. She was discharged with 10 mg of propranolol twice daily. After one month, she was re-admitted with a week of fever, chills and malaise with a week of evolution. She reported abstinence from alcohol since the episode of hemorrhage. In the emergency, she was conscious, cooperative and oriented although slowed down, febrile (38.3ºC oral temperature) and hemodynamically stable, without ascites or peripheral oedema. The rest of the objective examination was irrelevant. Analytically, she presented anemia and thrombocytopenia, hepatic panel within its usual values, but with elevation of inflammatory parameters (Table 1). She underwent a thoraco-abdomino-pelvic computed tomography (CT) without evidence of infectious focus. She was admitted, and was given a therapeutic course with amoxicillin/clavulanate 1.2 g 8/8 h. During the 70-day admission, four episodes of bacteremia were documented. Initially, she was isolated Escherichia coli multi-sensitive, complying with 10 days of amoxicillin/clavulanate with apyrexia and inflammatory lysis. On the 13th day of admission, there was a resurgence of fever and inflammatory parameters, with isolation of Klebsiella pneumoniae ESBL+ and Escherichia coli, microorganisms progressively more resistant to justify the expansion of the antibiotic spectrum to tigecycline and colistin. This scheme was suspended five days later due to renal injury to colistin, and antibiotherapy was changed to ceftazidime 2 g 8/8 h that complied for 17 days with good clinical and analytical evolution. The bacteriological cultures performed between episodes of bacteremia were sterile.
