A 62-year-old female underwent a diagnostic left heart catheterization in 2012. The procedure was complicated by a left main coronary artery dissection requiring an emergent coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) of the left anterior descending coronary artery and the obtuse marginal artery. Unfortunately, the dissection of her left main coronary artery resulted in the worsening of the patient’s heart failure symptoms despite the emergent CABG. Since the patients’ ejection fraction after CABG never improved, she transferred to our advanced heart failure clinic. Over two years, multiple right heart catheterizations (RHCs) were completed; Fick method calculations consistently demonstrated a normal cardiac index. However, the patient experienced worsening symptoms. Once she was profoundly symptomatic, her case was presented at the medical review board, and she was approved for an OHT. Her transplant was uneventful; however, during surgery an abnormal amount of blood was noted draining from the pulmonary veins. Her initial 24-h post-operative course was remarkable for a high cardiac index and right ventricular (RV) cardiac output, a low systemic vascular resistance, and an elevated pulmonary pressure.

While a shunt was suspected, an iatrogenic shunt was ruled out via bubble echocardiography. However, computed tomography (CT) scans revealed an abnormal left superior pulmonary vein draining into the innominate vein. The CTA demonstrated the presence of an extracardiac shunt in the form of PAPVR.

After a multidisciplinary decision to pursue operative repair, the chest was re-opened. The left superior pulmonary vein (LSPV) was identified and visualized. A careful dissection was initiated from the pulmonary hilum toward the innominate vein outside the pericardium. The venous connection was completely mobilized, a tributary branch was ligated, and the vein was transected at the innominate level. After mobilizing the vein, an end-to-side anastomosis was made between the LSPV and the donor heart left atrial appendage while under cardiopulmonary bypass with beating heart. The heart and lung machine was used to avoid hemodynamic instability during the exposure of the left atrial appendage for the anastomosis. After the anastomosis and hemostasis, the patient was weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass and no inotropic support was required. The cannulas were removed after protamine was administered. The chest was closed in standard fashion, and the patient recovered in the intensive care unit. The patient was discharged home on Day 15.