A 37-year-old male presented to our tertiary uveitis facility in January 2020 by referral for further vitreoretinal evaluation. His symptoms were flashes and photopsias predominantly in the right eye. He had previously been diagnosed with presumed bilateral BSCR in the summer of 2016. Initial laboratory evaluations, including complete blood count, complete metabolic panel, hemoglobin A1c and iron studies, were all unremarkable. Laboratory evaluations for infectious etiologies, including QuantiFERON-TB Gold (QFT), rapid plasma reagin (RPR), and fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) tests, were all negative or non-reactive. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain in September 2016 was unremarkable. In November 2016, the patient was treated with topical corticosteroid and intravitreal bevacizumab in the right eye (OD), as well as 60 mg daily oral prednisone. In December 2016, he was started on immunomodulatory therapy (IMT) with cyclosporine and methotrexate, which were both stopped in 2017 due to a possible lack of efficacy. The patient was then started on adalimumab, during which his symptoms (flashes and floaters) reportedly improved. After about 1 year of therapy, adalimumab was stopped due to reduced serum iron levels in early 2019. In October 2019, he received a fluocinolone acetonide intravitreal implant 0.18mg injection OD but noticed no subsequent improvement in visual symptoms.

On initial exam in January 2020, the patient noted moderate ocular discomfort (OD > OS), hazy vision (OD > OS), and floaters (OU). Visual acuity was 20/20 OU. On initial evaluation, review of systems was negative from a systemic standpoint. Intraocular pressures were 13 mm Hg OD and 12 mm Hg OS. Anterior segment exam was notable for 1+ flare bilaterally, with mild posterior subcapsular cataract OD, but otherwise unremarkable. Dilated fundus exam was notable for optic disc edema (OD > OS) and peripapillary and peripheral ovoid hypopigmented chorioretinal lesions (OU). The right eye also showed temporal peripapillary atrophy, 1+ vitreous cells, macular retinal pigment epithelium pigmentary changes, and small retinal hemorrhage in the superotemporal quadrant periphery. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) showed optic disc elevation in peripapillary intraretinal fluid with mild epiretinal membrane (ERM) OD > OS. Wide-angle fluorescein angiography (FA) (OPTOS Plc, Dunfermline, UK) showed hazy media, disc leakage and peripapillary staining OD, and diffuse optic disc leakage with mild segmental staining of venules along the inferior temporal arcade OS. There was hyperfluorescence of several of the lesions in the peripapillary region and along the inferior temporal arcade without any sign of leakage OU.

Two weeks later, full-field electroretinography (ffERG) showed mild-to-moderate global retinal dysfunction, with clear geographic regions of macular depression (OD > OS). The 30 Hz flicker implicit times revealed significant delay in both eyes (OS > OD). Visual evoked potential showed relatively symmetric delay for both small and large stimuli, suggesting mild optic nerve dysfunction. Goldmann visual fields (GVF) and Humphrey visual fields (HVF) showed blind spot enlargement OD and normal blind spot with no generalized constriction OS. Laboratory evaluations were notable only for human leukocyte antigen (HLA) A29 positivity. Angiotensin converting enzyme, lysozyme, and repeat QFT test results were all within normal limits.

At 1-month follow-up visit in February 2020, the patient noted stable visual acuity, some improvement in floaters in both eyes, and persistent haziness predominantly OD. Visual acuity remained 20/20 OU. Intraocular pressure was 15 mm Hg OD and 8 mm Hg OS. Anterior segment exam was notable for 1+ flare OU. Dilated fundus exam was notable for 0.5+ cells and 0.5+ haze in vitreous OU. Overall examination findings of the posterior pole were stable Findings in SD-OCT and wide-angle FA were relatively unchanged since the first visit. Wide-angle indocyanine green chorioangiography (ICG) showed clear media, multiple hypocyanescent spots in the posterior pole and midperiphery in the intermediate phase, and hypocyanescent spots faded in the late phase OU. Fundus autofluorescence showed hypofluorescence around the optic disc and retina.

The patient was diagnosed with BSCR based on HLA-A29 positivity, typical fundus appearance, and negative evaluation for other autoimmune and infectious etiologies. Given the patient’s active disease as evidenced by optic disc edema associated with vitreous cells in both eyes, along with highly suggestive FA and ICG findings, the patient was begun on therapy with infliximab at a dose of 7.5 mg/kg monthly. He was also given 3 days of intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone at a dose of 1000 mg/day followed by a tapering course of oral prednisone.

The patient did not come to follow-up visit until April 2021 and received eight cycles of 7.5 mg/kg infliximab infusions along with 1000 mg prednisone for 3 days during that period. VA declined to 20/40 OD due to posterior subcapsular cataract (PSC) formation and was 20/20 OS. No AC cell and flare were present in both eyes. Vitreous was hazy OD due to PSC and clear OS. Optic disc SD-OCT did not show significant changes. On FA, media was blurry at the center OD due to cataract formation. Partial optic disc staining was present in OU. There was no retinal vascular staining and capillary leakage in OU. Staining of peripapillary chorioretinal lesions in both the early and late frames of the FA remained the same OU. Four months later, the patient received additional four cycles of IFX infusions along with 1 day of 1000 mg methylprednisolone. VA decreased to 20/70 OD due to progression of PSC and was 20/20 OS. Ophthalmic examination, SD-OCT and FA findings remained unchanged. ICG was performed and hypocyanescent spots showed marked improvement with scattered few hypocyanescent spots at posterior pole (OS>OD) in both eyes on ICG. Electrophysiological testing including ffERG, mfERG, and VEP and visual field testing, including GVF and HVF, remained the same since the initial visit. Although there was significant improvement in ocular findings on examination and both in FA and ICG, mycophenolate mofetil 2000 mg daily was added to his treatment regimen due to the presence of optic disc edema and there remained a few hypocyanescent spots at the posterior pole in ICG.