We present the case of a 63-year-old female patient who consulted the emergency department for jaundice associated with cholora, acholia and asthenia of 4 days evolution (year 2016). On physical examination, the patient was hemodynamically stable, with mild jaundice evident in skin and mucous membranes, and a soft, depressible and painless abdomen to the touch. On questioning, the patient denied risk factors for infectious diseases. A laboratory test was requested that showed a cholestatic pattern: total bilirubin of 7 mg/dL, a direct bilirubin of 5.5 mg/dL, an alkaline phosphatase of 408 IU/L, a glutamic oxalacetic transaminase (GOT) of 166 IU/L, a glutamic pyruvic transaminase (GPT) of 271 IU/L, without leukocytosis or associated anaemia. The ultrasound showed dilated intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts (13 mm) with the presence of hypoechoic material in the middle third, without being able to visualize the distal portion.

A contrast-enhanced abdominal MRI was requested and showed a poorly defined, expansive mass that involved the common hepatic duct (CHD) and extended caudally.

A stenosis in the HCC was identified that extended approximately 17 mm, causing dissociation of the intrahepatic bile ducts, with the middle and lower third of the common bile duct having adequate calibre. This process included the portal vein and compromised the hepatic artery in its path through the hilum, in association with regional adenomegaly.

Due to the location and characteristics of the neoplastic process, a Klatskin tumor was suspected and tumor markers were requested to evaluate the same. Given the increase in bilirubin values and the negativity of the alpha fetoprotein, Ca 19.9 and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) tumor markers, admission for a possible surgical resection was decided.

Conventional surgery was performed, where biliary compromise associated with bilateral vascular compromise of the hepatic artery and the portal vein was observed, for which the inoperability of the same was decided. Biopsies of the hepatic pedicle mass were taken for subsequent chemotherapy. The patient evolved adequately, without postoperative complications.

The pathological anatomy report showed infiltration by large cell B lymphoma double expressor. The patient was clinically stable and in a position to begin chemotherapy treatment, so it was decided to begin with a RCHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) regimen. She completed 5 cycles and, as she was a double complement expressor, a sixth cycle with an ascending dose EPOCH (etoposide, prednisone, vincristine, cyclophosphamide and doxorubicin) was started. She responded favorably to the chosen regimen, with only two hospitalizations between the different cycles, the first for febrile neutropenia secondary to mucositis, and the second for a cholangitis that resolved with antibiotics without the need to remove the stent.

A positron emission tomography (PET) was performed prior to the fourth cycle of the chemotherapy schedule, which showed a decrease in the size of the known liver lesion in the III segment at the level of the carrefour, which measured 12.5 mm, prior to 25 mm.

The patient completed the chemotherapy regimen in early 2017 and went into remission but began to have repeated intercurrences. She had numerous episodes of cholangitis associated with the presence of a CHC stenosis, for which repeated endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatographies (CPRE) were performed for the drainage of the bile duct with multiple replacements of bile stents. The stenosis generated the suspicion of a relapse, for which it was decided to carry out a cholangioscopy with a spyglass for the taking of biopsies under direct vision. The result was negative for atypical cells, confirming that the cause of the stenosis was a fibrosis as a response of the lymphoma to the chemotherapy.

Due to the large number of intercurrences in the patient since her referral (year 2017), a surgical resolution was decided in a multidisciplinary ateneo (year 2020). A scheduled surgery was carried out, where a hepatic jejunum anastomosis in Roux Y and a cholecystectomy were performed. She required low-dose inotropic and empirical antibiotics with imipenem but she evolved favorably in the intensive therapy. She was discharged on the seventh day without complications.

Follow-up was performed in an outpatient setting with MRI and laboratory studies, which did not show evidence of disease recurrence at 6 years of remission.
