A 24-year-old man of Persian ethnicity presented with a chief complaint of mouth malodor after a period of mild coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) recovery, which he wanted to resolve as soon as possible. His dentist noticed bone loss and bleeding on probing in the interproximal area of teeth numbers 18 and 19 clinically. Scaling and root planing was performed, and periapical and panoramic radiographs were ordered for patient evaluation. However, the patient refused to take radiographs. The patient’s halitosis subsided after 1 week of treatment. After 2 months, patient returned to his dentist with the chief complaint of cold sensitivity in his mandibular incisors. The dentist performed a vitality test, and the teeth were vital except teeth numbers 23 and 24. The dentist took a periapical radiograph, and a radiolucent lesion in the anterior mandible was evident.

In panoramic radiograph, a large, well-defined lytic radiolucent lesion with scalloped borders extending from tooth number 31 on the right side to the left ascending ramus was evident. Further cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) study revealed a large multilocular lytic lesion, with a relatively distinct margin, which caused thinning and perforation of buccal and lingual cortexes and signs of scalloping.

After examination, the patient was referred to an oral and maxillofacial surgeon. In the medical interview, the patient explained his mitral valve prolapse; history of recurrent episodes of otitis from the first year of his life; history of septicemia with an unknown origin when he was 1 year of age after episodes of diarrhea and vomiting; history of bronchodilator usage for seasonal allergy; history of levothyroxine, cabergoline, desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) spray, and testosterone gel usage for 4 years after diagnosis of empty sella syndrome following polyuria and polydipsia; and finally, a history of recent COVID-19 infection (3 months earlier). His familial history revealed Hashimoto’s thyroiditis in his maternal family; his grandfather, mother, and all three of his aunts suffered from this kind of hypothyroidism. The patient’s past surgical history included a repair of an inguinal hernia 10 years prior without any complications. In addition, the patient was obese, with a body mass index (BMI) of 34.5.

On clinical examination, extraoral and intraoral findings were unremarkable. Laboratory tests, including complete blood count (CBC), were normal, except for an increase in erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels. An incisional biopsy was performed in the anterior mandible, and the specimen was sent to the department of oral and maxillofacial pathology at the Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences. Sections showed diffuse infiltration of large pale-staining cells such as histiocytes with indented and numerous eosinophils in the fibrous background. An immunohistochemistry (IHC) examination revealed scattered positive for cluster of differentiation-1a (CD-1a) (+ +), strongly positive for Langerin (CD-207) (+ + +), and more than 50% positive for S-100.

According to clinical, radiological, and histopathological data, the diagnosis of LCH was reached. Differential diagnoses were osteomyelitis, eosinophilic granuloma, and bone metastasis. However, owing to laboratory tests, radiologic data, and clinical history, the diagnosis of LCH was confirmed. Therefore, for further examination, the patient was referred to the nuclear medicine department for positron emission tomography with fluoro-2-deoxyglucose and computed tomography (FDG PET/CT), which revealed hypermetabolic lytic lesions in the mandible, right parietal, left frontal, and left sphenoid bones, and hypermetabolic opacity in the left ethmoid sinus. In addition, increased metabolic activity in the sellar region, communicating hydrocephaly, and prominent hypermetabolic palatine tonsils were observed. Moreover, heterogeneous-increased metabolic activity in bilateral tibia and femurs was evident.

A brain MRI revealed a remarkable enlargement of sella-containing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) intensity material. Adenohypophysis appeared as a thin layer at the base of enlarged sella, and enhanced homogeneous and inflammatory changes were seen at the left mastoidal air cells. Extension of inflammation toward the left middle ear was seen (it is noteworthy that the patient suffered from otitis for many years). According to multifocal involvement of disease and its questionable prognosis, the patient was referred to the oncology department for systemic chemotherapy. Further tests revealed mutations in the BRAF oncogene and no detectable mutations in KRAS and NRAS. The oncologist chose a denosumab, vinblastine, etoposide, 6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate, and pegfilgrastim regimen; however, follow-up was not possible as the patient died following an accident.