The case of a 43-year-old woman with a history of breast cancer diagnosed before menopause is described. The patient began with nonspecific gastrointestinal symptoms, such as postprandial fullness, increased abdominal perimeter, intermittent abdominal pain with a predominance in the mesogastrium of 12 months of evolution. Subsequently, dyspnea of medium efforts was added. The patient went to a primary care doctor, who established the study protocol and requested an ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis, which showed a tumor that covered the entire abdominal cavity, and complemented the study with a contrasted computed tomography of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis, which showed a 27.5 x 12.7 x 28.2 cm, heterogeneous, predominantly liquid tumor with the presence of septa.

The tumour markers presented Ca 125 at 84.16, ACE 10.07, AFP 1.83, B-HGC 0.1. The haematological biometrics showed evidence of liver function and coagulation times within normal parameters. The patient was sent to the Gynecological Tumour Service of the Oncology Hospital of the Siglo XXI National Medical Center, where we proposed laparotomy with transoperative study. Surgical intervention was carried out in which left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed, which was sent for transoperative study.

The surgical event was found to be mucinose, with a carcinomatosis index of 16 points, with mucin implants throughout the extent of the parietal peritoneum, Gleason capsule and spleen, in addition to a ruptured left ovarian tumor.

The left ovary was received in the study, weighing 3450 g, measuring 28 x 27 x 14 cm, with a broken capsule, a multilocular inner surface with mucous content, and a cystic area measuring 7 x 6.5 cm with sebaceous content and hairs. Histological sections showed an ectodermal tissue composed of squamous epithelium and hair follicles, as well as an endodermal tissue composed of intestinal epithelium, which in various sections showed marked atypia with complex architectural arrangement, up to the point where seal ring cells were found, corresponding to adenocarcinoma. No immature elements were identified in the tumor sample.

Ovarian staging and debulking surgery was continued, consisting of total hysterectomy + bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy + peritonectomy + appendectomy. In the presence of evidence of tumour activity, a cholecystectomy and splenectomy were performed and hyperthermic intraoperative chemotherapy with 45 mg of cisplatin in 1000 ml of 0.9% saline at 40 degrees C was added, resulting in optimal debulking, which was classified as stage IIIC. In the histopathological report, tumour implants (adenocarcinoma) were observed in the omentum, liver capsule and spleen capsule.

The patient was referred to the Medical Oncology Service and was considered a candidate for adjuvant treatment with carboplatin and paclitaxel in six cycles, which ended without incident. She is currently in good oncological condition with a disease-free period of seven months; she is being monitored by the Gynaecological Tumour Service.
