Female, 14 years of age, who began to suffer in March 2021, presenting pain in the right pelvic limb with predominance in the knee, of intensity 8/10 on the visual analogue scale (VAS), which limited walking, reporting at least three previous episodes. Therefore, she went to the Regional Hospital of the State of Veracruz in July of the same year, where she had radiographs of the right pelvic limb, finding a bone lesion in the mid-section of the femoral shaft, with irregular edges, with periosteal reaction in the cortical anteromedial part, which showed sclerotic areas with a well-defined transition zone. In the axial computed tomography (CT) of the pelvic limbs in September 2021, there was an irregular bone lesion in the mid-section of the right femur, in the anteromedial face, with a sclerotic pattern and osteolysis. The first percutaneous biopsy was performed in the operating room in September 2021, which was sent to pathology, where a sample was reported as insufficient. The Paediatric Oncology Service was requested for evaluation, which, in the negative result, requested a new biopsy to standardise conduct. A bone scan with technetium 99 was performed in October 2021, where an abnormal increase in osteoblastic activity was observed in the mid-section of the femur. In the thoracic CT, there were calcified right paracardiac metastases of approximately 2 cm and peripheral metastases of 0.5 cm. In October 2021, a second percutaneous biopsy was performed in the operating room, which was sent to pathology, where a sample was reported as amorphous extracellular matrix with bone metaplasia and scant cellularity. The Paediatric Oncology Service was requested for evaluation, which, in the negative result, requested a new biopsy to standardise conduct. A new evaluation was performed by the Paediatric Oncology Service, which justified, by the result of the biopsy, not meeting the criteria for initiation of chemotherapy. Subsequently, in December 2021, surgical treatment was decided by the Paediatric Orthopaedic Service. During the surgery, a tumour was found in the mid-section of the femur of approximately 13 cm in length by 3 cm in width, with firm consistency, irregular edges, ochre colour and a well-defined transition zone. A wide margin resection (approximately 15 cm) was performed and an intercalary femoral prosthesis was placed. The surgical piece was sent for definitive pathological study. Two weeks after the surgical procedure, a report of the surgical piece was received from the Pathology Service, which reported: low-grade osteosarcoma, hypocellular, positive in the fibroblast component, with irregular edges, ochre colour and a well-defined transition zone.


Surgical technique

With the patient under general anaesthesia and in supine position, aseptic and antiseptic procedures and the placement of sterile surgical fields were performed. An anteromedial approach to the femur was chosen, using a longitudinal incision of approximately 25 cm, dissecting by planes until a gap between the rectus femoris and the vastus medialis muscles was found. The vastus medialis muscle was then dissected until the femoral diaphysis was found. A tumour was found in the middle third of the femoral diaphysis, approximately 13 cm long and 3 cm wide, which was removed with wide margins, and an osteotomy was performed 16 cm proximal to the knee joint surface. A bone marrow sample was sent for pathological examination, and the presence of free margins was confirmed by the pathological service. A second osteotomy was performed 16 cm distal to the greater trochanter, and a second bone marrow sample was sent, with a negative report for malignant cells. The proximal and distal femur was rimed with rims of diameters 9, 10 and 10.5 until the proximal digital fossa was passed. A bone anchor was placed, and the osteotomy was regularised. An endomedular nail was introduced until the distal limit was reached, and a diaphyseal prosthesis was placed with bone anchors and crowns at the diaphyseal ends. Locking pins were placed, and the length of the limb was compared with the contralateral limb. The interval between the rectus femoris and the vastus medialis muscles was repaired, and the joint was closed by planes.
