48-year-old man, with no relevant antecedents, presented secondary trauma to a high-energy vehicular collision. He was transferred to the emergency department of the nearest hospital and, due to progressive deterioration of consciousness, was intubated, connected to a ventilator and transferred to the base hospital in his region. The severity index of the trauma was: Injury Severity Score (ISS) of 38, Revised Trauma Score Triage (RTS-T) of 10 and Trauma Injury Severity Score (TRISS) of 23.

The tomographic study showed multiple bilateral rib fractures with slight displacement, fracture of the sternum manubrium not displaced, right pleural and pericardial occupation, fracture of the spinous process (T1), liver laceration, mild hemoperitoneum and frontal hematoma, with no evidence of intracranial injury. A right pleurotomy was performed, with an initial debit of 1,100 cc of blood and he was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). A left pleurotomy was performed due to the finding of a left pneumothorax in radiographic follow-up.

She progressed with increasing requirements for oxygen and vasoactive drugs. Laboratory tests showed acidosis, thrombocytopenia, coagulopathy and acute renal failure. The chest radiograph showed bilateral diffuse infiltrates and velamentous clouding of both costo-frenic angles. On the third day after the trauma she presented the following ventilatory parameters: tidal volume 380 ml, compliance 23 ml/cmH2O, PEEP 10 cmH2O, respiratory rate of 32 per minute, paO2 53.4 mmHg, paCO246.1 mmHg, oxygenation index 33, inspired fraction of oxygen (FIO2) 80%; paO2/FIO2 of 66 and Murray score of 35. She was ventilated in prone position, without improvement of oxygenation. Due to catastrophic respiratory failure, a decision was made to connect her to veno-venous ECMO in the ECMO-Ministry of Health commission.

ECMO was requested for transport to our center. It was connected to the ICU by percutaneous cannulation via the right femoral vein (23 FR) and the right jugular vein (17 FR), with a flow rate of up to 4.5 L/min. It was then transferred to the surgical ICU of our hospital, where it was kept anticoagulated with non-fractionated heparin.

On the first day of connection, an increase in paO2/FIO2 was observed to 176. CT showed extensive bilateral pulmonary contusion foci with suggestive images of areas of left pulmonary infarction.

He evolved without the need for vasoactive drugs on the 3rd day of ECMO connection. After an evident radiographic and gasometric improvement (paO2/FIO2 consistently greater than 200), the flow of fresh gases in the ECMO circuit was discontinued on the 10th day for evaluation of the exchange capacity with a ventilator alone. Due to good evolution, he was disconnected from ECMO on the 12th day. Weaning was initiated prior to tracheostomy, achieving disconnection of mechanical ventilation on the 16th day. Pleurostomy was removed on the 17th day. He was transferred to the hospital of origin on the 22nd day, and was discharged on the 32nd day.
