Patient, 10 months old, female, admitted to HCPA nine months ago, remained in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) for four months for genetic investigation, requiring invasive mechanical ventilation (IMV) for respiratory stability. During the admission, she required tracheostomy (TQT) and IMV for home use. For this, the patient was adapted in the NICU to the Trilogy 100 mechanical ventilator (Philips Respironics, United States), ventilatory mode with controlled pressure, inspiratory pressure (IPAP) of 25 cmH2O, expiratory pressure (EPAP) of 6 cmH2O, respiratory frequency (FR) of 22 irpm, auto-track sensitivity and inspiratory time of 0.8 seconds.

After his adaptation, he was discharged to the pediatric inpatient unit, where he was clinically stable, without the need for oxygen therapy, awaiting judicial release for home care. However, in the ninth month of hospitalization, he started with fever and hypoxemia [partial oxygen saturation (SpO2): 90%], requiring the placement of oxygen (2 L/min) and the transfer to an isolation bed, where he performed the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for COVID-19, which was positive.

The unit's physiotherapy team installed a closed suction circuit to prevent aerosol dispersion, although it was ineffective because the child was active and often disconnected the circuit. They also inserted a high efficiency particulate air (HEPA) filter into the ventilator's outlet, followed by a heat and moisture exchanger filter (HMEF) near the TCV. They used the HMEF in the manual resuscitator for the performance of bronchial clearance techniques and a HEPA filter in the outlet of the compressed air, with the aim of reducing aerosol dispersion during the aspiration of the airways.

In the initial chest radiograph, no changes were observed. The venous blood gas indicated the presence of respiratory acidosis (pH = 7.27; pCO2 = 69.9; HCO3 = 31.7), with the need for adjustments in ventilatory parameters (IPAP = 28 cmH2O; EPAP = 5 cmH2O; FR = 25 irpm), and the use of oxygen therapy (1 L/min). After seven days of the onset of symptoms, a new chest radiograph was performed, with the presence of a peri-hilar infiltrate and apparent consolidation in the middle lobe.

During the physiotherapy sessions, manual techniques were performed to maintain pulmonary expansion and promote bronchial hygiene. The most used techniques were: compression/decompression, prolonged slow exhalation (ELPr), manual hyperinflation (HM) with self-inflating bag and bag squeezing. In order to keep the patient active and prevent the regression of the motor picture, daily motor stimulation was maintained through the guidance of the family member.

After 19 days from the onset of COVID-19 symptoms, the patient was discharged from hospital, clinically stable, with negative SARS-CoV-2 counter test, blood gases without alterations and return to ventilatory parameters used prior to infection. A few days before discharge, the genetic investigation was completed, confirming Ondine's syndrome. Despite a prolonged hospitalization (300 days), the patient presented head control, sat without support, rolled and reached for objects without difficulty. In addition, the functional evaluation through the Functional Status Scale (FSS-Brasil) indicated moderate degree of dysfunction (12 points), and the motor and respiratory physiotherapy was continued at home.
