We present the case of a 31-year-old woman with a history of a mitral valve defect. She was diagnosed at the age of 3 years with a ventricular septal defect. She was treated with a pericardium patch and a Bjork-Shiley 27 mm prosthetic mitral valve. She had acute thrombosis and obstruction of the prosthetic mitral valve at the age of 11 years. She had a Saint Jude 27 mm prosthetic mitral valve and a Saint Jude 19 mm aortic prosthesis. She had a progressive heart failure secondary to periprotective mitral regurgitation at the age of 23 years. In 2013, a surgical solution was chosen: Saint Jude 29 mm prosthetic mitral valve (mechanical) and Magna Ease 29 mm bioprosthetic tricuspid valve. She had a prolonged postoperative stay in the intensive care unit. She presented with a picture of dyspnoea with small effort, progressive weight loss, abdominal volume and lower limbs. On physical examination, she had a systolic-diastolic murmur in the precordium without irradiation, jugular engorgement without pulmonary congestion elements, ascites and oedema of the lower limbs. An echocardiogram was performed: preserved systolic function of the left ventricle and right ventricle, non-functional aortic prosthesis, mild to moderate insufficiency of the mitral prosthesis without significant gradient, moderate to severe tricuspid regurgitation and pulmonary congestion. Right cardiac auscultation: pulmonary artery pressure and cardiac output within normal range, trans-tricuspid gradient of 20 mmHg. Cardio-resonance: preserved systolic function of the left ventricle and elements of systolic dysfunction of the right ventricle. Computed tomography: multiple calcifications in the leaflets of the tricuspid prosthesis with an inner diameter of 27 mm, calcifications in the leaflets of the pulmonary valve with dilation of the pulmonary artery up to 36 mm, dilated right ventricle with a cavity of 45 mm at the level of the tricuspid annulus, coronary arteries without lesions. Severe tricuspid regurgitation was found in a biological prosthesis and surgical treatment was indicated.

Cardio-surgical group discussion: high risk patient for multiple cardiac surgeries, STS risk score 13 points, high risk of right ventricular failure post-operative. It was decided to opt for percutaneous tricuspid replacement with Edwards Sapiens 3 (S3) prosthesis of 29 mm considering the original diameter of the Magna Ease biological prosthesis. It was performed in the angiography room, under general anaesthesia and trans-esophageal echocardiography (TE). Access to the implant of the right femoral vein prosthesis. F5 radial arterial access, JL3.5F5 guide catheter was inserted in the left coronary artery through which the BMW 0.014 guide was advanced to the septal branch of the descending anterior artery, the outer end of the guide was connected to the pacemaker stimulator. The catheter was advanced through the femoral artery to the right pulmonary artery, the right Judkins 4 (JR4) catheter of 29 mm was exchanged for the 260 cm standard 0.035 guide catheter, the guide was used to position the catheter in the distal branch of the left pulmonary artery. The Amplatz Super Stiff 260 cm (Cook Medical) catheter was advanced to the same branch, the JR4 catheter was removed. To avoid difficulty in passing the prosthesis, the tricuspid valve was pre-dilated with Nucleus 18 mm balloon (NuMED). The S3 prosthesis was loaded in the Commander release system in reverse to the usual way. The S3 prosthesis was advanced through the right femoral artery and positioned under fluoroscopy taking as reference the Magna prosthesis in tricuspid position. The release of the prosthesis was performed under 140/min pacemaker stimulation. The release system was removed, the F5 pigtail catheter was used to perform right ventricular ventriculography: no evidence of tricuspid valve regurgitation and 2 mmHg trans-tricuspid gradient. 3 mmHg echographic gradient (TE). The patient was referred to the intensive care unit and admitted without the need for vasoactive agents. In the first 24 h there was evidence of tachypnea and hypoxaemia, a total of 3 litres of ascites fluid was drained with clinical improvement and persistence of oxygen therapy requirement. Three days post implant an echocardiogram was performed: S3 prosthesis 29 mm in tricuspid position and average gradient 5 mmHg, right and left ventricular function preserved and no change from the previous examination. The patient was discharged on the sixth day post implant. She evolved with remission of symptoms and after 12 months of the intervention she was in good condition.
