The patient was a 59-year-old Japanese man with a 28-year history of type 1 diabetes. He visited our hospital monthly for management of diabetes with intensive therapy employing multiple-dose insulin injections. His height and body weight were 168 cm and 52 kg (body mass index: 18.4 kg/m2), respectively. He showed depleted insulin secretion (serum C-peptide level was below the limit of detection), such that his blood glucose levels fluctuated severely, and his hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) level was around 9.0% despite intensive insulin therapy. He had been diagnosed with asymptomatic chronic severe (grade III) aortic regurgitation (AR) 16 years before the current presentation but had declined follow-up for the AR. He had never undergone surgery nor the implantation of any prosthetic devices.

Eight days after his regular hospital visit, he visited an emergency clinic complaining of breathing difficulty and had a fever above 38℃. Until that day, he had not noticed any fever, chills, weakness, or any other symptoms. His blood pressure and pulse rate were 192/82 mmHg and 118/min, respectively. He showed orthopnea, and his oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 80%. He was transported to the emergency department of our hospital. A physical examination revealed a Levine 3/6 systolic murmur, although his cardiac murmur had not been checked at regular hospital visits. No physical findings suggesting IE, such as Osler nodes, Janeway lesions, or conjunctival petechiae, were recognized. His white blood cell (WBC) count was markedly increased to 20,800 /μL, and his C-reactive protein (CRP) was elevated to 6.06 mg/dL. Serum creatine phosphokinase MB was within the normal range, at 6.0 IU/L, and troponin T was negative. Chest X-ray showed pulmonary congestion with cardiac enlargement (cardiothoracic ratio: 55%). Electrocardiography revealed ST elevation on V1-V4, but emergency echocardiography showed no dysfunction of cardiac contractility. He was diagnosed with acute heart failure due to valvular disease, and treatment with non-invasive positive pressure ventilation and nitrates was initiated.

After hospital admission, a detailed examination by transthoracic echocardiography showed severe aortic regurgitation, severe mitral regurgitation, and a mobile vegetation on the mitral valve. Transesophageal echocardiography revealed a 16.5×6-mm mobile vegetation on the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve and an 11.2×5-mm nonmobile vegetation on the noncoronary cusp of the aortic valve. These findings raised strong suspicion of NVE. In this case, head computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging revealed no cerebral infarction or hemorrhaging, although a mobile vegetation was detected.

On reviewing the clinical course until hospitalization, we noted that at the visit four months before admission, his WBC count had been slightly elevated. The following month, his albumin (Alb) level decreased to 3.0 g/dL, and his hemoglobin (Hb) level had shown a gradual decline over the 2 months prior to admission. During this period, he had experienced a 4-kg weight loss. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy and whole-body CT were performed, but no abnormalities were detected. One month later, he had regained some weight, and the laboratory findings had nearly normalized, except for a slightly elevated CRP level (0.54 mg/dL). At the last visit (8 days before admission), his WBC count had again risen to 9,300 /μL, while his Hb and Alb levels had again decreased to 13.1 g/dL and 3.0 g/dL, respectively. Furthermore, his CRP level had increased to 4.18 mg/dL. At that time, his diastolic blood pressure has shown an obvious decrease. Thus far, he had not experienced a fever or any symptoms other than weight loss. We suspected diseases of infectious and/or malignant origin and initiated comprehensive examinations to identify the source of his clinical findings.

After heart failure treatment had been started, his clinical symptoms showed rapid improvement, and his hemodynamic stability was maintained during the first six hours. He initially received empirical intravenous antibiotic therapy consisting of 12 g/day of ampicillin sulbactam (ABPC/S) and 120 mg/day of gentamycin (GM). Three blood culture sets were obtained on the admission, and all were positive for S. warneri [minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) to ABPC/S ≤8 μg/mL; MIC to GM ≤1 μg/mL; MIC to cefazolin (CEZ) ≤2 μg/mL]. Thus, IE caused by this organism was diagnosed.

According to the clinical guideline established by the Japanese Circulation Society, emergency surgery is generally recommended for heart failure of NYHA III to IV or urgent surgery for NVE mobile vegetation exceeding 10 mm and severe valve dysfunction. In this case, however, his heart failure was successfully improved. Based on the guideline, the risk of embolism was considered to have been reduced by the administration of appropriate antibiotic therapy. In addition, the patient had type 1 diabetes, and his glycemic control was so poor that we were concerned that double-valve surgery would be a high-risk procedure. Therefore, we planned elective surgery after sufficient control of both infection and diabetes.

Based on the blood culture results, the antibiotic regimen was switched to 6 g/day of CEZ. A detailed dental examination revealed no abnormalities, such as periodontitis. After four weeks of antibiotic therapy, he underwent surgical therapy. His aortic valve was found to be bicuspid, and the aortic and mitral annuli were intact without abscess formation. Large vegetations were exenterated, and the mitral and aortic valves were both replaced with mechanical valves. He experienced no postoperative complications and was discharged on the 22nd day after the operation without apparent embolism. He has not had any recurrence in over two years since the operation.