A 19-month-old boy was admitted to the Emergency Department because he fell from his baby feeding highchair. This fall occurred in apparent well-being, without the presence of anticipatory signs or symptoms. First, he fell on his gluteus and then he banged his head (occiput) on the ground. He presented with vomiting (three episodes) and he was very irritable. His respiratory rate and heart rate were >60 breaths and >150 beats per minute, while oxygen saturation was <80%. Upon physical examination, the child was hydrated and conscious, but irritable. More importantly, we noted subcostal retractions, and, at the auscultation, decreased breath sounds in the left basal part of chest. The patient was ventilated with an AMBU balloon connected to an oxygen source and monitored with a pulse oximeter. Despite our intervention, oxygen saturation fell below 70% and the more we ventilated, the more the saturation dropped down. The lung ultrasound showed the absence of the typical A lines and the consolidation of the lung, which was directly visualized as a solid parenchyma. On the basis of the poor clinical condition, the patient underwent orotracheal intubation with a cuffed endotracheal tube. After the baby was stabilized, he underwent a chest computed tomography (CT) showing complete atelectasis of the left lung with an interruption of the main left bronchus at 12 cm from bronchial bifurcation. An FBA was suspected as the mother also stated that the baby in the previous days had an intensive cough attack and disappeared within 24 h without any treatment. Therefore, a rigid bronchoscopy was performed and an almond of 2 cm in diameter in the main left bronchus was found and promptly removed.

The patient had never consumed almonds or other nuts before and in this circumstance ingested the almond by chance.

The baby had a progressive clinical improvement, and after 24 h, he was extubated and discharged from intensive care to be admitted to the general pediatrics ward for a few days with gradual and a total respiratory function recovery.