In November 2019, a boy aged 12 was admitted to the Wuxi Children’s hospital for intermittent dizziness, headaches for more than a month, and unstable walking for half a month. It is noted that the patient had a mild cough a week before the onset, and it resolved spontaneously without intervention. Furthermore, the boy has not received any vaccinations since he was 6 years old. Some neurological tests, such as the Oppenheim test, Brudzinski's sign, Kernig's sign, and Babinski's sign, yielded negative results, whereas the Tandem Gait and finger-to-nose test yielded positive results, particularly in the right hand. In addition, a spectrum of demyelinating diseases in the central nervous system, such as antibodies against aquaporin-4, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, and glial fibrillary acidic protein, were negative. The following autoimmune encephalitis relevant tests revealed that AMPA1/2 receptors, and GABABR in CSF were negative, but the NMDA-IgG was positive with a titer of 1:32. Brain MRI revealed aberrant signals in both cerebellar hemispheres, indicating significant cerebellar atrophy. Eventually, the boy was diagnosed with anti-NMDAR encephalitis. The detection of some tumor markers, including alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen (CA) 125, and CA 19–9, was performed to rule out the possibility of tumors, and all were negative. Then, this patient was treated with pulse therapy of methylprednisolone sodium succinate (20 mg/kg, 3d) and later changed to prednisolone tablets (40 mg, po, qd). Finally, the boy's symptoms were relieved, and he was discharged from the hospital. Follow-up visits in January and May 2020 revealed that this child was in good health with no noticeable symptoms. However, the child was readmitted to the hospital in August 2020 with dysgraphia for 6 days. The neurological examination results were comparable to the last time, with the finger-to-nose test remaining positive, but the Tandem Gait was negative. The NMDAR-IgG titer was 1:10 in serum and 1:3.2 in CSF, and MRI imaging revealed worsened lesions in the cerebellar hemispheres. Besides, the CSF oligoclonal IgG band test was performed, and the result was positive. The positive anti-NMDAR-IgG combined with imaging results led to the diagnosis of relapsing anti-NMDAR encephalitis. A similar therapeutic schedule was applied, and the boy was discharged after improving his symptoms. Later follow-ups revealed that the patient's symptoms were eased to a certain extent, but there was a recurrence. Additionally, his memory and learning skills were somewhat impaired.

CSF transcriptome sequencing was performed in both episodes to help further interpret the etiology of this case. Before the examination, informed consent was obtained from the boy and his parents. Briefly, the total RNA of CSF was extracted using the RNeasy Micro Kit (Qiagen) following the manufacturer's instructions, from which the host rRNA was removed before the sequencing library construction. The library was then constructed using the Trio RNA-seq Kit (Nugen), and the meta-transcriptomic sequencing was performed on the Illumina hiseq X-ten platform as described previously. The resulting raw reads were first trimmed to remove those of low quality and adapters using Trimmomatic software, and the reads of human origin were removed using the in-house script. The generated clean reads were then directly applied to the blast analysis against the nr database in NCBI to parse the taxonomic composition using BLAST + 2.12.0. Afterward, the reads of interest were mapped to the reference sequences to resolve the coverage using bowie2, and then de novo assembled using the Megahit program under default parameters. Then, the assembled contigs were used as queries for the Blast analysis to confirm their taxonomic status. Furthermore, the MEGA program was used to align and build a maximum likelihood tree for the phylogenetic relationship with other reference strains.

For the sequencing in the first episode, there were 37,013,105 paired reads generated in total, among which the majority were assigned to Homo sapiens as expected. Based on the read blast analysis, those probably belonging to eukaryota, bacteria, and viruses accounted for 70.54%, 17.04%, and 7.61%, respectively, of the reads irrelevant to humans. Moreover, similar results were achieved from the blast analysis using assembled contigs as queries. Among these reads from putative exogenous agents, a total of 2459 can be mapped to hRSV type B (strain SE01A-0135-V02) with coverage of 98.5% of its genome sequence (accession no. MZ516143). In particular, most reads concentrated on the location of genes NS1, NS2, and L. RT-PCR and sanger sequencing were used to fill in the gaps in the assembled contigs and confirm the genome sequences. Finally, with a total of 15,184 bases, the sequence of the whole genome was recovered, except for part of the 3' UTR region. Furthermore, it had been deposited in the Genbank (accession no. ON630422). Based on the sequence analysis, the acquired genome sequence shared 99.69% nucleotide identity with SE01A-0135-V02. Afterward, using the ML tree based on the G gene, the phylogenetic relationship of the Wuxi strain with other genotypes of hRSV group B was disentangled. The results indicated that this strain grouped with SE01A-0135-V02 inside B6, the most prevalent hRSV genotype in group B worldwide. The remaining reads were dispersed to other taxonomic groups with low read numbers or short assembled contigs. The second sequencing resulted in 34,609,924 paired reads, and except for reads from human beings, no reads associated with agents were confirmed relevant to human disease conditions. Due to the absence of the antibody or antigen tests of hRSV at the time of onset, we conducted the test of serum IgG to the hRSV after the CSF sequencing using the Human RSV-IgG ELISA Kit (SHUANGYING BIOLOGICAL), and the result was positive.