A 56-year-old male presented to the emergency department of our hospital due to sudden onset shortness of breath and an episode of syncope while walking around inside his house. He underwent robotic assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy for prostate carcinoma, 5 days prior to his presentation to the Emergency Department. His post-operative course in the hospital was uneventful. In the emergency department, his blood pressure was 94/54 mmHg, heart rate 121 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 breathes per minute, he was afebrile, and his oxygen saturation was 92% on 6 L per minute of oxygen via nasal cannula. Cardiac examination revealed S1S2, regular, tachycardic, no murmur/gallops/rubs. Respiratory examination revealed normal vesicular breath sounds bilaterally. He was noted to have asymmetrical left lower extremity edema. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus tachycardia, no ST-T wave changes. Troponin was mildly elevated at 0.120 ng/mL (reference range: 0 to 0.020). Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of chest showed extensive bilateral pulmonary emboli, with a large clot burden in both main pulmonary arteries, evidence of acute right ventricular failure. Duplex venous scan showed acute left infra-popliteal deep vein thrombosis. Echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction of 60% to 65%, abnormal septal motion and flattening of interventricular septum, right ventricular systolic pressure of 49.7 mmHg, moderately dilated right ventricle, decreased right ventricle function, Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 12.1 mm (normal 15 to 20 mm). As the majority of the clot burden was distal, it was not deemed amenable to surgical extraction as recent surgery was a major contraindication for thrombolysis. The patient was started on a heparin drip and inhaled nitric oxide at 20 ppm along with oral sildenafil 40 mg every 8 hours. The next day, the patient was stable hemodynamically and his inhaled nitric oxide was tapered off. Repeat echocardiogram 48 hours from initial presentation showed improved right ventricle size and function. His right ventricular systolic pressure decreased to 22.4 mmHg and his tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion improved to 17.8 mm. We recommended that he continue sildenafil for the next month after discharge along with oral anticoagulation with a plan to follow-up as an outpatient. The patient gave written consent to treatment during his hospitalization. The patient and his family members were well-informed regarding the entire plan of care, and they were in agreement with the care plan.