65-year-old woman with no significant medical history who in 2004 initiated lancinating paroxysms in the right V2 and V3 territories with classic triggers, for which she was diagnosed with right trigeminal neuralgia. In the brain MRI scans up to 2021, the sequences that allow to identify if there is a neurovascular crossing were not performed. From the beginning, pain control with carboxamides was difficult. In 2021, she presented exacerbation of previous paroxysms that appeared in V1. The neuralgia became refractory, with no response to carboxamides and lamotrigine, and very little response to clonazepam, for which she required phenytoin and/or lidocaine infusions in severe exacerbations. Simultaneously, she initiated lancinating paroxysms in the posterior part of the tongue and the right lateral wall of the oropharynx, which were exacerbated with swallowing and which progressively increased in intensity and frequency. It was considered the beginning of a classic trigeminal neuralgia and glossopharyngeal neuralgia, concomitant and refractory. A double microvascular decompression in one time was considered the best therapeutic option.

In March 2021, a right retrosigmoid craniectomy was performed with exposure of the perimesencephalic cistern and the basal cisterns. The release of the fifth cranial nerve was performed, and a close contact with the superior cerebellar artery in its sensory part and thinning in the entrance area of the nerve root was observed. Teflon was placed between the superior cerebellar artery and the fifth cranial nerve along its entire length. Subsequently, the basal cistern was explored and a vascular loop of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery was observed in close contact with the fifth cranial nerve, where teflon and dural sealant were placed. The postoperative course was without incident, with complete resolution of the trigeminal neuralgia and a reduction of >50% of the intensity of the paroxysms in the glosso-pharyngeal territory. After two years, he continues without trigeminal paroxysms and presents <1 paroxysm/month of tolerable intensity in the glosso-pharyngeal territory triggered by swallowing. The pharmacological treatment continues in a descending pattern without the reappearance of the paroxysms.
