A 56-year-old male patient diagnosed with COVID-19 was referred to the Oral Medicine Department with the chief complaint of an uncomfortable burning sensation in the mouth along with whitish plaque covering the tongue. The complaint appeared a year ago, at first it was just a thin spot, which sometimes arise and disappear. For the last three months, the condition was getting worse parallel to the hospitalization of the patient because infected by COVID-19. Furthermore, in the last five months, he experienced a massive weight loss of 25 kg.

The patient was diagnosed with HIV for the last six years and stopped taking ARV medication during the mid-COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, the patient was diagnosed positive for COVID-19, for 8 months since this examination was carried out and had not come back negative. The symptoms that patient got during COVID-19 infection are coughing, fever, and shortness of breath. The symptoms are getting worse from month to month.

On the first visit when the examination was carried out, the general condition of the patient was compos mentis but looked weak and suffered. The patient was wearing nasal cannula oxygen with a saturation of 94%. The intraoral examination is inadequate, but there was visible a white plaque that covers almost the entire surface of the tongue and intraoral mucosa.

The patient underwent various supporting examinations including complete blood count, examination of CD4+ count, and HIV viral load. Based on the results of the investigations carried out, the patient has anemia, lymphopenia, also HIV positive with high viral load results, and COVID-19 infection for 8 months. In conclusion, based on the history, clinical examination, and supporting examinations, it was found that the patient was diagnosed with HIV stage IV with wasting syndrome, confirmed COVID-19 severe case, and intraoral diagnosis as pseudomembranous oral candidiasis.

The management for this case from Department of Internal Medicine were given Co-Trimoxazole (Trimetropin/Sulfamethoxazole), Efavirenz/Emtricitabine, Tenofovir, Lovenox, Enoxaparin Sodium, Anticoagulant, Remdesivir, and Vitamin D 5000 IU. While the management provided by the Department of Oral Medicine were in form of education and oral hygiene instruction, including brushing the teeth and tongue at least two times a day and administering nystatin oral suspension 4 times 2 mL per day by swishing for a minute before spit.

At the first medical control, showing that the general condition of the patient still looked breathless, with thick white plaques that covered almost the entire intra-oral mucosa conditions still showed in the mouth even worse, oral candidiasis conditions spread to the oropharynx. The patient still had difficulty following the instructions given, such as brushing his teeth and tongue regularly because of the general condition of the patient.

The patient was instructed to continue maintaining oral hygiene, discontinue the usage of nystatin oral suspension, and replaced it with systemic antifungal administration of fluconazole. Because the patient is struggling in cleaning his teeth and tongue mechanically, we administered chlorhexidine gluconate mouthwash 0.2% of 10 mL swish and spit three times a day to prevent secondary infection.

During the second medical control, the patient’s general condition improved, less shortness of breath was visible and the patient was able to follow the instructions from the previous visit. In the intraoral examination, it was found that the white plaque on the surface of the tongue had thinned.

The patient was instructed to maintain the cleanliness of his oral cavity by brushing his teeth and tongue twice a day, continue to use chlorhexidine gluconate three times a day and additional therapy was given to apply a thin layer of Vaseline album on the upper and lower lips, because chapped lips were visible.

During the third medical control, the general condition of the patient was getting better compared to the previous visit, without any shortness of breath, but the patient’s lip was still dry and exfoliation was visible. While the white plaque covering the tongue disappeared completely. The instructions given to the patient are still the same as the previous visit.

Treatment and monitoring that is carried out periodically give the expected results. Chief complaints of pain and discomfort experienced by the patient and the white plaque that covers the patient’s tongue were resolved completely. The good general condition of the patient makes the patient cooperative and supports the patient in carrying out the instructions given.