A 31-year-old female presented with right elbow pain for the past 3 years with no past injury to the elbow. Physical examination revealed elbow stiffness and tenderness of the lateral epicondyle of the humerus. Cozen assessment was positive, indicating a clinical diagnosis of lateral epicondylitis of the elbow. The plain radiograph showed patches in the right lateral condyle of the humerus and the dorsal part of the olecranon. Free spots in the dorsal region of the olecranon process of the ulna. Computed tomography (CT) showed a high-density macular focus and smooth edge of the lateral condyle of the right humerus and dorsal side of the ulnar olecranon. There was a high-density shadow with a clear boundary, no noticeable fracture line shadow in the elbow joint, and no noticeable swelling in the surrounding soft tissue. Indicating calcification of common extensor tendinosis. Since a bony mass was noted around the lateral epicondylar region of the elbow, CT was performed to exclude the extent and characteristics of this lesion and to rule out any hostile pathology, such as malignancy. The patient had undergone conservative treatment for approximately 2 years. Her visual analog scale score before surgery was 6/10. Her pain did not respond to conservative treatment with analgesics, physiotherapy, or a rest regimen. The pain recurred more intensely 1 week prior, to the extent that she could not use her right upper limb to perform daily activities, and her sleep was severely disturbed. Therefore, surgical treatment was recommended for her. The patient then underwent surgical exploration of the elbow under general anesthesia. A right elbow lateral incision of approximately 5 cm, an incision of the subcutaneous tissue exposed to the extensor tendon, and a milky white liquid outflow from the common extensor tendon region with dystrophic calcification was made. Decompression of the involved tendons and thorough cleaning were performed. Calcification was excised, and extensor tendon repair was done using 2-0 Vicryl sutures. The patient was advised to rest with minimal exercise for 1 month, followed by complete physical activities. Histopathological examination of the excised tissue revealed fibrous ligament tissue with calcifications. The postoperative plain radiograph showed complete removal of the heterotopic bony growth from the lateral epicondylar area with no recurrence of the heterotopic bone formation around the elbow joint. The patient had complete elimination of elbow pain (visual analog scale score 0/10), and at the follow-up of 6 months, she had no pain with full elbow function and a full range of elbow extension and flexion.