A 91-year-old man with recurring episodes of heart failure (HF) was admitted to our hospital presenting with dyspnoea and leg swelling accompanied by pitting oedema. A physical exam revealed respiratory distress, crackles, and a 4/6 Levine diastolic murmur upon heart auscultation. His medical history included an aortic valve replacement for severe aortic regurgitation with a 3F Enable 25 mm SBV via an anterior right thoracotomy in 2015, which was complicated by an advanced atrio-ventricular block requiring permanent pacemaker implantation. Other comorbidities included liver cancer (with an estimated survival of over 12 months), chronic kidney disease (CKD), hypertension, and a smoking history. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a mildly reduced ejection fraction (EF) and structural bioprosthetic valve deterioration (SVD) leading to severe intravalvular aortic regurgitation (Doppler aortic PHT of 201 ms with holodiastolic reverse flow in the descending aorta). In preparation for a potential transcatheter heart valve (THV) treatment, a multi-detector computed tomography (MDCT) was performed, confirming severe deterioration of the aortic prosthesis leaflets. The effective inner diameter (ID), measured at the level of the inflow ring of the SBV, was 24 mm with an annular perimeter of 76.2 mm; no relevant left-ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) or annular calcifications were found. The acquired CT-scan images were used to calculate the virtual THV-to-coronary ostium distance (VTC) and the virtual THV-to-sino tubular junction (VTSTJ). The VTC was 4 mm for the right coronary artery and 5 mm for the left coronary artery, with a VTSTJ >2.5 mm. The risk of coronary obstruction was low (Type 3A according to the VIVID classification). The peripheral accesses were suitable for TAVI, with no significant calcifications or vessel tortuosity.

Considering the prohibitive surgical risk and suitable anatomy, the Heart Team recommended TAVI as the best treatment strategy. Transcatheter heart valve sizing was determined based on MDCT data and with the ViV digital app. The procedure was performed through right transfemoral access obtained with echo-guided puncture; the right radial artery was used as secondary access for contrast injection. Venous access was unnecessary as rapid pacing was performed using the patient’s permanent pacemaker. A supra-annular Acurate Neo2 self-expanding valve (SEV) (Boston Scientific, MA, USA), size M, was advanced on a Safari pre-shaped 0.035″ wire (Boston Scientific, MA, USA) and successfully deployed 3 mm under the lower edge of the Enable valve. Post-dilatation was performed with 24 mm balloon (Simvalve Force, Simeks, EU) obtaining a good final angiographic result. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a residual mean gradient of 4 mmHg without evidence of paravalvular leak (PVL). The patient showed significant improvement after the procedure and was discharged after 3 days. In consideration of the patient’s high bleeding risk due to advanced age and CKD, and the lack of evidence supporting the use of anticoagulation following ViV procedures, we chose to proceed with single antiplatelet therapy using Aspirin. At 6-month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic and completely satisfied with the procedural result hesitating in an improved functional capacity (NHYA I). Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed good valve performance (Vmax 1.65 m/s, mean gradient 6 mmHg, absence of PVL).