A 24-year-old man with MFS-related cardiovascular complications was admitted to our Internal Medicine Department because of 3 consecutive episodes of acute decompensated HF with reduced ejection fraction (ADHFrEF) from 2014 through 2017. His remaining medical history includes arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia, hyperthyroidism, anaphylactic shock due to flecainide, and previous tabagic habit.

MFS diagnosis was made in 2010 when ascending aorta and aortic valve substitution with mechanical prosthesis were performed due to type A acute aortic dissection in presence of family history—mother, father, and 3 sons with MFS. During intraoperative period, inferior acute coronary syndrome occurred and was treated with coronary artery bypass graft surgery.

On May 2014, mechanical descending aorta and aortic arch prosthesis implantation were performed due to chronic dissecting aneurysm. Peri-aortic hematoma and medullary ischemia complicated surgery and caused lower limb paraplegia, dolorific and thermal hypoesthesia, and rectal incontinence. After 2 months, during his first admission for ADHFrEF, laboratory tests were notable for N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-proBNP) of 12,000 pg/mL and transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal prosthesis function, dilatation of all cardiac chambers (mainly the left ones) with moderate mitral and tricuspid insufficiency, left ventricular hypertrophy, inferior wall akinesis, septal dyskinesis, and hypokinesis of the remaining walls with severe left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) reduction −20%. He was treated with intravenous diuretics and internal cardiac defibrillator (St. Jude Ellipse DR, DDD mode) without cardiac resynchronization therapy (electrocardiogram criteria not met) and discharged on maximal medical therapy (furosemide, carvedilol, ramipril, spironolactone, digoxin, and amlodipine).

New episode of ADHFrEF occurred on august 2017. Notable admission laboratoristic values included NT-proBNP of 2719 pg/mL and midregional-proadrenomedullin (MR-proADM) of 1.61 nmol/L, whereas transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiogram showed an LVEF of 35%, normal prosthesis function, severe tricuspid regurgitation, and rupture of the anterior leaflet of the chordae tendineae with severe mitral regurgitation. Patients were treated yet with intravenous diuretics and digoxin and discharged on optimal medical therapy (furosemide, carvedilol, ramipril, spironolactone, digoxin, and amlodipine).

Lastly, he was readmitted to our Internal Medicine Department on November 2017 due to third episode of ADHFrEF and infected mediastinal fluid collection secondary to 1 month before severe valvular insufficiency surgical correction with mitral mechanical prosthesis implantation (31-mm ST Jude) and De Vega tricuspid annuloplasty.

Physical examination was notable for blood pressure 120/80 mm Hg, pulse 82 bpm, respiratory rate 26 apm, O2 saturation 87% on room air with orthopneic obligatory position, and Marfanoid habitus (weight 147 kg, height 2.2 m). Cardiopulmonary evaluation revealed metallic second heart sound, stony dull percussion with reduced tactile vocal fremitus and crackles at the basis of the lungs, widely diminished vesicular breath sounds, presence of abundant ascites, and leg swelling.

Notable laboratoristic values included NT-proBNP of 10,132 pg/mL and MR-proADM of 2.36 nmoL/mL.

Arterial blood gas analysis revealed severe hypoxemia with respiratory and metabolic alkalosis (pH 7.56, pO2 46 mm Hg, pCO2 24.8 mm Hg, HCO3− 21.9 mmol/L, alveolar-arterial gradient 31 mm Hg). Although electrocardiogram highlighted atrial fibrillation with ventricular rate of 80 bpm, left ventricular hypertrophy, and inferolateral subepicardial ischemia, transthoracic echocardiogram showed the same features as the previous except for LVEF of 30%, presence of mitral mechanical prosthesis, with paravalvular leak and mean gradient of 9 mm Hg, and mild tricuspid insufficiency.


Hilar congestion with cardiomegaly, right upper lobe pulmonary consolidation, and infected mediastinal fluid collection have been shown on chest x-ray and high-resolution computed tomography, respectively.

Patient was treated with intravenous furosemide 250 mg q.d., canrenone 100 mg q.d., piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g q6h, and teicoplanin 12 mg/kg b.i.d., then 12 mg/kg q.d. On day 9, once reaching hemodynamic stabilization, sacubitril/valsartan midrange dose of 49/51 mg b.i.d. has been added to carvedilol 3.125 mg b.i.d., spironolactone 100 mg q.d., furosemide 250 mg q.d., and digoxin 0.25 mg q.d.

On 1-month follow-up sacubitril/valsartan has been increased to 97/103 mg b.i.d. for patient's good clinical condition, allowing persistent and progressive clinical, laboratory (NT-proBNP reduction and MR-proADM increase), echocardiographic-LVEF increase (42% vs 30%), left ventricle end-systolic diameter, left ventricle end-diastolic diameter, left ventricular mass, and left ventricular mass index reduction, and quality of life improvement without new episodes of ADHFrEF until 9-month follow-up (Fig. ​(Fig.1B1B and D; Table ​Table1).1). Because of the lack of a specific dosage regimen for sacubitril/valsartan in MS-related cardiomyopathy, we used the recommended therapeutic scheme.