4-year-old male patient with a history of nasal impetigo two weeks before admission (treated with topical mupirocin and oral cefadroxil; dose, duration and adherence to treatment unknown), with no other morbid history, who presented macroscopic glomerular haematuria associated with oedema of the lower extremities of 5 days' evolution, with the last 12 hours prior to the consultation adding headaches, nausea and vomiting. He went to the emergency department (ED) in convulsive status, after 20 minutes of generalised tonic-clonic convulsions.

On admission to the ED, the patient was afebrile, with non-evaluable blood pressure, with quantitative consciousness impairment associated with generalized hypertonia and bilateral and pretibial oedema. Endotracheal intubation was decided and phenobarbital (10 mg/kg) was administered to manage the convulsive status.

On physical examination in the intensive care unit (ICU), blood pressure was 134/94 mmHg (BP 110 mmHg) (p95 for patient 108/66 mmHg, p95+12 120/78 mmHg).

Initial laboratory parameters included: complete urine with haematuria (> 100 erythrocytes per field), proteinuria 3+ and leucocyturia 10-25 per field, creatinemia 0.3 mg/dL, anaemia with haematocrit (HTO) 21%, haemoglobin (Hb) 7 g/dL, with normal mean corpuscular volume (VCM) and mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration (CHCM), leukocytosis of 23,900 cells/mm3, thrombocytosis of 756,000/mm3, without elevation of acute phase reactants, hypocomplementemia with complement C3 level at 25 mg/dL (normal value, VN: 80-150 mg/dL) and normal C4. The rapid antigen test for Streptococcus beta-haemolytic group A (Streptococcus pyogenes) in pharynx was positive and the Anti-streptolysin O (ASO) was (+). The non-contrast brain computed tomography showed no acute changes. The renal ultrasound concluded bilateral nephromegaly with increased cortical echogenicity and decreased corticomedullar differentiation.

The patient was diagnosed with nephritic syndrome due to complicated GNAPE with hypertensive emergency - convulsive status.

Within the first 24 hours of his ICU stay, the patient required mechanical ventilation (MV) and anticonvulsant therapy with phenobarbital. He progressed without seizures, with a normal electroencephalogram (EEG) (on the day following admission) and a normal cerebrospinal fluid study. Antibiotic therapy was initiated for eradication of Streptococcus pyogenes with cefotaxime and diuretic therapy with furosemide.

The next day, he developed renal impairment with creatinine elevation to 0.99 mg/dL, hypertension and 24 hour proteinuria of 36.6 mg/m2/h, without oliguria. He initiated antihypertensive therapy with amlodipine and intravenous labetalol, with good initial control.

With favorable evolution, extubation was performed at 48 hours, which was well tolerated from the ventilatory point of view. However, after 24 hours of extubation, the patient's consciousness deteriorated, with both ocular opening and withdrawal of limb only in response to painful stimulus and poor verbal response (Glasgow Coma Scale 8), and developed blood pressure figures > p95+12 despite receiving therapy with labetalol in continuous infusion (up to 3 mg/kg/h), amlodipine (10 mg/day) and furosemide, which required the reintroduction of mechanical ventilation and infusion of sodium nitroprusside (up to 3 mcg/kg/min), with the aim of achieving gradual reduction of blood pressure figures (25% daily) to prevent secondary neurological damage. Given the presence of acute neurological symptomatology associated with HTA in a patient with glomerulonephritis, the diagnosis of PRES was suspected, which was confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain (day 5), which showed an increase in the subcortical signal in bilateral and symmetric occipital region, without restriction in diffusion, which was compatible with vasogenic edema (PRES). Ophthalmological evaluation was normal and a new EEG evidenced occasional episodes of generalized voltage depression.

Adding enalapril to the treatment. Finally, after 10 days with a slow pharmacological weaning, normalization of blood pressure was achieved. The control MRI (day 12) revealed regression of the previously described findings. Successful extubation was achieved after 5 days.

During his stay in the ICU, the hemoglobin level dropped to 5 g/dL, with normal mean corpuscular volume and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration, without plateletopenia, so hemolytic anemia was suspected given a positive direct Coombs test and hemoglobinuria. He required red blood cell transfusions twice. Steroid therapy with methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/d) was initiated for 72 hours. The coproculture was negative, as was the urinary antigen for Streptococcus pneumoniae. Epstein-Barr virus and Parvovirus B19 serology, extractable nuclear antigen (ENA) profile, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), anti-DNA antibodies, anti-B2 glycoprotein 1 antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies and lupus anticoagulant were all negative. All cultures were negative (blood cultures, urine cultures, cultures of endotracheal aspirate and pharyngeal cultures). ANA (antinuclear antibodies) was positive 1/160.

The patient improved with blood pressure normalization, increased complement levels, and a urine test without proteinuria or hematuria. The direct Coombs test remained positive on the 9th day of hospitalization.

On day 31, the patient was discharged normotensive, without anaemia, with preserved renal function, without proteinuria or haematuria, with normalisation of C3 levels and asymptomatic from the neurological point of view. He was discharged with pharmacological therapy with prednisone, amlodipine, enalapril and folic acid. The patient did not present recurrence and remained asymptomatic 6 months after discharge.
