A 51-year-old inpatient man was referred to the Oral Medicine Department of Hasan Sadikin Bandung Hospital with difficulty swallowing due to a sore throat and dry mouth last week. The patient could not taste the food. He also complained of fever, weakness accompanied by cold sweat, blurred vision, weak extremities, itchy skin, redness, and body swelling. He was diagnosed with chronic adrenal insufficiency, severe psoriasis vulgaris with psoriatic arthritis, acute circulatory collapse, anemia of inflammation (AI), acute kidney injury (AKI) stage III, dehydration, gastritis related to drugs (methotrexate and cyclosporine), urinary tract infections, and malnutrition by the Dermatovenereology Department and the Internal Medicine Department. He was given 0.9% NaCl, ceftriaxone, omeprazole, metoclopramide, methotrexate, cetirizine, loratadine, folic acid, calcium, albumin, 5% dextrose, chlorpheniramine maleate, cefadroxil, and paracetamol.

According to his medical history, he has complained of reddish, scaly, itchy patches on his skin with a burning sensation on the scalp, nape, and knees since 15 years ago. He was diagnosed with psoriasis vulgaris by the Dermatovenereology Department and was treated with methylprednisolone. After the complaints of itching and redness on the skin subsided, he bought it himself and took the drug for 15 years without doctor monitoring. Four months before his hospitalization, he stopped taking medication on his own. He reported no history of other systemic diseases, such as hypertension or diabetes mellitus. He has no family history of having the same complaint. He denied a history of allergies to food, drugs, or other allergens.

The physical examination revealed a general state: looks moderately ill; consciousness: compos mentis; weight: 63 kg; height: 167 cm; blood pressure: 110/70 mmHg; pulse: 80 times/minute; respiration: 20 times/minute; body temperature: 36.5°C. Extra-oral examination revealed dry, scaly skin all over the body. He had joint stiffness. His face looked symmetrical, and the skin was scally, dry, and reddish. The conjunctiva was anemic, and the sclera was non-icteric. The lips were dry and peeling, and there were painful fissures at both corners of the lips. The nails appeared thickened with a ragged texture. The submandibular and submental lymph nodes showed no abnormalities.

Intraoral examination revealed dryness and a glassy appearance of the oral mucosa, and the mouth mirror was adherent to the buccal mucosa. The palate had a glassy appearance and was free of debris. The tongue was erythematous, depapillated, and lobulated; two-thirds of the anterior dorsal tongue had shallow longitudinal fissures, and the mouth mirror stuck to the dorsal tongue. The ventral tongue appeared glassy. There was no saliva pooling on the floor of the mouth. Plaque and calculus were present in all regions. A serological examination may be seen in Table 1. Based on anamnesis and clinical examinations, he was diagnosed with severe xerostomia (a score of 8 according to the Challacombe scale and a score of 17 according to the Indonesian Summated Xerostomia Inventory (SXI-ID) questionnaire), a fissured tongue, exfoliative cheilitis, angular cheilitis, and generalized chronic marginal gingivitis.

The oral management of the patient was to apply a thin layer of petroleum jelly on the lips three times a day for exfoliative cheilitis, gargle with chlorine dioxide mouthwash three times a day for xerostomia, apply 2% miconazole cream two times a day for angular cheilitis, and suck benzydamine HCl lozenges three times a day for painful swallows. On the fifth day of his hospitalization, the patient developed respiratory distress and was diagnosed with hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP). On the sixth day of his hospitalization, he had decreased consciousness, and his condition deteriorated. The patient’s family refused to have him intubated and transferred him to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), and the patient passed away.