39-year-old male with no significant history. He presented with a non-severe COVID-19 infection in August 2021, receiving the following corticosteroid regimen for 10 days: dexamethasone 8 mg intramuscular every 24 hours + deflazacort 6 mg orally every 12 hours for the first six days. The total corticosteroid doses received by the patient were as follows: 80 mg dexamethasone + 72 mg deflazacort = 560 mg prednisone/560 mg prednisolone over a 10-day period. During a seven-month period since the diagnosis of COVID-19, the patient presented with 10/10 left-dominant coxalgia on the visual analogue scale (VAS), which increased progressively, limiting the range of motion of the hip and making it difficult to walk.

After the physical examination, we found claudicatio intermittens in the left lower limb; flexion of 45o, abduction of 30o, extension of 20o, external and internal rotation of 15o. A posterior-anterior radiograph of the pelvis was requested as an initial study, which showed loss of the sphericity of the left femoral head, as well as geodes and a crescent-shaped sclerotic image. Magnetic resonance arthrography was performed, which showed collapse of the left femoral head, both hips with diffuse hyperintensity zones and a crescent-shaped image in the left hip. After the radiographic findings and the significant limitation of mobility for the development of daily activities, a total replacement of the left hip was proposed and performed through a posterior-lateral approach. During the surgical event, the femoral head was observed macroscopically, which showed areas of bone necrosis and geodes inside. As for the articular components, non-cemented components were used as described below: acetabular cup #54 (G7 ZimmerBiomet), short stem #4 (Taperloc Microplasty ZimmerBiomet), ceramic head #36 ± 0 mm and Liner 54/36 UHXLP. During the postoperative period, he walked without incident and began walking with a walker 12 hours after surgery, with a decrease in left hip pain to 2/10 on the visual analogue scale (VAS), as well as a significant improvement in mobility arcs.
