44-year-old male with a history of bilateral carpal tunnel surgery and no other relevant history. He consulted for progressive dyspnoea up to functional class III for months, with oedema in the lower limbs, weight gain and episodes of dizziness with a single syncope. On physical examination, he presented a tendency to hypotension (90/60 mmHg), with the rest of the vital signs preserved, good mechanical ventilation with crepitant rales in both pulmonary bases, oedema in the lower limbs 3/6 with a positive Godet, and a marked decrease in the ability to open the mouth. The electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm of 75 beats per minute with an electrical axis deviated to the left, the presence of a right bundle branch block with microvoltage in the derivations of the limbs. The chest X-ray showed a cardiothoracic index at the upper limit of normal with signs of redistribution of flow to the upper pulmonary fields and the presence of a moderate right pleural effusion. In the laboratory, a normal creatinine value of 1 mg/dl was observed, and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (pro BNP) of 3500 pg/ml (for a normal value adjusted to age of up to 210 pg/ml). A Doppler echocardiogram was performed, where a diffuse increase in the thickness of the parietal walls (septal thickness 1.93 cm, posterior wall 1.7 cm) and of the ventricular mass was observed, with hypokinesia of the basal and middle ventricular segments with mild impairment of the ejection fraction (51.7%). The global longitudinal strain technique, which measures the strain in the direction of the base-tip of the ventricular cavity and is considered more sensitive than the ejection fraction, was -10.5% (normal value considered between -18 and -22%; lower values suggest poor myocardial deformation). In addition, a marked apical-basal gradient was observed, a characteristic pattern of cardiac amyloidosis. He did not have significant left-sided valvular pathologies. In the right ventricle, a slight deterioration of the function of the systolic function was observed, with an increase in the thickness of the free wall, without signs of pulmonary hypertension. The picture was interpreted as IC and good initial response to diuretics was indicated. With the suspicion of infiltrative disease, a bone scan with pyrophosphate and free light chains in serum was requested. The bone scan had a visual Perugini score of 1, not suggestive of transretin amyloidosis. The free light chains were 163 mg/dl (normal range between 5.7 and 26.3 mg/dl) and the kappa free chains were 8 mg/dl (normal range between 3.3 and 19.4 mg/dl) with a kappa/lambda ratio of less than 0.26, for values considered normal between 0.26 and 1.65. In serum immunoelectrophoresis, a monoclonal component of the lambda type was found. A bone scan with contrast was also performed, where a similar ejection fraction to the echocardiogram was observed, with late gadolinium enhancement of the subendocardium diffused, with cancellation of the blood pool. With these results, a gum biopsy was performed, which confirmed the diagnosis of AL amyloidosis. After the confirmation of the diagnosis, treatment with cyclophosphamide, bortezomib and dexamethasone (CYBORD scheme) and Daratumumab was immediately started. After the third cycle, he had a similar ejection fraction to the previous one. After a complex multidisciplinary evaluation, he was admitted to the emergency cardiac transplant list. One month after the diagnosis of the disease, he had the possibility of receiving the same with good evolution. This allowed him to restart a suppressive chemotherapy with good tolerance after 3 months of receiving the transplant, with a requirement for intravenous infusion of continuous and inotropic drugs. The echocardiogram was repeated, showing a similar ejection fraction to the previous one. After a complex multidisciplinary evaluation, he was admitted to the emergency cardiac transplant list. He had a good evolution without new admissions.
