A 60-year-old man with a history of bilateral laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK) presented to the emergency department via ambulance immediately upon sustaining severe penetrating trauma to his right orbit. The patient was riding his bicycle when he rode over a rock, lost balance, and impaled his right orbit on the bicycle’s metal handlebar; he then pulled his head back and found that his right globe was dislodged anteriorly from the orbit. He did not lose consciousness but experienced significant nausea and vomiting. On examination in the emergency department, the patient had no light perception (NLP) in the right eye. The right pupil was nonreactive, and there was an afferent pupillary defect by reverse. The patient had a full-thickness horizontal right upper eyelid and canalicular laceration extending along the lid crease from the medial canthus to a few millimeters shy of the lateral canthus. The right globe was totally avulsed through this laceration and rotated nasally with apparent transection of the optic nerve and extraocular muscles. Orbital soft tissue was also prolapsed through this laceration. There was additionally a short full-thickness horizontal right upper eyelid laceration just superior to the lid margin as well as a superficial vertical laceration of the nasal bridge at the level of the eyebrows. Examination of the left eye was normal.
The patient was taken to the operating room by the ophthalmology service for urgent surgical exploration and repair by the attending oculofacial plastic surgeon. The optic nerve and all extraocular muscles were confirmed to have been completely transected. The avulsed globe was attached to the intraorbital contents by a thin band of connective tissue. Given the patient’s NLP vision in the right eye on presentation, the fact that the initial penetrating trauma had induced a near-total enucleation, and the concern for phthisis bulbi and necrosis if the nonviable globe was repositioned within the orbit, enucleation was completed intraoperatively. The right upper eyelid canalicular laceration was repaired, and a bicanalicular Crawford stent was inserted and sutured to the nasal mucosa. The transected levator palpebrae superioris muscle was then repaired. A plastic conformer was placed to prevent forniceal shrinkage. Skin was reapproximated using a combination of simple interrupted and running sutures. The patient healed well and had a smooth postoperative course.