The patient, a 56-year-old female, was admitted for “10+days of right eye droop and 1 day of aggravation”. 10+days ago, the patient had no obvious inducement of right eye face droop without limb movement restriction, accompanied by right parietal and occipital pain, no nausea, vomiting, dizziness, walking unsteadily, feeling of cotton stepping, no slurred words, no choking or coughing of drinking water. The patient was treated outside the hospital, and improved relevant examinations to consider the diagnosis of “cerebral aneurysm”. 1+days ago, the patient’s right eye droop was aggravated, so she went to the neurosurgery department of our hospital. History of previous diseases: No history of hypertension, diabetes, family history of aneurysms, respiratory or neurological diseases. Physical examination after admission: the patient’s vital signs were stable, and her mind was clear. The left pupil, with a diameter of about 3mm, is sensitive to light reflection; the right pupil, with a diameter of about 5mm, is slow to light reflection; the right eye has a drooping face; the right eye has limited eye movement; the right eye has decreased vision; the left eye has no obvious abnormality in vision and eye movement; the limbs have normal muscle strength and muscle tension; the bilateral pathological signs are negative; the meningeal stimulation sign is positive; and the spine is bent. After admission, 3D reconstruction and enhanced scanning of CT head vessels showed that the end of C7 segment of the right internal carotid artery was swollen and two saccular processes with a length of about 0.4 cm were seen, which were multiple aneurysms with daughter aneurysms. Diagnosis after admission: 1. C6 aneurysm of the right internal carotid artery 2. Ophthalmoplegia of the right side 3. Anesthesia and surgical procedure: sevoflurane was given to retain spontaneous respiration induction and after successful tracheal intubation with visual laryngoscope, the mechanical ventilation was normal. Subsequently, craniotomy aneurysm clipping was successful performed. During the 3.6-hour surgery, 3200mL liquid (1600mL crystal and 1300mL of colloid) was input, 1700mL of urine was urinated, and 200mL of blood was bled. The last blood gas analysis (FiO2 50%) during the operation showed that pH was 7.45, PaCO2 was 40.3mmHg, PaO2 was 212.7mmHg, Na was 137.9mmol/L, K was 3.24 mmol/L, and Ca was 1.0mmol/L. After the operation, the patient was transferred to the small recovery room with a tube. SpO2 99%, BP 100/50 mmHg, HR 68 bpm, EtCO2 32 mmHg at the time of admission. One hour after entering the anesthesia recovery room, the patient recovered from spontaneous breathing, but the tidal volume was low, about 90mL. Half an hour later, the patient developed dyspnea in the inspiratory phase, severe triple concave sign, and mild blood liquid ejected from the endotracheal tube. SpO2 96%, BP 110/70 mmHg, HR 58 bpm, EtCO2 48mmHg were immediately aspirated into the trachea, sucking out a large amount of pink foam liquid, with manual ventilation conducted, and the airway resistance was high (35cm/H2O). The tidal volume is about 60mL. Confirm the catheter and withdraw the tracheal catheter to 16cm, yet the airway resistance is not significantly improved. The fiberoptic bronchoscope showed that the left and right main bronchi were edematous, the lumens were narrowed, and there was fluid exudation inside. After anti heart failure treatment, they retained the tracheal catheter and sent it to the intensive care unit for further symptomatic support treatment. They provides patients with diuretic, hormonal, anti infective, and invasive ventilator treatments. Fiber bronchoscopy examination showed that edema of left and right main bronchi basically disappeared. Eight hours later, they pulled out the trachea catheter and separated from the ventilator. The symptoms were relieved on the fifth day after surgery and they were discharged from the hospital. Three months after discharge, they recovered well after follow-up.