A 36-year-old previously healthy female was stung once by an unknown Hymenoptera that resulted in local swelling and erythema at dorsum of her right hand. Spiking fever started within 6 hours despite sting site gradually became unidentifiable. She visited a local clinic where oral steroid (prednisolone 20 mg/day) and antibiotics were prescribed. She came to our emergency department 3 days later for persistent on-and-off fever. She presented with high temperature (38.9°C), tachycardia, and hypotension (blood pressure 80/52 mmHg) at triage. Electrocardiography showed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular rate around 130 beats per minute and diffuse ST elevation. Chest radiography showed normal cardiothoracic ratio without signs of infiltrates or congestion. Hemogram did not show eosinophilia, leukocytosis, leukopenia, or left shift. MB isoenzyme of creatinine kinase (CK-MB) and cardiac troponin-I elevated to 96.0 ng/mL and 8.0 ng/mL, respectively. C-reactive protein was 10.5 mg/L and procalcitonin was 0.32 ng/mL. NT-proBNP was 20 700 pg/mL. Echocardiography showed global hypokinesia of left ventricle with an ejection fraction of 30.6%, and no pericardial effusion. Emergent cardiac catheterization did not reveal coronary artery lesions or vasospasm. Intra-aortic balloon pumping was inserted during the procedure for cardiogenic shock. Hypotension progressed accompanied with ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation, then in-hospital cardiac arrest followed. Manual cardiopulmonary resuscitation was unsuccessful for 25 minutes and percutaneous cardiopulmonary support (PCPS, CAPIOX® Centrifugal Pump Controller SP-200, Terumo) was used. Spontaneous circulation was established 25 minutes later with full recovery of consciousness.

Rapid influenza antigen test (Directigen EZ Flu A+B test; BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA), sputum cultures, blood cultures, and serology tests for respiratory viruses sampled at admission were all negative. On hospital day 2, serum levels of CK-MB and troponin-I peaked at >303 ng/mL and >81 ng/mL, respectively. Follow-up echocardiography 24 hours after initiation of PCPS showed deteriorated left ventricular function, persistent closure of aortic valves and intra-cardiac thrombi in both left atrium and left ventricle, about 24 hours after initiation of mechanical support. On day 3, shock progressed with multi-organ failure. Continuous venovenous hemodialysis was applied due to metabolic acidosis and oliguria. On day 4, right ventricular function also became seriously depressed and electric activity of heart gradually disappeared. PCPS was therefore shifted to bi-ventricular mechanical supports via cannulations to right atrium, pulmonary trunk, apex of left ventricle, and ascending aorta. Both systems were established using MEDTRONIC Affinity CP Centrifugal blood pumps. Due to pulmonary hemorrhage with severe consolidation of bilateral lungs, a membrane oxygenator was used to achieve adequate oxygenation. Blood flow rate was set at 3.5 L/minute that could maintain mean arterial blood pressure at around 65 mmHg. Endomyocardial biopsy of left ventricle was performed and pathology revealed significant inflammation composed of mainly lymphocytes and some eosinophils. Myocyte damage with necrosis was present but not extensive. In terms of ventilator settings, driving pressure and plateau pressure were set at around 15 and 30 cmH2O respectively for lung protection. Fiber bronchoscopy was used repeatedly to remove obstructing blood clots in the major airway. On hospital day 13, electric activity of the patient’s heart remained absent, and both blood pumps were shifted to Levitronix Centri-Mag (Levitronix LLC, Waltham, MA, USA) ventricular assist systems for better support. The patient was transferred to a transplant center and registered as a candidate for heart transplantation. On day 14 another cannula was inserted into the left common femoral vein for inflow augmentation of right VAD. From day 14 to day 48, the patient suffered from episodes of massive bleeding from the mediastinum and vagina, sternum wound infection with abscess formation, pressure sore infections, and progressive hyperbilirubinemia. Her condition stabilized after debridement, surgical hemostasis, and strong antibiotics use. She underwent 5 courses of therapeutic plasma exchange to prevent antibody mediated rejection and received orthotopic heart transplantation on day 49. Pathologic study of the patient’s heart showed pancarditis of both ventricles and no specific change of the 3 coronary arteries. VA ECMO was kept till day 58 for post-operative heart failure. Repeated endomyocardial biopsy after transplantation showed no evidence of cellular or humoral rejection. She experienced episodes of septic shock under immunosuppression thereafter and received exploratory laparoscopy and appendectomy on day 93. Extubation was performed on day 96 and she was discharged on day 101. She remained clinically stable at 3-month follow-up.