History of Presentation
A 77-year-old man presented to the emergency department with angina that had started 24 hours prior. His electrocardiogram was unremarkable, and laboratory tests showed a mild elevation in cardiac troponin I (3.72 ng/mL).

Past Medical History
His medical history was notable for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diverticulitis, and significant coronary artery disease, for which he had previously undergone quadruple coronary artery bypass surgery. One month earlier, he was admitted with unstable angina and underwent coronary angiography, which revealed patency in 3 of his 4 grafts, except for an occluded vein graft to the second obtuse marginal (OM2). PCI was performed on the native coronary artery, and 3 drug-eluting stents (DES) were placed in the proximal left circumflex (LCx) artery extending into the OM2. This procedure was complicated by a coronary artery perforation, necessitating the placement of a covered stent (Papyrus 20 × 3.5 mm, Biotronik) in the proximal segment of the LCx. Notably, the covered stent was optimized using intravascular imaging. The patient had a prolonged hospital course with pericarditis and atrial fibrillation (no significant pericardial effusion on serial transthoracic echocardiograms [TTE]) but was discharged without resuming anticoagulation, with a plan to start this as an outpatient.

Investigations
Upon evaluation in the emergency department, a TTE demonstrated normal left ventricular function with basal inferior wall akinesis, moderate mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, and a hypoechoic, well-circumscribed mass in the posterior atrioventricular groove that could not be clearly interpreted. Given the resolution of symptoms and negative preliminary test findings, computed tomographic angiography was performed, revealing a 39 × 29 mm PSA of the proximal-to-distal segments of the LCx, just distal to the recently placed covered stent.

Management
A heart team discussion deemed the patient to be at too high a risk for surgical intervention, leading to the planning for PSA closure. A 6-F right femoral access was obtained, and an EBU 3.5 guide catheter was used to engage the left main artery. A Hi-Torque Wiggle wire (Abbott) was used to navigate the LCx. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) was performed to identify the origin of the PSA. Subsequently, a PK Papyrus covered stent, 3.5 × 26 mm (Biotronik), was implanted within the LCx-OM2. After dilation with a 3.5-mm distally and 4.0-mm proximally noncompliant balloon, final IVUS and angiography confirmed successful sealing of the PSA, resulting in TIMI flow grade 3 to the distal vessel.

Outcome and Follow-Up
The patient was discharged the following day with instructions to continue dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel. At the 6-month follow-up visit, the patient remained asymptomatic. Dual antiplatelet therapy was discontinued in favor of a direct oral anticoagulant because of his history of atrial fibrillation. Repeated TTE showed no significant changes.