A 5-year-old presented to the paediatric emergency department (ED) having ingested chlorpyriphos 13 hours prior to presentation, followed by abnormal jerks, fast breathing and difficulty with breathing. The history was also comprised of excessive sweating and urination, mouth secretions and involuntary movement of the limbs. Vomiting followed the ingestion of crushed charcoal and palm oil. The patient had lapsed into coma prior to presentation. The temperature at presentation was 38.3°C, Glasgow coma score was 3, pupils were pinpoint pupils and there was hypotonia in all limbs. In addition, the patient was severely dyspneic, tachypneic (respiratory rate of 48/minute with intermittent sighing breaths), a saturation of 88% and widespread crackles. The pulse rate was 180/minute, blood pressure 120/80 mmHg, and random blood glucose 14 mg/dl. Serum lactate and cholinesterase tests were not done due to lack of facilities.

The patient was diagnosed with severe organophosphate poisoning (OPP) and aspiration pneumonitis. As ICU care was beyond the affordability of the parents, non-invasive ventilation (NIV) was administered using bubble continuous positive airway pressure (b-CPAP) causing his saturation to increase to 99%–100%. Hypoglycemia was corrected with a bolus of dextrose solution and tachycardia was treated with 20 ml/kg of normal saline. Intravenous Dexamethasone, Mannitol and IV Atropine at 0.02 mg/kg/dose were also administered. Empirical intravenous antibiotics were administered for aspiration pneumonitis. Pralidoxime was not given due to unavailability. Within 3 hours of presentation, the patient had fresh-whole-blood exchange-blood-transfusion (FWB-EBT) with 500mls of blood.

The patient’s GCS appreciated to 9/15 but IV Atropine was discontinued after the first dose due to a rapid increase in the heart rate. The blood glucose fluctuated between 41 to 259 mg/dl in the first 15 hours of admission and subsequently normalized with treatment. By the second day on admission, the patient developed thready pulses and hypotension for which another bolus of normal saline was administered. Dopamine infusion was commenced at 5mcg/kg/min using a peripheral vein and IV Mannitol discontinued. A second aliquot of FWB-EBT was administered with 500mls of blood.

Over the first 30 hours of admission, the consciousness level improved and respiratory distress slowly declined. However, the patient developed rhonchi which was treated with nebulized Salbutamol and Budesonide and was subsequently transited to Oxygen therapy with nasal prongs with clinical improvement. The saturation remained stable at 97%. On Day 2 of admission, a chest radiograph was done which showed bilateral infiltrates in keeping with pneumonia.

The patient regained full consciousness by the 39th hour of admission. Intravenous Vitamin C and B, as well as oral Vitamin E and Zinc were commenced for their antioxidant effects, and regular diet was recommenced in a graded manner over the subsequent 48 hours. The patient’s clinical condition progressively improved and was discharged home after 10 days but was subsequently lost to follow-up.