A 26-year-old woman who was 14 weeks pregnant visited our hospital complaining of chest pain while in the left lateral decubitus position. Her medical history was unremarkable, and this was her first pregnancy. Her mother had been diagnosed with no pericardium, but she was both asymptomatic and untreated.

The patient’s physical examination was normal. However, chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly with a cardiothoracic ratio of 65%, the cardiac silhouette was shifted to the left side, and the pulmonary artery was enlarged. An electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm and incomplete bundle branch block. Laboratory tests revealed no abnormal findings. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a ‘teardrop-shaped’ left ventricle and paradoxical motion of the interventricular septum on the parasternal view. The apical four-chamber view revealed compression of the middle of both ventricles. In cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, a bulging of the apex was apparent that was markedly accentuated when the patient was in the left lateral position. Although the imaging did not directly confirm the presence of the pericardium, the change in cardiac shadows during postural changes suggested a diagnosis of pericardial agenesis.

ur patient continued her pregnancy while avoiding the left lateral position. After 31 weeks of pregnancy, she was hospitalized to allow careful monitoring of her condition. Several meetings including members of the obstetrics, cardiology, cardiovascular surgery, and anaesthesiology departments were held to discuss her treatment plan. In addition to the pericardial defect, the pelvic position of the foetus made treatment decisions difficult. Two options were considered: caesarean section and external rotation followed by vaginal delivery. However, the pressure of external rotation risked inducing cardiac herniation. Thus, after further discussion, caesarean section was scheduled at 37 weeks of pregnancy, as foetal lung development would be completed around 34–35 weeks. However, at 34 weeks of pregnancy, the patient developed sudden, intermittent chest pain when in a supine position. An electrocardiogram taken at that time revealed negative T-waves in leads II and V3–V6. One hour after the test, her chest pain improved, and the negative T-waves disappeared. According to the European Society of Cardiology acute coronary syndrome (ACS) guidelines, the working diagnosis was non-ST elevation ACS (NSTE-ACS), based on the worsening chest symptoms, ST segment depression, and the absence of an elevated troponin level, which would have suggested unstable angina. Emergency cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was performed but it did not provide direct evidence of myocardial ischaemia, such as the myocardial oedema seen in black-blood T2-weighted images, or the wall motion abnormalities of the left ventricle seen in cine magnetic resonance images. Rather, the enlarged uterus had lifted the diaphragm and pushed the heart upward. It was assumed that the heart was strangulated in the pericardial defect. A continuation of the pregnancy would thus have been difficult, and an emergency caesarean section was successfully performed. Since the chest pain did not occur during pregnancy as long as the patient avoided the left lateral position and was caused by external mechanical compression, pharmacological treatment, including calcium antagonists and antithrombotic therapy, was not administered. Thereafter, she no longer had chest symptoms due to myocardial ischaemia, and a week later, she was able to leave the hospital. Her baby had no disabilities and developed normally. However, 6 months after delivery, she experienced brief chest pains when carrying her baby. Because she wanted a second child, she decided to undergo cardiac surgery before the next pregnancy. Additional imaging studies were performed for preoperative evaluation. Computed tomography showed lung tissue between the aorta and pulmonary artery. Coronary angiography showed no significant stenosis whereas left ventriculography revealed left ventricular enlargement and apex drooping. A year after delivery, cardiac surgery was performed to address the pericardial agenesis. The intraoperative findings showed that the left pericardium was absent. Additionally, an edge of the right pericardium was sclerotic and located on the inferior surface of the heart. The myocardial ischaemia was suspected to have been caused by compression of the right coronary artery by this sclerotic edge. Based on these findings, the final diagnosis was hemi-pericardial agenesis with a sclerotic edge of the right pericardium. During cardiac surgery, this edge was removed, the diaphragmatic and anterior surfaces of the heart were covered with Gore-Tex, and surgery was completed. There was no recurrence of the chest symptoms after surgery or in her daily life. One year after surgery, she became pregnant with her second child. She had no chest symptoms during her second pregnancy and safely gave birth to the child.

