A 60-year-old man who came to the Padjadjaran University Dental Hospital complained of a lump on the tongue two months prior, which was painless and often accompanied by bleeding when consuming acidic foods or drinks. The complaint was followed by abdominal discomfort, difficulty defecating, weight loss, and decreased appetite. The patient had eaten only porridge and lacked water intake for the past two months. The general condition of the patient at the first visit appeared weak and pale with normal vital signs.

Extraoral examination revealed anemic conjunctiva and icteric sclera. Intraoral examination showed multiple and branching fissures on the median dorsum of the tongue; multiple depapillation scattered on the anterior third of the tongue dorsum surface resembling islands with hyperkeratotic edges; and hematoma on the posterior one-third of the tongue dorsum, blackish red in color, irregular shape, negative diascopy test. The diagnoses of tongue lesions were fissured tongue, geographic tongue, suspected syphilitic ulcer, suspected oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), and suspected oral hematoma.

Referrals for routine hematology, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL), Treponema Pallidum Hemagglutination Assay (TPHA), and total Immunoglobulin-E (Ig-E) were performed. Serologic examination of VDRL, TPHA, and total Ig-E was conducted to exclude the differential diagnosis of bleeding lesions of the tongue. Based on the laboratory examination results, the diagnosis of bleeding lesions on the tongue was oral hematoma.

Case Management
Pharmacological therapy in the first visit included anti-fibrinolytic agents and hematinic supplements for one week, and non-pharmacological therapy consisted of instructions to maintain oral hygiene, a healthy lifestyle, and avoid trauma factors that trigger bleeding. A referral to the internal medicine department and oral surgery were given to the patient for follow-up on tongue lesions.

Instructions to consult the internal medicine department were given, and the patient was immediately given a blood transfusion and scheduled for an excisional biopsy of the tongue lesion. The excision biopsy was performed by an oral surgeon to be analyzed by the anatomical pathology department. The results of the histopathological-anatomical examination showed sub-epithelial fibro collagenous connective tissue and muscular fibers with mononuclear and polymorphonuclear inflammatory cells so that the lesion was impressed as granulation tissue by nonspecific infection without signs of malignancy.

The tongue lesion improved during the follow-up appointment at the oral medicine department. The complaint of a lump on the tongue that bleeds easily has disappeared, and the patient is now more comfortable eating. Difficulty in defecation was no longer felt. A healthy lifestyle is implemented by regularly eating vegetables and drinking enough mineral water, but the patient consumes fruit and red meat infrequently. The general condition of the patient seems healthy and has experienced an increased body weight of five kilograms. Anemia condition has shown improvement, as shown by the patient being able to perform blood donation, with a hemoglobin value at that time of 12.8 g/dL.

Extraoral examination revealed non-anemic conjunctiva and icteric sclera. Intraoral examination still showed multiple and branching fissures on the median dorsum of the tongue, as well as a map-like appearance with filiform papillae atrophy. The oral hematoma was healed, and the diagnosis at this visit was a fissured tongue and geographic tongue.

Pharmacological therapy such as a folic acid supplement of 400 µg once a day and vitamin B12 twice a day were given at this visit as supportive therapy for geographic tongue lesions. Instructions to continue a balanced lifestyle and maintain oral hygiene were given as non-pharmacologic therapy. The patient was also educated about the condition of the fissured and geographic tongue is a normal variation of the oral cavity that is not dangerous.