31-year-old male, involved in a high-energy traffic accident (50 km/h), driving a motorcycle. The patient was a hospital trauma surgeon and had no relevant medical history or previous injuries to the ankle. Initially evaluated by a multidisciplinary medical team in the emergency department who ruled out thoracoabdominal injuries after the examination and blood analysis and radiographs of the chest, pelvis and spine. During the secondary evaluation of the patient, the affected limb was examined and radiographs of the ankle were performed. He presented moderate swelling and soft tissue haematoma at the medial and lateral aspect of the ankle. During the physical examination, the patient presented pain and impotency with any mobilisation. No instability was detected during the ligament examination. The radiographs of the ankle did not show acute bone injuries. The clinical case was classified as a sprain of the ankle and anti-inflammatory pharmacological therapy, cryotherapy and semi-compressive elastic bandage was indicated. The patient was authorised to bear weight on the affected limb. No suspicion of posterior tibial tendon rupture was detected and this injury was not noticed. After the improvement of soft tissue swelling, the patient performed self-examination of the ankle by palpating the mobile tubular structure at the medial aspect of the ankle and pain when attempting inversion of the foot. He returned to the emergency department and an MRI was indicated to extend the study. The MRI image showed an avulsion of the flexor retinaculum with posterior tibial tendon rupture associated with partial rupture of the deltoid ligament, complete rupture of the peroneal-astragalus ligament. The anterior aspect of the deltoid ligament was not reduced with the neutral position of the ankle. The flexor retinaculum was sutured with double sutures of resorbable material, reinsertion of the posterior region of the deltoid ligament and fascial tissue with two tapes and two 3.5 mm metallic arpons. In addition, reinsertion of the anterior region of the deltoid ligament was performed with a Mason Allen type suture with tape and a 3.5 mm metallic arpons. After the stability of the tendon was verified, the ankle was immobilised for three weeks to protect the repair of the flexor retinaculum with a double supracondylar plaster cast. After the operation, the patient was able to bear weight on the affected limb with a double supracondylar plaster cast for one month. After this time, partial weight bearing was initiated. The patient was able to walk with a rigid orthosis and daily rehabilitation sessions with magnetotherapy at home. One month after the operation, the patient did not have pain during walking with partial weight bearing with a rigid orthosis. Six weeks after the operation, the patient was able to bear weight with no need for orthesis or canes, with good tolerance. Two months after the start of rehabilitation, the patient presented a deficit of 10° for plantar flexion (50°) and a 5° deficit for dorsiflexion with respect to the contralateral ankle (30°) without presenting deficits in other ranges of movement. Three months after the operation, the patient was able to walk in a toe-off position and started sports activities prior to the trauma. The functional result according to the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) scale for the hindfoot and ankle is 97 points out of 100, so we can consider a good postoperative functional result.
