A 4-month-old male infant, after an uncomplicated pregnancy and delivery, weighed 3000 g at birth; there were no complications during pregnancy and no family history. The infant had symptoms of mild respiratory distress for 2 months, without fever or cough. He was diagnosed with patent foramen ovale by echocardiography at the primary hospital and received no treatments. Later, the symptoms were aggravated, and his parents sought care, again at the primary hospital, 9 days later. Ultrasonography of the abdomen showed features suggestive of hemangioendothelioma of liver. The hospital suggested that to the infant should be transferred to our hospital for treatment.

Examination revealed an irritable infant with cough, fever, breathlessness and cyanosis; the infant weighed 6.8 kg and was in respiratory distress with a relative ratio of approximately 130/min. The infant had multiple skin hemangiomas of varying sizes on the head, neck, right index finger, and right shank. His physical examination was remarkable for bilateral wheezy phlegm in both lung bases. The physical examination showed enlarged cardiac dullness, but there were no significant heart murmurs. Abdominal distention was noted. The liver was soft and located 8 cm below the costal margin at the right mid-clavicular line.

Echocardiography showed right atrial and right ventricular dilatation with a thickened right ventricular anterior wall and interventricular septum. The normal structure of the cardiac chamber and continuous atrioventricular septum were observed. The infant was diagnosed as having severe pulmonary artery hypertension with mild tricuspid regurgitation and trivial mitral regurgitation. Ultrasonography of the abdomen showed densely hypodense lesions, increased volume of liver lobes, with a clear boundary and a maximum diameter of 4.1 cm. The liver lobes had a heterogeneous internal echo and enhanced peripheral echo. Visible blood vessels were observed in the hypodense lesions. There were only a few normal liver parenchymas.

A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed an enlarged, irregularly shaped liver with multiple low-density intrahepatic masses, and its CT value was approximately 43 HU. Contrast-enhanced abdomen CT showed significant enhancement in the periphery of tumor, uneven enhancement in the center part of tumor during the arterial phase, centripetal enhancement in portal vein phase and even enhancement in late phase of tumor, which was more enhanced than normal liver. The lesions were more uniformly strengthened, and their degree of strengthening was higher than that of normal liver tissue in the delayed period.

The laboratory examinations showed normal values for creatine kinase, creatine kinase-MB, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, unconjugated bilirubin, serum total bilirubin, conjugated bilirubin, creatinine, serum urea, and coagulant activity. However, thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was 19.5 uIU/mL (NL = 1.36–8.8 uIU/mL), free triiodothyronine (fT3) was 3.21 pmol/L (NL = 4.5–10.5 pmol/L), and free thyroxine was normal. Meanwhile, alpha-fetoprotein was 15434.76 Ug/L (NL = 0–25 Ug/L).

After we discussed the patient's condition, the infant was diagnosed with hepatomegaly, pulmonary artery hypertension, cardiac insufficiency, pneumonia, hepatic hemangioendothelioma, hypothyroidism, and multiple hemangiomas. Then, PAH and cardiac insufficiency were managed with fluid restriction, oxygen, diuretics, and inotropic support. In addition, the pneumonia was managed with antibiotics. Because fT3 was mildly decreased, we suggested that the infant should be regularly seen for endocrinology consultation. Meanwhile, propranolol was given at a dosage of 1 mg/kg every 12 hours.

Eight days after admission, the patient underwent transcatheter arterial embolization under general anesthesia. Unfortunately, because the diagnosis was relatively clear and the condition of the infant was worsening, his parents agreed to allow the patient to undergo TAE and refused a digital subtraction angiography-guided percutaneous biopsy after we informed them of the clinical risk. In addition, the TAE was approved by the ethics committee of Ji’nan Children's Hospital. The perineum was disinfected and draped with the patient in the supine position. The femoral artery was punctured by the Seldinger technique, and 100 IU/kg of heparin was administered to avoid thrombosis. The celiac artery was catheterized with a 4-F PIG angiographic catheter (Cordis, MI) under X-ray guidance. We observed that the blood supply to the IHH was derived from the proper hepatic artery branches, including the left hepatic artery and right hepatic artery, by digital subtraction angiography. The celiac artery was catheterized again with a 4-F Cobra guide catheter (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) under X-ray guidance. Then, the 2.6 F microcatheter (Asahi, Nagoya, Japan) was used for superselective catheterization of the feeding artery. During the procedure, a pingyangmycin-lipiodol emulsion was injected slowly through the catheter until the periphery of the hemangioma was completely surrounded. Gelatin sponge particle (350–560 μm) embolization of the feeding artery was performed if the blood supply artery was faster, as shown by angiography. Selective celiac arteriography was performed once again if necessary to judge the degree of embolism of the supplying arteries. The injection was stopped when a small branch of the portal vein around the tumor was developed or the total volume was administered. At the conclusion of the embolization, the microcatheter was withdrawn, and the sheath was removed. Hemostasis of the femoral artery was then achieved by manual compression for 10 to 15 minutes.

Postoperatively, meticulous nursing care was given to the patient, and symptomatic relief and supportive treatment were continued. Thirty-five days after admission, the PAH decreased, the symptoms of cardiac insufficiency were alleviated, and the severe pneumonia was cured. On the third month after the TAE, the abdominal distention was alleviated. The liver was soft and located 2 cm below the costal margin at the right mid-clavicular line. A CT scan of the abdomen still showed an irregularly shaped liver with multiple significantly strengthened intrahepatic masses, and the size of the largest mass was 1.6 cm. Echocardiography showed normal pulmonary artery pressure and EF. The patient underwent a second TAE under general anesthesia. There were no serious complications after the operation. At the 1-year follow-up, the infant had steadily gained weight, the liver volume and size of the mass decreased considerably, and the hypothyroidism returned to normal.