53-year-old woman with a history of RA of 15 years of diagnosis in treatment with methotrexate, rest of the history without important data, who presented clinical picture 8 months ago (before coming to our service) with progressive asthenia and adynamia, pallor of teguments, unquantified thermal elevations of nocturnal predominance, unintentional weight loss of 15 kg in approximately 6 months, without medical evaluation or follow-up, to which was added 3 months later dyspnea of large to medium efforts, and whose symptomatology became acute 5 days ago (before coming to our service), together with bleeding from the upper digestive tract (STDA), characterized by abundant melena evacuations, 3 evacuations in 24 hours, hematemesis on 2 occasions, scarce, without apparent cause. The patient denied consumption of non-steroidal analgesics (AINE) and had an increase in volume in the left leg, which hurt her and had the presence of oedema and erythema, with limitation to mobility, which is why she came to (our) Emergency Service.

During her hospitalization with severe anaemia without haemodynamic repercussion, 3 erythrocyte concentrates were transfused without apparent complications. After her stabilisation, a diagnostic approach was initiated for consumptive syndrome. Due to the clinical picture of the left lower limb, a US Doppler was performed that evidenced deep venous thrombosis. An ultrasound of the abdomen was performed for probable hepatopathy due to methotrexate, which reported splenic and hepatic infarctions, as well as the presence of chronic hepatic changes. Endoscopy was performed with evidence of small varices, without active bleeding. Due to the suspicion of neoplasia due to the patient's background and clinical picture, a simple and contrasted axial tomography of the thorax and abdomen was performed and hepatosplenomegaly and multiple axillary, mediastinal and paraaortic lymph node clusters were found, suggesting infiltrative activity. This was assessed by the General Surgery Service for the performance of a biopsy of the right axillary lymph node, where a neoplastic proliferation of lymphoid cells was reported. Subsequently, the Haematology Service of the unit was assessed, laboratory studies (Table I) were requested and a bone marrow aspirate was performed in which dysplastic plasma cells and reticular cells were evident, for which it was concluded that there was the presence of infiltrative lymphoplasmocitary activity. With the background, clinical picture and complementary studies, a diagnosis of stage IV NHL was made and the patient was sent to a third-level hospital for the performance of immunohistochemistry, staging and initiation of treatment. In the third level, a diffuse B-cell lymphoma with B CD20 immunophenotype with an overgrowth of dendritic cells was identified, and the patient was assessed for the initiation of treatment with chemotherapy.
