A 60-year-old woman was admitted to the nephrology department with epigastric pain, hematemesis and lower leg oedema. Arterial blood pressure was 90/50 mmHg, which was inside the normal range for this patient.
Laboratory results were remarkable for disturbed liver enzymes with a cholestatic pattern: alanine amino-transferase (ALT) and aspartate amino-transferase (AST) levels were slightly elevated at 28 U/L and 61 U/L, respectively, while alkalic phosphatase levels (388 U/L) and γ-glutamyltransferase levels (291 U/L) were strongly elevated. Serum albumin levels were 24 g/L and the international normalized ratio was normal at 1.02.
Other laboratory findings, including total bilirubin (0.32 mg/dL), direct bilirubin (0.26 mg/dL), total platelet count (176,000 platelets per microliter), and white blood cell count (8,400 cells per microliter), were within the normal range.
The patient had an extensive history of cardiac and renal disease. At the age of 11 years, congenital pulmonary valve stenosis was diagnosed for which the patient underwent valvulotomy. Subsequently, ill- tolerated atrial fibrillation and flutter developed for which flutter ablation was attempted unsuccessfully. Because the patient remained symptomatic, atrioventricular node ablation with pacemaker placement was performed.
Oral anticoagulation was started with fenprocoumon because of a CHA2DS2-Vasc score of 3 (woman, heart failure and peripheral vascular disease). At the age of 55 years, overt right heart failure developed and the patient continued to struggle with ascites and peripheral oedemas requiring multiple hospital admission. In addition, she also developed a problem of recurrent transudative pleural effusions of unclear aetiology.
Echocardiography at that time showed severe pulmonary and tricuspid valve regurgitation with a moderately dilated right ventricle and right atrium. The left ventricle was slightly dilated with moderate mitral valve regurgitation. Right heart catheterization demonstrated pulmonary arterial pressures of 74/30 mmHg with a central venous pressure of 28 mmHg. A pulmonary homograft was placed when the patient was 57 years of age and concomitant tricuspid valve annuloplasty was performed. Despite a lower central venous pressure of 13 mmHg, the patient still continued to be readmitted multiple times for signs and symptoms of right heart failure. Persistent systemic venous congestion ultimately resulted in end-stage renal disease for which renal replacement therapy was started through intermittent haemodialysis. The case was complicated by recurrent severe gastro-intestinal bleedings, requiring frequent blood transfusions with up to 60 units of packed cells per year. Despite this in combination with intravenous iron substitution, haemoglobin levels varied between 5.3-8.8 g/dL. Because of these intractable bleeding problems, oral anticoagulation with fenprocoumon was stopped at the age of 59 years.
A gastroscopy showed an erosive gastropathy with a diffuse congestive, friable mucosa. As a first- line prevention of recurrent gastric bleedings in the setting of cirrhosis, propranolol was started at a dose of 5 mg orally twice daily (the patient did not tolerate higher dosing because of low blood pressure). In addition, endoscopic coagulation of a fundic angioma and clipping of a Dieulafoy lesion had been performed.
These lesions were thought to be caused by hypertensive gastropathy. However, intractable bleedings remained.
The hepatic venous pressure gradient was measured at 16 mmHg (27 mmHg-11 mmHg). Although, there was some reluctance because of fear for worsening right heart failure, a management decision was made to create a TIPS. The procedure was uneventful. After TIPS placement, the hepatic venous pressure gradient decreased to 4 mmHg (14 mmHg-10 mmHg). Thus, although TIPS did lower the hepatic venous gradient considerably, portal pressure remained high because of the elevated central venous pressure.
After TIPS placement, the patient developed signs of hepatic encephalopathy and ammonia levels of 77 μmol/L were measured. Treatment with oral lactulose and enemas was started with little improvement. At that time, another episode of gastric bleeding recurred.
Abdominal ultrasonography showed good patency of the TIPS with normal Doppler flow. Gastric bleeding from an antral ulcus was detected with endoscopy, despite gastric hyperaemia being visually decreased compared to the situation before TIPS. A biopsy was performed that showed an oedematous foveolar mucosa, suggesting mucosal ischemia. Bleeding was too diffuse for additional endoscopic ligation. No worsening liver function was found on laboratory results, with the international normalised ratio 1.01 at this time. Echocardiography showed no meaningful changes compared to the situation before TIPS placement. The right ventricle remained moderately dilated with poor longitudinal function and persistent severe tricuspid valve regurgitation. However, the general condition of the patient deteriorated and fever with bilateral pulmonary consolidations developed.
Multi-organ failure emerged and at this point the family of the patient decided to withdraw care. The patient died eventually 43 days after the TIPS procedure.