A 26-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with a history of recurrent yellow skin and urine for over a year. On June 1, 2022, the patient presented with yellow skin and urine, without any obvious triggers. An ultrasound examination revealed the presence of multiple stones in the common and intrahepatic bile duct, with mild dilatation of the intrahepatic (diameter: 0.32 cm, reference: ≤ 0.2 cm) and common bile duct (diameter: 1.04 cm, reference: 0.6–0.8 cm). These findings supported the initial impression of obstructive jaundice. On June 15, 2022, the patient underwent laparoscopic choledocholithotomy, cholecystectomy and choledochoscopic lithotomy. However, there was no improvement in liver function nor symptoms of jaundice after surgery over the past year. In order to seek further medical assistance, the patient was admitted to our hospital with icterus of unknown origin on August 12, 2023. The patient denied a history of smoking, alcohol abuse, and long-term use of liver-damaging medication, including herbal and dietary supplements.

The physical examination revealed the presence of generalized yellowing of the skin and sclera, as well as a palpable spleen with 2 fingers below the rib cage. Additionally, the subject’s body mass index was recorded at 17.4 kg/m².

The results of vital laboratory examinations were presented in Table 1. Additionally, antinuclear antibody (ANA) 1:100, p-antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA) positive, autoimmune liver diseases antibody profile were all negative; hepatitis A to E, Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, coxsackie virus, herpes zoster virus, treponema pallidum and human immunodeficiency virus were all negative.

Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) demonstrated the existence of dilated left intrahepatic and common bile duct, in the absence of a gallbladder, splenomegaly and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the hilar region. The histological examination of the liver revealed that the structure of the hepatic lobules and the capillary bile duct network were not clearly discernible. Some capillary bile ducts displayed dilatation, accompanied by the formation of bile thrombus. There was also bridging fibrosis from the portal tracts to the central vein. Disappearance of bile ducts was observed in 10 of the 12 portal tracts. This phenomenon is most commonly attributed to vanishing bile duct syndrome (VBDS). The simplified Scheuer score indicated a grade 2 and stage 3 to 4. Whole exome sequencing revealed the presence of a heterozygous mutation in PKLR (NM_000298.5:c.119G > A) and UGT1A1 (NM_000463.2:c.–3275T > G).

In light of the aforementioned evidence, a revised diagnosis was rendered as VBDS with PLKR and UGT1A1 mutation, cholestatic cirrhosis. A dosage of 1000 mg/d ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) and 8 mg/d methylprednisolone was administered in order to improve cholestasis and hepatic inflammation.

Over time, a contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan performed on September 10, 2023 revealed the presence of stones in the common bile duct, despite the absence of fever, abdominal pain, or other complaints. The patient refused to have the stones removed from the common bile duct. On October 25, 2023, an MRCP examination showed dynamic changes. The biliary system showed banded stricture and a pruned tree appearance, which was in consistent with the imaging appearance of sclerosing cholangitis. Further colonoscopy was performed with adequate bowel preparation, adhering to guidelines for patients with suspected mucosal damage, which revealed the presence of UC involving the terminal ileum and right hemicolon. This finding was consistent with the colonoscopic manifestations of PSC-UC. Moreover, PSC-UC is a unique subtype of UC, which makes it difficult to apply Montreal classification criteria to describe the disease’s topography. Consequently, the diagnosis was revised to PSC-UC with PLKR and UGT1A1 mutations, choledocholithiasis.

On November 25, 2023, transduodenoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and endoscopic sphincterotomy (EST) were performed. A 4 mm × 5 mm black irregular stone and a large number of sedimentary stones were successfully removed using endoscopic duodenal papillary sphincter dilatation (EPBD). Following resolution of the obstruction, a long-term regimen of 1000 mg/d UDCA in combination with 10 mg/d obeticholic acid (OCA) was prescribed to improve cholestasis. In addition, 8 g/d colestyramine was prescribed to facilitate the adsorption of excess bile acids, while 1.2 g/d rifaximin was administered to prevent biliary tract infection. Furthermore, given the fact that the patient’s UC was limited to the terminal ileum and right hemicolon, there was a paucity of mucopurulent and bloody stools, as well as diarrhea. Mesalazine tablets (2 g per day) was medicated with the objective of improving colonic inflammation. On July 30, 2024, the patent’s liver function was as follows TB/DB 33/25.9 μmol/L, alkaline phosphatase (ALP)/GGT 183/112 U/L, IgG 17.19 g/L. The patient’s condition remained stable.