40-year-old woman with a history of mood disorder and increased stress in the last year. She was admitted to our center after a syncope associated with palpitations. During the examination, she reported retrosternal chest pain without irradiation in the three days prior to the consultation, associated with dizziness and significant distress.

Enter the emergency department hemodynamically stable, the electrocardiogram (ECG) in sinus rhythm interspersed with non-sustained wide complex tachycardia. Propanolol and amiodaron are administered in intravenous bolus. It presents torsion of points and posterior ventricular fibrillation that is defibrillated with 200 Joules at 20 seconds of the start, coming out to sinus tachycardia, vigil, connected. Emergency ultrasound shows segmental alterations. Enter the hemodynamic department, coronary angiography with epicardial coronary arteries without angiographic lesions. Ventriculography shows medioventricular hypokinesia with depressed ejection fraction in moderate degree 35%. Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure 26 mmHg. The values of NT-ProBNP and Troponin T after electrical defibrillation were 2478 pg/mL and 36.1 ng/L, respectively.

ECG at admission QTc prolonged 490 ms, negative T waves in V1 to V3, DI and aVL.

Cardio-resonance showed marked alteration of segmental motility associated with edema, without late enhancement, suggestive of a mid-ventricular variety of stress cardiomyopathy. Mild systolic dysfunction and minimal left ventricular dilatation6.

During the first 24 hours the patient persists with salves of polymorphic ventricular tachycardias (TV), without new episodes of syncope. She then evolves with a decrease in QTc without new episodes of TV. ECG prior to discharge in RS, QTc 430 ms, isobifasic T in V2.

She is discharged 7 days after admission with low dose bisoprolol and enalapril.

Echo at one month discharge showed no segmental abnormalities, normal size cavity, wall thickness and mass index in normal ranges. Ejection fraction (EFI) within normal limits, EFI 55%.

Follow-up at six months the patient has remained asymptomatic, with no new episodes of chest pain or palpitations.
