43-year-old woman with a history of hypertension with treatment with losartan, two cesareans and bilateral tubal occlusion. She was admitted to our hospital and reported pain of 24 hours of evolution, colicky type in hypogastrium and irradiation to the left iliac fossa, as well as nausea and vomiting on two occasions. Semiliquid evacuations were added initially and later ceased and gas was not passed. On physical examination, the patient presented abdominal pain, as well as distension, especially towards the left flank. There was presence of tympanism in the mesogastrium and left flank. Peristalsis was present, minimal, abolished in the left flank and mesogastrium. Peritoneal irritation was absent. A nasogastric tube was placed with minimal gastric output and no improvement in symptomatology. Laboratory studies demonstrated: 9700 leukocytes with 87% neutrophils, creatinine of 0.7 mg/dL, urea of 22 mg/dL and C reactive protein of 5.0 mg/L. Simple abdominal radiography showed significant dilation of the left side of the colon, with hydroaereous levels. The tomography shows the dilation of the left side of the colon, with an image that simulates a coffee bean in the coronal section.

In view of these clinical and imaging findings, emergency laparotomy was performed on the basis of suspected sigmoid volvulus or complicated adhesive syndrome. During surgery, a cecum flexed forward and to the left was observed, with no retroperitoneal fixation. The flexion point was produced by an adhesive band placed on the ascending colon. The adhesive band was released and adequate continuity to the distal colon was confirmed. Ischemia, necrosis or perforation of the cecum was not observed. Appendicectomy was performed with decompression of the cecum through the appendicular base and subsequent ligation of the appendix. Cecopexy was performed towards the right iliac fossa wall. After surgery, the patient's clinical condition improved and she had normal presentations. The patient continued to be monitored correctly in the surgical outpatient department and remained asymptomatic.
