A 42 year-old patient was referred to our tertiary cancer center with a history of recurring seroma of the left breast. The patient had undergone bilateral breast implant removal with partial capsulectomy 11 months prior to her first visit at our institution. The patient presented with no notable comorbidities, and had a history of bilateral breast augmentation in the submuscular plane with cosmetic indication at age 21 in the year 2003. No information could be found regarding the type of implants she had originally received. The patient returned to the same surgeon in 2008 complaining of bilateral seroma, to undergo a first bilateral breast implant replacement with textured anatomical implants of 425 cc (Sebbin LSA TF 425). In 2013, she underwent a second implant replacement procedure to increase the size with 480 cc implants from the same manufacturer (Sebbin LSA TF 480). In 2017, the patient returned for a check-up where she complained of pain and breast volume increase bilaterally. At the time, she had received an ultrasound scan which identified periprosthetic effusions bilaterally, with no lymphadenopathy or palpable masses in the breast regions. The effusions were drained without analysis, but recurred over the years, when the patient sought help from the same surgeon and underwent a third revisional procedure in 2022, with a bilateral breast implant removal and sampling of the anterior periprosthetic capsule. The surgeon sent two specimens from the right side (9 × 1 cm and 3 × 3 cm) and one from the left (2 × 1 cm). Histopathological report of the specimen found ‘Acellular amorphic proteinaceous material’ on the right side, and ‘Sclero-hyaline fibrous tissue with lymphocyte-monocyte inflammation, requiring correlation with the clinical presentation’ on the left side. Despite the explantation, seroma still recurred on the left side, and was sent for cytopathological testing which identified ‘a population of atypical pleomorphic cells with irregular contours suggestive of a lymphoproliferative process with CD30+ elements’ for which further diagnostic testing was advised. For this reason, the patient sought treatment at our institution where the case was managed by a multidisciplinary team (MDT) featuring a plastic surgeon, an hematopathologist, a hematologist, an oncologist, a radiotherapist, a surgical oncologist, and a breast imaging radiologist. The original histological specimen from the capsule sampling was reviewed by a hematopathologist from our referral center, who identified occasional sparse large atypical CD30+ cells that were deemed compatible with BIA-ALCL diagnosis. Anaplastic cells presented the following phenotype: CD30+, CD3-, CD7-, CD5-, CD4-, CD8-, Granzyme B+/-, TIA1-, ALK1-, PAX5-, CD79a-, CD68-, CD15-/+. The patient received an ultrasound scan with fine-needle aspiration cytology of the recurring effusion which confirmed an atypical CD30+ lymphoproliferative process. Total body scanning with positron emission tomography/computerized tomography (PET/CT) was performed in a different facility in closer proximity to the patient’s domicile, revealing a 67 × 20 mm area of seroma in the left breast region with focal 18F-FDG (Fluorodeoxyglucose) uptake (SUV max 1.8). No other areas of uptake could be located in all other explored body segments. The patient also received magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of both breasts with contrast medium to complete preoperative staging, confirming the seroma of the left side. Slides of the specimen from the previous surgery were reviewed by the hematopathologist who deemed the findings sufficient for identifying BIA-ALCL with early infiltration of the periprosthetic capsule (pT2 according to the proposed MD Anderson-TNM staging system). Three weeks after the initial visit, the patient underwent radicalization surgery with en-bloc capsulectomy containing only 150 cc of serous effusion without implant. The liquid contents were sent for culture and cytopathological testing while the solid specimen was sent for histopathological examination. Additionally, the patient underwent sentinel lymph node biopsy of 2 axillary nodes identified preoperatively through segmental lymphoscintigraphy. Lymph nodes presented chronic reactive silicone-associated lymphadenopathy with no signs of lymph node metastasis. Histology report of the capsule revealed cell aggregates infiltrating the periprosthetic capsule, but clear resection margins and no signs of infiltration beyond the capsule. As such, the patient received a stage IC (pT3pN0M0). Post-operative course was uneventful, and no further adjuvant treatments were deemed necessary by the MDT. She continued her stringent monitoring protocol, with post-op PET/CT at 6, 12 and 18 months from surgery showing no signs of local or distant disease recurrence. As it stands, the patient is still continuing her follow-up visits and scans, with a disease free survival beyond 18 months.