A 61-year-old female patient with a history of acute pulmonary thromboembolism secondary to a right pelvic deep vein thrombosis episode four years earlier presented. Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) was diagnosed during follow-up and she was treated with oral anticoagulation with vitamin K antagonists (VKA).

In the diagnostic approach, a pulmonary angiogram was performed in which bilateral peripheral thrombi were documented with a predominance in the right main branch with extension to the upper, middle and lower lobar branches, causing linear and segmental and subsegmental defects, as well as total occlusion of the left anterior, medial and posterior segmental branches. The pulmonary artery was observed dilated to 40 mm in diameter. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed in which the dilated right ventricle (RV) was observed (basal 43 mm, middle third 51 mm and length 84 mm). Longitudinal systolic function (systolic excursion of the tricuspid annulus plane of 15 mm, speed of the tricuspid annulus S wave of 7.8 cm/s and circumferential (18% shortening fraction of the RV) reduced. Estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 96 mmHg and flattening of the interventricular septum.

To complete the stratification, a right and left cardiac catheterization was performed with the following measurements: pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PAPs) 105 mmHg, pulmonary artery diastolic pressure (PAPd) 44 mmHg, pulmonary artery mean pressure (PAPm) 64 mmHg, pulmonary vascular resistance (RVP) 13.7 UW/1,096 dyn, D2VI 11 mmHg. Selective pulmonary angiography was performed, which showed filling defects in both main branches of the pulmonary artery, as well as subocclusive lesions in the left and right subsegmental arteries that were amenable to surgical treatment.

The case was discussed with the surgical team and the patient was proposed as a candidate for surgical treatment.

Both pulmonary thromboendarterectomies were performed in a planned fashion with a total time of cardiopulmonary bypass of 149 minutes and two hypothermic arrest times of 17 and 15 minutes. The pulmonary artery and its main branches and lobar branches were examined and thromboendarterectomy was performed.

She was transferred to the intensive cardiovascular care unit after surgery, where she was hypotensive with evidence of systemic hypoperfusion and mechanical ventilation with an inspired oxygen fraction (O2) of 100% to achieve an oxygen saturation (O2) of 90%. The hemodynamic profile by pulmonary floating catheter in cardiogenic shock (cardiac output [CO] of 1.97 l/min, IC of 1.13 l/min/m2, PAPs of 95 mmHg, PAPd of 54 mmHg, PAPm of 65 mmHg, PVC of 10 mmHg, IS of 14.1 ml/m2, SVR of 1191 dyn), was initiated with inotropic (levosimendan) and dual vasopressor (norepinephrine and vasopressin) therapy, which was titrated to the maximum therapeutic dose. Despite the therapy used, six hours after surgery the patient was still in cardiogenic shock and refractory hypoxaemia despite having high mechanical ventilation parameters, including FiO2 of 100%. Diffuse bilateral radiopaque infiltrates were observed on the chest radiograph. Based on the evidence consistent with pulmonary reperfusion syndrome with PaO2/O2 of 80, it was decided to escalate the treatment and support was added with an extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) by right femoral vein cannulation, through which the extraction cannula was advanced to the inferior caval-atrial junction and a return cannula was advanced to the superior caval-atrial junction. Once circulatory support was established, the flow was titrated to 3 l/min.

Circulatory support was provided with adequate evolution, with haemodynamic stabilisation, and the amines and inotropics were removed in the first 12 hours, as well as the pulmonary congestion was reduced and extubation was achieved in the first 48 hours. As for the biventricular function, with progressive improvement (until achieving LVEF of 40%, integral time speed 16 cm, lateral mitral speed «s» 9 cm/s and right ventricular shortening fraction of 35%), without complications related to ECMO, the therapy was successfully suspended after six days, and the radiography of control after withdrawal of ECMO with a reduction in the pattern of bilateral infiltrates.

He was then transferred to the cardiology floor, where a new pulmonary angiogram was performed, reporting no new pulmonary thromboembolic event, so oral anticoagulation was initiated with acenocoumarol, reaching an international normalized ratio of 2.5. He was discharged home without complications.
