36-year-old woman who presented 6 years ago with asymmetrical progressive weakness of hands associated with cramping and muscle atrophy. Examination also showed right steppage but with normal sensation – Inflammatory Neuropathy Cause and Treatment (INCAT) disability scale total 4; and Medical Research Council Global Scale (MRC) total 58. Conduction block was identified in the left median nerve 8 cm proximal to the wrist and in the bilateral ulnar nerve distal to the elbow. Anti-GM1 antibody was positive.

With the diagnosis of NMM defined, the patient received intravenous Ig 2 g/kg/month (100 g) for two consecutive months. Her muscle strength improved (INCAT: 2) and she was switched to subcutaneous Ig 2 g/kg/month (100 g), and remained clinically stable. Each time the dose of subcutaneous Ig was attempted to be reduced, there was a worsening of muscle strength.

Despite a stable dose of subcutaneous Ig, after five years of follow-up the patient deteriorated and developed severe weakness in both hands with no sensory symptoms, marked disability and complete dependency for activities of daily living such as dressing, bathing and feeding, unable to care for her daughter (INCAT: 5; MRC total: 40; Handgrip Martin Vigorimeter left: 0 kPa, and right: 0 kPa; Rasch-built Overall Disability Scale: 16). Treatment was again rotated to intravenous Ig at a dose of 2 g/kg/month for four months with no improvement. Subsequent treatments with prednisone at a dose of 1 mg/kg/weight for six weeks and rituximab at a dose of 375 mg/m2 for four consecutive weeks were also not effective.

Based on a recent report, we decided to initiate ultra-high dose Ig treatment of 4 g/kg/month (200 g), followed by 5 g/kg/month for two months (250 g), divided into two cycles every 15 days. The patient's cardiovascular risk score (QRISK2) was low (6%), and the daily dose of intravenous Ig never exceeded 35 g/day. The patient presented progressive improvement (MRC: 54; left hand grip: 5 kPa, and right: 30 kPa; Rasch-built Overall Disability Scale: 41; and INCAT: 3).

The patient regained independence for daily living activities and was able to return to work. The only adverse event related to the use of ultra-high dose Ig was headache.
