Male patient in his seventh decade of life. Farmer, with no medical history. Active smoking for 40 years with a smoking index of more than 40, exposure to wood smoke and mining. He presented in August 2021 with pleuritic-type chest pain associated with inspiration, which is why he came for evaluation. During the initial approach, the presence of a pulmonary tumor was detected in the left upper lobe through a chest X-ray, which is why he was referred to a third-level hospital for further diagnostic evaluation. A computed tomography (CT) scan identified a pulmonary tumor located in the upper left lobe that retracted the major fissure, multi-lobed, with spiky edges, heterogeneous with hypodensities suggestive of necrosis, measuring 54.9 × 30.1 × 41.2 mm and extending to the pleura. The presence of a tumor in another anatomical site was not evident. A core biopsy was performed, which was reported to the pathology department of the hospital as a non-small cell carcinoma (NSCLC) with angiolymphoid invasion and necrosis, which was negative for the immunohistochemical markers TTF-1, P40, ALK-1 (clone D5F3 Ventana), PDL-1 (clone SP263 Ventana) and ROS-1. In addition, real-time PCR was performed for mutations in the K-RAS and EGFR genes, which were negative. Subsequently, a PET/CT was performed, in which hyperglycolytic metabolism was observed in the tumor (SUVmax of 12.1) and lymph nodes of the 4L, 4R and 10R stations. With an ECOG 0, EVA 0, no white molecular alterations and the exclusion of another primary and/or metastatic site, it was decided to perform a left superior lobectomy with lymphadenectomy for proper classification (TNM). The surgical resection product measures 22 × 13.5 × 4 cm, and the tumor, 6 × 5.4 × 4.8 cm. Histologically, the neoplasia has a large, poorly differentiated cell morphology, with comedonecrosis and angiolymphoid invasion. In this diagnostic scenario, and with the previous inconclusive biopsy, it was decided to perform an immunohistochemical panel to determine the mesenchymal origin, such as vimentin, which is negative; epithelial, such as OSCAR cytokeratin, which is positive diffuse, and a differentiation panel consisting of TTF-1, P40, Napsina A, CD56, Synaptofisina and INSM1, which are all negative, in addition to SMARCA4/BRG1, which is preserved, and the exclusion of metastases in the dissected lymph nodes, confirmed with immunohistochemistry.

Unable to determine a cell differentiation lineage through immunohistochemistry and real-time PCR studies, integrated next-generation sequencing (NGS) testing for DNA and RNA in paraffin-embedded tissue was performed with the Ion Torrent Genexus™ (ThermoFisher Scientific) instrument. The 50-gene panel tested negative for mutations. Based on the histological, immunophenotypic and molecular evidence, the diagnosis of a LCC-NI was determined.
Three months after the surgery, the patient presented with paresthesia and tonic-clonic movements in the left forearm, as well as decreased strength in the left lower extremity that prevented walking. An MRI was performed, which reported a metastatic lesion in the right parietal lobe, which was later confirmed by biopsy.
