32-year-old male with a history of HIV infection on antiretroviral therapy (undetectable viral load and CD4 count of 454 cells/mm3) and smoking and drug use (marijuana, ecstasy and ketamine). He presented to our sexual health unit with a 2-week history of mucous urethral discharge with little local burning, associated with an erythematous indurated ulcer in the balanopreputial sulcus 1.5 cm in diameter, painful and exudative. On physical examination, he had a 2 cm left inguinal lymph node, sensitive to palpation, soft, not adherent to deep tissue and not associated with inflammatory skin signs. He had no fever or other associated symptoms. In the directed history, he reported 20 male sexual partners in the last year, with insertive and receptive oral and anal sex, with occasional use of condoms. He had no history of travel outside Chile. Four weeks before the onset of symptoms, he had had a risky sexual contact without condom with a partner contacted through a mobile phone application. With the presumptive diagnosis of a primary syphilis and urethral infection under study, blood and urethral discharge samples were taken for microbiological study. Because of the high-risk sexual behaviour, an anorectal swab was also taken for Gram staining and culture. According to the current regulations in Chile, three doses of 2.4 million IU of benzathine penicillin were administered intramuscularly at weekly intervals, in addition to 250 mg of intramuscular ceftriaxone and 1 g of oral azithromycin, both for once. The laboratory study confirmed the diagnosis of syphilis, with a VDRL (venereal disease research laboratory) reactive with a 1:2 dilution and MHA-TP (microhaemagglutination assay for antibody to Treponema pallidum) reactive. Gram staining and urethral discharge cultures (blood agar and Thayer Martin) were negative. The anorectal swab showed few Gram-negative diplococci in Gram staining, with abundant development of N. meningitidis and commensal microbiota in the current culture. The bacterial identification was performed through MALDI-TOF MS spectrometry. The patient had a favourable evolution, with no urethral discharge and with regression of the genital ulcer lesion and inguinal lymph node at two weeks of follow-up. Gram staining and control cultures of urethral, pharyngeal and anorectal discharge were negative. The recent sexual contact was referred for study and treatment. However, he was asymptomatic and the pharyngeal, anorectal and urethral cultures were negative.
