The patient, a 61-year-old male, was diagnosed with acute pancreatitis 9 months before admission and received conservative treatment. After discharge, he intermittently experienced upper abdominal distension and pain, and an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed the formation of a pancreatic pseudocyst. Four days before admission, the patient developed severe dyspnea with chest pain and cough, severe enough to prevent lying flat. Physical examination indicated shortness of breath, bilateral diminished breath sounds, tachycardia, and with no abdominal abnormalities. The patient had a long history of alcohol and tobacco use and multiple previous surgeries, including lumbar fixation surgery and abdominal wall lipoma removal.

Laboratory tests showed slightly elevated serum tumor marker cancer antigen 125 at 98.25 U/mL (normal range 0–35 U/mL) and urine amylase at 333 U/L (normal range 32–641 U/L). Imaging (CT) revealed massive bilateral pleural effusion and the formation of a pancreatic pseudocyst.

Diagnosis and interventions
Upon admission, thoracic puncture drainage was performed, bacterial culture of the pleural fluid was negative, no tumor cells were found, but the cancer antigen 125 level in the pleural fluid was significantly elevated at 1859 U/mL (normal range 0–35 U/mL). Amylase levels in the pleural fluid were 53,844 U/L on the left and 1365 U/L on the right. On the sixth day, a diagnosis of PPF was confirmed, and an ERCP was performed with the placement of a 7Fr nasopancreatic duct to drain the pancreatic pseudocyst.

Immediately after admission, thoracic puncture drainage was performed, draining a large amount of pale blood-tinged pleural fluid, along with parenteral nutrition support and somatostatin treatment, gradually assisting the patient in pulmonary function exercises. On the seventh day, an ERCP examination revealed communication between the pancreatic pseudocyst and the pleural cavity. During pancreatic duct cannulation, the guidewire could enter the pseudocyst, so a 7Fr nasopancreatic duct was placed for drainage. The culture of pancreatic fluid from the nasopancreatic duct grew Enterococcus faecium and Klebsiella pneumoniae, but the patient did not develop fever, and white blood cell count and C-reactive protein were normal, yet antibiotics were administered. On the ninth day, no fluid was drained from the bilateral thoracic drains, and another ERCP was performed. The nasopancreatic duct was cut at the duodenal papilla, leaving the internal part as a pancreatic duct stent.

Outcomes
The patient received a total of 13 days of hospital treatment, during which 4180 mL of pleural fluid was drained from the left side, 2470 mL from the right, and 495 mL from the nasopancreatic duct. Six months after discharge, the remaining nasopancreatic duct was removed. There was no recurrence during a 5-year follow-up, and the patient’s general condition was good