A 65-year-old male presented with swelling and boutonniere deformity on the right middle finger for six months after a motorcycle accident on January 1st, 2023. Initially, he managed the injury with painkillers and did not seek medical attention. After six months of persistent symptoms, including an inability to fully extend the finger and noticeable edema, he sought treatment.

Clinical findings
The inspection of the right hand showed the presence of deformity with edema. The active range of motion (ROM) was impaired in PIP joint in digiti III of the right hand. The active ROM of PIP joint digiti III of the right hand 45–110 degrees. The passive ROM of PIP joint digiti III of the right hand within normal.

Diagnostic assessment
We performed X-ray of the right hand AP/Lateral which showed there are no abnormality in the bone and we diagnosed the deformity from soft tissue which is central slip injury.

Surgical technique
A central slip defect reconstruction utilizing partial ulnar side of flexor digitorum superficial tendon was performed. Under anesthesia, the patient was positioned supine with a tourniquet applied to the upper arm. A midlateral incision was made on the ulnar aspect of the right middle phalanx, centered at the PIP joint. The incision extended dorsally in an oblique manner. A transverse incision was made over the MCP joint flexion crease, just proximal to the A1 pulley. The procedure involves identifying and protecting the ulnar digital neurovascular bundle, exposing the central slip and extensor tendon to the PIPJ, full-thickness dorsal flaps are elevated. Scar tissue and pseudotendinous tissue is identified and excised. The central slip cannot be repaired primarily, so the ulnar slip of the FDS tendon is used for reconstruction. The ulnar neurovascular bundle is mobilized to visualize the periosteal insertion of the A3 pulley.

The extensor tendon is mobilized and tenolyzed, followed by incision of the dorsal capsule of the PIP joint and removal of interposed tissue. The A3 pulley's periosteal insertion is incised longitudinally, and the PIP joint's volar capsule is incised longitudinally. The ulnar slip of the FDS tendon is identified and a 2–0 non-absorbable, monofilament suture is placed around it. A transverse incision is made at the MCP joint flexion crease, proximal to the A1 pulley revealing the flexor tendon sheath. The tendon sheath and A1 pulley are incised longitudinally. The FDS tendon is identified. The ulnar slip of the FDS tendon is isolated and transected to release the ulnar slip, avoiding entrapment or catching of the radial slip. The 2–0 suture that was placed around the ulnar slip at the level of the PIP joint is used to release distally based FDS tendon slip and deliver the ulnar slip of the FDS tendon distally.

A 2.8-mm drill is used to create a vertically oriented bone tunnel dorsal to volar. An elevator is placed between the flexor digitorum profundus tendon, volar plate, and volar aspect of the base of the middle phalanx protecting the volar anatomic structures. The FDS tendon slip passes through the tunnel while maintaining the PIP joint in extension and reduced position. The FDS tendon slip passed through the intact proximal section of the central slip and extensor tendon. A tendon weaver completes a Pulvertaft weave, confirming the appropriate tension with the PIPJ in the reduced, full extension position. A 3–0 non-absorbable suture secures the pulvertaft weave. The margins of the capsule and central slip reconstruction are approximated across the PIP joint, and adhesions are released and the lateral bands mobilized.

The overall posture, stability, and motion with tenodesis assessed. All the incisions are copiously irrigated. The tourniquet is deflated and hemostasis is obtained. Capillary refill of all fingers is assessed. The skin is closed using horizontal mattress stiches. A sterile dressing is applied with an appropriately padded PIP joint extension splint to allow for early DIP joint and MCP joint motion.

Follow-up and outcomes
First follow-up was done 4 days after for wound treatment. The patient was given oral meloxicam 7,5 mg twice a day and doxycycline 100 mg twice a day for 3 days. The second follow-up was done 3 days after for wound treatment. After 2 weeks, we remove the back slab, remove the external suture and begin the active and passive ROM exercise. After 3 weeks, the wound was healed, and we found the ROM of PIP joint 0 to 90 degrees. And after a month, the patient came with improved ROM of PIP joint 0 to 100 degrees, and improved functional outcome. After 7 weeks of physical rehabilitation, patients already back to work with improve ROM of PIP joint 0 to 110 degrees. The function of the patient's right hand is evaluated with DASH score, which improves significantly from 50 to 4.2.