Female, Caucasian, 73 years old patient who sought a breast disorder service with a complaint of a pink change in the skin of the right breast about 30 days ago. A bilateral mammography 5 months before the consultation showed benign changes (Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System – BI-RADS™ 2). The patient had a history of invasive ductal carcinoma in the right breast G3 without special type, which was treated with segmental resection and axillary lymph node dissection levels I and II in December 2011. At the time of surgery, a tumor measuring 3.0 cm and three axillary lymph nodes showing metastasis (3/10) were observed. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor was positive for estrogen receptor (90%), positive for progesterone receptor (2%), HER-2 negative, Ki-67 positive (60%) and of the luminal B subtype. The patient's adjuvant therapy included six cycles of doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide and paclitaxel therapy, followed by radiotherapy (25 sessions with a dose of 50Gy in the right breast and supraclavicular fossa, plus a boost of 10Gy). The patient is currently undergoing endocrinological treatment with letrozole (6 years of treatment). On physical examination, she presented two pink lesions in the right breast, one erythematous and almost imperceptible at the junction of the upper quadrant (JQS), and the other a more intense violet lesion at the junction of the lower quadrant (JQI) measuring 0.5 cm.

An incisional biopsy of the lesion was performed at the JQI, which demonstrated atypical vascular lesion in hematoxylin-eosin staining. A complementary immunohistochemical study of the angiosarcoma was suggested for completion of the diagnosis. Following the outcome of this study, the patient underwent resection of both skin lesions. The anatomic pathological report of the resected specimen showed well-differentiated angiosarcoma (G1), a neoplasm characterized by aligned vascular anastomoses of atypical endothelial cells, characterized by the presence of hyperchromatism and anisocytosis and, in some cases, containing erythrocytes, organized in a pattern of infiltrated growth, permeating the mammary parenchyma and the dermis in the JQI, measuring 1.9x1.4cm, and in the JQI, constituting neoplasm restricted to the dermis, measuring 1.1x0.5cm. The immunohistochemical examination revealed positivity for expression of the group of differentiation 31 (CD31) and oncogene C-MYC, confirming the malignancy secondary to radiation therapy. The computed tomography of the thorax and abdomen and the bone scintigraphy did not show signs of distant metastasis. The patient underwent a simple mastectomy of the right side, without reconstruction as a complementary treatment. The final histopathological report showed well-differentiated angiosarcoma (G1) and three more microscopic foci were found in the mammary parenchyma, the largest of which measured 2mm. Two years after surgery, the patient did not develop a recurrence.
