A 13-year-old adolescent male, with no significant previous medical history, presented to the emergency department with a 3-day history of acute bilateral pleuritic chest pain associated with mild non-productive cough and no dyspnea. Associated with this, he had mild rhinorrhea and a single febrile episode that day (temperature of 38ºC). Chest pain was localized to the costal margin region and worsened with cough, without diurnal variation. The patient-reported relief with paracetamol. There were no complaints of joint pain, weight loss, anorexia, fatigue, episodes of syncope or exercise restriction. In fact, he practiced sports regularly—canoeing 2 times a week. No evidence of an infectious exposure or contact with household or environmental fumes, dust, or mineral oils was described. There was no known family history of cardiopulmonary conditions. He had a chest radiograph taken 4 years earlier during an acute illness, which showed a marked interstitial infiltrate that was presumptively treated with azithromycin with no further clinical symptoms and no further follow-up.

On admission, the patient’s temperature was 37.8°C with normal peripheral oxygen saturation (99%) in room air. His heart (93 beats per minute) and respiratory rate (15 breaths per minute) were normal and blood pressure was on the 85th percentile (115/66 mmHg). Physical examination revealed diminished breath sounds in the lower two thirds of the chest with no adventitious sounds. No respiratory distress, finger clubbing, cyanosis, abnormal heart sounds, or other findings were present. Chest radiograph revealed a marked interstitial infiltrate, comparable with his previous examination. A thoracic computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple bilateral areas of ground-glass opacities involving > 65% of lung parenchyma, suggestive of PAP. Respiratory viral testing was negative, and he remained stable throughout his monitoring in the emergency department. He was discharged with empiric antibiotics (amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and azithromycin) to cover a potential respiratory infection, with clinical resolution of symptoms and was sent for follow-up at the pediatric respiratory clinic.

Upon further investigation in the outpatient setting, positive antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) at a titer of 1/89 with a fine speckled pattern were detected, while other autoantibodies tested negative and immunoglobulin levels remained within normal limits. Bronchoalveolar lavage revealed fluid with a milky appearance and positive periodic acid-Schiff staining; microbiological examination, including for mycobacteria, returned negative results. Spirometry indicated a mild restrictive pattern with reduced forced vital capacity (FVC) at 2.92 L (77%) and forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) at 3.21 L (69.9%), alongside a normal FEV1/FVC ratio (109%). In addition, the DLCO single breath (SB) showed a moderate decrease at 13.8 ml/min/mmHg (48.6%). Suspecting PAP, a genetic panel was conducted, which showed no mutations associated with surfactant dysfunction. Subsequently, GM-CSF antibody testing was performed with a positive result, raising suspicion for AI-PAP. At 20 months of follow-up, the patient remains asymptomatic and continues to exercise regularly. He repeated spirometry testing with normal FVC at 4.03 L (81.3%); FEV1 at 3.71 L (87.5%); FEV1/FVC ratio at 91.96% and DLCO SB at 25.54 ml/min/mmHg (83.7%). As the patient remains stable with no respiratory symptoms, we decided to defer treatment and continue monitoring with regular clinic visits.