A 73-year-old man was referred for SAVR to address symptomatic aortic valve regurgitation (AR). Two years earlier, he presented with multiple exanthematous lesions. A skin biopsy revealed plasma cell infiltration, leading to a referral to a haematologist. Computed tomography revealed systemic lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. A renal biopsy performed for renal dysfunction confirmed AA amyloidosis; a lymph node biopsy showed interfollicular plasmacytosis and a hyperplastic germinal centre, consistent with the plasmacytic subtype of iMCD, supported by elevated plasma IL-6 levels. The patient was administered intravenous TCZ (640 mg every 2 weeks), alongside prednisolone (10 mg daily). The skin rash and lymphadenopathy resolved. Echocardiography revealed moderate pure AR and left ventricular enlargement. Since the patient gradually experienced exertional dyspnoea with progressive left ventricular enlargement, SAVR was deemed necessary.

Due to haemorrhoid bleeding and hepatosplenomegaly, a hepatologist was consulted; Child–Pugh grade A liver cirrhosis and oesophageal varices were diagnosed. A preoperative team conference involving an intensivist and pharmacist reviewed the mechanisms of action of TCZ, potential complications, and perioperative management. Surgery was performed 26 days after the last TCZ dose. During the perioperative period, TCZ was withheld, whereas steroids were continued orally or intravenously. Preventive measures for surgical site infections (SSIs) included screening for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus nasal carriage, skin antiseptic preparation, prophylactic antibiotic therapy, and hyperglycaemia control. The nasal culture was positive for coagulase-negative Staphylococcus. Surgical aortic valve replacement was performed via median sternotomy under cardiopulmonary bypass, with 65 min of cardiac ischaemic time and 128 min of cardiopulmonary bypass time. Blood transfusions, including red blood cells, plasma, and platelets were required; the patient was extubated the following day. The pathological findings revealed focal fibrous thickening without amyloid deposits.

The surgical wound showed no signs of infection on postoperative Day 2; negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) was initiated on the closed surgical wound to prevent SSI. Negative pressure wound therapy was discontinued on postoperative Day 13, without apparent SSI. The patient was discharged on postoperative Day 17 without any signs of infection.

Although IL-6 levels temporarily increased on postoperative Days 1 and 2, they progressively decreased until postoperative Day 24, then rose again following TCZ resumption. C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were slightly elevated, peaking at 0.56 mg/dL on postoperative Day 2. By postoperative Day 24, CRP had increased to 1.06 mg/dL without infection. Before the increase in CRP, vascular endothelial growth factor levels increased on postoperative Day 13.

The patient did not experience recurrence of skin rash or lymphadenopathy during the perioperative period. Postoperative creatinine levels temporarily increased but returned to preoperative levels by Day 24. Tocilizumab was resumed on postoperative Day 30 after confirming the absence of infection, including SSI.