68-year-old man with a history of insulin-requiring type 2 diabetes, coronary artery disease managed with coronary bypass (1996) and coronary stent (2005), and smoking stopped at 38 years of age. He has a history of portal hypertension syndrome characterized by variceal hemorrhage on 4 occasions since 2019, despite medical management with beta blockers and esophageal variceal ligation on 5 occasions, associated with gastric varices and portal thrombosis in 2022. The picture was attributed to a liver cirrhosis secondary to steatohepatic disease associated with metabolic dysfunction.

He presented to our service for a new episode of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. Emergency upper endoscopy was performed which showed scars from an old ligation at the level of the distal esophagus, without current varices, stomach without blood stains, normal fundal mucosa, body and antrum, and gastric fundal varices (GOV 2); pylorus, bulb, duodenal to 3 without lesions, no blood stains. Liver tests at admission showed total bilirubin (TB) of 0.74 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase (AP) of 128 U/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) of 119 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 38 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 29 U/L and an international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.2. A contrast abdominal and pelvic scan showed a liver of normal size, nodular contours, wide cissures, without focal lesions, associated with a moderately distended and thin-walled gallbladder.

Given the patient's history of recurrent upper gastrointestinal bleeding unresponsive to beta blocker therapy and endoscopic therapy, a transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) was performed for management.

A transient elastography (FibroScan®) was performed, which reports a liver stiffness with a median of 6.9 Kpa, with an IQR (interquartile range) of 13%, correlated with F1 stage of the METAVIR classification; and controlled attenuation parameters with a median of 241 dB/M with an IQR of 23%, compatible with absence of hepatic steatosis.

The finding of no liver cirrhosis on the non-invasive method of assessing fibrosis led to a liver biopsy, which reported liver tissue with dilation and perivenular non-zonal sinusoidal congestion, corresponding to a non-specific histological finding, but with a compatible picture with EVPS. No steatosis, necroinflammatory damage, or significant fibrosis was observed.

In the context of portal hypertension, absence of liver cirrhosis, and a compatible liver biopsy, EVPS is diagnosed.
