A 20-year-old man began to experience cough, chest pain, and mild exertional dyspnea. He was admitted to the hospital at 23 years of age with respiratory failure. He had been successfully treated for acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) at 3 years of age, with chemotherapy that included a cumulative dose of cyclophosphamide of 15.6 g/m2. His ALL relapsed six years later, when he was 9-years-old, and he was the treated again with cyclophosphamide and underwent a second and complete remission. During chemotherapy for ALL, he did not experience pulmonary adverse events, including pneumonia, and chest X-ray at the time of cessation of chemotherapy at 11 years of age was normal. He was never treated with radiotherapy. Unfortunately, he was lost to follow-up for several years, until he presented to our hospital at the age of 20 years, due to a one-week history of non-productive cough.

On this most recent hospital admission, at the age of 23 years, he was in respiratory failure, and chest imaging showed pleural thickening and platythorax, or flattening of the chest with a reduction in the anteroposterior (AP) diameter, was prominent. His respiratory rate was 52/min with 75% SpO2. No respiratory infections were identified. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse infiltrates and bilateral pleural thickening. His pulmonary vital capacity was 0.56 L (13.3%) of the predicted value. No physical findings, blood tests, or family history suggested the presence of collagen or autoimmune diseases. Non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (PPV) with oxygen was commenced for respiratory failure. He developed severe dyspnea with New York Heart Association (NYHA) class IV heart failure, secondary to pulmonary fibrosis, which gradually worsened.

At 25 years of age, he died of cardiopulmonary failure, five years after the onset of respiratory symptoms. Permission for an autopsy was not obtained. It was assumed that his platythorax, or reduced AP diameter of the chest, might have been secondary to pulmonary hypoplasia with pulmonary fibrosis because the diaphragm in his chest X-ray films had been elevated. He had previously received a moderate dose of cyclophosphamide (cumulative dose, 15.6 g/m2) for the treatment of ALL. Finally, based on the clinical course and exclusion of other diseases, a clinical diagnosis was made of cyclophosphamide-related late-onset pulmonary fibrosis resulting in platythorax, or reduced AP diameter of the chest.