The medical records of patients with a diagnosis of congenital myotonia studied and followed in the pediatric neurology consultation in a third-level hospital between 2015 and 2020 were reviewed. The inclusion criteria were to present a clinical diagnosis – myotonia, warm-up phenomenon, characteristic electromyographic pattern and/or family history – and/or a molecular diagnosis (mutation in the CLCN1 gene). The clinical signs and symptoms, as well as the results of the complementary explorations and the genetic mutation found, were collected by reviewing the medical record. Demographic variables (age and sex), course of the disease (age of onset, symptoms and signs, time elapsed until diagnosis and clinical evolution), family history and evaluation of the response to treatment were collected.

Five cases with clinical diagnosis of congenital myotonia were identified (three with Becker's disease and two with Thomsen's disease). The incidence in relation to the number of births was estimated at 1:15,000 newborns for cases with Becker's phenotype and 1:21,000 newborns for Thomsen's phenotypes.

Most of our patients were female, and the male was the only one who started before the age of six. The initial clinical presentation included myotonia in the lower limbs in four of the five patients and in the upper limbs in all but one. The age at onset ranged from 22 months to 12 years, with a median of 6 years. Genetic diagnosis was performed in all cases approximately two years after onset, and the family of one patient refused to have it performed. All had a worsening with cold, but the warming phenomenon was only in those with the Becker phenotype.

Patients with recessive congenital myotonia showed some progression. As a family history, it is worth noting that patients 2 and 3 were sisters, without the parents showing any clinical signs, and that the mother of patient 1 showed mild clinical signs that were doubtful with the cold. The patient who refused the study had a history of myotonia in the maternal branch.

Blood tests did not show elevated creatine kinase in any of the patients. The electromyogram was abnormal in all patients except the first one at 2.8/12 years of age. The test was not repeated later because it was not considered necessary.

The most used treatment initially was oxcarbazepine (in patients with recessive form), with a good response in general. In case 2 it lost efficacy with time and mexiletine was initiated. Patient 4 initiated several drugs without success due to loss of efficacy or side effects. Patient 5 rejected treatment due to mild clinical presentation.

Patient 1 had a previously undescribed, likely pathogenic mutation (CLCN1: c.824T>C) inherited from his mother. Cases 1 to 3 had the Becker phenotype with composite heterozygosity mutations, and cases 4 and 5 had the Thomsen phenotype. Case 5 declined genetic testing.
