A 44-year-old woman with a history of multiple sclerosis who had been treated with interferon beta-1b since the age of 26. She had previously had mild menstrual migraine headaches without aura and had taken rizatriptan once, which she did not tolerate well. She did not use any other medicines.

About four episodes of thunderclap headaches occurred in the context of sexual intercourse three years prior to the emergency room visit. The headaches were described as bitemporal, oppressive, explosive onset, with a maximum intensity on the visual analogue scale of 8/10. They were triggered by orgasm, no other symptoms were associated, and they resolved gradually over an hour. These episodes occurred over a period of about one month, and the patient denied headaches in other contexts.

She reported three episodes of explosive onset headaches similar to the previous ones, but this time exclusively triggered by vigorous physical exercise, one year prior to our evaluation. She did not report headaches in other situations, including sexual activity. She temporarily decreased the intensity of physical exercise and was able to gradually reintroduce her previous exercise without new events in about a month. She did not seek medical attention for any of these episodes.

Two weeks prior to our evaluation in the emergency department, the patient had a neuritis optica flare that was treated with high-dose methylprednisolone for five days. On the day the course was completed, she awoke at night with a headache that was the worst she had ever had (visual analog scale 10/10) accompanied by nausea, photo- and phonophobia. The headache was bilateral and occipital, with a pressing quality. She went to the emergency department, where she was found to have high blood pressure (180/100 mmHg) and a head CT scan and lumbar puncture were performed, with normal results. After administration of analgesia and correction of blood pressure, the patient improved and was discharged.

She had three more episodes of thunderclap headaches over the next week. All occurred while she was awake and at rest, with no associated triggers. The intensity of the pain decreased gradually over the next few hours, but did not completely resolve between episodes. She denied other associated symptoms.

On admission to the emergency department, a head CT scan was performed with contrast administration, which showed focal and segmental narrowing of several intracranial arteries suggestive of cerebral vasoconstriction. The patient was admitted to the neurology unit and oral nimodipine was initiated. A cerebral arteriography was performed, which showed numerous short segments of vascular stenosis followed by post-stenotic dilations in arterial vessels, mainly of medium caliber.

The patient did not have any headaches in the following days. Autoimmunity and serology studies were negative. She was discharged asymptomatic and a control arteriography at three months, in which all findings had resolved, confirmed the diagnosis of SVCR.
