We describe a case of 18‐year‐old male patient, affected by DMD and in a wheelchair from the age of 11, who has always been followed up by a multidisciplinary team in our Institution. Since the age of six, he was treated by oral medication with deflazacort. During these years, the patient was regularly followed up by pneumologists by using with spirometry and by neurologists who monitored the evolution of the neuromuscular disease in terms of thoraco‐abdominal function and scoliosis. Forced vital capacity (FVC), forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1), and peak expiratory flow (PEF) were, respectively, 60%, 70%, and 70% of predicted values (FVC, 2.24 Lt; FEV1, 2.09 Lt; PEF, 4.07 Lt). The patient also underwent right‐heart catheterization to monitor pulmonary vascular resistances with evidence of values within normal range. When he progressively developed dilated cardiomyopathy in 2016, at the age of 14, he underwent HeartWare LVAD implantation, because of acute refractory heart failure. The heart transplant option had not been considered by paediatric cardiac surgeons, (i) because of the emergency the patient was in and (ii) because of the common scepticism towards heart transplant in these DMD patients. Weaning from mechanical ventilation occurred as a routine, and no post‐operative complications were encountered.

During the following 47 months the patient was regularly followed up, and we only report an infection of the exit site, treated by antibiotics and surgical toilette, 30 months after LVAD implantation. The debridement of the drive line consisted of incision of the skin following the path of the cable, exteriorization of the cable more proximally, cleaning of the fistulous path, and re‐suturing of the skin. Although the recovery was excellent, seeing that the drive line exit was very close to the sternal wound, the patient became psychologically stressed enough to spontaneously ask for a radical solution to the problem. FVC, FEV1, and PEF were, respectively, 1.66 Lt, 1.62 Lt, and PEF 4.41 Lt. Based on the patient's good general conditions and patient personal motivation, our multidisciplinary team started to consider heart transplant as an option. Thus, in 12 February 2020, at the age of 18, the patient underwent heart transplant with no post‐operative complications. Weaning from mechanical ventilation occurred as a routine once more. In the first post‐transplant day, it was possible to extubate the patient. The discharge from the ICU was possible on the third post‐operative day. As far as mobilization is concerned, in our Unit, the patients are followed up by a specialized team of physiotherapists. The patient was trained by them from the first days; and as soon as he was transferred from the ICU to the ward, mobilization was started as soon as possible. As regards sternal stabilization, as we usually do, we suggested to use a tissue sternal band. Mobilization in a wheelchair was possible on the fifth post‐operative day. The total hospital stay was 3 weeks, the time needed to perform the three canonical biopsies for the evaluation of any myocardial rejection. A standard triple‐agent immunosuppressive therapy was administered (cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil, and steroid). At 3 months, FVC, FEV1, and PEF were unchanged than at the pre‐transplant.