Our patient is a healthy 37-year-old Hispanic male who sustained a simultaneous rupture of his bilateral patellar tendons after jumping attempting to make a “lay-up basket” while playing basketball. Pertinent history includes anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction of the right knee using an ipsilateral bone-patellar tendon bone (BPTB) autograft in 2002. The patient was unable to ambulate and presented to our clinic in wheelchair. The patient was unable to perform a straight leg raise and had a tender defect at the inferior pole of the patella bilaterally. Plane radiographs demonstrated bilateral patella alta and MRI studies demonstrated bilateral proximal patellar tendon ruptures. The recommendation for acute simultaneous surgical repair of both knees was given to the patient.

Operative technique
Intraoperative exam showed significant swelling of both knees, with full extension and flexion to 140 degrees bilaterally. There was palpable defect and patella alta bilaterally associated with patellar tendon rupture.

The knee was approached through the standard anterior midline approach. The extent of the tear was elucidated, involving both the medial and lateral retinaculum. A hematoma was evacuated, and the deep and subcutaneous tissues were irrigated. Traction sutures were placed in the quadricep tendon to help mobilize the patella distally. The proximal patellar tendon and the distal stump of the patellar tendon were elucidated.

Two 4.75 mm bio-composite SwiveLock suture anchors (SpeedBridge Implant System with Scorpion-Multifire Needle, Arthrex, Inc., No. AR-2600SBS-8) were placed within the inferior pole of the patella at the origin of the patellar tendon. A Krackow locking stitch was performed with each of the SwiveLock suture anchors with a pull through suture. This was brought up and down the patellar tendon in a locking stitch configuration. The knee was placed in 30 degrees of flexion, and the patellar length was made to be 4.5 cm. As the patient did not have an intact contra-lateral patellar tendon to base our patella tendon length, 4.5 cm was chosen as this has been an average male patella length recently described in the literature. Intraoperative C-arm fluoroscopy was utilized to confirm appropriate patellar height. This was double checked by attempting to obtain a Caton-Deschamps index of approximately 1:1. The knots were then tied down from the locking stitch configuration in the upper repair back onto the suture anchors in the patella.

The same anchors had #2 FiberTape sutures (Arthrex, Inc) loaded. These were crisscrossed in a suture bridge configuration and placed in separate SwiveLock anchors in the tibial tubercle with the knee at 30 degrees of flexion. The remaining paratenon and soft tissue was imbricated to help reinforce the repair. The medial and lateral retinaculum were then repaired with a running locking #2 FiberWire suture (Arthrex, Inc). After an extensive irrigation of the deep and subcutaneous tissues, a standard layered closure was then performed.

The left knee was addressed next in an identical fashion. At the end of this case, each knee was able to obtain 0 to 30 degrees of flexion without any undue tension on the repairs.

Patient follow-up
The patient remained non-weight bearing except for transfers for 6 weeks post-operatively. Both knees were initially locked in full extension with a brace. Two days after surgery, the patient started physical therapy with Continuous Passive Motion machine, increasing ∼15° per week. After 6 weeks, the patient started full weight bearing with braces locked in extension with a walker. His ROM was approximately 0–110° on both legs, and he could perform straight leg raises without difficulty.

At 10 months he demonstrated 5/5 quadriceps strength, −10° of extension, and 140° of flexion bilaterally. Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) score was 57 bilaterally.

At 12 months the patient had normal alignment with symmetric quadriceps strength bilaterally. His ROM remained at −10 degrees of uncorrectable passive extension and 140 degrees of flexion bilaterally. The patient's right and left knee IKDC score improved to 69 and 72, respectively. His recorded Lysholm score at 12 months for his right and left knee was 94 and 99, respectively.