A 28-year-old Asian woman was admitted to the hospital for the treatment of “a pelvic mass for 10 months” on November 11, 2018. The patient usually had regular menstruation, moderate menstrual volume, dysmenorrhea, and a G1P0L0A1. Gynecological examination: The rear of the uterus was approximately 8 cm in diameter with poor activity and tenderness, but no other abnormalities were noted. The patient had no obvious cause of abdominal pain during the first 10 months prior to admission. Ultrasound examination revealed a heterogeneous mass on the upper right side of the uterus with a diameter of approximately 4 cm, nodule of the greater omentum with a diameter of approximately 2 cm, and serum CA125 level of 416 mU/mL. Is it diagnosed as “endometriosis? Inflammatory Pelvic Masses”. Anti-infective rehydration therapy was administered and the patient was discharged with pain relief. Two weeks after discharge, the patient’s CA125 level decreased to 106 mU/mL and returned to normal after 6 weeks. However, the pelvic mass gradually increased. Re-examination of pelvic ultrasound performed showed a 7.7 cm × 7.4 cm × 8.2 cm mixed echoic mass on the right side of the uterus with clear boundary, fine punctate echo in the cyst, and abdominal and pelvic effusion. Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography showed that the cyst wall of the pelvic mass was significantly enhanced, malignancy was suspected, and surgical treatment was recommended. On November 14, 2018, the patient underwent transabdominal pelvic and intestinal adhesion release, omental, bilateral ovarian, peritoneal multipoint, and multiple adenomyomas, and hysteroplasty. During the operation, approximately 600 mL of hemorrhagic ascites were aspirated. Upon exploration, a gray-red mass with a diameter of approximately 8 cm was observed on the surface of the greater omentum, which was soft and resembled rotten meat. Diffuse “moss like” brown cellulose deposits were found on the surface of the uterus, bilateral adnexa, abdominal wall, intestinal tract, lateral groove of the rectum, and anterior wall of the rectum. The lesions were not completely cleared and some areas were electrocoagulated. Pathological examination of the resected specimen showed retinal tissue endometriosis with vasodilation, blisters, scattered and focal lymphocytic infiltration, bilateral ovarian cystic follicles, peritoneal fibers inside adipose tissue necrosis, fibroblast proliferation, increased foam cell infiltration, and uterine adenomyoma. Ascites pathology showed many red blood cells, a small number of small lymphocytes and neutrophils, and no tumor cells. Postoperatively, the patient recovered smoothly, and was treated with gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRH-α). Leuprorelin was started once a month for 6 months, followed by oral dienogest (DNG) for 3 years, after which the medication was stopped for 3 months. The patient conceived naturally and had normal pregnancy. A baby boy weighing 3300 g was delivered via vaginal discharge at 39 + 3 weeks of gestation. Both the mothers and babies were healthy, with no recurrence or adverse reactions during follow-up.