The patient was a 34-year-old primigravid Japanese woman who had hypothyroidism, for which she had been prescribed levothyroxine sodium hydrate (50 μg/day). She presented to another clinic with genital bleeding and a 2-week delay in menstruation and obtained a positive result on a urine pregnancy test 2 weeks later. The patient was referred to our hospital for perinatal care. At 6 weeks of gestation, she had mild abdominal pain and no genital bleeding. Examination using a vaginal speculum revealed cervical erosion and moderate white discharge. Transvaginal ultrasonography revealed a gestational sac, a 9-mm fetus with a heartbeat, and a subchorionic hematoma in the uterus.

At 7 weeks of gestation, the patient experienced a miscarriage. She had a fever of 37.0–37.5°C, and her white blood cell count was within the normal range, with a C-reactive protein level of 1.0–2.0 mg/dL. Ultrasonography showed a 3 cm subchorionic hematoma, and her hemoglobin level was 9.0–10.0 g/dL, indicating mild anemia but no bleeding. Laboratory test results showed abnormal serum albumin (3.2 g/dL) and creatinine (6.69 mg/dL) levels, whereas sodium, potassium, and chlorine levels were within the normal ranges. She was seronegative for the human immunodeficiency, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C viruses, as well as the cardiolipin, antinuclear, anti-glomerular basement membrane, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA and p-ANCA). However, she was seropositive for lupus anticoagulant. Protein C and S activity levels were normal. The patient had no history of diabetes mellitus, heart failure, pyelonephritis, sepsis, or hyperemesis gravidarum. She also experienced no symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus, such as malar rash, oral ulcers, arthritis, leukopenia, and thrombocytopenia. The patient experienced oliguria, and her serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels were abnormally increased. Qualitative urine test results showed strong positivity for occult blood and white blood cells but exhibited negativity for protein. Urine sedimentation test results showed erythrocytes; leukocytes; other tubular epithelial cells; and vitreous, granular, and epithelial cylinders. N-acetyl-β-D-glucosaminidase and β2 microglobulin were also detected in the urine.

A renal biopsy was performed without any complications approximately 10 days after miscarriage. Optical microscopy revealed cytoplasmic vacuolar degeneration of the tubular epithelium throughout the cortex. Focal tubular epithelial cell shedding, necrotic debris in the tubular lumen, and medullary tubular epithelium degeneration were also observed. The tubular interstitium showed mild edema and occasional focal infiltration of inflammatory cells, which were predominantly lymphocytes mixed with neutrophils and eosinophils. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed negativity for immunoglobulin G, immunoglobulin A, immunoglobulin M, complement component 3, complement component 1q, and complement component 4. Notably, no glomerular lesions were observed on light or electron microscopy; that is, renal biopsy findings indicated only tubulointerstitial damage. She was diagnosed with stage III AKI according to the RIFLE, AKIN, and KDIGO criteria. However, she was not diagnosed with septic abortion or hyperemesis gravidarum.

The patient underwent manual vacuum aspiration under general anesthesia. At the time of surgery, her serum albumin and creatinine levels were 2.5 g/dL and 9.81 mg/dL, respectively. Urinalysis results showed a protein level of 0.28 g/dL and no white or red blood cells. Moderate bleeding occurred intra-operatively; however, the patient tolerated the procedure well. During the peri-operative period, the patient was treated with loop diuretics, and the urine output exceeded 0.5 mL/kg/h after treatment.

Notably, the patient’s urinary output and laboratory findings, including serum creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels, improved without additional treatment. Urinalysis revealed no abnormalities. Histopathological examination of the resected endometrial tissue revealed decidual and implantation-related changes. Moreover, chorionic villi without enlargement, which consisted of syncytial trophoblast and cytotrophoblast cells, were observed. There were no findings indicative of molar pregnancy. After manual vacuum aspiration, the patient’s laboratory parameters and renal function recovered, and she had no complications. Antiphospholipid syndrome was ruled out as the lupus anticoagulant was negative postoperatively. The patient was discharged 3 days postoperatively.