A 27-year-old woman with beta-thalassemia major since 24 years and 16 weeks of pregnancy was referred from the Internal Medicine Department to the Oral Medicine Department with complaints of swelling, bleeding gums since early pregnancy, and bad breath. The patient was hospitalized with complaints of pain in her knee so he could not move. She was admitted to hospital with complaints of pain in her knees so she could not move and was diagnosed with Arthritis ar Genue Sinistra related to Thalassemia by an internal medicine specialist, sub division of rheumatology. General condition patient was weak, sick, and difficult to move during the approximately two weeks, when she was hospitalized. Patient has never visited a dentist, either before or now, with complaints about her oral cavity. The patient had a splenectomy in 2009. Her beta-thalassemia major was treated with routine blood transfusions once a month and iron anti- chelation drugs (deferoxamine); however, it was stopped due to pregnancy. There was no history of other systemic disease in this patient. A family history of the same disease was ruled out. History of recurrent stomatitis and drug or food allergies was ruled out.

The patient’s general condition weak, with normal vital signs; however, the patient had fever. Intraoral examination revealed gingival hyperplasia; erythema; soft consistency; a dark red, rounded gingival margin; tendencies to bleed on the labial, buccal, palatal, and lingual areas; and pain. Oral hygiene index-simplified (OHIS) score was poor (5.7) and there were true pockets in all regions. Peripheral blood morphology result: (1) erythrocytes: polychromacy in anisochrome populations (hypochrome, normochrome), anisopoikilocytosis (ovalocytes, target); (2) leukocytes: sufficient quantity, hypersegmentation (+); (3) platelet count: numbers increase, spread out; Interpretation: moderate anemia et causa thalassemia major accompanied by signs of increased erythropoiesis activity with suspected infection. The diagnosis was made based on the history, clinical features, and examination, as well as additional examinations, namely gingival enlargement accompanied by chronic periodontitis associated to pregnancy with β-thalassemia major and exfoliative cheilitis of the lips. The classification of periodontal disease in this patient is chronic periodontitis with gingival enlargement associated with pregnancy and beta-thalassemia major. The prognosis in this case was good because the patient was cooperative and followed the directions of the Oral Medicine Department. In this case, multidisciplinary therapy was a collaboration between an oral medicine specialist, a periodontist, and an internist. Dental therapy consisted of spooling with 3% hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) solution, chlorine dioxide spray mouthwash (Oxyfresh®, USA), antibiotics (amoxicillin 500 mg tablet, and metronidazole 300 mg tablet), and scaling/root planning. Spooling of H2O2 3% solution was performed at every visit; chlorine dioxide spray mouthwash was used three times a day after meals, and antibiotics were administered for seven days at third visit. Scaling and root planning were performed by the periodontist after the general condition was controlled and after the gingival hyperplasia and spontaneous bleeding improved. Blood transfusions to remove packed red cell buffy coat (PRC BCR) are also carried out routinely once a month. Non-pharmacological therapy, including oral hygiene instructions, was still given to patients. Oral complaints in this case occurred due to the poor oral hygiene, β-thalassemia major, and pregnancy, were also informed to the patient as education.

This patient had eight follow-up visits, consisting of two inpatient and six outpatient visits, with the following details:

First Visit
The first visit was carried out one day after the initial inpatient visit (day +1). Intraoral bleeding still exists in the lingual-anterior part of the mandible, but bleeding in the anterior part of the maxilla has stopped. The patient still had a fever. Medications previously provided were used accordingly. Pharmacological were continued, including spooling 3% H2O2 on all parts of the gingiva, using chlorine dioxide as a mouthwash, and applying a thin layer of petroleum jelly to the lips. A blood transfusion was carried out last night. Oral hygiene instructions are still given to patients.

Second Visit
The second visit was performed two days after the initial visit (day +2). Intraoral bleeding Follow-up visits should be conducted in outpatient settings. Pharmacological therapy including spooling 3% H2O2 on all parts of the gingiva, using chlorine dioxide as a mouthwash, and applying a thin layer of petroleum jelly to the lips. A blood transfusion was carried out last night. Oral hygiene instructions are still given to patients.

Third Visit
Nine days after the initial visit (Day+9). First outpatient treatment. Oral symptoms appeared to improve; bad breath was greatly reduced, but the gums were still swollen. The chlorine dioxide spray mouthwash was still being used and had run out. The patient could brush her teeth with a soft toothbrush but still experienced bleeding. Spooling was performed with 3% H2O2. The previous therapy was continued, antibiotics were prescribed 3x/day for seven days, and a blood transfusion was planned as a preparation for scaling the dental calculus. Oral hygiene instructions are still given to patients.

Fourth Visit
One month after the first visit (Day+30). Oral complaints improved significantly, bad breath was absent, gingiva enlargement decreased, and spontaneous bleeding ceased. The patient did not experience bleeding when brushing her teeth. Transfusions were performed between visits H+9 and H+30. During this visit, laboratory hematology tests and subsequent blood transfusions were performed. Antibiotics were no longer administered, 3% H2O2, chlorine dioxide, petroleum jelly and oral hygiene instructions were continued.

Fifth Visit
One week after the 4th visit (day +37), the oral complaints improved, but pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapy continued, including spooling 3% H2O2 on all parts of the gingiva, chlorine dioxide as a mouthwash, and applying a thin layer of petroleum jelly to the lips. Oral hygiene instructions are still given to patients. Supragingival scaling was planned two weeks later or after routine transfusions were administered.

Sixth Visit
Two months after the initial visit (day +60), the oral complaints improved. The gingival hyperplasia in some areas was no longer present, although in other areas still present, but they have undergone improvement. The transfusion had already been performed one week previously. Pharmacological therapy was continued, including 3% H2O2 spooling, chlorine dioxide spray mouthwash, and petroleum jelly. Non-pharmacological therapy namely oral hygiene instructions and an interdental toothbrush was suggested. Supra- and subgival scaling were performed.

Seventh Visit
Two weeks after the 6th visit (Day+74), all the complaints improved. Gingival hyperplasia mostly resolved after scaling. Pharmacological includes 3% H2O2 spooling, chlorine dioxide spray mouthwash, and petroleum jelly as well as non-pharmacological therapy, consisting of oral hygiene instructions and the use of an interdental toothbrush.

Eighth Visit
Three months after the initial visit (day +90), routine blood transfusions were performed one week before the visit. The patient is no longer presented with any oral complaints. All patients with gingival hyperplasia recovered optimally. The spooling process was stopped with 3% H2O2. Supra- and subgival scaling were performed again in all maxillary and mandibular regions. Instructions for the use of an interdental toothbrush, chlorine dioxide spray mouthwash, and petroleum jelly are still provided.