38-year-old male patient with no relevant medical history, presented to the emergency department with a one-year history of a condition characterized by a history of multiple teeth falling out (1st, 2nd, 3rd upper left molar, 3rd upper right and lower molar); no association with trauma, smoking or poor dental hygiene. In the last month he presented gingival recession and difficulty chewing. On physical examination, he presented increased mobility in posterior teeth of the maxilla and mandible, associated with severe gingivitis and halitosis. Panoramic radiography showed multiple lesions in the bilateral mandibular body of the punch-drilled type. Complementary study with a CT scan of the skull showed multiple bilateral bone lytic lesions in the mandible, maxilla, left temporal bone and ipsilateral sphenoid zygomatic region. In the histopathological study, the mandibular biopsy presented foci of chronic inflammatory lymphoplasmocytic infiltrate, micro granulomas in fibrous connective tissue and hemorrhagic foci composed of histiocytic cells. Immunohistochemistry presented positive markers for CD1a, CD68 and S100. In the extension study in bone scintigraphy, increased osteoblastic activity was observed in the axial and appendicular skeleton, and in the myelogram, myeloid hyperplasia with 5% plasma cells and rouleaux, all findings consistent with HCL.

In the course of the evaluation, the patient had polyuria, polydipsia and nocturia; so a suspicion of a pituitary gland condition was raised, and general and hormonal laboratory studies were requested, highlighting panhypopituitarism with diabetes insipidus, hypogonadism, hypothyroidism and secondary adrenal insufficiency. In addition, a brain MRI was requested, which showed a hypothalamic nodule of 12 × 8 × 7.2 mm that compromised the infundibular region, associated with the absence of the normal signal of hyperintensity of the neurohypophysis in T1, a lesion highly suggestive of granulomatous infiltration.

Given the clinical background, laboratory, imaging and pathological findings, a therapeutic management was decided as a HCL of multisystem involvement, with involvement of the central nervous system. A bucomaxillofacial defocalisation of the primary mandibular lesion was performed, hormonal supplementation of the affected axes and a chemotherapy scheme was initiated, initially an induction scheme of vinblastine/prednisone/6-mercaptopurine, however, when a hypophyseal involvement was demonstrated, and taking into account the guidelines of the Ministry of Health of Chile and the Chilean Society of Haematology, it was changed to a scheme with cladribine (2-CdA) plus cytarabine for 5 cycles, achieving a first complete remission (RC1) with a decrease of the pituitary gland nodule by 50%, radiotherapy was indicated at low doses to the first lumbar vertebra (L1) with improvement of the pain. Biphosphonates were not indicated due to being considered of high risk due to maxillary involvement. He is currently in RC1 in follow-up, fully integrated into his work activities and maintaining hormonal supplementation without problems. The patient was asked for informed consent for disclosure of his clinical background.
