A 63-year-old male Hispanic patient presented to hospital as an emergency with sudden onset of severe respiratory distress, palpitations, and profuse sweating. He was in his usual state of health and could feely ambulate with independent activities of daily living until 30 minutes before arrival to emergency room. He had a 20-year history of hypertension, a 15-year history of diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease requiring insertion of a coronary artery stent five years previously, a ten-year history of New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class II heart failure with a reduced ejection fraction (EF) of 35%, chronic kidney disease (CKD) stage 3B. On admission to hospital, his medications included carvedilol (25 mg twice daily), lisinopril (20 mg daily), spironolactone (25 mg daily), furosemide (20 mg daily), glargine insulin (20 units at bedtime), insulin lispro injection (7 units three times daily), atorvastatin (40 mg daily), and aspirin (81 mg daily), with no known drug allergies.

On examination, his blood pressure was 205/110 mmHg, his respiration rate was 29 breaths/min, his heart rate was 118 beats/min, pulse oximetry was 82% (in room air), and his temperature was 36.2°C. His weight was 72 kg and his height was 68 inches, resulting in a body mass index (BMI) 24.13 kg/m2. On physical examination, the patient was in severe respiratory distress, he was sweating, and unable to speak clearly. His jugular venous pressure was elevated, as shown by jugular vein distention (3+). On chest auscultation, profuse bilateral crackles were present in all pulmonary fields. Cardiac auscultation was remarkable for a gallop with a regular rate along and a systolic murmur 3/6 heard at the left midclavicular line, at the level of the fifth intercostal space. The point of maximal cardiac impulse was displaced to the left (at the anterior mid-axillary line) and no abdominal distention or ascites was noted, with lower limb pitting edema (1+) up to the level of the mid-calf.

The patient was placed in the cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) area where blood gases on air were measured, and laboratory tests were ordered. The patient was treated with 100% oxygen using a non-rebreather mask and positioned at 90°, resulting in improvement pulse oximetry, which increased up to 90%. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia, lateral lead ST depression (of 1 mV), left axis deviation and left ventricle hypertrophy. A portable chest X-ray was obtained which was remarkable for an enlarged cardiac silhouette, stag’s antler sign of upper lobe pulmonary venous diversion (cephalization), and Kerley B-lines, indicating interstitial edema.

Although laboratory tests were ordered, because the patient was critically ill, and further management could not be delayed, initial treatment was guided based on the clinical findings, clinical history, the ECG, arterial blood gases, and X-ray findings. In view of the findings of the initial investigations and the absence of fever, pneumonia was excluded and a diagnosis of hypertensive cardiogenic pulmonary edema was made. Intravenous (IV) nitroglycerin treatment was commenced, starting at 30 mcg/min and increased by 15 mcg/min every 3 minutes, with continuous pulse oximetry and monitoring of vital signs every 3 minutes. After 18 minutes, nitroglycerin was titrated up to 120 mcg/min and his blood pressure decreased to 148/82 mmHg, his systolic blood pressure reduced by 29%, his diastolic blood reduced by 25%, and his heart rate decreased to 87 beats per minute. A rapid clinical improvement was made and the patient was able to communicate in complete sentences and was able to breathe without the use of accessory muscles. Pulse oximetry showed an oxygen saturation >97%, and oxygen supplementation continued with the use of a nasal cannula at 3 L/min and the patient’s pulse oximetry measurement was >96%.

After 25 minutes, the patient was treated with enalapril (2.5 mg IV) combined with furosemide (20 mg IV). Nitroglycerin was decreased at a rate of 10 mcg/min every 5 minutes until it was discontinued, followed with an oral dose of isosorbide dinitrate (30 mg). After complete clinical stabilization, the laboratories results showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 11.43×109/uL, hemoglobin of 10.9 g/dl, hematocrit of 31.8%, platelets level of 74×109/L, sodium of 144 mmol/L, potassium of 3.9 mmol/L, chloride of 107 mmol/L, carbon dioxide (CO2) of 25 mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 27 mg/dL, creatinine of 1.4 mg/dL, brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) of 3,452 pg/ml, and troponin I <0.05 ng/ml. Blood gas measurements on air included pH of 7.381, pCO2 of 44.8 mmHg, pO2 of 57 mmHg, HCO3 of 25.8 mmol/L, and oxygen saturation of 84%.

The patient was evaluated for the presence of possible underlying pulmonary embolism (PE) using the Wells risk stratification criteria for PE, and stratified as low-risk, with further evaluation with a D-dimer level of 340 ng/ml, which was interpreted as negative. Evaluation for hyperthyroidism showed a normal ultrasensitive plasma thyroid stimulating hormone assay (usTSH) measurement of 2.56 μU/mL and free thyroxine (T4) of 6.87 μU/mL.

The patient was admitted to the internal medicine hospital ward with a diagnosis of hypertensive cardiogenic pulmonary edema and discharge home 48 hours later. On discharge from hospital, his medications included furosemide (40 mg daily), carvedilol (12.5 mg twice a day), sacubitril/valsartan (24 mg/26 mg twice a day), spironolactone (25 mg daily) and isosorbide mononitrate (60 mg daily). The patient underwent weekly follow-up by his cardiologist who optimized the medication therapy. No emergency room visits or hospitalization were reported, at least for the next 60 days.