We present a case of a 59-year-old lady with a twelve-year history of secondary progressive multiple sclerosis who was referred to ophthalmology with a few weeks’ history of bilateral blurring of vision.

The patient had no past ophthalmic history and no drug history other than the anti-epileptic medications related to her multiple sclerosis. Previously documented ophthalmic examinations did not reveal any signs of Fuchs' endothelial corneal dystrophy, and the patient has no family history of corneal pathology.

The patient had been on amantadine therapy at a dose of 100mg twice daily for the past 7 years and was started on levetiracetam 250mg twice daily as an add-on agent. Visual deterioration was experienced shortly after commencement of levetiracetam therapy for a breakthrough seizure.

On examination, the patient’s best corrected visual acuity was 0.5 logMAR right eye and 0.5 logMAR left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed corneal edema involving both eyes and absence of uveitis. Corrected intraocular pressures were 16mmHg right eye and 18mmHg left eye. Corneal topography was performed which confirmed bilateral significant corneal thickening with a right central corneal thickness of 936μm and left central corneal thickness of 1134μm. The rest of the eye examination was normal.

Since amantadine is a known cause of corneal edema, it was agreed with the patient and her caring neurologist to switch from amantadine to lamotrigine. Levetiracetam therapy was continued at this stage. No improvement in vision was noted two months after this change in treatment. The patient expressed the wish to temporarily stop levetiracetam on a trial basis in view of the direct temporal association between the onset of symptoms and the commencement of the medication.

Amantadine was re-introduced, while levetiracetam dose was tapered. Improvement in vision was noted a few days after levetiracetam dose reduction. Levetiracetam was stopped altogether, and the patient remained on amantadine and lamotrigine. A provisional diagnosis of levetiracetam-induced corneal edema was made at this stage. Her vision normalized and repeat corneal topography six months after stopping the levetiracetam showed a right central corneal thickness of 567μm and a left central corneal thickness of 573μm, and a visual acuity of 0.2 logMAR both eyes. Slit-lamp examination confirmed clear cornea and the absence of corneal guttata in either eye.

The patient was examined again thirteen months after the first presentation. No further changes in her medications were made, and her vision had remained stable at 0.2 logMAR in both eyes. Repeat corneal topography showed no further changes.