A 32-year-old woman, gravida 1, para 0, complained of continuous vaginal fluid flow for more than 2 h and bloody amniotic fluid for 20 min in the 36th week of pregnancy. After admission to our hospital, placental abruption was immediately suspected, which led to an emergency cesarean section at 36-week gestation. During the operation, one-fifth of the exfoliated surface of the placenta was found. Birthweight was 2,500 g. Apgar scores were 5 at 1 min and 10 at 5 min. The patient reported a history of hereditary glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency (G6PD). There was no abnormality in her medical history and allergy history. Serology of maternal blood for human immunodeficiency virus, Chlamydia, and syphilis, Group B streptococcal status was negative. She had no history of a poor dentition or intrauterine device (IUD) use. Down’s screening at 17 weeks of pregnancy found a high risk of trisomy 18 syndrome. Further amniocentesis chromosome examination showed no obvious abnormality in the 46 chromosome karyotype. Physical examination was normal, and subsequent antenatal visits were unremarkable. There was no prior history of severe illness or surgery.

The patient began to experience lower abdominal pain on the second day after surgery, which was temporarily tolerable and was intermittent. Routine histologic examination of the placenta and cord was negative. Her postoperative hospital course was relatively uncomplicated and she was discharged home on postoperative day 3.

On postoperative day 6, she presented to the Emergency Department (ED) for chill but no fever, worsening lower abdominal pain, and new onset of pollakiuria, urgent urination, odynuria, and dysuria. Physical examination revealed a mass and severe tenderness in the abdominal bladder area. Gynecological examination found that the uterine cervix was smooth with no tenderness upon palpation and movement, a mass in the front wall of the vagina was palpable, and the tenderness was evident. She experienced severe pain when a catheter was inserted into the urethra. The catheter drains a small amount of urine. The patient did not have gross hematuria. A pelvic ultrasound exam revealed a mass measuring approximately 6.8 × 5.8 cm, which was located under the incision scar and in front of the bladder. Biological examination showed an inflammatory process with 19.820 WBC/mmy3 with 90.67% neutrophils and 3.93% lymphocytes, CRP 64.36 g/mm3. She was admitted for management of presumed pelvic hematoma.

We performed open surgery via cesarean section to remove the hematoma and check the incision site. Two cystic fluid dark areas were observed under the uterine incision during the operation. We punctured the abscess and absorbed dirty pink and foul-smelling pus. The puncture solution was reserved for aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cultures. After the uterine incision was opened layer by layer and the serosal sutures were cut off, a large amount of pus blood gushing out was observed at the lower muscle layer and the retroflection peritoneum of the bladder under the incision. Approximately 250 mL of bloody pus with a bad odor was absorbed. Then, we lavaged the space entirely, followed by the placement of a drainage tube. The patient received intravenous ceftazidime 3 g/day associated with levofloxacin 0.5 g/day for one week in the postoperative period. The puncture solution, the absorbed pus, and the drainage were respectively pumped into a blood culture bottle for aerobic and anaerobic culture. All three cultures grew the same A. odontolyticus species on the sixth operative day. When accurately diagnosed, the antibiotics were changed to IV penicillin 3.20 million IU every 6 h. The patient was discharged 19 days after admission on 2 g of oral Amoxicillin four times a day. The patient has been seen in the Infectious Diseases clinic on two occasions in the three months since discharge, and she remains well. Then, the patient discontinued Amoxicillin and continued to follow up for 10 months without recurrence.

