A 3-year-old boy with an Ommaya reservoir in his right ventricle presented to our hospital with a fever. The reservoir was used to prevent hydrocephalus after a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt removal placed after a grade 3 intraventricular hemorrhage. He also had a right subclavian portal catheter placed 2 years previously due to Hirschsprung disease (entire colon type). He had a history of catheter-related methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) bacteremia. He was mechanically ventilated through a tracheostomy because of congenital central hypoventilation syndrome. On examination, he had a fever of 38.8°C and erythema around the Ommaya reservoir. Hematology showed a white blood cell count of 9260 cells/mL with 50% neutrophils. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from the Ommaya reservoir showed a leukocyte count of 6 cells/mL (40% neutrophils and 60% lymphocytes) and Gram-positive bacilli on Gram stain. Empiric intravenous treatment was initiated with 300 mg/kg/day of cefotaxime for Ommaya reservoir infection.

After 3 days of cefotaxime treatment, his fever persisted. Therefore, considering the patient’s history of catheter-associated MRSA bacteremia, two sets of blood cultures were drawn, one from a peripheral site and another from the indwelling vascular catheter. A second CSF sample from the Ommaya reservoir was obtained, and antibiotic treatment was switched from cefotaxime to vancomycin (20 mg/kg/day) and meropenem (120 mg/kg/day). The CSF from the Ommaya reservoir showed the following features: glucose concentration, 55 mg/dL with blood glucose of 101 mg/dL; protein concentration, 40 mg/dL; and leukocyte count, 194/mL (81% neutrophils and 19% lymphocytes). Three days later, C. striatum was identified in CSF cultures. Antibiotic susceptibility testing (BD Phoenix automated microbiology systems) revealed that the strain was susceptible to penicillin, amino benzylpenicillin, cefotaxime, cefepime, sulbactam/ampicillin, imipenem/cilastatin, meropenem, erythromycin, clindamycin, levofloxacin, and vancomycin and was resistant to sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim.

Thus, vancomycin and meropenem were de-escalated to 400 mg/kg/day of ampicillin.

Ampicillin treatment was continued for 2 weeks. A CSF culture obtained on day 6 of ampicillin treatment was negative for C. striatum; thus, the Ommaya reservoir was removed and replaced by external ventricular drainage. However, cultures of the removed Ommaya reservoir, and CSF samples grew C. striatum, which was susceptible to meropenem and vancomycin and resistant to the other antibiotics tested. Vancomycin was initiated to treat this new C. striatum meningitis strain, and after 8 days of treatment, the CSF culture from lumbar puncture was negative for C. striatum. External ventricular drainage was removed after confirmation that the ventricular enlargement had not progressed.

The patient was discharged from the hospital after confirming that there was no residual infection or ventricular enlargement.