A female infant was born at 34 weeks of completed gestational age with a birth weight of 2,820 g. A complete course of antenatal corticosteroids had been given and routine antenatal imaging showed polyhydramnios and a large for date fetus. There was history of maternal gestational diabetes and pre-eclampsia.

The infant was delivered by caesarean section in good condition with APGAR scores of 61, 95 and 1,010, but in view of respiratory distress she was given surfactant via less invasive administration 25 min after birth. She was then transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit on continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) in 40% oxygen. At 4 h after birth in view of on-going respiratory distress and an increasing oxygen requirement up to 60% she was intubated and mechanically ventilated. A chest radiograph revealed evidence of possible bilateral eventration of the diaphragms. Diaphragm ultrasound examination confirmed this suspicion. An echocardiogram (ECHO) performed at that time revealed mild hypoplasia of the isthmus, but a repeat ECHO demonstrated a structurally normal heart. After undergoing a spontaneous breathing trial and a period of non-invasive assessment of the electrical activity of the diaphgram, she was successfully extubated after 36 h of invasive ventilatory support. Futhermore, she did not require post-extubation non-invasive respiratory support and remained self-ventilating in air until discharge. As she did not require prolonged periods of invasive respiratory support, she was felt not to be a candidate for surgical intervention in the acute neonatal period.

During her neonatal course she was hypoglycaemic on admission to the neonatal unit with a blood glucose of 0.4 mmol/L and required a maximum glucose concentration of 20%. She was subsequently diagnosed with hyperinsulinism and commenced diazoxide. She had poor feeding despite normal videofluroscopy and ear, nose throat (ENT) examination and went on to require feeding support via a nasogastric tube. On neurological assessment she exhibited central hypotonia with brisk reflexes and was noted to have extensive melanocytic naevi over the lateral aspect of both arms with additional patches on the sacrum. Histopathological examination of a punch biopsy demonstrated results consistent with dermal melanocytosis. She was born with two neonatal teeth which were removed postnatally, however she subsequently developed two fibrous lesions on the anterior alveolar ridge which were pedunculated and mobile, these were later removed at 1 month of age. Extensive neurological investigation was performed and revealed normal brain magnetic resonance imaging scan, with normal upper and lower limb electromyography and nerve conduction studies. Considering the differential diagnosis of spinal muscular atrophy, immunohistochemistry analysis was performed, which showed normal results. Ophthalmological assessment and a renal ultrasound scan was performed, both were normal. Postnatal genetic testing revealed a KMT2D gene mutation, associated with Kabuki syndrome.

She was discharged home on day 64 after birth with nasogastric feeding support and continued on diazoxide medication. She continues to have extensive input from occupational therapists, speech and language therapists and physiotherapy teams.

Imaging and measurements
The chest radiographic thoracic area (CRTA) measured post extubation (day three after birth) was 1,654 mm2, equivalent to that of a term infant with severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Ultrasound imaging (USS) showed focal diaphragmatic eventration with bulging of the dome of the liver into the right and left hemithoraces. A spontaneous breathing trial (SBT) was conducted prior to exubation and electromyography of the diaphgram was measured during this period. The mean amplitude of diaphragmatic electrical activity was 2.47 μV, similar in magnitude to that of ventilated infants of the same gestational age with intact diaphragms. She successfully passed the SBT and subsequent extubation.

The parents gave informed written consent for this report and ethical approval was given for measuring the diaphragm EMG during the SBT prior to extubation (REC reference: 20/SW/0,062).