A 52-year-old female patient from Wolkiet (Northwest Ethiopia) was apparently healthy two years ago but then started experiencing irritability, heat intolerance and diaphoresis. She had an anterior neck swelling of 30 years’ duration. For this, she was evaluated at Haider referral hospital (North Ethiopia), diagnosed with a toxic multinodular goiter and managed with propylthiouracil 100 mg orally (po) three times per day. Six months following initiation of the medication, her symptoms improved, and she was offered surgical treatment, which she refused. Four months prior to her current presentation, she developed generalized body fatigue which worsened during activities like climbing stairs, combing her hair and standing from a squatting position. Concomitantly, she noticed violaceous rash over both hands and neck, which later involved the anterior part of her bilateral thighs and shoulders, hair loss and facial puffiness, but no morning stiffness. One week preceding her current visit, she had difficulty swallowing food, and was unable to support her head. On physical examination, she was acutely sick looking, conscious and oriented. Vital signs were all in normal ranges (blood pressure [BP] = 110/80 mmHg; pulse rate [PR] = 88 beats/minute; respiratory rate [RR] = 24 breaths/minute; temperature [Toc] = 36.7°C; Sa02 = 94% while breathing in room air). She had pink conjunctivae and non-icteric sclera. The anterior neck mass measured 4 by 5 cm, and was non-tender, mobile, multi-nodular, hard in consistency, not attached to overlying skin and showed no palpable lymphadenopathy. The chest was resonant on percussion note and clear on auscultation. Heart sounds were well heard, and there was no murmur or gallop. Abdominal examination revealed no enlarged organ or any sign of fluid collection and she had no visible deformity or limitation of movement on locomotor examination. On integumentary examination, there was an erythematous hyper-pigmented lesion on her face with periorbital edema (heliotrope rashes); confluent violaceous and erythematous macular rashes on the knuckles of the hands (Gottron’s sign) and macular rashes on the forearms with a salt and pepper appearance; and violaceous macular rashes on the neck line (V-shaped rashes), shoulder and back (shawl’s sign) (E) and upper thighs, laterally (holster sign). Additionally, she had a hypopigmented area on her nails, hands, anterior chest and bilateral thigh. On neurologic examination, she was alert and oriented to time, place and person, and cranial nerves were all intact. She had difficulty holding objects against gravity and standing from a squatting position. Sensory examination was normal and meningeal irritation signs were absent. Her laboratory test results showed that she had moderate anemia (hemoglobin = 10.9g/dl, MCV = 78.0 Fl, and RDW: 13.5%), with normal other blood cell lines and erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Liver enzyme was mildly elevated (SGOT/AST: 52.97IU/L SGPT/ALT: 52.99IU/L), and serum albumin was low (2.6g/dl) with a normal bilirubin level. Renal function tests and serum electrolytes were normal. Thyroid function tests were within normal range. Urine analysis and serology test results were unremarkable. Serum creatine kinase before treatment was mildly elevated = 232u/l (normal range =20 – 198). The results of serology tests, such as the ANA, RF and anti-HIV antibody were non-revealing. Another immunological panel was not done due to limited clinical set up.

Thyroid FNAC smears showed cellular aspirate composed of moderately pleomorphic round to polygonal cells admixed with scant colloid suggestive of thyroid follicular neoplasm. Thyroid gland biopsy was not possible since excision is required. Thyroid ultrasound showed multiple hyper-echoic masses on the left side of the thyroid measuring 4.5×2.4 cm, with calcification and multiple ipsilateral neck lymphadenopathy, the largest measuring 1.2 cm on the short axis dimension suggestive of thyroid malignancy. Chest x-ray was normal. Muscle biopsy showed increased nuclear internalization, scattered lymphocyte infiltration and atrophy, which was suggestive of inflammatory myopathy.

The diagnosis of thyroid neoplasm-associated dermatomyositis was considered based on ACR-EULAR classification criteria and the patient was put on prednisolone 40mg daily, methotrexate 7.5 mg po weekly, folic acid 5 mg po daily and cotrimoxazole 960 mg po 3 times per week. Broad spectrum sunscreen and liquid paraffin (moisturizer) were applied on a daily basis. The patient was advised on regular exercise, avoidance of direct sunlight exposure and was linked to chronic follow-up clinic. After 2 weeks of steroid treatment, the patient showed remarkable improvement in muscle strength, and the steroid dose was tapered every week thereafter. After 2 months of treatment, she showed dermatological improvement and her physical exercise endurance was also significantly better.