A 52-year-old male patient with initial diagnosis of pulmonary arterial was admitted to the Department of Cardiology for medical assessment and decision on further treatment. The patient had a history of right-sided spontaneous pneumothorax, treated with thoracentesis and vacuum drainage 35 years earlier. The patient felt increasing dyspnea on exertion. He also complained about signs of right ventricle failure and cyanosis. Four years earlier the patient was hospitalized three times for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation that was converted to sinus rhythm by electric cardioversion besides electrocardiographic examination was normal.

In the same year coronary angiography indicated normal coronary arteries. Echocardiography revealed mild pulmonary hypertension with calculated right ventricle systolic pressure of 36 mmHg without right ventricle dilation.

In the following years, progressive heart failure with increasing pulmonary artery pressure in echocardiography has been observed. Angio-CT was performed on two occasions and chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension was excluded each time. High-resolution computed tomography has excluded interstitial pulmonary pathology. Spirometry was normal. Screening for autoimmune diseases and HIV infection was negative.


Timeline – history, course of the disease, diagnosis and treatment

1976	right-hand pneumothorax
2007	Hospitalized three times for atrial fibrillation and heart failure echocardiography, cardioversion, coronarography were performed. Every time discharged from the departments with diagnosis: Atrial fibrillation, Heart failure, NYHA class II.
2010–2011	Increasing growing shortness of breath and symptoms of heart failure. Patient was hospitalized 3 times. Indirect features of pulmonary hypertension in echocardiography were detected. Three times chest-CT examination was performed; pulmonary embolism or chronic thromboembolic pulmonary arterial hypertension (2 x angio-CT) or pulmonary fibrosis (high resolution computer tomography) was excluded.
Diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension was established, WHO class III.
DEC-2011	Admission to cardiology clinic – echocardiography (TTE, TEE), 6-min walking test, NT-proBNP, right heart catheterisation, pulmonary vasoreactivity test.
Diagnosis of irreversible arterial pulmonary hypertension was established.
Treatment with the illoprost and sildenafil has started
JAN-2012	control visit – improvement in WHO class, decrease of NT-proBNP concentration and increase of 6-min test distance
MAY-2012	Control RHC. SaO2 of blood samples obtained during RHC from upper lobe artery of the right lung amounted 87%.
Angiographic diagnostic of pulmonary arteries revealed PAH fistulas between subclavian and upper lobe of right lung arteries
JUN 2012	angio-CT of systemic arteries revealed additional presence of bronchial artery fistulas to upper lobe of right lung arteries
III-2013	Embolisation of fistulas
VI-2013	Death as a result of worsening of heart failure combined with pneumonia.



At admission to our clinic functional class of patient was assessed as WHO III, In physical examination the second heart sound (S2) was accentuated with widened split S2. Moreover, heart auscultation indicated holosystolic murmur of tricuspid regurgitation. The auscultation of the chest did not show a vascular murmur. Peripheral and central cyanosis was marked. Hepatomegaly, peripheral edema and varicose veins bilaterally were examined.

SaO2 obtained by pulse oximetry method was reduced to 88%. Electrocardiography revealed atrial fibrillation, right axis deviation and negative T wave in precordial leads v1-v3. Additional tests were as follows: NT-proBNP concentration – 3383 pg/ml, six-minute walking test distance - 373 m with 7/10 points in Borg dyspnea score.

Echocardiography showed features of severe pulmonary hypertension: right ventricle enlargement to 44 mm (four chamber view), with depressed function of right ventricle TAPSE 9 mm, right atrium area enlargement to 40 cm2, severe tricuspid valve regurgitation (++++), increased calculated RVSP to 112 mmHg, shortened pulmonary artery acceleration time to 60 ms and mild pericardial effusion. There was no interventricular septum defect. Trans-esophageal echocardiography did not show a defect in the atrial septum too, which was confirmed later by angio-CT.


SaO2 of blood obtained from radial artery was reduced to 87,8%. Right heart catheterization was performed. SaO2 of blood samples obtained during RHC from vena cava superior, vena cava inferior, right atrium, pulmonary trunk, middle lobe artery of the right lung and left pulmonary artery amounted respectively: 64,8%; 77,4%; 73,2%; 70,2%, 69,3%; 71,2% and did not indicate the presence of a left-to-right shunt.

Hemodynamic measurements showed severe precapillary pulmonary hypertension, irreversible in vasoreactivity testing with inhaled nitric oxide (80 ppm) and a combination of oral sildenafil (50 mg) and inhaled nitric oxide (80 ppm).

Based on the whole clinical data and the results of RHC, a diagnosis of idiopathic irreversible pulmonary hypertension was established.

Treatment with inhaled iloprost (Ventavis) 6 × 5 μg and sildenafil (Revatio) orally 3 × 20 mg was initiated. Moreover, digoxin (0,1 mg daily), warfarin (INR range: 2–3), furosemide (40 mg orally daily) and spironolactone (100 mg daily) were administered.

Noninvasive follow up was performed one month later – the patient reported improved physical capacity, class II WHO, NT-proBNP concentration: 1014 pg/ml. Six-minute walking test distance - 471 m.

Invasive assessment was done five months later. RHC showed higher than in initial measurements values of PAP [75,4/51,8 (59,7) mm Hg] and PVR (13,4 WU) (Table ​(Table22 – control RHC).

Oxygen saturation of blood samples obtained during RHC from upper lobe artery of the right lung was elevated and amounted 89.7%.

In the pulmonary angiography reduction of peripheral vascular drawing typical of pulmonary arterial hypertension and the lack of contrast of the right upper lobe artery were detected. Additionally the evidence of retrograde blood flow visible as a negative contrast in right pulmonary artery was found. Afterwards, right subclavian artery arteriography was performed and a huge vascular malformation communicating with right upper lobe artery was detected.

Angio-CT of systemic arteries confirmed presence of previously described fistulas and revealed additional presence of bronchial artery fistulas to upper lobe of right lung arteries.

Selective embolisation of fistulas was performed (50% mixture of Lipiodol and monomeric n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate glue). Embolisation did not bring any clinical change in the patient’s condition.