Patient presentation: newborn at J1 of life, male, from a non-consanguineous marriage and from a first uncomplicated pregnancy and carried to term, no family history of genetic diseases, born by caesarean section due to suspicion of chorio-amniotitis. Adaptation to extra-uterine life was good with an APGAR score of 8/10 and birth weight: 2295g, birth size: 48cm, head circumference: 31cm (-3DS), facial dysmorphia and clubfoot more accentuated on the right.

Clinical examination: he was admitted on J1 for cranio-facial dysmorphia and refusal to breast feed with examination on admission: SaO2: 95% at ambient air, FC: 142 beats/min, TRC< 3s, baby pink, cranio-facial dysmorphia including micro-cranium and hypertelorism, hypotonia, normal stretched fontanelle, weak suction, eupneic, cardiopulmonary auscultation without anomalies, flexible and depressible abdomen, no visceral enlargement, club foot more marked on the right, rest of the examination was without particularities.

Diagnosis: During the hospitalisation, a high-pitched monochromatic cry mimicking a cat meow was observed. The figure illustrates the cranio-facial dysmorphism as well as the more pronounced club foot on the right. A chest radiograph with nasogastric tube in place was performed and returned without anomalies. A constitutional cytogenetic study (FISH) was performed: the analysis by molecular cytogenetic techniques from the specific probes of the cry of the cat (Vsys probe) highlighted a micro deletion of the locus in 5p15.2 in all interphases cells studied. This result correlates with the diagnostic suspicion.

Therapeutic interventions: in the presence of a positive infectious history (suspicion of chorio-amniotic infection and weak suction), the newborn was initially given a probabilistic antibiotic therapy (cefotaxim 100 mg/kg/12 h IV and gentamycin 3 mg/kg/j IVL, parenteral and then enteral feeding by gavage and newborn care).

Follow-up and results of therapeutic interventions: a malformative assessment was performed and returned without anomalies (transfontanellar, cardiac and abdominal ultrasound, brain MRI). A specialised ophthalmological examination was without particularities. The parents were informed about the disease, its long-term prognosis and the interest of genetic counselling in the case of a possible subsequent pregnancy. Therapeutic education sessions were given to the parents. The clinical evolution was marked by respiratory and haemodynamic stability. The antibiotic therapy was stopped after the negative infection assessment; he was discharged on J15.
