We present a case of CAF between the proximal LAD and the PA trunk, causing a “steal phenomenon” to distal LAD territory. Given the rare occurrence of this fistulae type, the clinical presentation is exceptional in this variant, causing a significant shunt from the LAD territory, which resulted in daily cardiac ischemic chest pain.

A 57 years old female, with Type 2 DM, presented to consultation complaining of typical anginal chest pain for 2 years. Anginal episodes were related to physical activity and occasionally at rest, had variable duration and were associated with dyspnea and dizziness. During the last 6 months, symptoms progressed to become daily despite optimal medical treatment. Physical examination was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm and no ST changes, Trans-thoracic echocardiogram, on Doppler analysis, revealed a small jet flow in the main pulmonary trunk without definite identification of its source. We decided to proceed to a nuclear stress test to confirm ischemic heart disease. The test revealed an antero-apical wall defect, along with normal left systolic function. Coronary Angiogram demonstrated the tortuous and dilated LAD to PA CAF, and of notice, a significant decrease in the caliber of the LAD distal to fistula take off, as an indirect sign of an ongoing “steal phenomenon”. LAD proximal to fistulae take off, was dilated. According to Sakakibara fistulae classification, this patient had a Type A fistulae.

These types of fistulae are typically complex and large, and may have a high flow. 3-D CCTA was performed, which confirmed the isolated aberrant branch (fistula), taking off from the LAD at 0.4 cm distal to first diagonal branch, which communicated with the left anterior surface of the pulmonary trunk. The fistula was very tortuous and measured 9.96 cm in length.

Because of the anatomical location and characteristics, the tortuosity of the trajectory, the caliber of the fistula, and the severity of the symptoms, surgical closure was decided.

The operation was performed through a standard median sternotomy, on a beating heart, OFF-PUMP.

The fistula was clearly identified on the surface of the right ventricle reaching the proximal portion of the main pulmonary trunk above the pulmonary valve. The aspect of the fistula vessel wall, although of good caliber, looked very friable and easy to be ruptured on a beating heart. So, dissection and surgical clip closure was discarded. Instead, the fistula was closed using several stitches of 5/0 polypropylene with pledgets. Additional 5/0 stiches were placed on small branches running on surface of the main PA, suspicious of being branches or collaterals from the main fistula trunk. One fine branch running over RVOT was left intact, believed to be a branch of the RCA supplying the RVOT, visualized in the Coronary angiography.

LAD was not identified at the level of the sutures, due to its intramuscular location, but close observation of the monitor for the presence of transient ECG changes, and the anterior/septal wall motion during the procedure, precluded any accidental inclusion of LAD in the stitches. Postoperative outcome was uneventful, with no perioperative MI or other complications. The patient was discharged on the fourth post-operative day. She is currently pain free and with no dyspnea after 5 months of follow up.