78-year-old woman with a history of undifferentiated carcinoma of the cavum treated with chemo- and radio-therapy in 2013 and basal cell carcinoma in multiple locations treated surgically in 2017. A renal tumour lesion was detected during follow-up by computed tomography, and she underwent radical nephrectomy in 2020. The histopathological analysis revealed a renal cell carcinoma, clear cell variant, with a nuclear grade of Fuhrman 2 without vascular or ureteral invasion with free margins; and it was staged as pT2aN0M0 (stage II, AJCC-TNM 8). The patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy and was monitored periodically. Two years after the first diagnosis, during her oncological follow-up, a multi-slice computed tomography with intravenous contrast was performed that evidenced a nodular thickening in the background of the vesicle measuring 15 × 10 mm, with rounded contours with homogeneous enhancement after administration of arterial phase contrast. The patient was asymptomatic with no abnormal findings on physical examination. The blood test did not show any alteration, and the CA 19-9 tumour marker was normal. Despite the absence of biliary symptoms and based on the morphological aspect of the vesicle lesion (assuming vascularised vesicle polyp with probable carcinoma focus) we suggested the patient to undergo surgical extirpation. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy with hepatic pedicle lymphadenectomy was performed without complications. The intraoperative freezing of the cystic margin was negative for atypia. At the cut, the specimen presented in the mucosa four polipoid lesions, the largest measuring 11 mm and the smallest 7 mm in diameter. None of the 6 isolated lymphadenectomy nodes presented tumour involvement. At microscopic examination, the largest polipoid lesion corresponded to a epithelial neoplasm consisting of nuclei of small to medium size, hyperchromic, with wide and clear cytoplasm, arranged in solid nests and cords, with prominent microvascularisation compromising up to the muscularis mucosae, without involvement of the hepatic face. The rest of the polipoid lesions corresponded to accumulations of lipophages. No stones were found. The diagnosis of metastatic CRCC was confirmed by immunohistochemical staining that showed strong positivity for vimentin and PAX8, patchy positivity for CD10 and negativity for pancytokeratin. The surgical margins were free of tumour. Eight months after surgery, the periodic checks did not show recurrence and she is free of disease.
