A 34-year-old female patient presented to the outpatient clinic complaining of difficulty in swallowing due to an enlarging mass on the left side of her neck for the past few months. The swelling was also associated with pain radiating to her left shoulder and mild shortness of breath.

She had no significant past medical history except for cervical spinal surgery due to a herniated disc 3 years ago with implant seen in situ at C5-C6 level. She has no significant family history or history of smoking or alcohol intake.

On examination, the patient was vitally stable. Chest was clear and abdomen was soft. Neurological examination was normal. An immobile, non-tender, and non-pulsatile swelling was noted on the left side of the neck.

Blood work-up showed normal blood cell count, electrolytes, renal, liver, and thyroid function tests. C-reactive protein was high measuring approximately 21.9 mg/L (normal value less than 5 mg/L). AFP-tumour marker was within normal limits.

Cervical spine radiographs were obtained and showed a maintained vertebral alignment with radio-opaque metallic disc spacer in situ at level C5-C6. The trachea appeared slightly displaced to the right side.

Neck ultrasound showed normal appearance of the thyroid gland and no evidence of cervical lymphadenopathy. Nevertheless, upon scanning the left carotid region, a hypoechoic tubular and lobulated left paraspinal soft tissue mass centred between the left common carotid artery anteriorly and the cervical vertebra posteriorly measuring approximately 30 × 34 × 80 mm in diameter was seen, and it appeared to be displacing the left common carotid artery anteriorly and the trachea laterally. The mass showed a heterogeneous echotexture with minimal vascularity on colour Doppler images.

A contrast-enhanced CT scan of the neck showed a well-defined iso-to-hypo-dense mass compared to the surrounding musculature centred on the left carotid space extending from the bifurcation of the common carotid artery down to the thoracic inlet with minimal extension to the mid-line measuring approximately 85 × 32 × 26 mm in diameter. The mass was located between the common carotid artery and the internal jugular vein with displacement of the common carotid artery anteromedially. It showed homogeneous faint delayed enhancement at the late arterial/early venous phase exerting mass effect by displacing the trachea and oesophagus to the right side with no signs of local invasion. No calcifications were noted.

Contrast-enhanced MRI of the neck showed a well-defined hyperintense lesion on T2WI centred in the left carotid space extending from the bifurcation of the common carotid artery downward to the thoracic inlet with minimal extension across the mid-line. It was centred between the left common carotid artery and the internal jugular vein displacing the common carotid artery anteromedially and showed enhancement upon contrast administration. It was seen exerting a mass effect and displacing the trachea and the oesophagus to the right side. A C5-C6 disc spacer was also noted showing a metallic artefact minimally indenting the thecal sac.

The differential diagnosis included neurogenic tumours such as schwannomas, conglomerated lymphadenopathy, carotid body tumours (paraganglioma), and other soft tissue tumours.

The patient underwent a core needle biopsy of the lesion, and histopathology found interlacing bundles of elongated spindle cells with wavy nuclei interspersed with collagen bundles; no atypia, pleomorphism, mitosis, or necrosis were seen. Immunochemistry was diffuse and strong for Beta-Catenin and Vimentin. Focal scattered positive for Smooth Muscle Actin (SMA), SOX 10, and S100 was observed. Findings were suggestive of fibromatosis.

The patient underwent mass excisional surgery in her home country, and the histopathology of the lesion also showed findings denoting aggressive fibromatosis. Unfortunately, after several months, the patient returned with recurrence of the lesion with the same symptoms of pain and neck swelling.

The C5-C6 intervertebral disc cage was removed with vertebral bodies osseous fusion done. The patient underwent another excisional surgery, which resulted in a complication of chronic hoarseness of voice likely due to the involvement of the recurrent laryngeal nerve.

Fortunately, she improved after the surgery with no recurrence of the lesion up to the current date.