A 30-year-old female was evaluated for a two-month history of progressive pain and decreased vision OD. Two weeks before the development of ocular symptoms, the patient began prednisone taper as a treatment for her systemic inflammatory symptoms. Past medical history includes inflammatory arthritis, gastrointestinal symptoms suggestive of inflammatory bowel disease, and 20-pound weight loss prior to presentation. The complete details of the patient’s case were reported previously and are summarized herein along with additional ocular fluid chemokine and cytokine analysis.13

On examination, BCVAs were 20/40 OD and 20/20 OS, and pupils were 9 mm and akinetic OD and 5 mm with brisk light reactivity OS. Intraocular pressures were 65 mmHg OD and 21 mmHg OS. Slit-lamp examination showed pigmented, granulomatous keratic precipitates (KP) within the inferior cornea, 3+ anterior chamber cell, diffuse iris atrophy with pigment on the zonules, and ectropion uveae OD, and OS was unremarkable. Gonioscopy showed 3+ pigmented cells within the inferior angle OD. Fundus examination was unremarkable in both eyes. A diagnostic anterior chamber paracentesis was positive for VZV DNA by PCR testing, and serologic testing was positive for VZV IgG antibody. Subsequently, she was diagnosed with VZV-associated hypertensive anterior uveitis, prompting initiation of oral acetazolamide and ophthalmic timolol, dorzolamide, and brimonidine for ocular hypertension, as well as valacyclovir 1g TID and prednisolone acetate 1% every 2 hours. The patient’s disease course and further details of her management were previously described.13

The patient was diagnosed with a cerebrovascular accident (CVA), thought to be due to VZV-associated CNS vasculopathy, and was hospitalized for 2 weeks during which her ocular symptoms gradually improved. She, however, developed worsening pain and vision in the right eye two months after her CVA, and her BCVA declined to 20/100 with an elevated IOP of 39 mmHg OD. Examination revealed 1+ ciliary injection and 3+ anterior chamber cell, and she was switched from prednisolone to difluprednate with minimal improvement. Subsequently, she underwent a glaucoma filtration procedure with an Ahmed shunt due to her persistent elevated IOP despite maximum tolerated ocular hypertensive therapy. An aqueous humor sample of the right eye was obtained during filtration surgery for a chemokine/cytokine profile analysis. The levels of 22 cytokines and chemokines including IFN-γ, IL-10, IL-12p70, IL-17A, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, TNF-α, IL-18, IL-1RA, IL-1a, IL-1α, IP-10, MCP-1, MIP-1α, MIP-1β, SDF-1α, IL-21, IL-22, IL-23, and IL-27 were estimated using the multiplex bead immunoassay technique. Concentration levels of 7 cytokines/chemokines were detected including IL-6, IL-8, IL-18, MIP-1b, IP-10, MCP-1, and IL-1RA. IL-1RA was the most abundant cytokine (1000 pg/mL), while IP-10 and MCP-1 were the second most abundant cytokines (150–200 pg/mL). IL-18 and MCP-1b levels of 10–20 pg/mL were detected but at minimal levels in this AqH sample. IL-6 and IL-8 were detected but found to be the least abundant cytokines, each with levels of <10 pg/mL.

