February 2020, a 36-year-old with no significant past medical history presented with 5 years history of left sided penoscrotal mass. He has no lower urinary tract symptoms. No History of trauma or infections and he denied any history of weight loss, anorexia or fever. On examination, there is a smooth surface, tender cystic lesion around 20 mm ∗ 20 mm attached to the left side of the bulbar urethra at the penoscrotal junction, it was deep without any skin tethering and not related to the left spermatic cord and it was partially mobile.

Doppler ultrasonography showed a well-defined hypoechoic mass measuring 2.7 ∗ 3.1 ∗ 2.0 cm with significantly increased vascularity at the left of penoscrotal junction. Pelvis Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a mass in the left inferolateral side of the base of the penis with a clear fat plane, which is isointense to the testes in the T2 weighted imaging, T1 weighted imaging and Diffusion-weighted imaging and it was connected to the vas deferens, no lymphadenopathy was noted. Alpha fetoprotein and beta-human chronic gonadotrophin levels were all in the normal range. Given the results of workup and the pain experienced by the patient, a decision was made to proceed with surgical removal of the mass for both diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. During surgery, a mass was seen in the left posterolateral of the scrotum and it was resected completely and sent for histopathology.

Histopathology of the mass showed cellular spindle cell tumour arranged into interlacing fascicle, the cells have spindle to oval vesicular nuclei with evenly dispersed chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli. The tumour showed high mitotic activity reaching up to 3/High-power field. Immunohistochemistry analysis was consistent with synovial sarcoma, revealing a positive TLE-1, CD99, B-cell lymphoma 2 (BLC2), Focal cytokeratin and focal epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). The material was sent for Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and reported a rearrangement of the SS18 gene at 18q11.2 which has been observed in synovial sarcomas. The mass margins were difficult to be assessed by histopathology as the sample had fragmented margins.

The patient presented to the clinic after 2 weeks and given the histopathology report, a re-resection with wider margin was discussed with the patient and he agreed. Positron emission tomography – Computed tomography (PET/CT) was done for Head and Neck, Chest, Abdomen, Pelvis and musculoskeletal structures. Only a 29 ∗ 27 mm thyroid nodule in the lower pole of the left thyroid lobe with moderate hypermetabolism at standardized uptake values (SUVs) of 4.9. Thyroid US showed a solid isoechoic well-defined nodule in the lower pole of the left thyroid lobe with no echogenic foci, Thyroid Imaging Reporting and Data System (TIRADS) was TR3.

A second resection was made 3 weeks from the first one. The whole specimen was resected from both cords bilaterally which was deepened until reaching the corpus spongiosum which was shaved superiorly up to the urethra. The specimen was sent for histopathology. The resected mass was 6.0 ∗ 6.0 ∗ 3.0 cm in size, and it was negative for any pathology. The patient then went into active surveillance and after 16 months of active surveillance he was found to have metastatic lesions in the sixth liver segment and L1 vertebral body. Oncology team started chemotherapy regimen of Ifosfamide and Doxorubicin for 6 cycles with no improvement in the liver lesion. Surgical resection was made for the Fifth and Sixth liver sections with cholecystectomy. Patient then developed a new lung lesion and was started on Pazopanib and Stereotactic Body Radiation Therapy SBRT. The patient then underwent surveillance for 6 months then developed new liver and lung lesions then chemotherapy regimen of Gemcitabine and Docetaxel combination for 3 cycles and progressed then he was started 2 cycles of Dacarbazine and progressed then 2 cycles of Pembrolizumab and progressed. The patient then was shifted to palliative care, and he stopped following up.