A 69-year old diabetic male with ischemic heart disease, severely reduced ejection fraction and surgical revascularization with quadruple coronary artery bypass grafting in 1997 presented to his family physician with nausea and dyspnea for 24 h in late August 2016. A subacute non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction was diagnosed and partial thrombotic occlusion of the internal mammary bypass graft to the distal left anterior descending coronary artery was identified as culprit lesion. However, the remaining flow was reported to be TIMI grade 3. The venous bypass graft to the first diagonal branch was patent, whereas the remaining venous grafts to the intermediate and the posterior descending artery proved chronically occluded, as did all native coronary vessels. LV enddiastolic pressure (LVEDP) was severely increased (40 mmHg) and LV ejection fraction was below 15%. In spite of increasing congestion of the spontaneously breathing patient the remaining coronary flow was judged sufficient, and a conservative medical management was adjudicated and therapeutic anticoagulation and dual antiplatelet therapy were initiated. After initial recompensation the patient experienced repetitive hemodynamically relevant ventricular tachycardia that could not be controlled with ICD- and medical therapy and was associated with the repetitive need for inotropic support (INTERMACS level 3). Consequently, the patient was referred to our center for evaluation of advanced heart failure therapy. Due to coexistent severe cerebrovascular disease, chronic renal impairment and his advanced age, the patient was deemed ineligible for transplantation. Decision for permanent mechanical circulatory support (destination therapy) using an LVAD was made. For pre-existent mild aortic regurgitation a bioprosthetic AV (Edwards Perimount Magna 3000) was implanted along with a third-generation, continuous-flow LVAD (HeartWare, Framingham, MA). Initial postoperative echocardiography documented a normally working aortic bioprosthesis. Pulse pressure, as assessed by invasive arterial BP monitoring, was constantly ≥15 mmHg. At postoperative day 7 hemodynamic monitoring showed a repetitive distinct pattern with a brief decrease followed by a transient increase in peripheral arterial BP. This pattern occurred every 60 s and coincided with the LVAD flushing cycle. On close observation of the arterial BP waveform, no dicrotic notch was visible between systolic decline and diastolic runoff. Echocardiography testified permanent AV closure despite a residual LV ejection fraction of 15 to 20%.