4-year-old patient with no family history of interest was referred to the dermatology department for congenital ichthyosiform syndrome since birth. Erythematous plaques with active desquamative border were observed on the scalp, face, trunk, elbows, knees, extremities, palms and soles. Skin biopsy revealed hyperkeratosis consistent with seborrheic eczema.

Laboratory findings were normal except for aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Persistent hypertransaminemia was observed. The clinical morphology of the lesions suggested the clinical diagnosis of probable erythrokeratoderma variabilis given the changing and migratory character of the hyperkeratotic lesions. However, the alteration of the hepatic tests forced to evaluate other possibilities. The ichthyosiform aspect of the process associated with hepatopathy required to rule out the Chanarin Dorfman syndrome.

Review of the peripheral blood smear (PBS) was requested, revealing multiple cytoplasmic vacuoles within granulocyte series cells and platelets. Thus, the picture of generalized dry ichthyosiform erythroderma and the presence of lipid vacuoles in the polymorphonuclear (PMN) cells of the PBS suggested that the most likely diagnosis was neutral lipid storage disease, also known as Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome. Examination of the PBS smear of the patient's parents did not show the presence of vacuoles in the PMNs.

The diagnosis was confirmed by Sanger sequencing of the CGI-58 gene, the causative gene of the syndrome. It was performed in the index case and parents, and a nonsense mutation in exon 6 (934G→T; R312X) inherited from the father and an insertion/deletion at position 617 in exon 4 inherited from the mother were detected. The latter caused a change in the reading frame that resulted in a premature stop codon. The patient turned out to be a carrier of both mutations in homozygosis.

Following the diagnosis, ophthalmological examination, evaluation of muscle enzymes, otorhinolaryngological examination to rule out hearing disorders and neuropaediatric examination were recommended. In addition, periodic checks by the dermatology service were advised and contact was made with the nutrition and dietetics service to make an assessment. The ophthalmological and neuropaediatric examination was unremarkable; however, mild neurosensorial hearing loss and creatine kinase levels of 2 to 5 times the upper normal limit were observed despite no muscular pains.

As there is no specific treatment for this disease, the only effective treatment was the restriction of long chain triglycerides in the diet and supplementation with medium chain triglycerides. After six months of treatment, the patient showed clinical improvement manifesting a reduction of the scaling areas, without finding a significant variation in the levels of AST, ALT and FAL.
