16-year-old female patient with a history of situs inversus with dextrocardia, single ventricle due to tricuspid atresia, double left ventricular outflow tract and hypoplasia of the pulmonary artery ring. At the age of 7 years she underwent Glenn surgery with preservation of the anterograde ventriculo-pulmonary flow. At the age of 16 years she underwent fenestrated extracardiac Fontan surgery (inferior vena cava to left pulmonary artery anastomosis) and change of the systemic atrioventricular valve to a mechanical prosthesis due to severe insufficiency. She was discharged without complications, with oxygen saturation between 85-91%, and on treatment with acetylsalicylic acid and warfarin. One month after discharge she presented persistent cough associated with haemoptysis that increased in frequency progressing to frank haemoptysis within 3 days, for which she was admitted to emergency. On admission she was hemodynamically stable, afebrile, and with intermittent dyspnoea and cough. On physical examination, heart rate 90 bpm, blood pressure 110/60 mmHg, respiratory rate 22 bpm, oxygen saturation of 86% with ambient oxygen, decreased vesicular murmurs in the lower third of the left hemithorax, non-crepitant. Laboratory tests demonstrated haemoglobin of 13 g/dL, INR 2.5. Fresh frozen plasma anticoagulation was reversed and tranexamic acid was administered. Chest X-ray showed velamentous clouding of the lower half of the left hemithorax compatible with pleural effusion. A drainage tube was placed and 800 ml of serous fluid was obtained. Microbiological studies of sputum for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were negative.

Transthoracic echocardiography showed that the mechanical prosthetic valve was functioning normally; the systolic function of the single ventricle was preserved, as was the anterograde flow through the pulmonary artery. Cardiac angiotomography showed patency of the extracardiac Fontan conduit, hypoplasia of the pulmonary annulus, pulmonary anterograde flow with dilated pulmonary branches and multiple aortopulmonary collaterals, the largest of which was 2.5 mm in diameter. During the second day of observation, the patient presented new episodes of haemoptysis of up to 500 ml, so she was transferred to the cardiological intensive care unit. In a patient with severe haemoptysis requiring anticoagulation because of a mechanical prosthetic valve, percutaneous closure of the aortopulmonary collaterals and occlusion of the anterograde flow of the pulmonary artery trunk were decided.

Cardiac catheterization was performed under general anesthesia, the pressure of the Fontan system was found to be increased (19 mmHg) compared to the preoperative study of the Fontan in AP (pulmonary artery pressure 15 mmHg). Antero-grade flow from the pulmonary artery trunk to the pulmonary branches was found and multiple aortopulmonary collaterals were identified, the largest originating from the subclavian arteries. A 4.5 cm covered stent was implanted at the bifurcation of the pulmonary artery branches with the aim of eliminating the antero-grade flow from the pulmonary artery trunk, and a significant decrease in this flow was observed in the angiographic control. The occlusion of the most important aortopulmonary collaterals of the left and right subclavian arteries was performed with coils. Subsequently, the patient remained stable, did not present new episodes of hemoptysis, allowing the restart of anticoagulation. She was discharged 10 days later. In the follow-up at 6 months, the cardiac angiotomography found the presence of the covered stent at the bifurcation of the pulmonary arteries, the permeability of the Fontan system and the occluded aortopulmonary collaterals with coils. One year later, the control echocardiography showed preserved ventricular systolic function, a normal-functioning systemic mechanical prosthesis, a permeable Fontan system, and minimal pulmonary antero-grade flow. The patient remains in functional class II, with arterial saturation between 89-93%, and there was no recurrence of hemoptysis reported.
