A 25-year-old patient presented for a neurosurgical consultation concerned about his health. His history included a headlong dive into a swimming pool during the holidays two weeks previously. The dive resulted in a fracture of the cervical spine. The patient underwent surgery where he was staying for his holidays. Posterior stabilization of the cervical spine was performed. The patient was wearing a cervical collar, and the surgical wound still had not healed, with the sutures not yet removed. The patient demonstrated no pareses and was able to move about on his own. He did not have detailed medical documentation or diagnostic examination reports for preoperative and postoperative periods. At discharge, he was given an incomplete postoperative CT of the cervical spine in the form of a few old-style films showing some of the views but without digital images. The discharge summary did not contain the necessary detailed description of the treatment provided, including no details about the instrumentation used. The hospital staff or the operators could not be contacted because they would not answer the phone or reply to e-mails and text messages. We decided that a new CT of the cervical spine should be obtained. It revealed status post atypical hangman’s fracture of the cervical spine: a fracture of the C2 pars interarticularis on the left, dislocation of C2 against C3, fracture of the C2 vertebral body with detachment and anterior displacement of a part of the C2 vertebral body. The patient was operated on from a posterior approach. Posterior stabilization of C2-C3 was performed. The screws were correctly positioned in the lateral masses of C3. Within the C2 vertebra however, both screws were initially placed transpedicularly, but their ends did not reach the C2 vertebral body or lateral masses of C1 and extended into the left and right C1-C2 joint spaces. CT images of the status post initial surgery performed at another centre. Leaving this spinal stabilization in place made the patient unable to perform rotational movements of the head as the screws were placed within the C1-C2 joints. Anterior stabilization to prevent C2 dislocation against C3 was also not performed, and appropriate spinal stability was not ensured. After analysing the spinal CT images, we decided to re-operate. Our intention was to restore rotational head movements while ensuring stability of the cervical spine. We decided to use both an anterior and posterior approach. The first stage of the procedure from a posterior approach consisted of the removal of the screws from C2 bilaterally, with the ends of the screws being within the C1-C2 joint spaces, followed by the placement, from the same approach, of shorter screws that ended within C2, thus not reaching the joint spaces and not blocking head rotation. Before the procedure, we did not know what type of screws (manufacturer) had been used originally. It was revealed intraoperatively that the screws were of a type that was also available at our hospital. We did not change the location of the screws within the C3 lateral masses as they were properly implanted. The C2-C3 screws were then joined with longitudinal rods bilaterally. In the second stage of the procedure, from an anterior approach, we performed a C2/C3 discectomy and placed a cage in the C2/C3 space, followed by the placement of a pressure screw throughout the length of the body of C2 and the odontoid process. Finally, we used a cervical plate fixated with 4 screws for C2-C3 stabilization. The postoperative period proceeded without any complications. Apart from minor pain associated with the surgical wound, no concerning symptoms such as dysphagia or voice hoarseness were observed. A follow-up CT scan revealed normal postoperative appearances matching the preoperative assumptions. The patient was discharged home in a good overall and neurological condition. A follow-up functional X-ray of the cervical spine at 8 weeks after the procedure also revealed normal postoperative appearances. At present, the patient has functional flexion/extension and rotational head movements and cervical spine stability is also preserved.