A 66-year-old woman who presented to an ophthalmologist with complaints of metamorphopsia in her right eye. The patient was referred to our hospital for comprehensive eye examination, and her medical history revealed diabetes mellitus. There was no notable ocular or family history. Ophthalmic examination revealed that the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/32 in the right eye and 20/16 in the left eye. The intraocular pressures of both eyes were normal. There were no abnormal findings notable in the anterior segments and the immature cataracts in both eyes were observed. Fundus examination revealed reduced parafoveal gray-colored retinal transparency temporal to the fovea in both eyes. OCT image across the macula revealed a hypo-reflective inner and outer retinal cavity at the foveal center with the overlying ILM drape of the right eye. There were no apparent abnormalities in the retinal layer of the left eye, except for anterior hyaloid attachment both nasal and temporal to the macula. FA revealed hyperfluorescent spots from telangiectatic vessels situated temporal to the fovea in both eyes. Based on these clinical findings, the diagnosis of bilateral MacTel type 2 was confirmed. Thereafter, there was no change in the BCVA or ocular findings in the right eye, so the patient was followed-up without any treatments.

Four years later after the initial visit, the BCVA in the right eye was further impaired to 20/50 and metamorphopsia worsened. Fundus examination showed gray-colored retina temporal to the fovea. OCT image showed multiple hypo-reflective cavities and atrophy of outer retinal layers. The patient underwent cataract surgery and PPV with fluid-air exchange in the right eye. Seven months after the initial surgery, the patient had a full-thickness MH in the right eye. The patient underwent a second surgery with PPV and ILM peeling with SF6 gas tamponade. The MH was closed at month 1 postoperatively. Twelve years after the surgery, the retinal atrophy temporal to the fovea had progressed, but the MH remained closed. The inner and outer retinal structures temporal to the fovea, where retinal atrophy was seen, were disrupted. The BCVA of the right eye was slightly recovered to 20/32 at 1 year and improved to 20/20 12 years after the surgery.

Seven years after the initial visit, the patient experienced a decreased vision in the left eye. The BCVA of the left eye was 20/32. Fundus examination showed gray-colored retina temporal to the fovea. A scan using OCT revealed an inner retinal cavity within the macular area. Five years later (12 years after the initial visit), the patient complained of blurred vision in the left eye, and the BCVA was decreased to 20/50. The OCT image revealed a full-thickness MH. The patient underwent cataract surgery and PPV with an inverted ILM-flap technique and fluid-air exchange with SF6 gas tamponade. Following the procedure, the MH was almost closed at 1 month after the surgery, although there was tiny cavity in the outer retina, and the MH was fully closed at the 6-month postoperatively and the BCVA improved to 20/20. Twenty-two months after the surgery, the BCVA improved to 20/16, but the outer retina at the center had thinned, and disorganization of the inner and outer retinal layers and hyperreflective materials were seen temporal to the fovea.

In the patient, FAF and microperimetry were also evaluated. In both eyes, an increased FAF area was seen temporal to the fovea, possibly due to reduced blockage by macular pigment, and the retinal sensitivities were reduced in this area. As for the right eye, the center of the increased FAF was hypo-autofluorescence due to atrophy after longer than 12 years, and the retinal sensitivities in that area were particularly reduced. As for the left eye, longer than 2 years after the surgery, FAF showed hypo-autofluorescence at the center of the increased FAF area, where the retinal sensitivities were also reduced.