A 34-year-old female with no past medical or surgical history was presented to the emergency department (ED) with a five-day history of progressively worsening fatigue, heat intolerance, sweating, and palpitations. Her symptoms did not have a diurnal variation. The patient described fatigue and palpitations present with milder intensity for the last two years but was never bothersome enough to seek medical attention. Upon further questioning, the patient reported five kilograms of unintentional weight loss over the past five months. She did not report diarrhea, respiratory symptoms, or chest pain. Her menstruation was regular. The patient quit smoking three months before her presentation and never consumed alcohol. The patient denied any excessive use of caffeine in her diet.

A physical exam revealed euthermia (36.6 °C), tachycardia with heart rate (HR) up to 120 beats per minute (BPM), raised blood pressure (140/100 mmHg), a respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation at 99% on room air and a body mass index (BMI) of 23.5 kg/m2. Further examination revealed a diffuse goiter, fine bilateral tremors on outstretched hands, bilateral proptosis, bilateral lid lag and retraction, more on the right side. An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia (ST) without ischemic changes or signs of chronic hypertension. A chest X-ray and bedside transthoracic echocardiogram did not reveal of any pathology. A complete blood profile and kidney and liver function tests were unremarkable.

Further blood investigations revealed thyrotoxicosis with fully suppressed thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (<0.01 mIU/L, normal range: 0.3–4.2), with raised T3 (17.8 pmol/L, normal range: 3.7–6.4) and T4 (52.5 pmol/L, normal range: 11–23.3). Her TSH receptor antibody (TRAB) was positive (16.5 IU/L, cut off 1.75 IU/L), hence confirming a diagnosis of Grave’s disease (GD). The patient was educated about GD and the effects and side effects (especially agranulocytosis) of CBZ. She was then started on CBZ 20 mg once daily (OD) and Propranolol 80 mg sustained release (SR) OD with an outpatient follow-up for repeat TFT and further dose adjustment. However, after four weeks, the patient revisited the ED with a three-day history of palpitations associated with chest discomfort and dizziness. The physical exam revealed ST (HR 137 BPM) and a thyroid exam similar to her initial visit. A repeat TFT panel showed TSH <0.01, T3: 17.5, and T4: 64.1. She denied non-compliance with the medication. CBZ was increased to 20 mg twice daily (BD), and Propranolol 80 mg SR was continued. The patient was seen in the endocrine clinic after two weeks. She still complained of palpitations and heat intolerance; however, ST had settled.

Two weeks post-clinic visit, the patient visited the ED for the third time with a 1-day history of bothersome palpitations. Examination revealed ST (HR140 BPM), and her BMI had increased to 24.5 kg/m2. TFTs showed persistent hyperthyroidism (TSH <0.01, T3: 12.1, T4: 54.1). The patient was admitted and given CBZ 20 mg thrice daily (TD) and propranolol 160 mg SR OD under supervision. Her TFTs were repeated after five days, showing persistent hyperthyroidism with only a marginal improvement in T4 (39 pmol/L). Medication non-adherence as a possibility was discussed in a detailed interview with the patient. The patient insisted on strict compliance to the treatment. She was bothered by persistent symptoms, with no underlying stress or depression, and wanted to get the symptoms treated. She had gained some weight and had a reduction in her absolute neutrophil count, hinting toward compliance with the medications.

Additionally, her TRAB reduced from 16.5 to 6.9. She was discharged (on CBZ 20 mg TD and propranolol 160 mg SR OD) with a close follow-up plan.

At the follow-up visit after four weeks, she remained hyperthyroid (TSH: 0.01, T3: 11.1, T4: 43.9) with a normal heart rate. The patient was asked to bring empty bottles of her medicine to check her compliance, which strengthened the possibility of taking the medicines as prescribed. Malabsorption was ruled out with a negative celiac screen (negative anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies) and normal cyanocobalamin and albumin levels. CBZ resistant GD was considered at this point and was shifted to PTU 100 mg TD with propranolol 160 mg SR OD and prednisolone 20 mg daily for two months with a tapering regimen. At the four-week follow-up, she had no improvement in her TFTs (TSH: <0.01, T3: 11.3, T4: 40.1). After another four-week follow-up, her steroids were stopped, and PTU was increased to 150 mg TD due to persistently deranged TFTs (TSH: <0.01, T3: 12, T4: 40.4). Patient had a partial response to the increased dose of PTU with repeat TFTs after one month showing TSH <0.01, T3: 7, T4: 25.5. The TFT trend of the patient from diagnosis to the last follow-up is graphed.

Given only a partial response to increasing doses of PTU, patient was referred to surgical team to get definitive treatment via thyroidectomy, avoiding possible hepatotoxic and hematologic complications of long-term higher doses of PTU. The patient tolerated total thyroidectomy well without any complications. Her last thyroid profile was normal (TSH 3.42) on replacement levothyroxine 75 mcg daily.