24-year-old male with no personal or family risk factors or history of cardiovascular disease, with a history of autoimmune hepatitis with cirrhosis in Child Pugh A stage (diagnosed at 13 years of age and without specific treatment at the time of consultation), vitiligo and rapidly progressive alopecia areata. He consulted at the emergency department of another institution for dyspnoea of 15 days of evolution that progressed to functional class IV, associated with epigastralgia. In addition, he reported having had gastrointestinal symptoms one month before the consultation. During the directed questioning, he reported having a good previous functional class. On admission, he presented with a tendency to hypotension, with a heart rate of 115 beats per minute, saturating 98% to ambient air, good ventilatory mechanics and wet crepitations up to mid-pulmonary fields. He had no oedema in peripheral limbs and a 3/3 jugular engorgement was observed, without inspiratory collapse. The electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm at 115 beats per minute, with the electrical axis deviated to the left, narrow QRS with a striking poor progression of R waves in precordial leads. The ST-T segment did not show acute ischemic changes. The chest radiograph showed an increased cardiothoracic index with mild signs of redistribution of flow to the upper pulmonary fields. In the admission laboratory, he had hyponatraemia of 126 mg/dl (for a normal value of 135-145 mg/dl), altered hepaticogram with transaminases multiplied by 40 of the normal value, total bilirubin of 20 mg/dl (normal value between 0.10 to 1.4 mg/dl) with a predominant direct type, with mild increase of alkaline phosphatase and severe decrease of prothrombin time of 20% (normal value between 70-120%). The lactic acid was 4.15 mmol/L (for a normal value of up to 2.50 mmol/L). He also presented elevated cardiac biomarkers, with N-terminal brain natriuretic propeptide (NT-Pro BNP) of 8170 pg/ml (normal value up to 125 pg/ml according to age cut-off) and ultrasensitive troponin of 192 pg/ml (normal value up to 15 pg/ml). A transthoracic Doppler echocardiogram was performed that evidenced global severe biventricular dysfunction with marked thinning of the myocardial walls and dilation of the four cardiac chambers (left ventricular ejection fraction of 25% calculated by Simpson method).

In view of the clinical picture described, cardiogenic shock was diagnosed and various differential diagnoses were considered that could have led the patient to this state. One of them was cardiac compromise in the context of a worsening of his autoimmune disease and the other was acute myocarditis.  As part of the etiological study, a cardiac resonance was requested with intravenous contrast. In it, an increase in the volumes of both ventricles was observed with a severe biventricular deterioration, with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 10% and a right ventricular ejection fraction of 12%. In addition, a gadolinium enhancement was observed with an intramyocardial linear pattern in the basal and medial antero-septal segments and the basal infraseptal segments, and a subepicardial pattern in the inferior basal and medial segments and the infraseptal segments, suggestive of a diagnosis of myocarditis. In view of the clinical picture mentioned, treatment was initiated with pulses of methylprednisolone, high-dose intravenous diuretics and inotropic support with dobutamine. After the first day of admission, he developed a sustained ventricular arrhythmia and refractory cardiogenic shock to medical treatment. Subsequently, after a comprehensive multidisciplinary evaluation (in conjunction with rheumatology, infectious disease and hepatology teams) and the difficulty of the clinical condition mentioned, the possibility of a transplant was considered. At this time, the dilemma of a combined transplant (hepatic and cardiac) or a cardiac transplant alone was presented. After the decision to begin the pretransplant evaluation, the cannulation of an extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) device was decided as a bridge to the same. The days following the placement of the ECMO, marked improvement of the hepatic and coagulation parameters was observed, which was interpreted in the context of the hemodynamic compromise resulting from the low volume minute, associated with the presence of a previously compromised hepatic parenchyma. For this reason, his admission to the emergency cardiac transplant list was rejected, ruling out the possibility of a combined transplant. On the seventh day of the placement of the ECMO, he received an orthotopic cardiac transplant. He had a good postoperative evolution and the successful removal of the ventricular assist device was achieved on the fourth day of the same. However, he died two months after the transplant due to an opportunistic infection by Aspergillus. The results of the biopsy of the explanted organ confirmed the diagnosis of lymphocytic myocarditis.
