We present five days old neonate admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit with a complaint of absence of anal orifice. The baby did not pass meconium for 48hrs since birth and later on, the families noticed that meconium passed through the urethral orifice together with urine. Following further evaluation, they found that there was no anal opening apart from a slight fossa on the area that was supposed to be an anal opening. In addition, the neonate had abdominal swelling which progressively increased since birth. Otherwise, the neonate had no fever, yellowish discoloration of skin and eyes, vomiting, and abnormal body movement.

The baby was born to a 32-year-old para-four mother who does not remember her last normal menstrual period but claimed to be amenorrheic for the past nine months. The mother had antenatal care at the nearby health center and it was uneventful. She gave birth at the nearby health center by Spontaneous vaginal delivery after laboring for 14 hours and the birth weight was 3.2kg. The neonate cried immediately after birth with APGAR scores of 7 and 10 at 1st and 10th minutes, respectively. The mother had no chronic medical illnesses like Hypertension and diabetes mellitus. Her prior children are all healthy and alive.

On physical examination, general appearance was alert, and vital signs were pulse rate = 152 beats per minute, respiratory rate = 46 breaths per minute, temperature 36°C, and venous oxygen saturation 97% at room air. On HEENT examination, head circumference was 42 cm and anterior fontanel size was 2cm. The pertinent positive physical findings were on abdomen and Genito-urinary system. The abdomen was grossly distended, and there was no anal opening other than just a dimple on sacrococcygeal area. On the genito-urinary system, external genitalia appears female on inspection with labia majora well developed and no fusion. However, upon palpation, the labia minora fused entirely to the base of the clitoris and there is no vaginal opening. The phallus measures about 0.8cm with a central opening through which loose stool leaks while crying. The urethral opening is a common pathway for the urinary tract, genital, and rectum. There are no gonads palpable at the labioscrotal folds and inguinal area.

Laboratory tests and imaging were done to explore further findings. On complete blood count, white blood cell = 20,000, neutrophil = 53%, lymphocyte = 23%, red blood cell = 5*106, hemoglobin=15gm/dl, platelet = 272*103, the blood group was A+, and random blood sugar was 120gm/dl. Plain abdominal x-ray was taken and it showed absence of air shadow in the distal large bowel. The abdominopelvic sonography was done to reveal any Mullerian structures and distal bowel condition. However, it only showed that unilateral (left side) supernumerary kidney, one lying in renal fossa and the other lying caudally on the left psoas muscle both having distinct capsules and blood supply with a contralateral single normal kidney. The ultrasonography did not comment on the Mullerian structures due to collapsed bladder being unable to visualize the structures.

The patient was admitted with a diagnosis of term +Normal birth weight +Appropriate for gestational age +Cloacal anomaly +Ambiguous genitalia+ Supernumerary kidney+ Early onset neonatal sepsis. The neonate was managed with calculated maintenance fluid and intravenous antibiotics, ampicillin 150mg/kg/dose Iv twice daily (BID) and gentamicin 3mg/kg/dose iv daily. On the second day of admission, the baby was referred to black lion specialized hospital for better evaluation and management.