The patient was a 66-year-old man who lived in Juan Bautista Alberdi, province of Buenos Aires, with a history of hypertension and obsessive-compulsive disorder. His usual medication included amlodipine, quetiapine, venlafaxine, and valproic acid. He presented with a 4-day history of fever of 39°C with no associated symptoms and was admitted to the general ward for evaluation. On admission, he was found to be lucid with no motoric focal signs, no sensory deficits, and no neck stiffness (GCS 15/15). The rest of the physical examination and general laboratory tests were unremarkable. Cultures of blood and urine were negative, and the computed tomography of the brain, thorax, abdomen, and pelvis showed no abnormalities. After 24 hours, he presented with episodes of disorientation and spatial disorientation alternating with episodes of drowsiness (GCS 13/15). On physical examination, he was found to have a thick distal tremor in all four limbs. The cerebrospinal fluid examination reported: cerebrospinal fluid clear, and post-centrifugal appearance clear. White blood cell count 310/mm3 (mononuclear 54%, polynuclear 46%), red blood cell count < 1000/mm3, protein 0.76 g/l, glucose 54 mg/dl (glucose 120 mg/dl), and lactic acid 21 mg/dl. Empirical treatment with 10 mg/kg intravenous acyclovir every 8 hours was initiated. PCR for herpes simplex virus (HSV) and equine encephalopathy virus (EEO) were requested, but were not reactive. However, IgM (ELISA) for EEO was positive in serum and cerebrospinal fluid at 10 days. MRI of the brain showed an increase in the intensity of FLAIR and T2 sequences in the dorsal trunk, both in the protuberant and bulbar regions, both peduncles and basal ganglia, with bilateral involvement and a slight predominance of the right basal ganglia. There were also multiple focal hyperintense images in the white matter of both cerebral hemispheres. The patient deteriorated in sensory function (GCS 8/15), without airway protection, so he was admitted to the ICU. He required intubation and mechanical ventilation with sedation and analgesia. On admission to the ICU, he presented: arterial acid-base (AAB) status: pH 7.11, pCO2 41 mmHg, pO2 65 mmHg, bicarbonate 28 mEq/l, excess base 0 mEq/l, saturation 93% (with FIO2 21%), lactic acid 11.5 mg/dl. Mechanical ventilation was initiated with a minute volume of 9.8 litres (tidal volume 490 ml corresponding to 6 ml/kg of theoretical weight, respiratory rate 20 per minute, end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) 5 cmH2 O, fraction of inspired oxygen 30%), blood was drawn for arterial AAB status: pH 7.40, pCO2 70 mmHg, pO2 65 mmHg, bicarbonate 28 mEq/l, excess base 0 mEq/l, saturation 93%, PAFI 216. He presented without fever, hemodynamically stable, with adequate oxygenation and rhythm of diuresis. When sedatives were discontinued, he presented a GCS of 3 points out of 10 (corresponding to ocular and motor evaluation of 1 point), with generalized rigidity and adequate osteotendinous reflexes, with rhythmic movements of the tongue and perioral area. The 12-channel electroencephalogram did not show pathological discharges. On the tenth day of the onset of symptoms, he presented with eye opening and less rigidity, but he did not tolerate spontaneous respiratory support due to hypoventilation and hypercapnia, which led to transient hypoxemia. In the arterial AAB status, he presented: pH 7.31, pCO2 70 mmHg, pO2 76 mmHg, bicarbonate 35 mEq/l, excess base 8 mEq/l under spontaneous respiratory support in the form of a pressure support of 5 cmH2 O, respiratory rate 6 per minute, PEEP 5 cmH2 O and tidal volume between 120-150 ml. The following days, the patient was connected, responding to simple and complex orders, and he moved symmetrically with some weakness. Due to intolerance to spontaneous respiratory support, he was tracheostomized. In the functional respiratory evaluation, the pressure was lower than -40 cm H2 O, the end-expiratory pressure was higher than 80 cm H2 O, but he continued to have hypercapnia in the spontaneous respiratory support, so he required mechanical ventilation with controlled mode. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed, which reported normal right ventricular cavities, without signs of pulmonary hypertension. In the new MRI of the brain, the hyperintense areas in FLAIR and T2 sequences visible previously were reduced.

The patient progressed with decreasing ventilatory support as this report was being written.
