A 23-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department with a sudden onset of severe frontal headache lasting for 2 h. He experienced associated symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and chest heaviness. He has a unremarkable medical record and denies the use of illicit drugs. However, he is a smoker with a history of 23 pack-years but does not consume alcohol.

On physical examination, the young male appeared distressed but was fully conscious and oriented to time, place, and person. Chest auscultation revealed normal vesicular breathing sounds, while cardiovascular and abdominal examinations were inconclusive. Neurological examinations demonstrated neck stiffness, dilated pupils reactive to light, normal plantar reflexes, and no focal neurological deficits.

His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 178/103 mmHg, respiratory rate 26 breaths/min, temperature 38.9°C, heart rate 87 beats/min, and oxygen saturation of 94%.

Emergency tests were initiated. An ECG revealed ST segment elevation >2 mm in leads V2-V5, consistent with STEMI as the top of our differential diagnosis, requiring confirmation by cardiac markers. With prompt referral to a tertiary cardiac centre implemented, the patient received a 300 mg aspirin load while being transferred to the catheter lab. Troponin levels were significantly elevated at 1.48 mg/dl (normal <0.16 mg/dl).

Percutaneous coronary intervention was performed via the femoral artery, and the result showed normal coronary arteries with thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) flow grade of 3.

His ECG after coronary angiography revealed normal sinus rhythm with left ventricular hypertrophy LVH. An echocardiogram was performed, revealing normal ventricular function with no regional wall motion abnormalities (RWMA).

Following coronary intervention, he was admitted to the medical ward for further assessment and investigation. Blood samples were drawn for a complete blood count, random blood sugar, renal function tests, and CRP. The results revealed lymphocytosis and mildly elevated CRP.

We proceeded further with CT brain to exclude serious cause of headache. His brain CT showed cisternal subarachnoid haemorrhage SAH with extension anterior to the right temporal lobe. Abdominal ultrasound screening was performed to rule out polycystic kidney disease which was negative and cerebral CT angiography was scheduled to exclude cerebral aneurysm Nimodipine 60 mg every 4 h was initiated, with a target blood pressure of 160/100 mmHg.

On the second day, his condition suddenly deteriorated, culminating with cardiac arrest. Therefore, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), resulting in a Glasgow Coma Scale score (GCS) of 6. The patient was subsequently, intubated and placed on mechanical ventilation in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Due to his unstable condition in the ICU, we could not perform a repeated CT brain scan or the planned cerebral CT angiography.

Over the next 7 days, we diligently monitored him with a strict multidisciplinary team. A nasogastric tube was inserted for feeding and fluid replacement. His medications included intravenous fluids, antibiotics, proton pump inhibitors, and nimodipine.

On the 8th day, he suddenly developed ventricular fibrillation, and despite CPR with more than five defibrillations, we were unable to revive him and death was the final outcome.39734686