A 64-year-old male presented with exertional retrosternal pain. He had a past medical history of hypertension, dyslipidemia, obesity, bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome and underwent bilateral surgical release and cervical laminectomy. The resting electrocardiogram revealed an incomplete left bundle branch block, while the resting echocardiogram was completely unremarkable. He underwent a stress echocardiogram with dobutamine; at peak stress, the left ventricle developed regional wall motion abnormalities including hypokinesis of the inferior wall, associated with angina and soon followed by ventricular tachycardia, reversed with propranolol. The patient was hospitalized and underwent a coronary angiography which revealed slow flow, dominant right coronary artery with non-obstructive atherosclerosis and a left anterior descending artery (LAD) with intermediate lesions in mid and distal segments. A functional evaluation revealed a non-significant fractional flow reserve of 0.86 in the LAD, but a pathological CFR of 1.8 and an IMR of 61. Given the patient's symptoms, risk factors and diagnostic tests, he was considered to have microvascular angina and was treated with antiplatelet therapy, a statin, a calcium channel blocker and a transdermal nitrate, with symptomatic relief.

Three years later he developed complete atrioventricular block and presented in the emergency department with sudden hemodynamic collapse. A dual chamber pacemaker was implanted, and he was discharged asymptomatic.
Shortly after, the patient developed progressive symmetrical tetraparesis, associated with marked muscle atrophy, hand numbness, orthostatic hypotension and dysphagia. The neurology workup led to the diagnosis of familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy (FAP), and the Val30Met mutation in the transthyretin (TTR) gene was detected.
The following year, he developed NYHA class II to III congestive heart failure (HF), requiring uptitration of diuretics. The repeat echocardiogram showed moderate concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, with preserved ejection fraction but an abnormal global longitudinal strain and elevated filling pressures. He repeated the coronary angiography which excluded CAD progression. He underwent a 99mTc-DPD scintigraphy that revealed significant myocardial tracer uptake, diagnosing TTR amyloid infiltration. He was stabilized with medical therapy and kept under close follow-up, requiring antianginal therapy uptitration for exertional microvascular angina.