A 30-year-old Chinese woman presented with a left ovarian mass during a routine physical examination. She was asymptomatic and had no prior medical history of brain tumors or neurological disorders. The patient suffered from polycystic ovaries at the age of 19 without any treatment. Serum levels of CEA, CA125 and CA19-9 were within normal ranges.

An MRI revealed a hypointense T1-weighted and hypertense T2-weighted lesion measured 6.3 × 4.8 cm in the left adnexal area, with a slightly lower signal mural attachment nodule. Additionally, the diffusion-weighted image (DWI) showed an isointense signal of the mural nodules. Therefore, it was considered as a benign or borderline tumor.

The patient underwent laparoscopic resection of the left ovary and fallopian tube. During the 12-months follow-up, she underwent pelvic and abdominal ultrasound examinations every three months, and no abnormalities were detected. She remained in good condition after surgery without chemoradiotherapy.

Pathological findings
On gross examination, a 5 × 3.5 × 1 cm cystic mass was found in the left ovary. Two mural nodules with diameters of 0.8 cm and 1.2 cm were observed, which were gray-red and soft in texture. Histologically, it formed a well-define nodule on low magnification. The components of teratoma included epidermis, skin appendages were visible in the surrounding mural nodule and cyst wall tissue. Under high magnification, it revealed disordered glial cells and ganglions proliferate in the mural nodule. Abnormal ganglions were aggregated, with large sized and irregular nucleus, which also exhibited obvious nucleoli, and binucleated cells was seen. The mitotic figures were hardly identified.

Immunohistochemically, the glial cells were positive for GFAP and Olig2. The ganglion cells were positive for Neu-N, CgA, Nestin and CR. Moreover, the ganglion cells expressed CD34 and highlight the branched tumor cells. Weak expression of NSE and wild-type expression of P53 was observed in some tumor cells. Additionally, the tumor cells were negative for IDH1 and BRAF V600E. Ki67 index was approximately 5 %. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of ganglioglioma arising in an ovarian mature cystic teratoma was made.