We present a case of right-sided unilateral pulmonary edema in an 86-year-old Sinhalese Sri Lankan woman who presented with acute onset dyspnea with cardiogenic shock due to acute non-ST elevation myocardial infarction, complicated with grade 3 mitral regurgitation. She had clinical features of heart failure and pulmonary edema, but a chest X-ray showed unilateral infiltrates only on the right side. Distinguishing pneumonia from pulmonary edema according to chest X-ray findings was a challenge initially, and she was therefore initially treated for both conditions. She had remarkable clinical and radiological improvement after 12 hours of intravenously administered furosemide and glyceryl trinitrate therapy. Her brain natriuretic peptide level was elevated and further supported and confirmed the diagnosis retrospectively.nAn 86-year-old Sinhalese Sri Lankan woman who had been previously diagnosed as having hypertension, grade 2 MR, and ischemic heart disease with congestive cardiac failure, presented to our preliminary care unit with sudden onset shortness of breath at night while sleeping. She had eaten her dinner and taken her usual medications before sleeping. She had a New York Heart Association (NYHA) heart failure grade of class 2, and could manage her day-to-day activities without support. She could walk 25 meters and could climb 3–4 steps without becoming dyspneic. Apart from her usual symptoms she did not have fever, cough, or chest pain before admission. She is a housewife and mother of five children. She does not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol. At presentation she was on captopril 12.5 mg twice a day, atorvastatin 20 mg at night, soluble aspirin 75 mg at night, bisoprolol 2.5 mg once a day, and furosemide 40 mg in the morning.

On examination, she was found to be dyspneic, drowsy, pale, diaphoretic, and restless. Her body temperature was 37.0 °C. Her blood pressure (BP) was 90/60 mmHg, with a regular, low volume pulse rate of 102 beats per minute. Her heart sounds were unremarkable. Cardiac apex was not palpable. There was a pansystolic murmur at cardiac apex. Her respiratory rate was 26/minute. Her trachea was central and right-sided chest expansion was reduced. Bilateral crepitations and rhonchi were present more significantly on the right side. Her initial oxygen saturation checked by pulse-oximetry was 56% in room air. Her abdomen was not distended and there was mild right hypochondrial tenderness. There was no hepatosplenomegaly. Her cranial nerve examination was normal. Her limbs examination was normal with normal tone, power, and reflexes.

An electrocardiogram showed ST depression in leads V5–V6 and poor R wave progression in leads V1–V4. Her chest X-ray revealed alveolar-interstitial infiltrates and a fluid collection around horizontal fissure in her right lung. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 12,000/μL with 91.8% neutrophils, hemoglobin of 9.5 g/dL, packed cell volume of 30.3, mean corpuscular volume of 75 fl, mean corpuscular hemoglobin of 23.8 pg, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration of 31.4 g/dl, creatinine of 221.5 μmol/l, sodium level of 139 mEq/L, potassium level of 4.4 mEq/L, B-natriuretic peptide (BNP) of 2437.2 pg/ml (normal 450 for NYHA class 2), C-reactive protein (CRP) 7.56 mg/dL (< 10), and troponin I 59.2 ng/mL (< 0.01).

Although our patient’s temperature was normal, pneumonia could not be initially excluded in this older patient in the presence of a unilateral pulmonary infiltrate with effusion along the horizontal fissure, in combination with leukocytosis and awaiting CRP level (which took 4 hours to get the report), treatment with intravenously administered broad spectrum antibiotics (ceftriaxone 1 g twice a day and clarithromycin 500 mg twice a day) was initiated to cover severe community acquired pneumonia, and oseltamivir was started since there was an epidemic of influenza H1N1 at the time.

An emergency two-dimensional echocardiogram facility is not available in the preliminary care unit in our set up and our patient was not in a condition to be transferred to a place where a good quality echocardiogram machine was available to assess the severity of MR accurately. Echocardiography was done on third day of admission which disclosed: an ejection fraction of 25–30% with severe left ventricular (LV) dysfunction; and hypokinesia of anterior wall, LV apex, and lower 2/3 of interventricular septum, with an apical aneurysm. A two-dimensional echocardiogram showed grade 3 MR. Although her BNP level was found to be high it took 4 days to get the report due to delays in laboratory processing. Therefore it helped us to support the diagnosis retrospectively.

With all these challenges our patient was treated for severe acute on chronic heart failure although radiological evidence was unfavorable. Interestingly, she showed a remarkable improvement with preload reduction with loop diuretics and nitrates. After availability of troponin I levels she was treated for a NSTEMI on top of heart failure with intravenous heparin 500 units/hour infusion (her weight was 40 kg). Her condition was stabilized with adjustment of medical therapy for heart failure including diuretics, nitrates, and opioids. She had persistently low BP for which she needed inotropic support with dopamine and dobutamine which were tailed off subsequently. Repeat chest radiography taken 12 hours later showed complete resolution of the UPE. Subsequently, her CRP was normal and antibiotics were de-escalated after 24 hours, but oseltamivir was continued. She had a fast and remarkable recovery to her preadmission state on day 5 of admission after which she was discharged. She refused any further cardiac intervention. Two weeks after discharge she was reviewed at a medical clinic and found to have NYHA class 2 heart failure. Her BP was120/80 mmHg and pulse rate was 70/minute. Her medications were uptitrated and she was followed up in a medical clinic. After 6 month she had a two-dimensional echocardiogram and revealed ejection fraction of 40% with grade 2–3 MR.