A 54 year old male with a history of Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome resulting in cardiac arrest in his 20s, subsequently developed non-ischemic cardiomyopathy (New York Heart Association class IV with an ejection fraction of 15%.) He was admitted for heart failure and had a complicated cardiac care unit course with removal of AICD/Pacemaker due to endocarditis, and anticoagulation with Coumadin for right atrial thrombus/atrial fibrillation. He was discharged, but required multiple readmissions for heart failure, ultimately requiring venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation through the right femoral artery and left femoral vein as eCPR in January, 2020 and would remain on ECMO for 5 weeks. He underwent LVAD placement using left ventricle and ascending aorta cannulation sites 16 days after ECMO cannulation and subsequent tracheostomy in February for persistent respiratory failure.

Two days prior to removal of ECMO cannulas, the patient underwent right lower extremity guillotine amputation for dry gangrene due to iliac dissection and distal embolization. Five days later, on post LVAD day 25 there was noted to be stool leaking from the exit site of the driveline. The patient was taken to the operating room by the Cardiothoracic Surgery team and had a limited exploration, finding a bowel injury from the driveline. The injury was repaired with interrupted silk suture and the driveline was left untouched. Three days after this repair, Acute Care Surgery was consulted for stool leaking again from the driveline exit site. The patient was found to be profoundly septic. He was started on antibiotics and taken to the operating room for formal exploratory laparotomy and was found to have the LVAD driveline traversing the abdominal cavity from the right upper quadrant to the left mid flank. The driveline had injured the distal transverse colon and the prior repair was leaking. There was copious feculent fluid and numerous intra-abdominal abscesses that were drained. Due to the patient’s sepsis, the colon was stapled proximal and distal to the injured segment and the specimen was removed. The patient was left in discontinuity and a temporary abdominal dressing was placed for a planned second look surgery. He returned to the ICU where he was given antibiotics, mechanical ventilation and vasopressors.

Three days later, during the planned second look surgery the abdomen appeared clean. Due to the necessity of the LVAD, the driveline could not be disconnected. The first priority was to mobilize the driveline out of the peritoneum. The left side of the patient’s abdomen was opened transversely to allow the driveline to come to the middle. The peritoneum was taken down from the right side of the patient’s abdomen to develop a retrorectus plane in an attempt to reposition the driveline to the intended extraperitoneal location. A smaller transverse incision was made on the right side to get the driveline in this retrorectus plane away from the midline. Thus the driveline was successfully removed from the peritoneum without disconnection. A right hemicolectomy was performed, but due to the driveline exiting near the right lower quadrant, an end ileostomy was brought out in the left lower quadrant. His fascia was closed and retention sutures were placed due to the patient’s poor nutritional status and degree of abdominal sepsis. The patient did well post operatively and was able to resume enteral nutrition on postoperative day 3, meeting his caloric demands by postoperative day 7. He underwent revision of his guillotine amputation 15 days after his last abdominal operation.

The patient’s course was complicated by an intra-abdominal abscess requiring interventional radiology drainage 3 weeks after his last abdominal surgery as well as prolonged IV antibiotic treatment for resistant organisms including VRE. The patient completed his antibiotic course and had his drains removed. At the time of this report, the patient remains hospitalized, tolerating enteral nutrition, off mechanical ventilation and undergoing physical therapy.