This is an 8-month-old male patient born to a para 3 mother. The mother had ANC follow-up, but it was irregular, and it was at a rural health center with a poor setup where she could not get obstetric ultrasonography. The delivery was at home with a traditional birth attendant. After delivery, the parents noticed a swelling on the occipital part of the head. It increased in size progressively to attain the current size. The parents went to the health center, where they referred them to the primary hospital, which then referred them to our center. The swelling had no discharge, and the patient has no fever, vomiting failure to suck, high-pitched cry, abnormal body movement, or lethargy. Upon examination of the patient, there is a giant 40cm by 35cm cystic, transilluminating to light, tender, occipital area mass on the area of the torcula of the sinuses. There is a palpable bone defect at the sac’s base. The anterior and posterior fontanels are not open. The baby is playful, alert moving all extremities, sucking well, and has stable vital signs. The patient was then investigated with a CBC, blood group, renal and liver function tests that were in normal range, and brain MRI revealed a huge occipital T1 hypointense and T2 hyperintense sac content with multiple flow voids showing torcula, superior sagittal sinus, and transverse sinus, and a part of right occipital lobe brain tissue with a bone defect at the base of the sac. After getting informed written consent, the patient is put on the operating table with the head hanging beyond the operating table edge on the side of the anesthesia machine, with one anesthetist holding the head and the sac hanging beyond the table, and is intubated with the first attempt. After intubation, the patient was put in a prone position with the aid of a horseshoe Mayfield. Hair shaved and cleaned with soap and water, and one assistant holding the mass with a sterile gloved hand, the skin is then cleaned and draped. Initially, we made a transverse skin incision, drained the CSF, and the sac collapsed. Then, dysplastic brain tissue was resected, and venous sinus, tumor, torcula and other viable-looking brain tissue were gently reduced to the skull gently. Dura dissected, trimmed, trimmed and closed as a watertight primary. We did not recommend cranioplasty in a giant occipital encephalocele with a high risk of postoperative hydrocephalus; hence, we did not close the bone defect. After that, the skin was trimmed and closed in two layers. Postoperatively, the patient stayed in the neurosurgery ward for seven days with no hydrocephalus and no neurologic deficit. The patient is then followed at an outpatient clinic every 2 weeks with no surgery-related or neurologic complications.