A 40-year-old female bus driver was presented for recurrent chest pain over the past six months. She often woke up with pain early in the morning, and the discomfort was characterized by subxiphoid stuffy pain radiating to the left chest, shoulder, and arm, which lasted <2 min with spontaneous remission. The episodes became more frequent in the recent month. The patient reported no past medical history, family history of premature CAD, and traditional cardiovascular risk factor except for a body mass index of 24.7 and previous light smoking. Blood pressure was 117/76 mmHg. The laboratory tests were unremarkable including normal serum N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide and troponin level. Low density lipoprotein cholesterol level was 1.34 mmol/L, and glycosylated haemoglobin (HbA1c) level was 5.3%. Her treadmill exercise test taken in another hospital 3 months before was positive, with ST-segment depression in II, III, and avF leads (>1 mv), as well as anterior wall leads (0.8 mv) during the test. The patient was diagnosed with CAD. The following invasive coronary angiography in that hospital showed 40% stenosis in the middle segment of the left anterior descending artery, and coronary spasm was also considered given that the guide wire was blocked when passing through the brachial artery. The patient was discharged and treated with diltiazem, aspirin, and rosuvastatin for 3 months. She reported certain relief of discomfort with decrease in both frequency and intensity, but still suffered from episodic pain below the xiphoid. The patient had serial miserable life experience before suffering from the refractory angina. She became emotionally charged and often cried after witnessing her father-in-law crushed to death by a falling building 8 years before, followed by discovering the infidelity of her husband the next year. The patient was referred to our hospital for further assessment of the role of mental stress in the aetiology of angina. She reported depression and poor sleep quality. Psychological scale evaluation, including Perceived Stress Scale and Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, suggested that the patient was in a state of high stress, anxiety, and depression. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was normal (62%) on routine transthoracic echocardiography, and apparent structural heart disease was excluded. Myocardial perfusion imaging including contrast-enhanced echocardiography and PET with N-13 ammonia during mental stress testing were scheduled on separate days.

Mental stress testing was conducted in the morning with a fasting state. Diltiazem was discontinued one day before test. The patient was settled in a quiet and dim room, with a tailored head-mounted virtual reality device. Three pre-set mental stress tasks, including modified Stroop test, public speech, and mental arithmetic, were executed in sequence after a 15-min rest, with each task lasting 3–4 min. Echocardiography with contrast agent was performed at rest, the third minute and seventh minute of the testing and recovery, respectively. The patient was emotionally devoted and cried with grief when recalling her painful experiences during the part of public speech. She reported mild chest pain shortly after the speech task ended, which gradually aggravated with concomitant sweat. Apical perfusion delay (∼4 s) in replenishment following high-mechanical index (MI) flash impulse series was simultaneously observed on myocardial contrast echocardiography, along with hypokinetic regional wall motion and thickening abnormality at the left ventricular apex. A reduced LVEF (42%) compared to admission was noted, and left ventricular global longitudinal strain (GLS) was −17.1% (normal value < −20%). The patient was asked to take deep breathing in supine position to calm down. The chest pain was relieved without further intervention, and apical wall motion went back to normal on real-time echocardiography with normal LVEF and GLS measurements. Summed difference score (SDS), defined as difference between PET scans during mental stress testing and at rest carried out 1 or 2 days before enhanced echocardiography, was 3, which also revealed myocardial ischaemia.4 Hence, the patient was newly diagnosed with MSIMI.

Reactive hyperaemia index (RHI, normal value ≥ 1.68) reflecting peripheral microvascular function was measured on Endo-PAT 2000 (Itamar Medical Ltd, Caesarea, Israel), and showed mild decline 30 min after mental stress testing when compared to rest (1.6 vs. 2.0). Endothelial dysfunction was therefore noted. Coronary flow reserve (CFR) calculated with adenosine test on PET performed the day before enhanced echocardiography was 3.5, demonstrating normal endothelium-independent microvascular function. The patient was finally diagnosed with microvascular angina and MSIMI. Escitalopram was added to the treatment of her previous triple therapy to ease her anxiety. She also kept regular low-intensity exercise as recommended. The patient reported much less chest pain and anxiety during one month follow-up after discharge.