15-year-old patient, previously healthy, with no significant pathological history, with full vaccinations for his age. Originally from a rural area in the province of Buenos Aires, Argentina. His father worked in the countryside. They had dogs and chickens at home. There was a shed where seed bags were stored, and there were usually pigeons in the eucalyptus groves.

The patient consulted for productive cough and pain in the side of a month of evolution, without febrile records or associated respiratory difficulty. Initially a chest radiograph was performed that evidenced two images of condensation in the left pulmonary base. With these images it was decided to perform a Computed Tomography of the chest in which images of nodular consolidation in the left base were found. With suspicion of pneumonia, antibiotic treatment with Amoxicillin was initiated. He was referred to our institution.

The tomography images were interpreted as pulmonary nodules and a Positron Emission Tomography (PET-CT) was performed to measure the metabolic activity of 18 fluorodeoxyglucose and to identify the uptake of glucose in the tissues through the standardized uptake value (SUV). Neoplastic cells as well as inflammatory and infectious processes show an elevated metabolism in this study.13 The examination showed multiple pulmonary lesions in the lower left lobe with increased metabolism by SUV in a range of 10.88-13.53. No lesions were found in the central nervous system, abdomen or pelvis. The tomographic characteristics could correspond to fungal or granulomatous involvement.

The complete laboratory examinations were in the normal range (hemogram, liver profile, renal function, electrolyte panel, coagulation tests), with negative acute phase reactants. Ultrasound examinations of the abdomen, kidneys, testicles and thyroid were performed without pathological findings. In the context of the study of pulmonary nodules, a tuberculosis census was performed, without finding evidence of close contacts for this disease; intradermal reaction of the purified protein derivative (PPD) with a negative result of 0 mm; serial bacilloscopy in sputum by Ziehl-Neelsen staining and culture were negative.

Considering the images and epidemiological risk factors such as rural origin and contact with bird droppings, the possibility of a mycosis was considered. It was decided to carry out a bronchoalveolar lavage, in which samples were taken for microbiological study. The culture was negative for bacteria, fungi and mycobacteria. The determination of serologies for Aspergillus in the bronchoalveolar lavage was negative, as was the polymerase chain reaction for histoplasma.

A biopsy was performed using a tomographically guided needle. Direct mycological examination and Giemsa staining revealed yeast. The culture of the biopsy was positive for Cryptococcus neoformans grubii, which is sensitive to fluconazole (minimum inhibitory concentration 4 ug/ml) and itraconazole (minimum inhibitory concentration 0.06 ug/ml). The pathological anatomy showed a granulomatous inflammatory process with the presence of multinucleated giant cells and spherical structures positive with Schiff's periodic acid staining (PAS), which could correspond to a deep mycosis, without neoplastic cells.

As a patient with no history of immunosuppression, an immunological study was requested with a count of B lymphocytes, CD3, CD4, CD8, NK that was within normal limits, as well as the quantification of immunoglobulins (Ig) IgG, IgA, IgM and IgE and the determination of complement C3, C4 and CH-50. The HIV test by Elisa was negative.

A high serum cryptococcal antigen titre (1:128) was reported and a central nervous system scan was normal. A lumbar puncture was performed and the physical and chemical findings, negative tinta china stain, and cryptococcal antigen search in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and culture were negative. The determination for the analysis of antigens in serum and CSF was carried out in the Francisco Javier Muñiz Infectious Diseases Hospital, CABA and the analysis was performed by latex agglutination test.

He received treatment with Itraconazole 200 mg per day for 4 weeks, until a definitive diagnosis was made, and then completed 10 months with fluconazole 200 mg per day. He did not experience adverse effects from the treatment.

A metabolic re-evaluation of the pulmonary lesions was performed by a body PET-CT scan 6 weeks after the start of treatment. The nodular opacities were smaller and had a metabolism with SUV of 3.01 to 5.19. There were no new foci. The initial symptoms had subsided and he remained clinically asymptomatic.

At the end of the 10 months of treatment, a chest X-ray was performed with no pathological findings to highlight and a search for antigen in blood was also performed with a negative result.
