The 62-year-old female patient came to Unpad Dental Hospital with complaints of a lump on the corner of the left lip and pain. Anamnesis showed that the patient had a fever and was somewhat weak at the beginning before the complaint of the lump. Initially in the form of a white spot since 6 weeks ago then getting bigger, painful and broken. When it broke, the patient squeezed the lump until a pus-like liquid came out. The lump had shrunk but never completely disappeared. The patient went to the clinic and was given gentamicin ointment, but there was no change. The patient’s occupation. The patient denied a history of recurrent thrush and food or drug allergies. Smoking and alcohol consumption were not present.

On extraoral examination, a lump was found on the left corner of the lip, there was a 1 × 2 cm lump, filled with purulent exudate, and sore. The lip also looked dry and flaky. Intraoral found white plaque on the entire dorsum of the tongue can be scraped without leaving reddish areas, and on the teeth, there are cervical caries in several teeth.

First visit, the patient was given pharmacological therapy in the form of chlorhexidine gluconate mouthwash 0.2%, which was swished twice a day 10 mL and then discarded, and given a vaseline album to be applied to the upper and lower lips twice a day. Non-pharmacological therapy is given in the form of advice to get enough rest, maintain diet and oral hygiene and not use lipstick alternately. The patient was asked to do an anti-HSV-1 IgG serology test.

The following day the patient’s serology test results came out and was found to be HSV-1 reactive with a result of 122 (Positive > 25) The patient was then prescribed acyclovir 400 mg five times a day for 7 days and added a multivitamin to be taken once a day. Mouthwash and vaseline albums were continued to be used, additional education was given to the patient to avoid triggering factors such as emotional stress, fatigue, spicy food and sun exposure.

The next follow-up, 10 days after taking acyclovir, was carried out via text conversation using the Whatsapp application because the patient still did not have time to return for control. Acyclovir and multivitamins are taken regularly and now that the lump is no longer painful and sore and has started to shrink but has not disappeared completely, the patient is advised to stop taking acyclovir and chlorhexidine gluconate mouthwash 0.2% and continue taking multivitamins and using vaseline albums.

Follow-up 3 months later, the lesions seemed to have disappeared, the pain and soreness had completely disappeared. The patient has not taken any medication, and in the past 3 months, the lesions have not reappeared.