A 10-year-old African American female presented with bilateral lower extremity edema, abdominal distension, malaise, loss of appetite, nausea, and weight gain for two weeks. There was no history of fever, gross blood in urine or joint pains. Past medical history was significant for absence seizures, and she was started on ethosuximide 250 mg daily three months prior to presentation. The staring spells decreased from 8–10 episodes per day to 5–6 episodes per week after initiation of ethosuximide. Four weeks prior to presentation, she developed submental swelling following a dental extraction and received a seven-day course of amoxicillin. The patient had no history of prior allergic reactions with amoxicillin. There was no history of recent usage of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID), over the counter medications or proton pump inhibitors. There was no recent viral upper respiratory or gastrointestinal illness, streptococcal throat or skin infection and skin rash. Family history was not suggestive of systemic lupus, NS, other autoimmune diseases, renal failure, dialysis, kidney transplantation, or sickle cell disease. Her immunization was up to date and she had normal growth and development.

On examination, the vital signs showed an afebrile child with a heart rate of 74 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 per minute, blood pressure 122/86 mm Hg (>95th percentile for age, gender, and height), and oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. Her current weight was 49.4 kg (95th percentile) and the baseline weight prior to presentation was 41 kg. Physical examination showed puffiness of eyes and face, abdominal distension, and 1+ bilateral pitting edema of the lower extremities. There were no oral ulcers, joint swelling, tenderness or erythema. Skin examination showed some non-itchy and non-painful excoriated pustules on the frontal hairline and upper thighs posteriorly. There was no malar or discoid rash. Eye examination showed no redness; a formal ophthalmology examination showed no uveitis. Mental status was normal without seizures.

Prior renal function test was unknown. Differential blood count showed no eosinophilia. Liver enzymes were normal. Serum creatinine kinase was normal. Urinalysis showed specific gravity ≥1.030, pH 6.0, ≥500 protein, one red cell per high power field, two white cells per high power field, negative nitrite, and leukocytes. Urine eosinophil was not obtained. Random urine protein to creatinine ratio was 5.4 mg/mg (normal < 0.2 mg/mg). Urine culture was negative. Subsequent blood count showed drop in hemoglobin to 10.2 gm/dL with stable white cell count and platelet count. There was Coombs’ positive autoimmune hemolytic anemia. Anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-double-stranded (ds) DNA antibody and anti-histone antibodies (8.5 units, normal range: 0–1 unit, 1–1.5: weak positive, 1.6–2.5: moderate positive, 2.6 units or greater: strong positive) were all strongly positive. Anti-smith antibody was negative (5 AU/mL, normal range: 0–40 AU/mL). Ribonucleic protein, SCL-70 antibody, SS-A and SS-B were all negative. Serum immunoglobulin E (IgE) was elevated at 5811 KU/L (normal ≤ 696 KU/L) but there was normal serum IgG and IgA. Nasopharyngeal SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was negative. Varicella zoster DNA PCR and Epstein–Barr virus DNA PCR were negative.

Chest X-ray revealed no pleural effusion, pneumothorax, consolidation, or acute abnormalities. Renal sonogram demonstrated bilateral echogenic kidneys with right kidney measuring 11 cm in length and left kidney measuring 11.2 cm in length without hydronephrosis. A percutaneous sonogram-guided renal biopsy which was obtained three days after the onset of current signs and symptoms showed two portions of renal cortical tissue with ten glomeruli. Light microscopy showed a segmental mild increase in mesangial cellularity with moderate increase in the mesangial matrix. There was no segmental sclerosis, cellular crescent, nor area of segmental necrosis. The tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis were mild. There was moderate to severe interstitial inflammation, comprised of lymphocytes/mononuclear cells, plasma cells, eosinophils, and rare neutrophils, associated with severe tubulitis and tubular damage. No granulomas were seen. There was no active arteritis. The immunofluorescence study was negative for IgA, IgG, IgM, C3, C1q, kappa, and lambda light chains. Electron microscopy showed a normal glomerular basement membrane without immune deposits nor tubular-reticular inclusions. There was partial podocyte foot processes effacement. These findings were most consistent with acute TIN with podocyte injury.

The patient was treated with albumin/diuretic infusions for the symptomatic relief of edema and the weight trended down to near her baseline at discharge. Due to severe TIN and NS, a course of steroids, prednisone 60 mg daily, was started with gradual tapering over six weeks. Serum creatinine trended down to 1.13 mg/dL at discharge. Due to concerns of DIL, ethosuximide was changed to zonisamide after consultation with neurology and switched again after three weeks to sodium valproate for better seizure control. Rheumatology consultation was carried out, who agreed with the diagnosis of ethosuximide-induced DIL. Mild anemia persisted with serum hemoglobin of 10.8 gm/dL at the time of discharge.

The edema resolved within two weeks and her weight returned to the baseline. Hypertension, which was thought to be secondary to fluid overload and steroid usage, was managed with amlodipine. Blood pressure normalized and hence amlodipine was discontinued after completion of steroid therapy. At two weeks follow-up, the serum creatinine was 0.6 mg/dL (schwartz eGFR 90 mL/min/1.73 m2), serum albumin improved to 3.4 g/dL from 2.2 g/dL at discharge, urinalysis was negative for blood and protein, with normal spot urine protein creatinine ratio of 0.12 mg/mg. Serum 25 hydroxy-vitamin D and IgE improved. At two months follow-up, ANA was weakly positive with titer of 1:160 (homogenous pattern), dsDNA antibody was 10 IU (normal range 0–24 IU, IgG ELISA, ARUP laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT, USA), and anti-histone antibody was 1.0 unit.