21-year-old primigravida mother with no medical history. Early pregnancy check-up complicated with threatened preterm labour at 31 weeks, so she received full antenatal corticosteroid treatment. She presented hypertensive pregnancy with preeclampsia-eclampsia syndrome and pregnant women's cholestasis in the third trimester, which was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid. Infectious pregnancy routines with no significant elements, no history of HSV infection, either before or during pregnancy. Spontaneous onset of labour, termination of pregnancy by caesarean section due to unstable foetal condition. Newborn male, 3,000 g birth weight, good adaptation to extrauterine life, discharge to home at 4 days of life with exclusive breast feeding. At 8 days of life, he was seen in the paediatric emergency department for oedema of the eyelids and bilateral ocular discharge of 48 hours' evolution. Physical examination highlighted significant bilateral oedema of the eyelids that prevented visualisation of the conjunctiva; redness, local heat and bilateral ocular discharge of pus, with no skin lesions. Temperature on admission was 36.7°C, physical examination with no significant elements. Diagnosis of neonatal ophthalmia was made and hospital admission was requested with culture of ocular discharge, PCR for Chlamydia, Gonococcus and HSV types 1 and 2. Treatment was initiated with a dose of 100 mg/kg intravenous Cefotaxime, 20 mg/kg/day Azithromycin and 2 mg/kg/day Tobramycin ophthalmic, every 6 hours. At 24 hours, a positive result for HSV-1 was received, so treatment was initiated with 20 mg/kg/day Aciclovir intravenous, every 8 hours, discontinuing antibiotic treatment. During the course of the disease, he remained asymptomatic from a neurological point of view and without skin lesions, with a clear improvement in ocular discharge and oedema of the eyelids after the treatment was initiated. The haemogram, liver profile, azotaemia and creatinine were normal. The cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed a normal cytochemical study, negative PCR for HSV, negative multiplex and negative culture. The cerebrospinal fluid analysis was not repeated. The PCR in blood, nasopharynx and rectum was negative for herpes virus. At 72 hours, an eye fundus examination was performed, showing bilateral epithelial corneal ulcer, adding to the treatment of Aciclovir topical and artificial tears. He completed 14 days of intravenous Aciclovir, with a normal eye fundus examination, without corneal ulcer. At 22 days of life, he was discharged with suppressive treatment with 60 mg/kg/day oral Aciclovir, control with paediatric and ophthalmologist outpatients.
