51-year-old male patient with a single relevant antecedent of gouty arthritis diagnosed 20 years ago, without treatment to date of the study. Consultation for clinical picture of four years of evolution characterized by burning type pain, insidious onset, located in the right hip, intensity 8/10 on the analogous scale of pain, not irradiated and accompanied by reduction in mobility arcs and functional limitation of the ipsilateral extremity. The physical examination is accompanied by a palpable mass at that level.

He brings a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showing a large lesion at the neck of the femur with a diagnostic impression of chondrosarcoma. Based on the findings of the history, physical examination and diagnostic imaging, a diagnosis of chondrosarcoma in the right proximal femur is made and additional imaging studies, such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and a pelvic CT scan, are requested.

However, the patient returned to the consultation with a worsening of the clinical picture, which was accompanied by a limitation of standing and walking with a cane, and also brought with him complementary imaging studies.

A biopsy of the right femoral neck lesion was performed and the sample was sent for histopathological study. The result was obtained 15 days after the sample was taken and the lesion was described as follows: "No elements of malignancy in the observed samples. Presence of gouty tophi in the observed samples".

Allopurinol and colchicine were initiated as pharmacological therapy and the patient was closely monitored by the oncological orthopaedics team. The clinical picture improved with a reduction in pain in the right hip joint and a marked decrease in the volume of the mass and progressive recovery of the mobility arcs.

Finally, a new control MRI was requested, which showed severe right coxofemoral synovitis with gouty tophi. The control radiograph also showed evidence of gouty tophi in the right hip without joint space involvement. After six months, this patient continued to be monitored closely, with residual limitations in mobility arcs, which had improved with outpatient physiotherapy.
