A 54-year-old male who had a medical history of membranous nephropathy II with nephrotic syndrome was administered with long-term oral glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants. The patient had a 20 pack-year history of smoking, and denied a family history of hereditary diseases. Chest x-ray demonstrated normal findings at one month before admission. On August 8, 2016, the patient was hospitalized for fever accompanied by progressive dyspnea, cough, and expectoration for 5 days. On admission, the BMI of the patient was 24.5 kg/m2, and his body temperature was 39.0°C. Furthermore, the patient had symptoms of tachypnea (35 bpm) and severe hypoxemia (SaO2 86%). On auscultation, the patient had good air entrance bilaterally with scattered diffuse crackles and rhonchi. Furthermore, the chest CT scan revealed multiple ground-glass opacities, and laboratory tests revealed normal white blood cell (WBC) count, but with elevated neutrophil count, C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and (1→3)-β-D-glucan. The patient was diagnosed as RSV infection on the fourth day of hospitalization when positive RSV-Ab was detected.

On admission, the patient was immediately given respiratory monitoring and supplemental oxygen to improve the low oxygen saturation, as well as antibiotics (moxifloxacin for 4 days, followed by cefminoxine for 8 days), and antifungal therapy (voriconazole for 10 days). The dose of the glucocorticoids and immunosuppressants remained largely unchanged. After 10 days of treatment, the patient's condition became worse. Chest CT revealed the progression of the disease, and oxygen partial pressure was further decreased. The patient was transferred to the Emergency Intensive Care Unit, where the patient was intensively treated, including noninvasive mechanical ventilation, broad-spectrum antibiotics (i.v. meropenem, oral moxifloxacin, and cotrimoxazole), antifungal therapy (micafungin), corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 40 mg bid iv) to relieve the inflammation, and other supportive treatment. Ganciclovir was also prescribed due to a possibility of viral infection, such as cytomegalovirus. Five days later, the patient's condition was further aggravated based on the chest x-ray evaluation. Despite receiving another round of treatments, including invasive ventilator-assisted ventilation therapy, methylprednisolone (80 mg bid), antibacterial agents (cefoperazone sulbactam, tigecycline, and cotrimoxazole) and antifungal (micafungin) therapy, the patient eventually died after 2 days.