57-year-old male, salesman by profession, married to a woman and with a history of hypertension and structural focal epilepsy (due to trauma in his youth), on treatment with enalapril and carbamazepine. He presented an anxious-depressive picture of one year of evolution, attributed to confinement due to COVID-19, treated with escitalopram.

Initially, it did not affect his functioning, but he went to the emergency room because in the last two months he had started to have inappropriate social behavior with subsequent loss of learned skills and self-care, as well as a decrease in work performance, which led to his dismissal despite antidepressive treatment.

Examination was limited by marked inattention, restlessness and motor impairment; spontaneous speech was limited but with correct grammar; he had difficulty in naming and understanding complex orders as well as in performing bimanual praxis; he did not show frontal release reflexes or other focal signs. He was admitted to the neurology department for rapid progressive dementia.

A head MRI showed diffuse white matter changes. Screening for treatable causes of dementia revealed HIV positive with 90,600 copies/mL in blood and 462,000 in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), as well as 31 CD4/mm3 and CD4/CD8 ratio of 0.05; 5 leukocytes/µL in CSF with normal proteinorraquia. In parallel, JC virus (John Cunningham) negative, protein 14.3.3 below the cut points and biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease in CSF (total tau protein = 1800 pg/mL, elevated, and normal phospho-tau and beta-amyloid-42 proteins) compatible with non-specific neuronal death were received.

Other etiologies were ruled out and HAD was diagnosed as a presentation of category C3 HIV infection due to the defining clinical presentation of AIDS (dementia) and severe cellular immunodepression (<200 CD4), and antiretroviral therapy was initiated with bictegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide 50/200/25 mg. During admission, the patient presented a torpid evolution with infectious complications (Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia, pneumonia and oral candidiasis) and decompensation of his epilepsy with acute symptomatic onset of focal seizures with bilateral tonic-clonic evolution; carbamazepine 200 mg/12h was replaced with eslicarbazepine 800 mg/day due to its lower risk of interaction. The patient was stabilised after the resolution of intercurrent infections but the neuropsychological evaluation was hampered by persistent inattention. After two weeks of antiretroviral therapy, a decrease in the viral load in blood (638 copies/mL) was observed but an increase in the CSF (1,180,000 copies/mL). At discharge, the Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA) score was 9/30, with greater impairment of delayed recall, attention and language; 8/18 in the frontal assessment battery (FAB), with an intact ability to abstract, but a lexical fluency of 0 and significant impairment of inhibitory control, motor series execution and conflicting instructions; the trail making test (TMT) was impossible due to the attention deficit.

At the three-month follow-up, both the patient and his family reported subjective improvement in function. To monitor this improvement, the plasma and CSF viral load was repeatedly measured, and a reduction in both was observed (136 and 75,263 copies/mL, respectively), which confirmed adequate penetration into the CNS. A better performance in the neuropsychological evaluation was also observed: MoCA 23/30 (failures in visual-spatial domain, attention and lexical fluency), FAB 16/18 (deficit in inhibitory control), TMT-A without failures in 40 seconds and TMT-B with 3 failures not self-corrected in 3 minutes 53 seconds.
