A 56-year-old woman presented to our hospital with acute congestive heart failure. She needed dobutamine support and bilevel positive airway pressure for NYHA class IV dyspnea. Chest radiography revealed congestive heart failure. Echocardiography revealed severe aortic stenosis with heavily calcific bicuspid valve; the LVEF was significantly reduced at 15%. The aortic valve area measured 0.52 cm2. Mean pressure gradient was 49 mmHg. A peak aortic jet velocity was 4.4 m/s. Right-heart catheterization revealed a cardiac index of 1.6 L/min/m2 and pulmonary hypertension with the mean pulmonary artery pressure of 55 mmHg. Coronary angiography showed normal coronary vasculature without signs of significant stenosis. The pulmonary capillary wedge pressure was 37 mmHg. Computed tomography demonstrated a mildly dilated ascending aorta with a diameter of 42 mm. She was diagnosed as heart failure reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) due to severe aortic stenosis. The society of Thoracic Surgeons predicted mortality score was 12.4%.

Our heart team discussed her treatment. Our patient was a younger AS patient with severe LV contractile dysfunction and with bicuspid valve. Considering the severe LV contractile dysfunction, the patient seemed suitable for TAVI as the lack of ischemic cardiac arrest and extracorporeal circulation helps avoid ischemia, as well as ischemic reperfusion injury, inflammatory reaction, and oxidative stress. However, we hesitated to perform TAVI for this patient because extension of TAVI to such a younger patient with longer life-expectancy raises the issue of durability. Leaflet asymmetry of the implanted transcatheter heart valve which might occur after deployment into bicuspid valve may have an impact on long-term valve durability. While, conventional SAVR is possible while the heart is arrested with cardioplegic arrest, which is effective in majority of AS patients with acceptable morbidity and mortality. However, in some cases, especially in patients with impaired LV function like our patient, ischemic period followed by reperfusion period may lead to myocardial injury, which is associated with high perioperative mortality and morbidity. If SAVR could be performed with beating heart condition, the patient had benefited from this procedure without myocardial ischemia similar to TAVI. In spite of recent advances in myocardial protection methods, blood supply is the most effective technique of myocardial protection under beating heart condition. Cardioplegic arrest may induce reperfusion injury. In contrast, maintaining the myocardial contraction results in less myocardial edema and better cardiac function. We therefore decided to perform on-pump beating AVR with selective antegrade coronary artery blood perfusion.

She could not lie on her back due to severe orthopnea. Therefore, percutaneous cardiopulmonary support (PCPS) was initiated at the femoral vessels before the induction of general anesthesia. Surgery was performed via a median sternotomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was established after central cannulation. Under systemic temperature of 35–37 °C, CPB flow rates maintained at 2.5–2.8 L/min/m2, with a mean systemic pressure 60–80 mmHg. The aorta was crossed-clamped and opened. Direct 5-Fr silicon coronary perfusion cannulas (Sumitomo Bakelite, Tokyo, Japan) were inserted into the left and right coronary ostia, and oxygenated blood was continuously perfused at 34 °C and at a rate of 300 ml/min with mean perfusion pressure of 150 mmHg. The cannulas were fixed to the aortic wall with 5–0 prolene, and they were secured by tying them to a tourniquet. The valve was a severe calcific true bicuspid valve. Calcified leaflets were removed using the usual approach. The calcifications extending to the aortic annulus were carefully removed using a SONOPET ultrasonic aspirator (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI) and scalpel. After sizing the annulus, a 21-mm Regent mechanical valve (St. Jude Medical, St. Paul, MN) was placed into the aortic annulus using continuous suture technique with three 2–0 prolene sutures. The aorta was closed using the standard technique. Horizontal mattress suturing was performed for the first layer. After de-airing of the left ventricle, the aortic clamp was removed. Running suturing was performed for the second layer to ensure hemostasis. Transesophageal echocardiography was used to access septal and ventricular wall motion during surgery. The patient was weaned off CPB and PCPS under intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) support. Post-operative echocardiography demonstrated improved wall motion and an increase in the ejection fraction of up to 40%. She resumed a completely normal lifestyle by 3 weeks after the operation.