In February 2013, a 24-year-old black woman with anorexia nervosa, chronic anemia (baseline hemoglobin, 9.5–11 g/dL), and major depression was admitted to the cardiac care unit with congestive symptoms and low cardiac output that necessitated inotropic support. She had no notable family medical history. Three months earlier, she had been admitted for failure to thrive after several months of poor oral intake that had caused a 30-lb weight loss and metabolic abnormalities. Initial laboratory results included normal levels of thiamine, folate, and selenium; however, her zinc levels were low at 23 μg/dL (normal range, 70–120 μg/dL). She had a prolonged hospital stay while she underwent tube-feeding and received antidepressant therapy. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE), obtained to investigate subjective dyspnea, revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 0.60 and nothing unusual. She was discharged from the hospital with plans for outpatient mental health follow-up.

Two weeks before the current admission, the patient reported progressive dyspnea and cough, which were attributed to respiratory tract infection and were treated unsuccessfully with azithromycin. On the day of presentation, her mother noted that she had a disturbed gait, right-limb weakness, facial drooping, and slurred speech. The diagnosis was acute right-sided middle cerebral artery stroke. The patient was given intravenous tissue plasminogen activator, and she gradually recovered neurologic function. Hypercoagulability study results revealed nothing of note, and no dysrhythmias were detected. However, physical examination and auscultation revealed prominent jugular venous pulsations, a soft right ventricular heave, and a left ventricular (LV) S3. A TTE showed a dilated LV with globally reduced function, an LVEF of 0.10, an LV end-diastolic dimension of 4.6 cm, a left atrial dimension of 4 cm, and an estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of 60 mmHg.

Results of right-sided heart catheterization included a right atrial pressure of 18 mmHg (normal, 2–6 mmHg), a pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 29 mmHg (normal, 15–30 mmHg), a pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 16 mmHg (normal, 8–12 mmHg), a Fick cardiac output of 2.59 L/min (normal, 4–8 L/min), and a cardiac index of 1.71 L/min/m2 (normal, 2.5–4 L/min/m2). Cardiac magnetic resonance revealed normal chamber thicknesses and dimensions, severe biventricular failure, and a pericardial effusion of moderate size. No fresh or organized thrombi were seen in the cardiac chambers. Endomyocardial biopsy samples showed no acute inflammatory or infiltrative changes, viral inclusions, or adenovirus or herpes simplex virus after immunohistochemical staining. A reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction assay was negative for influenza A and B. Of note, no staining was obtained for changes associated with cardiomyopathy secondary to zinc deficiency, such as increased levels of superoxide dismutase or the protein LC3-II (a marker of autophagy).

The patient was started on conventional therapy for advanced HF. The cause of new-onset cardiomyopathy in this young woman was not obvious, so the treatment team searched the medical literature and consequently tested her zinc levels. These were consistently low at 34 μg/dL. She was started on an oral zinc supplement (220 mg/d) and was encouraged to increase her dietary intake. Four weeks later, she was discharged from the hospital on a therapeutic regimen of carvedilol (12.5 mg 2×/d), lisinopril (10 mg/d), spironolactone (50 mg/d), torsemide (10 mg/d), hydralazine (10 mg/d), isosorbide dinitrate (10 mg 3×/d), and zinc (220 mg/d).

The patient's LVEF improved to 0.25 after one month and to 0.35 after 3 months. Zinc supplementation was discontinued at 4 months by a practitioner who was unaware of earlier therapeutic decisions, and the remaining therapy continued. After 6 months on this regimen, the patient's zinc levels recovered only partially to 58 μg/dL, and her LVEF remained at 0.35. While not taking zinc, she had another period of poor food intake; her zinc level decreased to 44 μg/dL, and supplementation was resumed. One year later, during which time she had continued zinc therapy, the patient's HF symptoms had resolved, her LVEF had improved to 0.60, and her zinc level had increased to 62 μg/dL.