65-year-old male with no personal or family history of pathology of relevance. His condition began in 2020 with productive cough that intensified and was accompanied by shortness of breath with small to medium effort; as well as loss of 10 kg of weight in a period of 4 months. He went to a doctor who requested a chest X-ray that showed massive, multilocular right pleural effusion with right bronchial obstruction and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. A thoracocentesis was performed with a biopsy of the right lung and parietal pleura. The histopathological study reported an adeno-squamous carcinoma. His evolution was bad, which is why he was referred to our institution. On admission, a physical examination found him cachectic, with right pulmonary hypoventilation, 92% oxygen saturation and pneumokoccal dysfunction, with no evidence of systemic or haemodynamic compromise. A chest X-ray was performed that showed complete opacity of the right hemithorax, and a pleural catheter was placed with a serohematic flow. In the histopathological study of the revision material, the lung parenchyma was replaced by a poorly differentiated neoplasm with a solid mantle and syncytia, surrounded by abundant lymphocytes and plasma cells. The neoplastic cells had large, ovoid nuclei, fine chromatin, prominent nucleolus and wide, poorly defined cytoplasm. An immunohistochemical study was performed that was positive for CKAE1/AE3, CK 5/6, p63, EBER ISH, and negative for Napsina A, TTF-1 and CK 7, which ruled out the reference diagnosis of adeno-squamous carcinoma and established the diagnosis of CTLP. Molecular study in the paraffin block was positive for PD-L1 (SP263) +++ in approximately 100% of the neoplastic cells, and negative for EGFR, K-RAS, ALK, ROS1. In order to confirm the pulmonary origin of the neoplasm, a nasopharyngeal examination was performed that was negative. In April 2021, a PET-CT was performed that reported a heterogeneous parahilary pulmonary lesion that compromised the main bronchus and caused atelectasis; as well as multiple cervical, mediastinal and peri-gastric lymphadenopathies. The catheter was removed due to partial resolution of the effusion and chemotherapy treatment with gemcitabine/cisplatin was initiated. He received 6 cycles, however, the patient reported hearing loss and AKIN I acute renal failure was documented, so cisplatin was changed to carboplatin, and maintenance durvalumab was continued. In December 2021, disease progression was documented and he died in January 2022 due to respiratory failure.
