A 26-year-old male weighing 78 kg presented to the nephrology outpatient clinic in the third week of June with a history of rhinitis, low-grade fever, and decreased urinary output for three days. On his general physical examination for work in January 2023, he had a baseline creatinine of 0.7 mg/dL. On evaluation, he was incidentally found to have creatinine of 2.1 mg/dL. He had a history of weight gain of 6 kg with easy fatigue over the last 3 months. The patient had no significant family history and his medication history included two doses of 500 mg of acetaminophen and 5 mg of levocetirizine for rhinitis. He also complained of intermittent myalgia over the last two weeks. The clinical examination revealed euvolemia, pulse rate of 58/minute with blood pressure of 128/68 mmHg and urinary output of approximately 800 mL/day (less than 0.5 mL/kg/hour). There were no bite marks or discoloration of limbs that suggested direct muscle injury. Because of his unexplained renal insufficiency, he was admitted on June 26 and a full evaluation was initiated, which revealed elevated serum creatinine of 2.4 mg/dL with normal sodium levels (136 meq/L), potassium (4.9 meq/L), chloride (102 meq/L), bicarbonate (20 meq/L), and glycaemia. Urinalysis revealed traces of albuminuria with occasional presence of erythrocytes/high magnification field. The haemoglobin was 16.2 grams/dL, the leukocyte count was 8070/mm3, and platelet count was 208,000/mm3. The aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 69 U/L and the alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 51 U/L with normal levels of bilirubin. The viral serology tests for hepatitis B surface antigen, anti-HCV and HIV were negative. The abdominal ultrasound revealed normal-sized kidneys with no evidence of obstruction. He had normal complement levels, negative urine culture, and negative antinuclear antibodies. Because of his intermittent myalgia, the total creatine phosphokinase (CPK) was evaluated, revealing a value of 3869 IU/L with normal CPK-MB fraction. There was no history of direct muscle injury, crushing injury, prior history of recurrent muscle weakness or pain, family history of similar muscle pathology, or inadvertent drug abuse, and the glucose and electrolyte levels were normal. In the face of bradycardia, easy fatigue and weight gain, the thyroid profile was evaluated, revealing TSH >150 mIU/L, free T3 of 2.61 picomoles/L (range: 2.1 – 4.4 picomoles/L) and free T4 of 0.81 nanograms/dL (range: 0.80–2.70 nanograms/dL). The abdominal ultrasound revealed heterogeneous, diffusely enlarged thyroid gland with ecogenic septae suggestive of Hashimoto's thyroiditis. The total anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (anti-TPO) was greater than 1,000 IU/mL and anti-thyroglobulin antibody (anti-Tg) was 1,930 IU/ml. A biopsy of the kidneys was performed due to the uncertain cause of renal insufficiency, which revealed 25 glomeruli with normal cellularity and open capillary loops. The haematoxylin and eosin stain and Masson trichrome stain revealed epithelial tubular cell desquamation with cellular debris in many tubules, which was indicative of acute tubular injury. The immunofluorescence was negative for all antibodies and the immunohistochemistry was positive for myoglobin. The full exome sequencing revealed no genetic predisposing gene for rhabdomyolysis. He was diagnosed with acute tubular injury induced by autoimmune thyroiditis and rhabdomyolysis based on the elevated CPK and was initiated with 75 mcg (1.8 mcg/kg) of sodium thyroxine with adequate hydration for rhabdomyolysis. His creatinine decreased to 1.8 mg/dL after 7 days of admission. The dose of thyroxine was gradually increased by 25 mcg every two weeks. At a one-month follow-up in August 2023, his creatinine had decreased to 1.2 mg/dL with normal CPK (208 IU/L). He is currently being treated with 125 mcg (1.8 mcg/kg) of sodium thyroxine with biweekly follow-up in the nephrology department.
