20-year-old female with a history of malnutrition, diabetes mellitus type 1 and admission 1 month prior to consultation for candidemia (Candida albicans) sensitive to fluconazole and intrahospital pneumonia as an intercurrent. In this admission, septic emboli were ruled out with an abdominal ultrasound, fundus of the eye, abdominal ultrasound and infammatory bowel disease with transesophageal and transthoracic echocardiogram. She received treatment with 400 mg intravenous fluconazole daily for 23 days and 4.5 g piperacillin tazobactam (PTZ) every 6 hours intravenous for 10 days, with negative blood cultures. The patient consulted 18 days after the admission described, with a clinical picture of a week of evolution characterised by pain in both flanks of a dull type, intermittent, intensity 4 in 10, associated with asthenia, adynamia, hyporexia, unquantified weight loss, dysuria, polyuria and inflammatory bowel disease. On physical examination, the patient was found emaciated, dehydrated, with blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, heart rate of 100 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 cycles per minute and axillary temperature of 36.7 °C, abdomen with positive hydroaerolic sounds, deep pain in the hypogastrium without signs of peritoneal irritation, with mid-ureteral stones and positive right hand percussion. Blood tests reported: haematocrit 31.1%, haemoglobin 10.1 g/dL, white blood cells 13.2 x 109/L, platelets 392 x109/L, creatinine 0.9 mg/dL, blood glucose: 357 mg/L, sodium 129 mEq/L, potassium 5.4 mEq/L, chloride 86.5 mEq/L, albumin 3 g/dL, Quick time 115%, partial thromboplastin time 13.2 seconds, acid-base state with metabolic acidosis, serologies for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), VDRL, hepatitis B and C negative and inflammatory urinary sediment. The picture was interpreted as pyelonephritis in a patient with recent admission, paired blood and urine cultures were taken. Empirical treatment with 4.5 g PTZ every 6 hours intravenous was initiated, fluconazole 400 mg daily intravenous for isolation of Candida in the previous admission, parenteral hydration and basal insulin in bolus. The abdominal and pelvic ultrasound with EV contrast showed slightly enlarged kidneys, without signs of uronefrosis or lithasis, multiple bilateral cortical images suggestive of abscesses with left-sided predominance, the largest of 33 x 26 mm located in the anterior and posterior leaflets of the right side. A puncture guided by ultrasound of one of the abscesses of the right kidney was performed with isolation of Candida albicans sensitive to fluconazole.

The image was interpreted as bilateral multifocal renal abscesses caused by Candida albicans. Fundus examination ruled out fungal infections and transthoracic echocardiography did not show vegetations. She completed 6 weeks of treatment with fluconazole IV and an additional 2 weeks of oral treatment. She required continuous insulin infusion to control blood glucose and her nutritional status was optimised. She had a favourable evolution with clinical and imaging improvement and continued ambulatory clinical follow-up.
