69-year-old male patient with a history of cadaveric liver transplantation for cirrhosis secondary to steatohepatitis. The surgical time was 300 minutes (625 minutes cold ischemia time of the graft). Standard technique was used; the arterial anastomosis was performed between the donor celiac trunk and the recipient's hepatic artery using two 8-0 polypropylene hemi-surgents. The patient recovered favorably and was discharged on the 9th day postoperatively. Two months postoperatively, the patient presented abdominal pain in the right hypochondrium accompanied by alterations in the hepatic panel (FAL 1000 IU/l, AST 300 IU/l, ALT 300 IU/l and total bilirubin 1.9 mg/dl). The hepatic Doppler ultrasound revealed a round image in the hepatic hilum of 40 mm in diameter with turbulent flow inside accompanied by focal hypoechoic bilobic lesions. An MRI was performed which revealed the same image of 35 mm in diameter in relation to the hepatic artery, with a void of flow and filling after the administration of intravenous contrast and wedge-shaped subcapsular areas suggestive of ischemic zones. The MRCP revealed severe dilation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic proximal intrahepatic bile duct with presence of bilomas in both lobes. Subsequently, digital arteriography was performed which confirmed the diagnosis of pseudoaneurysm of the hepatic artery (PAH) of 50 x 60 mm without passage of contrast to the intrahepatic branches, which prevented its treatment by endovascular route.

In this situation, surgical ligation and resection of the pseudoaneurysm was decided. A primary anastomosis was attempted but a viable proximal end or ostium was not identified. Because of this and the ischemic compromise of the bile duct, re-transplantation was decided and an exceptional route was requested to INCUCAI, thus entering the waiting list and accessing a new graft 30 days later. The patient did not develop other complications during the new waiting period. The evolution after re-transplantation was favorable and the patient was discharged on the thirteenth postoperative day. The anatomopathological analysis reported a pseudoaneurysm of the hepatic artery with haematoma. The patient is asymptomatic and has been monitored for 9 years since the re-transplantation.

The incidence of PAH has been reported to be 0.27-2% of cases. Despite its rarity, it is considered a serious and life-threatening complication with a mortality rate of 69-75%. It is caused by a partial interruption of the arterial intima, causing blood to leak from the lumen forming a sac that resembles an aneurysm. Although the optimal strategy remains a matter of debate and must be adapted to the specific condition of each patient, most studies agree on the need for intervention due to the high mortality risk associated with rupture of the PAH. Traditional surgical methods for PAH include ligation of the hepatic artery or excision of the affected arterial segment, often accompanied by the use of extra-anatomical autologous grafts or re-transplantation.

The same image is evident in the coronal section in proximity to the portal vein and large subcapsular biloma. The cholangiopancreatic MRI shows severe dilation of the intrahepatic and proximal extrahepatic bile duct with presence of bilomas in both lobes.
