A 62-year-old Thai woman presented with sudden bilateral visual loss and headache for 5 days. She denied a history of head trauma. Her medical history was significant for poorly controlled hypertension.

Vital signs were normal except for blood pressure of 200/105 mmHg. Visual acuity was no light perception (NLP) with fixed pupils in both eyes. The ocular motility of both eyes was limited in all directions. Both eyelids were difficult to open. Hertel exophthalmometer measurements were 16 mm in the right eye and 14 mm in the left eye. There were significant chemosis and episcleral corkscrew vessels in both eyes. Both corneas showed mild, diffuse stromal edema without any infiltration. The anterior chambers were deep and quiet in both eyes. Intraocular pressures were 45 mmHg and 48 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. Gonioscopy revealed blood in Schlemm’s canal at the nasal angle of the right eye. Fundus examination showed slightly dilated and tortuous retinal veins with normal-appearing optic discs in both eyes. The cup-to-disc ratio was 0.3 bilaterally. Optical coherence tomography demonstrated normal thickness of the macula in each eye. There was no audible bruit. Other neurological examinations were unremarkable.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium of the brain and orbits demonstrated dilation of the bilateral superior ophthalmic veins (SOVs) and a marked degree of orbital and periorbital congestion bilaterally. However, neither compression nor stretching of the bilateral optic nerves was observed. Interestingly, diffusion restriction, with corresponding reduction of the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), in the entire orbital segment of the optic nerves bilaterally was revealed on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI). That is consistent with bilateral PION. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) of the brain and orbits revealed arterialization of the bilateral cavernous sinuses and SOVs.

Cerebral angiography confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral anterior-drainage dural CCFs. The right dural CCF was fed by the dural branches of the ICA (right meningohypophyseal trunk). The left dural CCF was fed by the dural branches of the ECA (left-middle meningeal artery and the left artery of the foramen rotundum and the dural branches of the ICA (left meningohypophyseal trunk). Each side of the dural CCF contributed arterial blood flow into the bilateral SOVs (contralateral SOV through inter-cavernous communication). No cortical venous reflux of arterial blood flow was noted. Based on these findings, transvenous coil embolization was performed. The bilateral cavernous sinuses were embolized using coils to occlude the feeding vessels from the dural branches of both the ICA and ECA. Immediate post-embolization cerebral angiography showed complete closure of the fistulas.

Three months after embolization, ophthalmic examination demonstrated progressive improvement of the aforementioned ophthalmic signs; however, the patient’s visual acuities remained NLP in both eyes.