A 17-year-old healthy female patient presented to the orthopedic clinic complaining of right-groin pain for 9 months. The patient initially started complaining of right-groin pain upon walking long distances. She had no history of trauma. The pain gradually progressed, and eventually also occurred at night. This pain was associated with an increased swelling in the same region. The patient denied any constitutional symptoms.

Physical examination revealed a mildly tender, hard, localized swelling over the right pubic area with no overlying pulsations or skin changes. The range of motion of the right hip was within normal.

A pelvic radiograph revealed an expansile lytic lesion involving the right superior pubic ramus. A pelvic MRI showed an expansile multicystic bony lesion measuring 6.8 × 3.3 × 4.5 cm with multiple fluid–fluid levels involving the right pubic ramus.

Routine hematological investigations including complete blood count (CBC), kidney function tests, C-reactive protein (CRP), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and alkaline phosphatase were within normal ranges.

Based on these clinical and radiological features, the patient was preliminarily diagnosed with an aneurysmal bone cyst of the right superior pubic ramus. Following a discussion of the initial diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment options with the patient and her parents, the patient was scheduled for curettage and grafting of the right superior pubic ramus.

We started the procedure by taking a percutaneous biopsy. The frozen section confirmed the benign nature of the lesion. Afterwards, using a modified Stoppa approach, an extensive curettage of the cyst was done followed by irrigation with alcohol and saline. Demineralized bone matrix and synthetic biphasic calcium phosphate granules bone graft were subsequently impacted. The cyst components were sent for histopathological evaluation. The final histopathology result revealed blood-filled cystic spaces lined with multinucleated giant cells and separated by cellular septae containing fibroblasts, giant cells, and woven bones with hemosiderin deposition consistent with an aneurysmal bone cyst.

The patient was followed up for 14 months, she progressed to full weight-bearing and was symptom-free. The follow-up pelvic radiographs at 17 days, 8 months, and 12 months post-operatively demonstrated that the bone grafted site has matured satisfactorily, respectively. The patient is planned to be followed-up in an orthopedic clinic for at least five years after the surgery.