A 56-year-old female patient presented with complaints of dyspnea that required oxygen supplementation. Her medical history dates back to July 2013 when she was hospitalized in the chest ward for dyspnea and cough with yellow sputum. She was subsequently diagnosed with Sjogren’s syndrome complicated with interstitial lung disease (ILD) and PAH (Table I). Her chest X-ray at that time showed vascular markings with interstitial thickening, costophrenic (CP) angle blunting and cardiomegaly. An echocardiogram revealed a pulmonary arterial (PA) systolic pressure of 99 mmHg, enlargement of the right atrium and ventricle, D-shaped left ventricle (LV), and severe tricuspid regurgitation. Chest CNYCT showed no filling defects, excluding pulmonary embolism; it also displayed an enlarged pulmonary trunk, right atrium (RA), and right ventricle (RV), further evidencing pulmonary hypertension. Symptoms of dry mouth, dry eyes, and cracked tongue mucosa, with a Schirmer’s test showing <5 cm, oculus uterque (OU). A positive minor salivary gland biopsy, nuclear medicine scan showing impaired salivary gland function, and a positive anti-Ro test, confirmed Sjogren’s syndrome. She started on Revatio (Sildenafil) 20 mg three times a day (TID) for pulmonary hypertension control, adding Tracleer (Bosentan) in 2016 due to disease progression. A right heart catheterization (RHC) revealed a mean pulmonary arterial pressure (PAP) of 39 mmHg, pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) nearly 15 Woods, and a wedge pressure of 4, indicating pre-capillary type, group I, CTD-related PAH in 2017. The right heart catheterization (RHC) report allowed for insurance coverage of Opsumit (Macitentan) 10 mg once a day (QD), replacing Tracleer (Bosentan) in 2017. From 2017 to 2020, she was hospitalized multiple times for steroid treatments to manage her underlying Sjogren’s syndrome.

Pulmonary hypertension treatment is risk-based, and until 2017, the patient was considered low to intermediate risk, controlled with two medications (Sildenafil + Macitentan). Her condition remained stable until October 2020, when she experienced worsened dyspnea accompanied by cough and expectoration of white sputum, suggestive of infection. On November 10, 2020, the patient experienced severe dyspnea, cold sweats, and cyanosis, with SpO2 dropping to 70%, necessitating 100% O2 via face tent. Blood gas and lab tests revealed a lactate level of 5.2 mmol/l and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) over 10,000 pg/ml, strongly suggesting cardiogenic shock. She was prepped for intensive care unit (ICU) admission, intubated, and initiated on four pulmonary hypertension medications. Her condition stabilized and showed improvement, preventing further deterioration. On November 12, 2020, evaluation for heart-lung transplantation began. Her condition continued to improve with off vasopressors on November 13, 2020, and extubating on November 14, 2020, and transferred to a general ward on November 21, 2020, with O2 tapered to nasal cannula 2l/min. A follow-up RHC continued to show elevated pulmonary artery pressure, likely attributed to chronic hypertension leading to right heart strain and eventual failure. After intensive care unit (ICU) treatment, she was referred to National Taiwan University Hospital for evaluation for heart-lung transplant.

Reviewing the records since the onset of her illness, it was evident that pulmonary artery pressure had steadily increased, and the distance covered in the 6-minute walk test was progressively shortened. Currently, the patient is classified as high risk. She continues regular hospitalizations for control. Despite the relatively stable condition, her chief complaint during the admission is still dyspnea. The physical examination revealed mild rhonchi ILD and a pansystolic murmur indicative of severe valvular heart disease, with no other significant findings. Ventavis (Iloprost) 10 mcg/ml 2 ml was added in 2020. Molecular hydrogen therapy (1 capsule/day) was initiated in May 2023. Hydrogen capsules (PURE HYDROGEN) were purchased from HoHo Biotech Co., Ltd. (Taipei, Taiwan, ROC). Each capsule contained 170 mg of hydrogen-rich coral calcium containing 1.7×1,021 molecules of hydrogen, which is equivalent to 24 cups of water with 1,200 ppb of hydrogen or 0.6 mM of hydrogen per 200 ml of water. Adjuvant therapy with hydrogen capsules resulted in increased CD127 + Treg, decreased anti-Ro antibody, decreased B cell subsets, and stabilization of clinical symptoms and signs was observed following the addition of hydrogen therapy in this patient. No adverse reactions or events were observed following the administration of hydrogen capsules. Flow cytometry and serological examination were employed for whole-blood analysis to assess changes in immune cells and autoantibody before and after hydrogen therapy. For subsequent whole-blood analysis via flow cytometry, blood samples were prepared using standard fluorescent dye preparation methods and fluorescent antibody reagent kits with dried reagents (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). The methods, steps, immunophenotypic analysis, and cell gating were conducted following previously described procedures. Our analysis of immunophenotypic markers before and after hydrogen therapy revealed increased CD127 + Treg and decreased B cell subsets after treatment. Moreover, this study adheres to the CARE reporting guidelines (2013 CARE Checklist).