A 24 years old pregnant woman was admitted in Debre Tabor Comprehensive Specialized Hospital gynecology ward due to severe preeclampsia and preterm delivery. She did not have signs and/or symptoms of balantidiasis. She had no history of smoking, drinking alcohol, and other underlying chronic diseases. However, her caregiver health professional sent urine sample for routine urinalysis test to the inpatient laboratory department.

The urine physically appeared to be somewhat dark and turbid with little foam. The chemical examination (Agape ™ Urine Reagent Strips test kit) results revealed; Specific gravity of 1.01, pH=6.0, Albumin=1+, blood=3+ (hematuria), and Leucocyte=2+ (leucocyturia) which may be indicative of urinary tract infection (UTI). From the microscopic examination of centrifuged (3600RPM for 3 minutes) urine sediment, we found motile and ciliated parasite together with many white blood cells /high power field (HPF) and many epithelial cells/low power field (LPF). The processing of urine was conducted within five minutes after passage. The urine sediment repeated in the next morning revealed similar result.

The ciliated parasite appeared to be ovoid with rapid motility in circular fashion under the microscope slide. The entire body of the parasite was enclosed with short and uniform cilia which aided its motility. But, the cilia around the mouth appeared to be longer and clearly visible than the others. The parasite possessed the mouth part that was found at pointed anterior end (cytostome) and rounded posterior end (cytopyge). In addition, the body of the parasite contained several food vacuoles, macro- and micro-nuclei, and some red blood cells inside the cytoplasm. This parasite with unique morphological characteristics was confirmed by medical parasitologists and experienced microscopists jointly to be B. coli. We did not have gone to further staining of the parasite as we easily and correctly confirmed it with microscopy.

However, this was incidental and strange finding from the urine and it has never been detected here even from stool. The stool sample was collected from the patient. The stool physically appeared formed. But, it was found negative for the parasite. Finally, the finding was reported to the concerning health care giver for intervention and additional information was collected if she had contact with risk factors. But, she had no history of contact with pigs. She came from rural area where goats, sheep and other domestic animals are always in close contact with humans. She also had history of feeding raw vegetables. In addition, there are monkeys around the area which might have contaminated the vegetables she ingested.