A 30-year-old Emirati female G8P3A2Ep3, with a history of primary infertility for 3 years, had multiple IVF trials. Currently, she is a mother of three children with two previous early miscarriages and three ectopic pregnancies for which she had a bilateral salpingectomy.

She presented with left lower abdominal pain, vaginal spotting, and 6 weeks of amenorrhea. Upon examination, the patient was found to have a soft, non-tender abdomen and no cervical excitation by vaginal assessment. Pelvic ultrasound revealed a thin endometrium (0.6 cm), normal ovaries, and a suspicious complex mass (2.1 × 1.5 × 1.5 cm) in the left adnexa near the left ovary with a ring-like structure; no intrauterine pregnancy was visualised. Laboratory investigations revealed elevated β-HCG (251 IU/L) which plateaued after 48 hrs (220 IU/L). A diagnosis of EP was reached. Surgical and medical treatment modalities were offered to the patient; the patient opted for medical treatment. As such, methotrexate was administered, within two weeks, β-HCG levels plummeted to insignificant levels.

Her previous history showed that she had had a diagnostic hysteroscopy and laparoscopy in 2014, due to primary infertility, revealing an arcuate uterus, membranous adhesions between the fallopian tubes and ovary, and a left hydrosalpinx, a blue-dye test confirmed right fallopian tube patency only. In 2016, the patient conceived spontaneously following a failed in vitro fertilisation (IVF) trial, which resulted in a full-term spontaneous vaginal delivery. In 2017, the patient had an ectopic pregnancy in the left uterine cornua, which was surgically treated via laparoscopic salpingectomy. In 2018, an ectopic pregnancy in the right fallopian tube was surgically treated by laparotomic salpingectomy for a ruptured EP after failed methotrexate treatment. In 2019, the patient yet again presented with a left scar ectopic pregnancy; laparoscopic removal of the sac with suturing of the cornua part was performed. The clinical diagnoses of all ectopic pregnancies were confirmed histologically. In 2020, the patient had a set of twins conceived via IVF and delivered by c-section.

Considering the patient’s background of multiple EPs and being liable for more in the future, an x-ray hysterosalpingography was performed to determine the patency of the tubes and prepare a plan to prevent another reoccurrence of EP. The hysterosalpingogram reported the appearance of both tubes with the left tube noticeably shorter than the right, faint spillage on both sides, intravasation into the veins, and possible partial recanalization of both tubes had taken place. The agreed management after counselling the patient about the above findings was to have combined oral contraception and to opt for IVF should she plan to have another pregnancy.