48-year-old man with a history of liver cirrhosis with Child Pugh C classification, MELD score 10, hepatitis C virus (HCV) viral load 756 663.0 IU/ml Log: 5.88, alcoholism, oedematous ascites syndrome with multiple hospital admissions for evacuating paracentesis, and umbilical hernia. Daily medication: 100 mg spironolactone, 20 mg furosemide, 12.5 mg carvedilol and 1 mg clonazepam. He consulted for abdominal pain of colic type and vomiting of 48 hours of evolution. On physical examination, irreductible umbilical hernia was observed with incoercible local pain and absence of air-water sounds. Umbilical hernia was diagnosed as stuck. 15 cm resection of devitalised small intestine was performed with end-to-end anastomosis and drainage of 3600 ml of ascites fluid. He was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) in immediate postoperative vigil, with good respiratory mechanics, haemodynamically unstable, requiring noradrenaline. Clinical analyses of admission (Table 1) showed leukocytosis, acute renal failure, hyponatraemia and metabolic acidosis. Severity scores, SOFA (Sepsis Related Organ Failures Assesment) totaled 5 points and APACHE II (Acute Physiology And Chronic Health Classification System II) 17 points. Ascites fluid, blood and urine were cultured, and treatment with meropenem and vancomycin was initiated. He intercurred with postoperative ileus and hyperactive delirium that was treated with dexmedetomidine plus antipsychotics. C. tertium was isolated in two blood cultures and in ascites fluid and Escherichia coli (Table 2), the antibiotic scheme was adjusted according to the sensitivity to piperacillin tazobactam. He evolved with resolution of haemodynamic and renal failure. On the 10th day of admission he presented with dehiscence of intestinal anastomosis and tertiary peritonitis with isolation of Candida albicans. A new surgical intervention was performed and fluconazole was added. He evolved unfavourably, progression of organ dysfunctions, septic shock, resulting in death 16 days after admission to the ICU.
