A 57-year-old woman with a 14-year history of asthma and allergic rhinitis, on salmeterol/fluticasone, was hospitalized for recurrent abdominal pain that began two months earlier. The pain was intermittent and dull, accompanied by nausea, anorexia, malaise, and a weight loss of 5 kg. There was no fever, blood / mucus in the stool, or respiratory symptoms (rhinorrhea, wheezing, coughing). She had no history of alcohol/tobacco use or traditional herbal medicines. Six weeks before admission, she was diagnosed with an intestinal infection in a local clinic after a complete blood count (CBC) revealed leukocytosis and significant eosinophilia (25.61 G/L, 77.8% eosinophils). She received antibiotics and mebendazole without relief of symptoms. At presentation, the patient was alerted and oriented with stable vitals (BP 110/70 mmHg, T 37°C, HR 88 bpm, RR 18 bpm). She had a BMI of 16.6 kg/m² and sarcopenia, but no skin rash, lymphadenopathy, or edema. The abdominal exam showed tenderness in the epigastric and umbilical regions without guarding. CBC revealed leukocytosis and significant eosinophilia (20.8 G/L, with a total white blood cell count of 26.8 G/L, comprising 77.8% eosinophils). Peripheral blood film examination showed normal eosinophils. Bone marrow aspiration reveals 48% eosinophils without blasts, atypical cells. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for CHIC2 deletion as a surrogate marker for FIP1L1-PDGFRA showed no rearrangements of the PDGFRA gene. Autoimmune and vasculitis screenings (ANA, anti-dsDNA, p-ANCA, c-ANCA) were negative. Elevated serum IgG (2760 mg/dL; normal range, 700–1600 mg/dL) and IgG4 (1260 mg/dL; normal range, 3.9–86.4 mg/dL), slightly elevated IgE (137.5 IU/mL; normal range, <100 IU/mL) and high RF (144.4 IU/mL; normal range, <20 IU/mL) were observed. Other parameters were normal, including aminotransferase, blood urea nitrogen, serum creatinine, complement C3, complement C4, vitamin B12, serum cortisol, and NT-proBNP. ECG and echocardiogram were normal. Chest CT scans showed mild fibrosis and bronchiectasis. Sputum AFB smears and bronchoscopy were negative. The cytology of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid showed 35% neutrophils, no eosinophils. Spirometry indicated severe obstruction with bronchodilator response. The fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) level was 15 ppb. Stool samples were tested positive for leukocytes, with no signs of ova or parasites. Serology tests were positive for toxocariasis (positive IgG of Toxocara canis at 54.2 NovaTec-Units) but negative for Strongyloides stercoralis, Fasciola sp., Toxoplasma gondii, Trichinella spiralis, Ancylostoma sp., Angiostrongylus cantonensis, Ascaris lumbricoides, Clonorchis sinensis, Paragonimus sp., Gnathostoma sp., Entamoeba histolytica, cysticercosis, filariasis, and HIV. An abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan revealed gallbladder stones without acute cholecystitis and showed no gastrointestinal tract abnormalities. The upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed unremarkable results with a normal appearance. Colonoscopy showed mucosal inflammation in the sigmoid, left, transverse, and right colon with systemic biopsy. A five-day course of albendazole (400 mg twice daily) for suspected toxocariasis was ineffective. Colonic biopsies revealed significant eosinophilic infiltration (>85 eosinophils/High-power field (HPF) in the left colon, >100 eosinophils/HPF in the transverse and right colon). Given the patient’s nonresponse to toxocariasis treatment and the significant eosinophilic infiltration observed in the colon mucosa biopsy, a diagnosis of eosinophilic colitis was confirmed. The patient was treated with oral methylprednisolone (16 mg) and montelukast (5 mg). Symptoms resolved in two weeks and eosinophil counts normalized (0.3 G/L). The corticosteroid was reduced and discontinued, and the patient was maintained on montelukast for three months without symptom recurrence.