A 24-year-old man with a history of intravenous drug use (IVDU), low educational level and socioeconomic status, who reported severe headache and paresthesia in the right side of the head. Upon admission to the hospital, the patient had normal vital signs, and no jaundice. Neurological examination did not show any evidence of impaired consciousness or strength, nor any signs of meningeal disease. Paraclinical tests showed the following results: aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 136 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 68 U/L, positive IgG antibodies for HCV, 109,910 IU/mL viral load (amount of viral genetic material in a person’s blood) for HCV, normal CD3 count, and normal flow cytometry results. HIV infection was ruled out, and abdominal ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) scan showed no abnormalities.

One week later, he presented with generalized tonic-clonic seizures and somnolence. Lumbar puncture (LP) revealed high opening pressure (OP), and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed lymphocytic pleocytosis and high proteinorrachia (≥ 45 mg/dL). China ink test in the CSF showed encapsulated blastoconidia suggesting Cryptococcus, with positive Cryptococcal latex in 1/512 dilutions, so induction phase was initiated with amphotericin B and fluconazole. Cryptococcus gattii was observed in the last CSF culture report. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed altered signal intensity in the head of the caudate nucleus and contrast-enhanced lesions in the splenium of the corpus callosum, lenticular nucleus, and anterior limb of the left internal capsule, consistent with CM.

Since he was a non-HIV patient, treatment was started with amphotericin B deoxycholate at 1 mg/kg/day + endovenous fluconazole 800 mg/day for 4 weeks. Subsequently, consolidation therapy was initiated with oral fluconazole 800 mg/day, followed by indefinite fluconazole 200 mg/day. The patient exhibited clinical progression without neurological deficits and decreased OP (less than 20 cm H2O).

One month after discharge and 10 days after changing to 200 mg/day fluconazole, the patient reported severe headache and a generalized tonic-clonic seizure with dysarthria during the postictal phase. At that time, he had not yet started antiviral treatment against HCV. During hospitalization, he was disoriented and somnolent. LP showed OP of 43 cm H2O, and simple cranial CT revealed hypodensity in the left frontal cortical and subcortical areas, with CSF reporting proteinorrachy (158 mg/dL). Considering that this was a CM relapse, a combination of liposomal amphotericin B (5 mg/kg/day) and fluconazole (600 mg every 12 h) for 4 weeks was initiated, followed by consolidation and maintenance therapy with fluconazole 400 mg per day for 8 weeks (minimum) and at 200 mg per day for 6–12 months, respectively.

In the following days, new seizure episodes with disorientation, somnolence, fever, and emesis occurred. A new cranial CT scan showed ventriculomegaly, and MRI showed multiple nodular lesions in the brain parenchyma and near the basal nuclei. A biopsy was performed for these lesions, which showed negative PAS, Gomori, and Ziehl-Neelsen staining. However, fibrillar and neuroglial structures, fibrotic tissue and inflammation with lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate, well-defined granulomas, and perivascular inflammation were identified. Negative results were obtained in smears and cultures for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, cultures for bacteria and fungi, PCR for M. tuberculosis, and KOH. The patient continued treatment without neurological involvement, fever, headache, or seizures. LP showed an OP of 5 cm H2O and cranial CT scan during follow-up did not show ventriculomegaly, so the patient was discharged 3 months after readmission. Upon discharge, the patient was prescribed fluconazole 800 mg per day, and was followed by the infectious disease unit, and was prescribed with sofosbuvir/velpatasvir 400/100 mg per day for 12 weeks, as well as antiseizure management with levetiracetam. HCV load remained under 12 U/mL at one month of treatment, at the end of treatment, and 3 months after termination, so the antiviral treatment was considered successful. Brain MRI with contrast was performed during follow-up, which showed resolution of the Cryptococcal lesions.