We report a case of a male newborn, second child of a healthy mother. The pregnancy was uneventful and he was born at 39 weeks’ gestation by a vacuum extraction after a 19 h spontaneous membrane rupture. During labor the mother presented with fever (38.1 °C), leukocytosis with neutrophilia and elevation of C-Reactive protein. Antibiotics were started. Apgar scores were 8, 8 and 9 at 1, 5 and 10 min, respectively. After birth, the 4.1 kg newborn was transferred to the neonatal special care unit with respiratory distress. He needed supplemental oxygen for the first 8 h, after which he showed significant clinical improvement. Despite clinical improvement the blood panel at 24 h of life showed elevated inflammatory markers (C-Reactive Protein 4.6 mg/dL and procalcitonin 10.79 ng/mL) and treatment with ampicillin and gentamicin was initiated. Blood cultures (day 1 and 7) were sterile.

At day 7 he presented with gross hematuria (bright red urine) with a normal clinical exam. He had no hypertension, oliguria or edema. Urine microscopy showed a high number of red and white blood cells and trace proteins (25 mg/dL). Serum creatinine and coagulation were normal. Although there was no leukocytosis or elevation of C-Reactive Protein, hematogenous bacterial pyelonephritis was suspected and cefotaxime was added. Urine and blood cultures were sterile. Renal ultrasound (day 10) showed an enlarged left kidney, with a slight hyperechogenicity of renal sinus fat, and an echogenic content inside the bladder, suggesting an infectious process (cystitis and possibly pyelonephritis). The Doppler ultrasound (only possible at day 15) did not have indirect signs of renal venous or arterial thrombosis. He completed 8 days of gentamicin, 14 days of ampicillin and 9 days of cefotaxime.

Gross hematuria persisted until day 16 and urine microscopy on day 15 still showed an elevated number of red (250/µL) and white blood cells (positive leukocyte esterase test +++), as well as a low level of proteinuria (25 mg/dL) and occasional granular casts. Nitrite test was negative. A new urine culture was also sterile. Urine DNA by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for adenovirus was positive, cytomegalovirus and human polyomavirus were negative. The newborn remained clinically stable and was discharged on day 18 with a normal urinalysis.

On 1 month follow-up visit he remained asymptomatic, with normal urine microscopy. He had positive anti-adenovirus antibodies (IgG) and normal renal ultrasound. After one month he remained asymptomatic, with normal urine microscopy and normal renal ultrasound.