A 63-year-old man presented to our emergency department with a history of frequent hematuria. Physical examination was unremarkable and his blood work was normal with a serum creatinine of 1.2 mg/dL. A contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a large infiltrative bladder growth, more on the right lateral wall and dome with moderate left-sided hydroureteronephrophy and a right-sided, small, intact bladder, excluding a bladder perforation. A diagnostic cystoscopy with transurethral biopsy was scheduled. However, he presented to the emergency department 2 weeks later with instability, abdominal distension and respiratory distress requiring intubation and ventilatory support. His biochemical panel showed high creatinine (20 mg/dL), hyperkalemia (9 mEq/L) and hyponatraemia (128 mEq/L), and his blood gases showed severe metabolic acidosis (pH 7.1). When questioning the patient's caregivers later, a history of oliguria with gradually increasing abdominal distension over the previous 2 days was obtained, for which he had undergone an external collection of "ascitic" fluid in a center. Anti-hypokalaemic measures were initiated. An ultrasound at the bedside showed left hydroureteronephrophy with severe right hydroureteronephrophy and free fluid in the abdomen. In view of the instability and unavailability of haemodialysis in our facility, a bedside emergency nephrostomy was performed with a single-sided nephrostomy catheter. Under ultrasound guidance, a percutaneous nephrostomy was inserted at the bedside and the patient's general condition improved. There was an initial diuresis with a fall in creatinine to a nadir of 2 mg/dL. Due to persistently elevated creatinine levels, the CT was repeated 4 days after the nephrostomy and, to our surprise, we noted that the tip of the pigtail catheter was in the left perirenal space acting as a percutaneous drain with complete resolution of free fluid in the abdomen. The chronology of events of an initial extremely elevated serum creatinine that had fallen dramatically after the drainage of the extravasated fluid adjusted to a clinical picture of pseudo renal failure due to absorption of extravasated urine. We hypothesised that the source of the extravasated urine was most likely a rupture of the renal fornix due to a high-pressure obstruction on the left side. In view of the still elevated creatinine and the gradual decrease in the output of the pigtail catheter, a percutaneous nephrostomy was inserted into the collection system under ultrasound guidance, followed by normalisation of his creatinine. A nephroscopy with cystogram was performed in the sequence and showed a distal left ureteral obstruction and a small, intact bladder, excluding a bladder perforation. A cytoscopy biopsy of the bladder growth confirmed it as an invasive muscular squamous carcinoma. We explained the diagnosis and prognosis to the patient and performed a laparotomy exploration 2 weeks after the biopsy. During intra-operative observation, a dense desmoplastic reaction was observed around the bladder, which was shrunk and glued to the left pelvic walls and the pubic bone. Due to the inoperable nature of the disease, the radical cystectomy plan was abandoned and a palliative bypass of the ileal conduit with right-sided nephrectomy was performed. The patient did well in the post-operative period and was discharged 5 days later. However, he developed multiple thoracic metastases in the following months and his general condition deteriorated steadily, resulting in his death 3 months after surgery due to cachexia.
