A 71-year-old man with diabetes and Chagas disease had recent significant weight loss (60 kg). The clinical investigation resulted in a diagnosis of megaesophagus associated with significant obstruction at the level of the cardia. Esophageal balloon dilatation was performed, successfully recovering digestive transit. In the meantime, during surgical risk assessment, the patient also presented chest pain on minimum exertion. Coronary computed tomography angiography performed three years earlier showed heavily calcified multivessel disease involving the left main (LM); no further investigation had been performed at that time. This time he was referred for us for cardiac catheterization.
The exam carried out on 16 February, 2016 showed: right coronary artery (RCA) with important calcification and a 50% lesion in the mid third; posterior descending artery (PDA) and right posterolateral artery (RPLA), with severe calcification and lesions of 80% and 70%, respectively; LM with 80% calcified lesions in the distal third; left anterior descending artery (LAD) with significant calcification and 90% lesion in the mid third; diagonal branches (DG1 and DG2) with calcified lesions of 70% and 80%, at the origin and in the proximal third, respectively; and left circumflex artery (LCx) occluded and calcified, receiving grade II collaterals of multiple origin. Left ventricular volume and contractility were preserved.

With this angiographic picture, Society of Thoracic Surgeons risk score 15.8% for morbidity or mortality, EuroSCORE II 4.67%, and significant frailty due to recent major weight loss, the heart team decided to perform percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of the LM, LAD, DG1 and DG2 initially and, in a second procedure after 30 days, PCI of the RCA branches. In both procedures, RA was also indicated due to significant calcification. The LCx would not be addressed since angiographically the vessel was not so severely involved and also considering the technical difficulty of recanalization, due to the length of the CTO and also heavily calcified walls (J-CTO score 4). The LCx was already receiving grade II collateral circulation.
On 19 February, 2016, after beginning dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel, the patient underwent RA of the LM, LAD and DG2 with a 1.5 mm burr followed by predilation with a 3.0 mm×20 mm balloon at 14 atm and implantation of drug-eluting stents (DES) in DG2 and LAD, using a mini-crush technique and a kissing balloon at the end. A kissing balloon was then performed at the LAD/DG1 bifurcation and finally the third DES was implanted from the origin of the LM to overlap with the LAD stent. Procedural success was achieved with TIMI flow 3 and without clinical or angiographic complications.
On 22 March, 2016, the patient returned for RCA PCI. The proposed strategy was RA in the PDA and RPLA with a 1.5 mm burr, followed by implantation of two DES. Through right femoral access and a 7F JR guide catheter we crossed the RotaWire extra support through the RPLA lesion, then conducted three successive 20-s passes at 170 000 rpm successfully and uneventfully. As there were no signs of dissection and TIMI 3 flow was maintained, the 0.009″ RotaWire was repositioned to cross the PDA lesion and debulking of the lesion was performed. After two attempts with short, gentle movements we succeeded in crossing the lesion, however entrapment of the burr ensued. The system was pulled back without success considering that the stretching of the system was causing wrinkles at the RCA and the 7F JR was penetrating deep into the artery, with risk of rupture. Attempts were then made to release the Rotablator, in both rotablation and dynaglide modes, by moving it forward and backward, but the burr did not even spin. Attempts were made to advance a parallel guidewire with 1.25 mm balloon but it did not progress within the 7F guide catheter. We therefore decided to puncture the left (contralateral) femoral artery and insert a 6F JR guide catheter to the RCA ostium, parallel to the first 7F guide catheter, and advance a PT2® guidewire (Boston Scientific) to the PDA branch with a 1.25 mm×8 mm balloon upstream to support this wire. We succeeded in arriving parallel to the Rotablator system until the proximal portion of the entrapment site. Attempts to cross the guidewire and balloon angioplasty tangentially to the burr were unsuccessful because the tip of the wire was not sufficiently stiff to cross it. When the PT2 was pushed with the back support of the balloon this forceful movement caused the tip of the wire to bend, and finally the guidewire was advanced with the ‘knuckle’ technique (used for recanalization of CTOs), taking advantage of the kinking of the distal portion of the PT2 guidewire, making a subintimal dissection. At this time we could not see if the wire had re-entered the true lumen, but the 1.5 mm balloon could then easily be crossed parallel to the burr and inflated to 16 atm to release the trapped burr. The burr was subsequently withdrawn maintaining the RotaWire in the initial position. After administration of 100 μg nitroglycerin, angiography confirmed that the PT2 guidewire had re-entered the true lumen and reached the most distal part of the PDA. The RotaWire was pulled out together with the whole 7F system. Through the 6F system and the same PT2 wire, PCI was finalized with implantation of the two programmed 2.75 mm×20 mm and 2.75 mm×16 mm DES at 12 atm in the PDA and RPLA, respectively, without any further predilation. We also noted the presence of a long and severe dissection in the mid third of the RCA, certainly caused by excessive handling and attempts to remove the burr, which caused deep penetration by the 7F guide catheter. This dissection was promptly corrected with implantation of a third 4.0 mm×32 mm DES, and final TIMI 3 flow was obtained without clinical or electrocardiographic complications. The two femoral puncture sites were occluded with 8F and 6F AngioSeal devices, respectively. The patient remained in the intensive care unit for 48 hours, the only abnormality being CK-MB elevation (twice the reference value). He was discharged on day 3 in excellent general condition. The control echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular contractility.