A 44-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with acute decompensated heart failure (HF). Seven years before the patient's admission, he had first been admitted for the treatment of acute decompensated HF. The patient had a history of hypertension. His blood pressure was 140/80 mmHg when he was not taking any medication.

An echocardiogram showed LV systolic dysfunction and dilatation with no significant valvular disease. The degree of mitral regurgitation at the diagnosis was mild. The LV wall thickness was 8.0 mm. Blood urine examinations did not reveal secondary or infiltrative cardiomyopathy, with the following measurements: white blood cell count, 9,900/μL; C-reactive protein, 0.28 mg/dL; thyroid-stimulating hormone, 0.57 μIU/mL; free thyroxine, 1.71 ng/dL; anti-nuclear antibody negative; immunoglobulin G, 1,363 mg/dL; angiotensin-converting enzyme, 6.8 IU/L; and urinary Bence-Jones protein negative. The patient had no history of drug or alcohol consumption that could have caused LV dysfunction.

Coronary angiography demonstrated no significant coronary disease. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography and 67Ga-scintigraphy showed no abnormal uptake in the LV. CMR showed no high-intensity regions on T2-weighted imaging or late gadolinium enhancement (LGE). An endomyocardial biopsy showed myocardial degeneration and mild interstitial fibrosis, but secondary cardiomyopathy was not observed. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with idiopathic DCM.

Two and a half years after the first admission, the LV diastolic diameter decreased from 60 to 51 mm, and the LV ejection fraction (LVEF) increased from 10% to 67% after the administration of medication, including beta-blockers (carvedilol, 10 mg/day) and RAAS inhibitors (perindopril, 8 mg/day; spironolactone, 25 mg/day).

Three years after the first admission, the patient stopped taking medication of his own volition against medical advice. His LVEF decreased from 67% to 25%, and the LV diastolic diameter increased from 51 to 72 mm. After the patient discontinued medical treatment, his systolic blood pressure increased from 131 to 162 mmHg. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with a ventricular rate of 99 bpm, which was not significantly different from the value before the discontinuation of therapy (97 bpm). We performed coronary angiography; however, no coronary stenosis was observed. In addition, secondary cardiomyopathy was investigated again by blood and urine examinations, but no significant observations were made. We also performed CMR imaging and an endomyocardial biopsy again. CMR at follow-up demonstrated an appearance of linear LGE in the ventricular septum, which was not observed at the baseline. An endomyocardial biopsy also demonstrated a significant increase in interstitial fibrosis and the development of replacement fibrosis compared with the baseline evaluation.

Although medications were re-introduced and the patient's compliance was good, the LV performance gradually worsened, and the B-type natriuretic peptide concentration increased over several years. Because of first-degree atrioventricular block and temporal complete atrioventricular block, beta-blockers could not be up-titrated to the target dose (final dose of carvedilol: 10 mg/day).

The patient was repeatedly admitted to the hospital because of HF. Although adaptive servo-ventilation was introduced, the effect was poor. At this time point, the patient was considered to be indicated for cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT) for the further up-titration of beta-blockers. However, a CRT device was not implanted since it was difficult to anticipate whether or not the patient might achieve reverse remodeling with the further up-titration of beta-blockers, causing biventricular pacing to potentially negatively affect his cardiac performance. A ventricular assist device and heart transplantation were repeatedly considered; however, the patient did not want to undergo therapy. The patient ultimately died four years later due to worsening HF.