An 80-year-old Japanese man presented to our hospital with complaints of fever and left leg pain, as well as bilateral lower extremity swelling. Although mild edema was always observed in his bilateral lower extremities, it gradually worsened 1 week prior to admission. On the day of admission, he had high fever accompanied by chills. He denied any recent leg trauma. His past medical history was significant for pulmonary tuberculosis at 30 years of age, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and congestive heart failure (CHF). A pacemaker was inserted because of atrial fibrillation (AF) with symptomatic bradycardia. He was an ex-tobacco smoker (100 pack year history) and did not drink alcohol. His maintenance medications were dabigatran (220 mg), furosemide (20 mg), and an inhaled corticosteroid/long-acting β2-agonist.

At initial presentation, he was alert and oriented but appeared distressed. His vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 38.8 °C; blood pressure, 135/90 mmHg; heart rate, 96 beats per minute with irregular rhythm; blood oxygen saturation, 93% with room air; and respiratory rate, 22 breaths per minute. He had a barrel-shaped chest, coarse crackles were heard over the lung base, and wheezes were heard over both lung fields. Pitting edema was observed in his lower extremities. His left foot had more erythema and edema than his right foot. His left lower extremity was warm and tender to touch. There were no skin breaks or other potential infection entry sites. Tinea pedis was ascertained by a potassium hydroxide test.

Arterial blood gas analysis showed the following results: pH, 7.408; partial pressure of carbon dioxide, 44 mmHg; partial pressure of oxygen, 72 mmHg; bicarbonate, 22.5 mmol/L; and lactate, 1.8 mmol/L. A complete blood count revealed the following results: white blood cells, 9,000/μL; red blood cells, 384 × 104/μL; hemoglobin, 12.4 g/dL; and platelets, 9.6 × 104/μL. Chemistry results were as follows: serum creatinine, 0.81 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 19.0 mg/dL; albumin, 3.7 g/dL; total bilirubin, 2.1 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 43 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 22 U/L; C-reactive protein, 0.36 mg/dl; and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP), 471 pg/mL (our patient’s basal BNP level was approximately 100 pg/mL). A coagulation test showed prolonged prothrombin time-international normalized ratio (1.29) and activated partial thromboplastin time (52.3 seconds). A chest X-ray showed a nodular lesion on the right pulmonary apex compatible with previous tuberculous infection without any infiltrations. An electrocardiogram showed AF with pacemaker rhythm without any sensing and pacing failures. Based on these results, we diagnosed our patient as having cellulitis and immediately admitted him to hospital because his respiratory status continued to worsen, necessitating supplemental oxygen therapy for dyspnea relief. We also considered a risk of sepsis and mortality because his sequential organ failure assessment score was 5 points (2 points greater than baseline) at initial presentation.

Cefazolin (1 g every 8 hours) was initially administered intravenously to treat his cellulitis, but after 25 hours of incubation, two sets of aerobic blood culture bottles (BD BACTEC™ Plus Aerobic/F Medium; BD Diagnostics, Sparks, MD, USA) were found to be positive (detected by BD BACTEC™ FX, Blood Culture System; BD Diagnostics, Sparks, MD, USA) for GNRs. The positive culture broth was inoculated onto a blood agar plate (BD BBL™ Trypticase™ Soy Agar with 5% Sheep Blood; Nippon Becton Dickinson Company, Fukushima, Japan) and light yellow colonies were observed after incubation of 24 hours at 37 °C. The causative organism was confirmed as GNF-GNR on day 4. Accordingly, we switched antibiotics to intravenously administered meropenem (1 g every 8 hours) on the same day, considering antibiotic resistance. On day 6, the causative organism was identified as S. spiritivorum. It was identified by BD PHOENIX™ System (BD Diagnostics, Sparks, MD, USA) and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry, using Microflex LT with MALDI Biotyper version 3.1 database (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany). Our patient’s condition gradually improved with the antibiotic use. We decided to switch antibiotics to orally administered levofloxacin (500 mg/day) on day 12, considering the antibiotic sensitivity of S. spiritivorum isolated from the blood culture. Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole was an alternative but was not used out of concern for adverse drug reactions considering our patient’s age. He was discharged on day 16 without any complications, and the antibiotic was discontinued on the same day. We followed up with him 2 weeks after discharge, during which he did not have any residual symptoms related to cellulitis.