A 23-month-old boy with hypoxic-ischaemic encephalopathy at birth with good brain motor potential and normal psychomotor development. He had a personal history of restrictive cardiomyopathy and was included in a cardiac transplant programme when he was 16 months old. He also required the implantation of an external Berlin Heart biventricular support device. In order to prevent embolic events, double antiplatelet and anticoagulant treatment was administered. When he was 23 month old presented with disconnection and right hemiparesis. A computerised tomography (CT) scan showed a hyperdense left middle cerebral artery (MCA), as well as a chronic right parietotemporal infarction. His blood analysis showed: red cells 4.16 × 106 µ/L; haemoglobin 11.4 g/gL; activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) 93 seconds and international normalised ratio (INR) 1.08.

Intravenous thrombolytic treatment was contraindicated due to double antiplatelet and anticoagulant treatment at full dose with heparin, so an intra-arterial thrombectomy was performed. Although the patient was 23 months old, he was in the third percentile of the weight curve (10 kg). Under general anaesthesia, the right femoral artery was punctured and an 11 cm long 4F sheath (Cordis, Ireland) was placed. A 4F vertebral Radiofocus catheter (Glidecath of Terumo, Belgium) was used to confirm the occlusion of the M1 segment of the left MCA. The artery was recanalised by mechanical thrombectomy with a stentriever using the 4F vertebral catheter as a tutor, positioning it in the petrous segment of the carotid artery. A 3 mm × 20 mm Trevo XP Pro Vue device (Stryker, The Netherlands) was used, with a straight Rapid Transit microcatheter (Codman Neurovascular, UK), opening the artery in one pass. The whole system was removed (tutor catheter, microcatheter and stentriever) simultaneously. In the control run, an iatrogenic dissection of the left internal carotid artery was detected, which had no clinical significance, however, as the left hemisphere was irrigated through the anterior communicant artery.

One month later, his heart transplant was carried out successfully. Neurologically, the only long-term sequel that came as a result of the stroke was a right upper limb spasticity.