31-year-old woman, native of and from Lima, Peru, with no known drug allergies, no relevant medical history, and no harmful habits. She presented to the emergency department with abdominal pain in the right flank of several days' evolution, accompanied by nausea and vomiting. Four days before admission, she developed fever and constipation. Her blood count, amylase and lipase were normal, and her serum beta-HCG was negative. An abdominal ultrasound revealed vesicular lithiasis and abundant intestinal meteorism. In the emergency department, given the persistent abdominal pain, biliary vomiting, marked abdominal distension and absence of peristalsis, an exploratory laparotomy was performed, with no findings to explain the condition. A small tumor was found in the ileum, which histopathologically corresponded to a benign wall cyst of the small intestine without atypia. Her postoperative evolution was favorable, and despite the persistence of abdominal pain, which was of lower intensity compared to admission, she was discharged six days later.

Three days after discharge, the patient presented generalized tonic-clonic convulsions at home, so she was readmitted. The brain scan and lumbar puncture were normal. The summary of the auxiliary examinations requested is presented in Table I. On her third day of hospitalization, she presented visual hallucinations and again convulsions, despite the administration of antiepileptics. On the fifth day, she presented a decrease in muscle strength in both legs, with bilateral arreflexia. On the eighth day, she had sinus tachycardia, flaccid paraparesis and hypotonia, difficulty and severe respiratory acidosis, and was admitted to mechanical ventilation. The thyroid profile, antinuclear antibodies and complement C3 and C4 were found at normal levels.

The patient's clinical manifestations (abdominal pain, convulsions, visual hallucinations and decreased muscle strength) and the change in urine coloration led to the suspicion of an acute crisis of porphyria, and the diagnosis was confirmed with the determination of elevated levels of delta aminolevulinic acid. Administration of beta blockers and glucose solutions was initiated. On the other hand, the use of hemin was also considered, however, the drug was not available in the country.

Due to the marked neuromuscular involvement, and despite initiating physical therapy, it was difficult to withdraw the mechanical ventilation, and he remained on mechanical ventilation for six weeks, with superimposed nosocomial infections.

After five weeks in hospital, the patient was given arginate of hemin at a dose of 4 mg/kg/day. On the second day of administration, it was decided to discontinue the treatment due to hypertransaminemia. After 48 hours of normalization, the administration was restarted until the patient had received four days of treatment. A week later, there was evidence of improvement in muscle function, with recovery of mobility in the feet. The patient was then gradually weaned off mechanical ventilation, which took four weeks to be discontinued. The patient was then discharged with the recommendation of physical and occupational therapy.
