A 19-year-old woman presented to the emergency department of our institution for acute onset of palpitations. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ventricular tachycardia, with right branch bundle block associated to left posterior hemiblock, and T waves inversion in the inferior and precordial leads. Blood test showed elevated troponin (27 ng/L, normal values <14 ng/L) and NT-pro BNP (aminoterminal pro B-Type Natriuretic Peptide) levels (2225 pg/mL, normal values <130 pg/mL). Hence, she was admitted to the coronary care unit.

About 5 years before, she had already presented to the emergency department with cardiogenic shock due to fascicular ventricular tachycardia; she was subsequently hospitalized and underwent cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) and a transoesophageal electrophysiological study, both with inconclusive results. She was discharged with a diagnosis of tachycardiomiopathy, with the prescription of a standard medical therapy (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist, and beta blockers), and a follow-up was planned. Her subsequent clinical history was uneventful.

During the present hospitalization, no further episodes of hyperkinetic arrhythmias were detected. Basal 12-lead ECG. Echocardiography showed diffuse hypokinesia of both the left and the right ventricles, and CMR was once again inconclusive. Then, the patient was advised to undergo cardiac computed tomography angiography (CCTA) to evaluate the anatomy of the coronary tree, under the suspicion of an undiagnosed congenital cardiac anomaly. CCTA was performed with a GE Lightspeed unit (GE HealthCare, Chicago, United States), with retrospective gating, at 100 kVp and 696 mAs, with a gantry rotation time of 0.35 s, and 0.625 mm slice thickness, with intravenous injection of 70 mL of Iomeron 400 mgI/mL (Bracco Imaging, Milan, Italy).

Differential diagnosis
Cardiogenic shock, namely a shock caused by inadequate blood flow, may be caused by different pathologies such as myocardial infarction, arrhythmias, or other cardiomyopathies. Undiagnosed congenital heart disease is a non-negligible cause of cardiogenic shock in otherwise healthy adult patients. Once myocardial infarction is ruled out by a 12-lead ECG, and an underlying cardiomyopathy has been excluded by an inconclusive CMR examination, CCTA is the technique of choice for the differential diagnosis among diverse causes of cardiogenic shock.

Investigations/imaging findings
The CCTA examination showed regular origin of the left main coronary artery, the left anterior descending artery, which presented a wide ramus intermedium, 2 diagonal branches, and the left circumflex artery, which appeared thin and non-dominant. Among all these vessels, there was no evidence of obstructive coronary artery disease. However, the ostium and the proximal portion of the right coronary artery (RCA) were absent, whereas its mid and distal portions were supplied by a wide collateral branch originating from the distal left anterior descending artery, which then surrounded the lateral wall of the right ventricle, ran through the distal part of the atrioventricular groove, finally giving rise to thin posterior interventricular and posterolateral arteries. Furthermore, a thin branch going from the mid left anterior descending artery to the sinoatrial node was observed.

Treatment, outcome, and follow-up
In view of the CCTA findings, the patient underwent an echo-stress test, which confirmed the presence of inducible myocardial ischaemia in the inferior wall, in line with the positioning of the arrhythmic focus. After being transferred to a specialized centre for the diagnosis and treatment of congenital heart disease, the patient underwent transcatheter radiofrequency ablation of sustained ventricular tachycardia originating by the posteromedial papillary muscle. Then, she was discharged with medical therapy (Acetylsalicylic acid and Verapamil). At her 6-month follow-up, she has always been asymptomatic, with no further signs of arrhythmias.