40-year-old woman, who came to the emergency department for 3 hours of oppressive chest pain, intensity 8 out of 10 on the visual analogue scale and diaphoresis. As a background of interest, she was found to be overweight and had diabetes mellitus for 7 years, treated with insulin and metformin. She did not report using contraceptives, denied smoking, direct relatives with early coronary artery disease or stimulant use and stated that she exercised regularly daily with 40 minutes of walking.

The initial electrocardiogram showed a subnormal 0.05 to 0.1 mV in V1 to V6 and aVL. The high-sensitivity troponin I concentration was reported as 1463 ng/dL. Based on the findings, the case was classified as a very high-risk SCAST. The blood parameters of hematology, glucose, urea and creatinine, sodium, potassium, chloride, coagulation profile AST, ALT and DHL were normal.

Initial pharmacological treatment was with a load of 300 mg of acetylsalicylic acid, 600 mg of clopidogrel, 80 mg of atorvastatin and 60 mg of subcutaneous enoxaparin. The patient was taken to the Haemodynamic Laboratory, where an immediate invasive coronary angiography was performed and a long stenosis of approximately 80% of the ostio-proximal segment of the anterior descending artery (DA) was observed, with no evidence of epicardial obstructions or alterations in the flow of the rest of the coronary arteries.

Due to the findings and clinical behavior, it was decided to perform an OCT of the proximal anterior descending artery, in which an image compatible with an intramural hematoma of 8 mm in length was observed, which conditioned a 90% stenosis of the arterial lumen. It was decided to implant a 16 atm. drug-releasing Resolut stent of 3.5 x 15 mm in the ostio-proximal segment of DA to distal left coronary trunk, with post-dilatation of the distal segment of the main trunk with a 4 x 12 mm balloon. The OCT performed after the stent implant allowed to observe an adequate implantation and expansion of the entire device, which was corroborated by a control angiography, so any residual lesion and a final TIMI 3 flow was ruled out.

During the 2-day convalescence in the Coronary Intensive Care Unit, the patient evolved without clinical events of relevance. The screening and study intended for other pathologies such as dyslipidemia, autoimmune diseases or thrombophilia only identified mild hypertriglyceridemia of 217, but with negative C-reactive protein, complement, rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibodies.

The transthoracic echocardiogram performed prior to discharge showed a non-dilated left ventricle with no regional or global mobility abnormalities and the left ventricular ejection fraction was estimated at 63%.

The patient was asymptomatic and without complications at discharge and was prescribed outpatient pharmacological treatment with acetylsalicylic acid 150 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg, atorvastatin 80 mg, metoprolol 50 mg and enalapril 5 mg every 12 hours. At the 6-month follow-up, her functional class was I of the Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) category, with no limitations or cardiovascular symptoms in her daily life.
