A 36-year-old woman, gravida 2 para 1, with no significant medical history except for one prior low-transverse cesarean delivery at term for arrest of dilatation, presented at a gestational age of 24 weeks 5 days for preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM) and chorioamnionitis. She underwent an emergent classical cesarean delivery due to non-reassuring fetal heart tones within 1 h of admission. Placental abruption and Couvelaire uterus were diagnosed intraoperatively, with the fetus and anterior placenta delivered en caul. Pathologic examination of the placenta indicated “abnormal placental separation” and ascending infection. She completed standard antibiotic therapy with ampicillin 2 g every 6 h and gentamicin 5 mg/kg every 24 h for her intrauterine infection until she was afebrile for 24 h, and had an otherwise uncomplicated postpartum course with discharge home in good condition on postoperative day 3.

She presented again on postoperative day 16 complaining of severe lower abdominal pain and foul-smelling vaginal discharge and was evaluated by a new team of physicians. Upon presentation, her physical examination revealed a well-healed skin incision, no abdominal distention, and marked fundal tenderness. She was afebrile and normotensive and had a high-normal white blood cell count at 9.85 × 109/L (normal: 4.5–11.0 × 109). Her urinalysis and urine cultures were negative, and there was no other obvious source of abdominal pain. She was diagnosed with postpartum endometritis, admitted, and started on intravenous gentamycin and clindamycin. After 36 h of antibiotic therapy, her lower abdominal pain persisted and she continued to have abnormal dark vaginal discharge, so transvaginal and transabdominal ultrasound were performed to investigate for retained products of conception as a potential cause. The ultrasound demonstrated an ill-defined, infiltrating echogenicity extending from the anterior junctional zone into the subserosal myometrium that protruded into the endometrial canal proximally. The endometrial canal otherwise appeared unremarkable, without evidence of abnormal fluid or air. These findings were not felt to be consistent with endometrial infection, but rather with postsurgical changes. Because of the immediate clinical presentation, ultrasound findings, and the pathology report reading “abnormal placental separation”, initially there was concern for focal placenta accreta. However, the patient had not experienced significant vaginal bleeding and her placenta had delivered intact without difficulty – in fact, it had delivered en caul and the intrauterine cavity was cleared of clots and debris, and the mass seen on ultrasound was avascular, atypical for focally invasive placenta. Upon closer review of the complete pathology report, the “abnormal placental separation” appeared to describe premature placental separation rather than lack of separation, which was initially presumed. Serum quantitative beta-hCG was drawn and resulted at less than 1.5 milli-international units, below the limit of detection, and supportive of complete placental removal.

By hospital day four, pain and dark vaginal discharge persisted, despite normalization of the white blood cell count and continued absence of fever. Her prolonged clinical course with only subtle improvement with antibiotic therapy raised concern for myometrial necrosis, septic pelvic thrombophlebitis, or a non-gynecologic intraabdominal pathology such as appendicitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with and without contrast was performed on post-operative day 20 to evaluate for these diagnoses. Therapeutic low-molecular weight heparin was initiated, and her antibiotic coverage was broadened with a plan to continue antibiotic therapy until 48 h without fever and with improvement in fundal tenderness. MRI revealed no evidence of septic pelvic thrombophlebitis but did show a large area of non-enhancement predominantly in the midline of the anterior myometrium, with a sharp posterior margin at the anterior junctional zone. This area revealed an infiltrating pattern of poorly defined T1 hyperintensity on the pre-contrast sequences that corresponded with the area of ill-defined avascular echogenicity seen on the prior ultrasound. Such an appearance is not typical for focal accreta which typically appears as an infiltrating mass-like process with areas of internal vascularity. Non-enhancing T1 hyperintensity involving the previously retroplacental myometrium indicates blood products in this clinical context, and imaging findings were hence considered consistent with a large, dissecting anterior intramural hematoma, likely related to Couvelaire uterus or postsurgical changes following classical cesarean delivery. Myometrial necrosis was considered due to the lack of enhancement in the affected anterior myometrium, which is an expected finding in a recent hematoma. There was no evidence of extra-serosal extension of the hematoma and no hemoperitoneum was identified. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was performed the same day because the MRI showed trace fluid around the cecum and appendix, which was concerning for an inflammatory process. On CT the appendix was unremarkable and these findings were ultimately thought to be consistent with a susceptibility artifact. The CT images also showed a large, relatively hypodense area in the anterior myometrium that corresponded with the same area of abnormality on ultrasound and MRI. On correlation with the intraoperative observations, the findings on multimodality imaging of a large dissecting anterior intramural hematoma were ruled most consistent with the diagnosis of Couvelaire uterus.

By hospital day six, the patient’s pain markedly improved, her vital signs and laboratory findings normalized, and she was discharged home with oral clindamycin to complete a ten-day course of antibiotics, in case of infection of the intramural hematoma. A follow-up MRI performed 2 weeks after the initial study showed interval evolution of the hematoma, without evidence of infection or abscess formation in the anterior myometrium.