A 57‐year‐old woman with a previous 8‐year follow‐up of idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy presented with worsening functional class and recurrent hospitalizations for heart failure New York Heart Association functional Class IV and Interagency Registry for Mechanically Assisted Circulatory Support Class V. She had been treated with guideline directed medical therapy at maximally tolerated doses—which included enalapril 10 mg b.i.d, metoprolol 50 mg b.i.d., spironolactone 25 mg, furosemide 40 mg b.i.d., and digoxin 0.125 mg daily—for at least 5 years. Comorbidities included active smoking and morbid obesity (body mass index of 37 kg/m2). She was mostly limited by exertional fatigue and dyspnoea, despite being mostly euvolemic not dependent on high doses of diuretics. Rest electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm at a rate of 70 bpm and a QRS duration of 80 ms. Left ventricular ejection fraction was 23%, with a dilated left ventricle (end‐diastolic diameter 6.7 cm) and diffuse hypokinesis. A cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) demonstrated severely decreased exercise capacity, with a peak oxygen uptake (VO2 peak) of 12 mL/kg/min (or 16.46 mL/kg/min when corrected for lean body mass), along with other variables indicating adverse heart failure prognosis, including minute ventilation/carbon dioxide production (VE/VCO2) slope of 42 and periodic breathing. At the second minute of exercise, at a heart rate of 131 bpm, the patient developed LBBB with widening of the QRS to 200 ms. This finding persisted into the recovery phase. Of note, attenuated pressoric response was also observed during the CPET. A subsequent exercise stress echocardiography evidenced exertion‐induced intraventricular and interventricular dyssynchrony, with electromechanical delay from QRS onset to S wave onset from septal, lateral, anterior, and inferior walls of more than 65 ms and difference between left and right pre‐ejection intervals of more than 40 ms, respectively.

As the patient was not considered eligible for cardiac transplant, given her active comorbidities, a decision was made to implant a CRT (Etrinsa 8 HF‐T, Biotronik, Berlim, Germany) to approach the EI‐LBBB. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging performed prior to CRT insertion showed only a small area of late gadolinium enhancement at the mesocardium basal septum, but no patterns suggestive of specific aetiologies other than non‐ischaemic dilated cardiomyopathy were noted. Initially, biventricular pacing was set at a minimal heart rate of 75 bpm with atrioventricular delay of 105–80 ms, and the ECG showed QRS duration of 145 ms.

Subsequent to CRT implant, the patient improved to New York Heart Association II, and no recurrent heart failure hospitalizations occurred. Medical therapy was relatively unchanged after CRT, except for the introduction of amiodarone due to ventricular arrhythmias and a change from metoprolol to carvedilol and introduction of hydralazine, both to enhance hypertension management, as blood pressure levels increased and tolerance to medications improved after CRT. Pacemaker interrogation showed 94% atrial pacing and 100% biventricular pacing. A few months later, repeat CPET at 6 and 12 months demonstrated significant and sustained amelioration in exercise capacity. Biventricular pacing occurred at 100% of the exercise time, and periodic breathing was absent on both exams. Reverse cardiac remodelling and improvement in ejection fraction were also noticed.