Patient and observation
Patient information: A 54-year-old woman with a history of acute rheumatic arthritis (RAA) treated in childhood and type 2 diabetes mellitus with well-balanced Glimpepiride. Having no known exposure to SARS-CoV-2, she presented in our training two months after the administration of a first dose of ChAdOx1-S/nCoV-19 vaccine in a picture of dyspnoea, productive cough and haemoptoic expectoration, digestive disorders with liquid diarrhoea and bilious vomiting as well as arthro-myalgia and profound asthenia. A few days later, the aggravation was marked by the appearance of coldness of the extremities with dysesthesia with burning and tingling of the limbs. The patient reports that this symptomatology was initiated 24 hours after the vaccine.

Clinical findings: the neurological examination objectified decreased muscle strength in the lower limbs with hypoesthesia in the soles of the feet. The cutaneous-mucous examination revealed well-defined reticular lace erythematous plaques consistent with diffuse reticular livedo in the four limbs. The rest of the somatic examination was without particularities.

Diagnostic approach: the biological assessment objectified a hypochromic microcytic iron-deficient anaemia (Hb: 9.8 g/dl, VGM: 79 fl, TCMH: 23 pg, ferritinemia: 15 mg/l), the other blood lines were without anomalies. The C-reactive protein (CRP) was at 30 mg/l and the lipid balance rechecked twice was disturbed (total cholesterol at 2.5 g/l, triglycerides at 1.4 g/l, HDL cholesterol at 0.45 g/l, LDL cholesterol at 1.7 g/l). Diabetes was balanced (glycated Hb at 7%). The D-dimers were negative (200 ng/ml). The rest of the balance, including the hepatic, renal, haemostasis balance, fibrinogen, serologies (hepatitis B/C, syphilis), complement as well as the immunological balance (AAN, anti-DNA antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, anti-B2 glycoprotein antibodies, anti-phospholipid antibodies, anti-MPO, anti-PR3) were negative. The nasopharyngeal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) coupled to the COVID-19 serology (IgM and IgG) were also performed, only showing elevated IgG.

On the radiological level, a thoracic angioscanner performed in search of a possible pulmonary embolism was normal. The transthoracic cardiac ultrasound did not reveal any anomalies. The arterial-venous ultrasound of the four limbs revealed a slight atheromatous infiltration of the lower limbs without upstream repercussions. In the neurological picture, the electroneuromyogram was normal and the cerebromedullary angio-MRI showed non-conflicting degenerative discopathies C5-C6 and L4-L5. In the context of research of a possible vascularitis, four millimetre skin biopsies of the wrist and thighs were performed, objectivising a non-specific chronic superficial dermatitis.

Therapeutic intervention and follow-up: On the therapeutic level, the patient received symptomatic treatment with pregabalin (75 mg x 3/day), antiplatelet agent (acetylsalicylic acid at a dose of 100 mg/day) and statins (20 mg/day). The evolution was marked by the resolution of the initial symptoms with regression of neurological and articular pain as well as skin manifestations after 3 months of treatment. In view of the negativity of the whole assessment, a post-vaccinal livedo was retained.
