A 4-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital with a 2-day history of fever, chest pain, and agitation. Her past medical history was unremarkable, and she had a negative family history of primary immunodeficiency disease. She had a temperature of 37.9 °C, a heart rate of 190 beats per minute, and an oxygen saturation of 97% in room air. Physical examination revealed clouding of consciousness and lip swelling. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 49 × 103/L (neutrophils, 90.5%, and atypical lymphocyte, 1.0%), a C-reactive protein concentration of 32.6 (normal range: 0–0.5) mg/dL, a lactate dehydrogenase concentration of 434 (normal range: 80–220) U/L, an aspartate aminotransferase concentration of 31 (normal range: 8–35) U/L, an alanine aminotransferase concentration of 20 (normal range: 5–40) U/L, and an anti-streptolysin O concentration of 1908 (normal range: 0–200) IU/mL. Chest X-rays revealed decreased permeability throughout the right lung field, and computed tomography (CT) revealed a right sided pleural effusion, fluid collection in the retropharyngeal and mediastinal areas, cervical lymphadenopathy, and marked hepatosplenomegaly. The patient was diagnosed with empyema, retropharyngeal abscess, and mediastinitis. She required admission to the intensive care unit due to respiratory failure. To improve her dyspnea, a chest tube was inserted, and meropenem treatment was initiated. The pleural fluid was turbid and exudative, with Gram-positive cocci. The culture of the fluid was positive for S. pyogenes. The patient’s condition improved temporarily, but on day 5 in our hospital, she developed a fever again. A repeat CT scan showed exacerbation of fluid retention in the retropharyngeal area and the mediastinum, for which the patient underwent drainage and debridement of necrotic tissue in the retropharynx and mediastinum. In the operation, the otolaryngology–head and neck surgery team performed retropharyngeal drainage and debridement with a left neck incision and two drainage tubes inserted, followed by the drainage and debridement of the mediastinal abscess by thoracic surgery team, using a bilateral video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) approach, with the two chest drain tubes (24 Fr) inserted on each side. The bilateral VATS procedure was sufficient for the drainage of the mediastinal abscess, including the retrosternal abscess, without using median sternotomy. The drainage tubes in the retropharyngeal space and the bilateral chest drain tubes were extubated on postoperative day 6. After detection of S. pyogenes, the patient was started on an intravenous drip of penicillin and clindamycin, after which she continued to recover steadily. The presence of cervical lymphadenopathy and marked hepatosplenomegaly at the time of diagnosis suggested the involvement of EBV. Serological tests for EBV revealed IgM and IgG antibodies specific to the EBV viral capsid antigen, but the patient was negative for IgG antibodies reactive with the EBV nuclear antigen, findings that are indicative of primary EBV infection at the time of the DNM onset. Finally, she was diagnosed with DNM and empyema following primary EBV infection. She had postoperative complications, including a catheter-related bloodstream infection and drug fever, but was discharged after 85 days in our hospital. She underwent immune function testing (immunoglobulins and complements), which revealed no deficits. At follow-up 1 year later, she was doing well.