40-year-old male who presented to the emergency department with precordial pain. His medical history included overweight, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, sleep apnoea hypopnoea syndrome with no requirement for continuous positive airway pressure, and coronary artery disease in his grandfather. His symptoms began 6 days prior to the appointment with precordial pain in functional class II (1000 metres), intensity 5/10, burning, no irradiation, lasting 15 to 20 minutes, which improved with rest and was not associated with dyspnoea, palpitations or sweating. He repeated similar episodes in the days following the appointment, in the same functional class, 2 hours prior to admission, when the pain started in functional class IV, postprandial, of greater intensity, 8/10, associated with dyspnoea, so he decided to seek medical attention.On admission, he presented the following vital signs: blood pressure 150/80 mmHg, heart rate 85 LPM, respiratory rate 16 RPM, oxygen saturation 98% (0.21), fever. Pre-existing residual chest pain of intensity 4/10, with no signs of heart failure. An electrocardiogram was performed, which showed negative T waves, symmetrical in precordial leads and a ST elevation of less than 1 mm with bifasic T waves in V3, without Q waves and good progression of R in precordial leads (not seen in the previous electrocardiogram). Laboratory: HtO 43%, Cr 0.8 mg/dl, ultrasensitive troponin of 132 pg/ml with subsequent elevation to 172 pg/ml. Acute myocardial infarction without ST elevation, TIMI score of 3 points, GRACE score of 66 points was interpreted. Aspirin loading, high intensity statins and anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin were administered. Nitroglycerine was initiated intravenously, with improvement of pain. In a new electrocardiogram, the reversal of negative T waves in precordial leads was observed, but persistence of the ST elevation with bifasic T waves in V2-V3 persisted. In the echocardiogram, good ventricular function and anterolateral, basal and medial hypokinesia were observed. In the coronary angiography, severe lesions were observed in the proximal third, middle of the descending anterior artery and severe lesion in the middle third of the first diagonal, so three drug-eluting stents were placed in these lesions. A new electrocardiogram was performed after the stents were placed, in which the absence of changes was observed. The patient was discharged without complications.
