The 52-year-old man tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 using a self-test kit after having a cold. He returned to work without fever after resting for two days, but lost consciousness while working outdoors in an ambient temperature of 35°C for five hours. Upon admission to the local hospital’s emergency department, his core temperature (Tc) was recorded as 40°C. The patient presented with persistent coma, dyspnea and gastrointestinal hemorrhage. No underlying diseases and relative family history was noted. Based on the characteristic presentation of hyperpyrexia, coma and multiple organ damage, a diagnosis of HS was established. He was admitted to emergency intensive care unit (ICU) of the local hospital and then received mechanical ventilation. The test results indicated the presence of pulmonary infection, hepatic and renal dysfunction, myocardial ischemia and coagulation disorders. The patient received initial management including rehydration (intravenously infused Lactated Ringer’s solution and normal saline at a rate of 2.5mL/kg∙h), intravenous administration of Piperacillin Sodium and Tazobactam Sodium, vasoactive medications for blood pressure support, continuous mechanical ventilation, and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) to manage subsequent anuria. The patient received plasma transfusion and was administered Tranexamic acid on day 5. The worsening of his condition led to his admission to the medical ICU of our hospital 7 days after HS.

Following admission, Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) testing of a nasopharyngeal swab yielded positive results for SARS-CoV-2. The patient was diagnosed with HS and severe COVID-19 based on China’s COVID-19 Diagnosis and Treatment Program (trial version 10): 1. real-time fluorescent RT-PCR detection of SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid is positive; 2. respiratory failure and requires mechanical ventilation; 3. shock; 4. combined with multiple organ failure requiring intensive care. The patient had no contact with COVID-19 diagnosed patients or healthcare workers in the hospital, indicating community-acquired infection. The physical examination showed a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 3/15, with scores of 1 for eye-opening, verbal response, and motor response. Additionally, the pupils were symmetrical and non-reactive. The heart rate was recorded at 106 bpm and blood pressure was maintained at 126/77 mmHg by continuously infusing norepinephrine at a rate of 0.4 ug/kg·min. The laboratory test results indicated a severe infection, along with anemia, thrombocytopenia, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), as well as acute liver and kidney injury. The white blood cell count (WBC) decreased from 3.55×109/L to 3.13×109/L, lymphocytes significantly decreased from 0.25×109/L to 0.1×109/L, and neutrophil percentage (N%) increased to 85.3%. The Procalcitonin level measured 2.81 ng/mL and C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 32.6 mg/L. Sputum culture testing yielded Stenotrophomonas Maltophilia and Candida lipolytica. The central venous catheter culture test detected Staphylococcus epidermidis, but the continuous blood culture test yielded no positive results. The Computed Tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral frontal subdural effusion, consolidation and atelectasis in the lower lungs, inflammation in the right upper lobe, bilateral pleural effusion, and a small amount of abdominal fluid.

The patient received synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation with a positive end expiratory pressure of 5 mmH2O and an oxygen concentration of 80% and continuous administration of norepinephrine and pituitrin to sustain normal blood pressure. Polyene phosphatidylcholine, adenosylmethionine budisulfonate, ulinastatin, and hemofiltration have been employed for the management of hepatic and renal dysfunction. The antibiotic was substituted with Meropenem and Thymalfasin was administered for 20 days to augment immune function. Mannitol was used to alleviate intracranial pressure for 3 days. To improve coagulation dysfunction, the patient received plasma and cryoprecipitate transfusions, continuous intravenous infusion of heparin sodium at 6000u/day and CRRT with sodium citrate for anticoagulant (8g/day) on day 7. Platelet transfusion was administered after 9 days of HS. His Tc fluctuated between 36 °C and 38.5 °C. CRRT was administered without anticoagulant on day 8. The patient had gastrointestinal hemorrhage and fever after 9 days of HS, but electronic gastroenteroscopy showed no signs of active bleeding. He underwent red blood cell suspension transfusion, hemostasis treatment and gastric acid suppression. Teicoplanin was added due to the presence of Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus isolated from sputum culture. The patient regained consciousness on day 13 with a GCS score of 14/15 and presented with a moderate fever. Gastrointestinal hemorrhage was not observed. Mechanical ventilation was discontinued and the tracheal tube was removed. But the creatinine levels increased following the suspension of CRRT on day 12.

On day 17, he developed sudden dyspnea with desaturation (oxygen saturation <85%) followed by a high fever (Tc: 39.3°C), necessitating reintubation and mechanical ventilation. Bronchoscopy revealed less sputum in both lungs and subbranches. He experienced a recurrence of coma, with a GCS score of 3/15. WBC increased to 14.94×109/L and NEU increased to 13.77×109/L. The levels of serum total bilirubin rose to 235.2 µmol/L, while creatinine increased to 441µmol/L. The brain CT scan revealed an ischemic stroke in the right frontal lobe and a hemorrhagic infarction in the right occipital lobe. The patient underwent cooling therapy using CRRT with ice-cold replacement fluid, along with persistent administration of Meropenem and Teicoplanin for anti-infection treatment. Carpofungin was added on day 18 due to the observed elevation in serum levels of Aspergillus galactomannan, Aspergillus IgG antibody, and Candida mannan. The RT-PCR testing for SARS-CoV-2 returned negative results.

The patient’s fever and infection improved on day 20, but he subsequently developed cerebral hemorrhage and hernia with bilateral dilated pupils. The dehydration therapy was used to reduce intracranial pressure, as surgery was refused by his family. On day 22, indicators of infection, levels of aspartate aminotransferase and creatinine increased again. Carbapenem-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii and A. fumigatus were cultured in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. The combination of Meropenem, Teicoplanin, and Carpofungine was administered for anti-infective therapy. The patient’s condition progressively worsened over the next 7 days, ultimately resulting in his demise on day 29. The patients’ inflammatory indicators, cytokines, and coagulation indicators are presented in Table 1.