An eleven-year-old female patient with lower back pain for five years associated with bilateral radiation to the lower extremities, which is more pronounced on the left side. The pain was insidious in onset, worsening over a 2-month period. On the neurological exam, motor power became 3/5 on hip flexion and knee extension; the other lower extremity muscle power was 5/5; the tone was normotonic; and reflexes had been +2 in all deep tendons. She was referred to our center for surgical intervention; otherwise, she had no history of spinal trauma or any spinal procedure, including a lumbar tap.

Laboratory examinations on the day of admission included a complete blood count and biochemical studies, which showed no apparent abnormalities. Contrast-enhanced lumbosacral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed type 1 (T1) hypointense and T2 hyperintense, 6 cm cranio-caudally and 2 cm antero-posteriorly, expansile lesions that extended from L2–L4 with involvement of the conus and cauda equina. It shows marginal enhancement after contrast administration. In the operating room, under general anesthesia, a prone position was made and a vertical skin incision was made to expose the operative area. An L2–L4 complete laminectomy with L1/L5 partial laminectomy is done as the tumor extends in both the cranial and caudal poles and the dura opened on the midline. Intraoperatively, the mass anchored the conus intradurally, filling the spinal canal and displacing the caudal roots anteriorly and laterally, with adherence to the nerve roots on each aspect from L2–L4. Surgical microscopic examination revealed a subpial thin-walled cyst with a grayish content. We did no longer have intraoperative motor evoked potential (MEP), sensory evoked potential (SEP), electromyography (EMG), or cavitron ultrasonic surgical aspirator (CUSA) for debulking; for this reason, we did no longer use them in this case either. Tumor dissection started at the posterior median sulcus. Few reviews have advocated the use of ultrasonography before myelotomy in difficult instances. The whitish cyst contents are expelled effortlessly because they were suckable; the cyst wall was excised in part, and the capsule, which was firmly adherent to the spinal cord parenchyma, was left in a few areas to not sacrifice neural tissue in an attempt to reap total capsulectomy. Care taken to prevent spillage of the cyst into the subarachnoid area. A postoperative lumbosacral MRI confirmed near total excision. The jelly-like cyst content and its wall were sent for histopathological examination, which confirmed a fragmented fibrous cyst wall coated through maturing stratified squamous cells with scattered keratin flecks and fragments of bland skeletal muscle and adipose tissue, which are typical of epidermoid cysts. The postoperative path was uneventful; the pain had resolved, motor and sensory function were intact, and the patient was discharged on the third postoperative day. She had been being followed in our outpatient clinic for the last 6 months; throughout the follow-up, the pain had completely resolved, the neurologic exam became uneventful.