37-year-old female patient with multiple medical consultations since early age: episodes of headaches plus compromised consciousness, non-specific chest pain, intestinal transit disorders, tremors and dysfunction of perineal musculature and pelvic floor. Evaluated by specialists, depression and interstitial cystitis are diagnosed, and the functional character of disorders is concluded, from the neuropsychiatric point of view. Therapeutic management by Psychiatry and treatment with lamotrigine, escitalopram, clonazepam, pregabalin, quetiapine and aripiprazole.

Consulted in the emergency department for atypical chest pain, without other manifestations or findings. SARS-CoV-2 infection was diagnosed by PCR COVID-19 in nasopharyngeal secretion. Electrocardiogram, cardiac enzymes and angioTC of the chest were normal. Discharged with symptomatic treatment. Three days later, he consulted for the same pain, without other symptoms, physical and complementary examinations, again normal.

He consulted for the third time in the emergency department a week later, this time for fatigue, shortness of breath and left precordial pain, exacerbated by the compression of sterno-costal joints, without irradiation. No other symptoms. On physical examination: well perfused, tachycardia 118 bpm, normotension, respiratory rate 25 bpm, pulse oximetry 99% (FiO2 0.21). Chest X-ray normal. Electrocardiogram: sinus tachycardia, no signs of ischaemia. Elevated troponins. He presented with loss of consciousness, with mid-sopor, interrupted by awakenings in relation to thoracic pain. SARS-CoV-2 associated myopericarditis was considered and he was hospitalised in a monitored unit. In the Intermediate Treatment Unit, the compromise of consciousness was deepened until coma. Tachycardia 180 bpm, blood pressure 140/90 mmHg, respiratory rate 50-60 bpm, pulse oximetry 80% with erratic curve, T° 36°C, poor perfusion, mottling score of 4, distal coldness and slow capillary filling, bilateral maintained palpebral tremor, cervical and upper and lower limb muscle contracture. Diagnoses of conversion disorder and possible severe respiratory alkalosis were considered. A mask with reservoir was placed (with FiO2 0.21) and intravenous boluses of lorazepam and saline solution 0.9% were administered. A new electrocardiogram objectified tachycardia of 167 bpm and diffuse infradesnivel ST in the anterior wall. Control examinations confirmed severe respiratory alkalosis with pH 7.68 and PaCO2 of 10 mmHg.

After several boluses of lorazepam, she slowly regained consciousness. The muscle contractures and chest pain disappeared. The vital signs and peripheral perfusion were normalized. After the recovery of the crisis, and in the following days, multiple examinations and multidisciplinary evaluation were performed. Electrocardiograms, cardiac enzymes and echocardiogram were normal. Gases and other normal biochemical parameters. The patient remained stable and had no memory of the episode.

After 5 days of hospitalization, she was discharged after a multidisciplinary evaluation (cardiology, neurology and psychiatry) that ruled out an organic origin.
