36-year-old bisexual man on pre-exposure prophylaxis of HIV, with no travel history, who reported attending an event where he had contact with casual partners whose identities and backgrounds were unknown. Ten days later he developed a fever, odynophagia and neck pain, and consulted several times, until seven days after the onset of symptoms he was admitted for persistence of symptoms despite the indicated antibiotic treatment. On admission he presented pharyngeal exudate, bilateral painful cervical adenopathies and umbilical papules on the scrotum and penis and pustules on the face of five days evolution. A computed tomography of the neck with intravenous contrast was performed, which ruled out collection, abdominal ultrasound with mild hepatosplenomegaly, and initiated empirical treatment with ceftriaxone and azithromycin. Samples were taken for culture, serologies, and scarification of two lesions of the face that were sent to the National Reference Laboratory, INEI-ANLIS Dr. Carlos G. Malbrán, for PCR of endpoint for Orthopoxvirus, with result DETECTABLE, confirming the diagnosis of monkeypox. The sequencing showed a high percentage of homology with sequences of the West African clade (MPV-ARG003-2022, Genbank_ID ON800897). Other differential diagnoses were discarded. The patient evolved with the appearance of a tongue ulcer and new asynchronous lesions in the buttocks, perianal region, right inguinal, umbilical, frontal, neck, right hand and dorsum of the foot in a total of no more than 25. In the laboratory an increase in transaminases was observed 2.2 times the normal value, with no other significant data.  Due to persistence of neck pain, a new computed tomography was requested 14 days after the onset of symptoms that evidenced adenomegalies with hypodens central aspect of necrotic appearance, that did not require surgical drainage. On day 17 PCR was performed on samples of pharyngeal exudate and semen that also resulted positive for monkeypox virus. The patient was discharged with frank clinical improvement two days later. The patient gave his written informed consent for the publication of this case report and the accompanying images.
