A 40-day old male infant was admitted to the Emergency Department (ED) with bronchiolitis and dyspnea. He showed no comorbidities during pregnancy, he was born at full-term and normal.

At the time of admission, the patient was reported to be coughing for a week, worsening with a vomiting episode in the previous two days and reduction of feeding. Diuresis was regular. At the same time, he was treated with nasal and aerobic salbutamol administration. Patient’s parents also reported an older sister with phlogosis of upper respiratory tract.

The physical examination highlighted persistent dry cough, globus abdomen, marbled skin with thoracic rush, respiratory rate of 52 breaths/minute, heart rate of 160 beats/minute and arterial oxygen saturation (SaO2) of 93%. No sign of neuropathological damage was evident. A nasopharyngeal swab performed with molecular assay Xpert® Xpress Flu/RSV (Cepheid, USA) tested positive for RSV. No Flu A and B were detected. During observation, SaO2 remained 93% until one hour and half from admission in ED when, due to hypoxaemia (SaO2 89%) and respiratory acidosis (pH 7.347; pCO2 56.6 mmHg) (BG1), the patient was given low-flow oxygen therapy (1 l/minute). After an initial improvement in clinical parameters (respiratory rate: 40 breaths/minute; SaO2 96%), flow oxygen therapy was reduced and stabilized to 0.5 l/minute until 12 h from admission in ED. Within this time frame, SaO2 was observed to be settled on 96–97%. Subsequently, a sudden worsening of respiratory dynamics happened (respiratory rate: 60 breaths/minute; SaO2 92%) and the therapy was changed to high-flow oxygen administration (8 l/minute). The subsequently BG2 performed after oxygen administration showed a correction in the parameters (pH 7.447; pCO2 45.5 mmHg) (BG2). Nevertheless, three hours after BG2, despite an improvement in the respiratory dynamics (respiratory rate: 48 breaths/minute; SaO2 96%), a re-evaluation of the patient’s parameters was performed showing again hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis (pH 7.336; pCO2 59.2 mmHg) (BG3).

Moreover, the chest Xrays performed at time of BG3 and two hours apart highlighted how fast was the clinical worsening: the first one showed normo expanded lungs with no opacification, while the second Xray showed diffuse bilateral pulmonary opacification with marked ectasia of the stomach.

Because of the persistent respiratory failure, the patient was treated with nebulized epinephrine and prepared for endotracheal intubation, however he died before this could be done.

Postmortem examination was carried out on the infant’s body.

Lung’s microscopic examination revealed severe vascular congestion with massive bleeding, peribronchiolitis due to lymphocytic infiltrates and sporadic foci of pneumonia with reactive interstitial infiltrates and alveolar atelectasis.

Also, extensive injury was present in the brain, characterized by white matter degradation in the left hemisphere, basal ganglia, hippocampus, bulbar region and pons with edema.

A detailed microscopic analysis showed hypertrophic astrocytes, acutely damaged glia and focal necrosis at the bulbar level, features reported to be associated with viral infection. Basal ganglia were affected by neuronal necrosis with perineuronal halo and white matter strongly damaged. The brain’s histological examination didn’t exclude injuries in the cardiovascular center, probably due to viral infection.

No narcotic or psychotropic drugs were detected in the blood.

Microbiological analysis performed on autoptic samples confirmed the viral etiology of brain damage and death. In fact, using molecular assay BioFire® FilmArray® RP2 Panel Plus (BioMérieux, France), RSV was detected in tracheobronchial aspirate, meningeal swabs, pericardic and abdominal fluids, lung and brain biopsies. On the contrary, the samples tested negative for Adenovirus, Coronavirus, Human Metapneumovirus, Human Rhinovirus/Enterovirus, Influenza A and B, Human parainfluenza virus, Bordetella pertussis, Bordetella parapertussis, Chlamydophila pneumoniae and Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Moreover, the microbiological cultures found neither fungal nor specific pathogenic bacteria.

Therefore, post-mortem examination revealed a severe bronchiolitis resulting in a fatal cerebral involvement due to RSV and its neurotropic behaviour.