A 77-year-old woman with haematemesis presented to the emergency room. Her medical history included only hypertension and dyslipidaemia. When she presented to the emergency room, her vital signs indicated shock (heart rate: 100 beats/min, blood pressure: 79/56 mmHg), and blood tests revealed anaemia (haemoglobin: 9.6 g/dL), which suggested upper gastrointestinal bleeding.

Non-contrast-enhanced CT was performed immediately because of renal dysfunction. CT revealed that the third part of the duodenum flexed steeply on the right side of the aorta and ran caudally, without crossing anterior to the aorta. The jejunum was located on the patient’s right side. The second part of the duodenum and the stomach were dilated, and there were high-density gastric contents that were considered to indicate a haematoma.

Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed following the CT examination, which revealed a mucosal laceration at the gastric cardia. Bleeding from lacerations of the cardia of the stomach as a result of forceful vomiting was first reported by Mallory and Weiss in 1929.1 In our case, the third part of the duodenum flexed steeply, and the lumen was narrowed, which caused an obstruction. As a result, repeat vomiting was considered to have caused Mallory–Weiss syndrome.

On the basis of the CT findings showing that the duodenal-jejunal junction was located in the right hemi-abdomen, intestinal malrotation was suspected.2 However, 7 days later, when CT was repeated, spontaneous resolution of the malpositioned jejunum was seen. The patient was then discharged from the hospital. However, months later, she was rushed to the emergency room for repeat haematemesis. Dynamic CT was performed before upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, on admission, and revealed contrast extravasation in the dilated stomach. Additionally, the third part of the duodenum was flexed on the right side of the aorta, and the duodenal-jejunal junction and jejunum were again located in the right hemi-abdomen. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a laceration at the gastric cardia, as in the previous endoscopy, which was considered Mallory–Weiss syndrome.

Two months after the second episode of haematemesis, the patient presented to the emergency room with nausea. Non-contrast-enhanced CT revealed no abnormalities in the duodenal positioning, but there was oedematous wall thickening in the second part of the duodenum. If we had not had previous CT images, we would have suspected duodenitis, but on the basis of all of the CT findings, we suspected the possibility of an underlying condition after the right-sided deviation of the small intestine had resolved spontaneously.

In summary, CT was performed 4 times over 5 months. The third and fourth parts of the duodenum and the jejunum deviated repeatedly, but this resolved spontaneously, which is not indicative of intestinal malrotation. Therefore, we diagnosed dysplasia of the ligament of Treitz.

Clinical outcomes
The patient underwent laparotomy, which revealed no abnormalities in the relative position of the duodenum to the jejunum. Additionally, the jejunum was located on the patient’s left side, and there was no intestinal malrotation. The ligament of Treitz was formed; however, its fixation in the upper jejunum was incomplete as it was attached only to the duodenum. The duodenal-jejunal junction was not fixed to the retroperitoneum, and the jejunum folded easily with the ligament of Treitz as a fulcrum. Surgically, the upper jejunum was fixed with 4 sutures to the retroperitoneum on the patient’s left side. The postoperative course was good, and the patient has remained symptom-free.