A 38 year old woman was admitted in the surgical ward November 2022 with the chief complain of progressive abdominal swelling which was associated with mild abdominal pain, and early satiety for five months. She had no systemic symptoms such as weight loss, constipation, diarrhea, craving for salty foods, easy fatigability or headache.
On examination, she appeared well-nourished but had gross abdominal distension, mild pale, afebrile with sclera tinge of jaundice.
Abdominal palpation revealed a large, non-tender, intra-abdominal mass occupying the entire lower abdomen and extending into the upper abdomen with no signs of peritoneal irritation or organomegaly.
Blood tests showed White cell count (5.7 × 109/l), Haemoglobin (9.8 g/dl), Bilirubin (103 mg/dl) with normal platelet counts (393 × 109/l. Liver enzymes, AST (24.0 U/l, ALT (21.0 U/l), albumin 42.7 g/l. Serum creatinine (53 μmol/l) and ESR (80 mm/h). All other blood tests were normal. An abdominal ultrasound revealed a complex abdominal cyst, both kidneys were normal in size and normal echotexture, the liver appeared normal. Contrast CT abdomen and pelvis – axial and coronal views, demonstrate a large thin-walled right suprarenal cyst (blue arrows) measuring approximately 23.5 cm (AP) x 20.3 cm (T) x 32.2 cm (CC) in size with a volume of 8 l. The large cyst displaces the right kidney (red arrows) inferomedial across the midline and exerts pressure effect on the liver, gall bladder, pancreas and small bowels. It extends into the right iliac fossa. Since there was a tinge of sclera jaundiced, but the mass was separately from the liver, pancreas, biliary trees and the right kidney. Given the size of the cyst and its compressive effects, surgical intervention was planned. An open surgical approach was chosen.

The patient underwent laparotomy. Under general anaesthesia, an abdominal extended midline incision was made, after opening abdominal wall layers, a huge retroperitoneal cyst was identified, that was occupying the entire part of an abdominal cavity.

The cyst was opened to get access for fluid suctioning as demonstrated in cystectomy was successfully done, about 8 l of brown-coloured fluid was sucked out from the mass. Cystic wall and fluid samples were sent for histology.

The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged on postoperative day 7. Follow-up at 6 and 12 months showed no recurrence or complications. Cytological examination of the sample reported presence of amorphous material, there was no evidence of malignancy. Histological results, the cystic wall was reported to have adrenal tissue without atypia, there was cystic wall infiltration by mononuclear inflammatory cells. The inner surface of the wall was not lined by recognizable specific cells. Regarding the intraoperative clinical findings where by the origin of the cyst was uncertained, the findings were more suggestive of a giant idiopathic retroperitoneal cyst.

