We present the case of a 28-year-old male with no medical history who is referred to our unit for intermittent jaundice, pruritus and coluria of 6 months evolution. The physical examination was completely normal. The blood analysis showed a mild elevation of total serum bilirubin (1.35 mg/dL) with a predominant direct (0.8 mg/dL), gamma-glutamyl transferase (126 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase (329 IU/L) and liver enzymes (ALT 76 IU/L; AST 115 u/L). The abdominal ultrasound revealed intrahepatic bile duct dilatation. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography was performed with abdominal scanning with gadolinium that showed a solid formation of defined edges of intermediate intensity, predominantly hypointense in T2 with slight enhancement after intravenous contrast administration; the same conditioned compression of the common hepatic duct with intrahepatic bile duct dilation to the left. The CEA and CA 19-9 tumour markers were normal. Endosonography was requested that showed a solid lesion in the liver hilum, hypoechoic, heterogeneous of defined edges of 39 mm that obstructs the common hepatic duct and displaces the hepatic artery and portal vein. A fine needle biopsy was performed with 22G needle diagnosing a well-differentiated neuroendocrine neoplasm; the immunomarking evidenced: CK (+), CD-56 (+), Ki-67 3%, chromogranin (+) and β-catenin (+) cytoplasmic. The positron emission tomography with gallium identified a hypercapturing soft tissue density lesion (SUV 34.5) in the liver hilum topography. The chromogranin-A was elevated (167 μg/L, reference value <100 μg/L). In the multidisciplinary oncological hospital, surgical procedure was decided. The intraoperative findings revealed the presence of a nodular tumour located in the common bile duct, next to the cystic insertion. There was no evidence of hepatic, ganglionic or peritoneal spread. Cholecystectomy, resection of the compromised bile duct with oncological margins, hepatic pedicle lymphadenectomy and biliopancreatic bypass through a Roux-en-Y end-to-end hepaticojejunostomy was performed. The patient was discharged on the fifth day of hospitalisation, without complications during the immediate postoperative period. The histopathological analysis of the operative piece showed a well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumour G1 of 2.8 cm (2 mitoses/10 high-powered fields) with a Ki 67 index of 3-20%. The surgical margins were free of tumour without presence of metastatic ganglion (6 isolated ganglia). After 1 year of follow-up, the patient remains free of disease without signs of recurrence.
