A 46-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital due to chest tightness and shortness of breath that lasted for over a month. Her medical history included a partial thyroidectomy, and she had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. She was treated with regular medications (Metoprolol succinate extended-release tablets, Sacubitril valsartan sodium tablets, Spironolactone, Dapagliflozin tablets) for HF, but the response was poor. During the physical examination, the patient was conscious and well-oriented. Her heart rate was 68 beats per minute, blood pressure was 150/98 mm Hg, respiratory rate was 20 beats per minute. There were no signs of bleeding or jaundice on the skin or mucous membranes, and no jugular venous distention was observed. The thyroid gland was not enlarged. Breath sounds were coarse in both lungs, with wet rales present at the lung bases. The heart rate was 68 bpm with a regular rhythm. The abdomen was soft, with no tenderness or rebound tenderness, and the liver and spleen were not palpable below the rib cage. The hepatojugular reflux sign was negative, but there was edema in both lower limbs.

She was hospitalized and underwent relevant examinations. Biochemical tests showed thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) of 7.190 uIU/mL, triglycerides of 0.81 mmol/L, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol ((LDL-C)) of 2.61 mmol/L, serum lipoprotein (a) of 435 mg/L, and NT-proBNP of 6245 pg/mL. An electrocardiogram (ECG) examination showed sinus bradycardia, T-U wave abnormalities, and QRS duration of 90 ms. Further transthoracic echocardiography revealed left-atrium (LA) diameter (anteroposterior) of 41 mm, left-ventricle diameter (LVD, anteroposterior) of 54 mm; interventricular septum thickness in diastole (IVSD) of 9 mm, end-diastolic left-ventricular posterior wall thickness (LVPWd) of 9 mm, left-ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 28% (M-mode), fraction shortening (FS) of 13%, and pulmonary artery pressure of 29 mm Hg. No significant coronary artery lesions were observed on coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA). The patient was diagnosed with dilated cardiomyopathy, class III heart failure with reduced LVEF according to the New York Heart Association (NYHA). Combined with the parameters, it can be observed that the volumes of the left atrium and left ventricle are gradually shrinking, indicating that the diastolic function of the left ventricle is improving. CCM treatment is reversing myocardial remodeling. In addition, E/e′ reflects the left ventricular filling pressure. The normal value should be less than 8. It can be observed that in this case, E/e′ returns to the normal value three months after CCM implantation. These two points both reflect the role of CCM in improving myocardial diastolic function in the treatment of heart failure. In summary, the patient had the following characteristics: (1) LVEF improved but remained as low as 30% after optimal drug therapy for heart failure; (2) Chest tightness and discomfort with slight activity, cardiac function grade III; (3) ECG shows narrow QRS. Considering the positive preoperative of levosimendan test, after general discussion and full communication with the patient and his family, it was decided to perform CCM implantation treatment.

The CCM implantation procedure was similar to that of traditional pacemaker implantation. The patient was placed in a supine position, disinfected with a towel, and the left subclavian vein was punctured twice under local anesthesia, and the capsular bag was made after the guidewire was inserted. Under the guidance of the guidewire, two tear-off sheaths were fed, and two ventricular pacing leads (Medtronic 3830–69) were fed through the sheath, and the position of the wires was adjusted to the right ventricular septum surface with a distance of 3 cm. During the operation, the near-field electrode (RV) was tested, showing a pacing capture threshold of 0.5 V, a sensed R-wave amplitude greater than 10 mV, and a lead impedance of 1080 Ω; the far-field electrode (LS) showed a pacing threshold of 0.5 V, a sensed R-wave amplitude greater than 15 mV, and a lead impedance of 900 Ω. These measurements met the criteria for successful electrode implantation. Both leads were securely anchored into the right-ventricular septum. After ensuring the absence of palpable diaphragmatic stimulation with a 10 V pacing pulse at 0.4 ms pulse width, the leads were connected to the Optimizer Smart pulse generator. Subsequently, the output pulses were set, and parameters were programmed and optimized.

Immediate postoperative ECG monitoring indicated normal CCM pulse delivery (Figure 1C). We observed the patients’ response to CCM by adhering to a standardized follow-up protocol. Utilizing a comprehensive array of assessment tools, including cardiac color Doppler ultrasonography, NT-ProBNP blood tests, six-minute walk tests (6MW), and the Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire (MLHFQ), we systematically evaluated the clinical statuses of the patients. The patient experienced no chest tightness or shortness of breath, and there was a marked improvement in exercise tolerance and quality of life.