68-year-old man with hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and active smoking, consulted in the emergency department on 01/02/23 for progressive loss of visual acuity (3 months of evolution) associated with left brachio-crural hemiparesis, exacerbated in the days prior to the consultation.

A NIHSS of 5 points was observed with dysarthria and minimal paresis of the left half-body, blood pressure 160/80 mm Hg, heart rate 75 lpm and pulse oximetry of 94% (FiO2 environmental). An angiography-CT scan showed a severe stenosis of the right ACI and a magnetic resonance imaging showed acute infarctions in the right cerebral hemisphere.

The echo Doppler confirmed a severe stenosis (VPS 356 cm/s) of the right ACI. After being evaluated thoroughly, confirming a severe symptomatic right carotid stenosis associated with a morpho-logically high lesion (which makes CEA technically difficult) and high surgical risk, we decided to carry out endovascular treatment by TCAR.

On 2/8/23, under general anesthesia and systemic heparinization (100 IU/kg of unfractionated heparin, for an Activated Coagulation Time [ACT] >250 s), the dissection of the ACC and VYI was performed. Once the carotid-jugular fistula was created, the ACC was clamped, establishing the dynamic reversal of flow.

The lesion was crossed (with the microguide in place) and the distal ICA was cannulated. An 8x30 mm carotid stent (Casper® Mirovention, Terumo) was deployed. Because the lesion was severe and distal, a phenomenon of proximal migration (towards the ACC) occurred during deployment, requiring the installation of a second stent (7x30 mm) to successfully treat the lesion.

Angiographic control showed immediate improvement of the ACI lumen and adequate expansion of the stents. The ACC was unclamped (reestablishing anterograde cerebral flow), the endovascular devices were removed, and the incision was closed as previously described.

The patient recovered satisfactorily, without complications, and was discharged on the second postoperative day with dual platelet antiaggregant treatment.

He has not presented neurological events during follow-up and the control echo-Doppler (3, 6, and 12 months) shows the stent is permeable and without signs of re-stenosis.
