The patient was a 45-year-old male born in Pakistan who had resided in Portugal for 7 years. He had a history of grade 3 obesity, with no other known personal history or usual pharmacological therapy.

The patient sought emergency care for fever, dry cough, dyspnea, chest pain, dysgeusia, headache and myalgia with 4 days of evolution. In the summary neurological examination at admission, there were no reported changes. In the evaluation of the respiratory system, tachypnea and pulmonary auscultation with bilateral rough vesicular murmur, without other adventitious sounds, were noted. The remainder of the objective examination showed no changes.

Of the complementary diagnostic tests performed at admission, there was a slight increase in inflammatory parameters and in arterial blood gases under an inspired oxygen fraction (FiO2) of 21%, with type 1 respiratory failure and extensive predominant bilateral, peripheral and basal opacities on chest teleradiography. After a positive reverse-transcription real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test for SARS-CoV-2 (nasal and oropharyngeal exudate) and negative tests for influenza A and B, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Legionella pneumophila, a diagnosis of pneumonia by SARS-CoV-2 infection was established.

Over the first 48 hours, progressive worsening of fatigue, dyspnea and type 1 respiratory failure, requiring an increase in supplemental oxygen therapy, were observed. Due to the lack of improvement, noninvasive mechanical ventilation was initiated; however, due to poor adherence, high-flow oxygen therapy was initiated through a nasal cannula, without a response to therapy.

In this context, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), level III, where he underwent sedoanalgesia and orotracheal intubation with connection to invasive mechanical ventilation.

On the eleventh day of hospitalization, treatment with remdesivir, dexamethasone, enoxaparin and empirical antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and azithromycin, administered on suspicion of bacterial overinfection, was continued. During this period, sustained fever was observed, with a weak response to antipyretic therapy, with improvements in inflammatory parameters after the third day of hospitalization in the ICU.

To exclude any concomitant infectious etiology, intravenous devices were replaced, and blood cultures, cultures of the tip of the central catheter and bronchial secretions, urinalysis, urine culture and transthoracic echocardiography were performed. Among the cultures, the blood culture yielded the only positive result, i.e., Klebsiella pneumoniae, which is sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid, which the patient was already receiving. The summary echocardiogram did not reveal valve changes suggestive of endocarditis, but the patient presented hypokinesia of the lateral wall and left ventricular apex, as well as poor biventricular function. A slight increase in troponins (1.8ng/mL) and ST-segment depression in leads I and aVL were confirmed, suggesting the existence of acute coronary syndrome or septic cardiomyopathy.

Other noninfectious causes of febrile symptoms in the critically ill patient were excluded, including treatment with neuroleptics or altered thyroid function.

Notably, there was a need for inotropic support with dobutamine in the ventilatory weaning phase as well as noninvasive ventilatory support after orotracheal extubation, which occurred on the fifteenth day of hospitalization.

On the sixteenth day of hospitalization (nineteenth day of confirmed disease), there was an episode of altered state of consciousness, conjugated deviation of gaze to the right and myoclonus of the face and thoracic region to the left followed by a generalized tonic-clonic seizure crisis, which ceased after midazolam therapy. The hypothesis that the seizure occurred in the context of a hypoxic-ischemic event was excluded because the patient remained normotensive, there was never a peri-event or hypoxemia, serum lactate level was normal, and diuresis remained preserved. Any ionic or glycemic disorders that could explain the inaugural seizure episode were excluded.

In the post-critical period, there was an absence of eye opening, no verbal response, failure to localize to pain (coma scale of Glasgow 7), and persistent left hemiparesis grade 3 out of 5. Due to the need for airway protection, the patient was sedated, subjected to orotracheal intubation and started on anticonvulsant therapy.

In the process of diagnosis of the convulsive episode, after cranial computed tomography confirmed no changes, the patient was subjected to lumbar puncture, with turbid CSF output and mild proteinorrachia but without pleocytosis and with normal opening pressure. In the CSF, neurotropic virus and venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL), acid-alcohol resistant bacteria tests and an RT-PCR test for SARS-CoV-2 were requested, and samples were collected for culture. Electroencephalography was performed 1 hour after propofol suspension and under fentanyl, with a single record and total duration of 13 minutes; the findings indicated no changes.

After confirmation of a positive RT-PCR test for SARS-CoV-2 RNA in the CSF, without CSF pleiocytosis, the hypothesis of bacterial but nonviral meningitis was excluded, considering the hypothesis of encephalitis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed on the seventeenth day of hospitalization showed multiple image artifacts associated with patient movement during the procedure, suggesting the need to repeat the examination.

After discontinuation of sedoanalgesia, a change in consciousness was observed, with a Glasgow coma scale score of 14, persistent left hemiparesis with muscle strength grade 4 in 5 and an absence of involuntary movements, allowing safe orotracheal extubation in 24 hours. Given the favorable clinical outcome, brain biopsy was excluded. On the twenty-first day of hospitalization, the patient was transferred to the ward.

The patient maintained apyrexia without altered state of consciousness. No new episodes of involuntary movements were observed, and on the twenty-sixth day of hospitalization, he underwent a reassessment MRI, which revealed no pathological changes. As he maintained a favorable clinical evolution, the patient was discharged on the thirty-first day of hospitalization without antiepileptic drugs and with an appointment for follow-up with the internal medicine department.
