A 50-year-old, P3A1 woman was referred to our urogynecology clinic due to malodorous fecal passage through the vagina for 6 months. The condition worsened since she had an extraction of copper T 380 mm IUD. She had IUD insertion for contraception 16 years ago. She had no history of any surgery. The patient denied any abdominal pain or fever. Upon admission, her laboratory examinations were within the normal range: Hemoglobin of 14.2g/dl, white blood count of 6600/µL, ureum 23.9 mg/dL, serum creatinine 0.73 mg/d, CRP 0.62, and fecal analysis within normal limit. Pelvic examination revealed vaginal atrophy and malodorous yellowish vaginal discharge. Vulva was within normal limits. A vaginal speculum examination showed the passage of feces from the cervical canal increased with coughing and straining.

Abdominal ultrasonography found normal size uterus measuring 4.00×4.51 x 7.55 cm with homogeneous parenchyma. No abnormality was found on the adnexa. Fecal passage through the vagina is highly suggestive of the presence of a fistula (colovaginal or uterocolon), thus after discussion with the digestive department, the patient was referred for several imaging examinations. Fistulography showed contrast via anal verge and filled rectum until distal sigmoid colon.

Abdominal and pelvic CT with contrast confirmed multiple rectovaginal fistulas with a diameter of 0.87 cm and a 0.34 cm communication that connected the 1/3 medial vagina to the distal rectum. Another fistula was 0.54 cm in diameter and 0.31 cm in length that connected the distal 1/3 of the vagina with the distal rectum. Rectum was normal without luminal narrowing or visible lesions. The uterine fundus was divided into 2 separate structures, suggesting uterine didelphys. MSCT scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed multiple rectovaginal fistulas, suspected uterine didelphys, and enlargement of the right paraaortic lymph node.

Colonoscopy did not show the fistula. Diagnostic laparoscopy and diagnostic hysteroscopy were performed and revealed severe adhesion between the sigmoid colon and the right posterior fundus of the uterus, the fistula was found during hysteroscopy and it connected the posterior right fundus to the sigmoid colon. The umbilicus was incised by 2 cm and veress needle was inserted. A hanging drop test was positive, then insufflation was conducted with CO2 gas, 14 mmHg. In this incision a 10 cm trocar was inserted. Another 5 mm trocar was inserted in the right hypogastric region. Laparoscopy was started and after peritoneum was penetrated, exploration was carried out and it appeared that the sigmoid colon had adhesions with the posterior uterus, bilateral adnexa within normal limits. After making sure there was no bleeding, the trocar from the laparoscope was removed with direct observation. Hysteroscope was then inserted through the cervical canal. On exploration, we found a uterine defect in the right posterior section with a size of ± 2x1x1 cm, connecting with the colon (visible haustra in the lumen).

History taking, physical examination, and imaging findings suggested recto-uterine fistula. The patient was scheduled for elective colostomy with adhesiolysis, reanastomosis using intraluminal stapler, and hysterorrhaphy. This was a joint surgery between urogynecology and digestive surgeon.