A middle-aged female with Crohn's disease presented with a sudden onset of fever, nonproductive cough, and diffuse abdominal pain for three days. The patient was febrile to 105°F, blood pressure of 114/59 mm Hg, heart rate of 91 beats/minute, and oxygen saturation of 88% on room air. Laboratory investigations were significant for leukocyte count of 9900/µL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 56 mm/h, C-reactive protein of 20.49 mg/dL, lactic acid of 2.0 mmol/L, procalcitonin 0.74 ng/mL, and D-dimer of 1923 ng/mL. A viral respiratory panel including COVID-19 was negative. Chest X-ray was initially unrevealing. However, computed abdomen/pelvis tomography revealed diffuse bilateral ground-glass opacities.

On the night of admission, the patient developed worsening respiratory distress. Chest radiography was repeated, showing evidence of diffuse airspace disease consistent with ARDS. Given the ongoing COVID pandemic, steroids and Remdesivir were started. Due to persistent oxygen desaturations, she was intubated, and antibiotics were broadened. Despite maximum lung-protective ventilatory-support-prone positioning, the patient remained hypoxemic and demonstrated respiratory acidosis. In progressive respiratory insufficiency with a FiO2 of 100% with shunting in her lungs and oxygen saturation of only 68% and increased vasopressor requirements, VV-ECMO was initiated on day three.

A bronchoscopy was performed to determine the underlying etiology of her ARDS. Inspection of her airways showed markedly abnormal airways with multiple areas of erythema, ecchymosis, and endobronchial mucosal sloughing. Additional workup for infectious and autoimmune etiologies was negative. Following the initiation of VV-ECMO, she developed worsening kidney injury, and continuous venovenous hemofiltration (CVVH) was initiated.

The patient developed a leukemoid reaction with a leukocyte count of 73,400/µL, and ferritin level rose to 25,873 µg/L from an initial level of 12, raising suspicion for HLH. Subsequently, she was started on Anakinra due to a suspected inflammatory condition. Further workup for HLH was conducted. Peripheral smear and flow cytometry revealed a normal T-cell clone with 54% circulating lymphocytes. Quantitative immunoglobulins and lymphocyte subsets were ordered to evaluate the underlying malignancy. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) identified T-cell rearrangement (TCR) gamma gene rearrangement, demonstrating an aggressive T-cell mature lymphoproliferative neoplasm that was CD30/ALK(-).

The patient's clinical condition improved on Anakinra and steroids and was successfully decannulated from VV-ECMO 13 days after implantation and extubated to a high-flow nasal cannula. For the remaining 3 weeks, she continued on high-dose steroids and etoposide. The patient was deemed stable for discharge 6 weeks following initial presentation, transitioning to oral steroid taper.