A 56-year-old Italian female patient with β-thalassemia major presented to the radiology department to undergo MRI to quantify myocardial, hepatic, and pancreatic iron deposition. The clinical history of the patient included a transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia condition (genotype HBB:c.118C > T/ HBB:c.93-21G > A), diagnosed at the age of 7 years, despite the fact that the first transfusion was carried out at 2 years. As a consequence of β-thalassemia, the patient underwent splenectomy and cholecystectomy.

At the moment of MRI, she had a negative HCV-RNA (Hepatitis C virus-Ribonucleic acid) test, no osteoporosis or other endocrine, cardiac, or hepatic complications, and good iron levels. The patient’s therapy included iron chelation with deferasirox, vitamin D, and luspatercept, an erythropoiesis modulator started 2 years before the MRI examination (good response, with an increase of about 35% of transfusion interval duration). Transfusion therapy included two units of concentrated and filtered red blood cells every 25 days with pre-transfusion hemoglobin values of 10–10.5 g/dl.

On MRI, a solid mass with lobulated and regular contours was incidentally identified within the prevascular compartment of the mediastinum.

The lesion was mildly hyperintense on T2-weighted images (T2-wi) and isointense on T1-wi. The mediastinal mass in question was discernible in a prior MRI examination conducted for the same purpose in 2020 before starting luspatercept therapy, albeit with a marginal enlargement.

There were no other apparent abnormalities observed in the remaining mediastinal compartments. No pleural or pericardial effusions were present.

The neurological examination was unremarkable, and in the preceding months, the patient exhibited no symptoms of mediastinal syndrome associated with compression of the adjacent neurovascular structures. Moreover, she did not exhibit any fever or experience any weight loss.

For further evaluation, the patient underwent 18F-deoxyglucose (18FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT) and chest CT with contrast media. On PET-CT, the mediastinal mass showed only mild FDG uptake (SUVmax = 4.3); no other sites of abnormal radiotracer uptake were reported in the neck, chest, abdomen, and skeleton. On CT images, the lesion presented regular margins, solid density, and mild contrast enhancement. The adjacent structures did not exhibit any signs of invasion, and lymphadenopathies or extra-thoracic disease were not present. Such radiological features, the indolent behaviour over time, the absence of systemic symptoms, and the lack of avid FDG uptake on PET-CT scan made the diagnosis of thymoma probable.

However, on lung window visualization, multiple rounded areas of parenchymal lucency, consistent with thin-walled cysts distributed symmetrically throughout both lungs, with normal intervening parenchyma, were evident.

No nodules or other interstitial abnormalities were associated with the cysts. No pneumothorax was detected. Coherently with thalassemic bone disease, the ribs appeared widened, and the spine displayed mild platyspondyly. The remaining portion of the chest and visible upper abdomen were unremarkable. The radiological findings were consistent with cystic lung disease, most likely LAM.

The patient was then referred to the pulmonary clinic for further evaluation. She was a never-smoker and did not report any respiratory symptoms. In particular, she denied a history of chronic cough, recurrent respiratory infections, or pneumothorax. No cutaneous lesions, notably facial fibrofolliculomas, were evident. On chest examination, the lung fields were clear. Peripheral capillary oxygen saturation was normal (98%), with a heart rate of 75 beats per minute. Pulmonary function tests revealed a substantial reduction in diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO; 42% of the predicted value), partly imputable to the condition of anemia, with a carbon monoxide transfer coefficient (KCO) of 73% of the predicted value. After discussion in a multidisciplinary tumor board setting, including a pulmonologist, the patient underwent left thoracoscopic thymectomy and concomitant lingual segment wedge resection. The histopathological report revealed a morphological finding and immunohistochemical pattern referable to type B2 thymoma with focal infiltration of the capsule. Extracapsular extension was not evident. However, the lesion was present at the resection margin (stage IIa according to Masaoka–Koga; stage 1a according to the tumor, node, metastasis [TNM] classification).

Regarding the lung parenchyma, histopathologic analysis described lung parenchyma with cysts of variable size lined by spindle cells in myoid habit with immunohistochemical reactivity for actin, estrogen, progesterone receptors, and HMB45 (focal positivity). Modest chronic interstitial inflammation, vascular congestion, and recent blood extravasation were evident. These morphological findings were compatible with pulmonary LAM.

A final histological diagnosis of thymoma and pulmonary LAM was made. For the neoplastic condition, the patient was a candidate for adjuvant radiation therapy due to the microscopically incomplete resection (R1). For LAM with concomitant β-thalassemia, treatment with sirolimus was recommended.