A 51-year-old female patient with a history of allergic reactions to nitrofurantoine and phenazopyridine, who had breast implants since 2010, developed a blistering pemphigus in 2015 (diagnosed by biopsy) and an apparent diagnosis of acquired haemophilia in 2016, with the presence of spontaneous ecchymosis in the arms and legs, intermittent non-inflammatory gonalgia, accompanied by myalgia in the upper and lower limbs and prolonged haemorrhages without petechiae, a painful condition in the left iliac fossa, resulting from left renal haemorrhage with ipsilateral pleural effusion.

She presented to the emergency department on September 22, 2020 with a hemorrhagic syndrome in the right breast, which began with an increase in volume and alteration of the consistency of the right breast, causing a displacement towards the midline, without medical management. She subsequently presented with hives with erythema around the areola, approximately 5 mm in diameter, painful, hypersensitive, not pruritic, with a spontaneous outpouring of blood. Physical examination revealed an evident growth in the right breast, lateral deviation of the nipple, a haematic outpouring from the infra-alveolar medial zone, concluding with a Baker grade IV capsular contracture of the right breast and grade I of the left breast. She was treated with antibiotics and factor VIII in the emergency department, without improvement.

He was then admitted to the haematology department on suspicion of coagulopathy, with a marked prolongation of activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) of 107.4 seconds (control 27.6 s) and a PT of 14 s (control 11.8 s). The study was repeated with APTT > 180 s and coagulation corrections-dilutions resulting in no correction, and plasma was collected for the Bethesda method, as well as a change in treatment to factor VIIa (NovoSeven) at a dose of 5 mg every three hours intravenous (IV). Given these characteristics, acquired haemophilia was suspected, and was confirmed with a result of 30,000 Bethesda units, a high response.

A computed axial tomography (CAT) scan was performed, which showed a hematoma in the implant of the right breast, respecting its capsule. For this reason, the plastic surgery department was contacted for the removal of both breast implants.

The patient was scheduled to be admitted to the operating room on September 28, 2020 at 4:00 p.m. A bilateral capsulectomy was performed, obtaining an intracapsular hematoma of 320 ml, as well as the macroscopic pathological inspection of the affected capsule. The procedure concluded successfully.

Before the surgical procedure described above, the haemostasis control was carried out by the haematology service, using factor VIIa (NovoSeven) with a dose (70-90 mcg/kg/every 3 hours) in relation to the weight (70 kg), corresponding to 5 mg every 3 hours for 7 days, achieving adequate haemostasis. After the surgery (72 hours) weekly rituximab (600 mg for four doses) was indicated; on October 3, 2020, the factor VIIa was replaced with tranexamic acid (650 mg every 8 hours orally) for a complete haemostatic control and for the outpatient management of the patient, so her discharge was decided, after an intrahospital stay of 12 days and continuing, later, on December 9, 2020 with deflazacort (30 mg/day) by the rheumatology service.

The patient is currently asymptomatic, denies the presence of hemorrhagic episodes and reports clinical improvement of inflammatory events in muscles and joints. The scar of the surgical event is without hemostatic problems.

The histopathological result of the right breast implant capsule, with mature fibroadipose and fibroconective tissue, allowed the identification of a prominent transmural mixed inflammatory infiltrate (acute and chronic), accompanied by few multinucleated giant cells of the foreign body type, while the left breast implant capsule presented a discrete inflammatory lymphoplasmocitary infiltrate.
