30-year-old woman with a history of celiac disease and a diagnosis in 2021 of adeno-squamous infiltrating carcinoma of the cervix, stage IV b, with retroperitoneal and abdominal-pelvic lymph node involvement. She completed intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) in the pelvis and retroperitoneum with boost in the left paramedian and concurrent cisplatin for 6 cycles. She also completed 2 courses of chemotherapy with cisplatin/gemcitabine. After 8 months, a control PET-CT scan showed an increase in size and metabolic activity of retroperitoneal and abdominal lymph nodes, which led to the initiation of treatment with pembrolizumab after demonstrating PDL1 expression in the initial biopsy. After the 8th cycle, immunomediated hypothyroidism was diagnosed, and levothyroxine was indicated, and continued with pembrolizumab due to favorable response. In January 2023, she was admitted for epigastralgia, late postprandial vomiting of 6 weeks of evolution and loss of 10 kg of weight. Physical examination did not reveal relevant data. Hto 33%, Hb 10 g/dL, ferremia 64 mcg/ dL, ferritin 250 ng/ml, transferrin 113 mg/dL, hypoproteinemia (4 g/dL) and hypoalbuminemia (2.4 g/dL). Anti-transglutaminase antibodies and HIV serology were negative. Abdominal and pelvic TAC: stomach with thickened walls. VEDA: extensive ulcerated lesion in the antrum and corpus of the stomach, edematous, with white-yellowish material (pseudomembranes) that denuded the mucosa when it was detached and compromised the pylorus. In the 2nd duodenal portion, a decrease in the height of the folds (in relation to a history of celiac disease) was observed. Flow cytometry: negative for lymphoproliferative process. Histology: antral mucosa with marked reactive and reparative epithelial changes, extensive denudation and erosion of the surface epithelium with accompanying white-yellowish fibrinoleucocyte material. In the lamina propria, an increase in the inflammatory infiltrate consisting of lymphocytes, plasma cells and numerous polymorphonuclear cells with exocytosis in the glandular epithelium was observed. Helicobacter pylori and cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection were ruled out. Immunohistochemistry: expression for PDL1 (Clone SP263), with a combined positive score (CPS) of 35%, which included a relative contribution of epithelial cells of 25% and inflammatory cells of 10%. With the suspicion of immunomediated gastritis, pembrolizumab was discontinued and meprednisone 0.5 mg/kg/day was initiated; it progressed favorably with tolerance to solid and liquid food. After three weeks of initiation of treatment, endoscopy was repeated, which evidenced a stomach with clear mucous content, fundus and body without lesions, antrum with congestive mucous and multiple extensive and superficial ulcers covered by fibrin. The descent of corticosteroids was initiated, and the reexposure to pembrolizumab will be defined with the oncologist in charge.
