A 53-year-old Southeast Asian man presented to a local physician with abdominal pain. He had no specific previous medical history or prior treatments. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed hepatomegaly. Since his abdominal pain was resistant to any medication, he was referred to our hospital for a comprehensive examination and subsequent treatment. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed an ulcer in the duodenal bulb, although he had been taking a histamine H2 antagonist. Helicobacter pylori infection was not detected in any examinations. Plain abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed intrahepatic reticulated calcification, indicating the presence of Schistosomiasis japonica. Contrast-enhanced CT demonstrated early enhancement of the pancreatic head and superior mesenteric vein in the late arterial phase. Maximum intensity projection (MIP) images revealed blood flow from the gastroduodenal artery (GDA) and superior mesenteric artery (SMA) to tortuous vessels, subsequently draining into the portal venous circulation. Based on these results, we diagnosed the patient with pancreatic AVM. His abdominal pain persisted despite treatment with oral acetaminophen and proton pump inhibitors. Continuous intravenous fentanyl injection relieved his abdominal pain. However, the duodenal ulcer did not improve upon the second upper gastrointestinal endoscopic examination. We considered that the duodenal ulcer was likely caused by the abnormal peri-pancreatic circulation due to the pancreatic AVM, and surgical resection of the pancreatic head was needed to alleviate his symptoms. Considering the risk of increased intraoperative blood loss due to abundant arterial blood flow caused by the presence of the AVM in the pancreatic head, preoperative arterial embolization was scheduled for the day before surgery. Angiography revealed the existence of the AVM in the pancreatic head, which was supplied by the GDA and anterior/posterior pancreaticoduodenal artery (AIPDA/PIPDA) branching from the SMA. After selective arterial embolization of the GDA, APIDA, and PIPDA using gelatin sponges (Serescue; Nippon Kayaku, Tokyo, Japan), AVM was no longer visible under angiography of the celiac axis or SMA. We did not use coils because we were concerned that intra-arterial coils might hamper arterial ligation and division. No complications occurred after arterial embolization until the next day. Since there were no abnormal laboratory data just before surgery, SSPPD was performed. After laparotomy, GDA and peripancreatic arterial branches from SMA were firstly divided to reduce the pancreatic blood flow. The intraoperative findings did not demonstrate any impact of arterial embolization on the pancreatic parenchyma. The operation time was 453 min, and the blood loss was 336g. The patient was discharged on the 16th postoperative day with no complications and has not experienced abdominal pain since.

Pathological examination revealed the presence of dilated vessels of unequal sizes, which was consistent with the features of pancreatic AVM. Eggs of Schistosoma japonicum were observed within pancreatic tissue and in the dissected lymph node around the pancreatic head.