An 86-yr-old man was referred for transfemoral aortic valve implantation.

Significant history included smoking 40 pack-yr (until the late 1980s) and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation requiring Coumadin anticoagulation since 1999, soon followed by the implantation of a ventricular pacemaker because of bradycardia. He was admitted for syncope in May 2011, and a severe calcified aortic stenosis was diagnosed. He was eupneic and showed no sign of heart failure or fluid retention. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a severe aortic stenosis (mean gradient: 58 mmHg, aortic valve area: 0.4 cm2) with left ventricular hypertrophy, impaired left ventricular ejection fraction (29%), inferoapical akinesia, and subvalvular septal obstruction (septum: 18 mm) with biauricular dilatation and pulmonary hypertension with vena cava dilatation.

Coronary angiogram showed a 75% stenosis of the left anterior descending artery. Echo-Doppler examination found normal neck vessels. Aspirin 80 mg daily was added to his treatment; the patient was scheduled for aortic valve replacement but did not arrive until August, when he was readmitted in emergency for acute dyspnea and confusion. He had gained 6 kg weight, with leg edemas and clinical signs of pleural effusion. At this time, his SpO2 was 92% and B-natriuretic protein was elevated at 2,336 pg·mL−1 (normal < 100 pg·mL−1).

After diuretic therapy and removing 850 mL pleural effusion, an emergent aortic percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty (Cristal Balloon, 23 mm) was performed and was immediately followed by left anterior descending balloon angioplasty with bare-metal stent implantation (Biotronik-Pro-Kinetic 2.74 × 10.0). Transvalvular mean gradient decreased from 59 to 38 mmHg. A few runs of torsades de pointe were observed on day 6 postintervention, disappearing when the lower rate of the pacemaker was accelerated to 80 beats/min. His condition improved dramatically, and he was discharged on furosemide, aldactazine, and clopidogrel. After careful review of the patient’s file by the heart team, the risk of a valve surgery was judged too high (logistic Euroscore: 51%), and the patient was proposed for a transfemoral aortic valve implantation.

Nurses’ notes mention nocturnal hyperventilation and anxiety crises. The patient was semiautonomous and lived with his daughter.

Transfemoral aortic valve implantation was scheduled in October 2011. On admission, 2 days before the procedure, the patient was described “anxious and hyperventilating”; his weight was 67 kg for 168 cm height; forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) was 1.1 L (50% of predicted) and forced vital capacity 1.7 L (55%); systemic arterial blood pressure was 120/60 mmHg; hemoglobin concentration was 167 g·L−1; creatinine was 12.7 g·L−1; glomerular filtration rate was calculated at 54 mL.min−1·m−2; potassium was 3.7 mEq·L−1; sodium was 141 mEq·L−1; bicarbonate was 22 mEq·L−1; and B-natriuretic protein was 2,073 pg·mL−1. Echography described an aortic valve surface area of 0.5 cm2 with a mean aortic gradient 55 mmHg and inferoapical akinesia in the left ventricle. Ejection fraction was measured at 27% by Simpson biplane method with moderate mitral regurgitation with biauricular dilation and estimated the systolic pulmonary pressure at >69 mmHg. Chest X-ray showed no significant pleural effusion. The patient was totally pacemaker dependent.

Two hours before intervention, the patient received 1 g acetaminophen by mouth. On arrival in the operating room, the patient, fully conscious, was noted to have periodic Cheyne–Stokes respiration; each cycle lasted ~85 s, with apneas lasting between 15 and 20 s with large SpO2 oscillations between 88% and 99%. He was equipped with two peripheral intravenous catheters and one arterial catheter. The arterial tracing also showed also 85 s oscillations and systolic pressure varying from 130 to 150 mmHg. A nonocclusive Venturi facial 40% oxygen mask was applied, and SpO2 reached a more stable range (92%-99%). Ten minutes later, blood gas analyses showed pH 7.39, Pao2 108 mmHg, Paco2 40 mmHg, SaO2 97%, and lactate levels 1.2 mEq·L−1. A capnograph sampling line was installed inside the face mask to monitor respiratory frequency (Carescape Monitor B650, GE Healthcare, Helsinki, Finland). Monitoring also included a 12-lead ECG, pulse-oximetry, and regional cerebral oximetry (rSO2) by frontal near-infrared spectroscopy (INVOS, Somanetics). Capnography revealed that arterial pressure oscillations were synchronous with the rhythm of respiration and pressure decreasing during apneic-hypopneic spells and increasing during hyperventilation; rSO2 followed the same pattern, despite finger SpO2 remaining at a constant 99%. A very low-dose propofol infusion was started with a target concentration of 0.2 µg·mL−1; sufentanil 2.5 µg was given before operators infiltrated each groin with 200 mg mepivacaine; the patient dozed off but remained arousable at the slightest contact of his face or when his name was whispered to his ears; another 2.5 µg sufentanil was given before femoral artery dilatation, a procedure required before the valve replacement. Ventilation cycles slowed to a maximum of 120 s with 24 s central apneas. When angiography and operating catheters were in place in the ascending aorta and a temporary pacemaker lead was introduced in the right ventricle, rapid pacing was induced at a rate of 200 beats/min to allow a new balloon-dilatation of the calcified valve. This procedure lasted <25 s, during which the patient remained conscious and continued to breathe in his usual fashion, the pacing having been induced just after the end of an apneic spell. A 26-mm valve (SAPIEN, Edwards Lifesciences) was then prepared and introduced into the aortic orifice. A signal was given to the operators once breathing resumed at the end of an apneic period, rapid ventricular pacing was started leading to asystole at a mean arterial pressure of 45 mmHg, and the valve was balloon expanded, and angiography confirmed the absence of paravalvular leak. The balloon was deflated just before rapid pacing was stopped, and the heart resumed beating at 80 beats/min under the stimulation of the implanted pacemaker. The whole sequence was filmed; it lasted 31 s, during which the patient kept breathing regularly (8 times during circulatory arrest, i.e., a rate of 16 times per minute) and did not wake up. Blood ejections resumed immediately after balloon deflation, with a systolic pressure of 80 mmHg. After a few deep breaths, respiration became regular; no further apneic spells occurred nor blood pressure or rSO2 oscillations. Systemic hypertension developed rapidly, culminating after 1 min at 190 mmHg and controlled with 40 mg of intravenous urapidil given over the next 15 min. Transthoracic echography measured the valvular area at 1.6 cm2 and peak transvalvular gradient at 15 mmHg. Pulmonary artery pressure estimation by transthoracic echography showed a peak systolic right ventricular-right atrial pressure gradient of 69 mmHg 1 day before the procedure and 45 mmHg 2 days after. One month later, it was 28 mmHg. Further evolution was uneventful, and the patient was discharged home 72 h later without having reverted to periodic breathing.