4-month-old indigenous lactating mother from the rural area of the interior of Panama, from the town of Urracá, 3 hours by canoe from the nearest health center. Her background included being the fourth daughter, born by vaginal delivery at home by a relative, without prenatal controls, her weight, height and Apgar score at birth are unknown. She did not breastfeed and was fed with powdered milk formula with iron for children under 6 months, receiving 3 ounces every 4 hours.

The nuclear family was composed of 6 people (parents and 4 children) who lived in a house with walls and floor of boards and palm roof, 2 rooms, without electricity, they were illuminated with kerosene lamps, water from a well, excreta in a river and they burned the garbage, their economic income came from subsistence agriculture.

He had no health care in his first 4 months of life and did not receive the vaccinations included in the national expanded programme of immunizations. According to his parents, his neurodevelopment was normal until his hospitalization.

The minor consulted in a health center with a history of 4 days of diarrhoea, without mucus or blood associated with vomiting of food content (the mother gave her tea because she could not tolerate milk), afebrile and without respiratory symptoms. Oral fluids and 4 doses of Enterogermina® (B. clausii: two billion spores/5 mL) were administered. Due to the lack of supplies (they did not have catheters, or intraosseous for the administration of intravenous fluids) she was transferred to a second-level hospital in the provincial capital and then to our institution in Panama City with a diagnosis of acute gastroenteritis and severe dehydration.

He presented to the emergency department with a consciousness compromise, dehydration characterised by a tearless cry, dry oral mucosa. He had oedema of +++ hands, feet, abdomen and face. He was afebrile and had signs of shock, capillary refill time > 2 seconds, cold extremities, filiform pulse and marble skin, heart rate 170 bpm, respiratory rate 55 bpm, blood pressure 91/37 mmHg, oxygen saturation 99%. He weighed 4.7 kg and was 56 cm tall at admission, Z-score height/age -2.52, weight/height and weight/age Z-scores were not quantifiable due to severe dehydration. On segmental examination, there were fine crepitus in both lung bases and erythematous-squamous lesions with desquamation of skin and others with hypopigmentation of trunk and upper limbs (interpreted as pellagroid dermatosis).

Lactate Ringer bolus was given at 10 ml/kg in the emergency department, followed by 5% Dextrose in 0.33% Saline 500 ml at an infusion rate of 29 ml/h over 6 hours without KCL until diuresis was obtained. She was started on Ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg/day for suspected sepsis, stabilised and sent to the ward where she continued to receive 500 ml of 5% Dextrose in 0.9% Saline at 20 ml/hr.

Among the examinations, a blood count revealed leukocytosis at 39.0 x 103/uL, severe anaemia 5.6 g/dL, thrombocytosis 502 x 103/uL, the rest of the results are detailed in. He was transfused with 50 ml of filtered and leuko-reduced red blood cells and 40 cc of fresh frozen plasma due to altered coagulation times. Enteral feeding was initiated by nasogastric tube and infusion was decreased to 15 ml/h of 5% Dextrose in 0.9% Saline 500 cc, and continued with negative water balance.

On day 2, initial peripheral blood culture was reported as Gram positive cocci in clusters, Oxacillin was added at 200 mg/kg/day, Ceftriaxone was increased to 75-100 mg/kg/day, total fluids to 120 ml/kg/day and calcium was corrected (value received 6.38 mg/dL).

On her 3rd day she lost venous access, so a central venous catheter (CVC) was placed. She was hypovolemic with subhydrated oral mucosa, increased respiratory work, cold extremities and capillary refill time of 3-4 seconds. Ringer's lactate was given at a load of 20 ml/kg in one hour. Arterial blood gas revealed uncompensated metabolic acidosis with pH 7.26, HCO3 13 mmol/L, PCO2 28.4 mmHg, PO2 39.2 mmHg, lactate 2.8 mmol/L. She was intubated and transferred to the paediatric intensive care unit (PICU) where she was placed on mechanical ventilation.

Total fluids of 100 cc/kg, infused epinephrine, low-salt albumin, and 10% calcium gluconate were administered, and fentanyl was changed to remifentanil due to elevated liver enzymes.

The blood culture of admission reported growth of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), Oxacillin was omitted and Clindamycin was added at 40 mg/kg/day; the blood culture of admission on the second day of admission to the ICU with Gram-negative bacillus smear was positive, and Ceftriaxone was changed to Ceftazidime at 150 mg/kg/day.

On his first day in the ICU, a substantial increase in serum biomarkers of cardiac damage was documented, the echocardiogram showed mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, left ventricular dilatation, left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 58%, no evidence of thrombi, vegetations or pericardial effusion, and he was diagnosed with acute myocarditis. Milrinone was started at 0.4 mcg/kg/min, furosemide and IV immunoglobulin 1 g/kg single dose.

The second day blood culture the germ was identified as Bacillus clausii, identified by the system (VYTEK 2TM), the susceptibility profile was not performed because the team did not have cut points for this germ, for this reason the antibiotic coverage was adjusted, considering it was not a contaminant, Ceftazidime was changed to Ciprofloxacin at 30 mg/kg/day and Ceftaroline was added at 8 mg/kg every 8 hours along with Clindamycin for MRSA. The 3 subsequent blood cultures with intervals of 48 hours between each were positive in both peripheral blood and CVC for isolation of B. clausii.

On his 6th day in hospital, the gastrointestinal panel (Maripoc gastro test methodology) performed on the second day detected Clostridiodes difficile toxin A/B, the tests for Campylobacteryeyuni, Norovirus GI, Norovirus GII.4, Adenovirus and Rotavirus were negative. Following these findings, therapy was escalated to IV Vancomycin at a dose of 60 mg/kg/day and metronidazole was added orally. Ceftaroline, clindamycin and ciprofloxacin were omitted, covering both B. clausii and C. difficile and MRSA .

HIV testing, serology for Chagas and SARS-CoV-2 antigen by immunofluorescence (FIA) were negative, immunoglobulins were within normal limits.

On the seventh day, arterial hypertension was reported and spirinolactone was added to the management.

On the 8th day, the laboratory tests showed altered coagulation times and increased azotaemia associated with anuria that had lasted for 12 hours. However, due to the patient's condition, a peritoneal catheter was not placed, the vancomycin dose was adjusted and vitamin K was administered. The patient continued to have anuria and anasarca, and she developed sustained hypotension. Noradrenaline was added, but her condition deteriorated with multisystem organ failure and she died twelve days after admission. No autopsy was performed because the mother refused permission for cultural reasons.
