A 4-year-old male diagnosed with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia is undergoing chemotherapy with vincristine, cytarabine, and etoposide. He presented to the emergency room with a 2-day history of fever, hypotension, and pruritic lesions on his inner thighs, which progressively spread to cover his entire body surface. Physical examination revealed multiple erythematous papules, some non-responsive to acupressure. On the elbows and knees, they formed large purple plaques, with few papules on the soles and palms and no oral mucosal involvement. Additionally, facial edema was noted. The patient was hospitalized 15 days prior for severe thrombocytopenia (platelets <6,000) and received a platelet transfusion. He was subsequently diagnosed with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia and started chemotherapy 10 days before admission.

The patient's diagnostic tests revealed significant abnormalities in the blood count: white blood cell count of 1,100, with an absolute neutrophil count of 50, absolute lymphocyte count of 840, absolute monocyte count of 150, and absolute eosinophil count of 50. Hemoglobin level was measured at 7.6 g/dL, hematocrit at 22.8%, and platelet count at 23,000 per microliter. Additionally, the C-reactive protein level was elevated at 2.67 mg/L. Liver function tests returned within normal ranges, as did the lactate dehydrogenase test, which showed a value of 245 U/L.

Based on the low-output clinical symptoms, it was decided to start volume expansion with crystalloids and to initiate intravenous immunoglobulin support. In addition, albumin replacement associated with diuretic infusion was started, in search of physiological dialysis. With worsening symptoms and suspicion of a hypersensitivity reaction, a biopsy of the skin lesions was taken for histopathological study. The dermatopathological changes observed were hyperkeratosis, focal parakeratosis, acanthosis with slight spongiosis, and frequent intraepithelial dyskeratotic cells, and there was involvement of the dermis by perivascular lymphoid infiltrates with abundant eosinophils. In addition, eosinophils permeated the acrosyringium, eccrine ducts, and epithelium. This skin biopsy report was compatible with drug-induced toxicoderma. According to the RegiSCAR scale for DRESS, the total score is 5, which classifies it as a probable case.

With the definitive diagnosis and given the continued progression of the lesions and lack of response to immunoglobulin, bolus methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg per day) was started. Five doses were administered without clinical relapses. After 2 days, the patient showed a better hemodynamic evolution, though with initial progress of the extension and intensity of cutaneous erythematous involvement, which resolved during the week. Given the patient's progression, a modification of the chemotherapeutic regimen is undertaken, with mercaptopurine being administered.

Finally, the management of this syndrome involves early elimination of the causative agent and treatment with antihistamines in their mild form, corticosteroids in their moderate form, and plasmapheresis in the more severe forms. Healthcare professionals should be more attentive to the early manifestations of this syndrome, as early diagnosis and treatment improve outcomes significantly.