Our patient is a 21-year-old G1P0 female with genetic testing confirmatory of SCD. Both parents were found to be carriers. She arrived at the obstetric service at 31-weeks gestation, citing difficulty in obtaining prenatal care due to her recent arrival to the U.S. and the COVID-19 pandemic. She was born without a shoulder blade and six missing ribs on her left side. In childhood, she had two spinal surgeries including a cervical spine fusion and an attempted correction of kyphoscoliosis at the ages of 1 and 13, respectively.

The obstetrics team arranged for consultations with pulmonology and anesthesiology. A new chest x-ray revealed a displaced left scapula and diaphragm, along with findings consistent with left lung hypoplasia. The patient had a baseline oxygen saturation of 94% and remained at this saturation throughout her third trimester office visits. She reported a history of recurrent pulmonary infections, with her most recent hospitalization for pneumonia occurring at 7-weeks gestation, but denied any active infections since then. The patient’s spirometry results were consistent with a severely restricted lung disease pattern with FEV1 28% of predicted value, FVC 29% of predicted value, and FEV1/FVC 98% of predicted value. The results of the echocardiogram were grossly normal, with an ejection fraction of 60%, minimal mitral and tricuspid valve regurgitation, and no evidence of right-heart strain.

During the anesthesiology consultation, it was noted that the patient had spinal deformities with disproportionate shoulders and a severely limited range of motion around the neck. Examination of the lumbar region revealed a surgical scar that extended downwards to the L1-L2 level. The patient reported having chronic back pain pre-dating the pregnancy and that she had been taking oxycodone/acetaminophen (Percocet) for the past several years. Her airway examination was notable for a Mallampati-2 score, > 3 finger-breadths thyromental distance, and adequate mouth opening. The patient’s height was 155 cm and her body mass index was 24.6 kg/m2. There were no anesthetic records available from her previous spine surgeries discussing airway management.

The patient went into latent labor at 37-weeks gestation, presenting with minimal cervical change, irregular contractions, and intact membranes. She was not able to obtain her outpatient MRI in time. At the time of presentation, the patient denied any respiratory complaints. A focused cervical and lumbar MRI (excluding the thoracic region for expediency) was obtained while the patient was still in latent labor to assure that there were no findings that might preclude neuraxial analgesia for labor. MRI of the cervical spine was significant for vertebral body fusion from C7-T6 and multilevel degenerative changes. A disc osteophyte was identified at the C4-C5 level causing mild spinal canal stenosis and indentation of the spinal cord. MRI of the lumbar spine confirmed the presence of surgical rods extending to L2. It was otherwise unremarkable, with no significant spinal canal or neural foraminal stenosis. The thecal sac ended at the level of the L5 vertebral body, and the conus medullaris ended near the L2–L3 interspace.

It was determined that the patient was at her baseline functional status therefore she could attempt a trial of labor, with the possibility of an assisted second stage if there was any change in her functional status. Difficult airway equipment, including a C-MAC fiberoptic scope, was prepared in a dedicated operating room. An ENT specialist was on standby in case a surgical airway was needed. The patient’s cervical exam indicated 4 cm of cervical dilation, 80% cervical effacement, and a score of -3 for fetal station. She experienced regular contractions every six minutes upon return from the MRI. The placenta was left-lateral and the fetal heart rate tracing was category I at this time. An amniotomy was performed and a fetal scalp electrode was placed for better fetal monitoring during the labor epidural placement.

The patient required additional positioning maneuvers to be seated for the epidural placement. Following recommendations for parturients with scoliosis, the doctors focused on maximally flexing the spine, to widen the interspinous spaces and align the iliac crests as effectively as possible. During standard epidural positioning, multiple adjustments were needed to minimize her pain and discomfort. The anesthesiologist first attempted a traditional midline approach for labor epidural anesthesia. A dural puncture with a Gertie-Marx spinal needle was attempted but there was no return of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) following a loss of resistance to air injection. The anesthesiologist then attempted a paramedian approach, positioning the needle 1–2 cm lateral to the spinal process on the convex side of the spinal curvature. A 9 cm epidural Tuohy needle was re-positioned and another attempt was made but there was no return of CSF. At this time, the anesthesiologist decided to thread the catheter and carefully assess analgesia with a slow load of 10 ml of 0.25% bupivacaine. The needle insertion depth was 6 cm, the catheter type was multiport 19G, and the catheter at skin depth was 11 cm.

Within twenty minutes of administration of the epidural, the patient was insensate to ice to the level of T9 and bilateral analgesic block was achieved. Her analgesia scores were 9 out of 10 prior to the epidural and 1 out of 10 within 15 min of the loading dose. She did not require any epidural “top-offs” (additional doses of medication through the catheter). Epidural analgesia was maintained with an injection of fentanyl preservative-free 100MCG through the epidural and a continuous infusion of 0.0625% bupivacaine combined with 2 mcg of fentanyl per mL.

The patient progressed to full dilation within two hours without the need for oxytocin augmentation and had a successful spontaneous vaginal delivery after twenty minutes of pushing unassisted. The newborn male weighed 2.565 kg and had an Apgar score of 9 at one and five minutes. The umbilical vein pH was 7.26. Approximately 2.5 h after delivery, a post-anesthesia evaluation was performed. The patient was awake and alert with no anesthetic complications. She was hemodynamically stable and breathing spontaneously without the need for assisted ventilation. 9 h post-delivery, the patient was in a stable condition with no headache or neurological issues. She was ambulating with no deficits. The patient had an uneventful hospital course and was discharged on postpartum day 2.