13-year-old boy from Cusco with a history of laryngeal papillomatosis since the age of two (at the age of three he required a tracheostomy) and a mother with a history of genital papilloma. The patient was admitted to the San Borja National Institute of Child Health in Lima, after a 16-day illness characterised by respiratory difficulties predominantly at night, inspiratory laryngeal stridor and moderate dysphonia; he previously received azithromycin and oxygen support, without improvement.

The physical examination revealed mild subcostal retraction, decreased vesicular murmurs in the left hemithorax and scanty wheezy breath sounds with predominance in the right hemithorax, which required oxygen support with a binasal cannula at 4 liters. The rest of the evaluation had no relevant findings. At the laboratory level, leukocytes were found at 8.03 × 103/u, platelets 209 × 103/u, hemoglobin 13.2 g/dL, C-reactive protein at 36.6 mg/L. As part of the imaging studies, a chest radiograph and a head and neck tomography were performed.

48 hours after admission, she presented with increased stridor and respiratory difficulty, so admission to the emergency operating room for tracheostomy, microsurgery and excision of papillomatosis lesions was decided. An appendicular tumour of papillomatose appearance with ventricular bands in the epiglottis, glottic face, vocal cords, subglottis and trachea up to ring 5 was evident. The anatomopathological report reported coilocitic atypia due to HPV and mild focal dysplasia.

In the immediate postoperative period, he was transferred to the paediatric intensive care unit for respiratory monitoring, with weaning from oxygen at 48 hours. He received a single dose of bevacizumab 400 mg intravenous and subsequently improved clinically. The patient remained hospitalised for seven days, achieving clinical stability through normalisation of oxygen saturation levels and progressive weaning from oxygen, and was subsequently referred to the hospital in Breña to continue his management. Telemonitoring was carried out after eight months and the family indicated that there was no evidence of relapse or other intercurrences.
