A 36-year-old Thai primigravida mother gave birth to a male newborn at a gestational age of 41 weeks by cesarean section due to maternal preeclampsia. Both parents were healthy and had no history of consanguineous marriage. The pregnancy was normal until 40 weeks of gestation when prenatal ultrasonography diagnosed bilateral intracerebral hemorrhages in the fronto-parieto-temporo-occipital regions. The newborn had a birth weight of 3,500 g. Owing to hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy, his Apgar scores were 1, 3, and 3 at 1, 5, and 10 min, respectively, necessitating intubation and ventilatory support. A ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt was performed to manage obstructive hydrocephalus, yet recurrent intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH) occurred postnatally. Brain imaging after the birth did not reveal any vascular malformation, brain tumor, brain infection, or intradural venous thrombosis. Congenital coagulopathy was further excluded. After weaning off intubation and initiating oral feeding at 7 days of age, the patient experienced multiple episodes of vomiting and reflux after being fed breast milk or infant formula and exhibited intermittent abdominal distension. Stool volume ranged from 20 to 100 ml/day, and the stool consistency was runny and soft, with no history of constipation. The vomiting and reflux persisted despite switching to lactose-free and hypoallergenic infant formulas. Clinical suspicion arose for non-IgE-mediated cow’s milk protein allergy (CMPA) due to equivocal serum level of specific IgE to cow’s milk and no dermatologic symptom. At 2 months of age, the patient developed clinical signs of sepsis secondary to an infected VP shunt caused by Staphylococcus aureus. Concurrently, marked abdominal distension was noted. No history of necrotizing enterocolitis was documented. Abdominal X-ray radiograph showed multiple dilated bowel loops without air-fluid levels or pneumoperitoneum. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed generalized bowel dilatation without midgut volvulus or malrotation. Gut obstruction was therefore excluded. The physician suspected bowel ileus associated with sepsis and the infected VP shunt. Antibiotics were administered.

Following the removal of the infected VP shunt at the age of 3 months, right and left external ventricular drains (EVDs) were subsequently inserted. Although marked abdominal distension decreased, mild abdominal distension occurred intermittently. Additionally, few to frequent episodes of vomiting per day were consistently documented. Serratia marcescens ventriculitis from the infected EVD occurred at the age of 5 months. Despite the antibiotic treatment, the patient continued to suffered from brain abscesses and recurrent ICH. Brain CT at 6 months of age revealed extensive bilateral encephalomalacia, hydrocephalus and a recent hemorrhage in the right high frontal lobe. Both parents, acknowledging the poor prognosis, agreed to forgo resuscitation for the patient. The infant passed away at the age of 7 months, cradled in the arms of the mother. Both parents consented to donate the infant’s body as a cadaver to the Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University. Formal informed consent for cadaver preservation and postmortem examination was obtained. The infant’s body was preserved using formalin injection and embalming technique.


Postmortem examination
Gross examination of the thoracic and cervical regions revealed a retroesophageal right subclavian artery (RRSA) originating from the proximal thoracic aorta instead of the brachiocephalic trunk, and causing a notable compression on the posterior esophageal wall. The RRSA measured 0.6 cm in diameter at its origin and 4.4 cm in length. No Kommerell diverticulum was observed. Intriguingly, the left bronchial artery originated 0.6 cm from the origin of RRSA, rather than from the thoracic aorta. The esophagus measured 1.5 cm in flat diameter, and the RRSA-to-esophagus diameter ratio was 0.4. The right inferior laryngeal branch of the right vagus nerve did not form a loop with the RRSA, and was therefore identified as the right non-recurrent inferior laryngeal nerve. The left recurrent laryngeal nerve looped around the aortic arch. No cardiac anomaly was observed.

Gross examination of the abdomen unveiled a stenotic colon commencing from the distal half of the transverse colon to the proximal sigmoid colon measuring 15.5 cm in length. The stenotic segment accounted for nearly 50% of the total length of the colon. The narrowest colonic segment measuring 0.6 cm in diameter was noted at the descending colon, while the unaffected colon ranged from 1 to 1.5 cm in diameter. The ratio of the stenotic colon’s diameter to the normal colon’s diameter ranged from 0.4 to 0.6. However, a small patent lumen was present along the stenotic colonic segment without atresia. Prior to the colonic stenosis, the proximal transverse colon showed marked dilation, measuring 2.3 cm in diameter, with loss of mucosal folding. The stomach, small intestine, mesentery, liver, pancreas, spleen, kidney, ureter and urinary bladder appeared normal. There was no pyloric stenosis, annular pancreas, intestinal atresia, gut malrotation or volvulus. No fibrous adhesion was observed between the abdominal viscera and the abdominal wall. The brain revealed bilateral encephalomalacia, ICH and dilated ventricles. Representative tissue samples from the brain, thoracic and abdominal viscera were collected.

Microscopic examination
All tissue samples were processed, sectioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). Histological assessment of the esophagus, stomach, small intestine, large intestine and rectoanal canal revealed normal mucosa, submucosa, muscularis propria and serosa/adventitia.

The stenotic colonic wall exhibited intact four layers with ganglion cells present in the submucosa and muscularis propria. A submucosal fibrosis was observed in the stenotic colon. The muscularis propria remained continuous, with no segmental absence of intestinal musculature. The brain showed hematomas in both cerebral hemispheres without evidence of viral cytopathic change, vasculitis, amyloid deposition, thromboembolism or neoplasm.