A 63-year-old female was admitted to the Emergency Department of our hospital because of a persistent pressure, like chest pain, which developed 3 hours prior to her admission. She had a history of hypertension for approximately 10 years but had no history of diabetes. She was a nonsmoker. The electrocardiogram (ECG) results showed ST-segment elevation at the precordium leads, and ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) was therefore suspected. The patient was transferred to the catheter lab for an emergency coronary artery angiogram (CAG). The CAG failed to show any significant stenosis in the large coronary artery. The thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) flow was graded at 3. The patient's chest pain relieved shortly after admission, and she was transferred to the coronary care unit (CCU) for further observation. The patient's troponin levels were monitored every 6 hours, and the pattern was consistent with that of STEMI. The peak value of troponin was 123 ng/mL. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography was performed and revealed decreased contractility of the anterior wall with a reduced ejection fraction (EF). Consistent with these findings, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed that the left atrial diameter was 31 mm, the left ventricular end-diastolic (LVED) diameter was 48 mm, and the EF was 50%. Based on the findings above, a MINOCA diagnosis was made. The patient was discharged 5 days after admission, following an uneventful observation period, with guidelines for the recommended medical therapies including dual antiplatelet therapy, stain, angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, and β-blockers.

Ten days after discharge, the patient developed shortness of breath, which exacerbated with exertion. Physical examination showed that the point of maximal impulse was laterally displaced. TTE revealed that the left atrial diameter was dilated from 31 to 41 mm, the LVED was dilated from 48 to 60 mm, and the EF had dropped from 50% to 38%. An apex ventricular aneurysm with a thickness of 5.7 mm, a range of approximately 30 mm without contractility, and a hypo-echo appendage attached to the left ventricular apex area without movement with cardiac cycle were observed and the N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-ProBNP) level was 7420 pg/mL. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed a left ventricular thrombus and decreased EF. Based on these clinical findings, the patient was diagnosed as having HF, ventricular aneurysm, and mural thrombosis. The clinical symptoms of this patient were relieved by diuretic treatment and the patient was discharged with the addition of Rivaroxaban to the treatment plan.

One week later, the patient came to the emergency room again with palpitations and shortness of breath. ECG revealed VT. The patient was admitted to the CCU for further treatment. Treatment with a loading dose of amiodarone, followed by a maintenance dose, failed to terminate the VT. Thereafter, amiodarone was replaced by lidocaine and esmolol. However, the VT persisted with deteriorating HF. The incessant VT lasted for 5 days before it was successfully terminated by 100 J synchronized electrical cardioversion. The VT recurred frequently and every time it was terminated through the use of electrical cardioversion. Epicardium radiofrequency ablation was performed to treat the VT, and the pericardium was punctured with the xiphoid process. Through electrophysiology mapping, the epicardium was ablated, and no VT was observed immediately after the ablation.

Fourteen days after the ablation, the VT recurred. About 100 J synchronized cardioversion was used to terminate the VT. Informed consent was obtained from the patient and an ICD was implanted. During the 7-day follow-up period, there were no shock delivered discharges and several episodes of VT were successfully terminated by antitachycardia pacing (ATP). After consultation with a cardiac surgeon, the patient was transferred to the Surgery Department for the removal of the ventricular aneurysm, to restore the heart geometry. One month after the surgery, TTE revealed that the left atrial diameter was reduced to 31 mm, the LVED diameter was reduced to 50 mm, the EF was increased to 50%, and the mitral valve regurgitation was greatly improved. The patient was free of events during the 3-month follow-up period after the surgery.