68-year-old male patient with a history of chronic degenerative type 2 diabetes mellitus and systemic arterial hypertension. As surgical history, he reported a hemorrhoidectomy 30 years ago. The rest of the history was denied.

He presented to the emergency department of our unit, reporting clinical symptoms that had started 48 hours earlier, with abdominal pain in the hypogastrium, intense, without irradiation, accompanied by nausea and multiple vomits of gastrointestinal content, fever and tachycardia. On physical examination, the abdomen was with present air-water sounds, soft, depressible, painful to superficial and deep palpation in the right hypochondrium, positive Murphy's sign. Due to the symptoms described, he was admitted to the Gastro-surgery department. An ultrasound of the liver and biliary tract was performed, finding a gallbladder of 6 x 4.7 x 4.2 cm, wall of 2.5 mm, multiple anechoic images of approximately 0.5 mm with projection of acoustic shadow, suggestive of vesicular lithiasis, with extrahepatic dilation of the biliary tract of 9 mm. In the laboratory examinations performed, creatinine values of 3.6 mg/dL, bilirubins, AST and ALT without alterations, GGT: 224 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase: 231 U/L, LDH: 122 U/L, leukocytes: 15.58 mm3, neutrophils: 86%, haemoglobin: 10.2 g/dL, haematocrit: 30.3% and platelets: 279 x109/L.

Following the hydration resuscitation and the management of the acute renal injury through a hydration plan performed by the Nephrology department, a contrasted abdominal computed axial tomography was performed as a complementary diagnosis. It reported a bile duct with a diameter of up to 10 mm in its pancreatic and intraduodenal portion with multiple ovoid images, the largest one with a diameter of 9.3 mm. For this reason, a magnetic cholangio-resonance was requested with a report of vesicular lithiasis associated with bile sludge and choledocholithiasis, conditioning a hydrocole-cyst, dilation of intra- and extrahepatic bile duct, and duodenal diverticulum without suggestive data of inflammation.

Based on the findings described above, and according to the 2018 Tokyo Guidelines, a diagnosis of severe cholangitis/grade III (acute renal and neurological failure) secondary to choledocholithiasis was made. Antibiotic treatment with carbapenem was prescribed. The patient had significant clinical and neurological deterioration, so it was decided to perform ERCP, finding a duodenum of normal shape, calibre, distensibility and mucosa of normal appearance; in the second duodenal portion, a major papilla was identified within a diverticulum of 30 mm in diameter, with opacification of purulent material at its ostium. An intrahepatic dilated bile duct, extrahepatic up to 12 mm, could be seen inside with four 10-14 mm stones. The pancreatic duct was not opacified. A short sphincterotomy and 12 mm transpapillary dilation with a balloon were performed, and the stones and fragments were removed. The clearance of the bile duct was corroborated. The conclusion was: cholangitis, resolved choledocholithiasis, short sphincterotomy, 12 mm transpapillary dilation, biliary balloon sweep, intra-diverticular papilla.

The patient subsequently had a favorable evolution, with no data of complications associated with the endoscopic procedure, with evident clinical improvement and normalization of laboratory studies. Resolution of the acute renal injury and neurological status was also reported. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed seven days after ERCP, which was performed without incident, so the patient was discharged to home after 16 days of hospital stay.
