79-year-old female patient, right-handed, who presented with a clinical picture of a month and a half of evolution, characterized by the presence of a necrotic tumor at the ulnar edge of the fifth finger of the left hand. The patient reported having suffered a sharp injury with a glass in the region where the tumor subsequently developed. Initially evaluated in the office for follow-up of the injury; reported the appearance of said tumor and the progressive growth of the same one month after the initial trauma. On physical examination, she presented a 3 cm diameter, black, ulcerated, necrotic lesion with signs of perilesional cutaneous suffering in relation to the proximal phalanx, with no signs of active bleeding at the time of evaluation. She also presented hypoesthesia of the ulnar edge of the finger, showing a two-point discrimination capacity of 15 mm. The patient had undergone an ultrasound and an angiography that reported the presence of a 10 × 7 mm hypoechoic image that could correspond to a hematoma in the painful region reported by the patient. Due to the slow evolution and the progressive growth of the tumor, surgical resection of the same was indicated. The surgical procedure was performed with the patient in dorsal decubitus under general anesthesia with her affected upper limb on a hand table. Through a Bruner volar approach, the resection of the tumor was performed; it was observed that the same was in continuity with the ulnar collateral digital artery of the fifth finger. The resection of the inA lucid tumor included the excision of the segment of the digital artery that was in relation to the same, since it presented irreparable damage. Subsequently, under microscopic magnification, heparin was washed from both arterial ends and an arterial end-to-end anastomosis of the ulnar collateral digital artery of the fifth finger was performed using micro-surgical technique, using Nylon 10-0. Subsequently, the hemostatic cuff was removed, confirming the patency of the vascular suture. Also, during the surgical procedure, the ulnar collateral nerve was found to be intact, so only a neurolysis of the same was performed. In the immediate postoperative period, immobilization was performed with a volar hand-held cast to protect the vascular suture. Two weeks later, the skin sutures were removed and rehabilitation of finger mobility was initiated. Results of the clinical case The patient was evaluated weekly until the removal of sutures and then monthly until discharge. She presented a favorable evolution without development of a new tumor or associated complications to the wound. She evolved with a visual analog scale of pain of 0/10 in both rest and activity and fully recovered the range of joint mobility at six weeks. In relation to the sensory deficit, at the six-week check-up she continued with a two-point discrimination of 15 mm, being 5 mm at twelve months. The resected tumor was sent to pathology confirming the diagnosis of pseudoaneurysm.
