A 57-year-old man was referred to our hospital for New York Heart Association functional class 4 HF and extremely elevated liver enzymes. He had palpitation from 2 weeks ago which was accompanied with orthopnoea and serious fatigue on admission, despite being healthy without any history of AF. The electrocardiography showed AF tachycardia of approximately 180 beats per minute, and the bedside echocardiography showed low LVEF of 20%. In addition to fatigue, coexisting hypotension and elevated lactate of 13 mmol/L indicated LOS. Electrical cardioversion was conducted, barely terminated AF successfully on day 1, and restored blood pressure and urinalysis response to intravenous furosemide. Intravenous landiolol hydrochloride was administered for AF tachycardia. HF and LOS were treated with intravenous dobutamine, intravenous furosemide and oral tolvaptan, and non-invasive positive pressure ventilation under mild sedation using intravenous dexmedetomidine hydrochloride. On day 2, torsade de pointes suddenly occurred subsequent to a premature atrial beat in a long-short manner of coupling interval with QT prolongation. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation with electric cardioversions, intratracheal intubation, and establishment of mechanical ventilation were carried out, which achieved return of spontaneous circulation. Temporary atrium-atrium inhibited pacing was emergently established to shorten prolonged QT and maintain regular heart rate. However, AF tachycardia recurred repetitively. Repeated electrical cardioversions failed to terminate AF. Hypotension continued along with oliguria. The liver dysfunction was further exacerbated with aspartate aminotransferase of 11,708 U/L. The intravenous amiodarone was started. On day 3, AF tachycardia with hypotension still occurred despite intravenous amiodarone and gradually became resistant to electrical cardioversions. The atrial tachycardia (AT) and common-type atrial flutter (AFL) appeared in addition to AF. On day 4, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) was diagnosed according to the Japanese Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis criteria, with DIC score of 6 points. Acute kidney injury was diagnosed according to the Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes criteria, fulfilling both serum creatine and urine output criteria. At this time, because the patient’s general condition was becoming worse and more resistant to treatment, we decided to perform semi-urgent rescue ablation to AF and common-type AFL for acute-phase rhythm control to treat HF and MOF.

The patient’s family agreed with our treatment policy and signed informed consent for the semi-urgent rescue ablation procedure.

On the same day, prior to the procedure, trans-oesophageal echocardiography was performed and found no detectable thrombus in the left atrium (LA). PVI to the AF and cavotricuspid isthmus ablation to common-type AFL were planned. Fortunately, the patient’s haemodynamics did not collapse at the time of ablation, we performed our institutional standard procedure including 3-D mapping. The cryoballoon was chosen as a PVI catheter because cryoballoon ablation was expected to have a shorter procedure time and lesser thrombogenic effect than other catheter types. A 20-polar catheter (Response™; Abbott, St. Paul, MN, USA) was placed in the coronary sinus. A three-dimensional electroanatomical mapping was constituted by a cardiac mapping system (EnSite velocity™; Abbott). Transseptal access was obtained using the standard Brockenbrough needle technique with intracardiac ultrasound and fluoroscopic guidance, and an 8-Fr SL0 sheath (Swartz™; Abbott) was inserted into the LA. The cardiac geometry including all pulmonary veins (PV) was established using a 20-pole circular mapping catheter (Reflexion Spiral™; Abbott). No left atriography was conducted because of acute kidney injury. Then, we changed the SL0 sheath to a steerable sheath (FlexCath Advance™; Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) and inserted a 28-mm second-generation cryoballoon catheter (Arctic Front Advance™; Medtronic Inc.). In each PV, the cryoballoon was placed at the ostium of each PV in turns, and cryoballoon ablation was performed after complete occlusion of each PV as confirmed by the minimum amount of contrast agent. During cryoenergy deliveries, the oesophageal temperature and diaphragmatic compound motor action potential were monitored to avoid LA-oesophageal fistula and phrenic nerve injury. Additional touch-up radiofrequency ablation using FlexAbility™ (Abbott) to the residual LA-PV conduction gap at the bottom of the right inferior PV after cryoballoon ablation was conducted, and complete PVI was achieved (detailed PVI procedural data). Subsequently, a 20-polar catheter (Livewire™; Abbott) was placed around the tricuspid annulus, confirming that the AFL was cavotricuspid-isthmus dependent. The cavotricuspid isthmus ablation for common-type AFL was performed by standard procedure using radiofrequency ablation catheter and successfully achieved bidirectional block. The whole procedure was finished uneventfully and restored sinus rhythm and blood pressure of approximately 110 mmHg.

Thereafter, AF and other atrial arrhythmias seldom occurred and was terminated by single electrical cardioversion. Normal blood pressure and urine output were restored. The hepatic and renal functions were improved gradually as well. On day 7, intravenous amiodarone was discontinued. On day 11, the patient was weaned from the ventilator support. The DIC was restored eventually. On day 18, pulmonary abscess that required long-term antimicrobial treatment was cured. On day 22, AF recurred, but oral amiodarone was restarted and suppressed the AF. Although the patient had a pulmonary abscess that required approximately one-month antimicrobial treatment after ventilator withdrawal, he was discharged alive on day 72. The elective coronary angiography and left ventriculography revealed no significant coronary stenosis and LVEF normalisation, diagnosing that the tachycardia-induced cardiomyopathy due to AF tachycardia was the cause of reduced left ventricular function. For 2 years, albeit the discontinuation of HF drugs and amiodarone, the patient has been free from HF symptoms and atrial arrhythmias including AF and AFL.