A 20-year-old male working as a farmer, free of past medical and surgical history was admitted to the emergency department complaining of severe colic pain in nature in the right flank region, radiating to the surrounding area and groin. The pain is associated with high-grade fever and recurrent vomiting. He reported painless hematuria, fever, and flu-like symptoms 2 weeks before admission to the hospital. Fever and flu-like symptoms had been treated with the use of analgesia. He had no previous history of urinary stone disease or urinary tract infections. Physical examination showed tenderness in the right groin and positive right costovertebral angle tenderness, otherwise, it was normal. A complete blood count test, urinalysis, stool analysis, and abdominal ultrasound were performed. Laboratory analysis showed moderate leucocytosis of 20 000/mm3 (normal range: 4.5-11 × 103/mm3), relative neutrophilia, and relative lymphopenia. The serum creatinine was normal. Urinalysis showed +3 hematuria and calcium oxalate crystals. The stool analysis showed Entamoeba histolytica present, with no ova or worms detected, and the rest of the stool analysis was normal. Abdominal ultrasound showed a hyperechoic cylindrical structure measuring 6 mm in diameter and 6 cm in length in the distal part of the right ureter involving the ureterovesical junction (UVJ) associated with minimal right-sided hydronephrosis and a mild increase in the echogenicity of the right kidney. There is no definite renal stone; otherwise, both kidneys are normal in size, site, and shape. Doppler imaging was not performed.

He was hospitalized in the urology department; conservative treatment was initially pursued. A contrast CT scan was done, which showed a 6-cm tubular-shaped structure (a foreign body) located at the distal ureter about 2.5 cm inside the bladder. The structure shows soft tissue density in the wall and fluid density in the inner aspect, causing minimal right-sided hydroureteronephrosis. An axial image at the level of the distal part of the right ureter shows a dilated ureter and rounded filling defect representing the obstructing parasite. Axial CT image at the level of UVJ at 10 min delay phase showing the parasite partially passing through the vesicoureteral junction. Otherwise, the right kidney is normal in size, echotexture, and cortical thickness with no stones or masses. There is no evidence of a fistula between the gastrointestinal and urinary tract.

A ureteroscopy was performed at the hospital. During the procedure, a 6-mm wax-like structure was discovered in the distal third of the right ureter, accompanied by a significant amount of pus. Additionally, a polyp-like projection was observed within the ureteroscope view. The extracted object measured 6 cm in length, had a brown colouration, was not moving structure, and displayed a tight elastic consistency. To facilitate pus drainage, a Double J (ureteral stenting) was inserted. Subsequently, the dead specimen underwent pathological review, identifying it as A lumbricoides. The patient received a 400 mg albendazole tablet once daily for 3 days and experienced an uneventful recovery.