A 38-year-old, O negative, pregnant woman in her fourth gestation was referred to our hospital for pregnancy surveillance. A first trimester spontaneous abortion resulted from the first gestation; no specific exams were conducted. The second pregnancy fetal demise was diagnosed at 16 weeks of pregnancy. Only a placental intervillositis was found on laboratory workup study.

On the third pregnancy, serological studies and sonographic evaluation were normal until 34 weeks of gestation. In the third trimester ultrasound, a left ventriculomegaly (VMG) (10 mm) was detected. A live newborn was born by vaginal delivery at term, with an Apgar score 9/10/10 at first, second and third minutes respectively and neonatal weight of 2,830 g. After delivery, physical exam revealed petechiae spread across the chest, left flank, and abdomen. A severe thrombocytopenia (32 × 109/L) was diagnosed requiring platelet transfusion. The neurological examination was normal, however transfontanellar ultrasound confirmed the VMG previously diagnosed, measuring 10 mm, without any sign of ICH. No further imagological studies were conducted. The placenta anatomopathological report identified mild chronic intervillositis.

Neonatal thrombocytopenia etiology assessment was performed. Although maternal platelet count was normal, the maternal and paternal platelet antigen serological typing revealed that the father was homozygotic for HPA-1a and the mother was homozygotic for HPA-1b. Moreover, maternal serum was positive for HPA antibodies. In respect to HLA genotypes father was homozygotic HPA-1a and mother was homozygotic to HPA-1b and maternal serum was positive for HPA-1a antibodies. Thus, the diagnosis of FNAIT was established. At four years old by the time of the mothers fourth pregnancy, the only known clinical impairment was VI nerve palsy.

On the fourth pregnancy, high dose IGIV (1 g/kg/week) was started at 14 weeks of gestation and prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg/day) at 20 weeks. The dose administered remained stable throughout the pregnancy. In the second trimester routine serologic evaluation, a positive anti-treponemal test and a toxoplasmosis seroconversion were identified. Previous syphilis screening was assessed with a VDRL test, with a negative result. In the second trimester, after positive treponemal test, reflex non treponemal testing (VDRL) was negative. The patient was previously not immune to toxoplasmosis but by second trimester a positive IgG with negative IgM were offered in the routine evaluation. Time lapse between first and second trimester analysis was 15 weeks. After debating all possibilities, and taking into account the patient wishes, treatment of a possible late latent syphilis and prevention of fetal toxoplasmosis was initiated. Remaining pregnancy was uneventful with no recorded signs of fetal affection in ultrasound examinations.

A cesarean delivery for breech presentation was decided at 37 weeks of pregnancy. The neonate was born with 2,660 g and an Apgar score of 9/10/10 at first, second and third minutes respectively. Newborn platelet count from umbilical cord was 262 × 109/L and physical examination was unremarkable. Currently with 12 months, the child has normal neurodevelopment. Reassessment of maternal serologies confirmed toxoplasmosis IgG and anti-treponemal negativity, six months after delivery.