A 72-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with bilateral lower limb edema for 7 days. The patient previously had hypertension and diabetes mellitus, and she experienced recurrent bilateral lower limb edema and generalized a recurrent cutaneous rash without receiving comprehensive systemic treatment in the last 2 years. The patient’s vital signs were within normal limits, with a blood pressure of 140/80 mm Hg. The initial physical examination revealed bilateral lower extremity edema, particularly the right ankle, and skin pigmentation. Laboratory examinations revealed blood counts, C-reactive protein, creatinine kinase, albumin, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time, serum biochemistry assays, immunoglobulin, and complement levels were all within the normal range. The chest and abdominal computed tomography scans revealed no notable abnormalities. Urine routine analysis was positive for occult blood.

On the 7th day of admission, urine routine analysis was positive for occult blood and urine protein. Serum biochemical tests revealed high creatinine levels, and the patient had abnormal kidney function. On the 8th day of admission, purpura emerged on the lower limbs and back. We identified the patient with HSP and administered vitamin C and other symptomatic treatments. On the 12th day of admission, the patient complained of abdominal pain, so we urgently reviewed the abdominal computed tomography. It showed segmental thickening of the intestinal wall and “concentric circles” in the ileocecal part, so we diagnosed intussusception. The patient’s conservative treatment was ineffective, so she underwent emergency surgery. During the operation, the ileum was lodged in the cecum to cause the intussusception. The intestinal mucosa is congested and edematous, while the intestinal wall is severely edematous and hemorrhagic. On the first postoperative day, the patient exhibited widespread purpura throughout the body; therefore, we administered glucocorticoids for symptomatic treatment. Unfortunately, the patient’s urine output gradually decreased, there was depressed edema of the lower limbs and renal function gradually deteriorated. Eventually, the patient developed acute renal failure. On the 6th surgical day, the patient underwent bedside hemofiltration and hemoperfusion therapies. After treatment, the patient’s edema gradually resolved, and her condition showed improvement. However, on the 9th postoperative day, the patient suddenly developed symptoms of heart failure, coughed up an amount of pink foamy sputum, with extensive wet rales in both lungs, blood pressure dropped. Two hours later, the electrocardiographic monitoring revealed ventricular escape rhythm, we immediately resuscitated the patient, and the patient resumed sinus rhythm after 5 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Laboratory tests revealed higher levels of troponin, myoglobin and creatine kinase isoenzymes. The repeat transthoracic echocardiogram showed new-onset severe left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction with an LV ejection fraction of 38% (LV ejection fraction was 58% on admission). We considered myocardial involvement as the culprit. However, her family abandoned treatment, and the patient died.