80-year-old woman with previous diagnoses of colonic diverticulosis and stage IV breast cancer with liver, bone and lung metastases, for which she began treatment with ribociclib and fulvestrant 3 years ago; currently in complete remission. She reported twenty days prior to the consultation abdominal pain, localized in epigastrium and left hypaxomenum, intermittent, aggravated after eating, associated with biliary nausea and vomiting that alleviated the pain. She denied fever or other accompanying symptoms. She consulted our center 10 days prior to admission, where ultrasound and laboratory studies were performed without pathological findings. Due to persistence of symptoms, she was admitted to the institution.  The following was found: BP 140/90 mmHg, Fc 100 LPM, Fr 18 RPM, Sat 98% (0.21), afebrile. Good peripheral perfusion, distended abdomen, not painful to superficial or deep palpation, without signs of peritoneal reaction. Laboratory: HTO 34%, Hb 11.8 g/dl, GB 4500/mm3, platelets 230 000/mm3, Cr 0.6 mg/dl, Ur 13 mg/dl, Na 139 mEq/l, K 3.7 mEq/l, Cl 101 mEq/l, pH 7.37, HCO3- 22, lactate 1.6 mmol/ and LDH 212 IU/l. In the abdominal and pelvic tomography with intravenous contrast, pneumoperitoneum was evident with predominance of the upper abdomen and parietal pneumatosis of intestinal loops and calcifications in the abdominal aorta. No free peritoneal fluid was observed. Due to suspicion of intestinal ischemia, emergency laparotomy was performed, where cupuliform structures were found in the small intestine, from 10 cm distal to the Treitz angle to 1 meter of the ileocecal valve, compatible with air cysts that crackled to the touch.

Vitality was preserved and there were no signs of necrosis or perforation (Fig. 2 A and B). It was decided not to resect. In the postoperative period, ceftriaxone metronidazole was administered, which was discontinued on day five after the negative result of the culture of abdominal fluid. She also completed a period of digestive rest associated with total parenteral nutrition. She evolved without the requirement of vasoactive drugs and without signs of peritoneal irritation. The patient was discharged on day ten without the antineoplastic medication. She was evaluated one month after admission, a new tomography of the abdomen and pelvis was performed which showed complete resolution of the abdominal picture.
