A 20-year-old male quarterback for a University varsity football team was tackled by another player in the first quarter, injuring his right lower extremity. He was found to have a right posterior hip dislocation upon assessment by the team surgeon. A closed reduction was performed on the sideline. Neurovascular status was intact before and after reduction. However, the hip remained unstable and required two further reductions. He was subsequently transferred to a Level I trauma centre for further investigations and management.

X-rays of the pelvis demonstrated a posterior fracture dislocation of the right hip. Under conscious sedation, he underwent closed reduction of the hip and was placed in a knee immobilization splint with the hip and knee in extension. CT of the pelvis post-reduction demonstrated comminuted fractures of the femoral head and a fracture of the posterior acetabular wall, consistent with a Pipkin IV injury. He was admitted to hospital and underwent surgical management one day post-injury.

Surgical management
The patient was positioned lateral decubitus. A Gibson approach to the right hip was utilized, along with a greater trochanter digastric osteotomy. The damaged portions of the gluteus minimus muscle were debrided. The posterior wall acetabular fracture was visualized, with detached labrum noted to be attached to the fracture. Anterior surgical dislocation of the hip was performed. Free comminuted chondral cancellous fragments were removed from the acetabulum. The femoral head fracture was fixed with two 3.0 mm partially-threaded headless compression screws. The infra-foveal femoral head was microfractured using multiple 2.5 mm drill holes in the region where there was unreconstructible chondral injury. The hip was reduced. Primary repair of the labrum was performed using two suture anchors.

A 3-hole 1/3 tubular plate was utilized as a spring plate over the small posterior wall fragment, secured with a 3.5 mm cortical screw. A 7-hole posterior wall reconstruction buttress plate was then contoured and applied across the spring plate. The greater trochanteric osteotomy was reduced and secured using 4.5 mm and 3.5 mm cortical screws. Fluoroscopy images demonstrated appropriate reduction and implant placement. Piriformis and external rotator tendons were repaired through bone tunnels. Soft tissues were repaired and closed accordingly.

Rehabilitation
Postoperatively, the patient was restricted to foot-flat weightbearing to the right lower extremity, no more than 70 degrees of hip flexion, and no hip adduction or internal rotation past neutral for 6 weeks. 6 weeks of DVT prophylaxis with enoxaparin in hospital and ASA 81 mg PO BID upon discharge was prescribed. The patient was discharged from hospital at 1-week post-surgery. X-rays at 2 weeks post-op demonstrated hardware in place with congruent hip joint.

At 6 weeks post-op, X-rays of the right hip demonstrated healed greater trochanter osteotomy and some disuse osteopenia of the femoral head. He was cleared to start progressive weightbearing as tolerated with 25 % weight increase weekly until full weightbearing in 1 month. Hip range of motion restrictions was removed and he was started on strengthening of the hip abductors, extensors, adductors, and flexors and his targeted return to sport program.

At 4 months post-surgery, x-rays continued to demonstrate a well-reduced hip with symmetrical congruent weightbearing surface, maintained hardware, without evidence of avascular necrosis. Mild heterotopic ossification in the supraacetabular region was noted. He was cleared for impact exercise including jogging.

Return to sport
At 6 months post-surgery, the patient was performing pain-free jogging, swimming, and weight training. On physical examination, he had 120 degrees of hip flexion, 45 degrees of external rotation, and 20 degrees of internal rotation, comparable to the contralateral side. No popping or crepitus was noted with hip range of motion. He was cleared for return to sport specific training. At 10 months post-injury, the patient returned to full-time play as the starting quarterback of his University varsity football team. He remained pain-free and completed the entire season with no complications at 1-year post-injury.