We present a 15-min-old male neonate born to a para-four mother who did not remember her LNMP but claimed to be amenorrheic for the past nine months. His mother had antenatal care at the nearby health center twice and was uneventful. However, she had no early obstetric ultrasound. Otherwise, she has no history of chronic medical illnesses like diabetes mellitus and hypertension. During her current pregnancy, she had no fever, headache or blurring of vision. She had never used any drug other than ferrous sulfate throughout this pregnancy. Her prior children are all healthy and alive. On her arrival at our hospital, she had vaginal bleeding of two hours duration. Subsequently, she was admitted with a diagnosis of third-trimester pregnancy plus multigravida plus antepartum hemorrhage secondary to abruptio placentae plus severe oligohydramnios plus breech presentation.

On pelvic examination, she had active vaginal bleeding. Obstetric ultrasound was done on arrival. Accordingly, the gestational age was 34 weeks, the placenta was fundal with a retroplacental clot, and amniotic fluid was significantly decreased with a single deepest pocket of 1.5 cm. The estimated fetal weight was 2.4 kg and breech presentation. Other investigations of the mother are blood group AB+, VDRL=negative, RBS=120 mg/dL, on CBC, white blood cells=9000, hemoglobin=11 gm/dL, platelet=180,000 and neutrophil=60%.

After informed written consent was taken emergency cesarean section was done for already mentioned indications to extract a live neonate weighing 2.01 kg with APGAR scores of 5 and 6 at first and fifth minutes, respectively.

The neonate did not cry and was resuscitated for five minutes. He was then transferred to neonatal intensive care unit for further management and investigations. On arrival, the neonate was in respiratory distress. His vital signs were pulse rate 160 beats per minute, respiratory rate 70 breaths per minute, temperature 33.4 degrees centigrade and saturation was 60% off oxygen. On HEENT anterior fontanelle measures 2 cm by 2 cm and has micrognathia and short neck. On the respiratory system, there were intercostal and subcostal retractions, labored breathing and grunting. On precordial examination, s1 and s2 well heard, no murmur or gallop rhythm. On the musculoskeletal system there is bilateral upper extremity shortening, the right lower limb was normal in position and structure, the left leg rotated inward (bent in medially) at the knee joint and foot was normal in structure. On neurologic examination he was lethargic, the tone was normotonic on lower right extremity and the Moro reflex was difficult to assess. Laboratory investigation showed blood group=A+, CRP=reactive, WBC=30,000, neutrophil=54%, lymphocytes=21.1%, HGB=8 gm/dL and platelet=150,000. X-ray imaging was done and it shows extreme shortening of upper extremities. The left lower limb is internally rotated. Echocardiography was normal. With an assessment of late preterm (34–36 weeks by Ballard score) plus low birth weight plus appropriate for gestational age plus phocomelia plus perinatal asphyxia plus early onset neonatal sepsis he was managed with oxygen support, maintenance fluid, and intravenous antibiotics. The neonate died after three days of hospital stay.