59-year-old man with a history of high blood pressure and active smoking. Consultation in the Primary Care Emergency Service for a 45-minute picture of oppressive chest pain radiating to the epigastrium and back associated with neurovegetative symptoms, paresis and paresthesia of the lower extremities (EEII). The ECG shows elevation of the ST segment in the anterior and inferior wall. The infarction network is activated and is referred to a hospital with a haemodynamic service for primary angioplasty, entering the ward 3 hours after the picture began.

6Fr radial sheath puncture was performed. Coronary catheters were advanced and injected into the ostium of the right coronary artery (RCA). The aortogram showed a suggestive image of a compressive hematoma and possible aortic dissection. Computed tomographic angiography (CT angiography) of the aorta was performed and showed a flap of dissection in the ascending aorta, consistent with a Stanford classification type A aortic dissection with intramural hematoma extending to the RCA and left coronary trunk (LCT) to the anterior descending artery (ADA). Aortic root replacement was performed with a 18 mm Dacron tube plus a single bridge with the saphenous vein reversed to the RCA.

In the immediate post-operative examinations, total CK of 310 U/L (normal value VN: 0-308 U/L) and CK MB of 52 U/L (VN: 0-25 U/L) were noted. He had a complex evolution with polytransfusion and high requirements of vasoactive drugs (VAD), with evidence of cardiac tamponade, requiring a surgical re-examination in which the drain was removed, the dose of the VAD was reduced until it was discontinued and extubation was achieved. The neurological evaluation confirmed a medullar syndrome with motor disorder of the type flaccid paraplegia of the lower limbs with neurogenic bladder and intestinal disorder. The nuclear magnetic resonance of the cervical and dorsal column concluded extensive medullar injury from T7 to the medullar cone. After 31 days of hospitalization, he was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital from which he was discharged. He is currently a cardiovascular asymptomatic patient, retired due to disability.
