Patient information: A 35-year-old man presented at the emergency department at night with acute lower back pain that had been present for 8 weeks but was getting worse despite optimal analgesic treatment. He reported a common surfing injury 5 weeks before the onset of the pain. He had already consulted twice about his complaints, a radiograph of the lower back had been taken and had shown no anomalies. Physiotherapy sessions had been prescribed without improvement.

He also describes the appearance of a cold sore a few days before the onset of the back pain. The patient has no particular ATCDs and has moderate consumption of tobacco, alcohol and cannabis. The intensity of the pain is greater at night and the patient sleeps little. These pains are described as intense burns.

Clinical findings: the clinical examination in the emergency department revealed a disappearance of all facial mimicry. The patient said he had consulted his general practitioner about this problem a week before; the latter had concluded that it was a case of paralysis a frigore due to a virus and no diagnosis and targeted treatment had been initiated. The facial paralysis was initially unilateral on the left at the time of the consultation but had become bilateral 48 hours later. The patient was not overly concerned because the treating doctor had reassured him about the trivial nature of the condition, especially since the nocturnal lower back pains were bothering him more.

Diagnostic approach: the anamnesis describes a difficult opening of the eyes without visual disturbance, a modification of the taste and an absence of cephalgia. The clinical examination shows an apyretic patient with a facial diplagia with a sigle of Bell present bilaterally. There is no sensory deficit in the face. The ocular movements are normal without nystagmus. The pupils are isocore and reflective.

He has a slight stiff neck with no deficit of strength in the 4 limbs. His reflexes are moderately diminished in the 4 limbs (2/4). The cutaneous-plantar reflex is in bilateral flexion. The Barré held and his gait is normal. He has a hyperesthesia in the dorsolumbar with Lasègue present at 60° bilaterally.

Therapeutic intervention: In view of the above, a lumbar CT scan is proposed before lumbar puncture and is normal.

The lumbar puncture is clear and demonstrates the presence of 29 nucleated elements with a predominance of lymphocytes (75%) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and the very high presence of immunoglobulin M (IGM) type immunoglobulins of Borrelia in the CSF (> 190 UA/ml) as well as a proteinorachia of 3.662 g/L.

PCR for Herpes simplex 1 and 2 is negative. Serology for Herpes simplex virus (HSV) and Herpes zoster virus (HZV) are negative. Serology for Borrelia is doubtful for the IGM and positive for the immunoglobulin G (IGG).

Follow-up and results: we concluded to a disseminated early phase neuroborreliosis; with facial diplagia, a lymphocytic meningitis and a dorsal-lumbar as manifestations.

The police background check revealed that the patient had stayed in the Landes for 3 months previously and had been bitten by mosquitoes and possibly a tick. He also described an erythema in his armpit that had lasted 4 weeks but was labelled as a sweat rub.

The patient was then given initial and rapid antibiotic therapy for 14 days with 2 grams of intravenous ceftriaxone daily, associated with acyclovir at the beginning; the latter was discontinued as soon as the herpes serologies were negative. After a few days, an improvement in symptoms was observed, both in terms of paralysis and pain. After four weeks, the neurological examination was normalised with a total recovery of the diplegia.
