A 52-year-old Japanese woman experienced respiratory discomfort and cough for several months. Because her symptoms did not improve, she presented to a local hospital. Computed tomography (CT) suggested multiple systemic metastases of right renal cell carcinoma; therefore, the axillary lymph node biopsy was performed, and she was referred to our department.

Although the blood biochemical test results revealed elevated levels of aspartate aminotransferase (to 137 IU/L) and alanine aminotransferase (to 166 IU/L) that were likely caused by liver metastasis, other remarkable findings were not observed. A pathological examination of lymph node biopsy specimens performed at the previous hospital showed an infiltration pattern and positivity for paired box 8, suggesting metastases of tumors arising from the Müllerian duct or renal cell carcinoma. Lymph node metastases of renal cell carcinoma were suspected because of negative estrogen receptor and progesterone receptor results.

CT revealed a tumorous lesion with irregular margins at the inferior pole of the right kidney. Positron emission tomography-CT revealed a mass in the right kidney and multiple metastases throughout the body.

When the patient presented to our department, the presumed condition was advanced renal cancer; therefore, we did not perform nephrectomy. Instead, we initiated drug therapy after the CT-guided biopsy results confirmed the histological type.

The patient's general condition deteriorated 1 week after the biopsy was performed. Although the pathological diagnosis had not yet been confirmed, nivolumab treatment was administered. However, the patient's general condition did not improve, and she died 1 week after treatment initiation.

Subsequently, the pathological diagnosis was confirmed, and the histological examination revealed an invasive renal tumor. Large tumor cells with papillary and tubular growth and large vacuolated and irregular nuclei were observed. Additionally, strong inflammatory cell infiltration in the stroma was observed without obvious sickle cell changes in the erythrocytes.

Differentiation of the renal tumors indicated renal invasive urothelial carcinoma, papillary renal cell carcinoma, fumarate hydratase-deficient renal cell carcinoma, anaplastic lymphoma kinase-rearranged renal cell carcinoma, collecting duct carcinoma, and SMARCB1-deficient renal medullary carcinoma. Immunostaining results indicated a diagnosis of RMC without SCH.