39-year-old woman with a history of CKD stage 5 on thrice-weekly dialysis 10 years ago, HPS and arterial hypertension. She consults at the surgery polyclinic for the need of total thyroidectomy in the context of long-standing non-toxic multinodular goiter.

The physical examination highlights increased facial volume with bilateral growth of the maxilla and mandible, a tumour of the hard palate and floor of the mouth, increased interdental space and loss of the nasal commissure with widening of the nostrils, which determine a leonine face.

The patient reported a painless and progressive increase in facial volume over the past year, associated with dysphagia, hoarseness, rhinolalia and respiratory difficulty in the last 2 months. A head and neck computed axial tomography (CAT) was performed without contrast, which showed bone widening of the cranial vault, base of the skull and facial mass, predominantly in the mandibular and maxillary bones, with the presence of tunnel-like images compatible with uremic bone leontiasis. Preoperative examinations were requested, which are described in Table 1, where a PTH of 4557 pg/ml, a calcemia of 10.6 mg/dl and a phosphemia of 5.5 mg/dl stand out.

Total thyroidectomy was planned and subtotal parathyroidectomy was decided in the context of a poorly managed LOU and HPS despite dialysis and pharmacological treatment. The patient was admitted for elective surgery and, in the context of a difficult airway, nasal intubation was decided using fibrobronchoscopy. However, after two unsuccessful attempts, it was decided to perform vigil orotracheal intubation with a fibrobronchoscope, achieving the installation of the endotracheal tube and subsequent sedation of the patient. Total thyroidectomy and subtotal parathyroidectomy were performed without incident. In the early postoperative period, she was transferred to the surgical intermediate service where she received scheduled haemodialysis and postoperative care, and she evolved satisfactorily without presenting complications such as hypocalcaemia. During the first day of the postoperative period, a decrease in PTH to 120 pg/mL was noted, without evidence of hyperkalaemia, a hungry bone effect or other biochemical complications. The patient decided to continue management and subsequent monitoring in another centre.
