A 62-year-old Japanese male was diagnosed with Stage IV advanced rectal cancer with liver metastasis. There was no personal medical history other than rectal cancer, and he has smoked 20 cigarettes per day for 40 years. He was initially treated with capecitabine plus oxaliplatin and bevacizumab as first-line chemotherapy. After 11 cycles of the regimen, the patient developed a skin rash, which was induced by infusion of these agents; thus, the treatment was changed to TAS-102 regimen. Approximately 2 months after initiation of TAS-102, the patient developed high fever and was emergently admitted to our hospital. The patient had received antibiotics from a few days before this visit, and vital signs on admission were as follows: blood pressure 100/68 mmHg, heart rate 82 beats/min, body temperature 37.4°C, and oxygen saturation was 90% on room air. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest revealed bilateral diffuse ground glass opacities in all lung lobes with traction bronchiectasis. Laboratory findings were as follows: white blood cell count 3400/μL (31.1% of lymphocytes, 1.8% of eosinophils), C-reactive protein level 9.96 mg/dL, and lactate dehydrogenase level 275 IU/L. Serum Krebs von den Lungen-6 and surfactant protein D levels were 528 IU/mL (normal < 500 IU/L) and 235 ng/mL (normal < 110 ng/mL), respectively. There were no elevated levels of serum antibodies associated with autoimmune diseases, and no evidence of any infectious agent, including general bacteria and acid-fast bacillus in sputum, on urine and blood culture. Although we initiated broad-spectrum antibiotics after emergent admission, the patient’s oxygen levels worsened. The patient then received non-invasive positive pressure ventilation, followed by nasal high-flow oxygen therapy and steroid pulse therapy using methylprednisolone 1 g for 3 days as treatment for suspected TAS-102-induced interstitial pneumonia. The patient was treated with 1 mg/kg of corticosteroid after steroid pulse therapy. The corticosteroid dose was then gradually decreased. During these treatments, the drug lymphocyte stimulation test result for TAS-102 was positive (stimulation index: 251%); therefore, the patient was diagnosed with TAS-102-induced interstitial pneumonia based on the Japanese Respiratory Society (JRS) guideline for management of drug-induced lung disease. Oxygenation and chest radiological findings improved after corticosteroid treatment, and the patient was discharged 23 days after emergency admission.