The patient was an 87-year-old male with a long-standing history of chronic heart failure spanning three decades. After suffering from acute myocardial infarction and heart failure for 20 days, the patient developed a pulmonary infection and was transferred to our medical center (Emergency Department, Chinese PLA ). On admission, the patient presented with poor general characteristics but was conscious. His vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 143/71 mmHg; respiratory rate, 18 breaths/min; heart rate, 57 beats/min; oxygen saturation, 99% in ambient air; and body temperature, 39 °C. Blood tests revealed the following values: white blood cells (WBCs), 8.75 × 109/l (neutrophils, 88.2%; lymphocytes, 5.9%; and monocytes, 4.7%); creatinine, 1.393 mg/dl; interleukin-6, 22.7 pg/ml; procalcitonin, 0.083 ng/ml; and pro-brain natriuretic peptide (pro-BNP), 15,648 pg/ml. The remaining blood parameters were within normal limits. A bedside chest radiograph revealed bilateral pulmonary infection. We referred to the laboratory results from the previous hospital and treated the patient with meropenem for anti-infection. And diuretic, vasodilator, and cardiotonic drugs were given to correct heart failure. The patient’s levels of infection markers, troponin, and urinary natriuretic peptide precursors exhibited a persistent increasing trend. On hospital day (HD)10, the patient’s white blood cells increased to 13.3 × 109/l (neutrophils, 88.3%; lymphocytes, 7.7%; and monocytes, 7.7%). Other parameters were as follows: C-reactive protein, 7.8 mg/dl; interleukin-6, 5.9 pg/ml; procalcitonin, 2.04 ng/ml; troponin T, 0.595 ng/ml; and pro-BNP, 33,418 pg/ml. Echocardiography revealed frequent wide QRS waves, and the heart rate increased to 124 beats/min. Sputum culture showed growth of C.gilardii (Table 1). After a comprehensive assessment, we modified the antibiotic regimen to cefoperazone sulbactam and minocycline on the basis of the results of drug sensitivity testing. The levels of infection markers and pro-BNP continued to decrease. Subsequent sputum culture did not show growth of C.gilardii. However, on HD 17, fever developed, levels of infection markers and pro-BNP again increased, and a set of cultures were performed from blood obtained from an upper-extremity vein. On HD 20, a blood culture revealed a critical number of Gram-positive cocci, and linezolid was added to the treatment regimen. On HD 21, the patient died. Later blood culture revealed growth of Staphylococcus epidermidis. The patient’s pressure sores did not suppurate, therefore, no culture was performed. Given that Staphylococcus epidermidis routinely lives on the skin, we speculate that Staphylococcus epidermidis may have entered the bloodstream through pressure sores.

Microbiological analysis
The bacterial isolates were cultured in a 35 °C incubator on Columbia blood agar plates incubated for 24 h, there were small, grey–white, round, raised, opaque colonies with neat edges. Gram staining was negative, and the bacterial cells were arranged singly or in pairs, without spores, and were medium−sized and rod shaped. The VITEK mass spectrometry detection system identified the strain as C. gilardii, with a confidence level of 99.9%.