62-year-old male with a history of diabetes mellitus with poor metabolic control and hypertension. About 15 days before the consultation he presented isolated febrile episodes that then became daily and 24 hours before his consultation he presented neck stiffness and altered consciousness. On admission he was febrile, confused and disoriented in time and space. On physical examination he presented neck stiffness with positive Kernig and Brudzinski signs. In the laboratory examinations there was a glycaemia of 584 mg/dL, haematocrit 36.8%, leukocyte count 19,600 ml/uL, platelet count 74,000/µL, creatinemia 1.94 ml/dL, total bilirubin 0.9 mg/dL and transaminases within normal parameters. A brain axial tomography was performed that did not show abscesses or other lesions. The abdominal tomography showed a collection in the segments V and VIII of the liver. A lumbar puncture was performed, from which a purulent CSF was obtained. It was not possible to perform cell counting of the sample, but Gram staining showed abundant leukocytes and Gram negative bacilli. The liquid presented proteinorraquia of 3480 mg/dL and glucorraquia of 34 mg/dL for a plasma glycaemia of 584 mg/dL. A test was requested by immunochromatography for HIV that was negative. The patient initiated antimicrobial treatment with ceftriaxone and ampicillin. After 72 hours, given the findings, treatment continued with 2g of ceftriaxone every 12 hours. In addition, he received 3 days of dexamethasone. Both in the blood and urine cultures and in the cerebrospinal fluid K. pneumoniae was identified (by biochemical tests) sensitive to ampicillin-sulbactam, ceftriaxone, amikacin, gentamicin and ciprofloxacin, with only resistance to ampicillin (intrinsic resistance). The antibiogram was performed by diffusion (Kirby Bauer method) in Mueller Hinton agar using the cut-off points of the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) 2023 for the interpretation of the category of the antibiotics reported. Gram staining and culture of this abscess were also negative, since it was performed when the patient had been on antibiotic treatment for 5 days. An ophthalmological evaluation was performed, ruling out endophthalmitis. After 72 hours the patient persisted with intense dorsal pain and stiff neck, which prevented him from moving and sitting. In the neurological examination, brachio-crural right paresis was evident, without sensory disorders. A new lumbar puncture was performed that presented hyperproteinorraquia, hypoglycorraquia and in the culture K. pneumoniae was isolated again, with the same profile of antibiotic sensitivity. In addition, a new abdominal tomography showed resolution of the hepatic collection. A new resonance of the brain was performed that ruled out the presence of collections, as well as ischemic lesions. The resonance of the spine showed an increase in the signal in the central region of the spinal cord (from D2 to D7) compatible with myelitis, associated with diffuse meningeal enhancement at the dorsal level and post-contrast enhancement of the filum terminale, of isolated roots of the cauda equina and of the sacro-coccygeal. In the electromyogram, radicular compromise was evident at the metamere L4 to S1 level on the right side with a slight denervating activity and probable degeneration, secondary to the popliteal sciatic nerve. Given the evolution, the findings in the resonance and in the electromyogram and the presumptive diagnosis of hypertrophic pachymeningitis post infection, it was decided to initiate treatment with methylprednisolone 1g for 5 consecutive days. He completed 28 days of antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone and, after the treatment with methylprednisolone, he evolved favourably. At the time of discharge from the hospital, the right hemiparesis was in improvement with a mild motor deficit.
