He is a 16-year-old boy who in the months prior to consultation suffers occasional sleep paralysis, after a few minutes of the postprandial nap, which causes him a lot of anxiety, the main reason why he comes to the consultation. Occasionally, these sleep paralyses were accompanied by hypnopompic hallucinations (which he associated with dreams or not being fully awake). He has a nightly sleep schedule of about seven hours plus two hours of nap that are very refreshing. He has good academic performance. When we asked him a directed history, he said that after months of suffering these sleep paralyses, episodes of shaking of arms and legs appeared, especially when he laughed, which almost made him fall (he thought it happened to everyone). Afterwards, these symptoms were added to three short nightly awakenings, with immediate subsequent reconciliation and occasional attacks of sleep in the morning, which he associated with mathematics classes (the teacher is very boring). After clinical suspicion, we requested a multiple sleep latency test and a nightly polysomnographic study, which are conclusive with the diagnosis of narcolepsy (very short sleep latency, REM sleep latency, somewhat fragmented sleep, average in the multiple sleep latency test of 2.1 minutes and the presence of four sleep onset REM). Since the episodes of drowsiness occur every day at the same time, we prescribed a short morning nap that refreshed him a lot and he reported being able to continue with his school activities. Afterwards, we had to add modafinil at the same time (200 mg). We recommended venlafaxine for cataplexy or even initiate treatment with sodium oxybate (the latter he does not want to take because of the discomfort of the second dose, and he also rejects venlafaxine because of fear of the side effects). We agreed that he would comply with good sleep hygiene, take modafinil and continue with the scheduled naps (the afternoon one he already took and the morning one) and, if it got worse, we would add other treatments. He is doing well with this schedule, he does not perceive much fragmentation of nightly sleep (one or two very brief awakenings after which he falls asleep again without problems); in fact, he wakes up rested, the cataplexy is occasional and does not interfere with his daily life, and the sleep attacks are very controlled. He reports feeling better and without major limitations in his daily life (good academic performance, he does not drink alcohol, but he does not care because he has never drunk, he keeps regular sleep hours and he exercises regularly).
