76-year-old woman of Paraguayan nationality, resident in the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires, with no history of recent travel, with a history of aortic stenosis and arterial hypertension, regular medication: bisoprolol. She began 5 days prior to admission with fever, cough with mucopurulent expectoration and respiratory dyspnoea that progressed to class functional III-IV, abdominal pain and headache. She was treated on an outpatient basis 48 hours prior to admission with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid; SARS-CoV-2, influenza A and B virus and respiratory syncytial virus were tested by polymerase chain reaction, which was negative. She consulted the hospital for respiratory dyspnoea class IV, nausea and abdominal pain, a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed that showed bilateral interstitial infiltration. She was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit on 30 March 2023, with secondary septic shock to respiratory focus, fever 38 °C, 120 beats per minute and acidosis, the severity scores of the Sepsis Related Organ Failures Assesment (SOFA) totaled 7 points and Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Classification System II (APACHE II) 21 points. Reanimation with fluids was initiated, clinical analyses were performed, which showed increased haematocrit, haemoconcentration, leukocytosis and acute renal failure, samples were taken for haemocultures, urine culture and respiratory culture. Samples were sent to the blood virology laboratory for dengue virus and CHIKV. A point of care ultrasound (POCUS) was performed, which showed moderate aortic stenosis, with a peak speed of 3.4 m/sec, preserved left ventricular systolic function, without segmental mobility alterations, without signs of acute cardiac failure, and no vegetations were observed in the valves by this approach. She was initiated with broad spectrum antibiotics: ceftriaxone and vancomycin. She progressed with respiratory, haemodynamic and renal failure. She required mechanical ventilation, high dose vasopressors, furosemide infusion for oliguria, refractory shock, and died on 31 March 2023. After death, bacteriological cultures of blood, urine and tracheal secretions concluded without bacterial development, real-time polymerase chain reaction and NS1 antigen not detectable for dengue virus, and real-time polymerase chain reaction for CHIKV detectable in serum.
