Patient information: he was a 17-year-old patient, a mechanic by profession, with no particular medical history, who had been stabbed in the back during a fight. He immediately presented with a sharp mid-thoracic pain without dyspnoea, cough or haemoptysis and a small amount of bleeding from the wound. He was transported to our facility as an emergency.

Clinical findings: On admission, at six hours of the trauma, the patient was stable neurologically, haemodynamically and respiratory. The conjunctival mucous membranes were discoloured. Locally, the examination had objectified a posterior thoracic linear wound of approximately 3 cm in length, in the right paravertebral area at the level of D4-D5, non-bleeding, without active bleeding, with visualisation of the end of the knife blade intra-thoracic. The pulmonary fields were free. The heart sounds were well perceived, regular, without additional noise, not deviated. The pulses were well perceived and symmetrical at all sites. There was no sensory or motor deficit in the upper and lower limbs.

Diagnostic approach: the radiograph of the thorax from the front and profile showed the knife that passed through the thorax from back to front, from bottom to top and from left to right, with the point of entry in front of D5 and the tip just above the carina. There was no pneumomediastinum or mediastinal enlargement or pleural effusion. The thoracic scanner showed the foreign body at the right paraspinal entry point at the level of D5 with its distal end in front of the thoracic outlet without damage to the thoracic outlet. It passed over the heart, through the esophagus and trachea from back to front. There were also air bubbles in the mediastinum, a right pneumothorax with low abundance and a subcutaneous emphysema in front of the entry point. The preoperative assessment was without particularities apart from a hyperleucocytosis of 16100/mm3.

Treatment: He was admitted to the operating theatre at 14 o'clock. Surgical exploration by right posterior lateral thoracotomy had revealed a knife about 15 cm long and 4 cm wide, passing through the thorax from back to front with its distal end at the level of the Barety's recess. It had caused a wound in the cross of the azygos vein, a right upper lobe pulmonary wound about 4 cm, a transfixing oesophageal wound with an oeso-tracheal fistula about 3 cm x 2 cm, just above the carina (between the anterior wall of the oesophagus and the posterior membranous wall of the trachea).

The foreign body was removed. The fistula was repaired by direct closure of the 2 tracheal and esophageal orifices with separate stitches in Monocryl 3/0: in 2 planes for the esophagus and in one plane for the trachea. A test with methylene blue through a naso-gastric tube and a test with SSI with air insufflation through the intubation tracheal tube allowed the seal of the sutures to be verified. A plastic covering of the tracheal and bronchial sutures with mediastinal pleura was performed. He also received a ligature of the azygos vein and a suture of the parenchymal wound. A thorough cleaning of the cavity was performed. A thoracic drain in a mediastinal position and another in the basal position as well as a naso-gastric tube were placed. A triple antibioprophylaxis with ceftriaxone, gentamycin and metronidazole was established for 10 days. A liquid and semi-liquid diet was started on day 2 post-operatively through the naso-gastric tube.

Evolution: postoperative complications were simple with a chest X-ray at J1 and then at J4 showing a minimal right apical pneumothorax with a blunted costo-diaphragmatic cul-de-sac; the control esophagogastroduodenal transit (EGDT) at J14 did not find a residual fistula. The drains and naso-gastric tube were removed at J14 and oral feeding was started without incident. He was discharged at J14 with follow-up in outpatient care.

Follow-up: at the last post-operative check at J45, he had no complaints, the physical examination was normal with a healed surgical wound and the chest X-ray was unremarkable.
