A 20-year-old female patient presented with progressive abdominal distension associated with abdominal cramp, failure to pass flatus and feces as well as frequent vomiting of ingested and bilious matter of one-day duration. The day before, she gave birth through C/S for an indication of severe fetal bradycardia. She also had preeclampsia without severity signs and an adult onset malnutrition with a body mass index (BMI) of 16.5Kg/M2. She had no history of previous abdominal surgery. She denied any similar complaint in the past or previous history of bowel habit change or constipation with passage of a blood mixed stool. She did not have any known chronic medical illness.

On physical examination she was acutely sick looking and in pain. Her blood pressure was 90/70mmHg, pulse rate was in the range of 116–120 beats per minute, respiratory rate was in the range of 22–24 breaths per minute. She did not have an objective fever record. Her abdomen was grossly distended and symmetric with visible peristaltic bowel movements. There was diffuse direct tenderness all over her abdomen, more at the right lower quadrant. There was a positive sign of intraperitoneal fluid collection with shifting dullness. There was a well approximated suprapubic surgical wound with clean dressing. Her digital rectal examination finding was unremarkable. She had a 3cm long, linear, vertically oriented, superficial wound on her left labia-majora which was initially thought to be an iodine burn to the skin, by the obstetrics team.

She was catheterized and resuscitated with two bags of normal saline and produced 200mL of urine over an hour. A nasogastric tube (NGT) was inserted but with no significant output. She was investigated with Complete blood count (CBC) and plain abdominal radiograph. Her white blood cell count was 1780 cells/µL with neutrophil predominance of 88%, hemoglobin of 12.7mg/dl and platelet count of 78 x 103/ µL. Her renal function test was normal and her liver enzymes were slightly elevated above the normal range but was not significant. Her plain abdominal radiograph shows centrally located multiple-air fluid levels with dilated peripherally located large bowel loop and whitening of the pelvic space indicating a fluid collection. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan was not requested because we work in a resource limited setting and for patients with bowel obstruction, we request CT scan when there is possibility of alternative diagnosis or when tumor obstruction is suspected.

After obtaining informed written consent, she was explored under general anesthesia with a diagnosis of acute abdomen secondary to mixed bowel obstruction secondary to small bowel volvulus. The intra-operative finding was a distal ileum encircling the cecum and proximal ascending colon, both of which were mobile and not attached to the right posterolateral abdominal wall. Both the ileum and cecum as well as ascending colon were viable. The tip of the appendix was entangled with the ileal knot, and it was gangrenous. The proximal small bowel and distal large bowel were grossly distended otherwise in their normal location. There was about four-liter of serous intraperitoneal fluid.

Intra-operatively, the patient was persistently hypotensive (80/50 mmHg) since after the induction of anesthesia and was started on vasopressor support. Considering the patient’s instability and viability of the bowels involved in the knot, right hemicolectomy was differed. Proximal and distal decompression of the distended small and large bowels was performed respectively. Cecum and ascending colon were fixed to the right posterolateral abdominal wall using interrupted sero-muscular stitches with non-absorbable suture (Silk 2–0).

Post-procedure, she was extubated and kept nothing by mouth (NPO) for 24 hours and put on maintenance fluid with replacement of her loss. She was persistently hypotensive despite fluid resuscitation and vasopressor support and hence she was put on double antibiotics with Ceftriaxone 1gm, IV, BID and Metronidazole 500mg, IV, TID with consideration of septic shock of genitourinary focus. She gradually deteriorated and up on re-evaluation on her first post-operative day, the superficial wound on her vulva has expanded upwards to the suprapubic area with clinical signs of Fournier’s gangrene. Therefore, we revised her antibiotics to Meropenem 1gm, IV, BID, Vancomycin 1gm, IV, BID and Metronidazole 500mg, IV, TID. After informed written consent was obtained, she was taken back to the operation theatre for radical debridement of the Fournier’s gangrene and subsequently transferred surgical intensive care unit (ICU) intubated due to persistent septic shock and delayed awakening from anesthesia. Unfortunately, she passed away with multi-organ failure due to refractory septic shock on her second post-operative day after the initial exploration.