An 86-year-old male patient presented to the emergency room for a 3-week nonpainful priapism. Our patient, a former cleaner agent, is only known for a transient ischemic incident. He has no previous surgical history. Physical examination showed a semierect nontender penis with a mild lateral deviation and a smooth glans. No superficial penile lesion was observed. The patient reported that he had lost normal erections almost 20 years ago. All clinical signs were in favor of a nonischemic priapism. The patient was a former smoker and reported mild upper respiratory tract symptoms as well. Lab work-ups and urine analyses were unremarkable; hence, the decision was to pursue investigations in an ambulatory setting using a penile ultrasound and a thoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT) scan looking for a malignancy.

Doppler ultrasonography (US) of the penis was performed, revealing circumscribed hypoechogenic nodules infiltrating the albuginea of the corpus cavernosum, with a base and right-side predominance. No abnormalities were detected in the corpus spongiosum. A normal resistive index with a normal penile artery velocity was measured, in favor of a nonischemic situation.

Thoracoabdominal CT revealed a mass at the lung's left hilum surrounding the bronchovascular structures. Several bilateral nodules and micronodules were observed. The largest ones were located at the right apex and right lung base. Mediastinal enlarged lymph nodes were also seen at the lower paratracheal station. The liver was also affected by several lesions; the largest was located at Segment 7, which measured 96 mm. The left adrenal gland and pancreatic lesions were noted. Finally, two osteolytic lesions were observed on the first left rib and on the transverse process of fifth lumbar vertebra (L5). The patient was referred to the lung cancer specialist for further investigations. A pulmonary biopsy was performed, confirming adenocarcinoma of the lung. Molecular analysis of the cells showed a pGly12Cys (G12C) variant of the KRAS gene. PDL-1 was also noted as positive.

After a multidisciplinary discussion, the decision was for the patient to pursue four-cycle chemotherapy and immunotherapy by cisplatin, pemetrexed, and pembrolizumab. The patient poorly tolerated the first cycle of chemotherapy and developed febrile pancytopenia. The decision was to halt the chemotherapy and pursue the immunotherapy by pembrolizumab.

As for the penile lesions, since the patient did not have any pain, surveillance was adopted.