An 18-year-old Caucasian, female patient presented at our clinic with complaints of multiple palpable lumps in her breasts bilaterally. On physical examination the patient had multiple pigmented lentiginous lesions on her face, body and her sclerae bilaterally, blue nevi on her trunk and upper extremities and a round moon-shaped face.

Upon ultrasonographic evaluation multiple compact nodules-fibroadenomas were found in both breasts, with the largest being in the upper outer quadrant of the left breast with diameter of 7.8 cm.

She had previously undergone total thyroidectomy in 2018 with the diagnosis of follicular adenoma and a removal of a large nodule of the left breast, due to its large size and pain, with a histopathology report suggesting fibroadenoma with myxoid stroma.

An excision biopsy of two nodules of the right breast was performed with myxoid fibroadenoma diagnosis, supporting our diagnosis of Carney complex.

On magnetic resonance imaging, multiple compact fibroadenomas were found on bilateral breasts, with high signal intensity on T2 and T2/FS images, with internal septations without restriction of diffusion, compatible with multiple myxoid fibroadenomas.

Furthermore, there were a couple of axillary lymph nodes and prominent internal mammary lymph nodes bilaterally.

In addition, there was an abnormality of soft tissue density at the anterior mediastinum, measuring 11 mm in maximum thickness, suggesting a prominent thymus.

All the above findings suggested a possibility of Carney complex. Further laboratory evaluation took place. Hormonal testing showed no abnormalities in testosterone, prolactin, PTH and DHEA-S levels.

Gene analysis was then performed with findings of PRHAR1A gene mutation, heterozygous for a missense variant of uncertain significance in exon 3 of this gene. This mutation has never been reported in the gnomAD database.

Genetic testing was performed to the parents as well, finding only the father positive to the same gene mutation.

Various conservative treatment plans were discussed with the patient, but none proved to provide a definite solution/treatment. Excision of big lobules was performed in the past with temporary alleviation of the patients’ pain symptoms and the recurrent surgeries were affecting her quality of life. The patient had also several sessions with our clinic psychologist and was assessed thoroughly before deciding upon the final solution of a bilateral mastectomy.

The patient underwent a bilateral skin-sparing mastectomy and placement of tissue expanders (smooth, Motiva Flora®) subcutaneously. Histopathology reported multiple myxoid fibroadenomas in both breasts, compatible with Carney complex syndrome, with disruption of normal breast parenchyma architecture. Figures show macroscopically and histologically the fibroadenoma.

Wound care was minimal, the patient was advised to wear a medical bra and regular visits to the outpatient clinic for follow-up and further filling of the tissue expanders at regular intervals until the desired size was achieved. Patient prior and post-mastectomy. After one year a second surgery took place and the expanders were replaced with permanent silicone implants (smooth, Motiva Ergonomic®) submuscular, with again the same minimal wound care requirements and bra placement.