A 56-year-old male came to emergency room with chief complain of atypical bilateral chest pain and shortness of breath.
The chest pain was getting more persistent and increasing gradually without any radiating pain in the past 1 week. Shortness of breath was felt in the last 3 years due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) (spirometry test 1 month before was as follow: FEV1/FVC ratio of 0.48 with FEV1 of 40%) and worsened 5 days before admission to the emergency room. He had been diagnosed with tuberculosis infection 3 years ago and already completed the 6-month treatment. Furthermore, he suffered from heart failure 2 year ago but did not comply to routine check-up. He was an active smoker with daily consumption of 2 packs per day since he was young until he was admitted to the emergency room.
On physical examination, he was fully awake with the vital sign as follow: Blood pressure (BP) of 90/60 mmHg, pulse rate (PR) of 92 beats per minute with strong but irregular pulse, respiratory rate (RR) of 30 breaths per minute, oxygen saturation of 88%, and axillary temperature of 36.9oC. His lung examination revealed slight wheezing in bilateral basal region and coarse crackle on superior lobe of right lung. Cardiac examination showed early diastolic murmur at pulmonal valve and holosystolic murmur at tricuspid valve, shifting of cardiac border, and raised jugular vein pressure. Other examinations were within normal limit.
Electrocardiogram (ECG) evaluation showed an occasional premature ventricular contraction (PVC) and premature atrial contraction (PAC) with right axis deviation (RAD), right bundle branch block (RBBB) and right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH), and spike P wave. Chest x-ray showed cardiomegaly and predominate pulmonal cone. There is also an infiltrate in upper lobe of both lung. Laboratory evaluation showed slight leukocytosis (12.800/mm3) and hyponatremia (124 mmol/L), while the CK-MB titer was normal (20 U/L).
Based on the initial evaluation, the patient was diagnosed with congestive heart failure because of cor pulmonale with suspected PAA and pneumonia. He was then transferred to high care unit where he was given oxygen mask 6 L/min, treated with oral spironolactone 25 mg and bisoprolol 2.5 mg once daily. He also received intravenous levofloxacin 750 mg once daily, furosemide 20 mg thrice daily, and dopamine with dosage of 3 mcg per kg body weight (BW). Five hours later, his blood pressure drops to 80/60 mmHg with sign of cardiogenic shock.
The dopamine then was tittered up to 5 mcg per kg BW. He was scheduled for transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and multi slice computed tomography (MSCT) on the following morning. TTE result showed normal kinetic on left ventricular segmental
¡ analysis, normal left ventricular (LV) systolic function with ejection fraction (EF) of 89%, grade I diastolic dysfunction on LV, decreased right ventricular (RV) systolic function (TAPSE 1 cm) with right atrium (RA) and RV dilatation, severe tricuspid regurgitation (TR), mild pulmonary regurgitation (PR), and high probability of severe PH (TR peak velocity 5.21 m/s, estimated mean pulmonary artery pressure 68.99 mmHg), accompanied by main pulmonal artery (MPA) aneurysm (4.2 cm in diameter). No congenital or structural heart defect was found. Contrast-enhanced thorax MSCT showed an aneurysm on the main pulmonal artery (MPA) (4.39 cm in diameter) and bilateral pulmonal artery dilatation with wall adherent apposition thrombus.
With additional findings from TTE and MSCT, the patient was then diagnosed with heart failure with preserved EF and RV dysfunction secondary to suspected severe PH due to COPD and CTEPH along with MPA aneurysm. The given therapy was continued with addition of beraprost sodium 20 mcg twice daily and warfarin 2 mg once daily. On the fifth day, he became stable with blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg and the symptoms was improved. He was then scheduled to be referred to tertiary hospital for further evaluation with right heart catheterization (RHC), but he refused. Therefore, conservative treatment with oral therapy of furosemide 40 mg once daily, bisoprolol 2.5 mg once daily, spironolactone 25 mg once daily, beraprost sodium 20 mcg twice daily, and warfarin 2 mg once daily continued.
Six months after regular monthly follow-up, the patient’s condition was improved with stable hemodynamic and without any significant complaint. TTE evaluation showed a decreased in the PH severity grading from severe to moderate PH and TR severity grading from severe to moderate. Moreover, the MPA diameter was not increased, with RA and RV dilatation and normal LV and RV systolic function.