Patient information
A 44-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with chief complaints of pneumaturia and repeated cystitis. The patient also had a history of hypothyroidism.

Enhanced contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed multiple diverticula of the sigmoid colon, and the boundary between the diverticulum and the bladder was unclear. Lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a fistula in the rectosigmoid colon approximately 15 cm from the anal verge. Cystoscopy revealed a fistula in the left posterior wall of the bladder. A sigmoidovesical fistula was diagnosed and laparoscopic surgery was planned. Intraoperative findings revealed severe inflammation around the sigmoidovesical fistula, and severe adhesions had also formed between the ileum and bladder. The ileum and bladder were difficult to exfoliate because of severe adhesions. Therefore, we decided to perform a combined bowel resection. The rectosigmoid colon, including the fistula, was mobilized and resected. The bladder fistula was transected and closed using a knotless barbed suture (V-LocTM 180, Covidien, Mansfield). The sigmoid-rectal anastomosis was reconstructed using the double-stapling technique. The partial ileum resection was reconstructed with functional end-to-end anastomosis (FEEA). In addition to the presence of a 2-site anastomosis, there was severe inflammation in the surrounding area, and considering the risk of anastomotic leakage, a diverting loop ileostomy 30 cm proximal to the ileo-ileal anastomosis was created.

Surgical procedures included laparoscopic high anterior resection, partial small bowel resection, partial cystectomy, and diverting loop ileostomy. The operation time was 236 minutes, and blood loss was 50 mL. The postoperative course was uneventful, and ileostomy closure was planned 1 month after the initial surgery. Under laparoscopic assistance, adhesions between the omentum and abdominal wall around the stoma were removed. Full mobilization was performed around the stoma, and the intestine was pulled outward. The ileum was reconstructed using FEEA. The surgical procedure involved laparoscopy-assisted ileostomy closure. The operation time was 100 minutes, and the blood loss was 30 mL.

Clinical findings
On the day after surgery, symptomatic shock occurred due to low blood pressure (<80 mm Hg) and tachycardia. Blood tests showed hemoglobin decreased from 15.3 before surgery to 8.6 g/dL after the surgery.

Diagnostic assessment
Abdominal computerized tomography (CT) revealed a large amount of high-density fluid in the abdominal cavity. The diagnosis was postoperative bleeding and hemorrhagic shock. A central venous catheter was inserted, and 8 units of red blood cells and 8 units of fresh frozen plasma were administered to stabilize the vital signs. The vitals stabilized, and no progression of anemia was observed after that. Although hemostasis was achieved, severe abdominal distention and high inflammatory response levels (C-reactive protein [CRP] at 42.9 mg/dL and white blood cell count [WBC] of 18,500/μL) persisted 7 days after surgery.

Contrast-enhanced CT revealed that the intra-abdominal hematoma was localized in the left and right lower abdomen, and percutaneous drainage was considered possible. On the 8th postoperative day, 18Fr drainage tubes were inserted into the left and right lower abdomen through CT-guided puncture, and a large amount of old blood was drained. After drainage, the inflammatory reaction and abdominal distension caused by the residual hematoma infection improved (CRP at 1.9 mg/dL and WBC of 5000/μL). No progression of anemia was observed. On the 14th postoperative day, drainage in the right lower abdomen changed from old blood to intestinal juice. A drain angiography revealed delayed anastomotic leakage at the ileostomy closure site. There were no signs of peritonitis with good drainage, but the drainage was approximately 100 to 200 mL, and flatus from the drain continued. No decrease in drainage was observed for the following 14 days.

Therapeutic intervention
Although reoperation was considered, severe intra-abdominal adhesions were expected due to the history of past surgeries, postoperative bleeding, and anastomotic leakage. Therefore, reoperation was judged to be a high-risk procedure. Contrast-enhanced CT showed that an organized hematoma remained in the mesentery of the small intestine, and the ileum on the 10 cm distal side of the anastomosis was compressed near the remaining hematoma. Considering the stenosis of the ileum on the anal side of the anastomosis due to residual hematoma as the cause of anastomotic leakage, fluoroscopic balloon dilation of the stenosis area through the drain on the 24th postoperative day was attempted. A Cordis BRITE TIP® sheath introducer (8 Fr × 23 cm) was placed at the fistula where anastomotic leakage occurred after the drain angiography. A radifocus GT wire (0.016 inches, 180 cm, 90°) (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) and a Renegade HI-FLO microcatheter (135 × 20 cm) (Boston Scientific, Tokyo, Japan) were used to reach the terminal ileum. Using Selecon MP catheter II (6Fr, 80 cm, φ20 mm) (Terumo), the stenosis area was identified in the ileum due to compression of the hematoma where the balloon could not pass.

Fluoroscopic balloon dilation was performed on the stenosis of the ileus using a CRE PRO GI wireguided balloon (180 cm, 15–18 mm) (Boston Scientific), inflating to 16.5 mm diameter at 4.5 atm for 3 minutes.

Follow-up and outcomes
From the day after the balloon dilatation, the amount of drainage decreased markedly, and flatus and defecation were observed from the anus. One week after balloon dilation, the drainage was almost zero, and the anastomotic leakage was judged to have resolved. The drain was gradually removed. Oral intake was good, and he had regular bowel movements. He was discharged on the 45th postoperative day. Since then, no recurrence of the stenosis or anastomotic leakage has been reported.