46-year-old man presented with visual impairment of three years' evolution, associated with occasional headaches, asthenia, severe adynamia, erectile dysfunction and loss of libido. Personal history of primary hypothyroidism and NF1 with multiple lesions consistent with neurofibromas with confirmed diagnosis in 2014. Family history includes a daughter with a diagnosis of NF1 who underwent surgery for a brain astrocytoma at the age of 11 years. On physical examination, he presented with multiple lesions consistent with neurofibromas, brown-milky spots on the back and abdomen, preserved higher mental functions, isochoric and reactive pupils, bitemporal hemianopsia, no cranial nerve impairment, motor or sensory deficits. In contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, a 24x24x39 mm-diameter, bilobed, suprasellar lesion was observed, which generated compression of the optic chiasm, corresponding to a lesion type KNOSP II - Hardy C. It was hypointense in T1 and slightly hyperintense in T2, with homogeneous enhancement after contrast administration, which may correspond to a pituitary macroadenoma.

He was referred to the Endocrinology Service where laboratory tests were performed and a hypopituitary syndrome with secondary hypervitaminosis D and mixed dyslipidaemia was detected. The serum ionogram and urinary density were normal, ruling out diabetes insipidus. The urinary catecholamine and mandelic acid were normal. A classic transnasal endoscopic resection was performed. A pale, capsulated, hypovascularised, hard-elastic tumour was detected and resected in a block. A 12 hour postoperative imaging scan was performed with intravenous contrast and the lesion was completely removed. The patient developed diabetes insipidus in the first postoperative days, responding to the administration of desmopressin. There was no evidence of cerebrospinal fluid fistula. He was discharged with a diagnosis of partial diabetes insipidus, with treatment with carbamazepine 100 mg every 12 hours, hydrocortisone 30 mg daily, levotiroxina 150 micrograms daily, with a good response. The pathological anatomy report described a compact fusocellular proliferation, arranged in a stellate pattern with very little interstitial stroma. The cellular elements were spindle-shaped with eosinophilic cytoplasm and slightly uneven nuclei. There was no evidence of mitotic activity, necrosis or residual brain parenchyma. The scarce interstitial stroma was highlighted with CD34 positive vascular elements. The reticular network was preserved. Immunohistochemistry was performed and the patient was positive for vimentin and nuclear transcription factor 1 (TTF1) with a diffuse and intense staining. It was also focal for VCL2 and S100. It was also negative for synaptophysin, EMA, GFAP and STAT6. KI67 6%. The final diagnosis was low-grade fusocellular lesion compatible with pituitary gland tumour.
