A 77-year-old male patient presented with a history of moderate cognitive impairment. The patient was admitted to the emergency department for a tonic-clonic seizure at home. The patient presented hemodynamically unstable in the context of a postcritical state and suspected intrapelvic bleeding. The code for a polytraumatized patient was activated, not because of the mechanism of injury, but because of the patient's hemodynamic status.  He was stabilized and optimized in the emergency department with intravenous fluid and transfusion of packed red blood cells. A pelvic girdle was placed. Once hemodynamic stability was achieved, a physical examination was performed. Clinically, the patient presented a shortening of the lower limb compared to the contralateral limb, external rotation and joint blockage when performing the log roll test in both limbs. He presented functional impotence in both hips. Given the patient's condition when he arrived at the emergency department, it was not possible to assess the neurological status. He had no signs of external injuries or bruises. Distal pulses were present at the foot level. He could move his upper limbs. A chest and anteroposterior pelvic radiograph was performed as part of the code for a polytraumatized patient, pending completion of an abdominal-pelvic computed tomography (CT) study. A bilateral femoral dislocation was diagnosed in the pelvic radiograph. The patient underwent a procedure to correct the dislocation.



Computed tomography angiography to rule out vascular lesions given the instability in hemodynamic that presented itself on admission. Vascular lesions were ruled out after the angiography. In the 3D-CT reconstruction of the pelvis, a bilateral transverse acetabular fracture was found, according to the classification of Letournel and a bilateral longitudinal fracture of the iliac wing was found, along with intrapelvic protrusion of both femoral heads. After initial evaluation, supracondylar traction was placed on the femoral head in both extremities and the pelvic traction was removed. The patient was admitted to the recovery unit until surgery, where he remained with the traction supracondylar femoral head in both extremities and the pelvic traction was removed. The patient was operated on the eighth day of admission. In our service, the acetabular fractures were ruled out after seven days waiting for the formation of a fibrosis in the focus of fracture and the decrease of intraoperative bleeding during surgical procedures. It was decided to perform the surgery in two stages due to the long duration of each intervention. Both surgeries were performed with general anaesthesia, tranexamic acid was administered to prevent intraoperative bleeding and decrease blood transfusions in relation to the surgeries; and antibiotic (cefazolin 2 g preoperatively and 1 g of cefazolin every 8 hours postoperatively for 24 hours) as an intrahospital protocol. During the postoperative period, enoxaparin 40 mg was administered subcutaneously every 24 hours for seven weeks. Initially, the surgery of the left hemipelvis was performed since, at the radiographic level, it presented greater pelvic protrusion and it was not desirable that a hematoma in the soft tissue phase could generate complications at the time of extraction of the femoral head (vascular injuries, intraoperative bleeding). The supracondylar traction was removed. The patient was placed in lateral decubitus, and a posterior lateral approach was performed with a Moore's autograft in the acetabular background (fracture focus). Subsequently, the anti-protrusion ring was implanted (Burch SchneiderTM Reinforcement Cage, Zimmer Biomet) anchored to the ischium and ilium. Prior to the implantation of the ring, it was necessary to perform dissection of the gluteal musculature (gluteus minimus and medius) to correctly place the femoral head. The medial ischial fracture of the ring was also anchored with screws. The check was performed under the control of a scope to verify the correct implantation. Subsequently, a double mobility cementaed acetabular ring was implanted and then the non-cemented femoral stem was implanted. After finishing the placement of the components, the capsule and pelvic musculature were closed by means of transosseous trochanteric points. The surgery of the right hemipelvis was performed seven days later. The patient was placed in lateral decubitus. To address the longitudinal fracture of the iliac wing, the first window of the ilio-inguinal approach was performed. It was synthesised with a six-hole anatomical plate. Subsequently, the same procedure as the previous surgery was performed, using an anti-protrusion ring with a double mobility cemented femoral stem and non-cemented femoral stem. This type of anti-protrusion rings are used when there are acetabular fractures that could be equivalent to a pelvic disjunction (type IV classification of acetabular defects of the AAOS) and an anchorage in the ischium and ilium of the ring is needed to support the ring. They are not indicated for isolated fractures of the anterior or posterior wall of the acetabulum where there is no involvement of the acetabular background. During admission, the patient remained in bed and was mobilised to avoid decubitus ulcers. Once the second intervention was performed and when the patient tolerated it clinically, he began to transfer with the use of a wheelchair. In bed he was allowed to have a full range of motion without restriction. The patient was discharged four weeks later and did not begin to load or walk until six weeks. He began to load with the use of a walking stick. We decided to delay loading because, despite the use of arthroplasty as a treatment, it was decided to wait until there was an initial consolidation of the graft in the acetabular background that provided better support for the ring. It was also added that the patient presented bilateral involvement and it would be difficult to start partial loading, given that he did not have a healthy hip to support. During the follow-up of the patient, at 12 months of the intervention he was already doing full load with the use of a walking stick, with a Harris hip score of 79 in the left hip and 77 in the right hip; and a score of 12 on the WOMAC scale. He has not presented any postoperative complications to date. The patient is satisfied clinically, he reports occasional discomfort and a slight limp of the right side. He has a full range of motion in the examination and does not report having had any episode of instability since the surgery.
