A 55-year-old female patient with no significant medical history presented to the emergency room with sudden onset of dyspnea. She had no history of hypertension, palpitations, headaches or diaphoresis. She was noted to be tachycardic (180 beats/min) and hypertensive (170/120 mm Hg) and was started on diltiazem drip. She also developed frothing and became hypotensive. Emergent intubation was done for impending respiratory failure. ECG showed ST-segment elevations in I, aVL, V2 and V3. Bedside echocardiogram showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) of 10% with dyskinesis of the apex and hypokinesis of the other segments. She was started on diuretics and norepinephrine drip for the management of pulmonary oedema and hypotension. Cardiac catheterisation did not reveal any significant coronary artery disease. Cardiogenic shock secondary to fulminant myocarditis was suspected and an intraaortic ballon pump was placed. She was transferred to our hospital for advanced heart failure therapies as the patient continued to be hypotensive.

Investigations

Laboratory assessment on admission showed metabolic acidosis with high lactate levels, elevated aspartate aminotransferase, alanine aminotransferase and acute kidney injury. The toxicology drug screen was negative. CT scan of the abdomen showed a 4 cm heterogenous enhancing right adrenal mass with areas of central hypoenhancement consistent with the appearance of a PHEO. Biochemical assessment showed high levels of plasma metanephrines; however, it is to be noted that the patient had recently been on pressor agents.


Differential diagnosis

CICMP can mimic several cardiovascular disorders. It can present as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy which is similar to hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) and are characterised by hypertrophy of the posterior wall and interventricular septum, as well as anterior motion of the mitral valve replacement; however, in CICMP, all these changes regress after surgical excision of the PHEO or PGL. CIMCP can present takotsubo or reverse takotsubo syndrome which are indistinguishable from primary takotsubo’s. CIMCP-induced myocarditis can be confused with viral myocarditis due to the similarity in presentations; however, in CIMCP, these changes are reversible with treatment of PHEO or PGL. Several radiological characteristics are useful to differentiate different radiological lesions.


Treatment

Dopamine drip was initiated in addition to the norepinephrine drip; however, the patient continued to remain hypotensive. Venous arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VAECMO) was started for resistant cardiogenic shock, and there was a marked improvement in the acidosis, liver enzymes and kidney function. Doxazosin therapy was initiated 1 day after the VAECMO was started and titrated to control blood pressure. The VAECMO flow rate was slowly weaned and stopped over 5 days. Subsequently, propranolol was added to control the heart rate with excellent response to both the agents.

Follow-up echocardiogram, a week after admission, showed significant improvement in cardiac function with an EF of >50%. Right adrenalectomy was done 3 weeks after the original admission. Pathology revealed a PHEO with no lymphovascular invasion.


Outcome and follow-up

On follow-up in the clinic 3 weeks after surgery, the patient’s blood pressure had normalised and was off antihypertensives. Genetic evaluation revealed no pathogenic mutations in RET, VHL, NF-1, SDH, MAX and TMEM127 genes.