A 17-year-old male with no significant past medical or family history was referred to our clinic from the dental department following an incidental finding of a NFB during preoperative orthodontic planning, including dental x-rays and cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) without contrast. The patient was entirely asymptomatic and denied any history of nasal obstruction, rhinorrhea, epistaxis, foul odor, hyposmia, halitosis, facial pain, discomfort, or sleep disturbances. The patient's parents recalled an event when their son was seven, where he inserted an object into his nose. They sought medical advice, where no imaging was performed and an anterior rhinoscopy was utilized for diagnoses but due to the child's non-cooperation during the examination, the physician recommended the removal of the foreign body under sedation. However, the family did not follow up, and since the child remained asymptomatic, they assumed the foreign body had fallen out on its own. On endoscopic examination of the right nasal cavity, a deviated nasal septum with inferior turbinate hypertrophy was noted. The mucosa appeared erythematous and slightly edematous. A foreign body was visualized, lodged, and adhered to the floor of the nasal cavity beneath the inferior turbinate. The object was partially covered with mucus and possibly some crusted material and had a shiny appearance, indicating a metallic nature. Radiographic evaluation, including lateral and frontal X-rays, revealed a circular radiopaque object consistent with a metallic snap button located along the floor of the nasal cavity. The surrounding bony structures appeared normal. A CBCT confirmed the presence of the foreign body with associated mild inflammation, but no significant bony damage or sinus involvement was observed. With informed consent from the patient's parent, the foreign body was removed under local anesthesia in a semi-sitting position to reduce the risk of dislodgment to the airway. After decongesting the nasal cavity with Xylometazoline 0.1 % and administering Lidocaine spray (10 mg/spray) in the right nostril, a hook was utilized to disengage the foreign body, which was then retrieved using bayonet forceps. The procedure was uncomplicated, with minimal bleeding, easily controlled with saline irrigation. Post-removal examination showed no significant tissue damage. The retrieved object, a metallic snap button measuring 1 cm in diameter, exhibited signs of long-term exposure, including substantial corrosion and biological deposits. The patient was discharged in stable condition and prescribed nasal rinses with a sodium chloride irrigation solution (0.9 %). The patient was doing well at his two-week follow-up with an unremarkable examination.