A healthy 12-year-old boy presented to our clinic with abnormal vision of the left eye, described by the patient as “seeing a squiggly line”, which was evident on Amsler grid testing. A review of his family history confirmed no significant known ophthalmological disorders or relevant information. On examination, his best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes, and the intraocular pressure was recorded as 14 and 13 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. The anterior segments, pupillary light reflexes and extraocular motility examination were all unremarkable.

Fundus examination revealed bilateral elevated maculae with yellow subfoveal deposits, giving off the characteristic “egg yolk” appearance of the vitelliform stage of Best vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD). On close inspection of the left macula, a darkish lesion was identified inferior to the fovea, consistent with retinal pigmentary changes suggestive of a possible complicating macular neovascularization (MNV). Fundus autofluorescence showed a circular ring of hyperautofluorescence surrounding the fovea, consistent with lipofuscin accumulation at the diseased RPE. The dark inferior juxtafoveal examination seen on fundus examination coincided with a tiny hypoautofluorescent spot seen in the left eye.

Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed bilateral subfoveal optically hyporeflective spaces and thickening of the cone outer segments. The left eye revealed an inferior juxtafoveal localized area of pigmentary elevation suggestive of MNV, which was confirmed as a neovascular frond by OCT angiography (OCTA). Electrooculography demonstrated an absent light rise with a significantly low Arden ratio of 1.1, confirming the diagnosis of BVMD.

Despite an intact BCVA of 20/20, the patient was treated with 2 monthly intravitreal injections of ranibizumab (0.5mg/0.05 mL) based on the experienced metamorphopsia and irregular lines demonstrated on the Amsler grid. A month later, the patient presented with marked subjective regression of the metamorphopsia, which was equally evident on the Amsler grid. Surprisingly, OCT revealed complete resolution of the subfoveal optically hyporeflective space with restoration of the normal foveal contour. On OCTA en face scans of the outer retinal and choriocapillaris slabs, the MNV demonstrated subjectively clear shrinkage in size and arborization. Moreover, the inferior juxtafoveal hypoautofluorescent corresponding to the MNV appeared smaller.

Based on the above, the patient was not offered any more injections, and was advised to follow up after four weeks while maintaining weekly monitoring at home using serial Amsler grid testing. A month later (2 months after the injection), the patient reported near disappearance of the symptoms and OCTA continued to demonstrate shrinking of the MNV. Of note, there was a small, but evident increase in the size of the subfoveal optically hyporeflective space, indicating rebound accumulation of the lipofuscin in the subfoveal space.

Over the course of 2 years, the patient reported no new symptoms both on the Amsler grids or in his day-to-day activities. Serial en face OCTA images demonstrated near disappearance of the neovascular frond, and the inferior juxtafoveal hypoautofluorescent spot was undetectable. Strikingly, the most peculiar finding encountered on OCT was the gradual increase in the subfoveal space with a steady buildup of lipofuscin deposits. No further signs of activity were detected, and the right eye was not complicated by MNVs.