A 71-year-old Japanese woman with a past medical history of type 1 diabetes, end-stage renal disease, complete atrioventricular block, and previous myocardial infarction was admitted to the Gastroenterology service of our hospital for evaluation and treatment of acute loss of consciousness secondary to hypoglycemia. At the time of admission, she had a permanent pacemaker and was undergoing hemodialysis three times a week. The Orthopedics service was contacted to evaluate swelling, heat, and redness of her left hand due to a bite wound at the tip of her left middle finger that was self-inflicted during an episode of dementia. A standard course of intravenous cefazolin (1g per day) was prescribed to treat presumptive cellulitis. The infection did not respond and progressed despite two full days of antibiotic treatment. Bacterial culture of the lesion revealed methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Upon physical exam, the patient displayed all four of Kanavel’s cardinal signs of flexor tenosynovitis. Vancomycin infusion (trough value, 15–20 μg/mL) was initiated to treat the MRSA infection, together with wound debridement and a partial amputation at the distal interphalangeal joint. Decompression of the median nerve was performed to relieve pressure resulting from a purulent abscess. While redness and swelling persisted after this procedure, the progression of the infection appeared to be somewhat reduced. While the antibiotic course of Vancomycin was continued, on day 5 the patient suddenly complained of abdominal pain, dark brown blood in the stool indicative of a gastrointestinal bleed, and developed signs consistent with systemic shock. Her initial systolic blood pressure reading was 60 mmHg which responded to acute administration of vasopressors. Laboratory data included an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count of 9890 per mm3, together with increased serum levels of C-reactive protein (CRP; 259.7 mg/L) and creatinine (421.7 µmol/L) and reduced levels of sodium (132 mEq/L), blood glucose (2.6 mmol/L), and hemoglobin (8.2 g/dL). Findings from an abdominal computed tomography (CT) study resulted in a diagnosis of non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia; an emergency small bowel resection was performed. Tube feedings were initiated and continued for one week. Norepinephrine was added to her regiment to maintain blood pressure at levels necessary to sustain organ perfusion with a target mean arterial pressure of 70.

During her hospital stay, the patient was exposed to SARS-CoV-2 after extended close contact with an infected individual while undergoing dialysis. Her nasal swab test was positive for COVID-19 using a loop-mediated isothermal amplification assay. Four days after the positive test, she developed signs of acute pneumonia. Results of a chest radiograph and CT scan confirmed this diagnosis and revealed consolidation of the lungs as well as bilateral pleural effusions. Antiviral treatment with favipiravir (200 mg orally twice per day) was initiated and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. This was in accordance with recommendations at the time of administration. The patient was hypervolemic with increased oxygen demand. Continuous hemodiafiltration was performed to avoid fluid overload.

Immediately before exposure to COVID-19, the patient developed clinical signs of necrotizing fasciitis. The infection had extended into the fascia and the surrounding musculature of her left hand. While emergency hand amputation was deemed necessary, the patient developed septic shock and required mechanical respiration due to a sudden increase in oxygen demand. High flow oxygen was administered continuously via the endotracheal tube, and her antiviral regimen was changed to remdesivir (100 mg intravenous once a day) together with intravenous hydrocortisone (200 mg/dose). Remdesivir was still under compassionate-use status at the time. While undergoing treatment for acute life-threatening events, the infection progressed to include the phalanges of the left middle finger, with bone necrosis visible on radiography. Vancomycin (500 mg) was prescribed to manage the osteomyelitis and prevent its further spreading. The patient subsequently developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Although the patient’s COVID-19 infection was under control after two weeks, she developed disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC; score >4) which may have accelerated bacterial growth. As heparin was contraindicated in this case, ART-123, a recombinant and soluble form of thrombomodulin alpha was administered intravenously (12,800 U once per day for 3 days) to dissolve the systemic clots. The infection progressed to include necrosis of the entire third digit as well as the skin, fascia, and musculature up to the radio-carpal joint with signs of progressive invasion into the forearm. Unfortunately, COVID-associated hospital restrictions and shutdowns precluded further surgical treatment at this time.

The patient ultimately recovered from COVID-19. At two weeks after the initial diagnosis was made, the patient was weaned from mechanical ventilation and the endotracheal tube was withdrawn. Two weeks post-extubation, the patient completed the treatment for COVID-19 and had a negative SARS-CoV-2 antigen test. A major amputation at the distal third of the forearm was then performed. The tissues were debrided and lavaged completely during the procedure and all infected tissue was removed. Because the amputation site was proximal to her indwelling hemodialysis shunt, its replacement was discussed with vascular surgeons and nephrologists. The procedure revealed heavy calcification of the arteries of her left forearm with tortuosity and possible occlusions both proximal and distal to the shunt. The bruit and thrill detected in the shunt also suggested the possibility of distal hypoperfusion ischemic syndrome. Adequate skin flap coverage was achieved and the stump was closed; a follow-up radiographic study revealed no complications. The stump appeared to be healing well, one month later, the patient succumbed to septic shock and cardiopulmonary arrest.