Object
The patient, a 37-year-old woman, was admitted to the Department of Endocrinology of Peking Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH) in September 2022 due to "bilateral lower limb pain for four years". She was born at full term with a birth weight of 3.75 kg, and the length was unknown. She was breastfed for one year and she showed no significant differences in growth, development, intelligence or activity compared to her peers. She experienced early loss of her permanent teeth (the exact age was forgotten) and underwent full-mouth dental implant surgery at the age of 24 years. Since 2018, she has experienced progressively worsening lower limb pain, along with decreased tolerance for activity and a diminished quality of life. By the end of 2022, she was unable to walk independently and relied on assistance for daily activities. She denied that her parents were consanguineously married and reported no family history of similar diseases. Physical examination revealed that her height was 162 cm, weight was 44.0 kg, and BMI was 16.77 kg/m2. She entered the clinic room in a wheelchair and had all 28 teeth as dental implants. The thyroid was not enlarged, and there were no obvious abnormalities in the lungs or heart. Both hands displayed ulnar deviation of the middle fingers. No other significant skeletal deformities were noted, although mild atrophy of the lower limb muscles was observed.

The study protocol was approved by the scientific ethics committee of PUMCH. The patient signed informed consent before participating in this study.

Laboratory evaluation
Fasting blood samples were collected in the morning at about 8:00 AM. Serum calcium, phosphate, ALP, alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and creatinine (Cr) were analyzed using an automatic biochemical analyzer (ADVIA 1800, Siemens, Germany). An automated Roche electrochemiluminescence system (Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland) was used to detect serum concentrations of parathyroid hormone (PTH), and 25 hydroxyvitamin D (25-OHD), β-isomerized C-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen (β-CTX), and procollagen type 1 amino-terminal peptide (P1NP). In addition, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was measured using an automatic biochemical analyzer (ADVIA 1800, Siemens, Germany). Free triiodothyronine (FT3), free thyroxine (FT4), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), blood cortisol, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were measured using an automated Roche electrochemiluminescence system (Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland). Serum immunofixation electrophoresis (IFE) was performed using an electrophoresis instrument (ProteomeLab, Beckman Coulter, United States) for differential purposes. All biochemical indicators were measured uniformly in the central laboratory of PUMCH.

Bone mineral density and X-ray examination
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA, Lunar Prodigy, GE Healthcare, Madison, WI, USA) was used to measure areal bone mineral density (BMD) at lumbar spine 1–4 (LS), femoral neck (FN), trochanter, and total hip (TH) at baseline and follow-up. Radiographs of the spine, pelvis, and bilateral lower limbs were obtained at baseline. Based on the patient's clinical presentation and radiological findings, regular follow-up radiographs of both femora were scheduled every 3–6 months to closely monitor the healing process of the fractures.

Detection of gene mutation
Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral leukocytes of the patient using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Mutation detection was performed using next-generation targeted exon capture sequencing. All mutations and potential pathogenic variants were validated by Sanger sequencing. The pathogenicity of the variants was assessed according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP) Standards and Guidelines. The pathogenicity of the missense mutation was predicted using MutationTaster software (http://www.mutationtaster.org/).

Treatment and follow-up
After being diagnosed with adult-HPP complicated by non-healing bilateral fractures, severe bone pain, and limited mobility, the patient requested further treatment. As AA was not yet available in mainland China, the patient was treated with experimental subcutaneous daily injections of 20 µg teriparatide to promote fracture healing. Simultaneously, the patient received daily supplementation with 600 mg calcium and 0.25 µg calcitriol every other day. However, after 6 months of the above treatment, bone pain persisted, and there was no radiographic evidence of healing in the bilateral femoral fractures.

The patient then initiated AA (Strensiq, Alexion Pharmaceuticals Inc., Boston, MA, USA) therapy and discontinued teriparatide treatment. Based on previous studies, we recommended administration of AA treatment for the patient through subcutaneous injections of 2 mg/kg per dose, three times a week. At 1, 4, 6, and 10 months of AA treatment, bone metabolic markers, BMD, femoral fracture imaging, and drug-related adverse reactions were monitored. The AA dosage was adjusted according to the improvement in the patient’s symptoms and fracture healing status. Initially, the patient received 2 mg/kg per dose, three times a week for 4 months, followed by 1 mg/kg per dose, three times a week for 2 months, and finally, 1 mg/kg per dose, once a week for 4 months.