A 7-year-old boy was brought to the Emergency Department by his mother. The mother complained that the child’s left eye had deviated upward. Five days before the deviation, the boy had blunt trauma from a football striking to the left orbit and face. The mother noticed an upward deviation but did not seek immediate medical consultation. The child did not have any pain, blurring of vision, diplopia, loss of consciousness, nausea or vomiting, seizures, or abnormal behavior at presentation.

The child was playful during the ophthalmological examination and had no abnormal head position. His vision was 20/20 in both eyes. He had mild limitation of depression in the left eye but had full extraocular motility in other cardinal directions. In the primary position, hypertropia was noted in the left eye, and it increased in the left gaze with a right-side head tilt, consistent with inferior rectus muscle palsy. He had normal intraocular pressure (IOP) in RE (17mmHg) and LE (16mmHg) as measured by a tonometer (iCare, Vantaa, Finland). No mass was felt around his orbit on palpation, nor was any optic nerve function deterioration noted. Fundus examination showed a healthy optic nerve head and normal retina without brakes. The exophthalmometer measurements at the base (91mm), RE (14 mm), and LE (15 mm) were of normal size.

Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed soft tissue density involving the left maxillary sinus extending into the left nasal cavity and left extraconal orbit. This mass could be attributed to an organizing hematoma and was reported to correlate with the clinical findings. The ear, nose, and throat (ENT) review revealed no nasal discharge or obstruction. The left middle turbinate was congested with purulent discharge adherent to the mucous membrane. The maxillary opacification was attributed secondary to trauma, but an urgent Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sinus with contrast was recommended to rule out other causes.

The Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) showed a 37.6×38.4 mm lesion within the left maxillary sinus, extending to the orbit, nasal cavity, premaxillary, and retro-maxillary areas with a heterogeneous signal and mild heterogeneous enhancement. There was also an underlying abnormal marrow signal in the left posterior maxillary alveolus with abnormal thickening and signal in the gingiva, which was suspected to be a neoplastic process.

A biopsy of the left maxillary sinus and left nasal cavity showed malignant round cell neoplasm positive for desmin, myogenin, and myogenic differentiation 1. Fluorescence in situ hybridization was positive for FOXO1.

Based on these clinical and imaging findings, the patient was diagnosed to suffer from alveolar fusion-positive RMS. A full metastatic workup included cerebrospinal fluid analysis, bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, chest CT, brain MRI, bone scan, and positron emission tomography. It did not reveal any metastatic lesions.

One month after the presentation, the child developed severe conjunctival chemosis, high IOP, and lagophthalmos. He was given thrice daily dorzolamide 2% eye drops to lower the IOP.

The Tumor Board labeled this child to have PM-RMS stage III. According to the TNM classification, the tumor was classified as T2bNxM0, representing intermediate risk based on Children’s Oncology Group Rhabdomyosarcoma Risk Stratification.11 The treatment plan included radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The chemotherapy included vincristine, actinomycin D, and cyclophosphamide (VAC) in high doses. The child received 45 Gy/25 fx using rapidArc technique. Five cycles were given, and treatment is still ongoing. Three months after the start of treatment, there was a marked decrease in the size and extension of the tumor, with the 3 months later image showing the orbits and optic nerve sheath free of tumor. Six months after initiating the therapy, the patient’s appearance improved, and his IOP normalized. Therefore, 2% of dorzolamide eye drops were discontinued. The child continues to be under the care of a multidisciplinary team.