A Black male infant weighing 2,021 g was born at 35 weeks and three days of estimated gestational age by repeat cesarean delivery because of concern for decreased fetal movement in the setting of a low biophysical profile score (based on muscle tone, heart rate, movement, breathing, and amniotic fluid volume). Maternal history was notable for sickle cell trait, advanced maternal age, and obesity. Pregnancy history was notable for oligohydramnios observed via ultrasonography at 31 weeks. Fetal ultrasonography also showed bladder distension, bilateral hydroceles, urethra dilation, and abdominal urinary ascites concerning for lower urinary tract obstruction and possible bladder rupture. Rupture of membranes occurred at delivery.

At delivery, the infant experienced respiratory distress and was treated with positive pressure ventilation, supplemental oxygen, and intubation. Apgar scores were two and seven at one and 5 min of life, respectively. Examination showed substantial bruising and duskiness of the left upper extremity. The infant was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit for treatment of respiratory distress and suspected lower urinary tract obstruction. On evaluation within 1 h after birth by orthopaedic and plastic surgery specialists, the distal third of the forearm and hand were cyanotic, and a large blister and surrounding area of desquamation were evident on the dorsum of the hand. No spontaneous movement of the left upper extremity was observed, and no withdrawal or response to stimuli was elicited. Doppler ultrasonography showed arterial flow to the level of the antecubital fossa, but no radial or ulnar pulses were detected. Physical exam findings were consistent with NCS, likely due to compression from uterine wall due to oligohydramnios during pregnancy.

After approximately 5 h of serial examinations, as well as extensive discussion with the orthopaedic, plastic surgery, neonatology, and pediatric anesthesia teams, as well as the infant’s parents, the decision was made to perform decompressive fasciotomy of the forearm, hand, and carpal tunnel to enable limb salvage. Fasciotomy was performed at approximately 6 h after birth. The infant was monitored closely throughout the following days. The appearance of the left upper extremity gradually improved. On day three of life, the forearm and hand had improved markedly in color and appeared well vascularized. Doppler signals were present throughout, from the brachial artery to each digit. The fasciotomy wounds were allowed to heal by secondary intention, and a custom splint was applied with the wrist in neutral position and the fingers extended. No signs of infection or ongoing ischemia were present. The wounds were well healed by six weeks of age. At the follow-up visit at four months of age, the wounds were fully healed. The patient had full passive range of motion of the wrist and fingers. He was noted to have slight flexion and extension of the ring and small fingers, but otherwise minimal active motion of the wrist or hand at this point. He had active motion of the shoulder and elbow. The patient will continue receiving occupational therapy, as well as splinting and scar massage to prevent/minimize contractures. Multidisciplinary teams will continue following his progress and recovery closely.