64-year-old patient admitted with a 8-month history of asthenia, anorexia, jaundice, weight loss of 30 kg and a mass in the right lung on chest radiograph, recently detected. In the last few days he added disorientation and apathy. A computed tomography (CT) of the chest was performed showing a 30x25 mm mass in the lateral segment of the middle lobe, homogeneous, with a small hypodens image inside, as well as bilateral pleural effusion. In the admission laboratory, a hepatogram alteration was observed (total bilirubin: 6.5 mg/dL, direct bilirubin: 6.3 mg/dL, glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase: 174 IU/L, glutamic pyruvic transaminase: 41 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase: 604 IU/L, tricyto-penia (haematocrit: 28, haemoglobin: 9.3 g/dL, white blood cell count: 3200/ mm3. Neutrophils: 89.6%, lymphocytes: 6.6%, eosinophils: 0%, monocytes: 3.8%, basophils: 0%, platelets: 100 000/ mm3), hypoalbuminaemia (1.8 g/dL), moderate hyponatraemia (127 mEq/L) and hypergammaglobulinemia (2.21 g/dL), the rest of the basic laboratory determinations being normal. Serum ammonium was normal. Serological tests for hepatitis A, B and C, VDRL and HIV were negative. The test for the detection of antinuclear antibodies (ANA/FAN) was positive with a titre of 1/1280 and a homogeneous nuclear pattern (AC-1). The tests for the following autoantibodies were positive: anti double-stranded DNA, anti cyclic citrullinated peptide, anti ribosomal P antigen and anti C1q, and negative for anti smooth muscle (AML), anti LKM, anti antimitochondrial antibodies, anti myeloperoxidase, anti proteinase 3, anti Sm, anti La, anti Ro, anti RNP and anti rheumatoid factor. The direct Coombs test was positive.

The complement fractions C3 and C4 were found to be decreased. C3: 28 g/dL (normal value: 90-180 g/dL), C4: 5 g/dL (normal value: 10-40 g/dL). The neutrophil count was decreased. Erythrocyte series with decreased haemoglobin was observed. Myeloid series with some elements with asynchronous maturation. These findings were interpreted as reactive changes. The abdominal ultrasound and Doppler port-a-cath scan were performed, and a mild ascites was found without hepatic focal lesions or signs of portal hypertension. A magnetic resonance imaging of the brain with gadolinium was performed, which showed mild cortical atrophy with a predominance of the frontal lobe, and no other relevant findings. The puncture of the pulmonary mass was performed under CT guidance, and the sample was sent to the anatomic pathology laboratory. The microscopic examination showed a predominance of neutrophils, and no neoplastic cells were found. The PAS, Ziehl-Neelsen and Grocott stains were negative. In the bacteriological laboratory, the sample obtained by puncture of the pulmonary mass was processed following the manual procedure. After 6 days of incubation, development was observed in the liquid media. With Gram staining, Gram-positive branched bacilli were observed, and a Kinyoun stain was performed on the liquid medium, and the result was positive. After 48 hours of subculture of the liquid medium in the solid culture medium, the growth of whitish colonies was observed. The identification was carried out by conventional tests and by mass spectrometry (MALDITOF MS), corresponding to Nocardia cyriacigeorgica (identification score 1.97). The thoracocentesis was performed, and the liquid was obtained with characteristics of uncomplicated exudate. Cells: 350/ mm3 (polymorphonuclear 19%, lymphocytes 60%, monocytes 21%, with presence of reactive mesothelial cells). The culture of the pleural liquid was negative. The liver biopsy showed mild and variable mixed inflammatory infiltrate in the portal spaces, with absence of interphase hepatitis and presence of a perivenous duct reaction highlighted by the immunohistochemical cytokeratin 7 technique. A level of acinar bilirubinosis was observed. No necrotic-inflammatory foci were observed. Mild perivenular and periportal fibrosis was objectified. The thoracocentesis was performed, and the liquid cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was obtained with the following characteristics: appearance of rock crystal, proteinorracia: 69.8 mg/dL (normal value: 20-40 mg/dL), glucorracia: 35 mg/dL (glucose: 86 mg/dL) and chloride: 115mEq/L (normal value: 114 to 118 mEq/L). Culture for common germs, acid-alcohol resistant bacilli, fungi and Nocardia was negative. PCR was negative for herpes virus. The patient met 8 criteria of SLE according to the criteria of the SLICC group 2012 (ANA positive with a titre of more than 1/80, leucopenia, thrombocytopenia, delirium, pleural effusion, hypocomplementemia, anti-DNA antibodies positive and positive Coombs test in the absence of anaemia) and 24 points according to the EULAR/ACR 2019 criteria (entry criteria ANA positive, plus additional criteria: leucopenia: 3 points, thrombocytopenia: 4 points, delirium: 2 points, pleural effusion: 5 points, decrease of C3 and C4: 4 points and anti-DNA antibodies: 6 points). He received antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone-trimetoprim-sulfamethosazole (TMS) for 1 month, then was changed to oral treatment with minocycline-TMS. As an immunosuppressive treatment, he started meprednisone 40 mg/dL and hydroxychloroquine 200 mg/dL, which normalised the hepatic panel. After observing a reduction in the size of the pulmonary mass in the CT, and in the face of a diagnosis of neuropsychiatric involvement due to lupus, pulse cyclophosphamide was initiated, achieving a frank improvement in consciousness. After 2 months of hospitalisation, he was discharged for follow-up as an inpatient, but still with nutritional support. After one year of being discharged, he had regained weight, was lucid, and in good health.
