A 72-year-old man with a history of hypertension and nonvalvular atrial fibrillation was referred to our hospital with a suspected posterior mediastinal tumor. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a well-encapsulated tumor 3 cm in diameter with a heterogeneous interior adjacent to the right side of the 8th to 10th thoracic vertebrae. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could not be performed due to claustrophobia. Based on these imaging findings and localization, we suspected a neurogenic tumor and planned surgical excision using RATS.

The patient was placed in a slightly forward tilt, left lateral decubitus position under general anesthesia. RATS was performed via the right intercostal approach using the da Vinci Xi system (Intuitive Surgical, Mountain View, CA, USA) with three arms. An 8 mm trocar was first inserted into the sixth intercostal space (ICS) along the middle axillary line. Another 8 mm trocar for the right arm was inserted along the posterior axillary line at the fourth ICS. A third 8 mm trocar for the left arm was inserted into the ninth ICS along the posterior axillary line. The three robotic trocars were placed in an inverted triangular configuration relative to the lesion, allowing precise instrument manipulation without collisions. After maintaining the pressure in the thoracic cavity at 10 mmHg, the da Vinci robot was docked. On the left, a Cadiere grasper was installed, while on the right, Maryland bipolar forceps was placed. The tumor was well encapsulated and dark red and presented as a soft oval mass located in the posterior mediastinum, bordering the Th9 to Th10 thoracic vertebrae. The tumor was completely resected without damaging the capsules. The cut surface was yellowish with a homogeneous solid mass. No serious complications were observed during the postoperative course. The chest drain was removed on the first postoperative day, and the patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. Postoperative microscopic examination revealed predominantly mature adipose tissue with hematopoietic tissue comprising erythroblasts, megakaryocytes, and granulocytes. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with ML originating from the posterior mediastinum. He has been well for 3 years after surgery without recurrence.