A 12-year-old boy with Down Syndrome and motoric disorders was referred from the Pediatric Department to the Oral Medicine Department of RS Hasan Sadikin Bandung. The patient was diagnosed with Down Syndrome and myeloradiculopathy. The patient’s mother said that the patient was admitted to the hospital because of weakness in both patient’s hands and feet. The patient had a history of falling down about one year ago. The patient’s mother also had a difficulty in cleaning the patient’s oral cavity regularly.

In the extraoral examination, the patient had a dysmorphic face. The patient also had a cracking and desquamative condition of the vermillion border of the lips. Lymph node examination could not be assessed because the patient wore a cervical collar. The intraoral examination showed an irregular ulcer with 1×0.7 cm in diameter, indurated margin, and white-yellowish base at the right lateral border of the tongue. There was dentinal caries on 63 tooth and also the tooth remnants on 55, 62, 74, and 85 teeth. The upper and lower tooth remnants were suggested to be extracted by pediatric dentist. The space of the extracted teeth will be maintained using a space maintainer. The 55 tooth was sharp and caused an occlusion trauma to the right lateral border of the tongue.

Laboratory examination showed a decrease in sodium value (130 mEq/L) and an increase in lymphocyte value (46%). The MRI examination was performed in the Radiology Department to determine the presence of abnormalities in the cervical spine. The results of the MRI examination showed a dislocation of the patient’s cervical spine. The patient’s mother provided informed consent to publish the patient’s case details and any accompanying images.

Based on the history review, the clinical examination, and appropriate investigation, the patient was diagnosed with a chronic traumatic ulcer mimicking OSCC, exfoliative cheilitis, reversible pulpitis of 63 teeth, and radix gangrene on 55, 62, 74, and 85 teeth. The diagnosis of the chronic ulcer was based on clinical examination. There was an indurated margin in the traumatic lesion, which mimicked Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma clinically. The patient has been hospitalized for 4 days and was given paracetamol 120 mg/5 mL oral suspension and amoxicillin 125 mg/5 mL oral suspension from the Pediatric Department. The patient also was given sodium chloride 0.9% solution, povidone-iodine mouthwash 1%, and petroleum jelly from the Oral Medicine Department. The patient’s mother was instructed to clean the patient’s oral cavity using gauze soaked in sodium chloride 0.9% solution, compress the ulcer using povidone-iodine mouthwashes 1% three times a day as an antiseptic and anti-inflammatory agent to the oral ulcer, and apply petroleum jelly to moisturize the patient’s lips. The patient was also suggested to extract the 55, 62, 74, and 85 teeth.

In the second visit (3 days follow-up), oral lesions already showed improvement. In the third visit (1-week follow-up), the size of the oral ulcer at the lateral border of the tongue was getting smaller and the lesion of the lips had some improvement.

In the fourth visit (10 days follow-up), the size of the oral ulcer at the lateral border of the tongue already had significant improvement. Two days after the fourth visit, the patient underwent neurosurgery. The patient was observed in the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit postoperatively. After two weeks of observation in the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit, the experienced respiratory failure and was declared dead.