A 72-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with constant and gradually increasing epigastric abdominal pain for the past 10 days. The pain worsened following meals and was associated with nausea and retching. Within the past 24 hours, she had become unable to tolerate significant oral intake, and the pain had migrated to the right upper quadrant of her abdomen. Her medical history is significant for secondary progressive multiple sclerosis (MS) for the past 27 years, treated unsuccessfully at another institution with an experimental bilateral percutaneous transluminal jugular venoplasty 11 years prior. She also has hypertension treated with hydrochlorothiazide, and depression treated with citalopram, but no history of trauma, abdominal surgeries, or cardiovascular disease.

Upon presentation to the emergency department, she appeared quite uncomfortable, although her vital signs were within normal limits with a temperature of 36.5°C, a heart rate of 68 beats/min, blood pressure of 123/71 mm Hg, and an oxygen saturation of 92% on room air. Her abdomen was tender in the right upper quadrant with a positive Murphy’s sign. No abdominal masses were appreciated, and she had no peritoneal signs. She underwent laboratory testing, which demonstrated a leukocyte count of 12,000/μL with 84% neutrophils and a hemoglobin of 10.7 g/dL. Her serum liver enzymes, lipase, and liver function tests were all within normal limits. She underwent abdominal ultrasound, which demonstrated a positive sonographic Murphy’s sign, a 5 mm thickened gallbladder wall, and stones in the gallbladder lumen, but with no pericholecystic fluid or gallbladder distension. She had an incidental note of a complex cystic lesion seen in the left upper quadrant felt to be dilated bowel; however, bowel gasses obscured the pancreas and aorta. She was initially diagnosed with acute calculous cholecystitis, but an abdominal computed tomography (CT) was requested, given the unexpected finding in her left upper quadrant. The CT scan revealed a large hematoma (20 cm diameter) in the mid-abdomen adjacent to the pancreas and transverse colon mesentery, associated with a small 1.1×0.6 cm aneurysm of the MCA. No extravasation of contrast was seen and there were no signs of colonic ischemia. Given her clinical stability at this point, an angiogram with embolization of the mesenteric aneurysm was initially attempted through the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). The exact site of the aneurysm could not be reached due to acute angle of the culprit branch. Only proximal coils into small vessels potentially supplying the area were placed.

This was considered an incomplete embolization and as expected, the bleeding continued.

The patient was subsequently taken for urgent laparotomy. Given the size of the hematoma and its status overlying the superior mesenteric artery and supraceliac aorta, an aortic CODA balloon catheter (Cook Incorporated, Bloomington, IN) was positioned (but not deployed) within the distal descending thoracic aorta prior to performing the laparotomy. This was performed as a safeguard in case emergent proximal aortic control was required and to minimize the extent of hemorrhage in the event of exsanguination. Within her upper abdomen, a large, contained hematoma was identified at the root of the transverse colonic mesentery. The left and right colon were fully mobilized, and the transverse colon was divided to facilitate access to the aneurysm. The haematoma cavity was entered, the clot was evacuated, and the bleeding MCA was identified and ligated. No further bleeding was identified, and the endovascular balloon was never inflated. At this point, a large section of the transverse and distal ascending colon appeared ischemic, requiring extended right hemicolectomy, leaving the descending and sigmoid colon intact. Throughout the operation, the patient remained hemodynamically stable, so a stapled ileocolic anastomosis was performed without fecal diversion. Of note, there were some adhesions to the gallbladder, however the gallbladder itself appeared grossly normal, and was left in situ.

Post-operatively, 24 hours after her operation, the patient had a sudden rise in her heart rate to 100 beats/min and a drop in her hemoglobin to 6.0 g/dL. She was emergently resuscitated with blood products, and underwent a repeat CT angiogram, which demonstrated the persistence of her MCA aneurysm, just proximal to the site of ligation during her operation. She underwent repeat angiography through the SMA, which demonstrated two remaining branches of the MCA, one supplying the bleeding aneurysm, which had been ligated distally during the preceding laparotomy. Due to their tortuosity, these branches were difficult to cannulate and the bleeding vessel could not be selectively embolized. Upon discussion with the teams involved, there were limited operative options. As a result, a plan was made to place a covered stent in the SMA across the ostia of the inflow of the MCA. This effectively stopped the bleeding, and the remainder of the SMA remained patent. For the rest of her hospital stay, she had no further bleeding episodes. Her hospital course was complicated by a prolonged post-operative ileus for 14 days requiring total parenteral nutrition supplementation. She also developed a deep vein thrombosis in her right brachial vein on a post-operative day seven, requiring anticoagulation. Her presumed cholecystitis was mild, likely secondary to her large bleed, and was managed with parenteral antibiotics for 14 days. She made a full recovery and was discharged home 21 days after her index operation. At her 6-month follow-up visit, she continued to do well without any symptoms of biliary colic.