A 1-year-old girl was referred to our hospital with a 3-month history of diarrhea and weight loss. She was fed a mixed diet (breast and formula milk) from birth, beginning with rice and soybeans at 6 months and progressing to cows’ milk, wheat, and chicken eggs (yolk and white) at 8 months. She did not develop anaphylactic symptoms with formula milk and cows’ milk intake. There were no accompanying signs and symptoms related to other organs, such as mild eczema, skin dryness, or frequent upper respiratory tract infection due to cows’ milk allergy. Neither she nor anyone in her family had allergic diseases, such as atopic dermatitis or asthma. At 9 months of age, she developed vomiting, diarrhea, and anorexia; her previous diagnosis was infectious gastroenteritis and postenteritis syndrome. One month before her transfer to our hospital, she was admitted to the previous hospital because her symptoms did not improve for two months, and her weight loss progressed. During the 2 months prior to her admission, her diet was unrestricted. Although her vomiting improved after a few days of fasting, oral intake of elemental diets, formula milk, or rice porridge resulted in repeated diarrheas. Upon admission to our hospital, her physical examination revealed the following: height, 69.0 cm (standard deviation [SD] −2.2); bodyweight, 6641 g (SD −2.8), 999 g lesser than the weight measured 3 months ago; body temperature, 37.1 °C; heart rate, 96 beats per minute; and blood pressure, 88/50 mmHg. Her blood test results were as follows: white blood cell count, 16,900/mL (normal range [NR]: 7000–15,000); eosinophil percentage, 2.0% (NR: <5.6); hemoglobin, 9.9 g/dL (NR: 13.7–16.8); and platelet count, 679 × 103 cells/mL. Her laboratory test findings were as follows: total protein, 6.4 g/dL (NR: 6.8–8.1); albumin, 3.9 g/dL (NR: 4.1–5.1); aspartate aminotransferase, 35 IU/L (NR: 20–45); alanine aminotransferase, 17 IU/L (NR: 4–24); blood urea nitrogen, 7.4 mg/dL (NR: 8–20); C-reactive protein, 0.47 mg/dL (NR: <0.03); sodium, 135 mEq/L (NR: 137–147); potassium, 3.6 mEq/L (NR3.6–5.2); bicarbonate, 19.1 mmol/L (NR: 21.0–27.0); and lactic acid, 21 mg/dL (NR: 4–16). At this time, a sufficient number of calories, amino acids, and fat was being administered intravenously. The serum IgE level was 1028 IU/mL (NR < 30), and radioallergosorbent tests were positive for milk (63.7 UA/mL class 5), casein (9.8 UA/mL class 3), alpha-lactalbumin (51.6 UA/mL class 5), egg white (58.8 UA/mL class 5), egg yolk (10.8 UA/mL class 3), ovomucoid (13.2 UA/mL class 3), wheat (14.5 UA/mL class 3), and soybean (1.3 UA/mL class 2). Skin prick tests were not performed to confirm the results of specific IgE test. Immunoglobulin (Ig) levels (IgG, 954 [NR 357–989] and IgM, 89 [NR 29–190]) and lymphocyte subset ratios were normal. Fecal eosinophil tests were negative, and no infection was detected in stool culture tests. Stool adenovirus, rotavirus, and norovirus antigen tests were negative.

Imaging and endoscopy examinations were performed to determine the cause of the prolonged diarrhea. Abdominal computed tomography and ultrasound examinations revealed no abnormalities in the small intestine; the large intestine was dilated but no wall thickening was observed, suggesting nonspecific enteritis. An EGD showed no macroscopic abnormalities from the esophagus to the duodenum. However, histopathology of the duodenum mucosa revealed the loss of mucosal villous structure, crypt hyperplasia, crypt apoptosis, and lymphocyte and eosinophil infiltration (<20 eos/hpf) into the lamina propria, with partially formed crypt abscesses. Total colonoscopy showed no abnormal macroscopic findings; however, histopathology of the colonic mucosa revealed erosion of the mucous membranes; cryptitis with decreased goblet cells, fibrosis, plasma cells, and lymphocytes; and some eosinophil infiltration (<20 eos/hpf) into the lamina propria. These findings were similar to the findings in the duodenum mucosa.

Autoimmune enteropathy and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) were suspected; therefore, additional tests were performed. Antiautoimmune enteropathy-related 75 kDa antigen and anti-villin antibodies were absent and no significant pathogenic variants were found in 25 genes (covered by public insurance in Japan) related to monogenic IBD and immunodeficiency, polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy X-linked (IPEX) syndrome. EGID was considered in the differential diagnosis, but a diagnosis of FPE was finally suspected based on the characteristics of the gastrointestinal mucosa, such as atrophy of small intestinal mucosal villi, crypt hyperplasia, eosinophil infiltration below the EGID diagnostic criteria (<20 eos/hpf), and lymphocyte infiltration. Her peripheral blood eosinophil count was also not elevated. Chronic atypical (positive for specific IgE) non-IgE-GIFA was suspected (7). Her diarrhea disappeared after prednisolone (PSL) therapy (1 mg/kg) and the complete removal of formula milk, cows’ milk, and chicken eggs from her diet. No relapse occurred even after discontinuing PSL one month later. Adverse effects due to long-term treatment with PSL, such as hypertension, did not occur. Five months after discontinuing oral PSL and the complete removal of formula milk, cows’ milk, and chicken eggs, duodenal histopathology revealed normal mucosal villous structure and well-differentiated ductal arrangement. Three months after the second EGD, she resumed eating chicken eggs without experiencing gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea and vomiting; however, 3 months later, her symptoms, including abdominal pain and diarrhea, relapsed within days of resuming cows’ milk consumption. Based on the abovementioned findings, FPE was diagnosed, with cows’ milk suspected to be the allergen source. At 2 years and 3 months, her height had improved to 81.5 cm (SD −1.4) and her weight to 11.4 kg (SD +0.33) without the occurrence of gastrointestinal symptoms.