The patient was a 51-year-old man weighing 79 kg who was referred to a private hospital for treatment for general malaise, with nausea and repeated vomiting accompanied by abdominal pain and diarrhea with 36 hours of evolution, which led to a significant loss of fluids, causing dehydration and severe hypotension, which required admission to the intensive care unit. In his medical history, the patient stated that on April 15, 2020, he had eaten wild mushrooms that he had collected between alfalfa crops in his property in the Department of Lavalle, Province of Mendoza, where rainfall is scarce and temperatures are very extreme. The land has characteristics of a wide plain with extensive presence of sandy and saline soils, where xerophytic vegetation is suitable for goat farming and the development of ecological beekeeping. In this alfalfa crop, a microenvironment is generated that allows the growth of fungi, which he sometimes harvested to eat. On this occasion, he observed some fleshy fungi that he cooked and ate, the same day, at lunch. He reported that they were very rich and that he had eaten all the preparations, with nothing left for the rest of the family. The patient continued his story: after about 10 hours of ingestion, he began with abdominal pain and nausea, followed by vomiting and diarrhea, so he consulted the emergency room of a zonal hospital of low complexity, where he was treated symptomatically. The next day, after 36 hours of ingestion, he had a severe abdominal pain and nausea, followed by vomiting and diarrhea, so he consulted the emergency room of a hospital of low complexity, where he was treated symptomatically. On the night of April 16, 2020, he was admitted to the intensive care unit of the Private Hospital of the City of Mendoza with gastroenteric-colonic syndrome with bloody stools and severe dehydration (zero cm of venous water), which required admission to the intensive care unit, for parenteral rehydration with crystalline solutions (saline and 5% dextrose in water). Given the severity of the condition and the recent ingestion of wild mushrooms, the Center for Information and Toxicological Advice of Mendoza was notified, where they indicated, in addition to the support measures initiated, that a nasogastric tube should be placed and activated and that activated charcoal should be administered serially (50 g every 6 hours for 4 days). In addition to N-acetylcysteine (70 mg/kg every 4 hours until normalization of transaminases), phytomenadione (10 mg, once a day) and penicillin G EV (1,000,000 IU every 4 h), to block the uptake of the eventual presence of amatoxin, as well as metoclopramide and omeprazole EV (40 mg/d) were administered. On admission, blood was drawn for laboratory and the patient was prepared for dialysis. At 12 hours of admission to the ICU, diuresis was achieved (80 ml/h). The report of examinations of admission laboratory showed altered renal function and elevated hepatic transaminases. The relatives of the patient collected some of the fungi that he had eaten for identification. A photo was shared with the Argentine Toxicological Information Center (REDARTOX) and with an expert in mycology belonging to the Institute of Mycology and Botany (InMiBo), who explained that it could be a fungus of the Lepiota genus, containing amatoxins, such as Amanita phalloides. The fungus could be sent by post to the Center for Identification of Toxic Fungi of the InMiBo, Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences, University of Buenos Aires on April 21, arriving on April 30, with the report issued on the same day. After a macro- and micro-morphological analysis, it was confirmed that the species was Lepiota brunneoincarnata Chodat & C. Martín. The cap had a diameter of 15 to 45 mm, convex to flat convex, with brownish-vinaceous scales with vinaceous tones, on a creamy base. Foot 20-60 x 7-13 mm, off-white, covered by brownish-vinaceous scales, also with vinaceous tones, on a creamy base. Spores (6.5-) 7-9 –(9.5) x 4-5 µm, ellipsoidal, hyaline, dextrinoid, basidios 32-33 x 6-7 µm. The phialides were 20-25 x 7-8 µm. The day 22 of admission was compensated, with normal renal function, hepatic transaminases without increase and amylase normal, but continued with nausea and gastric disorders. The day 24 of admission, in better condition, with normal renal function, hepatic transaminases and bilirubin in frank descent, persisting the gastric disorders. His hepatic transaminases increased dramatically (GOT, 435UI/L; GPT, 40 UI/L) 36 hours after ingesting the fungi, remaining elevated the first six days, entering a general trend of decline of the levels (Table 1). The day 11 of admission was discharged with normal hepatic transaminases (GOT, 36 UI/L; GPT, 40 UI/L). The patient also presented jaundice on day 3 of admission, when the total bilirubin reached its highest level (4.01 mg/dL), decreasing in the following days. Creatinine values were elevated the first three days of admission, with their highest level on day two (3.10 mg/dL), decreasing later to remain low for the rest of the treatment, without apparent problems. Creatinine and urea blood values returned to normal during the follow-up. Prothrombin times reached a maximum of 16.5 seconds on day 4, decreasing in the following days. Finally, he was discharged on day 27 of admission, recovered clinically and with laboratory values within normal parameters, 11 days after admission. On day 2 of June, when he was cited for a control, he was in good general condition and his last analytical was normal.
