A 69-year-old male with prior history of CABG presented with severe dyspnea at mild exertion (NYHA III) of 2 months duration was admitted in our center. The electrocardiogram showed ST depression in leads II, III, aVF, and V4-6, and blood examination revealed elevation of plasma N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide levels (2640 pg/mL). Echocardiogram showed left ventricular systolic dysfunction and low left ventricular ejection fraction (30%). The patient had inferior ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction in 2009, when he was 59 years old, with angiographic evidence of severe 3 vessels disease (coronary angiography showed CTO in proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD), 90% stenosis in mid and distal left circumflex artery, and 95% stenosis in mid RCA. The patient underwent CABG with left internal mammary artery (LIMA) to LAD, and sequential SVG to 1st obtuse marginal branch (OM1), 2nd obtuse marginal branch (OM2), and posterolateral branch (PL) in 2009.

Coronary angiography was performed via 6 French (Fr) left radial artery access and demonstrated patency of LIMA to LAD and SVG to OM1, OM2 conduits, but a complete occlusion of sequential SVG to PL conduit. Native left main coronary artery was occluded in ostium and native RCA was occluded in the mid portion with bridging collaterals. We decided to treat the native RCA CTO. Dual arterial access was achieved with another 6 Fr sheath in right femoral artery. The left and right coronary arteries were intubated with 6 Fr AL 0.75 (Launcher; Medtronic; USA) and 6 Fr EBU 3.5 (Launcher; Medtronic; USA) guide catheters, respectively. An antegrade approach via left radial artery was attempted; however, neither Fielder XTR wire (Asahi Intec, Japan) nor Gaia 3 wire (Asahi Intec, Japan) with Finecross microcatheter (Terumo, Japan) reached the true lumen in distal RCA. Then, parallel wire technique with Crusade microcatheter (Kaneka, Japan) and two Gaia 3 wires (Asahi Intec, Japan) were attempted, but also failed. We therefore switched to the retrograde approach using septal channel from LAD through occluded left coronary artery. Gaia 3 wire (Asahi Intec, Japan) crossed occluded left main (LM) and LAD, and finally reached true lumen in distal LAD. Sion wire was exchanged by Finecross microcatheter (Terumo, Japan) into dital LAD, and dilation of LM and proximal LAD with a 2.0 × 15 mm balloon was performed. Then, septal surfing technique (SST) was used for septal crossing. We tried different septal channels originating from proximal to distal LAD, and delivered Sion wire (Asahi Intec, Japan) retrogradely through distal septal branch into distal RCA supported by a 150-cm Finecross microcatheter (Terumo, Japan). Gaia 3 wire (Asahi Intec, Japan) crossed CTO lesion retrogradely into the true lumen in proximal RCA, and was advanced into Guidezilla guide extension catheter (Boston Scientific, USA) positioned in the antegrade guiding catheter. The Finecross microcatheter (Terumo, Japan) was delivered to the antegrade catheter and a RG3 wire (Asahi Intec, Japan) was externalized. The CTO was then predilated by a 2.0 × 15 mm balloon and stented with 2 overlapping drug-eluting stents (2.5 × 38 mm and 3.0 × 38 mm) with excellent angiographic result and TIMI3 flow in all distal branches.

Dyspnea was relieved at discharge. At 6-month follow-up, the patient had no recurrence of dyspnea.