A 12‐year‐old female child with end‐stage heart failure due to restrictive cardiomyopathy underwent orthotopic heart transplantation. Severe primary graft dysfunction was present during operation, requiring the use of venous arterial extra‐corporeal membrane oxygenation. Heart function has completely recovered after 4 days, and her post‐operative period was complicated by transient acute renal failure and complete atrioventricular block that lasted >3 weeks after the operation. In order to avoid left ventricle dyssynchrony and possible right ventricle lead damage due to multiple‐rejection surveillance endomyocardial biopsies, a transvenous dual‐chamber pacing using isolated left ventricle pacing through the coronary vein was indicated.

Under local anaesthesia and mild sedation, the left cephalic vein was cut down, and a guiding catheter was introduced into the subclavian vein and placed into the coronary sinus initially to perform a cardiac venogram. A unipolar steroid‐eluting endocardial pacing lead with active fixation mechanism (Attain StarFix® 4195, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) was implanted into the anterior inter‐ventricular vein branch. Measurements at implantation were as follows: threshold 2 V at 0.4 ms, R wave 6 mV, and impedance 300 Ω at 4.8 mA. A second bipolar steroid‐eluting endocardial pacing lead with active fixation (2088T®, St. Jude Medical, Minneapolis, MN) was implanted at the right atrium.

Both leads were secured and connected to a rate‐adaptive pacemaker (Accent DR®, St. Jude Medical, Minneapolis, MN) that was placed in a left infra‐clavicle muscular pocket and programmed to VDD. The electrophysiological lead measurements were stable after the implant: ventricular threshold 1.5 V at 0.7 ms, R wave 4.5 mV, P wave 4.3 mV (bipolar), ventricular impedance 260 Ω, and estimated battery longevity 5 years.

The post‐implant electrocardiogram showed right bundle branch block morphology‐paced complexes, and the echocardiographic evaluation showed absence of atrioventricular, inter‐ventricular, and intra‐ventricular dyssynchronies. At 5‐year follow‐up, the patient remained in Functional Class I with the same pacing system and preserved ventricular function.