A previously healthy female toddler presented with several episodes of emesis and decreased urine output. There was no history of diarrhea or bloody stool, intake of contaminated food or water, or international travel. She was born prematurely at 30 weeks and was fully immunized. Past medical history was unremarkable for solid organ or bone marrow transplantation, malignancy, autoimmune disorders, intake of nephrotoxic drugs, infections, or hypertension. There was no family history of renal disease. Prior renal function showed a serum creatinine of 0.3 mg/dL at one month of life.

Vital signs showed an afebrile child with a pulse of 140 beats/minute and blood pressure of 88/56 mm Hg (<50th percentile). Physical examination was unremarkable except for signs of mild dehydration.

Initial investigations upon presentation are shown in Table 1. Due to progressive decline in renal function, a kidney biopsy was performed on day two of admission which showed 39 normocellular glomeruli with no segmental sclerosis, necrosis, crescent, mesangiolysis, or capillary thrombosis. There were patchy areas of acute tubular injury (ATI) characterized by tubular dilation, epithelial attenuation, mitotic figures, and sloughing of cells. There were no tubular necrosis and significant cellular infiltrates. Immunohistochemical stains for myoglobin and hemoglobin were non-contributory. Immunofluorescence was negative for immunoglobulins and complements. Electron microscopy showed intact podocyte foot processes, the absence of electron-dense deposits, and segmental glomerular basement membrane (GBM) splitting without multi-lamination. There were no platelet or fibrin thrombi of the microvasculature, vascular mucoid intimal edema, onion skinning, detachment of glomerular endothelial cells, and “double contours”. The peripheral blood flow cytometry showed normocytic anemia with no clonal B cells, abnormal T cells, or blasts. Bone marrow biopsy showed normocellular bone marrow (90–95%) with no increase in blasts.

On day three of the presentation, bloody stools appeared which led to a high index of suspicion for HUS. Stool examination was negative for ST but positive for EAEC (BioFire FilmArray GI PCR panel). We could not specify the serotyping as it was not available commercially. Serum complements C3 and C4 were normal. A genetic test for atypical HUS was sent for gene variants of various complement proteins. ADAMTS13 activity was normal. The platelet counts remained normal, and the peripheral blood smear continued to show the absence of schistocytes.

The differential diagnoses included partial HUS, and AKI secondary to severe volume depletion induced by vomiting, non-microangiopathic hemolytic anemias, and malignancies. Although AKI and histological features of tubular injury could be due to severe volume depletion from vomiting, the presence of concurrent hemolytic anemia warranted a high index of suspicion for conditions such as partial HUS.

Isotonic intravenous (IV) saline with bicarbonate was initiated upon admission. However, the renal function continued to worsen with peak serum creatinine 4.4 mg/dL and BUN 141 mg/dL. Given oligoanuria and electrolyte abnormalities, she received three sessions of daily hemodialysis (HD) with unfractionated heparin for anticoagulation. Loop diuretic was not administered given concern for dehydration-induced oliguria. On day three of admission, a single dose of IV eculizumab 300 mg was given after administration of meningococcal vaccine and penicillin therapy, with rapid recovery of renal function and hemolytic markers. No further dosages of eculizumab were required. Blood pressure remained normal. A follow-up of laboratory testing showed the absence of autoantibodies to factor H and I, normal serum factor H and I levels, and elevated soluble complement 5B-9 (SC5B-9) levels. Atypical HUS genetic susceptibility panel showed no deletion or duplication of C3, C4BPA, CD46, CD59, CFB, CFH, CFI, CFHR5, DGKE, THBD, PLG, and MMACHC genes (Cincinnati Children’s Clinical Laboratories, Cincinnati, OH, USA). Platelet counts did not decrease throughout the hospital course. Urinalysis continued to show dipstick positive for blood but absence of microscopic hematuria along with 1+ to 2+ proteinuria. Urine beta-2 microglobulin was elevated (3200 mcg/L, normal: <300 mcg/L, Mayo Clinic Laboratories, Rochester, MN, USA). Serum albumin remained in 3.5–4 g/dL range. Serum uric acid returned to normal following hemodialysis and stayed normal with no need for anti-hyperuricemic therapies such as rasburicase.

In a short-term follow-up of six months, the patient was normotensive with normal renal function and blood counts with resolution of tubular proteinuria. There were no medication-related adverse events. Follow-up genetic testing showed no complement or factor deficiencies and the absence of complement gene mutations.