Male patient, product of controlled pregnancy, without previously detected anomalies. He was born at 36 weeks of gestational age, in a basic level institution, with 2.5 kg. He presented neonatal multi-organ compromise and episode of cardiac arrest in the first 24 hours postnatal. He was transferred to a higher level institution where he was diagnosed with Dextro-TGA. After stabilisation, he was taken to atrio-septostomy at the second day of life. Due to clinical conditions, neonatal switch arterial correction was not performed. He evolved with multi-organ compromise and pulmonary hypertension, and required mechanical ventilation for two months with prolonged stay in intensive care. He progressed to the disfunctionalisation of the left ventricle in a sub-pulmonary position (left ventricle banana morphology), with severe tricuspid valve insufficiency in a systemic position. At 7 months of life, he underwent Mustard surgery and tricuspid valve plasty. In the postoperative period, he had severe biventricular dysfunction and terminal cardiac failure, so they considered transplantation as the only viable option, which is why he was referred to a higher level institution. In the admission studies, the banana-like morphology of the left ventricle and severe right ventricular dysfunction in a systemic position were confirmed, with moderate to severe tricuspid valve insufficiency. There was no evidence of a stenotic gradient in the tunnels of the Mustard or alteration of the coronary pattern. The patient was dependent on inotropic support and was on the list for transplantation without a donor available for 4 months, so it was decided to opt for pulmonary artery clamping for left ventricular re-training. At 11 months of life and with 6.9 kg, pulmonary artery clamping was performed, obtaining a peak gradient of 20 mmHg and a mass of 19.3 g/m2. Inotropic support was discontinued. Once stabilised, left ventricular failure management and ambulatory levosimendan boluses were continued. The atrial natriuretic peptide (BNP) changed from 330 pg/ml before the first clamping, to a nadir of 48 pg/ml after the procedure. Given the adequate clinical response, a new adjustment of the clamping was performed at 20 months of life with 9 kg, achieving a gradient increase to 50 mmHg, with a mass of 50 g/m2 and change in the morphology of the left ventricle. BNP increased to 272 pg/ml in the first year after the second clamping, although the trend was subsequently downward.

The last bolus of levosimendán was 4 months after the second cerclage. He was kept on oral medical management and strict clinical follow-up by the pediatric heart failure clinic for 6 years, with progressive and adequate response, meeting some of the criteria for left ventricular preparation of Stanford. (table 1). BNP decreased to a value of 104 pg/ml, which was considered quite acceptable for the physiology at that time and supported the decision to carry out the complete correction. With these data it was decided that he was a candidate for anatomical correction. Jatene surgery was performed with reimplantation of coronary arteries and Lecompte maneuver, dismantling of Mustard, atrial reconstruction, removal of the cerclage and reconstruction of the pulmonary artery. After this procedure, the patient continued in ambulatory follow-up for pediatric heart failure for 3 years, with functional class II and BNP normalized. He continued with an ejection fraction of the left ventricle of 53%, ejection fraction of the right ventricle of 45% and without fibrosis, although with criteria of alteration of diastolic relaxation. In that evaluation he was stable, schooled, performed activities and sports routinely, continuing in strict follow-up by the pediatric heart failure clinic. Without reconsidering cardiac transplant.
