She is a 36-year-old woman with a single antecedent of anxiety-depressive syndrome, with the onset of episodic headaches, typically migrainous with visual aura at the age of 7 years. The patient was referred from another hospital where she had consulted 5 years ago for worsening of the frequency of migraine episodes. The pain had become daily/practically daily, was usually disabling, pulsatile and accompanied by intense photophobia. Her neurological examination and a magnetic resonance (MRI) of the skull were normal. She took non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs almost daily and triptans more than 15 days a month. She had failed with therapeutic doses of metoprolol, topiramate, zonisamide, amitriptyline, lamotrigine and botulinum toxin type A as a preventive treatment. She had been treated with erenumab (initially 70 and then 140 mg) and galcanezumab in her hospital. She had an apparent initial transient response with both antibodies, which was lost a few months later in both cases, so they were withdrawn.

In the first evaluation in our consultation, the patient had more than 20 days of pain per month, most of which were compatible with migraines with intense pain. We initiated treatment with valproic acid without a clear response (migraine crises persisted between 15 and 20 days per month), so we requested a special use of eptinezumab at a dose of 100 mg intravenously every three months. With this drug, the initial response was excellent in the first two months of treatment, in which a clear reduction in the number and intensity of crises and in the consumption of symptomatic medication was observed. However, this benefit was lost (for two consecutive quarters) in the third month after the infusion, which the patient interpreted as a failure of the treatment. We requested authorisation to administer eptinezumab at the end of the second month and, with this administration, the patient currently has a frequency of 3–5 days of headaches per month, which are less intense and respond well to conventional analgesia, allowing her to lead a normal personal and professional life.
