A 13-year-old male patient was admitted to the Children’s Hospital in Damascus after noticing a palpable enlarged mass in the left inguinal region. His medical history was unremarkable except for a surgical intervention on his spine 6 years ago due to an accident, which resulted in the loss of motor function and sensation in both of his lower extremities.

Due to the long period he had spent in bed, the patient developed decubitus sores on his left foot. The only finding on clinical examination was a mass in the left inguinal area, which was movable on deep structures and so was the overlaying skin on it. The mass was not tender on palpation, and no signs of local inflammation were observed.

Laboratory tests revealed an Elevated ESR (119 mm/h in the first hour). Other Basic Laboratory tests including (Complete Blood Count, Liver function tests, electrolytes, Urea, Creatinine and LDH) were ordered and were within normal ranges for age. Ordering these tests was essential to rule out systemic diseases. Given the absence of indicative physical findings for systemic disorders or immunodeficiencies, additional tests like those for HIV or Direct Antiglobulin were deemed unnecessary.

A CT of the abdomen, chest, and pelvis showed enlarged lymph nodes inferior to the inguinal ligament, with the largest measuring approximately (3.5 × 2.4 cm). Other organs and nodes were within normal limits.

All of the above-mentioned investigations were essential to rule other high-risk diagnosis including lymphoma and leukemia. However, these were not sufficient to reach the definite diagnosis, so a decision of surgical resection of the nodes was taken.

To confirm the diagnoses and exclude other potential differentials presenting with enlarged lymph nodes, surgical removal of all of these enlarged nodes was performed under general anesthesia, and biopsies were sent for microscopic study.

The biopsy showed hyperplastic nodal architecture with proliferation of histiocytes and plasma cells with vascular proliferation, consistent with Plasma cell subtype of Castleman’s Disease.

The patient was discharged from the hospital after 14-day period after ensuring that there were no remaining enlarged lymph nodes. The only recommendation was oral prednisolone. The patient underwent follow-up using a whole-body CT scan every three months. During each hospital visit, a comprehensive clinical examination and laboratory tests (e.g. Complete Blood Test, ESR, C-reactive protein, liver function tests, renal function tests) were performed in addition to the CT scan. After a 12-month follow-up period, the patient reported no new symptoms or enlarged lymph nodes. Additionally, no abnormalities were observed during clinical examination or in laboratory tests.