19-year-old male patient, no known family history as the patient is adopted.

At 6 months of age, he was brought to an emergency department with a 48-hour history of diarrhea accompanied by vomiting of gastric contents. The patient was severely dehydrated on admission.

Initial laboratory studies indicated a hydroelectrolytic imbalance, hyperglycemia, ketonuria (++++) and severe metabolic acidosis. Treatment was initiated for diabetic ketoacidosis as the main diagnostic suspicion. Also, due to respiratory distress, advanced airway management was necessary, so the patient remained in the intensive care unit for 11 days. Subsequently, treatment for ketoacidosis was discontinued during his stay, due to the suspicion of organic acidemia and not of diabetic ketoacidosis as the main cause of his clinical condition. The patient has not had new episodes of hyperglycemia since then, only indicating that he continued with severe metabolic acidosis. Bicarbonate replacements were performed until he showed improvement, which allowed the patient to be discharged to his home, although the cause of the metabolic acidosis of elevated anion gap could not be determined on that occasion.

At 12 months of age, the patient developed a second episode, with a diagnosis of laryngotracheitis as the reason for admission to the emergency department, with similar biochemical characteristics to the initial episode, with the exception of serum glucose, which was within normal parameters.

Laboratory studies at admission showed the following results: serum glucose 79 mg/dL; serum creatinine 0.2 mg/dL; serum calcium 8.7 mg/dL; serum phosphorus 4.2 mg/dL; serum chloride 100 mEq/L; serum sodium 135 mEq/L; serum potassium 1.9 mEq/L; serum magnesium 1.1 mEq/L; venous blood gas pH: 7.0; pCO2 27.1; pO2 52; serum bicarbonate 7.9 mEq/L.

The patient was discharged for clinical improvement on that occasion, but the persistence of ketonuria (++++). Because of this, the approach of metabolic acidosis of elevated anion gap was initiated, with suspicion of inborn error of metabolism.

Urinary organic acids were studied by gas chromatography and mass spectrometry. The results showed a marked elevation of ketone bodies (acetoacetate, 3 beta-hydroxybutyrate), which, together with the patient's clinical presentation, was highly suggestive of succinyl-CoA acetoacetate transferase (SCOT) deficiency.

Evolution
After diagnosis, maintenance therapy was initiated with a high-carbohydrate, low-protein (1.06 grams/kilogram of body weight) and low-fat diet including 30 g of cornstarch, a modified amino acid compound (Ketonex-2R), equivalent to 90 g, and 2 g of sodium bicarbonate.

The patient had 3 more episodes of mild-moderate anion gap metabolic acidosis, the last at 18 years of age, with no new episodes since.

His last laboratory results were as follows: venous blood gas pH 7.4; serum bicarbonate 25.9 mEq/L; normal levels of ammonia and lactate; with discrete positive (+) ketone bodies in urine and clinically asymptomatic, which demonstrated that the patient had an adequate response to treatment, so we inferred an absence of permanent ketosis.
