A male was born via an emergency cesarean section due to fetal distress at 40 weeks of gestational age. The mother's age was 33 years, with gravida 1 and para 1 parity. Both the parents and brother had no family history of congenital anomalies, aortic-related diseases, or sudden death. Based on the results of the prenatal ultrasonography at the end of the second trimester, the femur length of the fetus was found to be 1 to 3 weeks longer than the supposed length of the actual gestational age. Fetal echocardiography showed cardiomegaly with a fetal cardiothoracic circumference ratio of 0.5 or higher based on the baby's term. Moreover, the size of the foramen ovale was larger than normal, and left aortic constriction was seen next to the subclavian artery basin. Furthermore, no other abnormalities were found on prenatal ultrasound.

At birth, the weight was 3560 g (75 percentile), the length was 56.5 cm (over 90 percentile), and the head circumference was 36 cm (over 90 percentile). Apgar scores at 1 and 5 minutes were 4 and 6 points, respectively. In the delivery room, the patient had no spontaneous breathing and had bradycardia and cyanosis. After being admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit, various musculoskeletal malformations were confirmed via physical examination. Severe arachnodactyly and camptodactyly were observed in both hands and feet, and the soles of the feet were flat. The elbow and knee joints were not fully extended. The face had malar hypoplasia with senile facial appearance. The eye was deeply settled with a down-slanting palpebral fissure, and the ear with hypoplastic cartilage was poorly settled and crumpled. The patient presented with a sagging mouth, prominent coronal suture, and brachycephaly. A grade V/VI systolic murmur was heard at both the upper sternal border and left lower sternal border with grade III parasternal heave. Echocardiography showed poor cardiac contractility, severe pulmonary hypertension, dilated aortic sinus (20.2 mm) (Z-score; 8.08 by Boston, 6.37 by Detroit, or 5.97 by Halifax), and multiple intracardiac valvular dysfunction with valve prolapses (moderate aortic regurgitation, severe mitral regurgitation, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, and moderate pulmonary valve regurgitation). And the ophthalmologic examination results showed ectopia lentis in both eyes as well as lens subluxation. Liver herniation was confirmed using abdominal X-ray and ultrasound. The systemic score of the musculoskeletal manifestation was 11 points, according to the Ghent criteria (international diagnostic criteria for MFS).

For genetic diagnosis, Sanger sequencing and polymerase chain reaction were performed on the nucleotide sequence as reference for the FBN1 gene. As a result, a mutation in which G, the first base of the 32nd intron in the form of a heterogeneous mutation, was substituted with T (c.3964 + 1G > T). This was confirmed as the likely pathogen variant based on the 2015 ACMG/AMP guideline. The location of the mutation was included in the site previously known as the neonatal region of MFS (exons 24–32). The patient could be diagnosed with neonatal MFS with a novel FBN1 gene mutation within 2 weeks of life.

On the first day of life, differential cyanosis was found to show refractory hypoxemia despite more than 60% oxygen supply and signs of low cardiac output. The patient was managed medically for improving the low cardiac output according to severe mitral regurgitation and aortic regurgitation. Afterload reduction including milrinone continuous infusion, full sedation using fentanyl continuous infusion, and use of diuretic were attempt to improve the oliguria and heart failure. Despite the medical management, the patient presented with respiratory failure, heart failure, and severe pulmonary hypertension requiring continuous invasive mechanical ventilation. Aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation, pulmonary hypertension, and cardiac contractility got worse. After several consultations with the patient's family and medical staff about the treatment plan, palliative care was continued instead of surgical treatment. As a result, hepatic and pulmonary congestion accompanied by pulmonary hemorrhage had progressed as well. Eventually, it had progressed to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, and the patient died 32 days after the birth.