We report the case of a 42-year-old neuroscientist with a 23-month history of positional headaches following a lumbar puncture (LP) performed in February 2021 for suspected Multiple Sclerosis (MS), which was ultimately ruled out. The patient initially experienced position-dependent headaches localized at the back of the head and neck, accompanied by intermittent dizziness and tinnitus. Despite conservative treatments, including bed rest, caffeine tablets, IV hydration, and five non-targeted high-volume epidural blood patches (EBP), the symptoms persisted, with only temporary improvement lasting about six weeks. Over time, the patient’s condition worsened, leading to cognitive difficulties such as brain fog and an impaired work ability.

Diagnostic imaging was performed, and a high-resolution T2Space fat-saturated MRI revealed a small, nodular, hyperintense structure adjacent to the dorsal dural sac at the L3-L4 level, suggesting a possible post-puncture ‘arachnoid bleb’ corresponding to the alleged puncture site. A subsequent dynamic myelography and post-myelography CT on 03/05/2022 demonstrated unremarkable intrathecal contrast distribution without evidence of an epidural contrast leak or structural irregularities, particularly at the L3-L4 level, even during delayed imaging.

The MRI findings indicated the presence of an ‘arachnoid bleb’ at the suspected puncture site. Given the persistent, debilitating symptoms and lack of long-term improvement from the blood patches, a decision for surgical exploration at the L3-L4 level was made.

Microsurgical exploration identified an arachnoid bleb as a cause of a low-flow CSF leak. The patient gave his consent for the surgical management. The video depicts Neomenbranes overlaying the dura mater. Underneath, we identified an Arachnoid bleb and CSF oozing out, washing a layer of blood away. The CSF leaked like a tear, and we had the impression of a weeping dura. Treatment was performed by bipolar shrinking of the bleb; the dura was sealed and reinforced using a collagen Matrix—TachoSil (Takeda Pharmaceuticals, Zurich, Switzerland), a Dural substitute, and fibrin glue. The patient’s symptoms gradually improved following the surgery.