The authors present the case of a 49-year-old male patient. He was asymptomatic and had no personal history of chronic medication use. He was currently a smoker, but denied alcohol or toxic use. The patient was admitted to the emergency department due to chest pain and dyspnea that began half an hour earlier. Five days before admission to the hospital, the patient reported a similar episode of chest pain that began while walking and persisted for about 30 minutes after rest.

Upon arrival at the emergency department, the patient was prostrate and cyanotic with increased respiratory rate and hypoxia despite a high-flow oxygen mask. The patient progressed rapidly to cardiopulmonary arrest and advanced life support was initiated and he was intubated and ventilated. Blood gas analysis revealed severe metabolic acidosis with hyperlactatemia (pH = 6.87, carbon dioxide partial pressure - PaCO2 - of 105 mmHg, oxygen partial pressure - PaO2 - of 120 mmHg, bicarbonate - HCO3 - of 13.9 and lactate of 13.5 mmol/L). The electrocardiogram showed wide complex tachycardia with regular R-R intervals (170/minute) with a rightward shift in the axis, suggesting monomorphic ventricular tachycardia. As there was no response to advanced life support maneuvers, with persistence of ventricular tachycardia without pulse, and taking into account the complaint of chest pain, the hypothesis of acute myocardial infarction was considered and alteplase was administered for thrombolysis, given that the hospital did not have a hemodynamic laboratory. After recovery of spontaneous circulation, an electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm (90/minute) and bifasic T between V3 and V5.

The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. A transthoracic echocardiography revealed discrete hypokinesia of the apical segment of the inferior left wall. Blood analysis showed mild anemia (hemoglobin 11.5 g/dL), acute renal injury (creatinine 2.26 mg/dL and urea 76 mg/dL) and mild hypokalaemia (3.2 mmol/L). Markers of myocardial necrosis were slightly increased: hs-troponin 84 pg/mL (cut: 34.2 pg/mL), creatine kinase 510 IU/L (cut: 200 IU/L), creatine kinase MB 6.8 ng/mL (cut: 7.2 ng/mL) and myoglobin 2914 ng/mL (cut: 116 ng/mL). The level of D-dimer was also elevated (1,678 ng/mL; cut: 500 ng/mL). Hs-troponin increased to 358.50 pg/mL after 3 hours, and its maximum value was 832 pg/mL, 24 hours after admission.

Thrombolysis was complicated by bleeding at the insertion site of the central venous catheter and profuse haematemesis. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, which showed mucosal bleeding, digested blood and clots in the stomach. Because of the active bleeding, the case was discussed with the haemodynamic laboratory, and angiography was delayed until clinical stabilisation and cessation of the haemorrhage.

Three days after admission, the patient improved gradually, allowing orotracheal extubation. A computed tomography of the skull showed no changes. A ventilation-perfusion scan was performed, excluding pulmonary embolism. A coronary angiography revealed coronary arteries without relevant lesions and a right coronary artery with abnormal origin from the left coronary sinus. Then, an ACTC confirmed the abnormal origin of the right coronary artery from the left coronary sinus, with a path between the trunk of the pulmonary artery and the aorta posteriorly - an interarterial path with a length of 18 mm; there was no evidence of an intramural path or coronary atherosclerosis, with a zero calcium score. A cardiac magnetic resonance did not bring important information and no late contrast was detected.
