Thirty years-old Para two Gravida three gestational ages of 39 weeks and 4-day pregnant mother currently presents with chronic rheumatic heart disease, severe mitral regurgitation, moderate pulmonary hypertension, severe left atrial dilatation, mild aortic regurgitation, and mild tricuspid regurgitation scheduled for elective caesarean section. She had one previous caesarean section four years ago with an indication of fetal macrosomia. Her cardiac condition, however, was moderate mitral regurgitation, mild left atrial dilatation, mild pulmonary hypertension, and no tricuspid or aortic regurgitation. The patient had continuous follow-up after diagnosis until now but has not taken any medication since 8 years ago.

On the preoperative assessment, the mothers had shortness of breath during exercise, exercise intolerance after 1 year, an intermittent productive cough, and a history of anaesthesia. Otherwise, she had no history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, asthma, or a central nervous system disorder. Her vital signs were 110/70 mmHg non-invasive blood pressure, 90 beats per minute heart rate, 20 breaths per minute respiratory rate, and 36.7 °C temperature. On her entire preoperative follow-up, her blood pressure was in the lower border and maximum of 110/70 and the remaining blood pressure was less than this value. She appeared healthy, with adequate mouth opening and Mallampati class 1. Her atlantoccipital and temporomandibular joints were functional, had no tenderness, could move freely in all directions, and could bite her upper lip without difficulty. The spine examination was normal. Graham Steele heard a murmur in the left upper lobe during chest auscultation, and the third heart sound (a holosystolic (pansystolic) murmur) was heard at the apex via the diaphragm of the stethoscope in the left lateral decubitus position.

The patient’s CBC was 12.8 g/dl, Hct was 38%, and Plt was 176 x 103/l, according to the laboratory results. WBC was 6.3 x 103/l, RBC was 4.36 x 106/l, BG-O +ve organ function test Cr 0.4 mg/dl, SGPT 13.6 u/l, SGOT 20.5 u/l, and electrolytes were normal. ECG results showed a left atrial abnormality. Echocardiography presented chronic rheumatic heart disease: severe left atrial dilatation (68 mm), severe mitral regurgitation, mild aortic regurgitation, mild tricuspid regurgitation, moderate pulmonary hypertension, and an ejection fraction of 65%.

When the patient had been fully informed of the advantages and disadvantages of anaesthesia and surgery, she accepted her ASA Class III status before having her formal informed consent obtained. She transferred to the operating room after obtaining bilateral large-bore IV access. Apart for capnography, the patient was being monitored per usual procedure.

The patient’s vital signs at baseline were 102/61 mmHg BP, 90 bpm HR, 36.5 oC Toc from axilla, and 97% oxygen saturation. We intend to administer lower-dose local anaesthesia with opioid spinal anaesthesia along with trans-abdominal (TAP) block because we are a developing nation and do not currently have an epidural anaesthesia kit or an IV anaesthesia agent on hand to maintain the anaesthesia goal for mitral regurgitation and moderate pulmonary hypertension.

After assessing the location of the needle insertion and performing local infiltration with 2% plain lidocaine while seated, spinal anaesthesia was administered using a rigorously aseptic procedure. After a free flow of CSF and negative blood aspiration, 7.5 mg of heavy bupivacaine + 0.1 mg of morphine were administered via a 24G spinal needle as spinal anaesthesia between the L4 and L5 interspaces. The patient was placed in the supine position, and before making the skin incision, a TAP block with a 0.125% solution (40 mL of bupivacaine) was administered bilaterally. The level of T6 was reached with the spinal blockade. 2 L/min of supplemental oxygen was given through a nasal catheter immediately after spinal anesthesia and supine position.

Surgery started after 15 minutes of spinal anesthesia. Following the delivery of the baby, 10 IU of oxytocin IM were administered as uterogenic drugs. The uterus was remained relaxed after 10 IU of oxytocin, therefore the gynaecologist requested more oxytocin, but the patient’s blood pressure was borderline low. Misoprostol 600 mg sublingually was used to prevent hypotension brought on by oxytocin and to promote uterine contraction. Furosemide was given intraoperatively to prevent further exacerbation of pulmonary hypertension.11 In the first five minutes of delivery, the neonatal Apgar score was 9–10/10. It took 45 minutes to complete the procedure.

Total amounts of fluid, blood loss, and urine output were 1500 mL, 400 mL, and 300 mL, respectively. Throughout, we have not encountered any complications associated with spinal anaesthesia. The intraoperative time was mostly uneventful with the exception of a slight tachycardia relative to her baseline heart rate for the first 4 minute.

Post operatively; SpO2, NIBP, and ECG monitoring were used in the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU), along with oxygen supplementation delivered through a nasal catheter. She remained stable throughout the entire postoperative period. After spending an hour in the PACU, she was moved to the gynecology/obstetrics ward. Her initial analgesic need was not met until 18 hours later, when she received 50 mg of pethidine IV. She had a smooth hospital stay and was released after four days.