A 29-year-old right-handed Kurdish male was diagnosed with Sturge–Weber syndrome (SWS) and poorly controlled epilepsy since infancy. Since birth, significant hemangioma formations have been obvious on the right side of his face. At 11 months of age, following hospitalization for two circumcision and hernia surgeries, the first generalized seizure occurred. Since the first episode, he has been treated with phenobarbital escalating to a total dosage of 250 mg daily. During his teenage years and beyond, the frequency of his seizures decreased to twice a month. He also acknowledged that the clinical presentations of his seizures have changed since the age of 15–16 years. Witnesses reported that the majority of the former seizures began with left-sided paresthesia, without marching and convulsions, followed by loss of consciousness, with hand automatism and then left versive. He said irrelevant words in some of these attacks and occasionally had left-side Todd’s paresis. The second seizure type has appeared since the patient’s adolescence, starting as an epigastric aura, followed by impaired awareness and hand automatism. He had no recollection of his episodes after the auras. While these two types of auras have never occurred at the same time, second-type seizures have accounted for the majority of his seizures in recent years.

The physical and neurological examinations did not reveal any significant positive findings, nor did the patient have a positive family history of SWS or epilepsy. He had no history of tobacco, alcohol, or cigarette smoking. He and his parents were not evaluated for genetic disorders. Prior evaluations, including complete blood count (CBC) and metabolic panel, were normal. Neuropsychological tests showed that his overall intellectual function and verbal and performance IQ are reduced on average. Regarding memory function, his verbal memory was better than his visual memory. He had average performance on working memory, visuospatial, and executive functions.

Brain MRI with contrast and epilepsy protocol demonstrated tumor signals in the right temporal lobe’s ventral dimension of the para-hippocampus gyrus with right mesial temporal lobe sclerosis and SWS vascular lesions. Atrophy and high signal intensity in the right hippocampus with obliteration of hippocampus head digitation showed shrinkage of this area with sclerotic changes versus the left side (mesial temporal sclerosis; MTS).


A 9 × 10 mm high signal heterogeneous lesion with an intercortical cystic component without post-contrast enhancement, in the ventral aspect of the right Parahippocampal gyrus was also shown, suggesting a low-grade glioma (LGG). Atrophy of the right parietal lobe compared to the left side with cortical atrophy and sulci dilation was also noted. Prominent leptomeningeal enhancement in the right parietal lobe, secondary atrophy with mild enlargement of the ipsilateral choroid plexus, and dilation of parenchymal veins, in favor of SWS, were seen.

Long-term video-electroencephalography monitoring (LTM)
7 days after medication withdrawal, one of his typical seizures was captured. The patient was asleep when the seizure started. Then he developed grimacing, followed by staring and impaired awareness. Afterward, he started left-hand automatism. The whole event took ~ 120 seconds without post-ictal Todd’s paresis. The electroencephalographic ictal pattern started about 10 seconds before the clinical manifestations of the seizure, appearing as right anterior temporal 4 –5 Hz rhythmic theta, and spreading to the left temporal regions occurred after ~ 10 seconds. There was postictal right temporal delta slowing. The patient developed bradycardia during the seizure, which continued afterward. Thus, we ended medication withdrawal and stopped further seizure evaluation Interictally, independent right anterior temporal epileptiform discharges were recorded. Although previous electroencephalographic studies are not available, we think that our patient has developed temporal lobe epilepsy in recent years on the basis of expressed seizure-semiology including oro-alimentary symptoms and abdominal-visceral sensations.

Phenobarbital was deemed not to be the most appropriate medication for the type of seizures, so it was gradually reduced to 100 mg daily, and 2000 mg daily of levetiracetam was added. In follow-up visits, we carefully monitored the adverse effects of the drugs and seizure manifestations. Despite the frequency of his seizures and drowsiness having decreased to half, the patient noted that his irritability and aggressiveness increased. No suicidal warning is documented. After discussing the pros and cons of surgical treatment with the patient, he developed a positive attitude toward that. Especially because it could allow him to reduce the medications he requires and to improve seizure control. Therefore, we have planned a fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan to localize the epileptogenic zone more precisely, before scheduling him for surgery. The patient’s treatment was disrupted as a result of the need to obtain the essential funds for the PET scan and surgical operation.