A 19-year-old primigravida at 35 weeks of gestation with no medical or family history, without consanguinity, was referred for assessment of a fetal pelvic mass found on the third-trimester ultrasound. On admission, vital signs were within normal limits and prior fetal ultrasound scans were also within normality.

The patient was hospitalized for workup of the fetal malformation. The transabdominal obstetric ultrasound showed a single female fetus in longitudinal position, complete breech presentation and adequate biometrics and fetal weight for gestational age. The anatomical findings included fetal head with hypotelorism and microphthalmia; fetal abdomen with a 58 × 59 × 69 mm circular hypogenic image of irregular contours and a volume of 124 cubic centimeters localized posterior to the bladder, with no uptake of color doppler; uncompromised fetal urinary system, with a diagnostic impression of fetal hydrometrocolpos. Complementary fetal magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the finding of hypotelorism, microphthalmia and, in the fetal pelvis, a 74 × 64 × 52 mm cystic lesion of significant size and round morphology extending from the pelvis to the abdomen, of high signal intensity in T2 and low in T1, with no septations or solid components on the inside. It caused anterior displacement of the bladder and posterior displacement of the rectum. A small saccular formation was observed in the upper portion, suggesting the presence of fluid in the uterus, consistent with the diagnostic impression of fetal hydrometrocolpos.

During the hospitalization, the patient had preterm uterine activity; infection was ruled out with complete blood count, C reactive protein and normal urinalysis. Late preterm lung maturation was instituted. Progression of the preterm labor and a complete breech presentation required an immediate cesarean section at 36 weeks to deliver a single fetus with normal amniotic fluid, female newborn weighing 2,550 g, APGAR of 2, 0, 0 at one, five and ten minutes, respectively. Unresponsive to neonatal resuscitation maneuvers, the outcome being perinatal death.

Autopsy examination revealed low-set ears, micrognathia, broad nasal bridge and bilateral anophthalmia; neck and chest of normal appearance; ballooning abdomen; syndactyly in upper and lower limbs; external female genitalia with imperforate hymen. Internal exam of the skull and brain sections showed no evidence of gross malformations or focal lesions. In the chest, heart, lung and diaphragm were normal. In the abdomen, liver, spleen, kidneys and bladder had normal morphology. Uterus and vagina had a cystic appearance and were markedly dilated from content of yellowish material associated with vaginal atresia. These findings confirmed a definitive diagnosis of FS.