A 53-year-old African woman presented with heart failure with increasing dyspnea, lower limb edema, and cyanosis of her lips and extremities with refractory hypoxia. We noted that she did not have a history of heart disease or digestive pathology. She was never operated on previously, and had no history of medical pathology or surgery in her family.

A clinical examination revealed blood pressure of 120/70 mmHg, oxygen saturation at 85%, and a 3/6 diastolic murmur of aortic insufficiency with a holosystolic murmur (grade 4/6) suggestive of tricuspid valve regurgitation. Lower limb edema up to her knee joint was also present. We also detected a flushing with hepatalgia and asthenia. A neurological examination was normal; in particular, there was no sensory or motor deficit and no language disorder. The rest of the clinical examination was also normal.

A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm and a heart rate of 66 beats per minute (bpm).

She underwent transthoracic echocardiography, which showed slightly dilated right heart cavities with right ventricular end diastolic diameter (RVEDD)/left ventricular end diastolic diameter (LVEDD) of 0.8, right atrial (RA) area of 20 cm2, and tricuspid ring of 39 mm with a preserved function in which tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) was 16 mm and right ventricular (RV) velocity (S’) = 10 cm/second. Tricuspid valves appeared thickened and retracted with restricted mobility and poor coaptation responsible for a severe tricuspid regurgitation. Pulmonary valves were thickened with a moderate pulmonary (IP) insufficiency.

A large patent foramen ovale (PFO) with aneurysm of her interatrial septum was detected with continuous right-to-left shunting.

The left-sided valves were not normal. Our patient had a moderate aortic regurgitation and minimal mitral insufficiency. The function of the left ventricle was good with ejection fraction (EF) of 55%.

She was initially treated with furosemide. The evolution of her treatment was marked by regression of the signs of her heart failure.

Because of her hepatalgia, a computed tomography (CT) of her abdomen was done and showed multiple hepatic and mesenteric nodules. A resection of 30 cm of her small bowel was done with an anterior gastrointestinal anastomosis.

Biopsies of her liver and mesenteric nodules showed a secondary mesenteric and hepatic localization of a well-differentiated endocrine carcinoma. An immunohistochemical study showed positivity for chromogranin and negativity for synaptophysin. Laboratory findings revealed increased serum chromogranin A (574 ng/ml, normal < 102 ng/ml) and urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA; 1183 μmol/24hours, normal < 40 μmol/24hours). An octreotide scan showed an intense radiotracer accumulation in her liver as well as normal distribution of the radiotracer in her kidneys and spleen.

Because of all these elements, we concluded that our patient had carcinoid syndrome complicated by the involvement of both the right side and left side of her heart. Her cyanosis was due to a right-to-left cardiac shunt.

Our patient received somatostatin analogue therapy (one injection every 3 weeks). Her 5-HIAA and chromogranin A levels decreased to 450 μmol/24hours and 109 ng/ml respectively. For the heart disease, cardiac surgery was indicated: foramen ovale closure with tricuspid valve plasty.

The evolution of her treatment was marked 6 months after the surgical procedure by the regression of hypoxia with good clinical improvement. An echocardiography control showed minimal tricuspid regurgitation, without residual shunt of patent foramen oval.