A 22-year-old woman came to the Department of Oral Medicine with complaints of mouth ulcers causing pain and eating and drinking difficulty persisting for a duration of one month. This condition begins with a fever and appears like pimples on the lips. Based on the anamnesis, it was discovered that she had been using pod-type vapes for about a year but had never experienced complaints like when she came for treatment. She had never smoked traditional cigarettes before starting to vape. She said the reason for trying vaping was out of curiosity, and she quite often tried different types of e-liquid with different flavors. Before her complaint, she had simply changed the type of e-liquid to a different flavor without mentioning the brand. She vapes almost every day, but not all day, only in her free time or with friends. She was a healthy individual, and before this condition appeared, she had no history of taking medications, including antibiotics, analgesics, anticonvulsants, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, and antifungals. She also had no history of drug or food allergies, but the patient has unhealthy eating habits (eating irregularly and not consuming vegetables and fruit). Extraoral examination showed no lesions on other parts of the body, while the lips of the patient had serosanguineous crusts and an erosive area at the corner of the mouth, and tended to bleed. Intraoral examination revealed white ulcers with yellowish edges, irregular, varying sizes, and pain on the labial, buccal, lateral, and ventral mucosa of the tongue and floor of the mouth.

Based on the medical history of the patient and physical examination, which revealed oral mucosal involvement but no symptoms elsewhere in the body, as well as the non-reactive anti-HSV1 IgG results, the diagnosis of vaping-related oral erythema multiforme was established. The medical condition has been classified as minor erythema multiforme. The oral conditions were treated with 0.9% NaCl, which was moistened in gauze and placed on the lips three times a day. The patient was instructed to gargle 1 mg of dexamethasone in 10 mL of hyaluronic acid three times a day and avoid eating or drinking for at least 30 minutes after gargling. She was also given 2% miconazole cream applied to the wound in the right corner of the mouth twice a day, as well as vaseline album cream for dry lips. To maintain good oral hygiene, she was advised to brush her teeth and tongue twice a day, after breakfast and before bed. She was also instructed to stop vaping and avoid foods containing monosodium glutamate (MSG). The control was carried out after a week following therapy and showed that oral condition had improved. Written informed consent for the publication of details was obtained from the patient. This case report conformed with the Helsinki Declaration. The publication of this case report has also been approved by the institution.