A 31-year-old male patient, presenting with typical angina symptoms upon exertion, sought care at the emergency department. Notably, at the age of 14, he experienced an episode marked by persistent fever, painful cervical lymphadenopathy, and conjunctivitis. Despite elevated inflammatory markers and extensive diagnostic workups, no definitive diagnosis was made. He was treated for inflammatory pericardial effusion, which required drainage, and was given empirical antibiotics. After three weeks of supportive care and further investigation into potential Still’s disease, he was discharged on prednisolone. Over the years, he remained stable without further symptoms or complications.

Upon admission, the physical examination was unremarkable, vital signs were blood pressure of 135/82 mmHg, pulse of 82 beats/min, respirations of 14 breaths/min, oxygen saturation (O2 sat) of 100%, and temperature of 37.1°C. Cardiac and pulmonary auscultation revealed no pathological findings, and the extremities were well-perfused without oedema.

The electrocardiogram showed dynamic changes, including inverted T waves in lead aVF and leads V5–V6. Blood tests revealed elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T, peaking at 657 ng/L (normal < 34 ng/L). No other abnormalities were found in the blood tests, including a normal BNP (B-type natriuretic peptide) level. Echocardiography indicated preserved systolic function with no segmental alterations and no significant changes, including aortic dissection.

The patient underwent ICA that revealed left main trunk aneurysmal disease and chronic total occlusion (CTO) of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery, with a medial aneurysm of the left circumflex (LCx) artery 70% occluded, and a CTO of the mid right coronary artery (RCA) with several collaterals.

Given the aneurysmal disease, the patient underwent a computed tomography angiography (CTA) examination and was subsequently recommended for coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). The coronary CTA scan revealed a significant aneurysm involving the distal left main trunk and the ostial portion of the LAD, with thrombosis causing subocclusive stenosis. Additionally, two sequential aneurysms were found in the LCx, with parietal calcification but no significant stenoses. The mid-segment RCA showed an ecstatic segment with mural thrombosis but remained patent, allowing for anterograde filling through collateral vessels.

A CTA scan was conducted on the cranial, supra-aortic, and abdominopelvic vessels, demonstrating no aneurysms. Therefore, the CABG was promptly performed on the fifth day of admission. The surgical procedure comprised the following sequential anastomoses left internal mammary artery to the LAD artery, right internal mammary artery (RIMA) to the first obtuse marginal artery (OM1), and RIMA to the interventricular posterior artery. Showing a positive evolution, the patient was discharged from the intensive care unit and transferred to a general ward 2 days after surgery with dual anti-platelet and statin therapy (aspirin 100 mg/day, ticagrelor 180 mg/day, rosuvastatin 200 mg/day) and was discharged from the hospital one week later.

The patient is under follow-up in the cardiology consultation and, six months post-infarction, reports no cardiovascular symptoms, classified as NYHA (New York Heart Association) class I and CCS (Canadian Cardiovascular Society) class 0. Laboratory tests are unremarkable, and the echocardiogram shows preserved global systolic function with no kinetic changes.

