The patient was an 81-year-old woman with a medical history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia. The patient was brought to our hospital with severe right hemiparesis and total aphasia, and the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score at admission was 16. The last known well (LKW) to door time was 12 hours. At our facility, we follow a time-based imaging protocol for acute stroke cases: cases within 4.5 hours from onset undergo CTA first, while cases beyond 4.5 hours are evaluated with MRI first. MRI demonstrated cerebral infarction in the left middle cerebral artery area, and the diffusion-weighted imaging Alberta Stroke Program Early CT Score (DWI ASPECTS) was 7. MRA revealed left M2 segment occlusion. However, findings from the chest X-ray indicated a possible anomaly in the aortic arch, leading us to perform additional CTA to assess the access route for thrombectomy. CTA revealed RAA with mirror-image branching. The patient did not receive an intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator. Although there is limited evidence supporting MT in such scenarios, we carefully evaluated the patient’s condition based on several factors: the pre-stroke modified Rankin Scale (mRS) was 0, the DWI ASPECTS was 7, and the presentation was a wake-up stroke with a DWI-FLAIR mismatch, suggesting that the actual time from onset might not be as prolonged as indicated by LKW. Additionally, the patient exhibited severe symptoms with an NIHSS score of 16. Based on these factors, we judged that MT was appropriate, as it provided a chance to improve the patient’s outcome.

We chose the usual guidance system. A 9-Fr sheath was inserted into the right common femoral artery. A guidewire (Radifocus; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) and 6-Fr JB2 catheter (Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) were advanced using a 9-Fr OPTIMO balloon guide catheter (Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan).

The guide catheter was advanced from the abdominal aorta in the middle of the spine to the thoracic aorta on the right side of the spine and was easily placed in the left internal carotid artery in the usual way with reference to the CTA. Left internal carotid angiography revealed a left M2 inferior trunk occlusion. Thrombolysis in the cerebral infarction 2B reperfusion was achieved using Trevo NXT 3 × 32 mm (Stryker, Fremont, CA, USA) and Catalyst 6 (Stryker) after 3 passes. The time from puncture to recanalization was 61 min (10 min, from puncture to placement of the guide catheter in the left internal carotid artery; 51 min, from placement of the guide catheter to recanalization). Post-procedural CT revealed a small subarachnoid hemorrhage.

Atrial fibrillation was not detected, and whole-body contrast-enhanced CT was performed to further search for the embolic source. Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) and pulmonary embolism (PE) were observed in the right deep femoral vein and both pulmonary arteries, respectively. Transesophageal echocardiography demonstrated patent foramen ovale (PFO). Despite antinuclear antibodies and coagulability being examined using blood tests, these were not the causes of the cerebral infarction. The pathogenesis of the cerebral infarction was determined as a paradoxical embolism, and apixaban was administered after DVT and PE were revealed. The thrombus in the femoral vein and pulmonary artery almost disappeared, and cerebral infarction did not recur. Right hemiparesis and aphasia persisted, and at discharge, the mRS score was 5.