A 42-year-old P1A0 woman was admitted to our hospital with a two-week history of chronic fever. Her fever was notable for being present mostly during evenings. She reported that she felt better with paracetamol, but her fever did not abate. During her fever, she complained of watery stools for two days, after which she was constipated. The patient did not complain of dysmenorrhea or dyspareunia. She lived in a rural area where tropical infections, such as typhoid and paratyphoid fever, are common. There was no family history of malignancy. Her last pregnancy occurred 21 years ago and she had undergone hormonal contraceptive injections for 20 years. The patient had an irregular menstrual cycle with a duration of 5–7 days. The patient had no relevant medical history. Laboratory workup results suggested typhoid fever.

During observation in the ward, the patient suddenly developed severe, acute abdominal pain. The pain was unprovoked and started in the lower abdomen. It soon spread to the entire abdomen, and an acute abdomen was diagnosed. Subsequently, she underwent abdominal radiography, which showed excessive intestinal air distribution in the right upper abdomen and suspected localized ileus in the right upper abdomen. Diffuse peritonitis due to suspected hollow viscus perforation as a complication of typhoid fever was established, and an emergency laparotomy was performed immediately.

In the theatre, approximately 1000 cc of chocolate-like fluid was discovered after accessing the peritoneal cavity. The fluid was evacuated and ruptured bilateral ovarian cysts were observed. A gynecological surgeon performed the surgery and found bilateral endometriomas. The right endometrioma measured approximately 10 cm in diameter, whereas the left endometrioma measured approximately 15 cm. Adhesions with the surrounding organs were observed and successfully lysed. A bilateral cystectomy was performed.

She was transferred to a high-dependency unit before being transferred to the general gynecology ward. She was hospitalized for four days; fortunately, she recovered uneventfully. The pathological report confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral endometriomas.