A patient in her early 30s, G2P1001 with intrauterine pregnancy at 12 weeks’ gestation was initially admitted to an inpatient psychiatric unit seven months after delivering her first child due to new-onset psychosis and starvation ketosis. According to her husband, she had been self-isolating, not eating, and not taking care of her infant in the weeks after the birth of her first child. Her past medical history included hypothyroidism, inflammatory bowel disease, and anemia of chronic disease, but no prior psychiatric illness. Her thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level confirmed appropriate levothyroxine dosing. Her psychotic symptoms did not improve after initial inpatient treatment with olanzapine, mirtazapine, and haloperidol, and she continued to deteriorate with ongoing refusal to eat and 10 kg weight loss, which was a 20% loss from her weight at presentation. Her pregnancy was also complicated by an ultrasound diagnosis of multiple fetal anomalies at 17- and 20-weeks’ gestation, including double outlet right ventricle, transposition of the great arteries, and intracranial ventriculomegaly. The patient and her husband (i.e., her surrogate decision-maker) were informed of these findings and counseled on management options including prenatal genetic screening tests and amniocentesis, which they declined. They were also counseled on the options of pregnancy continuation, adoption, and termination, and they decided to continue the pregnancy.

Postpartum psychosis was eventually determined to be the patient’s most likely psychiatric diagnosis, given that the onset of her mental illness occurred after the birth of her first child and then persisted into her current short-interval pregnancy. Therefore, at 20 weeks’ gestation, she was started on lithium, the first-line treatment for postpartum psychosis. At 26 weeks’ gestation, she developed symptoms of an upper respiratory infection and significantly decreased her oral intake of fluids due to pain with swallowing. Her dehydration led to volume depletion and impaired renal clearance of lithium, which precipitated lithium toxicity with serum lithium levels as high as 3.90 mmol/L (therapeutic range: 0.8–1.2 mmol/L) [3]. She then developed respiratory failure due to aspiration pneumonia in the setting of lithium toxicity, and she was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) where she was intubated, started dialysis for lithium-induced AKI, and received norepinephrine, midodrine, and piperacillin/tazobactam for presumed septic shock. Blood, respiratory, stool, and urine cultures ultimately came back negative for growth; however, all the cultures were collected after antibiotic therapy had already been initiated. One week after ICU admission her fevers resolved, her chest X-ray showed interval decrease in multifocal patchy airspace opacities, her white blood cell count down-trended from 81.8 K/cumm to 19.1 K/cumm, her lithium level decreased to <0.10 mmol/L, and her serum creatinine improved from 2.58 mg/dL to 0.64 mg/dL. However, at 27 weeks’ gestation, she developed multiple mild-range blood pressures more than 4 h apart and intermittent severe-range blood pressures, which persisted for two days after vasopressors were discontinued. On the same day when her blood pressures became elevated, she also developed elevated LFT’s (AST 58 U/L, ALT 36 U/L), which rapidly increased to AST 413 U/L, ALT 281 U/L over the next 24 h. Liver ultrasound showed hepatomegaly with an otherwise normal- appearing liver. Due to concern for medication side effect as the underlying etiology of her elevated LFT’s, piperacillin/tazobactam was discontinued, and her sedative was switched from Propofol to dexmedetomidine.

After these medication changes, her AST initially slightly down-trended to 323 U/L while ALT up-trended 346 U/L; however, her LFT’s subsequently increased again to AST 506 U/L, ALT 510 U/L. In addition to rapidly rising LFT’s, her labs were notable for an elevated LDH of 603 U/L, an elevated protein/creatinine ratio of 2.83, and up-trending platelet count in the 400s K/cumm. During this time, she continued to have intermittent mild-range blood pressures off vasopressors. However, she had normal serum creatinine, serum glucose level, and coagulation profile, and her peripheral blood smear did not show evidence of hemolysis. During extubation trial, she was noted to have rhythmic jerking of her bilateral upper extremities that was initially concerning for seizure activity vs. agitation; however, she subsequently had a normal electroencephalogram and computed tomography scan of the head. Due to the overall clinical picture concerning for PE with severe features, the patient received a betamethasone course for fetal lung maturity and intravenous magnesium sulfate for seizure prophylaxis, then underwent cesarean delivery at 27w2d. On postpartum day #1 her LFT’s began down-trending to AST 359 U/L, ALT 471 U/L, and by postpartum day #8 her blood pressures returned to normal with AST 19 U/L, ALT 96 U/L. At her outpatient postpartum checkup one month after delivery, she continued to have normal blood pressures with AST 15 U/L, ALT 15 U/L.

The neonate was small for gestational age with a birthweight of 840 g (3%), although the estimated fetal weight measured appropriate for gestational age on prenatal ultrasounds. The neonatal 1 min Apgar score was 0 and 5 min Apgar score was 1. The infant had respiratory distress syndrome and required extensive resuscitation including chest compressions for 10 min and intubation. Postnatal imaging confirmed multiple anomalies including septo-optic dysplasia, double inlet left ventricle with a highly underdeveloped right ventricle, and an interrupted aortic arch. The infant eventually deteriorated due to cardiac complications and demised after palliative extubation was performed on day of life #66.