The patient was a 54 year old, para 2 mother, who came from a rural area to the Nekemte Compressive Specialized Hospital with the complaint of a mass in her vagina of 3 years duration. Three years ago, she encountered a protrusion of mass through her vagina, which gradually grew in size over time. She had two babies, last delivery being 12 years ago. Both deliveries were at home as the health facility is too far from her residency area, being assisted by traditional birth attendant, and she claimed that it was smooth. Initially, 3 years back, there was bleeding and an offensive discharge from the mass but that stopped in the last year. She developed lacerations on the mass 6 months back. For this reason she divorced and isolated herself from all social life for this long period of time. Now, she was brought to hospital by her older sister and other relative specifically for reason of the mass lacerations. She had no other known chronic medical illness.

Pertinent PE Finding
Vital sign: BP = 100/60 mm hg, PR = 84 bpm, RR = 20 bpm, T° = 36.5C°, weight = 47 kg.

GUS: there is pinkish mass per vagina which is about 7 cm from hymenal ring.

Uterine fundus is a leading part of the mass.

There was abouta 5 cm sized longitudinal laceration on the right side of the mass.

There was no bleeding and discharge from the mass nor laceration area.

Laboratory
CBC: hemoglobin = 12 g/dl, PLT = 285 thousand, neutrophil = 74% percent.

Urine analysis: normal finding.

Blood group = A, RH = positive.

HIV test = negative.

HBSAg = negative.

Ultrasound: partially full bladder seen in abdomen, uterus not seen in abdomen. Otherwise no other pertinent finding.

Chest X-ray: normal Chest X-ray finding.

For this finding, she was diagnosed with chronic uterine inversion. Images were taken pre-operatively and post-operatively, the uterine fundus was the leading point of the mass which protruded completely through the vagina and there was chronic laceration developed on the endometrial surface and after the operation, normal vaginal canal was seen. After reviewing management options with her and her family, she was scheduled for surgery and an abdominal hysterectomy was performed the following day. It was abdominal surgery and it was easy to take the uterus into the abdomen. As tissue was redundant and distorted, anatomical reference and surgical landmarks are difficult to identify. Due to this, the surgery was difficult and there was an intraoperative transactional right ureteral injury and an end=to=end anastomosis was done. She was discharged on her 10th day of operation being improved. She was given a follow up appointment 2 weeks later, and when she was evaluated it was found that she was doing well.