Patient A.P., female, born in 1979, has been diagnosed with dilatation cardiomyopathy in 1996. Anamnestically, disease started with tonsillitis, possible myocarditis (which was never proven), with pronounced symptoms of heart failure and general symptoms. She was hospitalized and after one month, the left ventricular ejection fraction was 10% with the aforementioned signs of congestive heart failure. She was hospitalized for 10 months and 9 days, with standard therapy for vitally endangered patient, oxygen support, numerous adjuvant therapy, and intensive monitoring. Therapy was administered (ACE inhibitor - ramipril, cardiotonic - digoxin, beta-blockers - metoprolol and combination of diuretics - furosemide and spironolactone), with the indication of heart transplantation. Clinical improvement occured with an ejection fraction that was gradually increasing and at the age of 21 she entered in remission or stabilization phase, with the ejection fraction value of 48-57% (regular echocardiography was performed every three months). For the following four years therapy remained the same, but in Jun 2004 (after an episode of low immunity), ejection fraction fell to 25%, with a clinical deterioration of the disease. The patient was hospitalized for a period of two months, and the condition stabilized, and she was discharged with therapy that was the same but without cardiotonic. Ejection fraction was stabilized, and in year 2006 it was 50%. At the age of 27, the patient decided on the first pregnancy that was successful with beta blocker (metoprolol) in therapy. After the first pregnancy, the ejection fraction was 40% and she was treated with the same therapy with eplerenone (25 mg) instead of spironolactone. The ejection fraction was controlled and did not fall below 45%. At the end of 2015 the patient became pregnant for the second time, and the pregnancy went neatly until eighth month (35 weeks), when she was urgently admitted to hospital, due to sense of suffocation and inability to walk. Ejection fraction decreased to 18% (brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) was 2600 pg/ mL (reference values are 100-400 pg/ mL)). During pregnancy she received only metoprolol in therapy. Physicians decide to continue with her pregnancy, in the 39th week they performed c-section, and the condition stabilized again after twenty days. In October 2016 new mode of therapy was administered, ramipril (2.5 mg, in the morning), metoprolol (47.5 mg, in the morning), spironolactone (50 mg, once a day) and ivabradine (5 mg, twice a day) with torasemide (5 mg, once a day). LifeVest Defibrillator was carried from 06 December 2016 until 27 February 2017 when it was removed. When removed and after examination (ejection fraction was 44%) she continued with ramipril therapy (1.25 mg) metoprolol (23.75 mg), torasemide (5 mg), spironolactone (25 mg) and ivabradine (7.5 mg, twice a day) with potassium supplements, and compliance with non-pharmacological measures (fluid intake restricted to 1.5 L/ day). The echocardiographic finding in March 2017 showed left ventricular dilatation with moderately reduced left ventricular function and left ventricular wall hypokinesia with ejection fraction of 44% (insignificant pericardial effusion was present, inferior vena cava with physiological flow, preserved valves function - Dopler sonography showed slight insufficiency of mitral valve with dilatation of anulus). Evaluation of a patient with ejection fraction 44% showed no indication for an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD), and conservative procedure and medication therapy were recommended. Regular check-ups and body mass reduction, regular control of renal function parameters and electrolytes were recommended. She is led under the diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy and heart failure NYHA stage II without any indication for the ICD prophylactic implantation.