A 26-year-old woman was referred by a neurologist for progressive, sequential, and bilateral vision loss and blurriness over the course of 1 month starting with and more prominent in the right eye without any painful eye movements. She had a past medical history of clinically isolated syndrome involving the spinal cord. Her sensory symptoms had started 7 years prior to presentation involving her left foot and migrating over a period of weeks to reach a level distal to the waist. Her magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and spine had revealed one lesion in the infratentorial region and another in the thoracic spinal cord. Follow-up MRIs identified temporally distinct new enhancing lesions at the C4, C6-C7, T2, and T7-T8 levels. Additional workup revealed negative results for anti-aquaporin-4 and myelin oligodendrocyte protein (MOG) antibodies. She was not receiving any medications at the time of presentation and her history for smoking and alcohol drinking was unremarkable. Her family history was insignificant for hereditary causes of vision loss including LHON.

Neuro-ophthalmological examination revealed a best corrected visual acuity (VA) of 20/100 OD and 20/30-2 OS. Her VA demonstrated gradual improvements during subsequent follow-ups. Ishihara color plates revealed that she was able to read only 1 out of 17 color plates in the right eye and 14 out of 17 color plates in the left eye. There was no relative afferent pupillary defect. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) demonstrated an average retinal nerve fiber layer thickness of 83 microns OD and 93 microns OS with slight temporal thinning. Dilated fundus exam showed pallor of both optic nerves with cup to disc ratio of 0.2.

The differential diagnosis for her visual symptoms included bilateral optic neuropathies, such as optic neuritis or LHON. Nutritional deficiencies were ruled out due to normal complete blood count, B12, folate. She proceeded with prednisone 1,250 mg PO daily for 3 days followed by 60 mg and a taper by 10 mg every 5 days; however, at follow-up visit, she did not report any improvements in her symptoms. Additional workups revealed mild T2 hyperintensities on the right side of the optic chiasm and three new cerebral white matter lesions (splenium; 2 lesions of left parietal periventricular white matter) on MRI. MRI findings and oligoclonal bands detected with lumbar puncture confirmed the diagnosis of MS. On subsequent follow-ups, her Humphrey visual field testing showed bilateral central scotomas in both eyes. Slowly progressive nature, sequential involvement of the eyes, symmetrical central scotomas, symptoms unresponsive to steroids, and hyperintensities in optic chiasm detected by MRI were suggestive of LHON. Dilated fundus exam revealed temporal pallor. The genetic testing for three primary mutations were negative; however, she was heterozygous for c.152A>G variant of DNAJC30 gene associated with arLHON. She was also tested positive for c.1239C>T variant in UQCRC1 gene with autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance. She was diagnosed with Harding’s syndrome and she was started on idebenone 300 mg PO TDS daily which led to improvements in her symptoms. Her VA demonstrated gradual improvements over yearly follow-ups (her latest corrected VA was 20/40-2 OD and 20/20-2 OS) and OCT metrics and examination remained stable with bilateral temporal pallor. The visual fields and OCTs 4 years after follow-up are shown.