A 55-year-old female patient with a medical history of rheumatoid arthritis and uterine myomatosis was diagnosed with a thyroid gland calcification. Thyroid biopsy was performed, and papillary thyroid carcinoma was detected. Total thyroidectomy was performed with positive resection margins and no signs of lymph node invasion. Radioactive iodine ablation was performed, and further imaging did not show signs of metastases. Thyroid hormone replacement was initiated, and regular follow-up was performed (with no abnormalities), which included thyroid ultrasound, thyroglobulin, and antithyroglobulin antibodies.

In the following years, TSH and thyroid hormone levels began with unusual pattern concentrations that continued for almost 7 years. TSH varied in most measurements between the normal range (0,02-40 uUI/L), but total T4 (212-295 nmol/L), free T4 (1,84-3,99 ng/dL), and total T3 (1,98-3,72 nmol/L) were consistently high or in the upper normal limit.

Subsequently, symptoms such as right hemibody tremor, rigidity, and hypokinesia were observed, and Parkinson’s disease was diagnosed. Initial treatment consisted of selegiline and pramipexole. Additionally, TSH levels increased above the upper normal limit. Therefore, a sella turcica MRI was performed finding a partial empty sella and alpha-subunit was found within normal limits, ruling out a pituitary adenoma. Parkinson’s symptoms continued to progress with a wide stepping gait, cogwheel rigidity, and tremor at rest in the right hand. Consequently, selegiline was replaced by rasagiline, and rotigotine was added; however, the latter was discontinued due to the emergence of a papular rash in the area of administration. Levodopa/carbidopa was started because of the worsening of symptoms and thyroid function tests showed TSH (0,29-3,44 uUI/L), total T3 levels (1,65-1,99 nmol/L) and free T3 (3,12-3,99 pg/mL) within normal limits. Nevertheless, total T4 (287-373 nmol/L) and free T4 levels (2,2-3,9 ng/dL) steadily increased.

Recently, the patient presented with hyperphagia and overspending, which was probably related to pramipexole. The medication was discontinued, and safinamide was added. In the latest medical follow-up, a thyroid ultrasound was performed, and lymph node mapping detected a nodular lesion in the thyroid bed measuring 8.8 x 7.3 millimeters. Moreover, thyroglobulin levels rose from 1 to 4 uUI/L in the last year. Biopsy confirmed the presence of atypical follicular cells. Thyroid function tests were abnormal with suppressed TSH (0,09 uUI/L), normal total T3 (1,87), and elevated free T3 (4,17 pg/mL) and total T4 (387,6 nmol/L). Thyroid hormone replacement was adjusted, and TSH concentration was later normalized.

The patient underwent lymph node resection, which was positive for malignancy. In the upcoming weeks, radioactive iodine will be administered. Over the years, thyroid function tests showed that free T4 and total T4 levels steadily increased, while TSH was mostly high or within the normal limits, suggesting a possible thyroid hormone resistance syndrome. Moreover, total T3 levels were abnormally elevated until levodopa/carbidopa was initiated, and the concentrations decreased below the upper normal limit. TSH levels also decreased without rising again above the upper normal limit, indicating a possible influence of levodopa on thyroid function.