25-year-old female patient admitted to the Central Emergency Room of the Institution with a history of abdominal cramp-like pain of 48 hours duration, of high intensity, of sudden onset, following a large intake of cooked corn, located in the right half of the abdomen, not irradiated, associated with repeated episodes of nausea and vomiting of the alimentary type. The patient reported a history of abdominal pain of similar characteristics but of lower intensity during the 4 weeks prior to the consultation, which partially subsided with diet, gastroprotective medication and oral anti-spasmodics. She reported a positive catharsis 24 hours prior to the consultation and no elimination of gases in the last 12 hours.

The patient had a history of surgery including an appendectomy 10 years ago and a cesarean section 2 years ago. She had no medical history and no regular medication.

On physical examination, the patient was afebrile, normophygmic and normotensive. The abdomen was distended, symmetrical, painful to the generalized palpation, with defense at the level of the right iliac fossa, without peritoneal reaction and increased frequency and intensity of hydroaereous noises. Rectal examination and gynecological examination without particularities.

The requested complementary examinations demonstrated leukocytosis (15,000/uL) and increased PCR (1.8 mg/dL), with renal, hepatic, ionogram, amylase, and urinary sediment within normal limits. B-HCG negative.

The simple radiological examination of the abdomen demonstrated an occlusive pattern with multiple hydroaereous levels, distension of small intestine loops and absence of air in the colonic frame. The abdominal-pelvic tomographic scan with double contrast demonstrated the presence of a heterogeneous mass with contrasted reinforcement of 4 cm in diameter, located at the ileocecal level, associated with proximal distension of small intestine loops.

The patient underwent a laparoscopy which showed the presence of a tumour lesion, with a regular surface, approximately 4 cm in diameter, located at the level of the ileocecal valve and multiple locoregional small-sized adenopathies. There was no evidence of secondary lesions or intestinal perforation. It was decided to proceed with a conventional right hemicolectomy with end-to-side transverse ileal anastomosis and protective loop ileostomy.

No complications were reported during the immediate postoperative period and the patient was discharged on the 5th day postoperatively after normal intestinal function and a functioning ileostomy were observed.

The histopathological examination of the surgical piece demonstrated the presence of a hardened mass of 3 x 1 x 1 cm located at the level of the ileocecal valve, with marked stenosis of the same, seated on cecal mucosa formed by a proliferation of well-differentiated smooth muscle cells and with a low mitotic index, associated with 25 mesocolon ganglion formations with sinusoidal hyperplasia without signs of secondary disease. The immuno-histochemical analysis of the piece revealed Actin (+), CD117 (-), Ki67 1%, findings consistent with benign leiomyoma of the cecum.

The patient underwent a laparoscopy which showed the presence of a tumour lesion, with a regular surface, approximately 4 cm in diameter, located at the level of the ileocecal valve and multiple locoregional small-sized adenopathies. There was no evidence of secondary lesions or intestinal perforation. It was decided to proceed with a conventional right hemicolectomy with end-to-side transverse ileal anastomosis and protective loop ileostomy.
