The case of a 100-year-old man is presented. He had a stroke that has left him paralysed on the right side and, therefore, has significant mobility problems. He smoked for a few years when he was young, but this has caused COPD. He also suffers from dysphagia, which causes bronchial aspiration that, together with COPD, leads to frequent respiratory crises. Despite his age, his cognitive state is perfect. He is conscious and oriented at all times, and only if he wakes up at night does he have an episode of delirium and agitation. He is permanently accompanied by a carer.

He had a profound bradycardia episode that required an emergency call. He was taken off bisoprolol and the bradycardia resolved, but his son is asking us if any of his medications were responsible.

We have no reports of clinical or diagnostic data, as well as the chronology and severity of the same, so the status of the situation makes an approximation of the patient's diseases through the medicines he uses. Nor is there information available on start dates or last changes in the medicines, except the withdrawal of bisoprolol as a possible cause of bradycardia.

Study and evaluation
The bradycardia episode has been controlled, but we took the opportunity to review all of his medication for PRM/RNM. The state of the situation prior to the bradycardia is studied, therefore, bisoprolol is present.

We use the CheckTheMeds® app to help us with the analysis and we supplement it with the data sheets.

Bisoprolol was probably the main cause of bradycardia. Besides bisoprolol, there are other medicines that can also alter heart rate and rhythm by different mechanisms.

Altered potassium levels, both hyper and hypokalemia, can alter heart rate producing tachy or bradycardia. Medicines that can produce hypokalemia are furosemide, budesonide and β2 agonists, salbutamol and formoterol. On the other hand, eplerenone will retain it, and take a potassium chloride supplement. In addition, there is an interaction between amiodaron and eplerenone that increases the effect of the latter.

The QT interval prolongation may also have influenced the heart rhythm. Medicines that may prolong it are salbutamol, amiodaron, trazodone, pantoprazole and furosemide. All of these medicines are important for the patient's heart problems, except trazodone which is used as a hypnotic and pantoprazole. Since you are taking apixaban, it may be convenient to maintain an IPP. The only IPP that does not prolong the QT interval is rabeprazole.

The anticholinergic burden was measured using the Crideco scale and the Anticholinergic Burden Calculator. Both scales showed a relevant anticholinergic burden, with the medicinal products ipratropium, glycopyrronium, furosemide, trazodone and zolpidem being involved.

Other problems that appear are:

Salbutamol and ipratropium inhaled in a scheduled manner 2 puffs every 12 hours when the recommended administration is on demand. In addition, salbutamol can have cardiac effects.

Paracetamol 1 g once daily. He takes it chronically at night because he has some pain. In patients of this age this dose can be very high. The dose of 650 mg is recommended so as not to saturate the hepatic metabolism.

Latanoprost to control intraocular pressure and prevent glaucoma. With 100 years, the likelihood of this becoming a problem is low and latanoprost can cause discomfort to the patient.

Zolpidem 10 mg ½ tablet daily. It is advisable to use the 5 mg presentation so as not to manipulate the medication.

Intervention
Trazodone is proposed to be withdrawn because it is being used in an unauthorised indication, is arrhythmogenic and has anticholinergic burden.

Substitute pantoprazole with rabeprazole.

Check with your pulmonologist if the dose of salbutamol 2 puffs every 12 hours is correct, as it can also have effects on the heart.

Change to paracetamol 650 mg and check if the pain control is maintained.

Change to zolpidem 5 mg 1/day. Chronic treatment with zolpidem or benzodiazepines is not recommended, but in this patient it will give few problems and if he wakes up at midnight he has episodes of agitation with alterations in heart rhythm. If the trazodone is withdrawn, it may be necessary to increase the zolpidem dose. That would increase the anticholinergic load but does not seem to be a problem in this patient. The main limitation could be the respiratory depression that could appear and that would require very good adjustment of the dose or search for other solutions.

Consult with the ophthalmologist about the need to maintain latanoprost.

Results/Follow-up
He is a MUFACE patient, so he has easy access to specialist doctors. A report was issued for the patient and it was the son (very high cultural level) who spoke to all the doctors. The response from them is known through the son. The intervention does not comply with the protocols for communication with doctors because the son's decision to be the one to transmit the information is respected.

The cardiologist confirms that trazodone prolongs the QT interval, but considers that its effect is negligible compared to the patient's cardiac problems. Neither trazodone nor pantoprazole is withdrawn.

Salbutamol was discontinued. The patient remains under observation.

Paracetamol 650 mg was changed and the pain was kept under control.

Zolpidem 5 mg 1/day is changed.

The ophthalmologist maintains the latanoprost.
