A 66-year-old male known to have diabetes mellitus type II, chronic obstructive airway disease, and hypertension presented to the emergency department with severe retrosternal chest pain and progressive shortness of breath. His physical examination was unremarkable apart from oxygen saturation of 91–92% on room air, BP 220/120 mmHg, and tachycardia with a pulse rate of 120 beats/minute.

Initial work-up prior to intervention showed Hb 14.7 g/dL, platelet 229 × 109/L, troponin 309 ng/mL, PTT 32 seconds, and creatinine 0.9 mg/dL. Furthermore, the 4T-score of our patient was low; therefore, testing for a heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) antibody panel was not pursued. An electrocardiogram showed ST elevation in the anterior-lateral leads and reciprocal ST depression in the inferior ones. Further, an echocardiography showed a reduced ejection fraction of 45% and left anterior descending artery (LAD) territory hypokinesia. As a bridge to percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), the patient received aspirin and beta-blockers as part of an initial anti-ischemic measure in addition to intravenous nitroglycerin to control hypertension.

On the coronary angiography prior to stent placement, total thrombotic occlusion of LAD at its midsegment was seen, along with 30% stenosis of the left circumflex artery (LCX) followed by subtotal occlusion after giving obtuse marginal artery. Therefore, balloon angioplasty was performed, and a drug-eluting stent was deployed. During the procedure, intravenous unfractionated heparin and a 180 mg loading dose of ticagrelor were given. The patient was to be maintained on ticagrelor plus aspirin; however, the platelet count 6 hours post procedure was done as per hospital protocol and revealed a platelet count of 70 × 109/L on two occasions with no active bleeding. The peripheral blood smear was unremarkable, and fragmented red blood cells could not be seen. Additionally, other laboratory parameters including hemoglobin and creatine were within normal ranges and comparable to the baseline line which makes the possibility of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia less likely. We attributed the platelet drop to ticagrelor. Therefore, an additional dose was withheld, and the patient was placed on both aspirin and clopidogrel instead twelve hours following the initial loading dose of ticagrelor. Fortunately, the patient’s platelet count recovered gradually, with complete resolution four days after the initial presentation, reaching 168 × 109/L without need for a blood component transfusion or other supportive measures, and he was discharged thereafter.