Our patient was an 83-year-old Japanese woman with chronic heart failure (ejection fraction: approximately 30%) who was initiated on empagliflozin 10 mg daily about 8 months before admission. She had never been diagnosed with diabetes mellitus (HbA1c 5.9% before starting empagliflozin). About 6 months before hospitalization, her treatment was changed to dapagliflozin 5 mg. Her diuretics and other cardiac medications were not adjusted during that time. Two weeks before admission, she tripped and fell, sustaining vertebral and rib fractures. The patient became significantly debilitated from the pain from the fractures, which caused difficulty walking and anorexia. She could eat only 50-70% of her usual dietary intake. This got worse in the following week when she also developed nausea and vomiting and further reduced her food intake to only 10-20% of the usual amount. During this period, she continued to take dapagliflozin. She was admitted to the hospital.
On admission, she was conscious with a body temperature of 37.4°C, blood pressure of 124/68 mmHg, heart rate of 91 bpm, and oxygen saturation of 98% breathing room air. Blood tests revealed a blood glucose level of 124 mg/dL, pH of 7.3, HCO3–concentration of 14 mmol/L, base excess of -10 mEq/L, anion gap of 20 mEq/L, and b-hydroxybutyrate concentration of 5150 μmol/L (Table 1). These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of normoglycemic ketoacidosis. The patient had no history of alcohol consumption, smoking, or drug use.
Other causes of high anion gap acidosis were ruled out. Her C-peptide level was consistent with the blood glucose levels on admission, indicating that she had adequate insulin secretion; therefore, insulin was not initiated. SGLT2 inhibitor use was discontinued, and the patient was initially treated with isotonic saline and a maintenance infusion of approximately 170 g glucose daily.
Despite not starting insulin, her pH (7.418), HCO3– concentration (20.7 mmol/L), and anion gap (13.3 mEq/L) improved on the day after admission. The Carb 60 diet was initiated, but intravenous glucose infusions were continued because the patient’s food intake was poor. The amount of glucose infusion administered was adjusted according to her food intake. On the fourth day of hospitalization, urinary ketones disappeared.
The glucose infusion was terminated on the 12th day of hospitalization once the patient could eat full meals. Although the patient’s blood glucose level was within the normal range, the urinary glucose excretion was 3+ (>500 mg/dL) for 8 days after the last dose of dapagliflozin.
On admission, the patient was unable to walk due to pain from the fracture, general fatigue, and disuse syndrome, but after rehabilitation, she was able to walk independently. She was discharged on day 19 of hospitalization after undergoing rehabilitation.
The SGLT2 inhibitors were not restarted.