A 76-year-old Japanese male visited to our department with a chief complaint of left scrotal swelling. The patient had been aware of the scrotal swelling for 4 years, and there was no evidence of enlargement. The left scrotal mass was soft and elastic without pain, and skin color was normal. Ultrasound examination revealed a 10 cm multilocular cystic mass with a solid component in part; however, apparent left testis could not be detected. T2-weighted images (T2WI) of the mass via magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed a multilocular cystic pattern with different degrees of hyperintensities in each cyst. The solid component was observed as a hypointense area. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed no significant decreasing apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value in the solid area. The results of laboratory examination including alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), human chorionic gonadotropin beta-subunit (βHCG), and lactate dehydrogenase were within normal limits. We performed puncture of the cystic area, and the aspirated brown fluid was analyzed cytologically. Although there was no apparent evidence of malignancy in cytology, malignant potential was not ruled out completely. Since the patient consented to complete resection, transinguinal radical orchiectomy was performed. There were no specific findings including adhesion to surrounding tissue or intraoperative complications, and the patient recovered without any postoperative event. In addition, neither apparent recurrence nor metastasis was observed at 7 years after surgery.

The surgically resected specimen revealed a 10 cm multilocular cystic tumor with solid component. The solid area was tan-brown in color without hemorrhage or necrosis. Histologically, tumor cells proliferate in sheets, containing scant cytoplasm and oval- or round-shaped hyperchromatic nuclei with nuclear grooving. Cysts lined with flat cells were observed, and other cystic architectures lined with cuboidal or columnar epithelium were found. Small nests of tumor cells with clear cytoplasm were seen. In addition, tumor cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm similar with those of Leydig cells were seen in part. No apparent invasion into albuginea was found. Populations of the tumor cells were classified into three groups as follows: tumor cells with scanty cytoplasm and grooved nuclei (adult-type granulosa cell tumor-like appearance), tumor cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm (Leydig cell tumor-like appearance), and tumor cells with clear to slightly eosinophilic cytoplasm (Sertoli cell tumor-like appearance). Results of immunohistochemical staining are summarized in Table 2. All subtypes of tumor cells were positive for alpha-inhibin, calretinin, CD99, melan A, and vimentin, whereas all were negative for EmA. Tumor cells with scanty cytoplasm and grooved nuclei were positive for CD56, which is consistent with adult-type granulosa cell tumor component. In addition, tumor cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm were positive for synaptophysin, suggesting a Leydig cell tumor component. Distinct nuclear staining of beta-catenin was observed in tumor cells with clear to slightly eosinophilic cytoplasm, which suggested a Sertoli cell tumor component. Based on these pathological findings, the patient was diagnosed with mixed sex cord stromal tumor consisting of adult-type granulose cell tumor, Leydig cell tumor, and Sertoli cell tumor components.