He is a 48-year-old male patient who denies chronic degenerative diseases and surgical history. His condition began four months prior to his admission to our hospital, following the accidental ingestion of caustic, immediately inducing vomiting. He went to a private hospital where he was hospitalized for 15 days on a medical treatment and was discharged with oral tolerance to papillae. He reported that he began to have difficulty swallowing solid food, which progressed to liquids after one month. During this period, an endoscopic study was performed without the possibility of passing the esophageal stenosis, which is 25 cm from the dental arch. This is why a study protocol was initiated in our hospital, with an esophagogram with water-soluble contrast.

Because of the patient's extensive documented stenosis on esophagogram study and his inability to tolerate oral route, surgical procedure was decided, which consisted of a McKeown type esophagectomy.

The stomach was then released and a tubulized stomach was performed along with a Heineke-Mikulicz type pyloroplasty, with the tubulized stomach being elevated transhiatal. The cervical border was also performed for the preparation of the esophageal-gastric anastomosis in two planes.

The surgical procedure was completed without complications, the patient fasted for five days, after which he drank a contrast agent, and the passage of the contrast agent was observed without the presence of leakage from the anastomosis. Therefore, a liquid diet was initiated and, subsequently, a soft diet. The patient was discharged on the tenth day of his stay without complications.

The patient is currently being monitored, three months after gastric bypass surgery, with adequate tolerance to oral intake of both liquids and solids, and with good nutritional status. A radiological study of the swallow was performed with a water-soluble contrast agent, and an adequate passage of the contrast agent was observed, with no evidence of stenosis.
