18-year-old male patient with a clinical diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1 since the first year of life. His background includes a complete education, his parents are not consanguineous, and he has no family history of café au lait spots. From a neurological point of view, he developed a delay in fine and gross motor development, an expressive language disorder with phonological and semantic alteration of language during childhood, for which he was treated with speech therapy in a language school, as well as physical therapy and occupational therapy during childhood. During adolescence, he was diagnosed with attention deficit disorder and hyperactivity, which was treated with methylphenidate, maintaining regular school performance. He had normal pubertal development. Ophthalmologically, he presented Lisch nodules from the age of 4, euriblepharon and astigmatism. He was monitored annually in ophthalmology and neuropediatrics. His last brain MRI was performed 6 months prior to the dermatology consultation, with no pathological findings, and in the spinal MRI, L5-S1 discopathy and peripheral enhancement in T11-T12 and T12-L1 were evident. At 16 years of age, a genetic study was performed that demonstrated deletion of exons 5-47 of the NF1 gene.

At 18 years of age, he consulted the Dermatology service of the Reference Health Center of Peñalolén Cordillera Oriente for the appearance of a new spot on his left thigh that had been there for a year, asymptomatic. He also reported the appearance of nodules on his right wrist, his right hand and scalp, that had been there for a few months, asymptomatic.

The physical examination revealed normal blood pressure, macrocephaly (head circumference 60 cm), and multiple generalized café au lait spots, ephelides in axillae, and right supraciliary, occipital, and right wrist oval subcutaneous nodules 0.5 cm in size, well-demarcated, mobile. In the left lateral thigh, there was a plaque 25 mm in size, somewhat pink, with loss of appendages, and soft consistency. Finally, in the lumbar and pectoral region, there were multiple small red-blue macules, less than 5 mm each, some slightly depressed.

Skin biopsy of blue patches on the chest and thigh plaque were performed, both compatible with NF. An ultrasound of supraciliary and occipital nodules was performed, which was compatible with subcutaneous nodular NF.

Using the clinical classification of García-Martínez et al.1 the patient was diagnosed with superficial subcutaneous nodular NF in the right supraciliary, occipital and right wrist, superficial cutaneous pseudoatrophic NF in the lateral left thigh and superficial cutaneous red blue NF in the lumbar and pectoral areas.
