42-year-old man with a history of major depressive disorder on treatment with venlafaxine, clonazepam and mirtazapine presents a history of worsening mood with thoughts of death, for which he consumes rodenticide 20 mg of the active Brodifacoum with an attempt at self-harm. He was hospitalized one day after the event, treated with intravenous vitamin K and transfusion of fresh frozen plasma, and was discharged 24 hours after normalization of the INR. At his home, he presented anterior epistaxis 5 days later. Emergency consultation where oxaloacetic transaminase, SGOT 63 U/L (VR 10-40 U/L); pyruvic transaminase, SGPT 93 U/L (VR 10-55 U/L); alkaline phosphatase, FA 139 (VR 45-115 U/L); prothrombin time, TP 9% (VR 70-120%); International normalized ratio, INR 7; activated partial thromboplastin time, TTPA 73.2s (VR 25-37s), concordant with coagulopathy due to Brodifacoum ingestion.

During hospitalization, the patient presented variable INR measurements, with initial ranges between 7 and 11.6 in the first three days. During the fourth day, the INR ranged between 3.6 and 1.8. After this, the patient achieved stable therapeutic ranges with INR between 1.5 and 1.2. The total daily doses of vitamin K administered during the hospitalization period varied between 20 and 40 mg depending on the results obtained from the INR measurements. Finally, an optimal dose of supplementation for the normalization of the INR of 10 mg intravenous every 8 hours (30 mg a day) was reached. The frequency of the coagulogram controls performed and the respective doses of oral vitamin K administered, until the optimal dose of supplementation with vitamin K for normalization of the INR was reached, are described.

Discharge was indicated and an optimised dose of vitamin K 10 mg orally every 8 hours was maintained, in addition to daily control of the INR with a haematologist and guidance on the importance of adhering to the medication and the need to avoid substances that may increase the risk of bleeding. In addition, a period of control in the polyclinic of anticoagulant treatment and outpatient control with haematology and psychiatry was indicated.

The patient was contacted at 4 months and indicated that he had not presented episodes of bleeding during this period. He reported that he had maintained the treatment with 10 mg of vitamin K, with which the INR level had been maintained in the therapeutic range. The patient did not report adverse effects, however, he reported difficulty in accessing the drug due to the cost of treatment and the low availability in pharmacies.
