Patient information
A 27-year-old man smoker was involved in a road accident; he felt from his motorbike without a helmet. The man drove the motorbike to the hospital and reported a headache and haemorrhagic wounds in the forehead.

The patient has no pathology history and works in a rural area.

Clinical findings
After his admission to emergency room, he lost consciousness and suffered two convulsive seizures. On physical examination, the Glasgow Coma Scale was 6/15 (no eye opening, withdrawal in the face of pain, no verbal response) with bilateral mydriasis, haemodynamic distress and good saturation. A penetrating head injury was identified with a profuse intracranial haemorrhage.

Timeline
After a fall on a motorbike, the patient got back on his motorbike and immediately went to hospital, complaining of headaches and a bleeding forehead wound. He received emergency treatment to stabilize his hemodynamic and respiratory functions. He was then transferred unconscious the same day to a better-equipped center, where he underwent a CT scan and underwent successful surgery.

Diagnostic assessment
His haemoglobin level was 6 g/dL and his blood group was O rhesus positive. The hospital had neither an intensive care unit nor a scanner. Penetrating head trauma complicated by intracranial haemorrhage leading to shock and seizures was the only diagnosis suggested. Vital prognosis based on clinical presentation was bad.

Therapeutic intervention
An initial intervention consists of an intracranial packing through the cranial breach followed by a cephalic bandage which help stop bleeding. The treatment involved stabilisation of the cervical spine, orotracheal intubation with oxygen at 6 L per minute and an insertion of a Foley catheter. Two peripheral venous ports were used to administer NaCl 0.9 % 1000 CC, Geloplasma* 500 CC, Mannitol 20 % 250 CC; Phenobarbital inj 40 mg/2 ml: 100 mg, then Thiopental 250 mg: bolus of 100 mg × 2 due to other convulsive seizures; Amoxicillin + Clavulanic Acid injection 2 g; Gentamycin 160 mg intramuscularly. A tetanus serum of 1500 IU and a transfusion of 450 CC of blood were performed.

The patient was transferred unconscious to a team at a first-category hospital, free of intubation in a stable haemodynamic state.

On the first day following the transfer, the patient progressed well; he was conscious and able to walk, with no neurological, haemodynamic or respiratory distress. The CT scan revealed an acute bifrontal edematous, an haemorrhagic parenchymal contusion predominantly on the right, a layer of acute subdural haematoma (3 mm) on the left fronto-parieto-temporo-occipital region, a 5 mm left subfalcoral hernia, a discrete compression of the right lateral ventricle, an acute bifrontal superior subarachnoid haemorrhage, a depressed frontal fracture with osteomeningeal breach and a fracture of the third cervical vertebra with spinal cord compression. The patient underwent a successful operation at the first category hospital.

Follow-up and outcomes
The post-operative period was marked by convulsive seizures, for which the patient was put on anticonvulsants with a good outcome.