He is a 27-year-old male, born and residing in Mexico City, with apparently healthy parents and three siblings. He received the BCG vaccine at birth, but had an adverse reaction two months later with adenitis in both axillae and non-healing at the site of vaccination; he improved with rifampicin for eight months, but had a keloid scar. At nine months, he developed oral and diaper area candidiasis. Although both resolved with treatment, they were recurrent. The oral candidiasis persists to date, affecting his tongue and gums. At seven years of age, he developed scalp tinea, which resolved with unspecified treatment. Since the age of 10, he has had rosacea on his face, initially with papules and erythema on the skin of his cheeks and nose, and currently with chronic changes. At 15 years of age, he developed onychomycosis, receiving multiple antifungal treatments, with no improvement and persistence to date. He has had ocular rosacea since childhood, and also suffers from asthma and allergic rhinitis.

His skin tests were positive for mites, epithelia of animals and pollen. Topical steroids and inhaled bronchodilators were administered. Because of the chronic nature of candidiasis, an immune system disorder was considered, HIV infection was ruled out and he was informed that he had a chronic granulomatous disease (the diagnosis was not known on what it was based). At 26 years of age, he presented with fever, weight loss, asthenia, adynamia, hyporexia, cough, haemoptysis, dyspnoea and a gluteal abscess. In the emergency department, the patient was in a poor general condition, with malnutrition, pale skin and mucous membranes, respiratory distress, oxygen saturation of 87%, rosacea on the face, tongue and oral mucosa with white plaques, erythema on the gums, a scar from the BCG vaccine 5 cm in diameter, pulmonary hypoventilation, and onychomycosis on the hands and feet.

The chest tomography showed images corresponding to a right pleural effusion and multifocal pneumonia. The ultrasound of the gluteus showed a deep abscess. The laboratory results showed anemia, leukocytosis at the expense of neutrophilia and elevation of the C-reactive protein. The dihydrorhodamine test was normal, ruling out the previously established diagnosis of chronic granulomatous disease. The culture of the sample taken from the oral cavity and the blood culture had growth of Candida albicans; in the culture of sputum, C. albicans and C. krusei were obtained; the culture of bronchoalveolar liquid was negative.

Vancomycin was initiated for the abscess, which improved. The patient received ceftriaxone, clarithromycin, and fluconazole, but the fever persisted. A pleural biopsy was performed, in which M. tuberculosis was detected by PCR. The intensive phase of the antituberculous, or antimycobacterial, regimen was initiated with isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol, with adequate improvement. During this hospitalization, he also developed herpes zoster, which resolved with 10 days of valaciclovir. The patient is currently completing his antituberculous treatment.Reevaluating the case, given the history of infection with the bacillus of Calmette-Guérin, tuberculosis, herpes zoster, mucocutaneous candidiasis, and rosacea, the diagnosis was oriented toward an increase in the function of STAT1 (Figure 4). A panel of genes of innate immunity errors was requested, by new generation sequencing, and the pathogenic variant c.961A>G (p.Arg321Gly) was found in the STAT1 gene, associated with an increase in the function of STAT1. His parents and three brothers do not carry the WT/WT) gene STAT1.
