40-year-old male presented with a 2-month history of progressive memory loss and behavioral changes. He became apathetic and forgetful of recent events, and his job performance as a cashier at a gas station deteriorated. A systemic history revealed a previously unknown history of recurrent oral thrush for 5 years, occasional acneiform lesions, new onset headaches, and episodes of fever in the past few months. Four months prior to presentation, he had a painful loss of vision and was diagnosed with idiopathic bilateral sequential panuveitis.

Neurologic examination showed anterograde amnesia with preservation of autobiographical memory. He was able to recall only one of three words spontaneously and another with semantic cues. All other cortical functions and neurologic examination were normal, and there was no evidence of meningeal irritation. A detailed systemic examination found only an axillary temperature of 37.7°C and an isolated oral aphthae. A formal neuropsychologic evaluation identified a deficit in verbal memory that did not improve with semantic cues, a decreased semantic fluency, and constructive apraxia.

The blood test showed elevated C-reactive protein (4.32 mg/dL). The head CT scan, plain chest X-ray, urinalysis, and toxicologic screening were normal. A lumbar puncture was performed with normal opening pressure, normal glucose (49 mg/dL in the cerebrospinal fluid, 78 mg/dL in the concurrent blood glucose), hyperproteinemia (1.4 g/L), and pleocytosis (440 leukocytes/uL, 80% mononuclear).

Our diagnostic orientation was a subacute-chronic meningoencephalitis with predominantly limbic involvement. The recent uveitis was within the so-called uveomeningeal syndromes, and the history of recurrent oral aphthae suggested the possibility of EB.

Brain MRI showed bilateral hyperintensities in the limbic regions, confirming the clinical suspicion of limbic encephalitis (LE), as well as leptomeningeal enhancement. An awake EEG was normal. An extensive study of microbiology and autoimmunity in serum and cerebrospinal fluid was normal. HLA-B51 was also negative. Ophthalmologic evaluation identified signs of bilateral retinal vasculitis, with no evidence of active uveitis.

Recurrent oral aphthae and posterior uveitis are key manifestations of EB, and retinal vasculitis is another typical ocular manifestation. While inflammatory meningoencephalitis is a common form of NB, EL is not a typical presentation. Therefore, although the patient met the diagnostic criteria for EB, other alternative etiologies for his neurological presentation had to be excluded.

In particular, we were looking to exclude the possibility of concurrent paraneoplastic EL. Consequently, a full panel of cell binding assays to detect onconeuronal and neuronal surface antibodies was requested and was negative. In addition, the possibility of a paraneoplastic EL with negative autoantibodies was raised. In accordance with current recommendations, a whole-body 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography was performed, which excluded an underlying tumour and showed bilateral temporal hypomethabolism at the brain level, supporting the diagnosis of EL. In addition, a testicular ultrasound excluded the presence of a testicular neoplasm.

Consequently, after ruling out other alternative etiologies, the patient was diagnosed with NB. He received five days of high-dose intravenous glucocorticoid treatment with clinical and cerebrospinal fluid improvement, followed by a tapering regimen of oral glucocorticoid, azathioprine and infliximab. A follow-up MRI two months later also showed almost complete resolution of the lesions.
