69-year-old male patient with a history of arterial hypertension, type II diabetes mellitus and arthrosis, presented to the emergency department of the Franco Ravero Zunino Hospital (HFRZ) on March 27, 2024 with a 3-day history of a condition characterized by right molar pain with subsequent increase in right facial volume and periorbital cellulitis, caused by a fall of 4 days before admission. The patient's medical records revealed a history of poor metabolic control associated with diabetic ketoacidosis in 2022 and diabetic foot.

Physical examination revealed exacerbated pain, oedema and erythema in the right periorbital region, associated with necrotic lesions in the right infraorbital region linked to chemosis, purulent exudate in the right eye, limited opening of the eye and decreased visual acuity.

Intraoral examination revealed the absence of teeth, the presence of multiple root remains and poor hygiene control. During his stay in the emergency department, the patient was reevaluated and a rapid progression of the necrotic lesions was observed, which increased in size and compromised the right geniana and palpebral region.

Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis with neutrophilia (23,400 mm3), procalcitonin (PCT: 10.14), elevated inflammatory parameters (CRP: 44.4), hyperglycemia (412 mg/dl) and ketonemia (+++). The gas results were consistent with metabolic ketoacidosis associated with sepsis of cutaneous focus. The emergency images, performed by computed axial tomography (TAC) with contrast at the admission of the patient, confirm the presence of oedema and periorbital inflammatory changes preseptal in relation to the right zygomatic region, without postseptal orbital compromise. Given the clinical presentation of the patient and his general medical condition, admission to the ICU was decided for intrahospital monitoring and management.

Intrahospital management was initiated with empirical antibiotic therapy with ampicillin/sulbactam, supplemented with cloxacillin and surgical cleansing in the central ward. Under general anaesthesia with orotracheal intubation, an approach was performed that involved the hospital's maxillofacial surgery team. Extensive surgical debridement was performed, comprising skin and subcutaneous cell tissue, which implied the extirpation of all necrotic and devitalised tissue. The extirpated tissue was sent for biopsy and culture. During the postoperative period, the patient remained in the ICU and evolved adequately, afebrile, with a decrease in facial oedema and resolution of acute renal failure.

Microbiological analysis of the patient's samples revealed a polymicrobial infection with the identification of Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococcus lugdunensis and Staphylococcus epidermidis. Based on the microbiological results, the infectious disease team recommended continuing empirical treatment with ampicillin/sulbactam and cloxacillin. After four days, a new evaluation was performed by the infectious disease team, which suggested discontinuing empirical treatment with ampicillin/sulbactam and initiating empirical therapy with cotrimoxazole and cloxacillin.
