2-year-old female patient, eutrophic, with a history of recurrent UTIs (3 episodes of common uropathogens in outpatient management) and an ultrasound finding of left hydronephrosis with an anteroposterior diameter of the pelvis of 40 mm and a left megaureter. She was prescribed prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole until the urinary tract studies were completed, but this was not done.

Consulted for a 24 hour history of fever and dysuria. On physical examination, he was in good general condition and hemodynamically stable (heart rate 108/min, respiratory rate 18/min, blood pressure 90/60 mmHg). Abdominal examination within normal limits with negative lumbar percussion. He did not have associated respiratory symptoms. Normal otoscopy.

Given the clinical picture and his background, a urine analysis was performed that showed: density 1.010, pH 6, protein +, glucose negative, ketones negative, hemoglobin traces, nitrites positive and sediment with leukocytes 15-20/cpo. With suspicion of UTI, a sample was collected for uroculture and empirical treatment was initiated with ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg/day intramuscularly on an outpatient basis.

On the fourth day of evolution, Streptococcus pneumoniae > 100,000 CFU/ml (sensitive to oxacillin, penicillin, aminopenicillin, levofloxacin and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and third generation cephalosporins) was isolated in the urine culture. Because she had persisted with a fever on the fourth day of intramuscular antibiotic treatment, she was hospitalized for intravenous therapy. A complete 13-valent pneumococcal vaccine scheme (2+1 scheme) was found. It was also recorded that the girl was an only child and did not attend day care.

On admission, tests revealed leukocytosis of 19,600/mm3 with left shift (neutrophils 48%), normocytic hypochromic anaemia with haemoglobin of 9.3 g/dL, haematocrit 31.3% (mean corpuscular volume 74 fl and mean corpuscular haemoglobin 22 pg), platelets 361,000/mm3, normal renal function with creatinine 0.27 mg/dL, urea 15 mg/dl and elevation of C reactive protein of 131 mg/L (reference value: 0-5 mg/L).

The renal ultrasound reported a right kidney 80 mm in longitudinal diameter, orthotopic, of conserved shape and echo-structure, with adequate corticomedullar differentiation, without dilatation of urinary tracts or lithogenic images and a left kidney of 80 mm in longitudinal diameter, orthotopic with dilatation of the renal pelvis of 34 mm, homolateral ureter dilated in its entire extension measuring 13 mm in its distal third and parenchymal thinning (8 mm), with loss of corticomedullar differentiation, without significant changes in relation to the previous ultrasound studies.

He received treatment with ceftriaxone 50 mg/kg/day intravenous with cessation of fever and clinical improvement at 24 hours, without presenting abscesses or other complications. The blood cultures that had been taken at the time of admission (after 4 doses of intramuscular ceftriaxone) were negative. In the laboratory examinations taken prior to discharge, there was improvement in the inflammation parameters (leukocytes 10,200/ mm3 and C-reactive protein 23 mg/L). He was discharged 5 days later, completing 10 days of oral antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin-clavulanic acid at 40 mg/kg/day.

Subsequently, a cystourethrogram (CUGM) was performed under antibiotic chemoprophylaxis, which revealed the presence of left-sided grade V vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) with normal urethra and bladder.

After 6 months free of ITUs, a renal scintigraphy with dimercaptosuccinic acid was performed that showed the left kidney with severe functional compromise (relative renal function 7%) and the right with normal uptake, after which it awaits urological resolution (left nephroureterectomy), maintaining antibiotic prophylaxis until the same. In addition, he continues nephrological follow-up for functional monorrhea.
