A 39-year-old pregnant Ethiopian refugee (Gravida 3 Para 2+0) was referred to our internal medicine emergency department at Gadarif Teaching Hospital, Gadarif State, Sudan, with progressive generalized body swelling, shortness of breath, and fatigability for 6 weeks and an unremarkable systemic review. The patient was admitted to the critical cases admission site and her history, taken with the help of a language interpreter later on admission, revealed an initially undisclosed remote episode of three unprovoked generalized tonic-clonic seizures 21 years ago which was treated traditionally. However, there was no history of head trauma or a family history of seizures. General examination of the patient has revealed a left-sided PWS involving the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve. However, this finding was initially missed on inspection but later confirmed by the patient’s spouse to be present since birth. The patient was also severely pale and had bilateral pleural effusions, tender hepatomegaly, and bilateral lower limb swelling.

Initial investigations revealed a hemoglobin level of 8.84 g/dl. Thus, heart failure due to anemia was diagnosed, and the patient was treated accordingly. However, eight days after admission, the patient had developed approximately six episodes of focal to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures that responded well to phenytoin but rendered the patient in a deep comatose state with a GCS of three. She was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) and a nasogastric tube was inserted to aid with her nutrition and drug administration. Moreover, to prevent further seizures, she was commenced on carbamazepine tablets 200 mg administered through the nasogastric tube.

A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain was delayed to the day after stabilization because there was only a single CT scan machine in the state of Gadarif and it was operated intermittently due to the unavailability of a sufficient number of radiology technicians. The CT scan revealed cortical calcifications in the posterior part of the left parietal area raising the differential diagnosis of SWS. Consequently, a repeat physical examination was performed, which showed the presence of a faint left-sided red to purple colored flat lesion on her forehead and eye. Upon questioning her spouse, this lesion was confirmed to be present and unchanged since birth, which helped us rule out the diagnosis of a salmon patch because this lesion did not fade, thus it was diagnosed as a PWS. Additionally, she had no features of megalencephaly capillary malformation syndrome which usually includes a large head or brain size, joint problems, and capillary malformations on the skin. Moreover, the patient had no limb hypertrophy, lymphatic drainage abnormalities, or bone or soft-tissue outgrowths suggestive of Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome. Thus, based on the CT scan findings and the typical presentation, we concluded the diagnosis of SWS.

Two days after ICU admission, the patient experienced a fluctuating change in consciousness and a new-onset contralateral hemiparesis (contralateral to the PWS), as well as aphasia, and emotional lability. Unfortunately, four days after admission to the ICU, the patient started to experience vaginal bleeding; hence, the obstetrics and gynecology department was consulted, and the patient was found to have a non-viable pregnancy (28 weeks + 1 d), and an uneventful induction was performed. During the same period, she became combative and uncooperative, which led to physical restraining. Three days later, the patient developed new focal to bilateral seizures that started as facial myoclonic episodes, and after consultation with the neurology department, the patient’s dose of carbamazepine was increased to 1000 mg daily, which helped in preventing seizure recurrence. It is worth mentioning that in her second trimester, and before receiving the CT scan result, a diagnosis of eclampsia was explored, but her consistent blood pressure readings with an upper normal systolic blood pressure of 139 on most days and a diastolic pressure with a maximum of 97 mmHg and a low range of proteinuria, as well as the absence of systemic features such as renal or liver impairment, excluded this diagnosis. After reaching the diagnosis of SWS, a multidisciplinary team (MDT) approach was put into play; hence, an ophthalmology consultation was performed to exclude glaucoma. However, the patient was very irritable and difficult to perform a fundoscopy examination. Moreover, the patient was transferred to the internal medicine wards after stabilization.