We present the case of a 77-year-old man with a history of type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension who presented with a recent diagnosis of mycosis fungoides (MF). On physical examination, he had a pruritic dermatosis characterized by multiple erythematous-descamative macules and plaques distributed generalized on the face, trunk, and extremities. Skin biopsies were performed on the right arm and left arm, where atypical epidermotropic dermal lymphoid infiltration was observed. In addition, areas of subepidermal detachment, spongiosis, and occasional eosinophils in the superficial dermis were evident. In immunostaining, CD3 (70%), CD7 (30%), CD4 (90%), CD8 (10%), CD4/CD8 90:10, and CD20 were observed in single cells. The histopathologic and immunophenotypic findings were consistent with MF. He was referred to the hematology department. His blood counts were normal, as was lactate dehydrogenase. Positron emission tomography showed no pathologic findings, and both peripheral blood smear and flow cytometry reported the absence of circulating atypical lymphocytes.

T cell clonality by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of the T cell receptor (TCR) in peripheral blood was negative. He was classified as stage IIIA (T4N0M0B0). Two weeks after diagnosis, he consulted due to the appearance of blisters after sun exposure. On physical examination, generalized dermatosis was observed, characterized by erythema associated with multiple erythro-crosslinked lesions, tight blisters and other de-tents. Two blisters were found in the oral mucosa, without ocular and genital mucosal involvement. With the suspicion of a bullous PA versus a MF, new skin biopsies for histopathology and direct immunofluorescence were taken from the edge of a blister and perilesional skin, respectively. The histology showed a dermo-epidermal detachment with linear immunoglobulin G (IgG) and C3 positivity in the basement membrane, confirming the diagnosis of PA. Treatment with meprednisone 40 mg daily associated with methotrexate as a corticosteroid sparing agent was indicated. The patient progressed favorably, without the appearance of new blisters despite the reduction of the corticosteroid dose or recurrence of MF. He is currently being treated with methotrexate 10 mg weekly combined with folic acid.
