A 39-year-old male presented to a tertiary care center following attempted hanging one hour prior. By EMS report, he was found on the ground coughing blood next to a tree with a with suspended wire noose. On presentation, he was alert and oriented. He reported difficulty projecting his voice but denied dyspnea. Physical exam revealed a ligature mark along the anterior neck at the level of the thyroid cartilage. The thyroid notch could be palpated, but other cervical landmarks were obscured by subcutaneous emphysema.

CT angiography revealed intimal injuries with thrombus (AAST Grades III-V) of the bilateral common carotid, left external carotid and bilateral vertebral arteries. A displaced transverse process fracture at C4 was noted. There was extensive subcutaneous emphysema with pneumomediastinum. On closer inspection, the infrahyoid strap muscles were disrupted, with distraction of the hyoid bone and epiglottis superiorly and the thyroid cartilage inferiorly. MRI demonstrated a partial tear of the nuchal ligament, requiring ongoing spine immobilization.

The OTO-HNS service was consulted to evaluate the patient's airway. Flexible laryngoscopy demonstrated mobile cords bilaterally with mild laryngeal edema. The epiglottis appeared to be detached from the laryngeal cartilage and the mucosa of the aryepiglottic folds/false cords was disrupted.

Shortly after initial evaluation by OTO-HNS, the patient was taken to the operating room (OR) for a controlled awake nasotracheal intubation. He was stable from an airway standpoint and due to the extent of his laryngeal mucosal lacerations, we felt the safest option was to transfer him to the OR for definitive airway management under direct visualization the night of his arrival. On hospital day two, the patient underwent tracheostomy, laryngoscopy, esophagoscopy, and repair of the hyolaryngeal injury. After raising flaps, a small defect was noted over the thyroid notch in the investing layer of the deep cervical fascia which, when opened, revealed a large soft tissue defect extending into the supraglottic airway. The sternohyoid, thyrohyoid and omohyoid muscles had ruptured 1–2 cm below their insertion on the hyoid. The thyrohyoid membrane was completely disrupted, as was the mucosa of the false cords and aryepiglottic folds. The epiglottis was detached from the thyroid cartilage and was distracted superiorly with the hyoid by the unopposed forces of the suprahyoid musculature.

Due to co-existing cervical spine injuries, the neck had to remain in a neutral position. An Allis clamp was used to retract the hyoid inferiorly and a single hook to pull the larynx/trachea superiorly. The laryngeal mucosa was repaired first with interrupted 4–0 vicryl suture. To keep tension off the wound, a modified thyrohyoidopexy with epiglottopexy was performed. 20-gauge needle was passed through the anterior thyroid cartilage under visualization with a flexible bronchoscope to ensure adequate distance above the anterior commissure before passing the midline suture. On the airway side, the suture was then passed through the petiole of the epiglottis. The inferior arm of four additional 2–0 vicryl sutures were passed through the superior thyroid ala (2 sutures each side). The superior arm of each suture was then passed around the hyoid. These tension sutures were secured, holding the hyoid and thyroid cartilages in close approximation. The ruptured ends of the strap musculature were reapproximated, penrose drains were placed, and the incision was closed in a layered fashion.

The patient had a gastrostomy tube placed. He was started on heparin for carotid thrombus and continued one week of intravenous Unasyn. The first tracheostomy change was performed on post-operative day (POD) 7 once resolution of airway edema was confirmed with flexible laryngoscopy. A video swallow study on POD 14 revealed mild-moderate oropharyngeal dysphagia which was minimized with swallow strategies. He was decannulated on POD 17 and discharged the following day.

At follow up, the patient was no longer in a c-collar. He was tolerating a regular diet. His voice was slightly hoarse, considered a grade one for roughness on the GRBAS scale (grade, rough, breathy, asthenia, strain), but he was able to communicate without limitation. Laryngoscopy demonstrated a well healed larynx with mobile cords, shortening of left aryepiglottic folds and inferior displacement of the epiglottis. Follow up CTA neck to evaluate his carotid injury demonstrated resolution of cervical air with a patent/intact airway.