A 15-year-old male patient (height = 161 cm; weight = 66 kg; body surface area = 1.70, blood group = B positive) with dilated cardiomyopathy was referred to Ankara University with loss of consciousness and cardiogenic shock in July 2016. Venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support was conducted about 1 week later. His left ventricular ejection fraction was 22%. Eight days later, the patient received SynCardia total artificial heart implant (50 mL; SynCardia Systems, Inc., Tucson, AZ, USA). On postoperative day 131 after TAH surgery, the patient complained of bilateral hearing loss and was referred to the ear, nose, and throat department.

Previous medical history revealed no evidence of hearing loss, family history of deafness, or any additional anomaly in his childhood. His medical records revealed no evidence of meningitis. However, he had received amikacin (15 mg/kg), an ototoxic antibiotic, against major gram-negative pathogens during his intensive care unit stay. The patient was listed on the high urgent heart transplant wait list and was mobile on the portable Freedom Driver (SynCardia).

The patient’s otoscopic examination was unre­markable. Pure tone audiometry and auditory brainstem response revealed bilateral profound hearing loss. Tympanometry revealed normal type A tympanograms bilaterally. Both computed tomo­graphy and magnetic resonance imaging confirmed normal morphology of the labyrinth and intact cochlear nerves.

He was reviewed by a multidisciplinary team (cardiovascular surgery, pediatric intensive care, pediatric cardiology, consultation-liaison psychiatry, physical therapy and rehabilitation, infectious diseases and clinical microbiology, anesthesiology, audiology, and otorhinolaryngology) to perform a cochlear implant. After possible options were discussed with both the patient and his parents, it was then decided that he would benefit from a cochlear implantation because of hearing loss and reduction in cognitive function and adaptation needed for heart transplant. After a discussion of his case with the multidisciplinary team, a right-sided cochlear implant (Nucleus CI24RE with Contour Advance Electrode; Cochlear, Macquarie University, Australia) was decided.

The patient was on warfarin (10 mg/day), which was stopped 3 days before the surgery, and heparinization (loading dose of 50 U/kg and maintenance dose of 20 U/kg/h) was commenced when prothrombin time (international normalized ratio [INR]) was under 1.5. Two hours before surgery, heparinization was stopped. In the operating room, a spare device was available for a possible TAH device malfunction. Flow results for the TAH were closely monitored by the anesthesiology team and the perfusionist. Nonpulsatile blood flow unfavorably affects the monitoring of vital signs, and noninvasive blood pressure was not sufficient in our patient. Under local anesthesia, invasive radial arterial catheterization was performed. In addition, the left internal jugular vein catheter was left in place, which allowed monitoring of central venous pressure and use as large fluid replacement when needed. After monitoring was started, propofol 2 mg/kg, rocuronium bromide 1 mg/kg, and fentanyl 1 μg/kg were administered cautiously, and the patient was intubated orally. Sevoflurane 1 to 1.5 minimum alveolar concentration in 40% oxygen was used for maintenance. Inhaled nitric oxide was also ready to use in case of possible pulmonary hypertensive crisis.

On postoperative day 250 after TAH implant, cochlear implant surgery with round window approach was performed without any perioperative complications; the patient had minimal blood loss (only 50 mL). The duration of the operation was 120 minutes. The patient was extubated in the operating room without any circulatory and respiratory problems. Heparinization was commenced at posto­perative hour 6. We started warfarin on postoperative day 1, and heparinization was stopped after achieving INR of 2.0. No complications (infections, hematoma) were observed at postoperative follow-up.

The cochlear implant was switched on at week 4 postoperatively. The audiology team reviewed him 4 and 8 weeks later; he showed continuous impro­vement in his hearing, with normal impedances. His speech perception results were significantly impro­ved at 3 months after cochlear implant.