A 29-year-old woman came to the Oral Medicine Clinic at Padjadjaran University Dental Hospital with canker sores throughout her mouth, swollen lips, and hemorrhagic crusts that bleed easily two months prior. The complaint started with a small canker sore on the lateral of the tongue, which the patient attempted to treat with “Natural Green Tea” alcohol-containing mouthwash, but the canker sore was felt to have worsened. The patient admitted to recurrent mouth ulcers but had never experienced such a severe condition before. Previous history of allergy or fever was refused by the patient.

Extra-oral examination revealed upper and lower lip edema with hemorrhagic crusts that bled easily. No lesions were found in other parts of the body. Intra-oral examination showed a macerated appearance on the upper and lower labial mucosa accompanied by multiple ulcers with erythema edges. Several ulcer lesions with irregular margins were also identified on the right and left buccal mucosa, ventral tongue, and floor of the mouth. The gingiva region of teeth 21–24 showed painless erythema with diffuse borders.

Based on the history and clinical findings, the suspected diagnosis on the first visit was herpes-associated erythema multiforme, with the differential diagnosis being contact stomatitis and stomatitis medicamentosa. Investigations were carried out to determine the etiology and rule out the possibility of a differential diagnosis. Results of a complete blood count, IgE, and anti-HSV-1 IgG titer. Based on the examination, a diagnosis of recurrent oral erythema multiforme was made.

Following the initial visit, the patient was advised to discontinue using alcohol-containing mouthwash. Prednisone was used at a dose of 20 mg per day, divided equally during morning and night. In addition, the patient was instructed to take multivitamins in the morning, rinse her mouth with benzydamine HCl mouthwash before meals, and 0.025% hyaluronic acid mouthwash after meals, 10 mL each three times a day. Furthermore, apply hydrocortisone cream to the lips three times per day. Improvement of lesions in the lips and oral cavity.

The complaint of swollen lips that bleed easily disappeared on the second visit (twelfth day), but there was a little stinging in her mouth. The patient still felt redness and pain in the upper labial and buccal mucosa. Multivitamins, hydrocortisone cream, and benzydamine HCl mouthwash were discontinued at this visit. The patient was instructed to continue to use 0.025% hyaluronic acid mouthwash, take prednisone at a dose of 15 mg per day, and do scaling. Total serum IgE levels were re-evaluated to screen for allergic conditions.

On the third visit, the pain in the mouth was no longer felt and the patient had done scaling. The patient used the medication according to the instructions given. Instructions to continue taking prednisone at a dose of 5mg per day, education to maintain oral hygiene, and a well-balanced lifestyle were given to the patient.