A 7-year-old girl was found to have decreased visual acuity in her left eye during a school checkup. Subsequently, she visited her local clinic, where an ERM was observed in her left eye, leading to a referral to our department for further investigation and treatment. Her medical and family histories were unremarkable. She was born weighing 3,710 g, with a gestational age of 40 weeks and 1 day. At her initial visit, the best-corrected visual acuity was recorded as 20/16 in the right eye and 20/32 in the left eye. The anterior segment and optic media were normal, and intraocular pressure was measured at 12 mm Hg in both eyes. Fundus examination of both eyes revealed straight vessels and an avascular field on the temporal side. Additionally, the left eye exhibited exudative changes and hemorrhage in the temporal peripheral retina, along with membranous tissue extending from the optic disc to the macula and around the periphery. Fluorescein angiography indicated an avascular field temporally in both eyes and fluorescein leakage in the left eye’s avascular field during the late phase, suggesting the presence of an active fibrovascular proliferation in these area. Examination of the mother’s fundus showed straight vessels in the temporal retina and avascular areas in the peripheral retina of both eyes. Based on these clinical findings, the patient was diagnosed with FEVR. Fundus examinations of the father and brother showed no abnormalities. A comprehensive examination by a pediatrician revealed no general abnormalities. At her first visit to our hospital, the FT was found to be strongly adhered to the macula, forming an ERM, with an abnormal layered vitreous cortex observed between the FT and the retina. OCT examination revealed ectopic inner foveal layers, absence of the foveal depression, a wrinkled macula, and thickening of the outer nuclear layer (ONL). Six months before symptom onset, the visual acuity of the left eye was 20/20, as recorded by a local doctor. Retrospective OCT analysis showed no ERM but identified foveal hypoplasia (extrusion of plexiform layers) in the left eye.

Encircling scleral buckling and retinal photocoagulation were performed to alleviate macular traction. Photocoagulation was performed as close as possible to the areas that were hyperfluorescent on fluorescein angiography. However, OCT revealed that the FT on the macula was adhering vertically and afferently and further rose from the retina. This resulted in increased retinal traction and thickening of the ONL, resulting in a decrease in visual acuity to 20/50.

One year and six months later, a vitrectomy was performed to excise the FT from the macula. During the procedure, multiple layers of the hyaloid membrane were noted, along with the extension of FT along these layers. Strong adhesions were present on the macula and optic disc. Given the absence of posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) and the strong adhesion of the posterior hyaline membrane to the surrounding retina, a PVD was initiated from the optic disc toward the equator. Within the FT, a single blood vessel was identified, but the majority of the FT, which was fibrous, adhered firmly to the retina. The FT was carefully detached using forceps from areas outside the vascular arcade where the retinal adhesion was less intense. A fundus examination post-surgery revealed the alleviation of macular traction without surgical complications and the visual acuity reached 20/20 at 6 months postoperatively. On OCT, the FT was removed, and the appearance of a foveal depression and normalization of the ONL were observed; however, an ectopic inner foveal layer was still present 3 months after the surgery.