A 9-year-old male patient presented to the Urology Department of Mulago National Referral Hospital with a history of a painless scrotal mass, which was initially small in size and had gradually increased in size over 3 years. As a baby, he was fairly well until the scrotal swelling ensued. His early childhood was unremarkable.

Physical examination revealed a non-tender fixed-left scrotal mass of 5 cm in diameter. The overlying skin was intact. No palpable regional lymph nodes seen.

A complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 12.3 g/dL and a white blood cell count of 7600 cells/mm3. The liver and renal function tests were within normal limits.

An enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis for local staging and assessment of distant metastasis demonstrated a heterogeneously enhancing mass (30–55 HU), occupying the region of the scrotum extending into both inguinal regions and the pelvis, making it difficult to delineate the testicles. No bone erosion was detected. The abdomen was negative for metastasis. The chest X-ray was also unremarkable.

An ultrasound-guided Tru-Cut biopsy was carried out and the sample was sent for histopathological and immunohistochemical examination.

In the histopathological review, the hematoxylin and eosin-stained section revealed a tumor composed of sheets of bland cells with spindle-shaped nuclei and pale eosinophilic cytoplasm forming a storiform pattern and diffusely infiltrating the underlying adipose tissue. Myxoid stroma with prominent thin-walled vessels was seen. The tumor cells were diffusely and vigorously positive for CD34.

Surgical removal was performed, with negative resection edges, and the patient was placed on adjuvant radiotherapy. He received a total dose of 60 Gy using conventional external beam radiotherapy with a cobalt-60 machine, in fractions of 2 Gy per day, using direct anterior fields to the primary tumor site. He completed the treatment with no immediate or late complications and good tolerance. The patient was doing well on follow-up.