A 36-year-old female patient with a history of ulcerative colitis and good disease control on sulfasalazine, ferrous fumarate and intermittent prednisone for flare-ups is presented.

He was admitted to the emergency unit with a 1 week history of progressive oppressive precordial pain associated with dyspnea and neurovegetative symptoms. On admission, an electrocardiogram was performed in sinus rhythm, with finding of supradesnivel of the ST segment in the lower wall.

The patient reported a 6-month history of general disorders, fatigue and night sweats. She had previously presented episodes of precordial pain in relation to effort that progressed to rest. The physical examination was without murmurs or alterations of the peripheral pulses.

An emergency coronary angiography was performed, which revealed severe 2-vessel disease: severe ostial lesion 90% in the left coronary trunk and severe subocclusive lesion 99-100% at the ostial level in the right coronary artery (culprit vessel). Primary angioplasty of the right coronary artery was performed with successful installation of a medicated stent. The hemodynamicist was impressed by a possible aortitis due to involvement of the arch and friability of the vessels when the balloon was advanced, so he suggested an etiological study oriented to inflammatory disease, prior to surgical resolution of the lesion of the left coronary trunk.

Laboratory tests showed mild anaemia (haemoglobin: 11.6 g/dL), mild leukocytosis (13,800/mm3), elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): 42 mm/h and C-reactive protein (CRP): 4.9 mg/L (normal value <1) and elevated ultrasensitive troponin. From the autoimmunity study, normal levels of complement C3 and C4, negative anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-DNA, negative extracellular nuclear antigen (ENA) profile and non-reactive VDRL were rescued.

Cardiac magnetic resonance (MRI) with contrast was completed with findings of acute infarction of the left ventricular inferior wall non-transmural myocardium and subendocardial ischemia in the anteroseptoapical resting of the left ventricle. Mild aortic and mitral insufficiency. Preserved biventricular systolic function.

Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed periaortic fibrotic wall thickening involving the root, aortic arch and abdominal aorta with severe left coronary trunk stenosis and mild left subclavian, left vertebral artery stenosis and severe lower mesenteric artery stenosis. Immune globulin G (IgG) 4 deposition disease or Takayasu's arteritis was suggested.

Within the differential diagnosis study, IgG levels were performed at 1,600 mg/dl (reference values: 700-1,600), and its subclasses: IgG1: 1024 mg/dl (elevated), and the rest in normal range (IgG2: 456 mg/dl; IgG3: 98.8 mg/dl and IgG4: 13.6 mg/dl).

Takayasu arteritis was diagnosed clinically and by imaging and treatment was initiated with prednisone 60 mg daily, methotrexate 20 mg weekly by injection and folic acid 1 mg daily. After 3 weeks of treatment she underwent myocardial revascularisation surgery with use of the left internal mammary artery (LIMA) as a graft to the descending anterior artery (DA) and aortocoronary bypass to circumflex artery. It was noted intraoperatively that the root of the aorta and the ascending aorta presented a healthy appearance. The patient is currently at home in good general condition and under ambulatory follow-up.
