We report the case of a boy born at 37 weeks 5/7 of gestational age by the vaginal route, with a birth weight of 2,160 kg (- 2.45 SD according to Niklasson), a size of 44 cm (- 2.56 SD) and a head circumference of 33 cm (- 0.74 SD). This intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) is in the context of maternal consumption of tobacco and cannabis.
The clinical examination at birth is normal. There is no dysmorphia. There is no particular family history or consanguinity.
Glycemic monitoring was initiated due to RCIU. At one hour of life, the child presented severe symptomatic hypoglycemia (glucose measured at 18 mg/dl) requiring the administration of a bolus of 10% glucose at 2 ml/kg followed by an infusion of 10% glucose at 60 ml/kg/day, which can be gradually decreased. The evolution was initially favorable with intermittent enteral feeding.
At eleven days of life, the child presented an episode of tremors. The measured blood glucose was 38 mg/dl with insufficiently inhibited insulinemia at 3.4 mUI/L (N: 3-25 mUI/L).
The cortisol and growth hormone responses are satisfactory (22.1 µg/dL and 5.4 µg/L, respectively). The ketonuria is negative. During another episode of hypoglycemia, the blood glucose is measured at 34 mg/dL, with an insulinemia measurable at 5 mUI/L. The glucagon test shows a rise in blood glucose of 40 mg/dL after 40 minutes. The diagnosis of hypoglycemia by hyperinsulinism is made.
The treatment consists of increasing daily intake of carbohydrates (infusion of a 10% glucose solution in parallel to continuous feeding by nasogastric tube) to a total of 14 g/kg/d. Given the recurrence of hypoglycaemia when the intake of carbohydrates is reduced (discontinuation of the infusion and switch to discontinuous feeding), treatment with diazoxide per os (10 mg/kg/d) is initiated. Due to the risk of pulmonary arterial hypertension associated with treatment with diazoxide, regular monitoring of cardiac ultrasound is performed and is normal.
Despite the persistence of hypoglycaemia despite treatment with diazoxide, subcutaneous treatment with octreotide was initiated, first intermittently and then continuously via an insulin pump. The initial dose of 7.5 µg/kg/d was increased to 24 µg/kg/d. In parallel to artificial milk on demand (160 cc/kg/d), the patient received carbohydrates in the form of dextrin maltose associated with water continuously via a nasogastric tube (7 cc/h). Regular abdominal ultrasound monitoring was performed due to the risk of cholestasis associated with treatment with octreotide. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and the electroencephalogram performed due to repeated hypoglycaemia did not demonstrate anomalies.
The genetic analysis of the panel of genes associated with congenital hyperinsulinism highlights a c.2696T>A p. (Ile899Asn) variant in the ABCC8 gene, in the heterozygous state, probably pathogenic (class IV). The genetic analysis of the mother does not highlight a mutation and the father's DNA is not available. The focal or diffuse character of the pancreatic lesion cannot be defined, an 18F-DOPA PET scan is performed and highlights a focal lesion (presence of a hyperfixing nodular focus at the level of the pancreatic body/tail junction). In this context, a partial pancreatectomy with ablation of the pancreatic tail is performed and the patient is cured with the discontinuation of octreotide and diazoxide. The anatomopathological analysis confirms a typical focal lesion, of complete resection, with a normal pancreas around it.
