A 74-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of dyspnea and chest pain for 1 month. She was previously diagnosed with hyperthyroidism due to heart failure with atrial fibrillation 11 years prior, which was treated with medication prescribed at a private clinic. However, she had discontinued taking medication for hyperthyroidism against medical advice several years prior. Two months before the most recent hospital admission, a thyroid function test (TFT) was administered to determine the cause of weight loss, and she was diagnosed with recurring hyperthyroidism; however, she refused treatment with medication.

Initial chest roentgenography showed bilateral pulmonary edema and pleural effusion, and electrocardiography showed atrial fibrillation. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed moderate left ventricle dysfunction (ejection fraction, 43%) with regional wall motion abnormalities at the area of the right coronary artery (RCA) and left circumflex artery (LCX). Subsequent coronary angiography revealed chronic total occlusion (CTO) of the RCA with collateral blood flow from the LCX, 90% obstruction of the LCX, and 80% obstruction in the mid portion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD). Initial cardiac markers showed normal creatine kinase-muscle/brain (CK-MB, 1.8 ng/mL; reference range, < 3.4 ng/mL) and mildly elevated troponin I (Tn I, 0.28 ng/mL; reference range, < 0.12 ng/mL) levels. TFT showed decreased thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (0.01 uIU/mL; reference range, 0.55–4.78 uIU/mL) and elevated T3 (2.39 ng/mL; reference range, 0.6–1.81 ng/mL) and free T4 (3.321 ng/dl; reference range, 0.89–1.76 ng/dl) levels and positive test results for thyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase antibodies.

Anti-thyroid medication treatment with 10 mg methimazole three times per day was initiated, and she was scheduled to undergo CABG surgery after normalization of the thyroid function. Chest roentgenography showed improving pulmonary edema and pleural effusion after medical management for 1 week. However, results of the TFT remained elevated (T3, 2.21 ng/ml; free T4, 3.77 ng/dl), and she developed fever (37.9 °C) without any sign of infection.

On day 8 of hospitalization, the patient exhibited loss of consciousness (LOC) with 7 s of sinus pause during the 6-min walk test and then again for 30 s at night. We performed electroencephalography to exclude seizure as a cause, and the findings were normal.

We concluded that sick sinus syndrome (SSS) caused the LOC. A follow-up chest roentgenography showed aggravation of pulmonary edema with pleural effusion and an elevated CK-MB level (8.9 ng/mL; Tn I, 1.82 ng/mL). A subsequent TTE showed no differences in findings compared to those from the initial TTE. We considered delaying CABG surgery because we could not determine whether the patient’s syncope was related to CTO of the RCA.

We decided to perform surgery on the patient after consulting with an endocrinologist who recommended iodine solution administration (Lugol’s solution, 5 drops two times per day) and continuous use of antithyroid medication until surgery. However, results of the TFT remained elevated (T3, 1.89 ng/ml; free T4, 3.64 ng/dl) before surgery. On day 14 of hospitalization, CABG surgery was performed under cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). The left internal mammary artery was anastomosed to the LAD, and the saphenous vein was anastomosed to the obtuse marginal artery. Graft patency was normal on blood flowmetry. She was successfully weaned from CPB. However, she exhibited extreme tachycardia (> 140 bpm) refractory to the intravenous beta-blocker (esmolol) and was, therefore, transferred to the intensive care unit after the intravenous administration of 130 mg of esmolol bolus injection.

Intravenous esmolol was administered by continuous infusion (range, 20–200 mg/h) and twenty-one 790 mg bolus injections on the day of surgery. In addition, she was administered cortisol (50 mg q 8 h), and the antithyroid medication dosage (15 mg methimazole three times per day) was increased after consultation with the endocrinology department. Twenty-hours after surgery, extreme tachycardia was not present; therefore, continuous infusion and bolus injection of esmolol were discontinued. Follow-up TTE results were the same as those seen preoperatively.

On day 2 after surgery, she exhibited tachycardia (> 160 bpm) for 30 min, which was controlled with five bolus injections of esmolol intravenously (120 mg total). Thereafter, she did not exhibit extreme tachycardia requiring intravenous beta-blocker. The steroid was discontinued on day 3 after surgery for a total of nine bolus injections (450 mg total). Results of the TFT showed decreased thyroid hormone levels (T3, 0.87 ng/ml; free T4, 2.86 ng/dl) on day 4 after surgery. Subsequent chest roentgenography showed haziness of the right upper lung field, and Klebsiella pneumonia was detected in the sputum. Despite appropriate antibiotic treatment, her condition was exacerbated and she developed multiple organ failure resulting from the deterioration of adult respiratory distress syndrome. She subsequently died 8 days after surgery.