This is the case of a 51-year-old female with a past medical history of IPAH. This had been diagnosed by right heart catheterization 16 years previously when the patient collapsed at home shortly after childbirth. The patient’s condition was stable for many years, being medically managed with intravenous iloprost at 1300 μg once daily. This allowed the patient an acceptable quality of life maintaining a WHO functional class II.

A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram in 2013 diagnosed a 5.5 cm PAA, worst affecting the main and left pulmonary arteries. Right heart catheter performed at this time demonstrated pulmonary artery pressure of 90/39 mmHg (mean 31 mmHg), right ventricular pressure of 93/10, end diastolic diastolic pressure of 20 mmHg and a mean right atrial pressure of 13 mmHg. Due to the progression of the underlying pathology additional pulmonary antihypertensives were added to the treatment plan (sildenafil and ambrisentan). The patient was considered for bilateral orthotopic lung transplantation but after assessment was deemed too clinically well to list for transplant at that time and the patient continued to be monitored by their local hospital.

Clinical deterioration prompted review at our centre in 2019, which identified worsening symptoms of shortness of breath, causing severe limitation of daily function (WHO functional class III-IV), and left shoulder pain. Echocardiography revealed marked progression of the PAA causing dilatation of the pulmonary valve annulus and subsequent severe pulmonary regurgitation. There was also severe right ventricular impairment, moderate tricuspid regurgitation and a 4 cm pericardial effusion lateral to the left ventricular wall. Pulmonary artery pressure was estimated at > 65 mmHg.

Computed tomography pulmonary angiography confirmed a 12 cm aneurysm of the pulmonary artery mainly affecting the main and left pulmonary arteries. There was also a 6 cm aneurysm of the right pulmonary artery. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging confirmed a right ventricular ejection fraction of 23% (this had been 40% at the previous assessment). A chest x-ray demonstrated marked cardiomegaly, tracheal deviation, and an extremely widened mediastinum extending into the left hemi-thorax.

Due to the presence of a giant PAA, severe pulmonary regurgitation and a 4 cm pericardial effusion, it was decided to list the patient for heart-lung transplantation. Episodes of right heart failure were managed with inotropes and the patient was maintained on pulmonary antihypertensive medications and diuretics whilst awaiting transplantation.

Approach via median sternotomy revealed the large aneurysm sac which was translucent to blood. The space occupying effect caused lateral deviation of the aorta, as well as inferior displacement of the heart into the diaphragm. It also extended well into the left hemi-thorax, severely compromising the left lung. Cardiopulmonary bypass was established via aortic and bi-caval cannulation and the patient cooled to 34 °C. Dissection of the pulmonary artery allowed identification of the ligamentum arteriosus and safe dissection of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve. Following dissection and preservation of the phrenic nerves the recipient heart and lungs were explanted. The donor heart-lung block was prepared and implanted and after haemostasis was confirmed, primary chest closure was performed. The patient was started on an induction immunosuppressive regime and transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit in a stable condition. A post-operative chest x-ray was performed which was normal. The only significant post-operative complication was a below-knee deep vein thrombosis which was easily managed with enoxaparin. The patient was discharged 34d post-operatively and follow-up for 13 months since discharge has confirmed good progress.