24-year-old male patient with no relevant medical history. Pre-event systemic review was negative. He presented with a 10-day history that began with nasal congestion. On the third day, he participated in a rescue operation in a forest fire, where he did not suffer visible burns. On the fourth day, he developed general systemic involvement and night sweats, red eye with mucopurulent discharge, epiphora, erosive lesions of the upper lip and whitish plaques on the inner walls of the oral cavity, which were painful. He consulted emergency services three times, where he was treated on an outpatient basis with chlorpheniramine, paracetamol and NSAIDs. Despite this, the condition progressed with myalgia, fever of up to 39°C, greater involvement of the general system and oral mucosa that made it difficult to eat, dry cough and vomiting of food.

Consultation for the fourth time, 10 days before the onset of the clinical picture, in the emergency department of our center. On admission he was described as tachycardic (115 bpm), temperature 37.8°C, respiratory rate of 20 bpm, saturating 97% with FIO2 ambient. On physical examination he had conjunctival injection with bipalpebral edema, purulent discharge and epiphora, erosive lesions sensitive with mobile whitish plaques in oral mucosa and urinary meatus. On physical examination he had conjunctival injection with bipalpebral edema, purulent discharge and epiphora, erosive lesions sensitive with mobile whitish plaques in oral mucosa and urinary meatus. Scarce skin lesions (< 5% body surface) in anterior thorax, hyperpigmented, non-pruritic, with negative Nikolsky sign. No other alterations. In his laboratory examinations he had leukocytes at 13,200, without eosinophilia and PCR at 205.4 mg/l (normal < 5). Red series, platelets, plasma electrolytes, renal and hepatic function normal. Complete urine examination and non-inflammatory sediment. He was diagnosed with "non-oncological mucositis", and was managed with infusions of physiological serum, ceftriaxone and hospitalization in a room with protective isolation.

In the study, a naso-fibroscopy was performed that showed congestive mucous from the nose to the hypopharynx with mucopurulent secretion, ruling out burns. The Computed Axial Tomography (TAC) of the thorax showed multiple foci of alveolar filling associated with a budding tree image, compatible with interstitial pneumonia.

In the etiological study, a respiratory filmArray™ was performed, positive for Chlamydophila pneumoniae and adenovirus. Serology was also requested for hepatitis B and C viruses, HIV, EBV, CMV, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, VDRL, PCR in oral lesions of HSV I and II, culture of current urethral secretion, for Neisseria gonorrhoeae and fungi, PCR urethral secretion, uroculture and blood cultures, all with negative results.

The patient was treated in a team with dermatology, ophthalmology, immunology and internal medicine. Support was provided with parenteral hydration and nutrition, nursing care, azithromycin associated with hydrocortisone for 5 days, antibiotic eye drops for suspected superinfection, oral rinses with miconazole 20 mg in gel format and protection of lips and urethral meatus with cream based on panthenol, bisabolol and glycerine.

After five days of treatment, good clinical and laboratory evolution was observed, so skin biopsy was discarded and oral feeding was gradually initiated.

On day 12 of hospitalization, the patient was in good general condition, eating properly orally, with clinical resolution of pulmonary condition, healing of oral and urethral mucous lesions.

So he was discharged with a referral for immunology check-ups.
