A 28-year-old female patient was on follow-up at our clinic after she presented with anterior neck swelling of 4 years. She claimed that the swelling was small at the beginning but progressed in size gradually, at which time she started filling some pressure locally. Lately, she had also been feeling easily fatigued, she has had palpitation and shortness of breath on exertion, and some degree of heat intolerance. However, her appetite had been as usual and she did not experience any weight loss. Upon examining her, her blood pressure was 118/80 mmHg, pulse rate was 114 beats per minute, and the temperature was 36.6°C. Neck examination showed 5cm × 6cm measuring enlarged thyroid gland in the anterior neck, which had firm consistency, nodular surface with mobility and no tenderness. There were no clinically detectable cervical lymphadenopathies (LAP). There were no signs of ophthalmopathy, and neurologic exam was normal. During her initial diagnosis, she was investigated with baseline complete blood count (CBC), serum TSH, T3 and T4, liver function tests (LFT), neck ultrasound and fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC).

Despite having normal free T3 and T4 levels, the patient was started on PTU 100 mg orally three times daily (TID) and propranolol 40 mg PO TID based on clinical symptoms of hyperthyroidism and low TSH levels. Neck ultrasound revealed that both thyroid lobes were enlarged in size due to multiple heterogeneous echo benign nodules with internal coarse shadowing calcifications, largest in the right lobe measuring 3.5 × 2.5 cm in the widest dimension. There were no significant LAP. Thyroid scintigraphy is warranted in this case, however due to its unavailability in our setting, we could not perform it. On FNAC, smear showed low cellular yield composed of sheets and clusters of atypical cyst lining cells, lymphocytes and abundant thin and thick colloid in fluidy background. The conclusion was atypia of undetermined significance (AUS); therefore, repeat FNAC after 3 months was planned. The repeat FNAC showed moderate cellular yield composed of clusters and dispersed bland follicular epithelial cells, along with foamy histiocytes, cyst lining cells and abundant thin and thick colloid in fluidy background. The index was nodular colloid goiter with hyperplastic focus.

After taking the ATDs for 7 months, she came to the clinic for her regular follow-up, at which point she was experiencing none of the clinical features of hyperthyroidism. Her pulse rate was maintained within the normal limits (80–84 beats per minute) and the TSH, T3 and T4 had normalized.

At this point, the patient was advised to have a definitive thyroidectomy to treat the toxic MNG and was admitted to the elective surgical department. Upon admission routine pre-operative lab investigations were sent. The LFT was within normal limits and the CBC test done twice 24 hours apart showed leucopenia with agranulocytosis. The patient had no fever, sore throat or any other signs and symptoms of infection, and the agranulocytosis was an incidental finding.

The diagnosis of asymptomatic PTU-induced agranulocytosis was made, with absolute neutrophil count of less than 500/µL, while she was on PTU for the control of hyperthyroidism which was not evident on her initial CBC profiles. Since she was asymptomatic and work-up for infection (urine analysis and chest X-ray) were unremarkable, she was not started on broad-spectrum antibiotics. However, the offending ATD was immediately discontinued. The patient was kept inpatient for monitoring on lugol’s iodine and propranolol 20 mg po QID. She was advised on danger signs like sore throat, fever, cough and so on. Eight days after discontinuing the ATD, the CBC profile was determined once again, showing normalized total leukocyte, as well as, absolute neutrophil count.

After informed consent was obtained from the patient, she was taken to the operation theater. She was put under general anesthesia, and subtotal thyroidectomy was performed. The intra-operative finding was 8 × 6 cm measuring thyroid gland with multiple calcified nodules.

Dunhill’s thyroidectomy procedure was performed after identifying and preserving both RLNs and the parathyroid glands. Drainage was left in the thyroid bed and incision closed in layers. The patient had smooth post-operative course, and she got discharged on the 2nd post-op day (POD). Histopathological analysis revealed nodular colloid goiter with cystic degeneration. The patient was followed for 6 months at the outpatient clinic. She has no complaints, and her clinical examination and laboratory test results are normal. She is clinically, as well as biochemically, euthyroid.