71-year-old woman, who was admitted to the emergency department of the Hospital of Mataró (Barcelona, Spain) on September 9, 2020 with progressive weakness, for which admission to neurology was decided. Her medical history included arterial hypertension, essential tremor, arthrosis and mild anxiety disorder, under treatment with gabapentin, sertraline and tramadol. The patient had consulted her general practitioner on September 1, 2020 for abdominal pain, along with mild diarrhea that lasted 24 hours. The next day she began to feel weak and, over the next few days, dyspnoea and dysphagia appeared, for which laryngitis was suspected and prednisone was prescribed. On September 8, 2020 she was visited again by her general practitioner for global worsening of weakness; she also presented dysarthria, dysphagia and bilateral ptosis, for which she was referred to the hospital emergency department.

She had no fever on arrival, her blood pressure and heart rate were normal, and her physical examination was normal with the exception of moderate tachypnea. The neurologic examination showed bilateral ptosis of the eyelids, bilateral facial paralysis, bilateral mydriasis that was unresponsive to light and accommodation, bilateral ophthalmoparesis for both supra- and infra-version, moderate tetraparesis of the extremities (3/5), and severe dysphonia and dysphagia. She was conscious and her speech content was normal, as were her myotatic reflexes, sensation, and coordination. Fatigability maneuvers were inconclusive and an ice test was performed, which was positive, transiently improving ptosis.

The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 was repeatedly negative (in his outpatient and in the hospital). The arterial blood gas showed hypoxemia: 75, with 95% SO2, and the rest of the explorations performed in emergency were normal (chest radiography, routine blood analysis, electrocardiogram).

Supportive treatment with oxygen, intravenous fluids, nasogastric tube feeding and measures to prevent complications were initiated. The condition stabilised on the third day of admission to the hospital, without requiring advanced respiratory support, and a slow improvement began on the eighth day, with tolerance to the adapted diet for dysphagia. During the first week she had arterial hypotension, which was corrected with intravenous fluids. From the second week, she was able to initiate physical rehabilitation, with good evolution, so she was transferred to a specific rehabilitation centre on the 19th day, and then she was able to walk with bilateral support. At the follow-up visit in neurology outpatient consultations six weeks later, the patient was completely recovered.
