A 61-year-old Syrian male with a history of alcoholism and heavy smoking presented to the dermatology department with complaints of itchy pigmented lesions without telangiectasias, scaling, or atrophy on the right side of his trunk and his right thigh. The patient denied prior history of exposure to chemicals or solvents, and there was no family history of skin cancers, skin diseases, or relevant systemic conditions. These lesions were persistent for 3 years, and the patient was previously prescribed a topical 0.1% hydrocortisone cream by a local dermatologist to relieve the itching; the patient used the cream intermittently and only when the itching was severe. Upon clinical examination, hyperpigmented patches on the right side of his trunk and the lateral surface of his right thigh were evident, with no other clinical features. Blood tests of the patient were all within normal ranges except a slight increase in the white blood cell count. Given the nonspecific features, a skin biopsy was performed for further evaluation, and histopathological examination of the biopsy revealed parakeratosic hyperkeratosic epidermis with slight spongiosis. Papillary dermis was infiltrated moderately by atypical lymphocytes with mild deposition of melanophages. Lymphocytic infiltrate was situated in clusters and in linear basilar distribution along the dermoepidermal junction. Immunochemistry of the atypical lymphocytes were CD3+, CD8+, CD4−, CD20−. A chest and abdomen computed tomography (CT) scan was conducted, but yielded only normal findings with no lymphadenopathy or organomegaly. The patient was diagnosed with early stage HPMF and was subsequently referred to a specialized hospital to receive the treatment. Our patient underwent psoralen and ultraviolet A light (PUVA) therapy, with oral 8-methoxypsoralen two times a week, and was prescribed a topical 0.1% betamethasone dipropionate. After 12 weeks of treatment, the itching was relieved, and the hyperpigmentation regressed, but did not disappear. The patient’s long-term prognosis is excellent, and he was instructed to apply moisturizer and avoid sun exposure and is being evaluated every 6 months to detect any further relapse or new lesions on other areas of the body.

