A 2-year-old girl presented to emergency department with 5 days of high grade fever, cough and bilateral eyelid swelling. Prior to the onset of this illness, there were edema and a perinasal face skin furuncle. She had previously been otherwise healthy.

Physical examination revealed a very ill girl with periorbital and facial edema, high-grade fever, increased respiratory rate, decreased SpO2, and chest crepitation.

An eye exam revealed swelling around the eyes on both sides. Both globes showed axial proptosis. Examinations also showed injection, purulent discharge in both eyes with slow-reacting pupils, severe conjunctival chemosis, and external ophthalmoplegia affecting the third, fourth, and sixth cranial nerves.

The vertical disk ratio of the right eye was 0.3, while that of the left eye was 0.4. There was no evidence of engorged retinal veins or disc edema.

Laboratory investigations showed a significantly high white blood cell count (WBC = 32,000 cells/mm3), low hemoglobin (5.5 mg/dL), and high C-reactive protein (112 mg/L). Blood culture was negative.

Orbital CT demonstrated extensive bilateral periorbital soft tissue thickening and facial subcutaneous edema. In addition; Contrast enhanced CT of thorax revealed Multiple peripheral located cavitary lesions in the bilateral lungs (Septic emboli) and associated bilateral moderate pneumothorax with consolidation areas with air bronchogram in the left lower lung of the lung.

The patient was admitted in the pediatric ICU and treatment was initiated with intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone 500mg 12 hourly, IV clindamycin 100mg 8 hourly, Voltaren eye drop 8 hourly, Lomefloxacin eye drop 12 hourly after an initial loading dose of one drop every 5 min for 25 min, chloramphenicol ointment nocte and oral ibuprofen syrup 8 hourly. Bilateral chest tube were inserted for pneumothorax decompression.

Her white blood cell count normalized and chest x ray was significantly improved. She was discharged from hospital after 15 days with orally administered antibiotic therapy (co_amoxiclav syrup 400mg) to be taken for one week.