38-year-old female patient from Sullana, Piura in the north coast of Peru, previously healthy, who was diagnosed with dengue without alarming signs in a local health center, with positive ELISA IgM test, receiving symptomatic ambulatory treatment.
Four weeks later, she presented with severe pain in the anterior cervical region, irradiated to the jaw and auricular region, accompanied by increased volume in the area, general malaise, odynophagia, dysphagia, palpitations and tremors in the extremities. She was evaluated in a hospital in her town, where she underwent a cervical ultrasound that showed a thyroid gland with heterogeneous echogenicity, with the presence of a solid, hypo-echogenic nodule in the left thyroid lobe, with irregular margins, measuring 27x15 mm, with no calcifications, classified as ACR-TIRADS 4 (American College of Radiology classification). In addition, multiple cervical and supra-sternal bilateral adenopathies were observed, increased in size, rounded, with well-defined contours, homogeneous structure, hyper-echogenic ganglionic hilum and increased vascular flow, predominantly hilar and central. During the ultrasound, the patient experienced severe cervical pain when she was in contact with the transducer. Due to the finding of a nodule with suspicion of malignancy, the patient was referred to Lima to complete the imaging and laboratory studies.
The patient presented with palpitations and resting tremor compatible with signs of thyrotoxicosis on admission to our hospital. Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) was found at 0.043 uUI/mL, free thyroxine (T4L) and free triiodothyronine (T3L) elevated, antithyroid peroxidase antibodies (ATPO) and antithyroglobulin antibodies (ATG) negative, and elevated levels of thyroglobulin (Table 1).
The thyroid scintigraphy with technetium-99m showed no uptake of radionuclide, consistent with thyroiditis. Due to the echographic characteristics of the nodule of the left thyroid lobe, ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) was performed, with a Bethesda II result.
The patient received corticosteroid therapy for two months, based on prednisone, whose initial dose was 50 mg/day, being progressively decreased until it was discontinued. The patient reported significant decrease of pain one week after initiating corticosteroid therapy. After one month, she presented a heart rate of 70 beats per minute and the thyroid gland (goiter grade Ib) was palpable with irregular surface, not painful to the touch and without tremor.
After two months, the patient was asymptomatic, without corticosteroids, and the laboratory results showed TSH 8.81 uUI/mL and free T4 0.95 ng/dL. After two more months, the patient remained asymptomatic and was found to have TSH 2.4 IU/mL, free T4 1.37 ng/dL, and normal thyroglobulin levels (Table 1).
The patient's identity has been protected for the purposes of this article. Her informed consent and permission from the head of the endocrinology department of the Edgardo Rebagliati Martins National Hospital were obtained for publication.
