The patient was a 44-year-old Japanese man with a history of acute appendicitis at the age of 15 years. He had no known allergies. He was a chronic smoker (15 cigarettes/day for 25 years) and consumed alcohol occasionally. From the age of 20 years, he experienced recurrent painful subcutaneous nodules on his limbs. At the age of 39 years, he developed polyarthritis and myalgia. Blood investigations performed at a local public hospital revealed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level. Myeloperoxidase-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody and proteinase-3-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were negative, eosinophil count was normal, and urine tests were unremarkable. He had no symptoms affecting the eyes, nose, or mouth. Furthermore, chest computed tomography showed no signs of interstitial pneumonia. He tested negative for HBV.

A skin biopsy from a subcutaneous nodule on his left lower leg showed infiltration of numerous lymphocytes and neutrophils in the medium-sized vessels in the deep dermis. Based on Watts criteria, a diagnosis of PAN was established, and treatment with PSL 40 mg was initiated. AZP was included later in the treatment. Five months into treatment, on PSL 10 mg and AZP 25 mg, he was referred to our hospital because of severe pain despite taking NSAIDs three times daily. At the first visit to our hospital, he was 40 years old, 171 cm tall, and weighed 80 kg. His vitals were as follows: blood pressure of 132/74 mmHg; pulse of 91 bpm; respiration rate of 12 breaths/min; SpO2 of 97% (room air), and body temperature of 36.0°C. Despite ongoing treatment, he showed no improvement in joint pain, myalgia, and painful rashes; the CRP level was 0.66 mg/dl. An ultrasound revealed tenosynovitis in the right posterior tibial and flexor digitorum longus tendons, with inflammation at the navicular tuberosity attachment of the posterior tibial tendon. Moreover, magnetic resonance imaging of the right elbow showed high signal intensity in multiple muscles on spectral attenuated inversion recovery (SPAIR) sequence. Despite changes in immunosuppressants, his symptoms and CRP levels did not improve, and PSL could not be tapered.

Although the administration of TCZ every two weeks normalized the CRP levels, he showed no symptomatic improvement. Even when the TCZ dosing interval was reduced to weekly, tapering of PSL was not possible. Subsequently, switching to UPA resulted in a relatively rapid resolution of joint pain, myalgia, and rashes. MTX, PSL, and NSAIDs were gradually discontinued, and after one year of UPA use, there were no relapses or side effects.