A 13-year-old otherwise healthy male sustained an injury after falling. Upon initial assessment by emergency services personnel, the patient exhibited signs of hypoxia and shock. Consequently, he was intubated, a chest tube was placed on the left side, and he received an intravenous bolus of tranexamic acid from a helicopter emergency medical service. Radiography revealed a large bilateral pulmonary contusion and left femoral fracture. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a thoracic aortic injury with a pseudoaneurysm (SVS grade III), in addition to multiple thoracic vertebral fractures with extravasation and bilateral pulmonary contusions. The pseudoaneurysm was situated at the aortic isthmus 8 mm distal to the left subclavian artery.

After initial fluid resuscitation and blood pressure control, his oxygenation level decreased to P/F 140 (FiO2: 0.8). As we suspected pulmonary contusion progression, venovenous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VV-ECMO) was considered, and ECMO catheters were inserted into the internal jugular and common femoral veins before TEVAR. The patient was 163 cm tall, weighed 48 kg, and had a body surface area of 1.5 m [2] (estimated using the Du Bois formula). The native proximal aortic diameter was 15 mm; we chose a 21-mm diameter stent graft (TAG TGM212110J; Gore, Arizona, US), as it was the smallest device available at the time. Because of the small diameter of the common femoral arteries on both sides (4 mm), we approached the left common iliac artery (8 mm) under laparotomy. In addition, the proximal landing zone of the stent graft on the thoracic pseudoaneurysm was relatively short (8 mm). To prevent endoleaks, the pseudoaneurysm was filled with a 33% mixture of n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (Histoacryl; B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany) and iodized oil (Lipiodol; Guerbet, Aulnay-sous-Bois, France) after stent graft deployment. The final stent graft diameter was 15 mm. The patient was postoperatively admitted to the ICU. Subsequent CT scans performed on postoperative days (POD) 3 and 25 revealed no endoleaks, resolution of the mediastinal hematoma, distal migration of the stent graft, or other postoperative complications.

A heparin-coated circuit was used for VV-ECMO; anticoagulants were not used immediately after induction because of the risk of bleeding. Unfractionated heparin was initiated on POD 2, with a target activated clotting time of 140–180 s. However, heparin was discontinued owing to worsening of the left hemothorax on POD 3; subsequently, open chest hemostasis and temporary chest closure were performed. Nonetheless, on POD 5, the ECMO circuit was occluded twice, and heparin administration was resumed. A left hemothorax reoperation was performed, and the thoracotomy was closed on POD 7, after which the patient was on stable VV-ECMO with unfractionated heparin at 10,000 units/day. The patient was weaned off VV-ECMO on POD 16 and discharged on POD 110.