We present a case of 2-year-old white girl with chronic crackles admitted to our Pediatric and Allergy Clinic. The pregnancy was unremarkable and after birth the child was healthy until the seventh month of life, when she developed RSV infection. From then on she had a LRTI every month treated with antibiotics, mainly macrolides for presumed bacterial pneumonia; symptoms persisted daily. She had been under the care of pulmonologists from a different department, who suspected childhood interstitial lung disease (chILD) and prescribed systemic and inhaled steroids, short-acting β2-mimetics, and antileukotriene. This treatment, however, did not lead to any clinical improvement; symptoms of crackles were present at all times. She was hospitalized eight times due to exacerbation of symptoms such as dyspnea, cough, and persistent crackles during physical examination. At the age of 11 months she had high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) which revealed lung areas of uneven aeration in the middle lobe of her right lung and small areas of densities which indicated postinflammatory changes. Due to suspected Pneumocystis jirovecii (carinii) infection, she was unsuccessfully treated with sulfamethoxazole and trimethoprim.

She was admitted to our clinic at 23 months of age with intense cough, dyspnea, and chronic crackles. A chest X-ray showed areas of density due to parenchymal and interstitial inflammatory changes. Autoimmune disease and atypical inflammatory infections (Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, and Bordetella pertussis) were excluded by use of a multiplex assay; immunodeficiency was also excluded. An echocardiogram revealed no abnormalities. Next, she was referred to the Pneumonology and Cystic Fibrosis Department in Rabka for bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL). The result showed: copious purulent secretions in her lower throat; mucosal edema of the larynx, trachea, and bronchial tree; and retention of the purulent mucus in bronchi with normal movement of bronchial cilia (high frequency video microscopy). Microbiological testing with growth on blood/chocolate agar isolated high colony count of Moraxella catarrhalis in the BAL fluid. It was beta-lactamase producer sensitive to amoxicillin-clavulanate. The BAL also showed epithelial cells, macrophages, and neutrophils under high power field. She was administered amoxicillin-clavulanate for 14 days with good clinical improvement in respiratory rate, labored breathing, and cough and she was discharged. She was observed for 2 months after discharge from the hospital and showed no signs of recurrence. Then, she had a few more respiratory tract infections (usually every other month) treated with antibiotics (crackles were present at each time during infection); between infections she remained healthy, without any crackles or wheezing.