We present a case of a 49-year-old woman with renal and heart failure following a long-term (lasting from 13 years of age) SLE prepared for kidney transplantation. Due to LN (class III, then IV), starting at childhood, she was treated with steroids, together with cyclophosphamide, replaced later by methotrexate and then azathioprine. Hence, the partial remission of nephrotic syndrome was achieved and from 2002 the patient did not receive any immunosuppressive therapy. She was also HBV and HCV positive. SLE involvement of circulatory system presented with early coronary atherosclerosis, ischemic heart disease, and myocardial infarction at the age of 20. In 2007, because of deterioration of kidney function with a serum creatinine concentration of 2.2 mg/dL and proteinuria of 2 g/day, the kidney biopsy was performed. The biopsy showed active and sclerotic focal proliferative lupus nephritis nevertheless immunosuppressive therapy was not introduced for the reason of active replication of HCV. The kidney function was gradually deteriorating over time. Despite cardiac intervention (PCI RCA), the patient developed severe post-infarction and dilated cardiomyopathy and required ICD implantation in primary prevention in 2009. Later, on lupus and secondary cardiomyopathic background, the patient developed severe MV and TV regurgitation. For this reason, the patient underwent mitral and tricuspid valve repair and left ventricle volume reduction surgery complicated by low cardiac output syndrome with a need for intra-aortic balloon pump use (2014). In the postoperative period, the kidney function deteriorated, requiring the initiation of renal replacement therapy. The patient has been on dialysis for 4 years. While being on active waiting list for kidney transplantation presented remission of laboratory indices of lupus (complement splits within normal limits: C3–0,93 g/l, C4–0,4 g/l, ANA negative) and persisting circulatory insufficiency with markedly reduced stair-climbing capacity (to one flight of stairs) with elevated BNP 619 pg/ml (n. 0–100). In transthoracic echocardiography, performed before renal transplantation, the left ventricle and the left atrium were significantly enlarged and the left ventricular systolic function was significantly reduced with LVEF 26% and GLS -3. Due to the implantation of the mitral ring, it was not possible to assess the left ventricular diastolic function. The high tricuspid regurgitant flow gradient with widened and poorly respiratory mobile inferior vena cava indicated a high probability of pulmonary hypertension. Furthermore, while preparing the patient for the surgical procedure, it was decided to include cardioprotective therapy with Levosimendan. Due to the time frame associated with the transplantation procedure, the drug infusion was started as soon as possible after cross-match results were known, immediately after the dialysis session. The infusion at a dose of 0.1 μg/kg/min was continued after surgery for a total of 24 h. The patient’s anesthesia for kidney transplantation and perioperative care included the aspect of optimizing transplanted kidney perfusion, avoiding the use of renal toxic drugs and those excreted by properly functioning kidneys, as well as the use of nephroprotective agents. Because of the patient’s cardiological burden, including recurrent episodes of extrasystole proceeding with decompensation of the circulatory system, together with the need of ICD turning off for the transplantation period, the Swan-Ganz catheter for hemodynamic assessment was not used. Anesthesia monitoring was limited the to ECG, central catheter with CVP assessment, direct blood pressure measurement from the cannula inserted into the radial artery, and cardiac ultrasound. In the perioperative period the CVP parameter was used to assess the volatility, and in the postoperative period, a cardiac ultrasound was used along with the assessment of VCI respiratory fill and motility. The therapy was aimed at the standard of fluid therapy called Goal Directed Therapy (GDT). During general anesthesia, fentanyl, triacrium, propofol, desflurane, antibiotic therapy, and standard immunosuppressive treatment were used as well as 25 g of mannitol infusion was administered as a nephroprotective treatment and 0.9% NaCl as a fluid therapy. In the course of postoperative immunosuppression, she received steroids, tacrolimus with mycophenolate mofetil which was stopped due to persistent leukopenia and cytomegalovirus infection. Furthermore delayed graft function was observed with a need for hemodialysis for almost 6 weeks (mostly due to fluid retention). BNP levels raised to 2996 pg/ml and then slowly decreased. The kidney biopsy performed 2 weeks after transplantation revealed acute rejection (AR II B Banff 2015) with ATN. Finally, the patient was discharged from the hospital on the 67th POD with the serum creatinine concentration of 1.4 mg/dL and BNP level of 1794 pg/ml. One month after kidney transplantation, there was a reduction in left ventricular dimensions, improved systolic function in the EF (increase to 30%) and GLS (decrease to − 6) assessment. In addition, there was a decrease in the tricuspid regurgitant flow gradient with normal width and respiratory motility of the IVC, which indicates a low probability of pulmonary hypertension. The improvement of echocardiographic parameters also reflected the simultaneous improvement of exercise capacity in the recipient from NYHA III/IV to NYHA II. In the 5-month observation, further improvement of heart function with a drop of BNP to 1066 pg/ml and normal kidney function were noted.