She is a 2-year-old girl weighing 14.2 kg with a diagnosis of ventricular septal defect and a history of pulmonary artery banding surgery performed at 1 year of age through a mid-sternal approach.

The patient underwent elective cardiac surgery for defect repair in our institution. A mid-sternal approach, aortobicaval central cannulation, mild hypothermia, and closure of the ventricular septal defect with a bovine pericardium patch, debanding, and pulmonary artery plasty were performed with a prolonged extracorporeal circulation (EC) time. The sternal closure was performed with Robicsek type left sternal edge reinforcement and the patient was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit (ICU).

On the third postoperative day, the patient was reoperated due to severe stenosis at the origin of both pulmonary branches. Artery and pulmonary branches were reconstructed with a patch of bovine pericardium.

Seven days later, the patient was readmitted to the operating room for sternal dehiscence and surgical site infection and high suspicion of mediastinitis. The intraoperative findings included: infection and dehiscence of the surgical wound; dehiscence of the sternal suture in its entirety; total loss of the sternum due to multiple fractures in areas of previous osteosynthesis and significant involvement of chondrocostal cartilages with necrosis and infection; there was also abundant purulent secretion in the mediastinum. Different samples were taken for culture and pathological anatomy and surgical cleaning was performed with extensive debridement of necrotic tissues; extensive opening of both pleurae; placement of pleural drains; mediastinal drain; placement of a catheter for mediastinal irrigation and total skin closure.

Mediastinal infection was confirmed in the operating room due to the finding of purulent discharge, while the pathological anatomy demonstrated acute osteomyelitis. In the ICU the patient evolved with stable hemodynamics, respiratory support was provided due to thoracic instability and mediastinal irrigation with physiological solution was left for 5 days.

3 weeks after the last surgery and with the infection controlled, a multidisciplinary medical team decided to perform thoracoplasty with titanium bars for the stabilisation of the thorax, after performing thoracic TEM with reconstruction of the thoracic wall.


Surgical technique
Skin reopening was performed at the level of the previous incision, dissection by planes until reaching the costal cartilages, curettage of the cartilage edges, cavity washing, release of the muscle flap (bilateral pectoral major, anterior sheath of the rectus abdominis muscle and part of the aponeurosis of the external oblique).

Sternal ribs were faced with 1/0 nylon suture; 04 mini-titanium plates 2.0 in the form of C (CONMET; LLC 24/1 Onezhskaya str. Moscow) adapted to the curves of the ribs in both hemithoraxes are placed, the plates are fixed to the ribs 1, 2, 4 and 5 with 1/0 surgical wire suture (TAGUM) and 02 mini-titanium screws 5 mm (CONMET; LLC 24/1 Onezhskaya str. Moscow) per side.

01 mediastinal drain 20 Fr and 14 Fr subpectoral Hemovac were placed bilaterally. Muscle flaps were approximated to the midline with 2/0 polyglactin suture, covering the entire titanium bars. The skin and subcutaneous tissue was closed with 2/0 Nylon total stitches.

Postoperative evolution
After thoracic plastic surgery, the patient was kept on mechanical ventilation, with sedoanalgesia, without inotropic vasopressor support, and continued parenteral antibiotic therapy. After 6 days of mechanical ventilation, with therapy for the management of withdrawal syndrome, and having received prophylactic corticosteroids, a scheduled extubation was performed; respiratory support was continued post-extubation with nasal CPAP for 6 days, and then a binasal cannula was used. Respiratory physiotherapy was provided throughout the pre- and post-extubation process. The patient completed 6 weeks of parenteral antibiotic therapy and was discharged after 2 months of hospital stay. At the 8-month follow-up, she was asymptomatic and was not taking medication.
