A 44-year-old woman with pulmonic valve stenosis and atrial septal defect underwent curative surgery at 4 years of age. At the age of 38 years, she noticed exertional dyspnea and was diagnosed with end-stage hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. At the age of 40 years, she was hospitalized for heart failure due to frequent atrial fibrillation attacks and implanted with a cardiac resynchronization therapy with defibrillator. Nonetheless, she had frequent hospital admissions, and in the current instance, she was hospitalized for heart failure exacerbated by atrial fibrillation attacks. She was administered medication for 1 month of hospitalization, which improved the circulation dynamics, but 3 days after discharge, she was readmitted and referred to our department with complaints of epigastric pain and loss of appetite.

She underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy for odynophagia and dysphagia, which showed a deep circumferential ulcer with white exudates in the esophagus, 28 to 36 cm from the incisors. Histopathological findings of the biopsy specimens taken from the ulcer showed only infiltration of inflammatory cells, indicating neither infection nor malignancy. There was no retention of food residues in the esophagus, which could cause physical obstacles, nor any history of ingestion of corrosive substances by mistake. Various drugs were administered to control her chronic heart failure, but only potassium chloride was previously reported to cause DIEIs. The potassium chloride dose was increased during the patient's previous hospitalization to prevent atrial fibrillation attacks and most likely induced ulceration. Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly with a cardiothoracic ratio of 56% and scoliosis. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed the presence of mild mitral regurgitation and LA enlargement, with a LA dimension of 55 mm. CT showed that the enlarged LA and vertebral body compressed the esophagus, where a high-density area was noted and suspected to retain drugs. This high-density area likely contained potassium chloride because the drug was orally administered before CT and was radiopaque for several hours after administration. Collectively, these findings indicated that the ulcer was induced by potassium chloride lodged in the esophagus owing to the LA enlargement. In the upper gastrointestinal series, retention of contrast media was observed at the narrowing site of the esophagus, which is close to the LA, suggesting esophageal obstruction due to LA enlargement.

Treatment with a proton-pump inhibitor was initiated, and potassium chloride administration was discontinued. Follow-up endoscopy 2 weeks later showed that the ulcer was healing, and epigastric distress and odynophagia were alleviated. However, conservative treatment with cardiovascular drugs did not effectively control the patient's heart failure, and therefore, she underwent left ventricular assist device implantation and waited for a heart transplantation. Follow-up endoscopy 2 months later showed that the ulcer had scarred, and an esophageal stricture had developed. The patient complained of dysphagia and vomiting after ingestion of solid meals, but she managed to maintain nutrition on a soft diet without intravenous nutrition and was observed without endoscopic therapy due to severe cardiac dysfunction.

Two years after the development of the esophageal ulcer, the patient underwent heart transplantation. Surgery was completed without any serious complications. Her general condition improved, but her dysphagia worsened as her medications such as immunosuppressive agents increased. Four months after the heart transplantation, endoscopic balloon dilation was performed for the esophageal stricture. Thereafter, her dysphagia improved during meals and while taking medicines. The patient was discharged 5 months after the heart transplantation. No ulcer recurrence has been observed for 10 months since her discharge.

We obtained written consent from the patient for publication of this case. Ethics committee approval is not included, as it is accepted in our hospital that case reports do not require such approval. In this work, we did not use patient data that would allow identifying her.