A 42-year-old white male presented to the Lahey emergency department (ED) with 3 weeks of progressive vision loss and temporal visual field loss of the left eye (oculus sinister, OS) and slight discomfort on palpation. His past ocular history was noncontributory, and his past medical history was significant for pulmonary blastoma cT2N2M0, stage IIIA involving the right lung, with extension into the superior vena cava (SVC), 3 years prior to his current presentation. He was treated with chemoradiation and right pneumonectomy with complete response to therapy. He had no first-degree relatives with a history of cancer nor other relevant ocular disease. He had no smoking history and drank alcohol very sparingly, roughly twice per year. In the ED, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the head and computed tomography angiography (CTA) were obtained to rule out a neurologic source of the vision loss. The study showed a lentiform dependent hyperdense material with layering hypodensity within the medial aspect of the left globe, consistent with choroidal detachment. No other acute intracranial process was seen, and there was no evidence of acute infarction, hemorrhage, or mass. The CTA did not show any intracranial aneurysm or other neurovascular abnormality. When the patient was referred to ophthalmology, he was only able to count fingers in the affected eye at distance, but his near visual acuity was intact at 20/30. At that point, a myopic shift was suspected and confirmed with autorefraction. His intraocular pressure (IOP) was normal at 13 mmHg. His ocular motility was orthophoric and full. His pupils were equal, round, and reactive, and there was no afferent pupillary defect. There was a left temporal visual field loss present to confrontational testing. His anterior chamber examination appeared shallow in the affected eye, later found to be due to choroidal effusions pushing the anterior chamber complex forward. The posterior pole examination in the left eye demonstrated a round, elevated, red-hued lesion which was believed to be a serous hemorrhagic choroidal detachment. Visual acuity of the right eye was 20/20, and examination of the anterior and posterior poles was normal.

B-scan ultrasonography of the left eye was obtained, demonstrating medium-to-high internal reflectivity and a fluid level within a large elevated nasal lesion. Subsequently, fluorescein angiography (FA) of both eyes was performed. The right eye was unremarkable, but in the left eye, a large nasal choroidal lesion was identified and found to block dye uptake. On the basis of this presentation, a metastatic choroidal lesion linked to his pulmonary biphasic blastoma was very high in the differential diagnosis, but a de novo tumor could not be excluded. Given the lack of trauma, previous surgery, or any other known ocular history such as glaucoma, a hemorrhagic etiology of choroidal effusions was unlikely. The absence of inflammation and negative B-scan findings made the diagnosis of posterior scleritis less likely.

As the suspicion for metastasis was high, a positron emission tomography (PET) scan was obtained, which was negative for metastasis. A repeat CT scan did not demonstrate any intracranial metastases. His near vision was still acceptable at 20/30, thus the patient and team opted to monitor the lesion closely. However, at a later visit, the nasal mass increased in size with an increase in subretinal fluid. In this case, there were no financial, language, or cultural barriers present. Therefore, a decision was made to proceed with an intraocular fine needle aspiration biopsy, which confirmed the suspicion of metastasis from lung origin. A multidisciplinary team recommended against the need for further systemic treatment.

A total of 3 weeks after the initial presentation, the subretinal fluid increased significantly, accompanied by submacular fluid, further compromising the patient’s vision. A short course of steroids was initiated to reduce the ocular inflammation and fluid. As the choroidal detachment enlarged, the vision continued to worsen due to forward shifting of the ciliary body and lens complex, ultimately causing angle closure and significant pain.

On the basis of the worsening clinical presentation and the development of a blind and painful eye, the decision was made to proceed with enucleation. On histopathologic examination, the choroid was infiltrated by a metastatic epithelial tumor, which predominantly showed the typical epithelial component of pulmonary blastoma with glandular formation. The stromal component was not present. The glandular epithelial cells were strongly positive for pan-cytokeratin and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) immunohistochemical stains. The findings were consistent with the diagnosis of metastatic pulmonary blastoma.