A 72-year-old patient presented himself with chest pain radiating to his left arm and progressive dyspnoea over the past few weeks. He had a history of a deep vein thrombosis of the lower limb and controlled arterial hypertension. There were no other relevant comorbidities.

On physical examination, the patient presented himself in good general condition without signs of heart failure, a blood pressure of 156/101 mm Hg and a heart rate of 73 bpm. He was eupneic and the arterial oxygen saturation was 93%. Renal function was impaired with a serum creatinine of 115 μmol/L and an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 54 mL/min/1.73 m², high-sensitivity troponin T was slightly elevated at 29 ng/L and NT-proBNP significantly increased at 5463 ng/L. The ECG showed newly diagnosed atrial flutter with an irregular heart rate of 93 bpm, as well as anterior and inferior repolarisation disorders (T-wave inversion in II, III, aVF, V1–V4). CHA2DS2-VASc Score was of 4 points.


Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal left ventricular ejection function (LVEF 55%), a slightly impaired right ventricular function (Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) 18 mm), and increased pulmonary arterial pressure (sPAP 47 mm Hg). A bicycle stress test was performed and showed a relevant blood pressure drop from 138/74 mm Hg at rest to 118/76 mm Hg at 67% of the age-predicted maximal heart rate.

Based on these findings, relevant coronary disease was expected, probably with left main disease (based on the blood pressure drop in the stress test).

PE was a possible differential diagnosis (Wells Score of 4.5 points predicted a moderate risk with a 16.2% chance of PE). Anticoagulation was already indicated due to atrial flutter.

The newly documented atrial flutter was seen as associated with the underlying disease. There were no signs of neurological abnormalities.


Investigations

The coronary angiogram revealed a coronary two-vessel disease followed by ad hoc percutaneous coronary intervention with complete revascularisation. Right heart catheterisation, performed because of the slightly increased sPAP, revealed an elevated mean PAP (mPAP) of 38 mm Hg of precapillary and postcapillary origin. Pulmonary angiogram showed thromboembolic occlusion of the subsegmental pulmonary artery of the right lower lobe. Arterial blood gas analysis showed respiratory alkalosis, partly metabolically compensated (pH 7.49, pCO23.4 kPa, pO211.7 kPa, HCO319.5 mmol/L, base excess −3.8 mmol/L).


Treatment

The patient was then admitted to the coronary care unit (CCU) where dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and clopidogrel, as well as oral anticoagulation with apixaban was started.

Haemodynamic monitoring on the CCU was acceptable with a blood pressure of 140/100 mm Hg, heart rate of 85 bpm, respiratory rate of 17/min and SO294% in ambient air. CT of the thorax on the following day confirmed the PE with extensive, bilateral, central to peripheral PEs. These findings were progressed compared with the results of the pulmonary angiography from the day before. In a further assessment, the only additional change was a newly diagnosed right bundle branch block (RBBB) and a change of the heart axis in the ECG. The patient was still without any discomfort or signs of cardiopulmonary instability and the arterial blood gas examination was unchanged.

During a falling after independent mobilisation on the CCU, the patient developed circulatory arrest with pulseless electrical activity (PEA). Immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation was started. During resuscitation, right heart catheterisation was performed, which showed an occlusive thrombus in the right pulmonary artery and was found impossible to mobilise by interventional techniques.


Outcome and follow-up

After 45 min of mechanical resuscitation, the patient developed a flatline in the ECG. Based on the recent finding in the pulmonary angiogram and the already prolonged and unsuccessful mechanical resuscitation, return of spontaneous circulation was very unlikely and the resuscitation efforts were stopped, on which the patient died.