A 3050-g full-term male neonate was born after an uncomplicated pregnancy to a 20-year-old primiparous woman at a gestational age of 39 weeks. The pregnancy was uncomplicated. The labor was not prolonged with uneventful spontaneous vaginal delivery. Apgar scores were 8 and 9 at 1 min and 5 min, respectively, with a normal grimacing response score of 2. His Apgar remained to be 9 at 10 and 20 minutes. He was alert with a good cry, pink color, a pulse rate of 134 and respiratory rate of 56. He was given vitamin K at birth. He presented to our hospital with failure to suck for three days at age of 29 days. The family also stated that he had intermittent vomiting since birth. Otherwise, there was no history of bleeding diathesis, fever, neck stiffness, or seizure. At presentation, he had a bulging anterior fontanelle. Moro was incomplete; sucking was not sustained but good muscle tone was noted in all extremities. His complete blood count (CBC) and coagulation profile were normal. Brain MRI showed bilateral cerebellar convexity T1WI and T2WI hyperintense hematoma measuring 2cm with supracerebellar and periaqueductal extension. Furthermore, obliteration of the fourth ventricle and dilation of the third and lateral ventricles was also noted. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a prone position utilizing a midline skin incision, bilateral burrhole craniostomy was done. After the dura was opened in a cruciate incision, a well-defined thick membrane; with dark hemolyzed blood came out with pressure. Intraoperatively, the patient had a cardiac arrest for which one cycle of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was done and a return of spontaneous circulation was achieved. Afterward, the skin was closed subdural drain was placed and the patient was extubated and transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Control CT scan done on 3rd post-op day showed complete evacuation of the hematoma and improvement of the hydrocephalus. The patient was discharged on the 7th post-op day improved. The first-month post-op follow-up was uneventful with normal developmental milestones achieved for his age.