Patient information
A male neonate was born via spontaneous vaginal delivery at 33 weeks of gestation due to an unknown cause of labor initiation. At birth, his body length was 42 cm, and his weight was 1.98 kg. No abnormalities were observed in the amniotic fluid, placenta, or umbilical cord, but scalp edema was noted. Shortly after birth, the infant developed respiratory distress, which required endotracheal intubation with mechanical ventilation and administration of pulmonary surfactant. This intervention allowed for a reduction in ventilator parameters, and nutritional support was provided via a peripherally inserted central venous catheter (PICC). By the 18th day of life, the infant exhibited stable breathing, tolerated feeding well, and had normal bowel sounds on abdominal examination. The parents opted for discharge at this time. However, on the 26th day of life, the neonate was readmitted to the neonatal department due to poor appetite, lethargy for 5 days, respiratory distress for 1 day, and poor responsiveness.

Physical examination
Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 38.2°C, a heart rate of 140 beats per minute and a respiratory rate of 42 breaths/min. The abdomen was soft, no intestinal type or peristaltic wave was found, the liver and spleen were not enlarged, and the bowel ringing was weak. He appeared lethargic with poor responsiveness. The jaundice and pallor in skin, a flat anterior fontanelle without signs of tension, and positive Kernig's sign with reduced muscle tone in the extremities were also observed.

Investigations
The blood routine examination revealed leukopenia (2.26 × 10^9/L) with neutropenia (1.12 × 10^9/L), elevated C-reactive protein (38.0 mg/L), and increased procalcitonin (1.100 ng/mL). Lumbar puncture showed normal pressure but elevated white cell count (1039.00 × 10^6/L), high protein (2.47 g/L) and low glucose (1.30 mmol/L) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Aerobic blood culture and CSF culture was performed initially upon admission, which yielded negative results. No abnormality was observed in abdominal ultrasound, however, pulmonary ultrasound revealed bilateral consolidations and alveolar-interstitial edema. In addition, echocardiography showed patent foramen ovale. Large hyperechoic areas in the left frontal and parietal lobes, with absent diastolic blood flow in the anterior and middle cerebral arteries were indicated by cranial ultrasound.

Management
Tracheal intubation and mechanically ventilator support were performed upon admission. On the day of admission, the patient experienced convulsive attacks, manifested as oral tic, which were controlled by phenobarbital sodium. Notably, On the 2nd and 6th day after admission, two CSF metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) have identified C. butyricum with 382 and 98 sequencing reads, respectively, thus diagnosing C. butyricum suppurative meningitis. The medical history found that the patient continued to take probiotics containing C. butyricum from the 10th day of birth in order to promote the secretion of digestive enzymes and intestinal moistalsis, and shorten the time to reach total enteral nutrition. Therefore, probiotics-associated suppurative meningitis was considered a high possibility and the anti-infection therapy including meropenem and vancomycin was administrated without adjustment.
