The patient presented signed the Free and Informed Consent Form and the other ethical principles were complied with, respecting the Resolution 466/12 of the National Council of Ethics in Research. This case report was approved by the Ethics Committee in Research of the Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), under opinion number ﻿4.455.365.

The 66-year-old male patient presented to the otorhinolaryngology consultation with a complaint of dysphagia type gagging to solids and nasal reflux of food for 1 year. He had a car accident 13 years ago and has diabetes mellitus. Video-endoscopy of swallowing (VED) was performed, and a bulge of the posterior wall of the hypopharynx was visualized in the structural evaluation, with saliva residue on the lesion. In the functional evaluation, after offering solid food, restriction to retroflection of the epiglottis, limitation of laryngeal elevation and nasal reflux of food was observed, with a large amount of food residue above the lesion, in the posterior wall of the pharynx. In the test of postural maneuvers, there was a worsening of dysphagia to cervical extension and better clearance to flexion of the head. Computed tomography (CT) of cervical spine, requested for evaluation of the nature of the lesion, evidenced the presence of cervical anterior osteophytes between the C3 and C6 vertebrae, the largest with a anteroposterior length of 12 millimeters (mm), narrowing the air column at the level of the oropharynx and hypopharynx. Other causes of dysphagia were excluded and the patient was treated with swallowing therapy and omeprazole, directed to pharyngeal reflux. 6 sessions of individualized weekly swallowing therapy were performed, with the objective of compensating the swallowing mechanism in the face of a mechanical obstacle in the pharyngeal region. The main aspects worked were: modification of the texture of the diet, avoiding solid and dry food; swallowing postural maneuvers, tested during the VED, especially the chin tuck (“head down” or “head flexion”), which increases the space of the vallecula (“open the vallecula”) and improves the pharyngeal transfer pressure of the food; and exercises to strengthen the tongue, to overcome the mechanical barrier of the oropharynx during the expulsion of food. It was also recommended, if necessary, to alternate the offer of solid food with liquid. The patient was instructed to repeat the tongue exercises at home, 2 to 3 times a day. After the initial sessions, the patient presented a satisfactory response, maintaining quarterly monitoring in the first year and semi-annual monitoring from the second year. He was referred for orthopedic evaluation to discuss surgical feasibility, and conservative treatment was chosen due to good compensation with clinical measures. He has been followed up for 2 years, maintaining efficient swallowing, without incidence of complications related to dysphagia. It was decided to maintain periodic reassessments, at least once a year, to detect early possible new imbalance of swallowing homeostasis related to the gradual decline of functions in the context of presbyphagia or the emergence of a new aggressive factor.
