Patient and observation
Patient information (presentation of the patient): he is a 28-year-old single man without children, an active military. He has been present for 5 weeks with progressive abdominal pain, more marked in the epigastrium and the right hypochondrium, followed shortly after by a non-quantified fever, chills, profuse sweats in a context of anorexia and weight loss of 6 kg. Note that the patient is not a drinker or smoker, vaccinated with BCG and has no other contributing personal or family history.

Clinical findings: On admission, the physical examination found the patient in a general altered state, asthenic with a weight loss of 6 kg in one month. A clinical systemic inflammatory response syndrome was present with the following elements: a fever of 39.1 °C, tachycardia (124 beats/min), polypnea (22 cycles/min). The pulmonary examination and exploration of the superficial lymph node areas were without particularity. In the abdominal area, moderate sensitivity in the right hypochondrium with hepatomegaly was found.

Chronology: dates back to February 2022 with the onset of diffuse abdominal pain with diarrhea-constipation transit disorder, all in a context of preservation of general condition with low-grade fever predominantly at night. A syntagmatic treatment was unsuccessfully initiated. The evolution is marked by the persistence of low-grade fever associated with anorexia and progressive weight loss of 12 kg over three months. In the face of this transit disorder with unexplained fever and the deterioration of the general condition, the patient will be admitted to the emergency department for further investigation.

Diagnostic approach: upon admission, a biological infectious syndrome was reported with a neutrophilic predominant hyperleucocytosis (17800 cells/mm3) and a high C-reactive protein of 323 mg/L.

In the face of his abdominal pain, the lipase and troponin tests were normal at 38 IU/L (VN: <3 78 IU/L) and 4 ng/L (VN: 2 to 16 ng/L) respectively. The liver function was stable with ALT (alanine amino transferase) at 22 IU/L (VN: < 40UI/L), AST (aspartate amino transferase) at 17 IU/L (VN: < 35UI/L), GGT (gamma glutamyl transferase) at 42 IU/L (VN: < 50UI/L), PAL (alkaline phosphatase) at 115 IU/L (VN: 40- 150 IU/L) and normal bilirubinemia. The liver function was normal with a prothrombin rate of 78% and an albuminemia of 39 g/L. The blood ionogram and renal function were normal. The chest radiograph and abdominal ultrasound were without particularity.

With a procalcitonin positive at 4.1 ng/L, an infectious disease assessment to search for the infectious focus was initiated, including a cytobacteriological examination of urine and blood cultures during the febrile peaks at 39°C, which were both negative. The hepatitis viral B, C and HIV serologies, as well as the syphilis serology performed in hospital were all negative. The lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and beta-2 microglobulin were normal at 231 IU/L and 2.28 mg/L respectively. The GeneXpert to search for the Mycobacterium on these bioptic pieces was negative. The quantiferon was negative. The search for the Mycobacterium on the morning expectorations of 3 consecutive days was negative.

On the morphological level, a thoraco-abdomino-pelvic scan showed an enlarged liver (hepatic arrow at 17 cm), the site of multiple, well-defined, rounded hypodensities, which were not enhanced after injection of the contrast agent. The largest lesions were in segment I (21 x 16 mm) and segment V (36 x 27 mm). No suspicious lesions were detected in the thoracic and pelvic levels. The first liver biopsies obtained by echo-guided puncture revealed subacute, fibro-inflammatory liver lesions, with no histological evidence of specificity or malignancy.

A liver MRI following the scan objectified a dysmorphic liver, the site of lesions in heterogeneous signal T2 surrounded by a wall in hyper signal T2, enhanced in the periphery after injection of the contrast agent, the largest of which is located in segment I (20 x 22 mm) and in segment V (33 x 31 mm). No deep lymphadenopathy had been objectified, either in the scan or in the MRI. A diagnostic laparoscopy performed on the hepatic nodules, the histological examination found epithelioid and gigantocellular granulomas of varying size with caseous necrosis in favour of a hepatic tuberculosis.

Therapeutic intervention: the patient was put on anti-tuberculosis treatment according to the standard protocol for months: Phase 1: quadritherapy (Isoniazide + Rifampicine + Pyrazinamide + Ethambutol) in a single oral intake each morning on an empty stomach for 2 months. Phase 2: bithrapia (Isoniazide + Rifampicine) in a single oral intake each morning on an empty stomach for 4 months

Follow-up and results of therapeutic interventions: from the first days of treatment, a good response was obtained with disappearance of the inflammatory syndrome with systemic response both clinically and biologically. After three months of treatment, a control scan of the liver showed a decrease in the number and volume of liver lesions.
