A 63-year-old woman was referred to the Athens Vision Eye Institute Cornea Clinic for management of severe mucous membrane pemphigoid in both eyes. Medical history was significant for diabetes mellitus and a positive skin biopsy for pemphigoid 1.5 years prior to presentation. The patient was being managed with methylprednisolone 16 mg per os once a day. Over the 6 months prior to presentation, significant redness developed in both eyes along with a persistent epithelial defect in the left eye.

Upon examination of the right eye, best-corrected visual acuity was 20/80 and IOP was 20 mmHg by Goldmann applanation tonometry. For the left eye, best-corrected visual acuity was light perception and IOP readings were unreliable. Slit lamp examination was significant for entropion and trichiasis, extensive symblepharon formation and forniceal foreshortening in both eyes as well as ankyloblepharon in the left eye. Severe conjunctival injection and ocular surface dryness was present in both eyes, while the cornea of the left eye was completely conjunctivalized.

A cataract (2+ nuclear sclerosis) was also seen in the right eye. Dilated fundus examination of the right eye revealed macular drusen and cupping of the right optic nerve with a cup to disc ratio of 0.5. We were unable to obtain reliable results on static automated perimetry despite several attempts. The conjunctivalized surface of the left eye impeded examination of the fundus and, for this reason, a B-scan ultrasound was performed, which did not reveal any abnormalities.

Given the severe ocular surface inflammation and the monocular status of the patient, aggressive treatment was initiated to preserve vision in the right eye. Monthly intravenous cyclophosphamide (25 mg/kg) infusions were administered for 6 months along with a slow oral steroid taper and topical preservative-free dexamethasone drops. The patient was subsequently transitioned to oral mycophenolate mofetil 2 g daily. At the 8 month follow up visit the ocular surface was white and quiet but the cataract had matured significantly with a nuclear sclerotic and a posterior subcapsular component. Vision in the right eye had dropped to 20/200 and IOP had increased to 35 mmHg. Despite cessation of oral and topical steroids and maximum medical therapy with oral acetazolamide 250 mg 3 times daily, topical preservative-free dorzolamide/timolol, brimonidine and latanoprost eye drops, IOP remained high at 28 mmHg.

Decision was made to proceed with clear cornea cataract surgery combined with ab interno goniotomy using the Kahook Dual Blade (phaco-KDB) in the patient’s right eye. Because of the significant forniceal foreshortening and the ankyloblepharon a pediatric lid speculum was used during the procedure and an assistant was manually retracting the patient’s lower lid as needed during otherwise standard clear cornea phacoemulsification via a 2.6 mm main incision. Following insertion of a single piece intraocular lens (Acrysoft IQ SN60WF 24.0 D, Alcon Laboratories, Fort Worth, TX, USA) and before removal of the cohesive viscoelastic the head of the patient and the head of the operating microscope were rotated, a Swan Jacob direct goniolens was applied on the cornea and 3–4 clock hours of pigmented trabecular meshwork were removed with the Kahook dual blade. Reflux of blood from collector channels into the anterior chamber was observed and the majority of the viscoelastic was removed with the irrigation aspiration handpiece. Postoperatively the patient was started on preservative-free topical dexamethasone eye drops, topical moxifloxacin and nepafenac.


Results
On the first post-operative day, the IOP was 14 mmHg and there was no layering hyphema in the anterior chamber. The patient’s corneal surface appeared very dry and within a few days a corneal epithelial defect developed, which was managed with a bandage contact lens and use of serum tears 30% and resolved by the 6th post-operative week. Intraocular pressure was 12 mmHg at 3 months post-operatively without any topical glaucoma medications and has remained in the 12–14 mm Hg range over a total follow up of 3.5 years. The patient’s visual acuity in the right eye at the last follow up visit was 20/40.