The female patient with a 7-week pregnancy achieved by IVF-ET resorted to our emergency services with abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and diarrhea that had continued the last 3 days and gradually exacerbated. No abnormality was detected in the ultrasonographic examination, including embryonic cardiac activity, and conservative medical treatment was provided because the patient's complaints were related to pregnancy. However, the patient, whose complaints worsened, turned to our emergency services a second time.

The consultation was held in September 2021 at the General Surgery Unit of the Katip Çelebi University Faculty of Medicine, Atatürk Education and Research Hospital. There was no special condition in the patient's family history. There was a median incision scar above and below the umbilicus due to urological intervention in childhood. Body mass index was 24.6 kg/m2.

The patient was prescribed oral oestrogen therapy (2 mg/day Estradiol), intravaginal progesterone (4x200 mg/day) and acetylsalicylic acid (ASA, 100 mg/day) in the context of the IVF-ET protocol. She had tachycardia (110 bnp) at the time of admission, and her blood pressure and fever values were normal. At the time of baseline examination, signs of severe acute abdomen were observed. The laboratory findings were as follows; white blood cells: 24,800/µL, platelet count: 290,000/µL, C-Reactive Protein (CRP): 154 mg/L, INR:0.98 and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-HCG): 54,335 mU/ml.

Abdominal ultrasonography revealed intestinal anes dilations, free fluid in the pelvis, a left ovarian cystic lesion and a 7-week pregnancy sac, but no embryonic cardiac activity. Additionally, the gynecological consultation also confirmed the embryonic heartbeat was absent. The patient refused to undergo a computed abdominal tomography and other radiological tests.

After the patient's abdominal pain and fever increased, blood tests were performed again and an increase in inflammation markers was observed. The patient accepted to undergo surgery after peritonitis findings exacerbated and her general condition started to deteriorate. We obtained informed consent from the patient. Surgical exploration encountered slightly serohemorrhagic fluid of 200 cc, as well as circulatory impairment and necrosis intermittently located at the two separate sections of the small intestine, beginning from the 90th cm after the Treitz ligament in the abdomen. A necrotic small bowel resection of approximately 150 cm was performed at two separate sections. The other findings observed during the surgery were as follows: 1) thrombi in the moderate and small-sized veins of the small bowel mesentery despite the presence of pulses in the arteries feeding the small intestines, 2) thickening of small bowel mesentery, 3) small and moderate-sized venous vein dilatation observed in the right halves of the right colon and transverse colon, and 4) left ovarian cystic lesion. Towards the end of the surgery, regeneration of ischemic fields was encountered in the small bowel segments close to the anastomosis. A second-look laparotomy was decided upon to control the presence of new ischemia in the small intestines.

Administration of intravenous total parenteral nutrition (40 cc/h), intravenous antibiotics and full anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin (2*6000 anti-Xa IU) was initiated postoperatively and continued until discharge from the hospital. The embryo was removed after confirmation of stillbirth by the postoperative gynecological examination. The contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) performed on the 1st postoperative day revealed a long segment thrombus in the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and pulmonary embolism. A second-look laparotomy was carried out 48 hours after the first surgery. The exploration showed that blood supply and feeding of all intestinal anuses were intact, while no anastomotic complication was present. The histopathological examination of the section resected in the first surgery demonstrated sporadic necrotic fields in the small bowel wall.

The patient's thrombophilia panel showed Factor V Leiden (FVL) (homozygous), methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) (heterozygous) and plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) 4G/5G (homozygous) gene mutations. The levels of protein S (49% [reference: 60-130%]) and protein C (62% [reference:70-140%]) were lower than normal limits. The patient was discharged without any complication. The patient has been monitored by the polyclinic without any complication since the 6th postoperative month.
