A 38-year-old man was admitted to the hospital for blunt chest trauma. The patient was generally healthy and had no risk factors of coronary artery disease. He was hit in the chest by a high-speed screw that was of approximately 6-cm diameter while working in a factory. He flew approximately 4 m away because of the force and pressure of the high-speed screw. He lost consciousness at once, but regained consciousness several minutes later. He was then transferred to the emergency room of a local hospital immediately. His Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15. He complained of intense and persistent chest pain, tightness, and dyspnea. Chest computed tomography showed bilateral pleural effusion and sternal and rib fractures. Thus, a chest tube was inserted for several days. Then, he was discharged without undergoing electrocardiogram (ECG) or other cardiovascular examinations.

Three months after hospital discharge, during a routine follow-up check-up, pleural effusion was still present with accompanying symptoms of chest tightness, shortness of breath after physical activities, and even dyspnea at night, which prompted his admission in our hospital. His vitals during admission were as follows: a regular heart rate of 98 beats/min, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min. Physical examination showed normal carotid and jugular venous pulsation. Bilateral thoracic respiratory movement and activity were normal, tactile language fibrillation of the right lung was abate, right lung percussion presented with dullness, and breath sounds were abate. There was no obvious rhonchus and moist rale during lung auscultation. There were no murmurs upon cardiac auscultation. Examinations of the abdomen and extremities revealed normal findings. The first ECG showed ST evaluation and T wave inversion in the I, avL, and V2-V5 leads and in the left anterior branch block. Troponin-I test was negative, and the NT-proBNP level was 706 pg/ml (normal range: 0–104 pg/ml), suggestive of an old anterior myocardial infarction. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a 26.4-mm left atrium, a 51.8-mm left ventricle, and a left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (EF) of 32% (M mode). The anterior LV wall and interventricular septum showed thinning at 6.6 mm, with remarkably reduced movement echo.

When examining the patient's carotid, intracranial, and lower extremity arteries, no obvious atherosclerotic plaques were found. All findings supported the diagnosis of old myocardial infarction (OMI), rather than arteriosclerosis. However, the patient was hemodynamically stable. After undergoing diuretic therapy, the patient was administered β-blockers, statins, and cardiac stimulants, which relieved his discomfort. Coronary computed tomography angiography showed moderate stenosis in the proximal LAD artery. To confirm the stenosis and examine the condition of the coronary intimal, CAG was performed at 3 months after the chest trauma, which showed approximately 70% narrowing of the lumen in the proximal LAD and the coronary segment had a curved lesion. The left circumflex artery (LCX) and right coronary artery (RCA) were normal. CAG results confirmed the diagnosis of OMI, but due to the cost burden, the patient refused IVUS examination. The patient underwent conservative therapy and was discharged from the hospital several days later.

One month later, on December 9th,2014, he returned to the hospital for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) therapy. After undergoing drug therapy, his conditions had improved slightly. Physical examination and ECG revealed almost normal findings. Transthoracic echocardiography showed improvement in LV systolic function and EF at 45%. He had full antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel. Then, he underwent another CAG at 4 months after the chest trauma, which showed a slight improvement of stenosis. There was approximately 60% narrowing of the lumen. IVUS was performed and revealed that the lesion severity was 55.9%, and the plaque of low echo appeared before thrombus formation after the subintimal tear. We completed the examination without further intervention because only 55.9% narrowing of the lumen was found and the patient had stable hemodynamics without evidence of constant myocardial ischemia. The patient was prescribed optimal medication, and his discomfort gradually alleviated. In July 17, 2018, 4 years after the trauma, follow-up evaluation revealed that the patient still experiences shortness of breath after working, but is relieved soon after taking a rest. Physical examination showed the following results: blood pressure of 114/80 mmHg, heart rate of 66 beats/min, absence of obvious abnormalities upon lung and heart auscultation; and absence of obvious edema in both lower extremities. Follow-up ECG revealed the following findings: rS in V2-V4 leads, T wave inversion in the I, avL, and V2-V5 leads and the left anterior branch block. Transthoracic echocardiography showed left heart enlargement with 39-mm left atrium, 54.7-mm left ventricle, and LV EF of 41% (Simpson's). Thinning of the LV anterior wall and interventricular septum was also noted, with the thinnest part being 4.7 mm; movement had almost disappeared and the echo was enhanced. However, the carotid, intracranial, and lower extremity arteries were still normal. Moreover, we found that the medications prescribed to treat heart failure was not religiously taken after the discharge; thus, we newly prescribed 23.75-mg metoprolol, 2.5-mg benazepril, and 20-mg spironolactone to be taken once daily, and coenzyme to be taken every 10 hours.