A 69-year-old female patient complained of progressive vision loss. Her parents were first cousins. She had been diagnosed with retinitis pigmentosa 27 years previously. The patient had been a smoker for 15 years. She had a past medical history of hyperlipidemia and hypothyroidism.

Upon a comprehensive ophthalmic evaluation, the patient was found to have a best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of counting fingers at 5’ and 3’ in the right and left eyes, respectively. Retinoscopy showed a refraction of –1.00 + 0.50×70 and –2.00 + 1.00×5 in the right and left eyes, respectively. The patient had pale optic discs with extensive deep atrophy of the central macula, epithelial pigment hyperplasia, and other areas of multifocal atrophy in the right eye. In addition, the patient had macular atrophy in the left eye. In the patient’s fundus autofluorescence (FAF) imaging, there was evidence of central hypoautofluorescence of the macula, with diffuse outward centrifugal extension from its center to its periphery.

Macular optical coherence tomography (OCT) determined that the average macular thickness was 191 µM and 193 µM in the right and left eyes, respectively. Macular volume was 6.9 mm3 and 7.0 mm3 in the right and left eyes, respectively. No macular edema, cysts, or subretinal fluid was found in either eye.

A visual field test revealed that the patient had mean deviations of –23.75 dB and –24.56 dB in the right and left eyes, respectively. Pattern standard deviations were +3.69 dB and +4.69 dB in the right and left eyes, respectively. The results of a full-field electroretinogram (ERG) showed a normal rod response and decreased cone response, bilaterally. For these reasons, a clinical diagnosis of STGD1 disease was made.

A single pathogenic homozygous intronic variant c.5714+5G>A of the ABCA4 gene was found upon sequencing and deletion/duplication analysis using next-generation sequencing (Invitae Corporation, San Francisco, California). She had six additional variants of uncertain significance (VUS) at the CACNA1F, EYS, KCNV2, KLHL7, MKKS, and USH2A genes.