We present the case of a 51-year-old man who started with paranoid thoughts, auditory hallucinations and addictive behaviour at the age of 20. He was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia and was treated with first-generation antipsychotics. In the following years, the patient had several admissions to hospital and psychiatric institutions. Since 2005, his evolution had been partially satisfactory. He maintained a relative independence and did occupational therapy, with great family support.

In late 2014, the patient developed a rigid acinetic syndrome. His treatment was clozapine (200 mg daily) and aripiprazole (15 mg daily), plus trihexyphenidyl (5 mg three times daily), lorazepam and trazodone. Dopaminergic interference was kept to a minimum. A DaTscan® was performed and was abnormal. Minimal doses of levodopa were tried, but the psychotic symptoms flared up. With only 150 mg levodopa daily, the patient again developed delusions of harm and persecution, and hallucinations, and even required admission to hospital. It was then decided to use a solution of paediatric levodopa (5 mg/mL), although the patient did not tolerate doses of more than 4 mL, which only achieved minimal relief.

The disease progressed markedly. In 2019, he had marked bilateral rigidity and akinesia, and was unable to stand or walk a few steps unaided. He also had dysphagia and sialorrhea. He lost a lot of weight and developed marked muscle atrophy due to his poor mobility.


In this situation, the patient was evaluated for subthalamic deep brain stimulation (DBS-NST) as the only way to achieve motor improvement in his case. He was not tested for levodopa due to his history, and was also unable to complete the preoperative neuropsychological evaluation. Finally, the patient was operated on in February 2020 under general anesthesia, without complications.

Six months after the ECP-NST, the improvement was already very evident. The patient was able to stand alone without support and the gait improved significantly. He had moderate bilateral akinesia, predominantly in the left extremities. In addition, the severity of dysphagia and sialorrhea decreased appreciably. Levodopa treatment was discontinued, while antipsychotic treatment was not modified at any time. We have not identified a worsening of his psychiatric symptoms. The positive and negative symptom scale is a 30-question questionnaire with a seven-answer range, where higher scores reflect a worse state. One year after the intervention, a slight improvement in the scale score was observed, especially in terms of negative symptoms. These symptoms improved in parallel with the improvement in his quality of life. The family confirmed his greater ability to communicate, his greater spontaneity and his greater speed of reasoning. His global cognitive status, assessed by the Mattis dementia scale, was not modified after the intervention.
