Patient with nine years and 11 months, male, previous diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder (ASD), oppositional behavior, bipolar affective disorder, cognitive deficit, difficult-to-control epilepsy and obesity, admitted via emergency and transferred from his city's hospital for suspected COVID-19. History of fever up to 39.5 ° C for four days associated with sporadic cough, hyaline secretion, convulsive escape and reduced appetite and urinary volume. Throughout the day, on April 1, he presented a worsening of the sensory, being referred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (UTIP), with a Glasgow coma scale of 3, myotic pupils, SpO2 = 80%, and immediate tracheal intubation was performed. A computed tomography of the chest was performed, compatible with a frosted glass standard. The SARS-CoV-2 search was positive.

After four days, he began physiotherapy three times a day with the goals of bronchial clearance, improvement of gas exchange and prevention of deleterious effects related to bed rest, such as decreased range of motion and loss of muscle mass, with the following procedures: compression/decompression, endotracheal tube and upper airway aspiration, passive kinesiotherapy, limb stretching and functional positioning in bed. On the same day, the NIV was adjusted to ensure a tidal volume of 7.5 ml/kg, and the oxygen saturation index (OSI) was evaluated, resulting in 6.5, characterizing mild acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).

After 14 days of admission, the patient showed clinical and haemodynamic improvement, good response to diuretic therapy and prone position (performed four times during admission), progressive ventilatory improvement, tolerating weaning from ventilatory support. He was extubated after 17 days of VMI. He remained on non-rebreathing mask oxygen therapy (7 L/min), maintaining SpO2=96%, with the need for frequent aspiration of the airways due to accumulation of secretions and ineffective cough. In physiotherapy, the maneuvers mentioned previously were performed, as well as periods of non-invasive mechanical ventilation (NMV), bilevel IPAP mode = 14 cmH2O, EPAP = 8 cmH2O, FiO2 = 40%, because of pulmonary hypoexpansion, aspiration of the airways, passive kinesiotherapy progressing to assisted kinesiotherapy, stretching and training of transfers.

In order to prevent the dispersion of aerosols, the aspiration during the VMI was done via a closed system and the VMNI was done via a mechanical ventilator with a double branch, total face interface (non-ventilated), a HEPA filter in the expiratory branch and a HME filter proximal to the patient. Over the course of the days, the child tolerated a reduction of oxygen and transition to nasal glasses at 3 L/min. She maintained a stable condition and progressive improvement, enabling her to be discharged from the PICU after 22 days. At that time, she scored 17 on the FSS-Brasil, a score characterized as severe dysfunction.

The day after the patient was discharged from the ICU, he was admitted to the pediatric inpatient unit. He developed somnolence, hyporesponsiveness and difficulty in managing airway secretions. A chest X-ray was performed, showing atelectasis, and, in addition to the procedures described previously, the HM technique was used with self-inflating bag and HEPA filter (twice a day, three cycles of 10 repetitions each), in order to avoid aerosol dispersion. After three days, a chest X-ray was repeated with total reabsorption of the atelectasis, supplemental oxygen was discontinued and the HM technique was discontinued, as there was no need for airway aspiration. The pulmonary auscultation was without adventitious noises. Also, according to the tolerance and collaboration of the patient, assisted and active kinesiotherapy and training of transfers (orthostatic and ambulation in the room with assistance) were performed. It was possible to progress to resisted kinesiotherapy and independent ambulation. Physiotherapy took place twice a day.

Patient was discharged after 41 days of hospital admission with negative PCR for SARS-CoV-2, 8 points in FSS-Brasil, a score characterized as mild dysfunction, and 60 points in muscle strength as assessed by the Medical Research Council (MRC).
