25-year-old male who consulted for vomiting, hypogastric pain and equivalent febrile symptoms. As background: hypothyroidism, chronic colitis under study in treatment with mesalazine, multiple consultations during 4 years with gastrointestinal symptoms. In the last year, he had a high-grade digestive tract hemorrhage, in which the video-endoscopy of the upper digestive tract (VEDA) reported a hiatal hernia and normal rest, a rectosigmoidoscopy was performed: without endoluminal lesions, with normal mucosal coloration, painful soft abdomen, with positive hydroaerolic noises. Laboratory was performed: 38% hematocrit, increased erythro-sedimentation, normal amylase and lipase, anti-transglutaminase antibodies, anti-gliadin negative, normal IgA, HIV, hepatitis B, VDRL, cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr negative. Non-inflammatory coproculture, with habitual flora. Abdominal radiography: hydroaerolic levels in the splenic colon frame and dilatation of intestinal loops. Together with the Surgery and Gastroenterology Services, it was initially interpreted as a flare-up of inflammatory intestinal disease, and corticosteroid therapy was initiated with hydrocortisone. It progressed with abdominal pain, haemodynamic instability and respiratory insufficiency secondary to distress. He was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit and, due to respiratory insufficiency, an orotracheal intubation was performed. The chest radiography showed an alveolo-interstitial pattern in 4 quadrants. He presented a drop in haemocrit, coagulopathy, metabolic acidosis and respiratory insufficiency. With suspicion of surgical acute abdomen, he was admitted to the operating theatre, where intestinal loops were dilated, with a cartilaginous appearance in the terminal third of the ileum, adenomegaly and mesenteric petechiae. He presented haemoptysis, vasculitis was suspected, so methylprednisolone pulse was initiated. Refractory to treatment, he died 24 hours after admission to the ICU due to multi-organ failure. The biopsy result was: Strongyloides stercoralis. Informed consent was obtained from the patient's direct family member for the publication of the case.
