We present a case of extensive calcified neurocysticercosis in an asymptomatic 47-year-old male living with HIV. The patient was recruited through the CYSTINET-Africa study in January 2021. In this study, people living with HIV (PLHIV) attending HIV Care and Treatment Centers (CTC) clinics in Chunya and Tossamaganga (southern highlands of Tanzania) were offered serological testing for T. solium cysticercosis. If results were positive (but also for a subset of serological negatives), patients were offered a CT scan. For every PLHIV, also an HIV-negative control (matched by age, sex, and location of residence) was recruited to compare the accuracy of the serological test and NCC disease presentation between HIV-positive and negative persons. The patient we presented was recruited through the HIV care and treatment center clinic in Chunya.

In 2012, he was diagnosed with HIV. His CD4 count at diagnosis was 31 cells per cubic millimeter of blood, and he was categorized as in WHO stage II. Immediately after diagnosis and complete medical assessment, he was started on antiretroviral therapy consisting of Azidothymidine (AZT) + Lamivudine (3TC) + Efavirenz (EFZ) on the 3rd April 2012. In 2017, he was changed to another ARV drug combination ie, started on a new drug combination consisting of Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) +3TC+EFZ; this was due to the changes in the national guidelines in the first-line ARV treatment. Six months after the initiation (TDF +3TC+EFZ) combination, his viral load was undetectable. On the 5th of August 2019, his antiretroviral treatment regime was again changed into Tenofovir disoproxil fumarate (TDF) + Lamivudine (3TC) + DTG (Dolutegravir) to avoid different side effects experienced from the regime he was using. His viral load was undetectable and remained undetectable in all subsequent viral load tests in 2018, 2020, and 2021.

Serological testing for T. solium was positive for cysticercosis antibodies using the LDBIO Cysticercosis IgG Western Blot test, but negative for cysticercosis antigen by the apDia Cysticercosis Antigen (Ag) ELISA test. The cerebral CT scan examination was performed at Mbeya consultant hospital on 5 November 2021. The patient was examined neurologically on the day of the CT scan, and an in-depth history was taken.

Personal History, Risk Factors, and History of the Risk Factors for the Taenia Solium Infection
This patient has been an artisanal miner (small-scale gold mining worker) since 2010, with a history of keeping pigs from 2009 to 2019. He has been married with 4 children; screening of the family members for T. solium infection was done, and the patient denied anyone in the family having neurological signs and symptoms of NCC (ie severe progressive headache and epileptic seizures). The patient reported known risk factors for T. solium infection, such as eating pork and never boiling water. He reported always using the pit latrine at his home and regular handwashing after the toilet and before eating.

Medical History of Taenia Solium Infection and Neurological Examination
The patient denied having experienced any loss of consciousnessor involuntary movements of limbs or having been diagnosed with epilepsy. Any episodes of severe progressive headache, mental state alterations, or other signs/symptoms that could be associated with NCC (or taeniasis) were also denied. The overall physical examination was normal, the patient looked healthy, not pale, not jaundiced and there were no palpable nodules (head/neck, trunk, and extremities). The examination did not reveal any focal neurological deficit.

Fundoscopic Examination
The patient’s red reflex was normal, blood vessels were normal, and macular reflex was normal. The optic nerve and disc appeared normal, vitreous body, and choroid. No floaters were detected.

Chest X-Ray Examinations
Cardiac shadow was normal in size and configuration, and both lung fields and costophrenic angles were clear. No focal pulmonary lesion was seen with the intact bony thorax. Therefore, the chest radiograph was classified as normal.

Computerized Tomographic (CT) Scan Examination of the Brain
Technique
Continuous axial cuts were obtained through the skull with intravenous contrast. Multiple calcifications typical for neurocysticercosis were seen in the cerebral parenchyma, basal ganglia, and cerebellum. Bilateral orbital calcifications and calcifications involving the skin, soft palate, oropharynx, and skull base soft tissue were noted. No midline shift was observed. The features were suggestive of diffuse inyracranial and extracranial calcifications.

Impression
Features were suggestive of diffuse intracranial and extracranial calcification.