A 26-year-old primigravid lady presents to our hospital with the complaint of progressively worsening abdominal pain of 3 days duration. After arrival to our hospital, she fainted but maintained consciousness. She reported a recent urine pregnancy test positive result in another clinic but did not have a pelvic ultrasound. The pregnancy was wanted, planned, and supported. On physical examination, she was acutely sick looking in severe pain, hypotensive (60/40 mmHg), and tachycardic (120 beats/minute). She had tender abdomen with guarding and rigidity on palpation. Blood exams showed a hemoglobin of 12.5 g/dL. Transabdominal ultrasound scanning was pertinent for significant hemoperitoneum to the level of Morrison’s pouch, left adnexal cystic mass, and IUP with crown-to-rump length based gestational age of 7 weeks + 5 days. Visualization of the ectopic pregnancy was limited by the presence of the adnexal cyst. However, due to cultural sensitivity, our patient declined transvaginal sonography.

With the impression of a ruptured ovarian cyst to rule out HP, she was rushed to an emergency laparotomy. The intra-operative findings were pertinent for approximately 1000 mL of hemoperitoneum, ruptured left tubal ectopic pregnancy, and intact left ovarian cystic lesion. As the ovarian tissue was thinly spread over the cyst sparing the ipsilateral ovary was technically difficult. With this impression, a left total salpingio-oophorectomy was done. To preserve the IUP, care was taken to avoid excessive uterine manipulation.

The entire surgical specimen was subjected for histopathology. She had a smooth postoperative course and was discharged on post-operative day-1. Obstetric ultrasound scan on the 30th laparotomy day showed a viable IUP heralding the continuation of the pregnancy. The detailed description of the histopathology is presented below. On her postoperative period, she was put on 250 mg intramuscular 17α-hydroxyprogesterone weekly for 3 doses.

Gross Pathology
Macroscopically the received specimen consisted of a 7x6x6 cm cystic mass with 6 cm long opened up fimbriated fallopian tube. Cut surface through the cystic tissue showed an uninoculated cyst filled with serous fluid.

Histopathology
Sections from the cystic mass showed thick cyst wall made up of luteinized granulosa cells theca lutein cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and central vesicular nuclei.

Sections from the fallopian tube show edematous wall infiltrated by variable sized chorionic villi with hydropic changes, extra-villus intermediate trophoblasts, fibrin clots, congestion and hemorrhage.

With these macroscopic and histopathologic findings, the diagnosis was finalized as ectopic pregnancy plus theca lutein cyst.