Mr S. was an 88-year-old patient, retired, construction worker, widowed, living alone in a first floor apartment with stairs. He had solely a daughter, his primary caregiver. He had no home help before his hospitalization.

His clinical history was marked by repeated arthritis described as gout, heart failure on a tight aortic valve stenosis that subsequently benefited from TAVI, moderate chronic renal insufficiency (clearance 45 mL/min/1.73m2), stenting bi-femoral aorto-bi-femoral stenting, high blood pressure, transient ischemic stroke, essential tremor and a right sural venous thrombosis. He had no toxic habits or allergies.

The 7th of November, this patient was admitted to the emergency department for cardio-renal decompensation consecutive to a pneumopathy. Patient recovered with antibiotic associate to diuretic therapy. After five days, he was transferred to a geriatric ward for a standardized geriatric assessment and for rehabilitation in front of exercise deconditioning.

Initial blood samples of November 13th, found a calcium level of 2.55 mmol/L, corrected at 2.84 mmol/L. There was severe denutrition with a dosage of albumin measured at 28.3 mmol/L. A PTH increased to 94 ng/L and a collapsed 25-hydroxy-vitamin D at 15 nmol/L were found. Clinically, he showed no clinical signs suggestive of hypercalcemia. Chest x-ray showed no anomalies. In December, given the suspicion of secondary hyperparathyroidism due to hypovitaminosis D and not in line with standard recommendations, a parathyroid ultrasound revealed no suspicious nodules. Colecalciferol supplementation was introduced. In addition, nutritional management was started. M. S presented at the same time knees painful arthritis with joint effusion associate to biological inflammatory syndrome. Chondrocalcinosis was suspected but acid uric level was high 478 µmol/L. A puncture was realized: 920 nucleated cells per mm3 and sodium urate crystals were found in the joint fluid. Treatment with colchicine and then the addition of allopurinol improved the symptoms. The cardiac status and physical improvements allowed the patient to return home on the 2nd of January.

Unfortunately, a new cardiac decompensation required re-hospitalization on January the 23rd. During this subsequent hospitalization, blood calcium levels remained slightly increased (2.64 mmol/L) and PTH was significantly increased (191 ng/L) despite vitamin D supplementation. In March, a 24-h urine sample was collected for calciuria measurement, which revealed a decreased urinary calcium concentration of 1.23 mmol/L. The fractional excretion of calcium was 1.2%. Due to these uncharacteristic results, a MIBI parathyroid scintigraphy revealed no abnormalities in favour of an adenoma or parathyroid hyperplasia. In April, a genetic analysis to detect the inhibitory mutation of the CASR gene coding for the calcium-sensitive receptor (gene 3q21.1) revealed a pathogenic variant classified as FHH type 1 according to ACMG guidelines. The patient’s family was informed and genetic screening was organized to avoid unnecessary additional tests. The patient was finally able to go home. Patient and his family gave their informed consent for this case report. Ethical Approval was not required for this manuscript. Consent for publication from daughter of the patient was obtained.