Clinical Presentation
A 68-year-old-woman presented to the emergency department with a 2-day history of acute confusion and behavioural changes (delirium), against the background of known severe cerebral palsy. She was known to have recurrent UTIs well-managed at home with oral antibiotics. The rest of her past medical history included bilateral staghorn calculi, which had been previously treated by PCNL. On presentation, her blood results showed a marked increase in C-reactive protein (CRP = 260.9 mg/L), a decline in renal function (estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) = 38 mL/min/1.73m2, urea = 11.7 mmol/L, and creatinine = 124), and microcytic hypochromic anemia with thrombocytopenia. The blood cultures that were taken returned as negative, and the urine cultures revealed mixed growth.

Diagnostic Approach
The initial diagnosis included a UTI, acute kidney injury (AKI), and microcytic anemia with thrombocytopenia, all in the context of urosepsis. As she was severely constipated, an abdominal X-ray was ordered, which first revealed left radiopaque renal calculi. A subsequent computed tomography (CT) KUB (kidneys−ureters−bladder) scan identified large left renal calculi, including a left staghorn calculus measuring 4.5 cm. The presence of a second displaced left-sided staghorn (measuring 4 cm) within a renocolic fistula was initially missed. The migrated staghorn was described as “calcification arising from the large bowel.” The presence of a renocolic fistula was suggested as there were pockets of air seen inside the renal pelvis.

Due to worsening renal function during hospitalization, repeat imaging (CT KUB) revealed a 4.4-cm staghorn calculus within the rectum. The CT report highlighted a strong suspicion of a renocolic fistula, facilitating the migration of the stone into the rectum. The stone was subsequently expelled spontaneously through the rectum.

Management and Outcomes
Given her significant comorbidities, the patient's condition was managed conservatively. She was deemed unsuitable for general anesthesia due to the high risk of intubation and was not a candidate for local anesthetic JJ-stent insertion due to her cerebral palsy. Nephrostomy was also ruled out as an option since the in situ staghorn calculus occupied the entire left renal pelvis. Ultimately, after an extended hospital stay, she responded well to conservative treatment with antibiotics. She was given a one-off (STAT) dose of amikacin at presentation and clarithromycin−amoxicillin (1.2 g intravenously three times a day) for 6 days, which was then escalated to ceftriaxone (2 g intravenously once a day) for another 8 days. Her case was also discussed at the Stone Urology Multidisciplinary Team Meeting (MDTM), and it was decided to provide symptomatic treatment only, with no further interventions, as there was a high mortality risk. After improving clinically, she was discharged to her usual place of residence.

Complication: Psoas Abscess
Several months later, she represented to the emergency department with signs of urinary infection (low oral intake, foul-smelling urine, and fevers). A CT KUB scan revealed a large left iliopsoas abscess, measuring 87 × 54 mm, with gas bubbles, alongside bilateral staghorn stones. Conservative management with antibiotics was again recommended due to her extensive comorbidities and high mortality risk. This approach was agreed upon by the Urology Team, the Medical Team, and the Interventional Radiologists. After an extensive course of antibiotics (clarithromycin−amoxicillin 1.2 g three times daily, for 4 weeks), she responded well and was discharged to her usual place of residence. A few weeks later, she attended the emergency department with aspiration pneumonia and sepsis and unfortunately passed away.