Here, we report on a 57-year-old patient who presented with pruritic erythematous plaques on the sides of the fingers and toes in 2008. From 2010, skin-colored papules emerged on the entire integument, including the face.

Concurrently, the patient was diagnosed with MGUS, specifically IgG kappa type, in 2011. He developed renal insufficiency necessitating hemodialysis in January 2012, attributed to histologically evident nephrosclerosis. Since then, the patient underwent hemodialysis three times per week and has unfortunately required multiple shunt revisions due to decreased flow. His renal condition further led to poorly controlled hypertension and consecutive loss of visual function due to hypertensive retinopathy.

Upon initial assessment at our dermatology department in August 2012, significant skin induration with a notable restriction of mouth and eye opening, eyelash loss, and ectropion was observed. Based on clinical and histological findings, diagnosis of scleromyxedema was confirmed. The patient’s skin condition failed to respond to topical steroids and PUVA treatment. Consequently, immunosuppressive therapy with prednisolone 100 mg/day was initiated, but turned out to be ineffective.

Given the limited options for additional immunosuppression in the context of dialysis-dependent renal insufficiency, high-dose IVIg was the treatment of choice. Due to preexisting renal insufficiency, a sugar-free IVIg preparation (Intratect® 100 g/L with a dose of 2 g/kgbw distributed over 2 days every 4 weeks) was chosen and initiated in February 2013. Concerning further treatment, several factors had to be considered. Since high-dose IVIg therapy is associated with a relative increase in blood viscosity, frequently leading to headaches and other adverse effects, both the daily dose (distribution of the dose over 3–5 consecutive days) and the infusion rate should be reduced to the lowest feasible level in patients with renal impairment or those prone to thromboembolic adverse reactions. Notably, in the herein presented case, the scheduling of IVIg intervals was particularly restricted due to the fixed dialysis intervals and the psychological strain of continuous hospitalization endured by the patient. Administering IVIg doses over more than 2 days was not possible due to the 3-days-a-week dialysis regimen and was also refused by the patient. Nonetheless, the infusion rate was reduced to the practical minimum of 1.6 mL/kgbwh. Fortunately, IVIg quickly resulted in a notable improvement of the patient’s skin and overall well-being.

Further on, the patient experienced syncopal episodes and was diagnosed with AV-block III, subsequently undergoing pacemaker implantation. The development of multiple basal cell carcinomas and other rare skin tumors such as trichoepitheliomas required multiple surgical interventions. Hence, kidney transplantation due to renal insufficiency was precluded. Due to persistent disease activity, progression of skin lesions and elevated intraocular pressure IVIg Intratect® intervals were reduced to 2 g/kgbw over 2 days every 3 weeks in March 2020, resulting in disease stabilization.

Nevertheless, the patient reported headaches, lethargy, and fatigue following Intratect® administration lasting up to 1 week. Experiencing fever, chills, and malaise for 3 days following each cycle of Intratect® had the most pronounced impact on quality of life. Hence, in September 2023, the patient was transitioned to the novel sugar-free IVIg preparation Yimmugo® (Yimmugo 100 g/L; Biotest AG; 2 g/kgbw distributed over 2 days every 3 weeks). After the first infusions, the patient reported fewer side effects with Yimmugo® compared to Intratect®, experiencing reduced fatigue and fewer headaches, resulting in increased productivity following IVIg administration. This was accompanied by ongoing clinical remission of scleromyxedema lesions. In November 2023, shunt thrombosis was detected during dialysis, which led to the initiation of anticoagulation therapy without the necessity of surgical intervention thus far.