A 51-year-old male patient presented to us with acute painful visual loss of his left eye (LE) from 3 days ago. The best-corrected distance visual acuity (BCDVA) was 20/20, and hand motion (HM) detection for the right eye (RE) and LE, respectively. The ocular movement was normal in both eyes. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable for both eyes. The LE fundus examination showed ONH swelling, choroidal bulging, multiple patches of subretinal fluid accumulation, and retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) corrugations. Fundus examination of the RE was unremarkable.

We used multimodal imaging including Optical coherence tomography (OCT) (OptoVue, Inc., Fremont, CA, USA, software version: 2018,0,0,18), fundus blue-autofluorescence (BAF), fluorescein angiography (FA) (Heidelberg Eye Explorer version 1.9.13.0, Spectralis Viewing Module 6.5.2.0; Heidelberg Engineering), Indocyanin green angiography (ICGA), and B-scan ultrasonography for further evaluation. Besides, orbital and brain MRIs with gadolinium enhancement were ordered. The OCT image revealed a mild RPE and choroidal bulging, RPE hyper-reflectivity with back shadowing, subretinal and intraretinal fluid accumulation, and mild retinal thickening. A geographic area of macular hypocyanescence was apparent in the ICGA image of the left eye. BAF showed a geographic area with a speckled autofluorescence pattern at the macula. Optic nerve enlargement was found in the B-scan ultrasonography. In FA images, vascular leakage was apparent at the ONH (hot disc). Besides, a geographic patchy hypofluorescent area with speckled hyperfluorescent margins with a size of three disc diameters (DD) was detected. Orbital and brain MRI showed a retrobulbar nodular mass with gadolinium enhancement at the junction of the optic nerve and sclera. An oncology consultation was done with no remarkable finding.

Considering the suspicion of malignancy and the presence of an enhancing nodular mass in the orbit, the patient underwent transconjunctival lateral orbitotomy one week after the presentation. A pink localized scleral nodule with edematous tenon was found. Sub-tenon triamcinolone acetonide was injected with the clinical diagnosis of nodular posterior scleritis. The patient refused admission and intravenous corticosteroid injection as the treatment order. Oral prednisolone 50 mg/Kg was started. Rheumatology consultation and screening lab results, including PPD test (tuberculosis), chest X-ray, serum ACE level (sarcoidosis), and C-ANCA level (Wegner granulomatosis), were unremarkable. At the last follow-up examination (one week after the surgery), the patient’s BCDVA was 20/20, and counting fingers at 2 meters for the RE and LE, respectively. Furthermore, SRF was absorbed, and the macula became atrophic. Oral prednisolone was tapered off slowly for three months.