Neonate born at 920 grams in the 29th week of pregnancy by emergency cesarean due to risk of loss of fetal well-being and suspicion of maternal chorioamnionitis. She is the first daughter of non-consanguineous parents, without known diseases to date, or history of previous abortions. However, the mother's infertility stands out, requiring up to 4 cycles of in vitro fertilization to achieve pregnancy. The pregnancy was monitored and moderate polyhydramnios was observed. After premature rupture of membranes and initiation of uterine dynamics, two doses of prenatal corticotherapy were administered for pulmonary maturation and neuroprotection with magnesium sulphate prior to delivery. The patient presented hyaline membrane disease, which was managed with administration of surfactant and invasive mechanical ventilation until 7 days of life. Subsequently, she was kept on non-invasive mechanical ventilation until 85 days of life, after 41 weeks of postmenstrual age, presenting a striking difficulty in withdrawing respiratory assistance. In addition, she presented frequent and severe mixed-character apneas (obstructive and central), some of which required resuscitation with self-inflating bag and cardiac massage.

The physical examination revealed severe hypotonia and muscular weakness, with lower limbs in a frog position, hyporreflexia and bilateral Achilles tendon retraction, as well as facial diplegia with an inverted “V” shape of the upper lip, characteristics that initially could go unnoticed due to the gestational age and the difficulty of exploration due to the clinical instability of the patient, but that nevertheless later became evident in the various physical examinations. In addition, at 35 weeks of corrected gestational age, difficulty in oral feeding was observed, not attributable to prematurity, with difficulty in removing the nasogastric tube.

Given the maternal history of infertility, the history of polyhydramnios during pregnancy, and the physical examination findings of hypotonia, facial diplegia, and arthrogryposis, the possibility of neuromuscular disease was considered.

A full neurological examination was then performed on the parents, and the mother was found to have clinical signs of myotonia (showing slow relaxation of fingers and hand after normal muscle contraction), which she did not perceive as symptomatic, as it allowed her to lead a normal life.

Following this finding, the mother underwent an electromyogram, which showed a pattern of myotonic discharges that, in the clinical context of the patient, suggested DM1. In view of these results, a directed genetic study was requested, which found 2,000 CTG copies in the newborn, and 833 copies in her mother, confirming the definitive diagnosis of DM1 in both, as well as explaining the different clinical expressivity according to the genetic anticipation phenomenon.
