An 83-year-old male patient was admitted to our cardiology department for TAVI. The patient had a history of amyloid and valvular cardiomyopathy with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction and severe calcific aortic stenosis (peak gradient 55 mmHg, mean gradient 41 mmHg, and valve area 0.65 cm2), with predominantly septal left ventricular hypertrophy and no obstruction. The patient was on apixaban for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. He was 170 cm tall and weighed 56 kg [body mass index (BMI) 19.38 kg/m2). The 12-lead resting electrocardiogram (ECG) on admission showed sinus rhythm with first-degree atrioventricular block (PR interval 470 ms), complete right bundle branch block (QRS duration 172 ms), and left anterior fascicular block with an axis of −153°.

A Sapien 3 Ultra 23 mm valve was successfully implanted via the right femoral artery under local anaesthesia. On post-operative Day 2, telemetry monitoring revealed brief episodes of asymptomatic third-degree atrioventricular block with a ventricular rate of 41 b.p.m, necessitating implantation of a dual-chamber pacemaker.

A dual-chamber pacemaker (Medtronic Azure XT DR) was implanted under local anaesthesia on the left side. Due to the absence of cephalic access, active-fixation pacemaker leads were introduced via the left subclavian vein. The ventricular lead (Medtronic 4076–58 cm) was screwed into the mid-septum with 18 turns of the screw using a RVOT Stylet Kit (St. Jude Medical). The atrial lead (Medtronic 4076−52 cm) was positioned multiple times in the right atrial appendage using an appropriate J-curved stylet. However, atrial pacing thresholds were excessively high (3 V/1 ms), likely due to atrial remodelling. The atrial lead was ultimately fixed with 17 turns of the screw, in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations, to the posterolateral region of the free wall of the right atrium (RA). This final position achieved adequate atrial sensing (1 mV) and a pacing threshold of 0.75 V at 0.4 ms at the time of implantation.

Upon return from the operating room, the patient was asymptomatic. Physical examination was unremarkable. The ECG demonstrated atrial and ventricular pacing at 60 b.p.m. with adequate capture. Follow-up echocardiography revealed satisfactory function of the aortic bioprosthesis and no evidence of pericardial effusion.

At H + 6 post-procedure, the patient became haemodynamically unstable. He was eupnoeic with a heart rate of 60 b.p.m. in sinus rhythm and hypotensive with a blood pressure of 93/47 mmHg (mean arterial pressure 52 mmHg). Pulmonary auscultation demonstrated asymmetry with decreased breath sounds on the right side. There were no signs of shock, such as mottling or cold extremities. Follow-up echocardiography revealed a 5 mm left ventricular lateral pericardial effusion. Pacemaker interrogation revealed an elevated atrial pacing threshold of 3 V/0.4 ms in bipolar configuration and complete absence of atrial capture at 5 V/1 ms in unipolar configuration, suggestive of atrial lead tip perforation. Chest radiography revealed an opacity extending to the mid-lung field without evident obliteration of the diaphragmatic dome or costophrenic angles. No mediastinal shift was observed. The cardiac device leads appeared to be in appropriate position. The atrial lead was in contact with the RA free wall. Chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a moderate unilateral right haemothorax without visible contrast extravasation in arterial or venous phases. The tip of the atrial lead was in contact with the lateral wall of the RA, without evidence of parietal breach or indirect signs of rupture. A small pericardial effusion was observed, with integrity of the large mediastinal vessels.

After consultation with cardiac surgeons and considering the patient’s haemodynamic stability, we decided against emergent lead repositioning or effusion drainage due to the patient’s anticoagulation with apixaban. Laboratory tests revealed anaemia (haemoglobin 11.2 g/dL, n > 13 g/dL) and elevated high-sensitivity troponin T (241 ng/L, n < 14 ng/L). The patient was transferred to the surgical intensive care unit for close monitoring. To reverse the effects of apixaban, 500 IU of prothrombin complex concentrate was administered.

At H + 12 post-procedure, the patient’s haemodynamic status deteriorated despite initiation of vasopressor support with norepinephrine. He experienced cardiac arrest with an electro-mechanical dissociation. Immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation was initiated. The patient regained spontaneous circulation after 2 min of chest compressions and administration of 1.5 mg of epinephrine (no-flow time 0 min and low-flow time 2 min). Transthoracic echocardiography excluded cardiac tamponade. Pleural ultrasound demonstrated worsening of the right pleural effusion without evidence of pneumothorax. Chest radiography revealed complete opacification of the right hemithorax. Arterial blood gas analysis indicated severe anaemia with haemoglobin of 7.2 g/dL (n > 13 g/dL), haematocrit 22.1% (n > 35%), and hyperlactataemia of 4 mmol/L (n < 1.6 mmol/L).

The patient was urgently transferred to the operating room for emergency surgical intervention. A vertical median sternotomy was performed to access the thoracic cavity. Upon opening the right pleura, a large 2-L haematoma was evacuated. Inspection revealed a laceration of the RSPV in contact with the screw-in helix of the atrial lead. The laceration was repaired using 5-0 Prolene non-absorbable suture. A small amount of clotted blood was visualized in the pericardial space. Examination of the RA revealed a pseudoaneurysm caused by the atrial lead. Subsequently, the atrial lead was secured within the RA.

The patient was rapidly extubated and transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit. His clinical course was favourable. Pacemaker interrogation demonstrated satisfactory electrical parameters for both atrial and ventricular leads. Follow-up echocardiography revealed no pericardial effusion, and chest radiography showed no recurrence of haemothorax. The patient was discharged on post-operative Day 5 (7 days after initial admission).