A 70 year old male patient with a medical history significant for hepatitis C, treated withinterferon therapy three years prior, and prostate enlargement. Despite persistent negative virological results on follow-up, the patient was referred to our department due to suspicion of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Notably, the patient’s lifestyle includes daily consumption of 300–500 ml of whiskey with no history of smoking. Blood tests were negative for HBs antigen and positive for HCV antibodies. Liver function was Grade A with a Child-Pugh classification of 5 points, and liver damage was also Grade A. The ALBI score was −2.43, ALBI Grade 2a, and ICG R15 19.1%. Tumor markers were normal with CEA 2.5 ng/ml, but high AFP 1984 ng/ml and CA19-9 3135 U/ml.

Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan: A multinodular fused mass with a maximum length of 91 mm spanning the posterior segment and caudate lobe was observed. HCC was detected by dark staining in the early phase and by washout in the equilibrium phase. The primary branch boundary of the right portal vein was obscured. A hemangioma was seen in S5 of the liver, and a small cyst was observed in S6 of the liver.

Initial treatment strategy: The HCC diagnosis was cT3N0M0, cStage III. There was no border to the first branch of the portal vein, and right caudate lobe resection of the liver was considered a radical resection. However, the resection limit was 44% based on a residual liver ICG R15 of 40% [4], and resection was judged impossible because of poor residual liver function.

Targeted therapy: The initial treatment consisted of targeted therapy with a molecularly targeted agent (lenvatinib, 8 mg) and transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE). A CT scan performed 4 weeks after the start of treatment showed that the tumor had increased by approximately 120% to a maximum length of 110 mm. We switched to a combination of atezolizumab (1200 mg) and bevacizumab (1000 mg) targeted therapy, which has been reported to be useful in lenvatinib-negative cases. No adverse events occurred with both targeted therapies. A CT scan performed after four courses of atezolizumab plus bevacizumab showed that the tumor had shrunk to a maximum diameter of 60 mm, the contrast effect had disappeared, and the mass had a generally low absorption.

Tumor markers were normalized to 3.4 ng/ml AFP and 18 U/ml CA19-9.

Surgical findings: post-hepatic lobectomy. Blood loss was 293 ml. 6 h 23 min.

Histopathological findings: Grossly, the tumor was yellowish-white with other nodal fusions. Histologically, most tumors were necrotic, and there was no evidence of residual active HCC. Epithelioid granuloma formation was observed in the surrounding area, which was considered a post-treatment change.

Postoperative course: The patient showed no signs of postoperative liver failure; however, CT performed on postoperative day 7 revealed the formation of a truncal abscess. Percutaneous drainage quickly relieved the inflammatory, and the patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 22 without drain removal. The drain was removed on postoperative day 38. The patient is currently alive 16 months postoperatively without recurrence. There is no recommended treatment after resection, and no additional treatment was provided.