A male neonate was born at 37 weeks of gestation through caesarean section due to a breech presentation. Apgar scores were 8 and 9 at the 1st and 5th minutes, respectively. The baby was admitted to neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) at seven days of life (DOL) because of chest retractions and fever (38.5°C). At admission, he was pale with moderate tachypnoea and dyspnoea and chest auscultation revealed bilateral fine gasps. Chest X-ray showed accentuated bronchovascular markings. White blood cell (WBC) count was 11.9 × 109/L (polymorphonuclear cells, 59.4%), the C-reactive protein level was within a normal range, and the blood culture was sterile. RSV type A was identified from the nasal secretion sample using multiplex polymerase chain reaction. The nasopharyngeal samples were negative for bacteria. Empirical antibiotic therapy (penicillin 150.000 IU//kg/die and gentamicin 5 mg/kg/die) was administered after admission to the NICU. Nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) was started a few hours after admission, and an increasing fraction of oxygen was required because of the worsened respiratory conditions. In the following hours, i.v. systemic corticosteroids were added to the therapy. Chest X-ray scan, after 24 hours of admission, showed opacities in the upper right and hilar-perihilar left lung regions. Antibiotics were discontinued after four days of therapy because of the infant’s clinical improvement, the sterile blood culture, the RSV detection in the nasopharyngeal samples, and the normal procalcitonin levels; nCPAP was replaced with high-flow nasal cannula. Three days after discontinuing the antibiotic therapy, the clinical conditions of the baby worsened. He presented with severe hypotension; i.v. fluids and catecholamine support were administered to treat the ongoing septic shock. Chest X-ray displayed massive opacification of the right upper and left lower lobes of the lungs. Heart ultrasound revealed a moderately hypertrophic interventricular septum that normalised in a few days. Wide-spectrum antibiotics (ampicillin 150 mg/kg/die, gentamicin 5 mg/kg/die, and cefotaxime 100 mg/kg/die) were administered, and nasal-CPAP was re-started. The WBC count was 23.2 × 109/L (polymorphonuclear cells, 77.7%), and the C-reactive protein level increased to 15.2 mg/dL. Blood culture yielded S. pneumoniae serotype 3, whereas CSF culture was sterile; i.v. cefotaxime was administered for 10 days, until the baby fully recovered, and the C-reactive protein and procalcitonin levels were within normal ranges. nCPAP was discontinued after 13 days, and then, the baby was discharged home. The following clinical course was uneventful and the neurodevelopmental outcome was within the normal range at 18 months of age.