Female patient, 12 years old, diagnosed with cytotoxic T lymphocyte antigen 4 (CTLA-4) deficiency. She had a history of recurrent sinusitis, otitis media and tonsillitis since the age of 3. Between the ages of 7 and 9, the patient had recurrent episodes of autoimmune haemolytic anaemia and an episode of immune thrombocytopenia. Since the diagnosis of primary immunodeficiency (PID) with hypogamaglobulinemia at the age of 9, she received IVIG infusion every 3 weeks and antimicrobial prophylaxis with sulphamethoxazole-trimethoprim.

At 10 years of age, the patient developed granulomatous-lymphocytic interstitial lung disease (GLILD), a non-infectious pulmonary complication, for which she received treatment with rituximab and mycophenolate mofetil. A few months after discontinuing immunosuppressive therapy, the patient developed fungal pneumonia.

In the sixth week of treatment with voriconazole for pulmonary infection with Aspergillus sp, the patient was hospitalized to receive a regular dose of IVIG (580 mg/kg), but the product available (3%, Sandoglobulin®, CSL Behring, lot 4302500091) was different from that used in previous infusions. Physical examination was normal, with 95% oxygen saturation (SatO2) at room temperature. Laboratory tests performed on the same day showed normal renal function. The IVIG infusion began at 1 ml/kg/hour, and the infusion rate was increased every 30 minutes, until it reached 6.7 ml/kg/h. The patient received a total of 600 ml of the immunoglobulin solution (concentration 3%), and remained without symptoms during the infusion.

About 30 minutes after the end of the administration, the patient reported increased dyspnoea and had bilateral rales on auscultation, hypoxaemia (SatO2 of 88% to 89% at room temperature), respiratory rate of 28bpm, heart rate of 125bpm, blood pressure of 114x68mmHg, axillary temperature of 37.1°C, with no other symptoms or signs. Non-invasive oxygen support at an inspired oxygen fraction of 50% was offered, resulting in SatO2 of 99%, and the patient was transferred to the emergency unit. The chest radiograph showed signs of bilateral diffuse infiltrate, mostly at the base of the lungs, with normal cardiac silhouette.

The patient received a single dose of intravenous furosemide (0.5 mg/kg) due to the initial hypothesis of volume overload. The echocardiogram did not show signs of abnormality, with an ejection fraction of 79%. The patient did not demonstrate other signs of congestion. After 24 hours, she presented SatO2>93% in ambient air, without other complaints, and, after 36 hours of the event, remained asymptomatic and was discharged from hospital.

After 3 weeks, the patient received IVIG infusion with the same product as used prior to the reaction without adverse effects. One year after the adverse effect was reported, the patient continues on regular IVIG replacement without further complications.
