2 years 6 months old female pre-schooler with a previous diagnosis of NF1. She consulted due to a 4 week diarrhea with blood streaks (5 to 10 episodes a day). A week after the onset of the diarrhea she consulted the emergency department, where rotavirus (+) was detected, with low inflammatory parameters, negative coproculture and normal abdominal ultrasound. She was hospitalized for 3 days to manage dehydration and was discharged without bleeding, with persistence of semi-liquid stools. 10 days after discharge she presented diarrhea with blood streaks, associated with low intake and weight loss of 1 kg reported by parents. They consulted a pediatric gastroenterologist who requested a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) panel of gastrointestinal pathogens and PCR of Clostridium difficile (which were negative) and indicated hospitalization for study.

On direct questioning, the parents reported no fever, abdominal pain, vomiting, respiratory or urinary symptoms, arthralgia, or new skin lesions. They did not own pets, and there was no history of travel or recent dietary changes.

The patient was diagnosed with confirmed NF1 at 8 months of age by genetic testing with the heterozygous pathogenic variant c.5606_5627del (p.Gly1869Valfs*28). She has skin involvement (café con leche spots) and bone involvement. At 18 months she required ankle arthrodesis for tibial curvature. She has no family history of NF1 or inflammatory bowel disease.

On physical examination, the abdomen was soft and indistinct, with increased air-bubble murmurs, without masses or visceral enlargement. The perianal examination was normal. There were multiple brown-coffee stains on the lower extremities and back. General examinations were performed, including a blood count with moderate microcytic-hypochromic anaemia (Hb 9.6 g/dL), leukocytosis with left shift (leukocytes 13,900), and discretely elevated inflammatory parameters (CRP 1.37 mg/dL, normal value up to 0.5 mg/dL).

A colonoscopy was performed, the rectum, sigmoid and various segments of the colon were examined up to the cecum, visualizing the ileocecal valve and the appendicular orifice. The last few centimeters of the distal ileum were also inspected. The mucosa from the anal margin to the cecum was observed to be erythematous, with loss of vascular transparency, unlike the cecal mucosa, which appeared normal. No lesions were identified in the anal canal or cecum.

Biopsies of the small intestine (ileon) and large intestine were taken. Microscopic examination showed mucosa of ileal type with preserved villous architecture and adequate epithelial differentiation, with a non-inflamed lamina propria. The mucosa of the large intestine had a mild distortion of architecture and adequate epithelial differentiation, a swollen lamina propria with a mild mixed inflammatory infiltrate and hyperplasia of lymphoid follicles. Isolated foci of microabscesses were recognized. The biopsy was consistent with mild colitis, with signs suggesting chronicity.

In addition, a PCR study for cytomegalovirus (CMV) was requested in a colon biopsy, which was positive.

Given a positive PCR for CMV, CMV IgG and IgM and CMV viral load in blood were requested, resulting in a positive IgG, negative IgM, and CMV viral load of 79.7 IU/ml. Further laboratory studies included PCR for gastrointestinal pathogens and PCR for Clostridium difficile in stool, both of which were negative. In the colon biopsy, Gram stain microbiological studies were requested, which showed +++ leukocytes without bacteria; biopsy culture showed S. gallolyticus/equinus complex in very low amount (interpreted as bacterial flora); acridine orange, Ziehl-Neelsen, Koch culture, and ADV PCR were negative.

Endoscopy and histology suggestive of UC was reported in the context of a patient with moderate symptoms (PUCAI 50) who was started on Mesalazine (70 mg/kg/day three times daily) and a request for a faecal calprotectin was made which was greater than 600 ug/g.

The immunology team evaluated the patient for suspected immunodeficiency. The parents did not report a history of infections, they reported that they were vaccinated, that they had good weight gain, no family history of immunodeficiencies, auto-immunity or early deaths. A study with lymphocyte subpopulations (normal), immunoglobulins (normal), HIV (negative), memory T lymphocytes (with alterations expected in the context of CMV viremia) and lymphoproliferation test (normal) was requested. In addition, a genetic panel of primary immunodeficiencies (Invitae) was performed, which contains 429 genes, of which 68 make up the panel of monogenic inflammatory intestinal disease. 7 variants of uncertain significance were obtained, none included in the panel of monogenic IBD.

Ganciclovir was initiated intravenous for CMV infection and continued for 15 days. The last PCR CMV control prior to discharge reported undetectable load.

The patient improved during the hospital stay with decreased frequency of stools and increased consistency, no rectal bleeding, no nocturnal stools and no abdominal pain, with PUCAI 0 at discharge.

Two months later, he presented with a reactivation of IBD with bloody diarrhea (PUCAI 35). A blood count was performed (normal), a panel of gastrointestinal pathogens was performed (–), PCR for Clostridium difficile was performed (+), and CMV load was undetectable. He was treated with oral metronidazole. However, he persisted with diarrhea with blood streaks, so he was hospitalized again.

A colonoscopy was performed, where erythematous mucous was observed in a diffuse form from the rectum to the cecum, with nodularity and loss of vascular transparency in the submucosa, greater in the left and transverse colon segments. No focal lesions were observed. The mucosa of the ileum and anal canal were observed without lesions.

Biopsy of the terminal ileum, right colon and left colon was performed. Microscopic examination of the ileal-type mucosa showed preserved villous architecture and adequate epithelial differentiation. The lamina propria showed no signs of inflammation. There were no aphthous erosions or granulomas. The mucosa of the large intestine showed mild distortion of architecture and epithelial dedifferentiation. The lamina propria was expanded by mixed inflammatory infiltrate, transmucosal distribution. Foci of cryptitis and cryptitic microabscesses and hyperplasia of reactive lymphoid follicles were recognized. No granulomas, viral or parasitic cytopathic changes were observed. All fragments of the left colon sample presented a similar histopathological picture.

She was given oral treatment with Vancomycin and Prednisone (1 mg/kg/day) with a good response and a favorable evolution. She was discharged with a decrease in the frequency of bowel movements. She persists with mild symptoms (PUCAI 5) in outpatient control, so the dose of corticosteroids is progressively decreased and she remains on treatment with Mesalazina.
