A 4-year-old boy with stage IV neuroblastoma received four cycles of chemotherapy, including high-dose chemotherapy including busulfan and melphalan, followed by autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation with autologous bone marrow supplementation. After eight additional cycles of chemotherapy consisting of temozolomide and irinotecan, which led to stable disease, the patient underwent preparative conditioning with fludarabine (150 mg/m2), melphalan (140 mg/m2), and 12 Gy of TBI for subsequent allogeneic CBT. The patient received tacrolimus and a short-term course of methotrexate for GVHD prophylaxis. The patient underwent engraftment on day 17. He then developed grade 3 GVHD, which was managed by increasing the prednisolone dose and was later discharged on day 85. The patient also received proton beam therapy (39.6 Gy) from days 121 to 150 post-transplantation for a right supra-mediastinum tumor with residual I123-MIBG accumulation in the right adrenal gland.

The patient remained healthy with no evidence of GVHD until presentation at our hospital with a productive cough on day 159. As his older brother displayed similar cold symptoms, a rapid antigen test for RSV was performed, which revealed a positive result. His respiratory symptoms gradually worsened, and he revisited our hospital on day 194 with dyspnea and intercostal retractions. Upon admission, he was given 0.7-1.0 mg/kg of prednisolone, which failed to improve his respiratory condition. Chest computed tomography on day 231 revealed infiltration, ground-glass opacity, and septal thickening in the bilateral lung fields along with right pleural effusion. Echocardiography showed an elevated tricuspid regurgitation peak velocity of 4.1 m/s and an interventricular septum close to the isobaric, indicating the presence of PH. In addition, pericardial effusion was detected. On day 231, the patient was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit, where mechanical ventilation and inhaled nitric oxide (NO) were initiated. Thoracoscopic lung biopsy on day 244 revealed diffuse intra-alveolar hemorrhage and edema on hematoxylin-eosin (HE)-stained samples. Elastica van Gieson staining revealed diffuse obstructive lesions due to fibrocellular components with plump endothelial cells in the pre-septal pulmonary veins and venules. While pulmonary muscular arteries and arterioles showed mild medial hypertrophy and focal intimal thickening (Heath-Edwards Grade 2), severe stenosis with concentric intimal fibrosis or plexiform lesions was present. Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with PVOD with mild pulmonary arterial/arteriolar lesions. Of note, HE staining also revealed enlarged type II pneumocytes with multinucleated and giant cell-like features, indicating the presence of prior lung injury that was likely attributable to his preceding viral infection.