We present the case of a 10-year-old male diagnosed with high-risk early T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia, who was treated according to the LAL SEHOP-PETHEMA 2013 protocol. Two years after diagnosis, he developed an early CNS relapse, so he was treated according to the InteReALL HR 2010 protocol with bortezomib. During induction, after being neutropenic for four weeks (20 neutrophils/μL), he was receiving prophylaxis with cefepime, cotrimoxazole and fluconazole. In addition, he was being treated with acyclovir for a herpes simplex virus 1 skin infection. In this context, he developed a severe headache that did not respond to usual analgesia. A cranial computed tomographic scan was performed that showed a hypodens lesion in the right temporal lobe. When the possibility of an infectious origin was considered, a lumbar puncture was performed and cefepime was replaced with meropenem and vancomycin.

Despite remaining afebrile, he developed signs of septic shock on the first day after admission to the clinic and was transferred to the paediatric intensive care unit for inotropic and vasoactive support. In addition, the antimicrobial spectrum was extended with gentamicin and caspofungin.

The blood analysis showed a progressive increase in C-reactive protein and procalcitonin (up to 312 mg/L and 47.58 ng/mL, respectively, on the third day of evolution), with no other relevant biochemical alterations. The blood count showed pancytopenia due to chemotherapy. The blood cultures ruled out bacteremia and fungemia, and herpes virus serologies were negative. The urine culture and the fecal culture were also negative. The biochemical analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid was completely normal (glucose, 63 mg/dL; proteins, 16 mg/dL; leukocytes 1/µL), but the presence of B. cereus was detected in the microbiological study (sensitive to meropenem, vancomycin, linezolid and ciprofloxacin). The presence of herpes simplex 1 and 2, herpes virus 6, cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus, enterovirus, parechovirus, toxoplasma, Neisseria meningitidis, Listeria monocytogenes, Streptococcus pneumoniae and Cryptococcus was ruled out in the cerebrospinal fluid.

The EEG showed diffuse slowing of brain activity with no clear epileptiform activity. On day 4, after the haemodynamic support was removed, a cranial MRI showed two hyperintense lesions in T2 and FLAIR that involved the subcortical region of the right temporal and parietal lobes. The parietal lesion had ring enhancement after administration of gadolinium and both lesions showed peripheral diffusion restriction. In addition, small haemorrhagic foci were observed scattered in the brain parenchyma. The image suggested a bacterial origin with an atypical germ, and these findings, together with those of the cerebrospinal fluid, led to the diagnosis of B. cereus abscess.

After two weeks of treatment, the patient had a favorable outcome with resolution of the headache and no neurological findings. A follow-up MRI showed a decrease in the size of the lesions. Vancomycin and acyclovir were discontinued after three weeks and meropenem was continued for six weeks.
