The patient consented to utilization of blinded data concerning the case for publication.

A 17-year-old female student suffered a fall when performing trampoline jumping. A loud noise, associated with inability to get up was experienced by the patient, followed by inability of mobilization and weight bearing.

Diagnostic work up demonstrated a fracture close to the distal of the tibia and the fibula.

The tibial fracture presented as an oblique fracture and the fibular fracture at the same level as a spiral type with additional fracture spike.

After preoperative testing, surgical stabilization was performed using i.m. nailing of the tibia. A tibial nail with a diameter of 10 mm was inserted and 3 interlocking screws were inserted distally, two from the medial to the lateral cortex and a third screw from the anterior to posterior cortex.

Proximally, an interlocking bolt was inserted using the targeting device from the medial to the lateral cortex. Since the strictly transverse fracture pattern of the tibia offered sufficient axial support, a compression screw was inserted and interfragmentary compression was applied. It was decided not to separately stabilize the fibular fracture, as the fibular reduction was considered sufficient.

On postoperative day 1, the patient was mobilized out of bed and for the left leg weight bearing was allowed as tolerated. Soft tissues were unremarkable and no significant swelling or any clinical sign of compartment syndrome was noted.

Distal pulses of anterior and posterior tibial artery were repeatedly palpated. The perfusion of lower leg and foot was unremarkable, she was discharged home on postoperative day 5 on continuous prophylactic antithrombotic medication.

On postop day 13, the patient experienced pain sudden onset of symptoms and swelling of the left lower leg and presented at the ER. At the site of the fibular fracture, significant swelling and tenderness on palpation was noted. There was no sign of peripheral peroneal nerve compression or sensory or motor deficits.

Selective ultrasound studies demonstrated an enlarged pseudoaneurysm of the left fibular artery. Clinically, no signs of imminent or acute compartment syndrome were present. In addition, using ultrasound studies, a deep vein thrombosis (DVT) was ruled out.

Therapeutically, the diagnosis of an “aneurysm spurium” was treated by selective embolization the left peroneal artery using PTA and coil embolization of the backdoor arteries (4× fig. 8 coil 2 × 5 mm) as well as feeding vessel (peroneal artery, 4× complex helical 6 × 6 mm, 1× interlock 6 × 10 mm).

The consecutive course remained unremarkable.

Follow up controls performed at regular intervals demonstrated timely and complete bony healing and no signs of perfusion deficits. The functional outcome was excellent and the young sportive patient was able to resume hockey and soccer team sports at a semiprofessional college level.

At the 2 year follow-up, the patient did not experience any long term signs of functional compartment syndrome or perfusion deficits when extensively performing extended sports activities.