A 72-year-old obese patient with hiatal hernia, asthma and a history of pancreatic cancer relapsed to chemotherapy was admitted for 24 hours for the neurolysis of splanchnic nerves.

The procedure was performed under ultrasound guidance with local anaesthesia (lidocaine 2% without epinephrine). The patient was positioned in a prone position. A left unilateral posterior approach was used. The right retrocrural access was limited by vertebral osteophytes. After planning the procedure, a PL 21 gauge needle was inserted in a sterile manner under ultrasound guidance into the retrocrural space between the D11 and D12 vertebrae. The needle was positioned in the desired space and a contrast agent was injected into the space. After confirming adequate diffusion of the contrast agent in the prevertebral space, a 70%/30% mixture of 96% ethanol and 7.5 mg of ropivacaine (total volume of alcohol approxiamtely 21 ml) was injected slowly. Immediate post-procedure monitoring showed no complications and no diffusion of the contrast agent or alcohol into the thoracic cavity. The patient tolerated the procedure satisfactorily and was transferred to her room for monitoring. However, 50 minutes after the procedure, desaturation to 85% ambient air was observed without changes in respiratory mechanics or auscultation or signs of cardiac insufficiency. The patient had not been resuscitated during the study or received medication that could produce ventilatory depression. A venous acid-base state did not demonstrate hypercapnia. An electrocardiogram did not reveal any alterations. A thoracic angiotomy was performed to detect pulmonary thromboembolism, which was negative, with a mild bilateral pleural effusion with laminar pericardial effusion. Life support measures were provided with a 2-litre/minute supplemental oxygen cannula with a saturation correction of 95%. 12 hours after the onset of the condition, the patient corrected her saturation disorder without specific therapeutic intervention.

The patient was discharged at 24 hours with corrected saturation, no additional disorders and good pain management. No pleural or pericardial effusion was evident on examination 10 days after the procedure.
