A 69-year-old man was evaluated for gradually progressive and sequential painless loss of vision. He first experienced painless “fogginess” in his right eye, followed by vision loss in his left eye after a few weeks. His past ocular history was non-contributory except for mild cataracts. Medical history revealed sarcoidosis (pulmonary biopsy proven, inactive since 2011), hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, coronary artery disease, coronary artery bypass grafting in 2007, and subsequently, a heart transplant in 2012, which resulted in prolonged oral sirolimus 2 mg daily for 93 months as well as mycophenolate 2000 mg and dapsone 100 mg daily.

Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/150 OD and 20/80 OS, with impaired color vision in each eye (Ishihara 0/10) and no relative afferent pupillary defect. The anterior segment, ocular motility, and intraocular pressures were normal. Fundus exam showed sector optic disc edema OD and diffuse optic disc edema OS. Humphrey visual field revealed advanced constriction and depression in both eyes. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed increased average retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) thickness of 104 μm OD and 164 μm OS and decreased average ganglion cell complex (GCC) thickness of 66 μm OD and 60 um OS. Brain and orbit magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast revealed T2 hyperintensity and possibly increased thickness of the optic nerves near the chiasm; no post-contrast enhancement in optic nerves or chiasm was observed. These findings have been previously seen in toxic optic neuropathies rather than ischemic optic neuropathies.2 Laboratory workup was all negative and included Lyme, Toxoplasma, QuantiFERON, Syphilis, COVID-19, Herpes simplex virus, Herpes zoster virus, Varicella-zoster virus, Epstein–Barr virus, Bartonella, Cytomegalovirus, liver function tests, basic metabolic panel, thyroid panel, vitamin B1, B12, folic acid, rheumatoid factors (RF), antinuclear antibodies (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), and angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE). Spinal tap showed a normal opening pressure of 16.5 cmH2O, normal cerebrospinal fluid analysis, negative culture, and cytology. Given the MRI pattern and exclusion of other etiologies, a toxic etiology was considered. He was on multiple immunosuppressive agents including sirolimus for 8 years, and blood sirolimus levels were always within normal limits. After cardiology consultation, sirolimus was replaced with cyclosporin 50mg, and prednisone 60mg daily initiated during the workup was tapered down to a maintenance dose of 5 mg daily. Over 19 weeks, BCVA gradually improved to 20/70 OD and 20/30 OS, the visual field improved as well, and the optic disc edema resolved. Repeat OCT after 17 weeks showed an average RNFL thickness of 68 microns OD and 80 microns OS. Given the improvement in visual acuity and resolution of optic disc edema (although may be non-specific for toxic optic neuropathy), with the exclusion of other optic neuropathy etiologies with comprehensive evaluation, the clinical course is consistent with sirolimus-induced toxic optic neuropathy.