19-year-old male with multiple consultations for a three-month history characterised by fatigue, abdominal pain in the right hypochondrium, of a dull character, moderate intensity and intermittent, associated with a holocranial oppressive headache and dark urine.

He was seen in the emergency department and had a blood pressure of 117/65 mmHg, heart rate of 62 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 12 breaths per minute, temperature of 36.4 °C, weight of 60 kg, urine output of 0.6 ml/kg/hour in the last 6 hours, mild jaundice and diffuse abdominal pain without signs of peritoneal irritation or hypovolemia.

He was admitted for study and treatment for suspected thrombotic thrombocytopaenic purpura (TTP, PLASMIC score 4 points). He received 2,000 ml of 0.9% saline solution in the first 24 hours with an increase in the urine flow rate to 1.3 ml/kg/hour, plasmapheresis (PLEX) and dexamethasone 20 mg/day intravenous (IV).

The initial study did not identify schistocytes in the smear, the Coombs test was negative and no haptoglobin measurement was available. Asymptomatic severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus type 2 (SARS-CoV-2) was detected.

Bloodstream infection (BSI), Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), Plasmapheresis (PLEX), Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), + 2 months prior to admission, *24 hours after completion of the third PLEX.

The remaining study was negative or normal for: ADAMTS 13 (activity 140%, reference >40%, vWF metalloproteinase activity not available), vitamin B12 (265 pg/ml, reference 197–771 pg/ml), cocaine, HIV Elisa, HBsAg, anti-HCV antibodies (AC), IgM and IgG for Epstein Barr and Cytomegalovirus, C3 (92 mg/dl, reference 90-180 mg/dl), C4 (32 mg/dl, reference 10-40 mg/dl), antinuclear AC, anti-DNA ds AC, lupus anticoagulant, anti-cardiolipin AC, anti β2-glycoprotein AC, light chains in blood, blood and urine electrophoresis and immunofixation.

Computed tomography of the chest, abdomen and pelvis with contrast ruled out thrombosis, neoplasia, visceromegaly and lymphadenopathy.

Renal biopsy showed extensive evidence of acute tubular damage associated with abundant hemosiderin pigment. The myelogram showed a plasma cell count of 4%, with no other series affected, and the bone marrow biopsy showed severe hypocellularity with no marrow infiltration.

The flow cytometry and immunophenotype for HPN were consistent and identified clonality in erythrocytes (56.12%) and granulocytes (84.31%). A study with fluorescein-labelled proaerolysin was not available.

The follow-up study ruled out PTT with PLEX discontinued on day 3. Dexamethasone 20 mg/day IV was administered for 6 days, then prednisone 60 mg/day orally. She recovered with a rise in platelet count.

On day 18 of hospitalization, he developed a bloodstream infection (BSI) associated with a catheter for S. aureus multisensible treated 14 days with Cefazolina 2 g every 8 hours IV. During this period he presented anaemia and thrombocytopenia, without requiring transfusion of blood products.

Following this episode, anticoagulation was initiated with oral rivaroxaban 15 mg every 12 hours, prednisone was adjusted to 40 mg/day orally, oral iron and folic acid were supplemented, and hepatitis B, pneumococcal, meningococcal and influenza vaccines were administered.

He has evolved with complete recovery of pancytopenia and ARF. He is currently asymptomatic, receiving oral anticoagulant treatment, without corticosteroids and awaiting to start complement inhibitor requested since the hospitalization.
