60-year-old female, former smoker, overweight, with rheumatoid arthritis, treated with methotrexate and golimumab. She had a history of pelvic tumor excision en bloc, with rectal resection, colorectal anastomosis reconstruction, and distal sacrectomy at the level of the fourth sacral vertebra (S4). The pathologic anatomy corresponded to a multilocular cystic formation of 22 x 8.5 cm. The histologic sections showed a fibrous tissue wall with a mature squamous or columnar epithelial lining and lymphohistiocytic infiltrates, ectatic blood vessels, and occasional glandular structures with reactive-type changes. These findings were consistent with a mature cystic teratoma.  Two years after the resection, she presented with discomfort at the sacral level. A CT scan and MRI were requested, which showed, at the level of the last sacral vertebrae, the presence of a heterogeneous soft tissue formation close to 60 mm in diameter, associated with rarefaction of fat planes and scarce adjacent fluid. A thick needle biopsy was performed, the result of which confirmed the recurrence of a mature teratoma. After staging, which did not show systemic disease, she was evaluated by a multidisciplinary tumor committee and surgical treatment with en bloc resection was indicated. A posterior approach was performed, resecting the previous scar, partial section of the gluteal and pyramidal muscles, sacral section at the level of S2-S3, respecting both S3 roots, release of the presacral space and excision of the piece. The patient evolved favorably in the postoperative period. The macroscopic pathologic anatomy showed a 7.8 x 6 x 4.5 cm tumor formation adhered to the sacral bone. It was predominantly solid, of heterogeneous consistency with sectors of friable appearance, cystic areas with liquid and gelatinous content and multiple focal areas of calcified consistency. The histologic sections showed bone involvement by neoplastic glandular structures with moderate nuclear pleomorphism, formation of micropapillary structures, mucin production and areas of necrosis. In some cystic areas of the periphery, a mature columnar epithelium was recognized . The surgical margins of resection were free of neoplastic involvement. The immunomarking techniques were positive for CK20, calretinine, p53 and, focally, for CDX2, and negative for CK7, WT-1, PAX8 and CA125. These findings were consistent with a recurrence of mature teratoma with somatic malignant transformation into a colorectal-type adenocarcinoma. A video colonoscopy was performed, which was normal, confirming the diagnosis of somatic malignant transformation of the sacral teratoma. She remained under multidisciplinary control. After 24 months free of disease, she presented deterioration of the general condition and rapid elevation of CA 19.9, so a PET/CT was performed, which showed multiple hypercapturing images at the visceral, soft tissue and bone level, consistent with secondary disease. Due to rapid functional deterioration, she could not receive systemic treatment and died two months later.
