11-year-old boy with bilateral occipital and frontal headaches associated with vomiting for 12 hours after a fall on the sacroiliac region. History of MS due to a missense mutation in heterozygosity in the FBN1 gene c.2243G>A.

Neurological and instrumental examination was normal, except for the marfanoid habit. A general analysis and a sacrococcygeal radiography were performed, both without alterations. The headache improved, becoming absent in the supine position, but reappeared when standing up and he could not tolerate standing, so he was admitted.

He showed little response to analgesia during admission. A cranial computed tomography (CT) scan was performed that showed increased density of the transverse sinuses in probable relation to slow venous flow. Given the suspicion of a HIE in relation to a possible CSF fistula, a cranio-medullary magnetic resonance (MR) was requested. The MR showed a mild decrease in the size of the tonsils (5 mm) and detachment of the dura with liquid collections outside of it at the dorsal and lumbosacral level, compatible with a CSF fistula; in addition, perineural Tarlov cysts were visualized at the sacral location. This image was not compatible with a dural ectasia, and the patient did not have previous neuroimaging.

Treatment was prescribed with hyperhydration, minor analgesics (dexketoprofen and metamizol), intravenous hydrocortisone initial dose 8 mg/kg/day, oral caffeine 2.5 mg/kg/day, along with bed rest in the Trendelenburg position. After five days the patient began progressive mobilization, showing a favorable evolution, with improvement of the headaches and tolerating standing. He was able to be discharged from the hospital after 12 days.

After four months without symptoms, the clinical symptoms reappeared coinciding with the start of sports activities at school. The control MRI showed the disappearance of the dorsal collection with persistence of sacral collections. He received the same conservative treatment as in the previous admission.

The control MRI one year later showed resolution of the subdural or extradural collections in the spinal canal and a new finding was identified as a fine image of dorsal midline hydromyelia. Two years after the first admission, he consulted again for orthostatic headaches and an MRI was performed, showing a re-fistulization originating at the L5-S1 level. In view of the relapse, treatment with a lumbar epidural blood patch (L4-L5) was decided by the anaesthetics department. One year after its implementation and three years since the start of the clinical trial, the patient remains asymptomatic.
