A term boy baby with birth weight of 3 kg was delivered by caesarean section in view of fetal distress. He cried immediately after birth. Routine care was given and at 10 min of life, he was noticed to have a low SpO2 (oxygen saturation) reading of 75–80%. So, he was started on oxygen by head box at 5 L/min. He had good respiratory efforts with mild tachypnea. As he continued to have low SpO2 even after a trial of both 5 L/min of head box oxygen and T piece resuscitator PEEP (positive end expiratory pressure) with 6 cm of water with FiO2 (inspired oxygen fraction) 100%, he was intubated and started on positive pressure ventilation. Baby was shifted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit for further management.

Even after mechanical ventilation in synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV) mode with maximum stabilizing pressures of PEEP 6 cm and peak pressure 20 cm of water and adequate sedation, the maximum SpO2 attained was 80%. He had cyanosis and features of poor perfusion (tachycardia and prolonged capillary refill time). So, the baby was started on inotrope support after a bolus of Normal Saline. Initial differentials considered were septic shock, pneumothorax, lung malformations, and cyanotic heart disease. Blood culture was done and baby was started on first line antibiotics. Chest X-ray showed normal cardiac shadow and normal lung fields. Echocardiogram was done which ruled out persistent pulmonary hypertension and structural heart disease.

Arterial blood gas done after 1 h of ventilation (at 2 h of life) showed pH of 7.5, paCO2 19.1 mmHg, paO2 of 199 mmHg, lactate 4 mmol/L, bicarbonate 18.1 mmol/L and base excess of −3.6. As there was unexplained hyperoxemia despite low SpO2 and persistent cyanosis, methemoglobinemia was suspected which was confirmed by high metHb (methemoglobin) level (7.6%). Serial blood gas values showed hyperoxemia and high metHb levels. He was given 3 mg intravenous single dose methylene blue and started on oral ascorbic acid 300 mg once daily. His ventilator settings were slowly weaned and he was extubated after 16 h to room air. Inotropes were also tapered and stopped within 24 h. As his blood culture had no growth, antibiotics were stopped after 2 days. From day 2 of life, he was maintaining a saturation of 75–85% in room air.

There was no relevant perinatal and family history. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase level and hemoglobin electrophoresis were also normal. Since day 3, he was on orogastric feeds and was otherwise stable except for persistent cyanosis. After sending genetic test (clinical exome), he was discharged on day 9 while on direct breast feeds as he continued to be stable except for cyanosis and low SpO2 reading (80–85%) in room air with normal paO2.

After discharge, the baby was under regular follow up and by 2 months of life, his saturation in room air was 88–90% and by 4 months SpO2 >92% on room air with no cyanosis. The clinical exome showed mutation in gamma chain of fetal hemoglobin – amino acid substitution of Tyrosine for histidine at codon 63 (p.His63Tyr) due to missense mutation in HBG2 gene (chr11:g.5275647G>A). Once we received the genetic test result, oral ascorbic acid was stopped and the parents were counselled about the excellent prognosis of this rare disease condition. At 5 months of life, he was well, acyanotic and his metHb level was normal.