A 61-year-old man visited our hospital with an accidental cut in his left thumb while using a power saw. The patient was diagnosed with an open fracture of the distal phalanx that was separated into two main fragments in the coronal plane. The extent of the soft tissue laceration closely coincided with the proximal extent of the fracture. The wound was irrigated and primarily sutured on the same day. However, the volar bone fragment was pulled by the flexor pollicis longus (FPL) tendon and displaced to the volar side.

The next day, surgery was performed using a digital block. The suture was opened and the tissue intervening between the bone fragments was removed. After adjusting the alignment of the joint surface of the distal phalanx, a 1.0-mm Kirschner wire was inserted as a transfixion pin from the volar bone fragment towards the dorsal bone fragment. However, the compression between the bone fragments was insufficient. Therefore, with the interphalangeal (IP) joint temporarily hyperextended so that the distal phalanx would not obstruct the passage, a 1.2-mm Kirschner wire was inserted along the volar side of the distal phalanx into the proximal phalanx head to create a flexion block pin. A Kirschner wire was obliquely inserted from the side of the FPL tendon to avoid penetration. When the wound was sutured again and the IP joint was passively flexed, volar and dorsal bone fragments were compressed against each other. A dorsal splint was used to maintain this position.

Result
Because the patient wanted an early return to work, manual activity was permitted with continued immobilization for 6 weeks, after which the pins were removed and a volar splint was placed for continued immobilization. Eight weeks after surgery, bone union was confirmed, and active range of motion exercises were started. Seven months after surgery, the active flexion range of motion of the IP joint was up to 45° and the active extension range of motion was up to 0°, resulting in a mildly limited range of motion. However, the patient was satisfied with his daily life and was able to work without any inconvenience.