We present the case of a 38-year-old white Moroccan male with no cardiovascular risk factors and a prior history of unexplored bilateral cecity, who presented to the emergency department with chronic edema of the limbs and progressive shortness of breath.

The initial evaluation found a hemodynamically stable patient with a normal blood pressure 105/76 mmHg, a pulse rate at 45 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation at 93% on ambient air. Physical examination showed an external jugular vein distension, extensive legs edema, and ascites. Cardiopulmonary auscultation was notable for a 4/6 holosystolic murmur at the mitral focus with symmetrical bilateral diffuse crackles. The ophthalmological assessment found a visual acuity reduced to light perception.

An electrocardiogram showed sinus bradycardia with a heart rate of 45 beats per minute and complete right bundle branch block. Chest radiography was notable for cardiomegaly and perihilar congestion. The B-type natriuretic peptide level was 1230 pg/ml (for a normal range under 300 pg/ml), the creatinine level was 9.6 mg/l (for a normal range between 6 and 12.5 mg/l), the albumin level was slightly low at 36 g/l (for a normal range higher than 39 g/l), and there was a high sensitivity troponin at 294 ng/l (for a normal range under 35 ng/l). Other laboratory test results were normal particularly ferritin, TSH, and electrolyte levels.

Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a dilated left ventricle (end diastolic basal diameter of 60 mm) with a severely reduced ejection fraction at 15% (Simpson biplane), mild mitral regurgitation, and an apical thrombus measuring 19 mm × 18 mm. The right ventricle was severely dilated (end diastolic basal diameter of 51 mm), with systolic dysfunction (Tricuspid Annular Plane Systolic Excursion (TAPSE) of 12 mm and Right Ventricle S' wave on tissue doppler (S’VD) of 5 cm/s) and severe tricuspid regurgitation. The inferior vena cava (IVC) was plethoric with a maximal diameter of 37 mm.

A detailed history revealed that since his early twenties, the patient had troubles walking, hearing loss, and anosmia and that his cecity started with altered night vision, but he had never been assessed or evaluated by an ophthalmologist prior to this presentation. The neurological examinations showed bilateral legs amyotrophy with bilateral ataxia. A fundoscopic examination was performed to explore his cecity and revealed retinitis pigmentosa. The patient’s clinical image associating a dilated cardiomyopathy with the specific neurological signs was strongly suggestive of Refsum's disease. We conducted an assay of plasma phytonic acid concentrations, which revealed a remarkably elevated level of 324 μmol/l, which confirmed the Refsum disease. Initially, the patient was put on intravenous furosemide, which provided subsequent relief from his heart failure symptoms. Following that, he received treatment with oral furosemide [40 mg twice per day (b.i.d)], Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors (ramipril 2.5 mg b.i.d), spironolactone (25 mg Once daily (o.d)), and an SGLT2 inhibitor (empagliflozine 10 mg o.d.). Beta-blockers were not administered due to sinus bradycardia. Additionally, the patient received vitamin K antagonists for the left ventricular thrombus.

In terms of the specific treatment for Refsum disease, the patient was counseled to adhere to a dietary restriction regimen designed to eliminate phytol-containing foods, with a daily phytanic acid intake below 10 mg. This involved avoiding the consumption of meat or fats from ruminating animals (such as lamb and beef) and baked goods containing animal fats, as well as dairy products such as butter and cheese.

The patient recovered and his condition became stabilized with NYHA class 2 symptoms of chronic heart failure; therefore, he was discharged on medical treatment for heart failure, vitamin K antagonists (VKA), and a low phytanic acid regimen.