A 54-year-old Lebanese woman on maintenance hemodialysis (HD) three times weekly for focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) was admitted to the emergency department after undergoing her scheduled HD the day before due to sudden onset of severe lower back pain on the left side, nausea and vomiting. The pain had started suddenly about 12 hours before her presentation and worsened rapidly. In a side note, a severe secondary hyperparathyroidism with cutaneous calcification was treated with cinacalcet for 3 years without response requiring parathyroidectomy (hypertrophy of four glands) 8 months prior to her current admission. Five days prior to her presentation, she was admitted to the hospital for severe anemia and retrograde haemorrage. Her ultrasound evaluation of the renal showed bilateral small kidneys with thinned parenchyma containing cysts up to 3 cm and vascular calcification without hydronephrosis. Four days prior to her presentation, a colonoscopy through the terminal ileum revealed a 7 mm polyp in the left descending colon, which was removed by mucosectomy. The microscopy returned as a sessile tubular adenoma with low grade dysplasia. The patient denied fever or a history of trauma. There was no prior history of antiplatelet use. In the emergency, her blood pressure and pulse rate were 112/65 mmHg and 96 bpm, her temperature was 36.8°C and she presented a mildly distended abdomen with significant pain in the left costovertebral angle. The laboratory findings showed hemoglobin of 9.0 g/dL while the hematocrit was 29.7%, total white blood cell count 12.2 × 1000/microliter, creatinine of 6.06 mg/dL, and C-reactive protein level of 6 mg/L. In addition, the PT was 83% and the INR was 1.13. On the day of presentation (i.e., 4 days after the colonoscopy), a multiphasic computed tomography (CT) of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis was performed with and without intravenous contrast. The examination revealed a large left perirenal intraparenchymal hematoma with a perirenal subcapsular collection up to 1.8 cm thick with a haematic collection in the entire renal compartment reaching a diameter of more than 9×4 cm, left hydronephrosis and oedema around the perirenal fat and calcifications in the hilum. For decompression of the renal pelvic system and drainage, we opted to treat her with retrograde insertion of a double J ureteral stent on the left, which identified a clot in the middle part of the left ureter. Culture of urine and cytology were negative. A simple abdominal radiograph showed the double J in place. The patient remained hemodynamically stable, but presented a new drop in hemoglobin (6.1 g/dL) the same night, which required a transfusion of one unit of packed red blood cells to stabilize. A decision was made for surgical exploration with presumptive diagnosis of subacute left perirenal hematoma and to exclude underlying malignancy. She underwent a session of HD without heparin. On the third day, she underwent a radical open nephrectomy on the left with preservation of the adrenal gland. She received another 2 units of packed red blood cells during the intervention. The renal parenchyma was almost entirely replaced by a hematoma measuring 9×9×7 cm and extending into the perirenal fat. A small papillary mass was sent separately for analysis. A detailed histopathological evaluation revealed a renal parenchyma with lesions of chronic nephritis mutilated by large hemorrhagic areas extending into the perirenal fat. In addition, there was a neoplastic proliferation of 2 mm, with papillary architecture covered by small cubic atypical cells and foamy macrophages in the shaft, compatible with papillary adenoma. On the day following the operation, the patient underwent HD and received a packed red blood cells. The postoperative period was uneventful. The hemoglobin level remained around 10 g/dL. She was discharged on the seventh day without any signs or symptoms of bleeding. The patient remains well and asymptomatic and is currently on regular HD.
