The patient was a 48-year-old man with no prior history of hierarchy, referred from a low complexity center for the study and treatment of pulmonary tumors. The chest radiograph showed a single radiopaque lesion in the right pulmonary field, in relation to the hilum. The computed tomography scan showed a compromise of the posterior segments of the lower right lobe. The clinical and imaging study ruled out the compromise of other organs, so it was decided to perform a lower right lobectomy with lymph node emptying. The intraoperative diagnosis of the surgical piece was of a poorly differentiated neoplastic lesion. The surgical piece showed a solid tumor lesion with irregular edges, hard-firm consistency and whitish tone, 7 cm in major diameter, compromising the pulmonary hilum and visceral pleura. Five hiliar lymph nodes were received without macroscopic alterations. The microscopic study revealed a neoplastic malignant lesion, consisting of primitive mesenchymal cells that acquired abundant acidophilic cytoplasm, eccentric nuclei and occasional cytoplasmic striations. The mitotic count was 10-15/10 high magnification fields, and necrosis foci were observed. The lymph nodes did not show tumor compromise. Among the differential diagnoses raised, we can mention: large cell carcinoma with rhabdoid findings, carcinosarcoma and mainly soft tissue metastatic sarcomas. In order to define the lineage, immunohistochemical studies were performed, the results of which were: desmin, muscle-specific actin, myogenin, vimentin and S100 positive, cytokeratins, CD34, smooth muscle actin and TTF1 negative. The histological image added to the immunohistochemical profile allowed the diagnosis of embryonic rhabdomyosarcoma. In view of the need to define the primary or metastatic origin of the pulmonary lesion, the patient was studied by various imaging techniques. Taking into account that they did not reveal tumor lesions in other organs, the neoplasia was considered a primitive pulmonary rhabdomyosarcoma (AJCC) pT2b pn0 pMx; IRSG staging: Clinical Stage 3+ Clinical Group Ib: Low Risk Clinical Group. The patient initiated chemotherapy (carboplatin + etoposide). Three months after the surgery, a tumor mass was identified in the upper right lobe. A right pneumonectomy was performed. The surgical piece presented a 5 cm diameter nodule in relation to the hilum, with histomorphological and immunohistochemical findings similar to those previously described. The patient continued with the chemotherapy cycles, and in a clinical follow-up at 11 months of the original surgery, a tumor lesion was detected in the right adrenal gland. The cytological study demonstrated the presence of atypical elements with an immunohistochemical profile similar to that obtained in the pulmonary tumor, so the lesion was interpreted as a secondary adrenal rhabdomyosarcoma. The patient continued with chemotherapy, during which he developed intercurrent infections, and died 20 months after the first surgery.
