A 17-year-old female adolescent presented to our clinic with a two-month history of left-sided chest pain and a one-week history of left-sided back pain at the level of T7. The chest pain was accompanied by palpitations and dyspnea occurring 3 to 4 days per week. A week before the first visit, the palpitations and dyspnea became less frequent, and she developed a daily intermittent dull pain on the left side of the chest and middle back without radiation, simultaneously in most cases. The pain occurred both on exertion and at rest, lasting for hours, with no alleviative or aggravating factors. She reported pain intensity of 2 to 6 on a 10-point scale. The intensity changed during an attack, and the average was 4. She was healthy otherwise. There was no limitation in daily life. She visited a local doctor one month prior to visiting our clinic. Holter electrocardiographic and laboratory test findings were normal. Her medical history included migraine for three years. Her regular medications were lomerizine, loxoprofen, and naratriptan for the prevention and acute treatment of migraine. Her migraine was well controlled, and she rarely experienced attacks. She denied trauma or prior surgeries. She denied suspected symptoms or family history for autoimmune or inflammatory conditions.

Her blood pressure was 107/60 mmHg and pulse rate was 62 beats/min. She was 162 cm in height and 43 kg in weight, with a body mass index of 16.4 kg/m2. No murmur or arrhythmia was audible on her cardiovascular examination. The lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally. Chest palpation provoked non-reproducible local pain in the lower sternocostal joints; horizontal arm traction maneuver and the crowing rooster maneuver provoked no pain. There was no tenderness on muscles and bones in the upper body.

Electrocardiographic and laboratory findings, including thyroid function, were normal. Chest and thoracic radiographic examination showed straightening of the upper thoracic spine and a loss of normal kyphotic curvature. Lower rib radiographs revealed no fracture or pneumothorax. We suspected straight back syndrome, according to the two different diagnostic criteria proposed by Davies et al and DeLeon et al. The distance between the middle of the anterior border of T8 to a vertical line connecting T4 to T12 was 0.91 cm. The anteroposterior diameter was 74.0 cm, and the transverse diameter was 243.2 cm. We advised her to start and continue chiropractic therapy to increase thoracic kyphosis. We proceeded with watchful waiting for one month in outpatient care.

After this first visit, the chest and back pain gradually relieved. Palpitations and dyspnea scarcely occurred. All symptoms disappeared within three weeks. At the one-month follow-up visit, echocardiography was performed, revealing trivial mitral regurgitation without prolapse. We confirmed the diagnosis of straight back syndrome. We reassured the patient that the disease is benign, and advised her to continue chiropractic therapy. She has not had relapse of severe symptoms or the need to visit the hospital. She never visited our clinic in the subsequent year.