Nine-year-old male school patient with attempted suicide. Product of second pregnancy, unplanned, unwanted, but accepted. Preeclampsia was reported at eight months of pregnancy with unspecified pharmacological management, obtained at term via abdominal, weight of 3,500 grams.

Head trauma at age 2 years from a fall from approximately 50 centimeters, without loss of alertness or medical attention. The 31-year-old father had symptoms of unspecified anxiety at age 26 without attention; the 14-year-old brother reported academic difficulties and irritability. Resto questioned and denied.

The family was disintegrated by the parents' separation when the patient was three years old, so he had been living for a year in a large family nucleus with his father, and living with his mother during school holidays. Low socioeconomic status.

About an hour before admission to hospital, and following a disagreement with his brother, the minor impulsively locked himself in the bathroom, where he got the shower curtain around his neck. When found by a relative, without knowing how much time had passed, he was observed with a loss of alertness, and was taken to a hospital unit near his home for treatment. On admission, he was reported to have a temperature of 35ºC, blood pressure of 80/44 mmHg, heart rate of 100 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 30 breaths per minute, weak central pulse, dilated pupils, hypertonic, with generalised cyanosis, ecchymosis in the left side of the neck and pulmonary fields with respiratory roughness, so advanced airway management and aminergic support with norepinephrine at a dose of 0.2 mcg/kg/min was carried out.

He was sent to a third level unit to continue his care, where a tomography of the skull was performed, which showed data of mild edema with decreased subarachnoid space and loss of the convolutions. He was kept sedated and neuroprotective in the pediatric intensive care unit, and was extubated five days later without incident. He was started on oral medication tolerating the diet.

He was referred to the mental health service for assessment and identification of potentially related risk factors. During his stay in the hospital area, the minor was directly questioned and symptoms of insidious onset, chronic course, with a factor associated with the separation of the parents and little contact with his mother were detected. He presented a picture characterised by sadness most of the time, hyporexia, recurrent dreams where he sees himself alone, with feelings of guilt, a decrease in the ability to think and concentrate (mainly in school), thoughts of death, which generated dysfunction in the family and school areas and attempted suicide a few days earlier. Based on the above, a diagnosis of severe depressive episode was made, and pharmacological treatment with fluoxetine at 20 mg/day was initiated.

The family structure and organization was found to be lacking a shared hierarchy between both parents, with confusion in the lines of responsibility and rules of living together, without clear boundaries, along with ambivalent parenting practices ranging from authoritarian to indifferent and inadequate supervision. In terms of communication, problems were observed manifested by discomfort in expressing ideas and feelings, which consequently led to the transmission of confusing messages. The older brother had a parental role to the patient. Consequently, the family showed dysfunction and psychotherapeutic intervention was granted to both the patient and his relatives.

The patient was discharged fifteen days after admission to the hospital, as he showed improvement and stability. He continued with follow-up in the outpatient department where the presence of a persistent pattern of inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity was detected, which, according to the mother, was noticeable from the age of two years. This could hinder his development and functioning, as in the case of the acquisition of reading, as he presented learning difficulties (he succeeded in learning up to the third grade of primary school with the help of the Regular Education Support Unit, USAER).

The results of the psychological tests (Bender test and human figure) indicated neurological immaturity, which supported the diagnosis of attention deficit disorder with hyperactivity (ADHD). Treatment with methylphenidate 20 mg/day was initiated.

Regarding his evolution, an improvement in the symptomatology was observed, so after a year of follow-up he was discharged to his General Hospital of the Zone to continue surveillance. Currently, the minor has remained with remission of affective symptoms, stability in symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity and impulsivity and without presenting suicidal behaviors.
