23-year-old male patient from Itagüí, Colombia, with a family history of sudden death of unclear etiology in his grandfather at the age of 50, with no other significant family or personal history. He was undergoing external monitoring for repeated syncopal episodes with a diagnosis since childhood of symptomatic sinus node dysfunction, for which he was implanted with a pacemaker.

During subsequent controls, there was no report of deterioration of functional class until 2012 in Guayaquil, Ecuador. During his hospitalization, the generator was changed; in the first postoperative month, he presented an early complication of a pacemaker pocket infection, which required the explant of the generator unit with subsequent abandonment of the previously implanted ventricular electrode. A new pacemaker implant was performed on the contralateral side without complications or new syncopal events in the following 10 years of follow-up.

She presented with NYHA III functional class impairment 6 months prior to admission with no other symptoms and no reports of electrophysiology service evaluations since the last pacemaker generator implant in 2012. During outpatient checks, discontinuation of beta blocker therapy was reported due to poor tolerability.

The physical examination found a systolic murmur in the aortic focus II/VI without irradiation, and no signs of central or peripheral congestion. There was no evidence of renal function, electrolyte or haematological profile alteration in the laboratory. The pacemaker was scheduled with evidence of depletion of the generator battery. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed where severe concentric hypertrophy of the interventricular septum was found at the middle ventricular level, of 26 mm with intracavitary peak gradient of 117 mmHg and anterior systolic movement of the mitral valve (SAM) which generated a mild mitral regurgitation.

He was evaluated by the Heart Team due to the sudden death risk score (16.8%) and a family history of sudden death, considering EUROSCORE II 0.67%; as for the previously abandoned electrodes and the contraindication of performing cardiac magnetic resonance, given the incompatibility of the pacemaker, a tomographic study was performed and the performance of myectomy was considered due to symptomatology and documented variant.

He was scheduled for a transapical approach ventricular myectomy with electrode removal; a left ventriculotomy was performed at the apex, with subsequent resection of the septum from the middle ventricular part to the base, with subsequent removal of electrodes attached to the tricuspid septal velum. There were no intraoperative complications and subsequently there was a decrease in the intracavitary gradient without the presence of the SAM phenomenon. During his stay in the Intensive Care Unit, the patient had two documented episodes of ventricular tachycardia with haemodynamic instability, for which an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) compatible with magnetic resonance (MRI) was placed. The patient did not have new episodes of VT. The patient did not have new intercurrences and outpatient genetic studies were initiated due to his family history.

The patient had a favorable postoperative evolution after the CDI implant. A variant, probably pathogenic, was found in heterozygosity of the FLNC, c 4636G>A consistent with autosomal dominant type 26 hypertrophic familial cardiomyopathy.

The patient is currently in functional class I, without arrhythmias detected in the telemetry and on regular treatment with Bisoprolol 5 mg. Genetic study of direct relatives was initiated, however, due to the difficult access to health services, its execution was limited.
