Patient information: A 19-year-old male with no significant medical history was admitted to our department with a painful left scrotal mass that had been present for 8 months and had not improved with antibiotics for pyogenic organisms. The patient reported intermittent low grade fever, night sweats, anorexia and unexplained weight loss since the onset of symptoms. He did not have a cough, sputum or haemoptysis. There was no history of tuberculosis in his personal or family medical history. He was vaccinated against tuberculosis at birth.

Clinical findings: Physical examination revealed a large, painful, slightly hot left bursa and two elongated, poorly defined, firm, painful subcutaneous formations in the anterior thoracic wall, 3 to 4 cm long. There were no rales on auscultation. The remainder of the examination was normal. Laboratory studies revealed a high c-reactive protein of 90 mg/dl. The blood count, creatinine, blood glucose and liver function tests were within normal limits. The standard chest X-ray showed reticulonodular infiltrates in both lung fields.

Diagnostic approach: In the presence of an ultrasound finding in favour of an epididymal tumour, the patient underwent a left orchidectomy. However, the pathological examination of the surgical specimen showed a granulomatous epitheloid necrosis of the epididymis, suggestive of active epididymal tuberculosis involving the body and tail of the epididymis and sparing the head and testicle. The intradermal tuberculin reaction was positive. The search for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) in sputum and urine for 3 consecutive days was negative on direct examination and culture. The serologies for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV) and Wright's stain were also negative. In search of other tuberculous sites, a thoraco-abdomino-pelvic tomodensitometry was performed, which showed a miliary tuberculosis, coelo-mesenteric necrotic adenopathies, two thoracic parietal collections (at the expense of the external oblique muscles measuring 33 × 10 mm on the right and 45 × 10 mm on the left) and a focal osteolysis of D11 and L5, suggestive of a spondylodiscitis in the early stages. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spinal cord confirmed the existence of a spondylodiscitis at the level of D7, D11, L4 and L5. The diagnosis of disseminated tuberculosis with epididymal, pulmonary, parietal, ganglionary and osteo-articular sites was retained.

Therapeutic intervention: a poly-chemotherapy for tuberculosis with isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide for 2 months, followed by the association of isoniazid and rifampicin, was initiated.

Follow-up and results: however, at the 4th month of treatment, the patient had presented generalised tonic-clonic convulsive seizures. A brain MRI was performed, showing multiple nodular lesions above and below the tentorial membrane corresponding to tuberculomas. The patient was put on anticonvulsive treatment and anti-tuberculosis treatment was continued. The evolution was favourable with recovery of the general condition and weight gain from the first months of treatment as well as a disappearance of thoracic parietal formations, adenopathies and tuberculous milia on the tomodensitometry with absence of recurrence of convulsive seizures. However, the slow decrease of the size of the tuberculomas obliged us to continue the anti-tuberculosis treatment for a long period. Finally, the patient was declared cured, without sequelae, at the end of the 234th month of treatment with a 2-year follow-up.
