A 24-year-old male patient came to the Oral Medicine Clinic, Dental Hospital Universitas Padjadjaran, with the chief complaint of dry and sore mouth for one month after taking medication from the psychiatry department. He was diagnosed with GAD and had been taking a compounded antidepressant from a psychiatrist, namely sertraline 50mg, sulpiride 50mg, and clobazam 10mg. Since three days ago, the patient had stopped taking the drug because he felt his mouth was getting uncomfortable History of recurrent oral ulceration and allergies was denied. He brushed his teeth and tongue twice daily, every morning and night, before bed. He denied the habits of smoking and alcohol consumption.

The patient consulted the psychiatry department because he felt stressed and anxious since being infected with COVID-19 about six months ago. He underwent hemorrhoid surgery in the same year, which intensified his complaint. The patient frequently used internet-based search engines to look for information on his condition and disease, which caused him to feel uncontrollably anxious. The patient worked for a private company with a very high work target at one point. The patient felt quite depressed and unable to self-regulate his psychological condition. He had a poor diet, lacked sleep, and rarely exercised.

This study has received approval and written informed consent from the patient to publish data and images. This study complied with the Declaration of Helsinki. The institution has approved the publication of this study. The extraoral examination showed dry and exfoliative lips. The intraoral examination revealed a depapilation surrounded by a white plaque on the dorsum of the tongue, frothy saliva, and a dental mouth mirror sticking to the tongue and buccal mucosa. The Oral Hygiene Index Simplified (OHI-S) from Green and Vermillion was used as a clinical parameter for evaluating oral hygiene conditions. The patient had plaque and stains in all regions of the teeth and calculus in some regions of the teeth, resulting in moderate oral hygiene with a score of 2.2.

The objective measurement of xerostomia can be done by assessing salivary flow rate (sialometry) or from the patient’s clinical condition using the Clinical Oral Dryness Score (CODS). The spitting method was used for salivary flow rate assessment in the unstimulated condition, collected between 8 to 11 am. Navazesh et al, stated that the subjects are required to fast, not smoke, not chew gum, and not perform any oral procedures at least one hour before the examination. Saliva is allowed to accumulate on the floor of the mouth and the subject spits it out into the graduated test tube every 60 seconds, for 5 minutes, and is quantified volumetrically using the indicator on the test tube. The salivary flow rate was stated as mL/min (normal = 0.3 to 0.4 mL/min).The patient’s unstimulated salivary flow rate was obtained at 0.28 mL/min.

The objective assessment of xerostomia using CODS obtained a cumulative score of three, categorized as mild xerostomia. The Depression, Anxiety, and Stress Scale-21 items (DASS-21) questionnaire was used to estimate the psychological condition and screen for common mental disorders. The DASS-21 questionnaire showed an extremely severe level of anxiety (score = 13). Based on anamnesis and clinical examinations, the established oral diagnoses were GT with mild xerostomia and exfoliative cheilitis.

Case Management
Pharmacological and non-pharmacological therapies were conducted to manage this patient. Pharmacological therapy was 0.2% hyaluronic acid gel, 0.025% hyaluronic acid mouthwash, and petroleum jelly 100% given for two months. Oral hygiene instruction and healthy lifestyle counseling were given as non-pharmacological approaches. Oral hygiene instructions include brushing teeth and tongue twice daily, in the morning after breakfast and at night before bed. The patient was also instructed to consume small but frequent amounts of a minimum of 1.5 liters of water daily, eat a nutritionally balanced diet, get enough rest, and exercise regularly. Patients were also referred back to psychiatrists regarding complaints and management of the patient’s GAD condition, however, he did not follow our instructions. He felt his mouth was getting uncomfortable due to the psychiatric medication.

The periodic treatment visits in this patient showed encouraging results at each control visit. This article reports three follow-up visits: two weeks after the first visit (first follow-up), four weeks after the second visit (second follow-up), and three months and ten days after the third visit (third follow-up).

At the first follow-up visit (two weeks after the first visit), the patient still had a sore tongue, and the oral cavity and lips were still dry. The patient has used the medication as instructed, the mouthwash has run out, and the gel medication remains in stock. There were dry and exfoliated lips, frothy saliva, dental mirror sticks on the buccal mucosa and dorsum of the tongue, and depapilation surrounded by a white plaque on the dorsum of the tongue. CODS and salivary flow rate as the supporting examinations can only be carried out at this visit. The CODS assessment resulted in a score of three, which is mild xerostomia, and the unstimulated salivary flow rate was 0.28 mL/min, which is hyposalivation. The DASS-21 questionnaire obtained a score of 29 with an anxiety score of 13, described as extremely severe anxiety.

After four weeks, the patient visited for a second follow-up. The patient felt that the appearance of islands on the tongue remained but with a reduced level of pain, however, the dryness of the lips and mouth had improved. The patient has used mouthwash and topical medication as instructed. The objective examination revealed depapilation surrounded by a white plaque on the dorsum of the tongue. The CODS assessment resulted in a value of zero, which is normal, and the unstimulated salivary flow rate was 0.34 mL/min, which has reached normal values. The DASS-21 questionnaire obtained a score of 28 with an anxiety score of 10, described as severe anxiety.

After three months and ten days, the patient no longer complained of oral dryness, the CODS was decreased to zero, and the unstimulated salivary flow rate increased to more than 0.3 mL/min. There was an improvement in xerostomia, and the GT became asymptomatic, with a greater reduction of the DASS in this patient. The DASS questionnaire obtained a score of 7 for anxiety, described as moderate anxiety. Until this fourth visit, the patient had not visited a psychiatrist and did not continue taking antidepressant medication. DASS assessment in this patient showed favorable progress in reducing anxiety scores at every visit. Supplementary extra-oral and intra-oral documentation taken during the third follow-up visit (three months and ten days). Furthermore, we educated the patients to consume one tablet of multivitamins daily, maintain oral hygiene, maintain a healthy lifestyle, and consult a mental health expert about their psychological condition.