A 35-year-old nulliparous woman with a history of infertility presented to the outpatient clinic. She reported a three year history of cyclical dull pain at her umbilicus. The pain was associated with an umbilical nodule that bled during menstruation. Of note, the pain worsened during menstruation and was relieved by analgesics. The patient also reported dysmenorrhea, menorrhagia and dyspareunia. The patient had a copper IUD inserted 3 years prior and had been using Zinnia P (levonorgestrel and ethinylestradiol) for the last 3–4 months in order to try relieve the pain. Her past gynecological history was otherwise unremarkable and she had a regular menstrual cycle. There was no medical, surgical or social history of note.
On examination, her vital signs were stable. A hyperpigmented swelling (3 × 2 cm) at the umbilicus was noted on abdominal examination. The swelling was firm, immobile, non-tender, not reducible and was not tethered to underlying structures. An abdominal MRI revealed an ill-defined enhancing mass measuring 3 × 4 × 6 cm located along the right anterior abdominal wall and was connected to a sinus tract extending inferiorly to the suprapubic region but did not communicate with the peritoneal cavity, findings suggestive of endometriosis. The differential diagnosis was broad, including an umbilical hernia, granuloma, keloid scar, nodular malignant neoplasms and embryological abnormalities. Additionally, bilateral adnexal lesions were noted, they were hyperintense with focal hypointense areas and variable restrictions, the right side lesion measured 1.6 × 1.7 cm and left side lesion measured 2.0 × 0.8 cm, findings consistent with bilateral ovarian endometriomas.

The patient was scheduled for surgical local excision of the umbilical nodule. The specimen was sent for histopathological examination. The results revealed a normal epidermis with scattered endometrial glands and stroma within the dermis. Photomicroscopy highlighted the presence of endometrial stroma and subcutaneous fat tissue. This morphology is consistent with endometriosis. The patient's postoperative recovery was uneventful, and she was deemed fit for discharge on postoperative day 2. She received counseling regarding her future fertility and possibility of IVF, risk of recurrence and was scheduled for a follow-up visit in two weeks. She was commenced on Dienogest, Visanne and a combined oral contraceptive for the management of endometriosis. She has been monitored clinically every four weeks, and no symptoms or signs of local recurrence have been observed during the 8-month follow-up period. Of note, despite her condition remaining stable following management, she did not conceive over the course of the following year.