A 23-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital due to worsening exertional dyspnea. He had shown difficulty running at two years old and been diagnosed with EDMD with a LMNA (Lamin A/C) gene mutation at exon 1 from leucine 102 to proline. In accord with the typical EDMD manifestations, his elbows, knees, and Achilles tendons had become contracted at five years old, and his posterior cervical muscles became rigid; however, he continued to go about his usual daily life, albeit with mild exercise restriction. His father had also been diagnosed with EDMD and died suddenly in his 40s.

When the patient was 19 years old, he was admitted to a hospital for the first time due to congestive heart failure. Signs of RV failure, such as leg edema and liver congestion, were prominent, as indicated by the high blood bilirubin level (2.5 mg/dL). Echocardiography showed that the tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) was 5.7 mm, RV-s' 5.1 cm/s, and RV fractional area change (RVFAC) 19%, indicating marked RV dysfunction. High-dose diuretics in addition to carvedilol (10 mg/day) and enalapril (2.5 mg/day) were introduced. Despite those medications, he was readmitted due to worsening RV failure.

At 22 years old, an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) was implanted due to his non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (VT) and family history of sudden cardiac death. At this point, right heart catheterization (RHC) showed a pulmonary artery wedge pressure (PAWP) of 22 mmHg, right atrial pressure (RAP) of 17 mmHg, and right ventricular stroke work index (RVSWI) of 6.47, suggesting sustained severe RV dysfunction. As such, RV failure was likely to be the main pathological condition throughout his clinical course.

He had symptomatic heart failure with New York Heart Association class III under maximal doses of guideline-directed medication, and his electrocardiogram showed a regular sinus rhythm and left bundle branch block with wide QRS (150 ms). His LV ejection fraction (LVEF) was ≤35% on echocardiography. He was therefore considered to be indicated for CRT and was thus upgraded from ICD at 23 years old.

On admission, his blood pressure was 106/65 mmHg, and his heart rate was 60 beats/min with a regular rhythm. The physical examination revealed a third cardiac sound and pan-systolic murmur (Levine II/VI) at the apical region. Respiratory sounds were clear, whereas a distended jugular vein and lower-limb edema were evident. Chest X-ray indicated an increased cardiothoracic ratio (59%) with no pulmonary congestion.

The electrocardiogram showed all biventricular pacing due to CRT. Echocardiography revealed mild dilatation in both ventricles (LV end-diastolic diameter: 54 mm, RV diameter 50 mm) with a reduced LVEF (30%). The RV function was also diminished, as indicated by a decreased RVFAC (11%) and a low TAPSE (8 mm). Both enlarged ventricles caused leaflet tethering and coaptation loss that resulted in moderate mitral regurgitation and severe tricuspid regurgitation. The inferior vena cava was dilated to 23 mm with reduced respiratory fluctuation.

In the histological findings of posterior cervical muscles performed later at the autopsy, increased variation in muscle fiber size with moderate infiltration of connective tissue was observed, which was compatible with EDMD. Blood tests revealed brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) 196.1 pg/mL, total bilirubin 1.4 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 39 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 43 U/L, and γ-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP) 451 U/L, which suggested liver dysfunction. Although the coronary arteries were intact on angiography, an RV endocardial biopsy revealed cardiac hypertrophy with increased magnitudes of the nucleus and myocardium.

Electron microscopy demonstrated typical findings of EDMD: a reduced number of myofibrils, necrosis, and the formation of pseudo- or true inclusion. Since other secondary cardiomyopathies were ruled out by these clinical and histological findings, we diagnosed EDMD-related cardiomyopathy.


The patient’s clinical course. Right heart catheterization (RHC) on day 11 showed severe LV/RV dysfunction and congestion, and some inotropes were started. Although the patient’s hemodynamics improved, his renal function progressively worsened on day 38. Concerned about the worsening of his renal function due to the blood pressure decline, dopamine and mechanical support (IABP and CRRT) were initiated, and the patient’s renal function and hemodynamics improved. However, he developed acute liver failure along with severe RV failure indicated by the RHC data on day 68. Although veno-atrial ECMO was introduced on day 71, liver dysfunction and DIC caused systemic hemorrhagic diathesis, and the patient died of multiple organ failure on day 100. CRRT: continuous renal replacement therapy, DIC: disseminated intravascular coagulation, ECMO: extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, IABP: intra-aortic balloon pumping, LV: left ventricle, RV: right ventricle

RHC on day 11 showed that the cardiac index (CI) was 2.0 L/min/m2 (Fick method), and PAWP was 15 mmHg, indicating Forrester subset IV. The pulmonary artery pressure (PAP) was 29/12 (18) mmHg, and the RAP was 15 mmHg. The RVSWI, one of the hemodynamic parameters for the RV function, was calculated with the following formula: RVSWI (g·m/m2/beat)=[mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP)-mean right atrial pressure (mRAP)]×stroke volume index (SVI)×0.0136. His RVSWI was 1.36 g·m/m2/beat, indicating severe RV dysfunction. To compensate for the patient's low output syndrome and congestion, we started a continuous dobutamine (3.0 μg/kg/min) infusion and added milrinone (0.125 μg/kg/min) on day 16.


On day 32, the RHC data were improved, with an increased CI (2.48 L/min/m2), reduced PAWP (13 mmHg), and increased RVSWI (2.8 g·m/m2/beat). However, on day 38, the patient's renal function progressively worsened, possibly due to high central venous pressure (CVP) and hypotension because the blood pressure had been around 70/40 mmHg several days before the worsening of the renal function. To increase his blood pressure, a continuous dopamine (2.0 μg/kg/min) infusion was initiated; the milrinone was reduced, and enalapril and eplerenone were discontinued. In addition, intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP) and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) were temporarily needed. As the patient's hemodynamics improved in response to increase mixed venous oxygen saturation (SvO2, 70-80%) and CI (3.0-3.5 L/min/m2), the IABP and CRRT were withdrawn on day 45.

On day 68, however, the CI dropped to 1.25 L/min/m2 again, and the patient's lung congestion and fluid retention deteriorated; the PAWP was as high as the RAP, at 22 mmHg. Furthermore, the patient's serum bilirubin levels and liver transaminase dramatically increased, suggesting the development of liver failure. On day 71, VA ECMO through a femoral vein to the subclavian artery was initiated, but due to the systemic hemorrhagic diathesis accompanied by the disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), the patient died of multiple organ failure on day 100.

An autopsy performed under informed consent from the patient's family revealed efferent enlargement in both ventricles with a thin wall thickness. The histopathological examination revealed that mild to moderate myocardial hypertrophy and severe fibrosis were evident in the RV and LV. The weight of the liver was significantly increased to 2,298 g, and macroscopic liver congestion and cholestasis were detected. On microscopic images, the portal vein area was scarcely changed, and atrophy or loss of hepatocytes was observed around the central veins, indicating “shock liver.” In the lungs, extensive alveolar hemorrhaging was observed, and a collection of macrophages had ingested hemosiderin was noted, reflecting systemic hemorrhagic diathesis.