We present the case of a 38-year-old woman with no relevant personal history, a resident of the Autonomous City of Buenos Aires (CABA), who consulted for fever, generalized myalgia and arthralgia, ocular retrograde headache of intensity 5/10 and a single episode of non-dysenteric diarrhea of 6 days duration. Her husband had been hospitalized three weeks earlier for a nonspecific febrile syndrome associated with lymphopenia, thrombocytopenia and aseptic hepatitis with a discharge without a diagnosis of aetiology. On admission, she presented a pruritic erythematous maculo-papular rash on the dorsum of hands and feet with a predominance in metacarpo-phalangeal joints and generalized abdominal pain without signs of peritoneal irritation, with no other alterations. A laboratory examination was performed that showed lymphopenia (367/mm³) with the rest of the series normal, normal renal function and normal hepatic panel, with no findings of hepatitis A, hepatitis C or hantavirus. Serological tests for human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis A, hepatitis C and toxoplasmosis were negative. The chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound did not show pathological findings. Serological tests for viral infections (human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis A, hepatitis C and hantavirus) were negative. The patient presented a deepening of lymphopenia (170/mm³), severe thrombocytopenia (30,000/mm³), prolonged aPTT (50 sec) and elevated transaminases (AST: 162 U/L; ALT: 103 U/L) without hyperbilirubinemia. She also presented daily febrile episodes, metrorrhagia and the appearance of facial oedema with bilateral bi-palpebral oedema. She progressed acutely with somnolence, photophobia and fine tremors of the tongue, with localized petechiae in the axilla and inner arm. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain was performed, which showed no densitometric alterations of the parenchyma, and lumbar puncture with physical and chemical examination of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was negative. The CSF panel for meningitis/encephalitis was negative, and culture of the CSF was negative. She was empirically treated with 2 g/d intravenous ceftriaxone for 7 days with negative blood cultures and negative urine cultures. She subsequently developed acute abdominal pain in the left flank with a fall in the haemocrit, prolonged aPTT (50 sec) with an increase in the value of Factor V (202%) and hepatitis (AST: 2134 U/L; ALT: 699 U/L). A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast was performed, which showed a 60 mm thick haematoma extending from the hypochondrium to the left iliac fossa, limited to the left abdominal wall with leakage of contrast, without emergency surgical procedure. Serological samples were sent to the National Institute of Human Viral Diseases Dr. Julio I. Maiztegui for dengue (IgM DENV), leptospirosis (IgM-IgG by MAT) and hantavirus (IgM) with non-reactive results and RT-PCR of JUNV that was positive. Since clinical suspicion was after the eighth day of the onset of symptoms, she did not receive plasma from convalescent. She had a good evolution, achieving hospital discharge.
