A 58-year-old female presented to the Emergency Department with a 6-month history of worsening dyspnea. Over the preceding 10 days, her symptoms had acutely worsened, accompanied by mild chest discomfort and bilateral leg swelling. Her medical history included asthma and hypertension. On arrival, she was found to be hypoxemic with an oxygen saturation of 74%, which improved to 94% with 5 liters of supplemental oxygen. Physical examination revealed bilateral inspiratory crackles and pitting edema in the lower extremities.

Laboratory investigations demonstrated an elevated NT-proBNP (Brain natriuretic peptide) level of 2110 ng/mL (range <125 ng/mL) and normal troponin levels. Computed tomography (CT) chest angiography revealed mild bilateral patchy ground-glass infiltrates, an enlarged pulmonary artery (PA) trunk, and dilatation of the right atrium (RA) and right ventricle (RV) with no evidence of pulmonary embolism. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 75% to 80%, moderate RA and RV dilatation, systolic and diastolic flattening of the interventricular septum, reduced RV systolic function, and an estimated PA systolic pressure of 55 to 60 mm Hg. No intracardiac shunt was identified on color Doppler or agitated saline contrast injection.

The patient was initiated on intravenous furosemide. Right heart catheterization (RHC) performed the following day, while the patient was receiving 3 liters of supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula. The procedure confirmed PH, with a mean pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP) of 41 mm Hg and a high cardiac output of 8.46 L/min by the Fick method. A vasoreactivity test using the standard adenosine protocol confirmed that the patient was non-vasoreactive, indicating calcium channel blocker therapy would not be beneficial. Further investigations, including complete blood count, thyroid-stimulating hormone, HIV screening, antinuclear antibody screen, rheumatoid factor, and thiamine levels, were unremarkable. Imaging studies, including CT angiography of the chest and abdomen and Doppler ultrasound of the liver, ruled out systemic shunts, pulmonary arteriovenous malformations, and splenomegaly. At the time of discharge, the patient’s hypoxemia had resolved with diuresis.

Outpatient evaluation included a pulmonary function testing that showed mild obstructive ventilatory defect. The sleep study and ventilation-perfusion study were unremarkable. As RHC demonstrated a pulmonary artery occlusion pressure (wedge pressure) of 11 mm Hg (<15 mm Hg) and a high transpulmonary gradient of 26 mm Hg (>12 mm Hg), Group II PH due to left heart disease was excluded. She was prescribed a corticosteroid inhaler, and oral furosemide (20 mg daily) was continued. Pulmonary hypertension-specific therapy was not initiated, given her PH was categorized as group III, attributed to obstructive lung disease. During follow-up appointments, the patient reported an initial improvement in her perceived dyspnea, which later stabilized. She consistently remained in the intermediate-low risk category according to the 4-strata risk assessment tool for PH follow-up.

Two years later, she returned with worsening dyspnea and leg swelling after discontinuing furosemide. Repeat CT pulmonary angiography revealed findings similar to her initial imaging but additionally identified an anomalous left pulmonary vein draining into the left brachiocephalic trunk. A retrospective review of her initial CT confirmed the missed anomaly. The TTE showed LVEF of 60%, moderate RA and RV dilation, reduced RV systolic function, and an estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 50 to 55 mm Hg. In contrast to previous RHC, the shunt evaluation this time demonstrated a 6% step-up in oxygen saturation between the superior vena cava (SVC) and RA, confirming a left-to-right shunt. This discrepancy was due to the SVC saturation measurement being appropriately obtained above the drainage of the left brachiocephalic trunk, now guided by the knowledge of PAPVR from the CT findings. The shunt fraction (Qp/Qs) was calculated to be 1.52. Consequently, her PH was reclassified as group I due to adult congenital heart disease.

The patient received treatment with intravenous diuretics. Due to her mild PH and intermediate-low risk classification based on the 4-strata risk assessment tool (WHO-FC III, NT-proBNP 81 pg/mL, and a 6-min walk distance of 460 m), PH-specific therapy was not advised. She declined additional evaluations, including cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and referral to an adult congenital heart disease center, choosing instead to continue with close outpatient monitoring.