A 71-year-old man hospitalized at another hospital for heart failure with a history of heart failure admission several times was transferred to our hospital for the further evaluation and treatment of refractory heart failure. Although he was suspected of having cardiac amyloidosis in the previous hospital, a diagnosis was not made.

At admission to our hospital, he received oral medications including many types of diuretics, but he still had dyspnea with an NYHA functional class IV. His blood pressure was 106/70 mmHg, and the third heart sound was audible at the apex. Congested jugular veins were observed, but no peripheral edema was found. Chest X-ray showed a high cardiothoracic ratio of 61% with bilateral pleural effusion. Electrocardiographic findings were a heart rate of 65/min with atrial fibrillation, intraventricular conduction delay and left-axis deviation. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed diffuse left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy with increased wall thickness of 12 mm, mild hypokinetic LV wall motion (ejection fraction=43%), increased right ventricular (RV) wall thickness of 7 mm with a reduced RV systolic function, and biatrial dilatation. Speckle-tracking echocardiography showed an ‘apical sparing’ pattern of longitudinal strain. He had abnormal laboratory test results showing a high brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level (1,186 pg/mL) and elevated high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T level (0.057 ng/mL). 99mTechnetium pyrophosphate (99mTc-PYP) scintigraphy revealed a grade 3 cardiac uptake on SPECT/CT fusion imaging. Bence-Jones protein was not detectable, and the ratio of free light chain κ/λ was normal. Later, we performed an endomyocardial biopsy and genetic analysis, and we finally made a diagnosis of ATTRwt.

With regard to the management of heart failure, we tried to control his heart failure with oxygen therapy and medical management including intravenous injection of furosemide, but he still had dyspnea with persistent general fatigue, and his level of bilirubin increased. Right-heart catheterization (RHC) showed a high pulmonary artery wedge pressure and pulmonary hypertension and a low cardiac index of 1.37 L/min/m2 (thermodilution) with a right atrial mean pressure of 8 mmHg.

Based on these results, we started dobutamine infusion at 2 μg/kg/min for his low cardiac output. His symptoms improved significantly with improvement of creatinine and bilirubin levels. Six days later, we administered pimobendan in order to taper off the dobutamine infusion. During the treatment course, he was basically stable except for temporary deterioration of heart failure due to influenza. After one month of medical therapy and cardiac rehabilitation while admitted, dobutamine infusion was terminated, and RHC showed a dramatic improvement in his hemodynamic status. Since his hospital discharge, his condition has remained stable without deterioration of heart failure or arrhythmias for six months.