An 87-year-old Persian male patient, previously farmer, who was bedridden because of a hip fracture since 2 years ago, was admitted to Shahid Mohammadi hospital, a tertiary care center in the south of Iran, due to loss of consciousness (LOC), respiratory distress, tachypnea, and oliguria.

He had a history of 10 days of hospitalization in another hospital due to fever and cough. In that center, a severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test was performed for the patient which was negative, however, based on ground glass opacity on his chest computed tomography (CT) scan and being on the outbreak of COVID-19, he fulfilled case definition of COVID-19; therefore, he received protocol’s treatment; remdesivir 200 mg stat and 100 mg daily for 5 days plus dexamethasone 6 mg daily intravenously. After relative recovery, he was discharged. The patient had no history of any chronic disease and did not receive any medications.

He had a history of weakness, fatigue, and loss of appetite which he received serum therapy in an outpatient clinic.

In our center, he was ill and toxic. His Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was seven.

Physical examination revealed heart rate = 107 beats per minute, blood pressure = 100/60 mmHg, temperature = 36.7 °C, saturation = 85% in room air, coarse crackle in lung auscultation, and bilateral pitting edema in his feet. There were no other findings in his physical examination. The patient was in stupor state without eye or verbal contact. He was only responsive to painful stimulus. Pupils were reactive to light and gag reflex was absent. Plantar reflex was normal. The patient had a suprapubic catheter because of benign prostatic hyperplasia for therapeutic purposes since 2 months before admission.

We asked for blood tests and CT scans for the patient. Blood tests showed WBC of 4.1 × 109 (neutrophils 86%, lymphocytes 9.6%), anemia (RBC = 4.34 cells/mcL, hemoglobin level = 8.8 g/dL, hematocrit = 28.8%, hypochromia ++, schistocyte +), thrombocytopenia (platelet = 110,000/mcL), abnormal electrolytes level (sodium = 158 mmol/L, potassium = 3 mmol/L, phosphorus = 5.4 mg/dL, calcium = 7.2 mg/dL), urea of 140 mmol/L, lactate dehydrogenase of 602 U/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 20 mm/h, C-reactive protein of 87.41 mg/L, creatinine of 2 mg/dL and serum albumin of 1.6 g/dL and blood sugar of 121 mg/dL.

Brain CT scan was performed, as the patient had LOC, which revealed senile brain atrophy without any abnormal findings.

His chest CT scan showed air trapping in the anterior aspect of both lung fields, right upper lobe (RUL) involvement and diffuse peribronchial cuffing, diffuse patchy ground glass opacity (GGO), and consolidation that some of them were subpleural and some of them showed crazy paving appearance because of adding interlobular septal thickening that they could be due to viral infection. Moreover, diffuse bilateral peribronchial thickening was seen.

Blood cultures were taken from two different sites which revealed no growth after 48 hours.

During his hospitalization, nasal respiratory viral panel multiplex RT-PCR was taken and revealed co-infection of influenza virus and RSV; therefore sepsis and pneumonia treatment was initiated for the patient including meropenem 1gr infused over 3 hours once a day, vancomycin 1 gr every 72 hours intravenously and oseltamivir 75 mg every 12 hours orally. He also received Albumin twice a day because of decreased level of albumin. Intravenous infusion of 5% dextrose water and half saline was administered according to standard protocols to maintain hydration and balance hypernatremia in the patient.

On the 7th day of his hospitalization the patient had become anuric. Creatinine and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level increased (creatinine: 4 mg/dL, BUN: 122 mg/dL), venous blood gas test revealed a metabolic acidosis (PH: 7.11, pCO2: 18.2, HCO3: 8.6) which was resistant to treatment. An urgent surgery consultation was requested for central venous catheter placement for performing dialysis but in the meantime, his blood pressure (BP) dropped and norepinephrine drip was infused. Because of low BP, the patient could not tolerate dialysis. Due to septic shock, he had cardiopulmonary arrest at night, and regardless of intubation and 45 minutes of cardiopulmonary resuscitation, he died.