A 70-year-old white man was treated for severe symptomatic aortic regurgitation due to healed endocarditis using TAVI from the apical approach. TAVI was performed at that time because he was considered a high-risk surgical patient due to secondary pulmonary hypertension, severely impaired left ventricular function with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20%, chronic renal failure, and a logistic EuroSCORE I of 24.36%. At the time he was treated by diuretics (torasemide 20 mg once a day), an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor (ramipril 5 mg once a day), a ß-blocker (bisoprolol 2.5 mg twice a day), and an aldosterone antagonist (12.5 mg once a day). On admission he had cardiac decompensation and resulting dyspnea (temperature 36.7 °C, pulse 99/minute, blood pressure 109/48 mmHg) but his emotional status and neurological constitution were good. The laboratory results were unremarkable except for: a mild increase in liver enzymes, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 59 U/l and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 67 U/l; a known chronic renal insufficiency (creatinine 2.1 mg/dl); and a mild decrease in hemoglobin (Hb) 10.7 g/dl. No urine analysis was done. Due to normal C-reactive protein and normal count of leukocytes no microbiological examination was performed. After interdisciplinary discussion of the case (including a normal coronary angiography that was performed a few days before) and cardiac recompensation, he was initially treated with an implantation of a JenaValve 27 mm self-expandable valve. Despite a good result after implantation with the JenaValve and minimal transvalvular central insufficiency, he presented recurrent cardiac decompensation due to his severely impaired LVEF. His case was discussed again at an interdisciplinary meeting: 4 weeks after TAVI he underwent the implantation of a LVAD system (Thoratec® HeartMate II). His postoperative course was uneventful. He remained asymptomatic for 1 year until the LVAD system showed recurrent significant high flow alarms. Echocardiography examinations during this year showed a continuous increase in transvalvular central insufficiency to the level of a severe regurgitation without any sign for structural alteration of the leaflets of the JenaValve prosthesis. Treatment options were discussed and a new TAVI as valve-in-valve was decided.

The procedure was performed under general anesthesia using a CoreValve Evolut R 29 mm prosthesis. The prosthesis was implanted without prior valvuloplasty. The flow rate of LVAD was reduced to minimum and pacing with a frequency of 140 beats/minute was applied during placement of the valve prosthesis. Positioning was done with great care using fluoroscopic and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) guidance with the aim of having the ventricular strut end of the CoreValve Evolut R prosthesis between the ventricular end and the “cusp feelers” of the JenaValve prosthesis. This position was obtained because of JenaValve structure and individual computed tomography analysis of our patient which had shown the ventricular edge of the JenaValve well positioned in left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT). The first positioning was successful with no need for repositioning. After the last fluoroscopic control the CoreValve Evolut R was released successfully in the planned position. Slow rapid pacing was stopped and the LVAD flow was increased and required good hemodynamic under normal LVAD flow. His postoperative course was uneventful and he has shown a very good recovery. A second TEE did not show any change regarding the performance of the valve-in-valve and only marginal residual insufficiency. At 12-month follow-up our patient had no complaints and had a satisfactory capacity in daily life. Echocardiography showed no relevant aortic regurgitation and an increase of LVEF to 33%. At that time the 6-minute walk test was significantly increased to 381 m (compared to 148 m on admission).