A 29-year-old woman, Para 1, with abnormal vaginal bleeding of one-month duration presented to the gynecology outpatient department of a level 2 hospital. She was HIV positive, commenced on antiretroviral treatment following diagnosis, but had defaulted the antiretroviral treatment for one month when she became ill with vaginal bleeding, resulting in virological and immunological failures (viral load 37400 copies/mL and CD4 count 26 cells/μL). Of note, it was unclear when the patient first started showing HIV symptoms. However, she was diagnosed with HIV about a year prior to presentation. Physical examination revealed a large mass on the cervix measuring 8 × 8 cm extending to the parametrium and to the pelvic side walls bilaterally. There was bleeding on contact and foul-smelling vaginal discharge. Ultrasonography detected a bulky cervix and bilateral hydronephrosis. The patient was clinically diagnosed with cervical malignancy stage 3B. She was recommenced on antiretroviral therapy with a treatment change from TLD (Tenofovir-Lamivudine-Dolutegravir combination) to a preferable renal friendly regimen (Lamivudine-Abacavir-Dolutegravir combination). A punch biopsy of the cervix was performed, and the histopathological report revealed the diagnosis of an extra-nodal BL. The immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization confirmed the diagnosis, with CD20, CD75a, CD10, PAX5 and Bcl-6 positive. In addition, the CD44 and c-Myc were positive, with the EBER-ISH demonstrating focal positivity. The Ki67 demonstrated a proliferation index of almost 100% and PAX5 moderately positive BCL6. She had white cell count of 2.67 x109/L, haemoglobin of 5.7g/dl and platelet count of 71 × 109/L. Results of other investigations were serum creatinine 187 mmol/L, urea 11.1 mmol/l, albumin 21 g/l, aspartate transaminase 41 U/l and alkaline phosphatase 100 U/l.

Following histological confirmation of the diagnosis and review at an oncology multidisciplinary meeting, she spent 43 days waiting to start treatment at oncology unit. The delay was due to long waiting list. This delay exceeded the 48 hours waiting period during which oncological treatment for BL should commence following diagnosis. The treatment plan was chemo-radiation therapy, and the patient gave written informed consent for the case to be published. However, she demised in the gynaecological ward on the 43rd day while waiting to start the treatment. During the 43 days, further imaging could not be performed due to poor functionality of the available CT and MRI machines. In addition to antiretroviral therapy, the patient received other supportive care such as blood transfusion and analgesia. Again, the number of days between the diagnosis of the BL and her death was 43 days. Histopathological postmortem was not performed as the diagnoses (BL and retroviral disease) were known. We reckon that the main primary cause of death is challenging to assign because of the multiple principal diagnoses. Because BL has rapid progression and high mortality rate in persons living with HIV particularly with high viral load, the attending physician certifying the death assigned BL as the most likely cause of death. However, the secondary cause of death was multiple organ failure (renal and haematological inclusive).