This is a case of a 42-year-old female from Kenya who immigrated to Australia in 2011. She presented with a 2-year history of intermittent painful eye redness associated with blurring of vision of both eyes. Ocular symptoms began soon after childbirth. There were no associated systemic symptoms. Hypertension and hypothyroidism were the only known comorbidities and were well-controlled.

On examination, she presented with a best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 6/18 and 6/30 on the right and left eyes, respectively. Conjunctival hyperaemia, large keratic precipitates, posterior synechiae, poorly dilating pupil, anterior subcapsular cataract and +2 anterior chamber (AC) cells and flare were noted on both eyes. No iris atrophy and iris transillumination defects were seen. Intraocular pressures (IOP) were within normal limits. Fundus examinations showed no signs of vitritis, retinitis, and vasculitis; however, dull foveal reflexes were noted on both eyes. Macular optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed bilateral cystoid macular oedema (CMO).

Dexamethasone 0.1% eye drop 6 times a day and atropine 1.0% eye drop 3 times a day to both eyes were initiated at initial visit. A week later, CMOs were still present in both eyes, which led to a decision to perform bilateral subtenon injections of 16 mg triamcinolone.

Two weeks post-subtenon injections, the BCVA improved to 6/12 on the right eye and 6/9 on the left eye. In the anterior chamber of both eyes, only 0.5 cells with resolution of flare and KPs were noted. On macular OCT, the CMO in the right eye partially resolved while it completely resolved in the left eye. IOP measured at 32 mmHg and 34 mmHg on the right and left eye, respectively, were attributed as a steroid response, which were treated with topical anti-glaucomatous medication. The patient was monitored every 2 weeks.

Subsequent visits showed further improvements. BCVA was 6/9 on both eyes and IOP of both eyes were back to normal range. No AC cells were appreciated in both eyes. However, the patient still presented with poorly dilating pupils due to posterior synechiae, and an anterior subcapsular cataract in both eyes. Macular OCT showed complete resolution of CMO in both eyes.

The patient tested positive for serum HSV IgM, which resulted in initiation of Valacyclovir 1 g three times a day. Autoimmune and other infectious aetiologies were excluded. HSV DNA were not detected on aqueous humour PCR analyses of both eyes.

On the last visit, there were no recurrence of eye redness, pain and signs of active intraocular inflammation. Although the patient reported cloudy blurring of vision, this was attributable to the cataract formation in both eyes. Dexamethasone 0.1% eye drop was reduced to 4 times a day and atropine 1.0% eye drop to once at night, and oral valacyclovir 1 g three times a day was continued.