A 21-year-old 25 week G3P1011 female with no PMH presented to the Emergency Department (ED) after sustaining a GSW wound to her left buttock while sitting in a car. On arrival, the patient was hemodynamically stable, with vitals within normal limits. Primary and secondary surveys were significant for mild distress, lower abdominal pain, a gravid uterus, and a GSW just superior to the left greater trochanter with no exit wound. There were no signs of vaginal or rectal bleeding during evaluation. Obstetrics and gynecology (Ob/Gyn) subsequently performed a bedside ultrasound that was negative for fetal heart tones. Abdominal and pelvic x-rays demonstrated a trans-pelvic bullet trajectory with the bullet lodged in the anterior abdominal wall. The patient was hemodynamically stable, and underwent Computed Tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis which demonstrated an acute comminuted fracture of the left iliac bone, passage of a bullet through the fetal cranium terminating near the placenta, a moderate quantity of free fluid in the pelvis suggestive of peritoneal blood product with concern for active extravasation from the uterus, and no evidence of retroperitoneal fluid collection.

Management
After imaging the patient was taken immediately to the operating room for emergent exploration of maternal injuries with OB/Gyn on standby to evaluate the cause of fetal demise. A midline laparotomy was performed to access the abdominal cavity, with no blood visible upon entry. The liver, spleen, stomach, and pancreas were inspected with no noted injuries. The bowel was run from the ligament of Treitz to the terminal ileum with no signs of injury to the mesentery or bowel. The colon was examined from the cecum to the peritoneal reflection of the rectum, and no injuries were noted. A large left retroperitoneal hematoma at the left lower cervico-uterine junction was noted and explored. The ureter was identified without injury. The left iliac artery and vein were inspected from the common iliac past the bifurcation and GSW in the pelvis, with both structures without injury. The bullet traversed the uterus, with two perforations noted in the left anterior and mid posterior uterus. Given that the bullet had traversed the full layer of the myometrium, OB/Gyn determined that surgical intervention by their team was warranted.

They began by ligating the hypogastric artery and using vessel loops to control the bilateral internal iliac arteries and minimize intraoperative bleeding, with subsequent delivery of the fetus and placenta. The fetus had sustained a GSW to the right temporal and left occipital regions, and was declared deceased upon delivery. Uterine injuries from bullet fragments were repaired with 0-vicryl. The OB/Gyn team performed a hysterotomy repair with 1–0 vicryl suture in a continuous locked fashion. The bilateral ovaries and fallopian tubes were inspected and appeared unremarkable. A non-expanding left sided hematoma was visualized in the left broad ligament. There was also some bleeding from the area around the uterine artery and vein in the left lower pelvis. The left uterine artery was ligated with a 2–0 vicryl suture. The abdomen was then examined and irrigated. The Fascia was closed with 1–0 PDS suture in a continuous fashion, and skin was closed with staples. Estimated blood loss (EBL) was 650 ml at the conclusion of the case.

Follow up
The patient followed up with Trauma Surgery on November 15, 2023. She stated that she was doing well, tolerating her diet, and that her pain was well controlled. Staples were removed from her midline incision and the patient was sent home with no further follow up appointments. Per patient preference, she preferred to follow up with her primary OB/Gyn at an outside facility.