A male newborn (35w + 5) presented to the emergency department on his sixth day of life for progressive failure to thrive associated with a 100-g weight loss. The mother reported having a fever, cough, and sore throat the day prior to delivery. At birth, the Apgar Scores were 9, 9, and 10 at 1, 5, and 10 min, respectively. Other than a late preterm delivery, there were no other abnormalities detected. The mother and newborn were discharged with a plan to return for follow-up in three days. At follow-up, the newborn was in good condition but subsequently developed a failure to thrive in the following days.

On admission, the baby was mildly febrile to 37.5 °C and he exhibited generalized hypotonia with hypo-reactivity to external stimuli. The patient had multiple apneic episodes resulting in oxygen desaturations; an arterial blood gas drawn revealed a pH of 7.21, consistent with metabolic acidosis. As neither viral nor active bacterial infections could be excluded, broad-spectrum antibiotics were initiated, and blood cultures were obtained. A markedly saturation to 75% persisted, requiring transfer to the pediatric intensive care unit where the patient was placed into a neonatal incubator with escalation of oxygen therapy. Laboratory studies revealed disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC), and fresh frozen plasma and platelets were transfused. The patient also received vitamin K and continued with broad-spectrum antibiotics. The following day, the patient developed diffuse generalized jaundice and became oliguric with labs revealing hepatocellular injury (elevation in aspartate aminotransferase [AST] and alanine aminotransferase [ALT]), and thrombocytopenia to <15,000. Despite aggressive treatment, the metabolic acidosis persisted. Polymerase chain reaction returned positive for enterovirus, specifically CVB3 VP1 gene, on the third day.

There was a progressive deterioration of hepatic and renal function in the following days despite antibiotics, immunoglobulin therapy, and intensive care level support. Pleconaril, an antiviral drug from a capsid inhibitor class, was also added to the therapeutic regimen. The baby developed tonic-clonic contractions at the upper and lower extremities and massive pulmonary, hepatic, and gastric bleeding. Four days into the hospital course, the patient experienced a cardiac arrest from which there was no return of spontaneous circulation despite resuscitative measures. Ultimately, the cause of death was sepsis due to Coxsackievirus B3 infection associated with multiorgan failure.

An autopsy was requested. The external examination did not show any abnormalities. The autopsy revealed multiple hemorrhagic areas in the lungs and liver, subepicardial and kidney petechiae, and gastric hemorrhage. Histology confirmed diffuse lung interalveolar hemorrhage, intraparenchymal liver hemorrhage, heart interstitial hemorrhage, and gastric mucosal focal hemorrhage.