67-year-old woman with a history of long-term diabetes mellitus, with poor adherence to treatment and glycemic control, who denied that she suffered from any other disease and had no surgical history. Her seven-day-old condition began with abdominal cramps, which began in the mid-abdomen and after 12 hours became generalized, accompanied by progressive abdominal distension, nausea and vomiting of bile, difficulty in passing gas and no bowel movements; the woman went to the emergency room two days after the onset of the symptoms. During her initial assessment at the physical examination, a distended abdomen was found, with increased peristasis, without signs of peritoneal irritation. Initial laboratory studies showed no alterations: Hb 14.9 g/dL, leukocytes 8.4 x 103 mm3, neutrophils 73%, platelets 352.0 x 103 mm3, albumin 4.2 g/dL, glucose 310 mg/dL, lipase 52 U/L. The patient was given an abdominal X-ray in which air-hydrogen levels were observed without any other relevant data, so a nasogastric tube was placed with a 300 ml output of bile content and admission was decided for medical management based on intestinal rest and management of solutions.

During her stay in the surgery floor, the patient had a stationary clinical picture, which after two days of admission presented an unfavorable evolution, characterized by an increase in the number of vomiting, which was up to five per day despite the use of nasogastric tube, which had a reported 24-hour expense of 120 ml, so the repositioning of this was decided and the patient underwent an abdominal tomography, where the dilatation of loops of small intestine was observed. At that time the patient did not present data of peritoneal irritation or data of systemic inflammatory response, so the medical management was continued.

After her fifth day of medical management, the patient continued with emesis (three per day) of gastobiliary content, with nasogastric tube with average 24 hour expenditure of 100 ml. On physical examination with distended abdomen, the patient presented generalized deep palpation pain, without data of peritoneal irritation or data of systemic inflammatory response syndrome. The tomography was reevaluated and dilatation of loops of small intestine was observed, as well as a transition zone at the level of the terminal ileum without being able to identify the cause of this; therefore, as it was a mechanical obstruction in an evident transition zone, it was decided to carry out surgical management.

During the surgical procedure, a laparotomy was performed and a 5 x 7 cm lithiasis was found impacted at the level of the ileocecal valve. An enterotomy was performed 60 cm from the ileocecal valve and the lithiasis was removed. Subsequently, the enterotomy was closed and the gallbladder was explored, where a cholecysto-duodenal fistula was documented, which was not operated on. The surgical procedure was concluded without complications or incidents.

The patient was kept on a bowel rest for three days and started oral intake of liquids with subsequent progression to soft diet with adequate tolerance, as well as adequate gas passage and with present evacuations. She was discharged on the fifth day of the postoperative period without complications or incidents.

The patient is currently being monitored by the Outpatient Department, with adequate tolerance to the oral route, without alterations in the intestinal evacuation pattern and without clinical or laboratory manifestations of pathology at the level of the biliary tract.
