A 33-year-old previously healthy woman presented in December 2017 with progressive dyspnoea, high fever, night sweats and weight loss. After a month of evolution, she was admitted to a general hospital with frank respiratory failure and septic shock with diffuse alveolar infiltrates, jaundice, haemoptysis and petechiae in the lower limbs. She was intubated and required haemodynamic support. A mild systolic mitral murmur was identified on precordial auscultation. There was marked leukocytosis with left shift, plateletopenia, hepatic and renal dysfunction associated with subnephrotic proteinuria and consumption of complement. The result of antinuclear antibodies was 1/80, despite normal anti-double strand DNA, anti-SM and anti-PR3 levels. After administration of ceftriaxone, she improved clinically. Yellow fever, dengue, chikungunya, leptospirosis, HIV and viral hepatitis were ruled out. The blood cultures were positive for Haemophilus spp. in all six samples collected. The transthoracic echocardiogram (ETT) demonstrated a diffuse, amorphous, echogenic mass with irregular surface and some mobile elements that involved both leaflets of the mitral valve, measuring 20x17 mm in the anterior leaflet and 19 mm in its greatest diameter in the posterior leaflet, resulting in severe flail mitral regurgitation and perforation. The magnetic resonance imaging showed small splenic abscesses, treated conservatively. A non-complicated fungal aneurysm of the left middle cerebral artery was treated by percutaneous embolisation. Thirty days after admission, she underwent mitral valve replacement with a size 29 mm Sorin® biological valve prosthesis and after extensive resection of the tumour. Moderate aortic regurgitation due to fibro-intervalvular mitro-aortic fibrosis and non-coronary cusp retraction was treated conservatively. The pathological examination confirmed the presence of an infected mitral valve myxoma. The patient completed 28 days of ceftriaxone and gentamicin, and was discharged asymptomatically. After one year of follow-up, there was no evidence of recurrence and only mild aortic regurgitation was observed. Infected myxomas present a higher risk of embolic events, although the clinical manifestations are indistinguishable from non-infected tumours.2 The present case appears to be the sixth reported case of infected mitral valve myxoma in the literature, fulfilling definitive criteria for diagnosis, and the third caused by a HACEK group microorganism.3 - 8 Of the 64 published mitral valve myxomas from 2006 to 2012, the symptoms were cardiovascular in 36.7%; 9.5 to 21.6% of the mitral valve myxomas underwent valve replacement and the time from diagnosis to surgery ranged from a few hours to 42 days.2 , 9 The mortality rate was reported as 2.6 to 3% and 5.1 to 21%.2 , 10 In the present series, the majority of patients presented symptomatic heart failure, underwent mitral valve replacement and all had good results in the follow-up.
