46-year-old Haitian male, residing in Chile for one year. In Haiti he was a livestock farmer. He presented a one-and-a-half-year history of a lesion that began as a papule on the anterior aspect of the right leg, which increased in size progressively. Initially asymptomatic, three months prior to the consultation he developed pruritus, pain, superficial ulceration and yellowish discharge. On physical examination, the patient was found to be of phototype V, with 1 x 1 cm, 2 x 2 cm and 3 x 2 cm warty plaques on the anterior aspect of the right leg. A dermatoscopy revealed a hyperkeratotic mass with ulcerated center, with reddish-black dots and congested hemorrhagic vessels. The general laboratory was normal; VDRL, HIV and PPD were non-reactive. Tissue samples were taken by a punch biopsy, including epidermis, dermis and subcutaneous tissue, and stained with Gram, routine bacteriological culture and anaerobic culture, which were negative. Bacilloscopy and Koch culture of the same tissue were also negative. The histopathological study was performed with hematoxylin and eosin stain, and showed a pseudoepitheliomatous epidermis with irregular hyperplasia, a dermis with abundant mixed inflammatory infiltrate with suppurative foci and giant cells of the foreign body type, some of which contained round cells with a thick brown wall, compatible with muriform cells; these cells were more evident when evaluated with PAS stain. Fungal culture was performed on Sabouraud dextrose agar at 25°C, which showed, after 15 days of incubation, the growth of black or dematiaceous, elevated, well-defined, velvety colonies. Direct microscopic examination with 20% KOH showed long, branched, sometimes tortuous, hyphae, and short chains of acropetal conidia, suggestive of Fonsecaea spp. Itraconazole was administered at 100 mg every 12 h for six months, in association with physical measures, which consisted of cryotherapy (liquid nitrogen) application to hypertrophic areas every six to eight weeks. Due to local complications, such as erosion or ulceration of the lesions, frequent healing was performed with application of mupirocin ointment topically for signs of bacterial superinfection.

The patient had a favorable evolution, with regression of the lesions and no evidence of relapses to date, remaining with a mild local hypopigmentation, expected in areas of treatment with cryotherapy.
