A 52-year-old man was admitted to a hospital because of sudden-onset palpitation and general fatigue. Electrocardiography revealed ventricular tachycardia with a heart rate of 180 beats/min. His heart rhythm returned to a sinus rhythm after prompt cardioversion and he was then referred to our institution for further investigation. His past medical history included RV outflow tract reconstruction using a homograft and closure of a ventricular septal defect for TOF, which was performed 47 years previously. However, he was lost to follow-up thereafter. Upon referral to our institution, his blood pressure was 116/70 mmHg, heart rate 80 beats/min, and oxygen saturation of 99% (on room air). On inspection of the jugular venous pulsation, a prominent a wave and deep y descent were clearly observed, which were consistent with the increased RV filling pressure and compensated augmentation of RA contraction. Of note, auscultation revealed a harsh diastolic regurgitant murmur in the third left intercostal space, widely split first heart sound (S1), and a single second heart sound (S2), indicating a severely dilated RV due to free PR and the presence of a non-functioning pulmonary valve. Moreover, a third heart sound (S3) was auscultated at the fourth parasternal border, which was consistent with a right-sided S3. The electrocardiogram revealed complete right bundle branch block, with a QRS duration of 200 ms. Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly with dilation of the bilateral pulmonary arteries. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed complete regression of the pulmonary valve, which resulted in free PR and a prominent RV dilation. Volumetric assessment of the RV was performed using cardiac MRI, which revealed an RV end-diastolic volume of 428 ml (RV end-diastolic volume index of 240 ml/m2), RV ejection fraction of 36%, and regurgitant fraction of PR of 74%. Moreover, multi-detector row CT clearly showed complete regression of the pulmonary valve of the homograft.

The patient underwent catheter examination for further investigation of his hemodynamic state. His RA pressure waveform was particularly notable, consisting of a prominent a wave and deep y descent, which were coincident with the fourth heart sound (S4) and S3 on a phonocardiogram, respectively. Moreover, pulmonary arterial end-diastolic pressure and RV end-diastolic pressure were revealed to be almost identical due to the free PR. Thus the clinical assessment of the “heart sound quintet”, including a harsh diastolic regurgitant murmur, widely split S1, single S2, and the presence of right-sided S3 and S4, was confirmed using multimodal anatomical and hemodynamic evaluation as severe right-sided heart failure concomitant with a significantly dilated RV because of complete regression of the pulmonary valve and resultant free PR.

After pulmonary valve replacement, the “heart sound quintet” had completely resolved.