We report a rare case of euthyroid unilateral GO with early massive mono-muscular fibrosis in a 50-year-old male patient. The patient had a family history of cardiovascular disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and myasthenia gravis but no family or personal history of thyroid autoimmune disease. The patient was a smoker of 20 cigarettes a day from the age of 30 and presented dyslipidemia for several years. Since June 2020, he experienced rapid and progressive swelling of the soft tissues in the right orbit, moderate pain during ocular globe movements, redness of eyelids and diplopia. Visual acuity was normal in both eyes. In October 2020, the patient was evaluated in our outpatient clinic. Moderate right orbit active inflammation was confirmed by Clinical Activity Score 3/7 (CAS),3 and eyelid edema was moderate. The eyelid aperture was 14 mm in the right orbit and 10 mm in the left orbit, and the Hertel measurements were 24 mm and 18 mm in the right and left orbits, respectively. In addition, the patient presented a severe reduction in elevation, persistent depression in the primary position of the right ocular globe and constant diplopia, as scored according to the Gorman score.4 The quality of life evaluated by Graves’ Ophthalmopathy quality of life questionnaire (GO-QOL)5 was reduced in both appearance and functional subscales. However, the functional subscale was reduced with respect to the appearance subscale, as the values were 12.5 and 50, respectively (considering 0 = worse condition and 100 = the best health state). Visual acuity was normal, and color vision by Ishihara tables was 16/17 and 17/17 in the right and left eyes, respectively. Evaluation of extraocular muscles by computer tomography (CT) scan (contiguous 1.25 mm thick slices, 200 mA, 120 kV, pitch 0.5) showed severe enlargement of the lower rectal body to the edge of the insertion tendon in the right orbit. Remarkably, the morphology of the other extraocular muscles in both orbits was normal. The muscle orbit area ratio measured in the right eyes was 0.25 Autocad units (in-house method; vn ≤ 0.20±0.03).6 Thyroid function was normal with a slight increase in TSH-R-Ab: 1.75 mU/l (n.v. < 1.5 mU/l). The amplitude of the p100 wave was slightly reduced by electrophysiology evaluation in the right eye. A thyroid ultrasound scan of the thyroid gland showed a thyroiditis pattern. Biochemical and clinical evaluations were negative for hematological or other systemic diseases. Routine clinical tests were normal, but the total cholesterol levels that were 220 mg/dl, triglyceride levels were 297 mg/dl, and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL) levels were 38 mg/dl.

The patient was treated by intravenous corticosteroid pulse therapy (Solumedrol; Pfizer, Karlsruhe, Germany) with a cumulative dose of 4500 mg over 12 weeks, leading to the resolution of inflammatory signs and symptoms. However, GO-QOL, Hertel measurements and diplopia remained unchanged; in contrast, electrophysiology evaluation and visual acuity worsened. Two-wall orbital surgical decompression plus parenteral glucocorticoids was chosen as the second-line treatment for GO. In that context, a biopsy of the right inferior rectus muscle revealed massive fibrosis with adipose tissue infiltration of this extraocular muscle.