A 31-year-old woman with no comorbidities, with a history of cesarean section with spinal anesthesia, who 15 days after the procedure began with a stabbing, intense, gradual onset, headache without irradiation or accompaniments, without improvement with the administration of analgesics. After five weeks, the patient presented blurred vision and dysarthria, so she went to the emergency department and was admitted with a diagnosis of probable meningitis. A study of cerebrospinal fluid was reported with pleocytosis at the expense of polymorphonuclear cells (290 cells with 69% neutrophils and 31% monocytes), with hypoglycorraquia (glucose 30 mg/dL) and proteins of 100 mg/dL. Gram staining, BAAR and Chinese ink were performed, all with negative results, as well as cultures for bacteria without development. Empirical treatment was initiated with vancomycin, ceftriaxone, ampicillin and fluconazole for 21 days; however, the evolution was torpid. It was decided to extend the study with a polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of cerebrospinal fluid for viruses, bacteria and fungi, as well as RT-PCR (GeneXpert) for tuberculosis, with negative report for all studies. Finally, because she lived in an endemic area, antibodies against Coccidioides spp were measured, which were also negative.

After eight weeks of the initial picture, the patient presented neurological deterioration with decreased alertness that required advanced airway management. Due to the above, an imaging study was performed that evidenced hydrocephalus and intracranial hypertension, for which an emergency ventriculostomy was placed. A second study of cerebrospinal fluid reported increased pleocytosis (1906 cells), elevated lactate (10.2), increased protein (323 mg/dl) and glucose of 24 mg/dL.

Infectious disease was consulted. During the evaluation, the patient was sedated with a RASS of -4, ventilatory support and dependent on vasoactive amines to maintain mean arterial pressure > 65 mmHg. Although the neurological examination was not fully assessable due to the state of sedation, the photomotor and consensual reflexes were assessed and were present, there was no neck stiffness or abnormal postures. The evaluation also showed a functional ventriculostomy drainage.

Due to the patient's subacute evolution, the findings of cerebrospinal fluid, the increase in lactate and the poor response to the previously administered antibiotics, neuroinfection by agents such as mycobacteria or fungi was suspected. Considering the above, coverage was increased with carbapenem, linezolid and moxifloxacin that cover mycobacteria, as well as intravenous voriconazole, as an antifungal. After adjusting the medication, the patient's clinical evolution improved, so a neurological window was performed and extubation was decided.

Differential diagnoses
Bacterial Meningoencephalitis
The clinical presentation of the patient suggested a bacterial meningitis, as this is one of the most common causes of central nervous system (CNS) infection. However, the presentation was not typical and the expected response to treatment was not observed. The patient's only history was the surgical procedure performed three weeks prior to the onset of the clinical presentation, and this type of etiology generally occurs acutely after the surgical procedure. Similarly, the cellularity in the cerebrospinal fluid study showed a predominance of polymorphonuclear cells with hypoglycorrhea, which initially suggested this etiology. However, since the microbiological study did not show any development and the RT-PCR for multiple bacteria did not show any replicating genetic material, the case was classified as aseptic meningitis.9

Mycobacterial meningoencephalitis
The patient's clinical picture began with a headache lasting more than 4 weeks, which led to the study of the picture as subacute. One of the suspected diagnoses was infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, however, the result of the RT-PCR of cerebrospinal fluid was negative. It should be noted that this etiology cannot be completely ruled out since these infections can be paucibacillary and give a false negative.

There are reports of other CNS mycobacteria, especially those that are fast-growing, that could explain the subacute presentation in this case. Infections with M. abscessus as well as M. chelonae have been reported in the literature.10,11

There are reports in the literature suggesting the use of carbapenems in combination with linezolid and moxifloxacin or clarithromycin for the management of non-tuberculous mycobacteria in CNS. Another drug recommended for the treatment of non-tuberculous mycobacteria is tigecycline, although it is not recommended in CNS infections due to its low penetration, so it was not included in the scheme.12,13

Fungal Meningoencephalitis
The patient's subacute evolution also required the study of fungal infections. In case reports there has been an increase in incidence each year,6,14 so it was taken as one of the differential diagnoses based on the temporal nature of the clinical picture. Although the patient did not have any relevant risk factors, with the exception of her postpartum period, risk factors for yeast infections such as Candida and Cryptococcus, as well as some filamentous fungi such as Aspergillus, Fusarium or Mucormycetes, such as Mucor or Rhizopus, were intentionally sought and questioned.

Due to reports of cases where the use of regional anesthetics was associated with subacute meningitis, with isolation of Aspergillus spp, treatment with voriconazole was initiated, considering the high possibility of some fungal infection.4 In addition, in the literature search, other causative agents were found during the application of regional anesthesia, including Exserohilum rostratum, Aspergillus fumigatus and Exophiala dermatitidis as contaminants of the medicine, causing infection in CNS.15 Likewise, sensitivity to voriconazole was reported by these agents, so the established therapy was continued while the development of cultures was obtained.

Diagnosis
Fungal culture was requested in cerebrospinal fluid in Sabouraud and Mycosel medium, and the development of a filamentous fungus was obtained. Staining with lactofenol blue was performed in the culture colonies, in which septate hyphae and groups of canoe-shaped macroconidia were observed, very suggestive of Fusarium spp. Diagnostic confirmation and species identification was performed with the MALDI-TOF system, with the result of Fusarium solani. Study of susceptibility to antimycotics was performed by microdilution technique in broth with minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of voriconazole: 2 ug/mL-1 (susceptible) and amphotericin MIC: 4 mg/mL (susceptible).

Targeted treatment
There is evidence that Fusarium has intrinsic resistance to echinocandins (also no CNS penetration) and has multiple mechanisms to acquire resistance to various antifungal agents. A dual regimen with liposomal amphotericin B and voriconazole has now been established as a first-line therapy for Fusarium spp.5 As soon as macroconidia were visualized, liposomal amphotericin B 5 mg/kg every 24 hours was added to voriconazole therapy at 4 mg/kg every 12 hours.

The patient showed clinical improvement with a decrease in leukocytosis, however, at 16 weeks from the onset of the clinical picture, she showed a sudden deterioration in alertness. A brain tomography was performed in which a hypodense area of irregular borders of 66x45 mm was reported, located on the right side of the occipital lobe, being an image suggestive of ischemia and peripheral cerebral edema. In the angiotomography the patient showed data compatible with multi-infarct disease and the clinical evolution continued in an unfavorable way, the death occurred in the following hours.
