46-year-old male, right-handed, sedentary, medical, no other significant history. Denies painful symptoms in the left elbow and shoulder prior to the onset of current condition. Initiates with mild respiratory symptoms and after nasal exudate is determined positive for COVID-19. Presents a mild illness that requires only symptomatic treatment. On the fifth day of the onset of the respiratory symptoms, he suddenly and intensely feels pain in the left elbow after a minor effort with the elbow flexed at 90o. He develops painful mobility limitations. He comes for emergency medical evaluation; on physical examination, he presents pain during elbow flexion and extension as well as pronosupination, pain on palpation in the anterior region of the elbow. He shows a Popeye elbow deformity, absence of the distal tendon of the biceps brachii, no evidence of neurovascular disorders. A padded sling is applied as initial treatment. The diagnosis of complete rupture of the distal insertion of the biceps brachii is confirmed by a magnetic resonance imaging. This study describes a complete avulsion of the tendon at its distal insertion with retraction of the tendon to about 8 cm from its insertion, with perilesional oedema. The patient is initially offered surgical treatment versus non-surgical treatment options. The patient opts for surgical treatment. Once the surgical management has been decided, the time at which it should be performed should be considered. In reports of this type of injury, it is recommended to carry out a surgical procedure within the first seven days after the injury in one group, 14 days in a second group or 21 days in a third group to achieve the best possible results of the treatment. However, in this case, we had to take into consideration that the patient was on the fifth day of the onset of COVID-19 symptoms. According to the recommendations of infectious diseases, it was recommended, at that time, to wait until day 14 to carry out a surgical procedure without complications, especially due to the high possibility of requiring intubation to ensure anaesthesia during the procedure. The waiting time from the onset of COVID-19 symptoms is based mainly on the safety of the patient, but also on the safety of the medical team that will carry out the procedure. Finally, a joint decision was made to operate the patient on the 17th day of the onset of symptoms.3
