18-year-old male, smoker of tobacco and marijuana. He started 4 days prior to the consultation with general malaise, myalgia and fever. He consulted the emergency unit for added dyspnoea class functional II-III. On admission he presented tachycardia, tachypnea and rales were heard in both pulmonary bases. He was in respiratory failure with the requirement of supplementary oxygen and in the laboratory a leukocytosis and respiratory failure with normocapnic hypoxaemia were found. On the examination he reported that he recently started to use electronic cigarette. In the computerised tomography (CT) of the thorax performed on admission to hospital, extensive areas with increased attenuation in "frosted glass" were observed distributed in both pulmonary fields, predominantly right with areas of consolidation and air bronchogram. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 was negative. The serology for HIV, anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies (p-ANCA), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA) and antinuclear antibodies (ANA) were negative. No microorganisms were identified in the direct observation and culture of the serial sputum and tracheal aspirate. Empirical antibiotic treatment with ampicillin sulbactam and clarithromycin was initiated.  In the absence of improvement, video fibrobronchoscopy was performed, showing haematotic debris in the lower airway, without endoluminal bronchial lesions. In the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) liquid was progressively recovered haematotic. The bacteriology of the BAL was negative and in the cytology there was a predominance of macrophages (50%) without evidence of haematofagia. It was interpreted as EVALI. The patient completed 7 days of antibiotic therapy and 3 consecutive pulses of methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg/day intravenous were indicated. He evolved favourably and was discharged 48 hours after the corticoid pulse. In the control CT of the thorax performed ambulatory one month after the hospital discharge, an improvement in pulmonary lesions visualised during the hospital admission was observed.
