A 24-year-old male patient was admitted to the Otorhinolaryngology Department at Welcare Specialty Hospital. He had a painless swelling in the anterior region of the hard palate that had gradually increased in size over the past five years. The patient reported no history of trauma and infection. During the examination, it was observed that the swelling was well-defined, firm, and non-tender. It was located on the left side of the anterior maxillary wall and had extended to the floor of the left nasal cavity, pushing the nasal septum to the right side. Intra-orally, the mass bulged on the anterior hard palate and there were no pulsation or signs of infection were visible. During a nasal endoscopy, it was observed that there was swelling in the floor of the left nasal cavity, and the septum was deviated towards the right nasal cavity. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed an oval-shaped radiolucent lesion in the midline of the maxilla and bony remodeling, 51mm in size. A vitality test revealed positive for all anterior teeth and FNAC was done to exclude malignancy. Based on clinical and radiological findings, the patient was diagnosed with a nasopalatine duct cyst. All necessary preoperative tests were conducted and the results were found to be within the normal range. The patient underwent a transnasal endoscopic marsupialization procedure under general anesthesia to treat the cystic swelling in the left nasal cavity. Initially, a greenish fluid was drained, followed by an incision made on the roof of NDC (floor of the left Nasal cavity). The incision was then enlarged and the roof of NDC was removed and sent for histopathology. Following a postsurgical nasal endoscopic evaluation, no signs of recurrence were observed.


Histopathological Examination
Microscopic examinations revealed the presence of fragments of cystic tissue. These fragments are partly lined by stratified squamous epithelium and partly by pseudostratified columnar epithelium which contain variable goblet cells and cilia. The cyst wall is composed of fibrous tissue that has mucinous glands, cartilaginous rests, arteries and veins, and mixed inflammatory cells.