A 28-year-old woman with a university education and a stable job is described, in treatment for major depression with a history of five attempts at suicide, treated with quetiapine, risperidone, sertraline and clonazepam. She was first seen in a low-complexity center for abdominal pain associated with vomiting, related to intentional ingestion of large amounts of paracetamol tablets. According to a rough estimate, the dose was 20 grams the day before and 10 grams the same day. Her laboratory showed elevated liver enzymes (TGO 3475 IU/L and TGP 2798 IU/L), a decrease in prothrombin time (PT 1%), and hyperlactatemic metabolic acidosis. Treatment with activated charcoal and N-acetylcysteine was initiated. At 24 hours of the event, the patient was referred to the intensive care unit of our center for a grade III encephalopathy, tachycardia, hypotension, and oliguria. A tracheal intubation was performed, infusion of vasoactive drugs (noradrenaline 0.08 gamma/k/h), haemodialysis (balance -1500), cultures and empirical antibiotic treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam. The admission laboratory showed a TP 10% (RIN 6.2), Factor V 5%, TGO 9711 IU/L, TGP 8030 IU/L, BT 6.5 mg/dL and hyperlactatemic metabolic acidosis (pH 7.25; pCO2 21 mm/Hg; PO2 74 mm/Hg; HCO3 9.1 mmol/L and lactate 12.7 mmol/L). FHF was diagnosed, Clichy4 score positive, King's College5 3 points, MELD6 34 points. In the computed tomography of the brain there were no signs of effect of mass or oedema. At the pulmonary level, consolidation in the right lung with predominance of the upper lobe. In the bronchoalveolar lavage, Staphylococcus aureus was isolated sensitive to methicillin, so the antibiotic treatment was adjusted. After 48 hours of admission and without progression of failure, enrollment in the emergency transplant list was decided.  At 24 hours of admission, the patient accessed an ideal cadaveric donor. The duration of the surgical procedure was 5 hours, with piggy-back explant technique with a cold ischaemia time of 6 hours and 30 minutes. She required 5 units of red blood cells, 10 units of fresh frozen plasma, 12 units of platelets and 16 of cryoprecipitate during the surgery. The patient evolved in the first 24 hours postoperative, with clinical and biochemical improvement (TP 82%, TGO 621 IU/L, TGP 1519 IU/L, total bilirubin 6.1 mg/dL, normalisation of the internal environment and lactate). At 48 hours she was able to disengage from mechanical respiratory support. On the fifth postoperative day she presented an isolated convulsive episode that subsided spontaneously, without the need for anti-convulsive drugs. She evolved favourably and remained under multidisciplinary follow-up with the mental health service where it was decided to grant hospital discharge while continuing psychiatric treatment in a rehabilitation center with ambulatory controls with the specialists involved. She is currently in her sixth year post transplant with adequate controls, good graft function and adherence to immunosuppressive treatment (tacrolimus XL and mycophenolate mofetil). She maintains strict follow-up by the psychiatric team and is on lithium, levomepromazine, quetiapine and sertraline. Informed consent was obtained in writing from the patient for the publication of this case and the accompanying images. A copy of the informed consent is available for review on request.
