A 62-year-old Tunisian Arab postmenopausal female diagnosed with Von Hippel–Lindau disease in 2021 presented with various manifestations related to the disease. She had a history of multiple surgeries, primarily for renal, adrenal, and pancreatic tumors, with incidental findings of ovarian masses.

The patient was asymptomatic from a gynecological standpoint, but primarily complained of headaches before undergoing brain surgery. She had no significant family or psychosocial history.

Her surgical history included
2021: A non-operable tumor (6 cm) of the left petrous bone endolymphatic sac, managed with radiotherapy.

2021: Left adrenalectomy for a 6 cm pheochromocytoma. Pathological examination revealed pheochromocytoma.

2021: Left nephrectomy for a ruptured left renal tumor. Microscopy showed multifocal clear-cell renal carcinoma of nuclear grade 2.

2022: Cephalic duodenopancreatectomy for a mass in the pancreas. Histological examination confirmed three serous cystadenomas and two well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors.

In January 2021, during postoperative surveillance with an abdominal–pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan, a 4 cm solid cystic left adnexal mass was incidentally discovered, which raised suspicion of malignancy. The mass was confirmed by transvaginal ultrasound and pelvic MRI, classified as Ovarian-Adnexal Reporting and Data System (O-RADS) 5 (high suspicion for malignancy).

Gynecological examination and surgical history
Physical examination: No abdominal–pelvic mass detected.

Speculum examination: Healthy cervix observed.

Surgical scars from previous left nephrectomy and cephalic duodenopancreatectomy were noted.

A multidisciplinary staff meeting concluded that surgery was necessary. A laparotomy was performed via a midline incision below the umbilicus, revealing a well-defined solid cystic mass in the left adnexa. No ascites or signs of peritoneal carcinomatosis were present, and the right adnexa appeared normal, with no macroscopic signs of malignancy observed intraoperatively, including the absence of exocystic vegetations.

Cytology was performed along with left adnexectomy, and the specimen was sent for frozen section examination. The results were inconclusive, raising the possibility of borderline tumors or tumors specific to Von Hippel–Lindau syndrome. Considering the patient’s postmenopausal status, a right adnexectomy and total hysterectomy were performed.

Histological examination later revealed bilateral clear-cell papillary cystadenomas of the Fallopian Tubes and broad ligament, characteristic of Von Hippel–Lindau disease (0.5 cm on the right side and 4 cm on the left side).The tumors consisted of tightly packed papillae with fibrous cores, covered by monolayered epithelium.

The immediate postoperative period was uneventful, and at the 1-month follow-up, no abnormalities were detected. The patient has since been followed up with every 4 months with normal pelvic ultrasounds. During these 2 years of follow-up, no complications have arisen, but the patient was recently readmitted to the neurosurgery department for recurrence of a brain tumor.