A 52-year-old woman referred to the urology clinic with urinary complaints. Her symptoms began three years ago with frequency, dysuria and dribbling. She also mentioned the frequent passage of red and black thread-like substances in her urine. Moreover, during these discharges, she had headache, fever and chills. Intermittent periurethral and genital itching was another complaint of hers. She had been treated by several specialists with the diagnosis of recurrent urinary tract infections, with no clinical improvement. The patient denied recent travel, camping, hiking, farming, swimming and insect bites. She had positive history of pilonidal sinus surgery and hysterectomy, 8 and 7 years earlier, respectively. Two years prior to the current visit, she had been hospitalized for assessment. On physical examination, she was well-appearing with normal vital signs. All her laboratory tests, including cell blood count, urine analysis and biochemistries were in normal ranges. Abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) scan revealed no abnormalities. Hence, she underwent cystoscopy, which demonstrated erythema and hyperemia of the bladder mucosa, suspended debris, and dilation of the left ureteral orifice. During consultation with an infectious diseases’ specialist, schistosomiasis was suspected, Therefore, she was treated with Praziquantel with the appropriate dose and duration and was discharged from the hospital.

However, her symptoms did not subside. She was revisited by another infectious disease specialist, who prescribed her ivermectin due to suspicion to urinary myiasis. Nevertheless, no improvement was observed. She was readmitted to undergo bladder irrigation with polyethylene glycol, but the bladder washfluid did not contain any visible larvae. This procedure was followed by a two-day hematuria with spontaneous cessation. She was discharged home and advised to repeat the urine analysis one months later. Her random urine analysis was normal, so she collected her 24-h urine and sent it to the laboratory for analysis, in which a live larva was demonstrated under light microscope by the pathologist. The larva was isolated and sent to an entomologist to be identified morphologically. Finally, it was determined that the larva belonged to the species Sarcophaga. The patient was advised to take personal hygiene and consume at least 3 L of water daily.