A 38-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital for more than two years with mild proteinuria accompanied by microscopic hematuria during laboratory examination. The patient was asymptomatic. There was no previous history of other diseases, and none of the patient’s family member had renal or autoimmune diseases. No history of ingestion of any drug or Chinese herbal medicine. On admission, his blood pressure was 151/81 mmHg, and physical examination revealed no specific signs of hyperlipidemia, such as corneal opacity or xanthomas. At presentation, he had proteinuria (0.94 g/24 h) and hematuria, but no leukocyturia. His estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) was 84 mL/min per 1.73 m2. Total cholesterol and triglyceride levels were 205 mg/dL and 115 mg/dL, respectively. The immunological indicators, such as serum C3, C4, and IgA levels were normal. The other laboratory parameters are described in Table 1. Immunofluorescence assay showed strong staining for IgA, C3, and ApoE, but negative staining for IgG, IgM, C1q, and C4. Futhermore, double immunofluorescence showed that both KM55 and IgA stained positive in the mesangial region. Renal biopsy revealed markedly dilated capillary lumina filled with thrombus-like substances and mesangial proliferation. About 12% of interstitial fibrosis with tubular atrophy was also observed. Thrombus-like substances stained positive for Sudan III and ApoE. Electron microscopy revealed lipid granule deposition in the dilated glomerular capillary lumen, mesangial hyperplasia, and electron-dense deposition in the mesangial area. These pathological characteristics were consistent with those of LPG with IgAN.

The ApoE gene analysis revealed a heterozygous C→T transition in exon 3, which changed the amino acid at position 25 from arginine to cysteine (Kyoto mutation). Family genotyping showed that this mutation was transmitted from the father to his daughter. The serum ApoE was 14.4 mg/dL determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (LOT: 20210702, JianCheng Bioengineering Institute). Combined with the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with LPG accompanied by IgAN.

After the renal biopsy, the patient was followed-up at the outpatient clinic of Daping Hospital. The plasma lipid level and eGFR were within the normal ranges for 18 months, even without lipid-lowering drugs. The proteinuria improved (fluctuated at + ~ ±; urinary albumin/creatinine ration from 186.06 mg/g Cr to 111.72 mg/g Cr) after administration of 10 mg of enalapril per day. Additionally, we followed-up with his daughter and her urine protein levels remained negative.