A 1-day-old, Black Bantu African preterm female baby weighing 1000 g was born to a Gravida 3, Living 2 mother via spontaneous vaginal delivery. Soon after delivery, she was referred to our neonatal intensive care unit owing to multiple congenital anomalies and moderate respiratory distress. The mother is 32 years and is in a non-consanguineous marriage. The mother did not seek any medical attention until her early third trimester of pregnancy, due to abruptio placenta. The first antenatal ultrasound revealed severe oligohydramnios. She was not diabetic (random blood glucose was 5.1 mmol/L) and did not receive folic acid supplementation during pregnancy.

At admission, the baby was alert with mild features of respiratory distress syndrome. She had multiple dysmorphic features that included microcephaly (head circumference < 10%), prominent occiput, low-set ears, right cleft palate and lip, micrognathia, elbow contracture bilaterally, and shorter lower limbs.


The birth weight was 1000 g, the length of the baby was 40 cm, and the occipitofrontal circumference was 30 cm.

Investigations
Skeletal X-ray showed rib flattening, right femur aplasia, and left femur hypoplasia. Laboratory workout included: complete blood counts, c-reactive protein, creatinine, blood urea, and electrolytes, which were all within the normal range. Cranial ultrasound was normal, but echocardiography revealed a small patent ductus arteriosus.

Differential diagnosis
The patient had bilateral femoral aplasia and unusual facies. These clinical entities led to the diagnosis of femoral–facial syndrome.

The similarity in etiopathogenesis makes caudal regression syndrome the common differential diagnosis. Both can be caused by poorly controlled maternal hyperglycemia. However, facial defects are absent in caudal regression syndrome, the key diagnostic feature.

Proximal focal femoral hypoplasia and craniofacial anomalies are usually absent.

Disruption conditions that can cause cleft palate include severe amniotic band syndrome.

Treatment
The infant was kept on respiratory support and empirical antibiotics. An orthopedic surgeon, an ear, nose, and throat surgeon, and a physiotherapist were involved. Surgical repair of the cleft palate is planned at age of 6 months. Functional rehabilitation is planned before the patient starts ambulation. Limb lengthening surgery is currently not done in our setting.

Outcome and follow-up
At the age of 1 month, the patient died from complications of severe late-onset neonatal sepsis.