38-year-old patient, diagnosed with asthma (07/2021) and anxiety (04/2023), clinical conditions for which he is prescribed salbutamol 100 mcg inhaler (2 puffs every 6 hours) and diazepam 5 mg (0-0-1), respectively, comes to a medical appointment (24/05/2023) concerned about a worsening of the episodes of anxiety and low mood that he presents, and cannot be attended to on this occasion by his usual Primary Care Physician (MAP).

After a medical evaluation, an anxious-depressive condition was diagnosed, for which a pharmacological treatment was prescribed that combined the use of desvenlafaxine 50 mg (1 tablet with breakfast) and mirtazapine 30 mg (1 tablet before bedtime). In addition, the suspension of use of diazepam 5 mg was recommended, in order to avoid a future problem of addiction.

EVALUATION AND STUDY
To carry out the Dispensing Service (SD), the scheme of the methodology proposed by the Forum of Pharmaceutical Care in Community Pharmacy (Forum AF-FC) in its Practical Guide for the Professional Pharmaceutical Care Services in Community Pharmacy was followed. During the provision of the SD and after an evaluation of the pharmacotherapy, the following Problems Related to Medication (PRM) and Negative Results associated with the Medication (RNM) were detected:

PRM of potentially serious drug interaction between mirtazapine and desvenlafaxine that could lead to a non-quantitative safety concern given the high risk of serotonergic syndrome (SS), a potentially fatal condition resulting from increased activity of the central nervous system that usually presents itself suddenly within the first 24 hours of initiating treatment with a serotonergic product, dose modification, or the addition of a new drug to an established treatment (2,4). Therefore, it became vital to intervene preventively to avoid its occurrence.

PRM of Health problem insufficiently treated by sudden discontinuation of treatment with diazepam that could lead to a RNM of Need for Treatment the risk of worsening of episodes of anxiety.

The clinical case was registered in the SEFAC e_XPERT platform, obtaining the initial status.

INTERVENTION
To avoid possible risks that could derive from the direct use of the prescribed pharmacological combination and with the aim of optimising the safety of the patient, only the usual medication (salbutamol and diazepam) was dispensed, and written information was provided to the patient, which allowed the intervention performed to be validated.

In addition, a referral report was prepared for the MAP through the SEFAC e_XPERT platform, which was delivered by the patient at the face-to-face medical appointment, where the intervention proposals shown below were collected and the risks detected were warned:

Consider discontinuing one of the two antidepressive drugs prescribed (mirtazapine and/or desvenlafaxine) or prescribing an alternative medication to both.

Use of diazepam should be continued for at least 2 to 3 weeks after the start of optimal antidepressive treatment, as this is the average time required for antidepressive treatment to exert a significant effect. After this period, the need for use and gradual withdrawal of diazepam should be assessed.

In addition, a record of the potential safety error detected was made through the online form of the portal of the Institute of the Safe Use of Medication (ISMP), for its evaluation and the implementation of measures that allow its occurrence to be avoided in future.

RESULTS
The patient comes in for an appointment with their usual MAP (5/31/23) to hand over the referral report.

Considering the potential risk of the reported interaction, the MAP suspended the treatment with mirtazapine and desvenlafaxine, and prescribed paroxetine 20 mg (1 tablet with breakfast). Given the similarity of clinical criteria with the pharmacist, the patient is advised not to suspend the treatment with diazepam until further evaluation.

Intervention was achieved from the FC by carrying out a preventive measure, which allowed the appearance of a PRM and RNM to be avoided, which could have compromised the safety of the patient, receiving thanks from both the doctor and the patient.

In addition, a brief telephone interview was conducted from the CF on 30/06/23 with the patient, which allowed us to verify that through the use of paroxetine and diazepam, he experienced an improvement in mood, as well as a better control of the episodes of anxiety, and the proposal made from the CF for the gradual suspension of use of diazepam was declined momentarily by the MAP, but considered as an intervention to be carried out in the short term.
