A 65-year-old woman was admitted with a one-month history of myalgia, generalised weakness, and intermittent non-specific chest pain.

She had suffered a stroke two years previously, which limited her mobility and for which she resided in a residential home. She had also experienced a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). with percutaneous coronary intervention to the left anterior descending artery five months prior to her current admission. Her other background included chronic kidney disease (CKD), dyslipidaemia, resistant hypertension, epilepsy, heart failure, type 2 diabetes mellitus, and asthma. She was a non-smoker and had no history of alcohol excess.

Her pre-admission medication included multiple anti-hypertensive medications, aspirin, ticagrelor, and insulin. She was also prescribed atorvastatin 80 mg ON, which she had taken for almost two decades, though the dose had been increased from 20 mg ON two years prior.

On examination she had globally reduced power more prominent on the right, which was the side affected by her previous stoke, and generalised muscle tenderness. The rest of the clinical examination was grossly unremarkable with a normal cardiovascular examination and no other evidence of an underlying rheumatological process such as a rash or joint swelling.

The most notable finding from her initial laboratory investigations was a markedly elevated high sensitivity cardiac troponin T (hs-cTnT) level of 3794 ng/l (normal < 12 ng/l), with no significant dynamic change between serial tests, and which was noted to have been raised at a similar level several months prior following her NSTEMI. A creatine kinase (CK) was subsequently checked which was also found to be significantly raised at 9416 U/l (normal 25-200 IU/l).

Her ECG showed no acute changes, and her transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH), but normal left ventricular ejection fraction without regional wall motion abnormalities, normal right ventricular function, and no significant valvular pathology.

It was initially unclear if her CK represented cardiac or skeletal muscle damage. The significance of the raised hs-cTnT was also uncertain. Acute coronary syndrome was thought to have been excluded as her initial presenting symptoms were inconsistent with this, there were no acute ECG or TTE changes, and the hs-cTnT levels were relatively static. The differential diagnosis was felt to be between chronic myocarditis, with the weakness being either due to co-existing myositis or deconditioning, and myositis without cardiac involvement and with a false hs-cTnT elevation.

Further tests were requested to differentiate between these two possibilities. A high sensitivity cardiac troponin I (hs-cTnI) was performed and was only mildly raised at 55 ng/l. A paired hs-cTnT taken at the same time remained significantly elevated at 4532 ng/l. A cardiac MRI showed no evidence of cardiac infiltration or inflammation. A focal area late gadolinium enhancement likely due to her previous NSTEMI was seen.

Based on the above investigations significant acute cardiac injury was felt to have been excluded. Myositis with false hs-cTnT elevation was now considered the most likely diagnosis and a rheumatology opinion was sought. They advised a number of antibody tests. Of these HMG-CoA Reductase antibodies were positive and PM/SCL75 antibodies were weakly positive. Other additional recommended tests done at this time, including ANA, ANCA, and hepatitis B/C, were negative, and A CT thorax, abdomen, and pelvis showed no evidence of underlying malignancy. The initial finding of a raised TSH meant that hypothyroidism contributing to the myositis had to be considered. However the fT4 was found to be normal, indicating the patient had subclinical hypothyroidism and excluding this as a significant contributing factor.

A bilateral MRI of the thighs was also advised, which revealed diffuse high signal change throughout the thigh muscles with surrounding oedema in keeping with widespread myositis.

Based on the clinical, MRI, and antibody findings a diagnosis of statin-induced IMNM was made. For confirmation a muscle biopsy from the quadriceps was taken. The results were not available until after discharge but when examined showed changes consistent with IMNM.

Following diagnosis her atorvastatin was stopped and the patient was started on prednisolone 40 mg OD. However she had a modest response, with a reduction of her CK levels but little change to her symptoms. Therefore after two weeks of steroid treatment she was commenced on an escalating dose of mycophenolate starting at 250 mg BD and intravenous immunoglobulin 2 g/kg over five days alongside a three-day course of IV methylprednisolone 500 mg OD followed by an increased dose of oral prednisolone at 60 mg OD. This resulted in a progressive improvement of symptoms and continued reduction in her CK levels. Her cTnT also decreased, but still remained significantly raised above her previous baseline, even after several months of treatment. She was discharged home on mycophenolate (1 g BD at time of discharge) and a weaning dose of prednisolone (30 mg OD at time of discharge). She was planned for follow up under the rheumatology team but unfortunately repeatedly did not attend her scheduled clinic appointments.