35-year-old male with a history of complete rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament 10 years ago. He had conservative management with immobilization for four weeks and subsequent physiotherapy for six months with partial improvement of symptoms. At the end of conservative management, he performed daily activities without apparent limitations until one month prior to reassessment, with 6/10 knee pain on the EVA scale and a sensation of instability when going down the stairs and intermittent oedema, with no new mechanism of injury. On physical examination, there was pain on palpation over the lateral joint line and anterior surface of the knee; anterior flexion of 85° and posterior flexion of 100°, full extension. Strength of the knee muscles was 5/5 with pain referable to the anterior aspect of the knee. In the special manoeuvres to clinically assess the knee joint, anterior drawer, Lachman, Lelli's tests were positive; lateral and medial McMurray, Steinman and Apley tests were positive. A simple magnetic resonance scan of the right knee was requested, and the following was found: absence of the anterior cruciate ligament, osteoarthrosis grade III-IV of the medial femorotibial compartment, osteoarthrosis grade II of the lateral femorotibial compartment, thinning of the posterior horn and lateral meniscus with minimal residual portion, horizontal tear of the posterior horn and lateral meniscus, posterior cruciate ligament oedema with change in mucoid degeneration. Radiographic measurements were performed for the intercondylar notch and alpha angle, in axial and sagital section, respectively. A decision was made to carry out diagnostic and therapeutic management by knee arthroscopy. Prior to the surgical procedure and with the patient under general anaesthesia, the pivot shift test was performed, which was positive with a grade III. Arthroscopy was carried out, with evidence of a closed notch, complete, inveterate rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament, pinching of the posterior cruciate ligament, rupture of the posterior horn and lateral meniscus, chronic, inveterate rupture of the medial meniscus, anterior cruciate ligament release, free intraarticular bodies, chondral lesion of 1 cm2 in the lateral femoral condyles in the load-bearing area, osteoarthrosis grade IV of the medial compartment of the knee, subquadricepital synovitis. During arthroscopy, a notchoplasty was performed, release of the posterior cruciate ligament, debridement of the osteophytes in the anterior tibial spine, partial meniscectomy of the lower flap of the posterior cruciate ligament and lateral meniscus, partial meniscectomy of the posterior meniscus, extraction of free intraarticular bodies, posteromedial, medial and subquadricepital, remodelling of the chondral lesion in the lateral femoral condyles in the load-bearing area, debridement of the chondral in the periphery of the lateral femoral condyles (periarthrosis), subquadricepital synovectomy.
The degree of arthrosis was considered to be a reason not to perform ACL tunnels to avoid future complications in definitive knee arthroplasty surgery. After surgery, the use of passive knee mobilizer from 0° extension to 100° flexion, as well as walking with assistance of crutches was indicated.
The patient was discharged from the hospital without complications the day after the surgery and began physiotherapy for muscle strengthening and stability. The patient reported being asymptomatic at the three-, six-, and nine-month follow-up visits, and was able to carry out his daily activities without limitations, as well as low-impact sports activities without impediment.
