A 41-year-old woman with obesity and 6 years of untreated diabetes mellitus presented to the emergency department with a history of 7 days of fatigue and 2 days of dyspnoea. In addition to these symptoms, she reported bilateral and abdominal lower back pain, which partially improved with paracetamol.

On presentation, the patient was hemodynamically stable, with dyspnoea, tachypnoea and an oxygen saturation of 80%. The chest X-ray showed bilateral basal alveolar infiltrates and the rapid test was positive for IgM against COVID-19. The chest tomography found a bilateral ground glass pattern that occupied 35% of the pulmonary parenchyma without signs of pulmonary embolism.

Due to an initial blood glucose of 500 mg/dL, urine ketones and severe metabolic acidosis, the patient was diagnosed with severe metabolic acidosis.

Initial management included oxygen therapy, saline hydration, insulin, ceftriaxone, dexamethasone, and ivermectin. Three days later, the lower back pain and abdominal pain worsened, and an abdominal contrast scan was requested, which revealed perfusion defects in both kidneys, predominantly in the left kidney, suggestive of renal infarctions. There was no evidence of extra-renal thrombosis. Based on these findings, anticoagulation was initiated with 60 mg enoxaparin every 12 hours. The additional physical examination did not show signs of peripheral ischemia, and the electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm. The patient had no history of atrial fibrillation.

The respiratory and hemodynamic evolution of the patient was unfavorable, requiring mechanical ventilation and vasopressors. Subsequently, nine days later, the patient presented acute renal injury (with oliguria, posterior anuria and water overload) and conventional hemodialysis was initiated (the only type of hemodialysis available in our hospital) with non-tunneled catheter.

Two weeks later, the patient was still on hemodialysis, mechanical ventilation, and anticoagulation. She died in the third week of treatment.
