20-year-old male, HIV negative, with pulmonary TB and irregular treatment in 2020-2021. He was admitted for bacillary impregnation syndrome, pain and functional impotence of the right shoulder. He presented a poor general state, thinned, severe muscular hypotrophy, cold tumour lesions with fistulae in the back, skull and anterior thoracic area with caseous secretion, without presenting motor or sensory deficits. The rapid molecular examination (GeneXpert Mtb/Rif) of the thoracic secretion was positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, sensitive to rifampicin (the phenotypical antibiogram showed a pan-sensitive strain). The CT demonstrated pulmonary consolidations and a tree in bud, along with cervical, dorsal and lumbar bone involvement with lytic images and pre- and para-spinal collections. The MRI showed infiltrative images from C4 to C6, D4 to D6, D9 to D12; pathological fracture of D6 and D10 and infiltration in L1, L2 and L3. He initiated anti-TB treatment with a standard first-line scheme (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, ethambutol). Given the extensive destruction and the danger of quadriplegia/paraplegia due to cervical and/or dorsal involvement, a permanent dorsal decubitus position, a Philadelphia collar, kinesiological treatment and a scheduled neuro-surgical procedure at the cervical levels, D6 and D10, were indicated. Prior to the scheduled surgery, he presented an acute case of paraplegia with a D8 sensory level, with a bladder compromise. It was interpreted as a level of acute compression at D6. Emergency neuro-surgical treatment with posterior spinal decompression via a dorsal laminectomy 6 and partially 5 and 7 and evacuation of a epidural collection was indicated. He was progressively recovering motor and sensory function. Subsequently, the scheduled cervical surgery via anterior approach with a corpectomy of C4, C5, C6 and C7 plus arthrodesis of C3 to D1 with vertebral body replacement plus autologous graft, plaque and screws was performed. In the control CT, a posterior luxation of D6 with spinal canal compression and neurological compromise due to spinal canal compression was evident. The surgical tactics were reconsidered due to mechanical and neurological instability. Decompression and alignment of the luxated level was performed with posterior arthrodesis of the three non-adjacent spinal levels, cervical, dorsal 6 and dorsal 10 in a single surgical procedure. It was fixed from C3 to D12 with polyaxial screws and cervicodorsal transition rod. In each surgical procedure, spontaneous evacuation of caseous material, BAAR positive, and profuse washing was evident. He presented clinical, bacteriological and pulmonary improvement. He recovered mobility with kinesiological rehabilitation in addition to the specific treatment (3 months of first phase and indication of continuation with isoniazid and rifampicin to complete 12 months). He walked on his own after a prolonged 5-month hospitalisation.
