A 59-year-old G4P4 postmenopausal woman had undergone renal transplantation in 2007. Her comorbidities included obesity (body mass index: 33.9 kg/m2), hypertension, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Additionally, she had a history of two-vessel coronary artery disease, severe mitral regurgitation (MR), and moderate tricuspid regurgitation (TR), for which she had received surgical treatment. She was regularly taking aspirin, candesartan, carvedilol, everolimus (as of 2011), methylprednisolone, cyclosporine, and mycophenolate sodium. Her gynecological history included a thickened endometrium (0.89 cm), which was noted in 2012, but she denied postmenopausal bleeding. During a routine cancer screening in 2016, elevated level of serum CA-125 (258.0 U/mL; reference range: ≤35 U/mL) was identified, and subsequently confirmed by serial measurements. The endometrial thickness had increased to 1.34 cm and hysteroscopy revealed an endometrial tumor, which was successfully removed by transcervical resection. Pathological examination revealed a high-grade USC, which was immunologically positive for p53, p16, and estrogen/progesterone receptors.

Preoperative echocardiography revealed mild MR and TR, with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 48% (New York Heart Association [NYHA] functional class II. Several episodes of transient hypotension (blood pressure: 64/40 mmHg) were observed intraoperatively. Total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. Final pathology revealed no residual tumor. However, cytology of the ascitic fluid revealed clusters of malignant cells. TP53 p.C277F and BUC1B p.R550* were later detected in a genetic test with copy number loss of MRE11A, ATM, CHEK1, BLM, TP53, FLCN, and NF1.

After the surgery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), where she developed lethargy, dyspnea with shallow breathing (15–17/min), and oliguria. On the second postoperative day, she was febrile (38.3 °C) and her central venous pressure (CVP) was 26 mmHg. Laboratory analyses showed mild normocytic anemia (hemoglobin: 11.4 g/dL), increased serum creatinine (1.73 mg/dL), hypercapnia, and pyuria. Chest X-ray revealed pulmonary edema. Electrocardiogram revealed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response and occasional premature ventricular contractions. Global hypokinesia with LVEF of 41% was evident on echocardiography; the blood pressure dropped to 80/50 mmHg and the patient was diagnosed with cardiogenic shock.

In view of the complex history, a multidisciplinary approach was implemented for her care. The cardiac surgeon prescribed norepinephrine and amiodarone for hypotension and tachycardia. Antibiotic therapy with meropenem and teicoplanin was started according to the nephrologist's suggestion, whereas oliguria and elevated CVP were treated with furosemide (40 mg/day). Bi-level positive airway pressure followed by oxygen via nasal cannula (3 L/min) was used to treat dyspnea. In the following days, the blood pressure improved and norepinephrine was tapered off. Serum creatinine gradually returned to normal values.

After a week, the acute cardiogenic shock had resolved and the patient was transferred to the gynecological ward. During her stay, fluid overload, persistent dyspnea, and pedal edema were observed. A cardiologist was consulted for the decompensated heart failure with pulmonary edema. Follow-up echocardiography revealed biventricular systolic failure (LVEF = 31%), moderate MR and TR, and pulmonary hypertension (estimated systolic pulmonary artery pressure = 111 mmHg). Therefore, the dosage of furosemide was increased to 80 mg/day, and candesartan and spironolactone were added. Water and salt restriction was strictly enforced. Thereafter, a favorable response was noted in terms of gradual resolution of pedal edema and dyspnea along with increased urine output. Postoperatively, the patient lost 6 kg in body weight and was discharged 48 days later. Home oxygenation was required to prevent oxygen desaturation. A follow-up chest X-ray performed a month after she was discharged confirmed improvement of pulmonary edema. Based on the genetic tests, everolimus, an immunosuppressant, was also used as anticancer therapy for her copy number loss of FLCN and NF1. Letrozole was prescribed for the positive estrogen and progesterone receptors.