Patient information: A 64-year-old patient with no particular medical history presented with progressive generalised abdominal pain associated with intermittent vomiting and low-grade rectal bleeding in the context of feverlessness and general malaise.

Clinical findings: vital signs were normal. Abdominal examination and rectal examination were normal.

Diagnostic approach: a colonoscopy performed showed a bulging and hard process of Bauhin's valve. The anatomopathological examination of this process showed the presence of a chronic inflammatory lesion in acute ulcerated outbreak, containing rare dense cellular clusters, whose rarity did not allow to specify with certainty their nature. An abdominal-pelvic scan was performed and objectified a significant circumferential thickening bulging of the caecum extending from the ileo-caecal junction of 21 mm maximum thickness, extending over 8 cm in height. This thickening is accompanied by infiltration of the neighbouring fat with the presence of neighbouring peritoneal nodules and a magma of mesenteric adenoiditis reaching 24 mm of small axis for the largest.

Timeline: Four days later, the patient presented with an occlusive syndrome of food and gas stoppage with incoercible vomiting in the context of fever and altered general condition. The unprepared abdominal radiograph confirmed the diagnosis of intestinal obstruction. The patient was operated and the exploration revealed a low-volume serous effusion with the presence of a 5x4 cm, mobile and narrowing ilio-caecal crossroad tumour and also the presence of right mesocolic lymphadenopathy. The patient underwent a right hemicolectomy with mechanical ileo-colonic anastomosis.

The anatomopathological examination of the piece of the hemicolectomy revealed the presence of a round cell pan-parietal malignant tumour proliferation of moderate to high cell density. The lymph node dissection brought back 16 lymph nodes of which seven were tumoural. An immunohistochemical complement confirmed the diagnosis of a diffuse large cell non-Hodgkin's B-cell lymphoma of germinal centre type with anti-CD20 positive, anti-BCL2 positive, anti-CD 10 positive, anti-CD 3 positive, anti-pan-cytokeratin negative and anti-chromogranin negative antibodies. The anti-Ki 67 antibody was positive on 70% of the labelled cells. A PET scan showed a lymphomatous extension to the supra- and sub-diaphragmatic, hepatic, peritoneal and pancreatic lymph nodes. An oeso-gastroduodenal fibroscopy (EGD) was performed and showed no anomalies.

Therapeutic intervention: the therapeutic decision was to put the patient on six courses of R-CHOP (Rituximab, Cyclophosphamide, Doxorubicine, Vincristine and Prednisone) protocol.

Follow-up and results of therapeutic interventions: the patient presented a good clinical and radiological evolution with the TEP-scan performed at the end of treatment showing a major metabolic remission.
