43-year-old male with a history of smoking; HIV diagnosis in 2021 (without treatment), with a last viral load of 183,000 copies and a CD4 count of 124/mm3. He consulted for a clinical picture of a one-month evolution characterized by subfebrile evening readings associated with involuntary weight loss (approximately 10 kilograms) and non-specific abdominal pain; with multiple previous outpatient care without improvement of the symptoms. A tomography of the abdomen was performed that showed a collection at the level of the tail of the pancreas of 38x17 mm with 20 Hounsfield Units (HU), which is why admission to the inpatient department was decided, in the context of an immunocompromised patient. On admission, he presented deep palpation pain in epigastrium and laboratory findings with mild normocytic normochromic anaemia. A thoracic tomography and a magnetic resonance of the brain were performed to determine other sites of probable dissemination, which were negative. Serologies for syphilis, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex and Epstein Barr virus were requested, and immunoglobulin G for toxoplasmosis was positive 1/64. A tomographically guided puncture of the pancreatic collection was performed, which showed a low number of leukocytes, with acid alcohol-resistant bacillus positive (BAAR +) and a culture with rescue of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Material was sent for pathological anatomy. A highly active antiretroviral treatment was initiated with emtricitabine, tenofovir and dolutegravir and anti-tuberculosis treatment with isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol was extended for atypical mycobacteria with good response, since the treatment is similar for any form of extrapulmonary tuberculosis, with at least four anti-tuberculosis drugs being the cornerstone. Hospital discharge was granted with follow-up by the infectious disease service on an outpatient basis, continuing with the treatment established until the twelve months were completed. A control tomography was performed where a decrease in the size of the pancreatic lesion (30x19 mm) with 20 UH was observed.
