He was a 31-year-old previously healthy man. On September 12, 2011, he fell while riding a horse, with a mechanism of direct trauma to the right knee. He reported that he started with a stabbing type pain, with intensity 5/10 on the EVA scale (visual analogue scale), constant, without predominance of time, located in the right knee, without irradiation, incapacitating, which increased during mobilization, but decreased with rest and with the intake of analgesics. He was evaluated by a doctor, who performed radiographic studies and later referred the patient to our hospital for definitive management. The patient came to our service with 10 days of evolution, with slight increase in volume at the level of the right knee, without ecchymosis or oedema or skin defects, with signs of increased joint fluid associated with pain, crepitus and limitation of the mobility of the knee. No clinical signs of instability or meniscal injury of the knee were observed. The patient presented with anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the right knee dated September 12, 2011, in which a solution of continuity of the medial femoral condyle was observed in a coronal direction, with joint involvement and displacement of 3 mm. He also had a magnetic resonance scan dated September 19, 2011, which showed a coronal fracture of the posterior portion of the medial femoral condyle with displacement of 3 mm on the articular surface, with probable injury of both menisci and probable injury of the anterior cruciate ligament. Surgical management was performed on September 27, 2011 by open reduction through an anteromedial subvastus approach of 7 cm and fixation in an anteroposterior direction under the principle of axial compression with two cannulated 7.0 mm screws with washers; the screws were placed under independent, minimal incisions in the anterior face of the knee. The patient was discharged 24 hours after the procedure and active and continuous flexion-extension of the knee was indicated without supporting the extremity. He was referred for postoperative control, observing that he presented no alterations in the healing of the surgical wounds, the sutures were removed, flexion of 120° and extension of 0° were observed, without pain and strength 5/5. He was sent to the rehabilitation service for strengthening of the extremity and he was referred to the tenth week for partial and progressive support of the extremity.
