A 63-year-old woman with a history of obesity and hypertension presented to the emergency department of a secondary hospital with a 7-day history of fever, dry cough, hyposmia, and myalgia. She was alert on admission with a respiratory rate of 22 cycles per minute, pulse of 90 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation of 90%. Laboratory tests revealed lymphopenia (1.55 x 109) and elevated C-reactive protein levels (10.62 mg/dL). A polymerase chain reaction test for COVID-19 was performed on a nasopharyngeal and throat swab, which was positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).

The patient rapidly deteriorated with fever, prostration and worsening dyspnoea. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed severe respiratory failure, while a chest radiograph showed bilateral pulmonary infiltrates. The patient was intubated and ventilated, but her respiratory condition continued to deteriorate despite the best critical care, including prone position ventilation and neuromuscular blockade. Her post-intubation chest computed tomography scan revealed extensive bilateral multifocal ground glass opacities with no signs of pulmonary embolism. The initial ventilator settings were: volume-controlled ventilation with tidal volume of 360mL (6mL/kg ideal body weight), respiratory rate of 14 breaths per minute, end-expiratory positive airway pressure (PEEP) of 14cmH2O and static compliance of 44cmH2O.

On the second day of admission, arterial blood gas showed pH of 7.34, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of 53 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) of 102 mmHg and bicarbonate (HCO3) of 29.7 mmol/L, with a PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 98. She met the criteria for indication of VV-ECMO and was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), which had an established program for VV-ECMO. The procedure was performed safely, with no complications. Analysis of the arterial blood gas 3 hours after the start of VV-ECMO showed pH of 7.386, PaCO2 of 43 mmHg, PaO2 of 94.3 mmHg and HCO3 of 25.4 mmol/L, without any abrupt change in PaCO2. Early nutrition and rehabilitation were initiated after the introduction of VV-ECMO. On the 14th day of admission, the patient developed ventilator-associated pneumonia caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and was subjected to 7 days of antibiotic therapy with ceftazidime and vancomycin, with a favorable response. On the 20th day of admission, her chest radiograph and compliance improved, and the patient was successfully removed from the VV-ECMO after 455 hours of support, and tracheostomized 7 days later. The patient maintained good renal function throughout the admission.

On the 34th day of admission, after 7 days of weaning from sedation with positive evolution of his neurological condition, a generalized limited epileptic seizure occurred, which led to diagnostic investigation.

Investigation
Laboratory blood tests revealed decreased levels of C-reactive protein (6.11mg/dL), procalcitonin (0.07ng/mL), fibrinogen (307ng/mL) and ferritin (2,802ng/mL), but increased levels of D-dimer (18,021ng/mL) and interleukin 6 (10.4pg/mL) in the day preceding the development of symptoms. None of the drugs administered to the patient was associated with SEPR, i.e. immunosuppressive, immunomodulatory and chemotherapeutic drugs.

A magnetic resonance (MR) scan of the brain was performed, and the fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images demonstrated symmetrical and confluent hyperintensity affecting the juxta- and subcortical white matter, primarily in the occipital and parietal regions, but also involving the frontal, temporal, and left cerebellar regions. Deep gray nuclei were preserved, and there was no evidence of any area of contrast-enhancing restriction. Susceptibility-weighted images showed multiple punctate microhemorrhages affecting the superficial and deep white matter, but sparing the area of hyperintensity in FLAIR. The punctate microhemorrhages predominantly involved the juxtacortical white matter and corpus callosum (especially the knee and splenium). In addition, there were three subacute hemorrhages less than 1 cm in the outer capsules with hyperintensity in T1.

The cerebrospinal fluid sample was negative for SARS-CoV-2 and had protein levels (31 mg/dL), glucose (74 mg/dL) and lactate (1.89 mmol/L) within normal limits.

Outcome
The patient had an almost complete recovery of neurological deficits, despite myopathy of the critical illness, and was discharged after 44 days in hospital, being referred to a secondary hospital for rehabilitation, and had almost returned to her previous mental condition.
