A 29-year-old gravida V par IV (all alive, 3 spontaneous vaginal deliveries, and the last child was delivered by cesarean section for the indication of a failed induction 4 years prior to the current pregnancy) came for ANC follow-up at a gestational age of 32 weeks from her LNMP.

After taking a medical history, it was discovered that all four of her children are healthy, doing well in school, and have no known history of genetic or seizure disorders. She was investigated with the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL), Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBSag), and urine analysis, all of which were negative. All cell lines in the CBC were normal, her blood group is A, and Rh is positive, according to the Complete Blood Count (CBC), blood group, and RH. Obstetric ultrasound was also performed showing normal anatomical scan of the all body parts of the fetus except the heart. Detailed fetal echocardiography evaluation was done with findings of: both atria have comparable size and normal situs. Both atrioventricular and semilunar valves are normally positioned with normal opening and closure. Both ventricles are comparable in size and contractility; in both 2D and color flow, the left ventricle forms the apex of the heart without any ventricular septal defect. But on the papillary muscles of the left ventricle there were two circumscribed, round, echogenic mass measuring 18.2 mm by 8.3mm and 13.5mm by 8.3 mm. Upon evaluation of the outflow tract, both the LVOT (left ventricular outflow tract) and RVOT (right ventricular outflow tract) have normal anatomy and function using 2D and CF ultrasound evaluation. According to the fetal echo finding, a diagnosis of cardiac rhabdomyoma was made. Since there is a high chance of tuberous sclerosis in cardiac rhabdomyoma, detailed neurosonography and other system exams were done to look for other signs of tuberous sclerosis. Despite searching for the other features of tuberous sclerosis, no other sign of it was found other than the tumor. She had regular ANC follow-up from 32 weeks of gestation up to 39 weeks without any complications.

At gestational age of 39 weeks plus 1 day, she underwent a cesarean section for the indication of full-term pregnancy plus a request for a repeat cesarean section, with the outcome of a 3200-gram female with an APGAR score of 10 and 10 at the 1st and 5th minutes. Both the mother and the neonate had a smooth post-operative period and were discharged on the third day.

After delivery, the neonate was evaluated on the 1st, 7th, and 30th days for any regression or increment of the mass, emergence of skin lesions, or seizure. All physical examination results were normal, and the mass size was similar to the antepartal evaluation.

At her 7th month, the child was evaluated again, and upon history inquiries, the infant was doing great developmentally for her age group. The infant was examined for neurodevelopmental delay, and the child was growing appropriately for her age. An echocardiography study by a pediatric cardiologist revealed well-circumscribed hyperechoic masses on both left ventricular papillary muscles, each measuring 21.8 mm by 9.2 mm and 14.7 mm by 8.5 mm and creating no left ventricular inflow obstruction.

A history from the family was obtained, and a physical examination with anthropometric measurements was performed to assess her developmental condition during her first-year evaluation. The child was developing normally, as other children her age were. Except for the heart, all of the systems examined were unremarkable. An echocardiography study has revealed well-circumscribed hyperechoic masses on both left ventricular papillary muscles with no size increment and creating no left ventricular inflow obstruction.