This is a 75-year-old para 6 patient from Western Ethiopia who saw her last menses 25 years back. Her age at giving birth to her 1st child and menopause were 18 and 50 years, respectively. She had occasional pelvic pain for the last 3 years for which she was visiting different health facilities. Currently, she presented to Nekemte Specialized Hospital with exacerbation of lower abdominal pain for 3 weeks. She feels discomfort in her vagina but no protrusion of mass through her vagina. She has no history of fever, abdominal swelling, vaginal discharge, or bleeding. All her previous deliveries were normal vaginal deliveries. Upon enquiring about the history of family planning utilization, she reported that the intrauterine device was inserted 40 years back at a public hospital. Since then, she had no history of gynecologic evaluation for a checkup. She had no history of gynecologic procedures, pelvic or abdominal surgery. The patient has no history of medical problems like diabetes mellitus, hypertension, cardiac or renal problems.

On examination, she was acutely sick-looking. Her vital signs were blood pressure (BP) = 120/80mmHg, pulse rate (PR) = 82 beats per minute, respiratory rate (RR) = 18 breaths per minute, and temperature of 37.1°C. She had pink conjunctivae. Lymph glandular system, chest, and cardiovascular system were normal. On abdominal examination, there was no mass, organomegaly, area of tenderness, or signs of fluid collection. Inspection of external genitalia showed no vulvar mass or lesion. On speculum examination, there is a foreign body at the external cervical os. However, there is no other cervical mass or lesion. On bimanual examination, the uterus was not enlarged and there was no adnexal mass or tenderness. On the integumentary system, she had no palmar pallor. On neurologic examination, she was oriented to time, person, and place. She had normal reflexes and no neurologic deficits.

On laboratory investigation, an ultrasound examination was done by a radiologist and showed unremarkable pelvic findings. Urinalysis, complete blood count, and serum blood glucose level were normal. With the final diagnosis of postmenopausal pelvic pain secondary to the retained intrauterine device, the patient was prepared and taken to the gynecology procedure room. In the lithotomy position, the speculum was inserted and the intrauterine device was easily removed with spongy forceps. The mother was observed for 4 hours and discharged with analgesia and doxycycline 100 mg PO twice a day for three days. Upon follow-up, the pelvic pain was resolved.