The patient is a 66-year-old female in good health. During the mid-1980s, she received repeated series of grenz ray treatment on her scalp to relieve itch associated with scalp psoriasis. With regular treatment of approximately one session per month over a 5-year period now and then supplemented with coal tar, salicylic acid, and prednisone, there was some relief of her condition. Over time, her hair thinned; the skin in the entire scalp area became pain-sensitive with scarring. Treatments with grenz rays had been given in a private clinic; treatment details such as single and accumulated dose were not available. She had suffered no radiodermatitis.

Within a very short period in 2020, some 35 years since the radiation treatment stopped, numerous BCCs and premalignant actinic keratoses (AKs) appeared in her scalp. A treatment regimen of surgical removal of BCCs verified by preoperative histology and cryotherapy of AKs by clinician’s assessment was initiated. Photodynamic therapy or topical treatments were not applicable due to pain sensitivity and sequelae from surgery. From 2020 to 2022, she received several cryo- and curettage treatments and a total of 13 surgical excisions of BCC by Mohs surgery. Her total number of excisions over time is estimated to about 30. Recalcitrant and de novo BCC in the increasingly damaged scalp, obviously, is an everlasting challenge; plastic surgeons and dermatologists were therefore searching another treatment modality of better therapeutic index.

In September 2022, she came with new histologically confirmed BCCs in the scalp. Ultrasound scanning (DermaScan C, Cortex Technology ApS, Aalborg, Denmark) showed echo-lucent tumors of thickness 0.5–1.3 mm in both the histologically analyzed sites as well as in a few additional lesions that could be identified based on clinical and dermoscopic examination. The patient after information granted her written consent to HIFU treatment made with or without pretreatment biopsy of suspected lesions.

Eligible lesions for treatment were outlined with a waterproof pen including a perilesional margin of 2 mm. Each selected lesion was mapped on a transparent foil to help the precise location on follow-up. The 20 MHz ultrasound scanning was used to confirm the depth of identified lesions at baseline and at subsequent follow-up visits. Due to the state of known pain-sensitive scalp, local anesthesia (25 mg/mL lidocaine + 5 mg/mL adrenaline, Amgros I/S, Copenhagen, Denmark) was administered to all lesions 10–15 min before treatment.

Lesions were treated with HIFU using the 1.3 mm probe; settings 150 ms/dose duration and acoustic energy 0.9 J/dose. 20–200 doses were applied to lesions depending on lesion extension. Treated lesions healed spontaneously with no complication or need of special treatment. Follow-up visits had been scheduled every 3–6 months to monitor cure rate/relapse, local tolerance, and newcomer lesions not identified before.

During the 15 months after the above-described initial clearing by HIFU, a total of 10 lesions that following routines would require biopsy followed by excisional surgery were treated with HIFU in sessions of about 30 min. Lesions healed in a few days with no complication or need of intervention. Full clearing was noted in 7 of 8 treated BCC lesions and both AK lesions. The single recurrent BCC of small size was observed after 15 months among the first six treated lesions; the lesion was retreated with HIFU. Examples of healed lesions 15 months after HIFU treatment; the tumor with recurrence.