A 48-year-old male was admitted to our hospital from a psychiatric facility with somnolence, cerebellar ataxia, and dysarthria of 3 days' duration. He had no fever in the previous month. He reported snorting escitalopram and clonazepam in the previous days, as well as intranasal disulfiram (1-2 g daily with a maximum dose of 10 g daily in the previous 48 hours) for recreational purposes in the past 2 months.

He had a history of untreated hypertension and paranoid schizophrenia, which had led to three hospitalizations for exacerbations due to treatment omission. He was taking olanzapine 10 mg/8 hours and paliperidone 100 mg intramuscular monthly for schizophrenia, as well as clonacepam 0.5 mg/24 hours and escitalopram 15 mg/24 hours. He was also receiving oral disulfiram 250 mg daily for chronic alcoholism despite an active drinking pattern.

On arrival to the emergency department, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute, oxygen saturation in room air was 98%, heart rate was 85 beats/minute, blood pressure was 177/100 mmHg, and temperature was 36.2°C. The patient was stuporous and disoriented with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 13/15. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and abdominal examination was unremarkable. A myotic, hyporesponsive pupil, profuse blinking, marked dysarthria, and unsteady gait were noted on neurologic examination. There were no clinical signs of intracranial hypertension or meningeal irritation.

Blood analysis showed hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis (pH: 7.28; real bicarbonate: 16.4 mmol/L), polyglobulia and macrocytosis. Renal function and liver profile were normal. No other findings of interest were found. Toxicological study was negative for ethanol, methanol and ethylene glycol. Urine toxic screen by immunoassay was positive for benzodiazepines. Computed tomography revealed mild, nonspecific symmetrical hypodensities of both the pallidum and posterior arms of the internal capsule, cerebral atrophy and chronic lacunar infarcts.

The patient was admitted to the hospital because of suspected encephalopathy related to a drug intoxication (presumably benzodiazepines), without ruling out other diagnostic possibilities. This first hypothesis was based on the fact that it was a hypnotic-sedative syndrome in a patient who reported consumption of benzodiazepines and who had a positive qualitative study in the urine.

Plasma levels of diazepam, nordiazepam and clonazepam were requested, all in therapeutic or subtherapeutic range (72 ng/mL, 412 ng/mL and negative, respectively). An EEG showed diffuse slow activity, without focal or epileptiform alterations. The examination of the cerebrospinal fluid showed a mild hyperproteinemia and all microbiological studies were negative.

The patient's history was difficult to collect as the information provided was often contradictory. In this regard, the explanation for the negative clonazepam levels was that the patient could not be guaranteed to have actually taken the clonazepam. Based on these plasma levels, it was most likely that he had not. On the other hand, the fact that the plasma levels of diazepam and nordiazepam were positive was consistent with the information provided by the patient. In retrospect, diazepam vials were found in the patient's home. Plasma levels in the therapeutic range do not exclude the possibility of adverse effects, but they make their severity and the clinical course followed by the patient less likely. Benzodiazepines probably contributed to the picture, but causation could not be attributed given these plasma levels.

On the other hand, hyperchloremic acidaemia with normal lactate levels in the clinical setting of this patient led us to consider the diagnosis of a metabolic disorder, especially an organic acidaemia, a disorder of the beta-oxidation of fatty acids or a disorder of the urea cycle. The systematic study in plasma and urine of fatty acids, acylcarnitines, acylglycines and carnitine was negative. In addition, the ammonium levels were normal and hypoglycaemia with hypocetosis was not found. The acidaemia resolved in less than 24 hours without specific measures, which made the hypothesis of a metabolic disorder very unlikely. In addition, during the initial stabilisation, the patient had received intensive serum therapy with 0.9% NaCl, which could have contributed to the acidaemia.

Within 24 hours, he developed a progressive decrease in level of consciousness with rapidly progressive respiratory failure requiring endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation and was transferred to the intensive care unit.

Respiratory examination and chest X-ray suggested aspiration pneumonia, and he was treated accordingly. To investigate the etiology of the encephalopathy, a brain MRI was performed. It revealed a large, bilateral, heterogeneous hyperintense signal in both globus pallidus, the posterior arm of the internal capsule and the putamen, in both FLAIR and T2. The T1-weighted sequence showed a hypointense area in the same areas.

Based on these findings, the case was reclassified as disulfiram-induced encephalopathy, as the radiological pattern had been previously described in the literature in other cases of disulfiram intoxication, as well as in cases of carbon monoxide intoxication (although this was not the clinical setting). The diagnosis of disulfiram encephalopathy was made by exclusion criteria. According to the algorithm of Naranjo et al [5], with a score of 4 out of 10, it was considered possible to attribute causality to disulfiram in this case. In turn, the published cases of disulfiram encephalopathy present important similarities with this case. However, there are no cases described of inhaled disulfiram, as it is not an approved route of administration. Unfortunately, disulfiram plasma levels could not be performed.

The patient's respiratory status improved gradually over the next two weeks until he was extubated. After withdrawal of sedation, neurological examination revealed difficulties in supination, intentional tremor and dysmetria in the finger-nose test, as well as proximal weakness in the upper and lower limbs. Subsequently, the patient showed neurological improvement. Ocular motility restriction and weakness resolved within a few days, but persisted with mild tremor and slight dysmetria. Due to the critical patient's myopathy, gait was not explored until two weeks later, when a complete resolution of ataxia was observed.

The patient was discharged with a mild residual intentional tremor. The brain MRI control at two months showed an evolution of the symmetric areas of cytotoxic edema to necrosis.
