A 48-year-old African American woman with past medical history only significant for uncontrolled essential hypertension presented to the Emergency Department with a chief complaint of palpitations. She also reported associated fatigue and shortness of breath. Over the past month, she described an intermittent sensation of an irregular heartbeat without any specific triggers. Her symptoms progressed to left-sided chest discomfort with associated left upper-extremity tingling. Additionally, she reported black spots in her vision, as well as dysphagia primarily to solids, which also had been worsening over the past few weeks. She had no history of similar symptoms in the past. She was not on any medications.

On admission, vital signs were significant for a blood pressure of 166/92 mmHg and heart rate of 109 beats/minute. A physical exam was significant for conjunctival pallor, without evidence of glossitis or koilonychia. In the Emergency Department, a complete metabolic panel was unremarkable including a serum creatinine of 0.56 mg/dL [0.60–1.20 mg/dL]. An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with occasional premature ventricular complexes. Troponins were within normal limits. Hemoglobin on admission was 5.7 g/dL [11.9–15.1 g/dL] with a mean corpuscular volume of 65.3 fL [80.0–96.0 fL]. Her serum iron on admission was 12 ug/dL [50–212 ug/dL], iron saturation was 3% [20–50%], and ferritin was 3.1 ng/mL [11.0–306.8 ng/mL]. The fecal immunochemical test (FIT) result was negative. Upon further questioning, the patient stated that she still menstruated, but did not describe menorrhagia. She denied hematemesis, hematochezia, or melena. She was transfused with 2 units of packed red blood cells in the Emergency Department and was started on 1400 mg of intravenous iron dextran complex infusions.

The patient was unable to sit for an esophagogram to evaluate for dysphagia secondary to nausea and vomiting while attempting to drink the contrast agent. Gastroenterology was consulted, and the patient underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy on day 6 of her hospitalization. Colonoscopy results were within normal limits. The EGD revealed a few intrinsic stenoses in the upper esophagus, with the narrowest measuring 9 millimeters. Biopsies were obtained from the proximal and distal esophagus with cold forceps for suspected eosinophilic esophagitis versus Plummer-Vinson syndrome, based on gross appearance. A pathology exam of the esophagus showed squamous-only mucosa, with mild chronic inactive inflammation. No eosinophilia was seen. Given the clinical, laboratory, and endoscopic findings, a diagnosis of Plummer-Vinson syndrome was made. Her dysphagia improved over the next 9 days in the hospital after iron infusions and blood transfusions, and she was able to tolerate a regular diet by eating slowly with small bites.

She underwent a cardiac workup to assess the palpitations, including an echocardiogram, which revealed an ejection fraction of 30–34%, with global hypokinesis and without valvular pathology or pulmonary hypertension. A nuclear stress test was negative for myocardial ischemia. A new diagnosis of congestive heart failure with reduced ejection fraction was made. Cardiology was consulted and she was started on carvedilol, lisinopril, spironolactone, and hydralazine. She was given a Life Vest in the hospital at discharge.

Approximately 6 months after her discharge, a follow-up phone call was made to the patient. She stated that she had been compliant with all of her medications and her dysphagia had resolved. At the time of the phone call, she was tolerating a regular diet without any dietary restrictions.