A 24-year-old male patient presented to our clinic in November 2023 with a history of blunt trauma to the right eye in October 2023. He had a hyphema at the time of the trauma, so a proper fundus exam was not performed at that time. Upon examination, visual acuity was (20/50), anterior segment examination was unremarkable, and fundus exam revealed a full-thickness macular hole. OCT revealed a full-thickness macular hole with a diameter of 320 um and a base diameter of 925 um. Surgery was offered, but the patient was reluctant, and a one-month follow-up was given to reconsider surgery. Two months later, he presented with a visual acuity of (20/100), and OCT showed an enlargement of the macular hole with a diameter of 368 um and a base diameter of 1233 um. Pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) was performed in January 2024, posterior vitreous detachment (PVD) induction followed by staining with trypan blue (Membrane blue dual, DORC, Netherlands). ILM peeling was initiated inferotemporally and advanced nasally then superiorly and concluded with an inverted temporal ILM flap over the hole. At this stage, the flap was not stable over the hole; it was tucked gently with a soft tip cannula, and a dispersive viscoelastic was applied over the flap; careful fluid-air exchange was performed at 30 mmHg with the flap observed flat over the hole, and SF6 20% flush was performed. After the surgery, the patient was instructed to maintain a face-down position. At two weeks postoperatively, the patient reported maintaining a strict face-down position and came with an improved visual acuity to (20/50). OCT showed successful hole closure, and the flap could be seen bridging the fovea. At three months postoperatively, the patient came back to the clinic with a complaint of a very faint central floater. Visual acuity was (20/30), and fundus exam revealed a clear vitreous cavity and a closed hole. OCT showed a partially detached flap that is still hinged temporally to the fovea. No intervention was offered to the patient since the floater is very minimal.