An 18-year-old hispanic male patient with no significant medical history presents to the emergency department (ED) complaining of substernal, non-radiated chest pain, orthopnoea, dry and non-productive cough, and subjective fevers at home, for the last 3–4 days. Family history remarkable for paternal grandfather diagnosed with non-ischaemic cardiomyopathy and a pacemaker at age 86 years old. Patient lives with both parents and denies any smoking, ethanol consumption, recreational drug use, abuse or neglect at home. He worked at auto-part shop and planned to start college soon.


Investigations


In the ED, serum troponin I levels were found to be elevated and ECG showed diffuse ST-segment elevation. He was admitted to the local hospital and initial workup was remarkable for an enlarged cardiac silhouette and mild pulmonary oedema observed on chest X-ray, a transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrating left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40%, with severe left ventricular (LV) concentric hypertrophy and mild posterior pericardial effusion. Additionally, the patient was found to have elevated titres for Coxsackie virus A and B. His symptoms initially improved with the initiation of ibuprofen and colchicine. Cardiac catheterisation was performed, which revealed no evidence of coronary artery disease. Repeat TTE showed an LVEF of 40%–45%, hypokinesis of anteroapical and inferolateral wall, with an elevated LV end-diastolic pressure, consistent with diastolic dysfunction. Chest CT angiogram showed evidence of pneumonitis and a pericardial effusion. And at this point, the constellation of symptoms was thought to be secondary to Coxsackie myopericarditis, for which he continued to receive medical treatment as previously mentioned.

On the fourth day of admission, the patient became diaphoretic, tachycardic and hypotensive with an undetectable blood pressure. Emergent TTE showed large pericardial effusion with impending cardiac tamponade features, and pericardiocentesis was performed. During the procedure, the patient developed pulseless electrical activity (PEA) cardiac arrest and received advanced cardiovascular support for 30 min. Ultimately patient was intubated, placed on venous-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO) and started on vasopressor support (norepinephrine 5 mcg/min and vasopressin 0.05 units/min), with numerous transfusions (9 packed red bloodcells, 10 units of platelets, 10 units of cryoprecipitate and 4 units of fresh frozen plasma) due to significant oozing of blood from the ECMO cannula. He was transferred to our hospital where endomyocardial biopsy (EMB) was then obtained due to concern of fulminant myocarditis and to test for other infiltrative cardiomyopathies. Pathology reports showed no signs suggestive of inflammatory or infiltrative process in the endomyocardium. Coxsackie Abs were repeated and were positive for Cox A type 9, Coxsackie B2 and Coxsackie B6, and an elevated Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) DNA quantitative PCR at 133 000 IU/mL. At this point, another TTE was done, which showed a severely decreased ejection fraction (EF) of 10%–15% with previously noted severe LV concentric hypertrophy (1.9 cm septum and 2.2 cm in the inferolateral wall).

The patient was started on intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for treatment of Coxsackie myocarditis, and broad-spectrum antibiotics due to worsening leucocytosis, but with no identified infectious focus. Colchicine was discontinued due to concern for rhabdomyolysis, with elevation of serum creatine kinase level to 2874 unit/L. Vasopressors were then discontinued and the patient was extubated. He also developed episode of flushing, fever, dyspnoea and decreasing oxygen saturation, with chest X-ray showing congested lung parenchyma with concerns for ARDS, therefore, IVIG was stopped.

Given improvement of cardiac function in another TTE with LVEF of 25%–30%, it was decided to attempt to remove the ECMO, which was unsuccessful. The patient remained on ECMO support and emergent discussion with heart failure team took place to determine best approach. The patient was evaluated for possible left ventricle assist device, however, deemed not a candidate due to significant global concentric LV hypertrophy, and the multidisciplinary team agreed to facilitate emergency listing for heart transplantation, with consideration to transition to another cardiovascular support such as intra-aortic balloon pump, with potential inotrope support.

During further evaluation for possible heart transplant, an incisional biopsy of a 1×1 inch palpable, painless, rubbery, mobile mass in the right arm was done and sent for pathology. The patient mentioned he first noticed this lesion approximately 2–3 months before presenting to the ED. Pathology report of the right upper extremity mass showed aggressive EBV (+) NK/T-cell lymphoma with a cytotoxic immunophenotype (positive for CD 2, CD3, CD56, BCL2, granzyme B, TIA1, MUM1 and diffuse coexpression of Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNAs by in situ hybridisation), and a modified SMILE (Steroids, Methotrexate with leucovorin, Ifosfamide with mesna, L-asparaginase and Etoposide) chemotherapy regimen was started. In situ hybridisation of the EMB previously obtained were negative for EBV-RNA.

Cardiac MRI was obtained, which revealed hypokinesis of the inferolateral and anterolateral wall, as previously described by TTE, delayed enhancement in the subendocardial and transmural distribution in these regions, with relative sparing of the septum. Additionally, avid enhancement and thickening of the pericardium, without a mass identified, and a pocket of pericardial fluid with septations, concerning for loculations, were also noted.


Differential diagnosis

The constellation of symptoms (shortness of breath, orthopnoea, hypotension and subjective fevers), with findings such as diffuse ST-segment elevation on ECG, leakages of cardiac markers (troponin), elevated Coxsackie virus titres (both of serotype A and B), as well as echocardiographic findings of pericardial effusion; all seemed to correlate with a classic presentation of viral pericarditis clinical due to Coxackie virus. However, despite medical treatment with colchicine, the patient continued to decompensate and eventually required pericardiocentesis due to cardiac tamponade, then developed cardiac arrest and ultimately requires ECMO support, for what seems acute onset heart failure. In this setting, fulminant myocarditis secondary to Coxsackie virus was considered. Cardiotropic RNA virus, such as Coxackie viruses, induce receptor-mediated endocytosis, with viral replication contributing to cellular dysfunction and ultimately apoptosis of the cell.1 When susceptible individuals are infected with highly virulent viral strains, maladaptive immunologic activity can occur, leading to persistent activation of T cells and continued antibody-mediated myocyte destruction, which can ultimately lead to fulminant myocarditis. EBV myocarditis could also explain the rapid deterioration in the setting of a positive EBV PCR, which is a more sensitivity test than traditional serologies for detection of acute infection.2 However, in situ hybridisation was negative for EBV-RNA.

Nevertheless, the significant concentric hypertrophy observed on the initial TTEs and the atypical delayed enhancement observed on the cardiac MRI are not explained by this diagnosis. Additionally, the EMB did not show an inflammatory process.

Fortuitous finding of EBV (+) NK/T-cell lymphoma by incisional biopsy of the right upper extremity allowed for a more fitting diagnosis for this case. The pericardial effusion, unresponsive to initial medical treatment and new acute heart failure with concentric hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, in the setting of newly diagnosed NK/T-cell lymphoma, raises the possibility of NK/T-cell lymphoma with involvement of the myocardium and pericardium as the most adequate diagnosis in this scenario, which englobes all the features previously mentioned in this case.

Other differentials taken into consideration include infiltrative cardiomyopathy such as amyloidosis. However, Congo red staining of the EMB samples failed to demonstrate deposition of amyloid.


Treatment

Given the diagnosis of extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma (ENKTCL) with suspected pericardial involvement and no bone marrow involvement, modified SMILE regimen was desired as the first-line chemotherapy regimen. This regimen includes dexamethasone, ifosfamide, mesna and etoposide, and excluded methotrexate, due to evidence of third-spacing and effusions, which could lead to delayed excretion and increased risk of toxicity.

However, due to his compromised cardiac function, it was believed that the patient would not tolerate cytotoxic chemotherapy which requires aggressive intravenous, and alternatively, emergent chemotherapy regimen was instituted: carboplatin (day 1–day 3), etoposide (day 1–day 5) and dexamethasone. Peg-asparaginase was later introduced in the regimen (day 7–day 21). This regimen proved effective, as evidenced by rapid recovery of the LV function and overall haemodynamic stability, and decision was made to incorporate a modified SMILE chemotherapy regimen, of which he received two cycles. Then chemotherapy regimen was changed to dexamethasone, gemcitabine, carboplatin and peg-asparaginase (DDGP). The patient received two cycles of DDGP. A full body positron emission tomography (PET) scan was negative for lymphoma. The plan is to continue two more cycles of chemotherapy (to complete six total cycles of chemotherapy). Currently, the patient is considering radiation therapy and possible stem cell transplant, after completion of the chemotherapy regimen. Additionally, the patient is currently on guideline-directed medical therapy for heart failure and has completed cardiac rehabilitation.


Outcome and follow-up

The patient has completed five out of six chemotherapy sessions with the previously mentioned regimens. After initiation of chemotherapy and optimal medical treatment for heart failure, the patient has recovered much of his cardiac function, as evidenced by an LVEF of 55%, no wall motion abnormalities and normal myocardial wall thickness on his most recent TTE. He continues to be followed by heart failure/cardiology team and oncology team in clinic.