Patient details
A 65-year-old Japanese man who had been undergoing regular hemodialysis for end-stage renal disease of unknown etiology since his 30s developed pancytopenia in 2017. His anemia made him dependent on regular red cell transfusion in 2018. In February 2019, we performed a bone marrow examination and found dysplasia in granulocytes and erythroid lineages with 1.8% of myeloblasts. G-banding method revealed normal karyotype. We thus diagnosed myelodysplastic syndrome with excess blasts in the recent International Consensus Classification [10] and myelodysplastic neoplasm increased blasts 1 in the 5th edition of WHO classification [11]. We administered three courses of azacitidine but ceased it due to severe cytopenia. The blast cells increased in his peripheral blood with disseminated intravascular coagulation in November 2019, indicating transformation to AML. To reduce the blast cells, the fourth course of azacitidine was administered, but it was ineffective. Since the genetic analysis identified a mutation in the tyrosine kinase domain of FLT3 in the AML cells, we started to administer 120 mg of gilteritinib every day. Although gilteritinib showed a temporary effect of decreasing white blood cells and lactate dehydrogenase on day 2 after initiation without obvious adverse events, they began to rise on day 4, and the treatment was deemed ineffective. We decided to terminate treatment for AML as well as hemodialysis and to use the best supportive care. The patient subsequently died of arrhythmia on day 7.

Written consent for genome sequencing and publication had been obtained from the patient. This research was approved by the local institutional review board (approval no. JHTF-2019-003) and conducted ethically following the World Medical Association Declaration of Helsinki.

Sample collection and processing
Blood samples were collected immediately before the first dose of gilteritinib (referred to as “before” in this study) and 4 days after the initiation of the treatment (referred to as “after” in this study). The CD34+ cells were isolated from the blood samples using CD34 MicroBead Kit-UltraPure (Miltenyi Biotec, Gladbach, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. CD34+ cells were quantified using a flow cytometer at Kotobiken Medical Laboratory (Ibaraki, Japan).

Assay for transposase-accessible chromatin (ATAC) with high-throughput sequencing
Library preparation, sequencing, mapping, and Gene Ontology (GO) analysis for ATAC-seq were performed at DNAFORM (Yokohama, Japan). Cells were lysed, and the rearrangement reaction was performed using Tn5 transposase (#FC121-1030, Illumina CA, USA) for 30 minutes at 37 ℃. The reaction solution was purified using the MinElute PCR Purification Kit (#28004, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Next, five cycles of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using custom Nextera PCR primers were conducted using NEBNext Q5 Hot Start HiFi PCR Master Mix (#M0543, New England Biolabs, MA, USA). The number of additional PCR cycles was determined using qPCR of the partially amplified product. PCR products were prepared using Agencourt AMPure XP beads (#A63881, Beckman Coulter, CA, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Paired-end sequencing was performed on the NextSeq 500 instrument (Illumina). The obtained reads (GEO accession number GSE210617) were mapped on the basis of the human GRCh38.p13 genome using the Burrows–Wheeler aligner (BWA-MEM: ver. 0.7.17-r1188).

Bioinformatic analysis of ATAC-seq
Bioinformatic analysis was performed as described previously. Peak calling was performed using MACS2 (ver. 2.2.6) and epic2 (ver. 0.0.41) with default parameters. Peak annotation was performed using HOMER (ver. 4.9.1). For GO analysis, we first extracted peaks that exhibited at least a twofold increase in ATAC signal before and after gilteritinib treatment. We then compiled a list of the protein-coding genes nearest to each peak and performed the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses using DAVID2021 (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/tools.jsp). The differential peaks were identified by calculating the log2FC value (< −0.75 or > 0.75). Next, the functions and transcription factor regulations among the peaks were analyzed by comparison with the transcription active site (Histone H3K27 acetylation site) or transcriptional repression site (Histone H3K9 di-methylation site) using ChIP-Atlas (http://chip-atlas.org/). Histone acetylation or methylation site data in the leukemia cells of the patient with AML were obtained using Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP) of H3K27ac (SRX4496694) and H3K9me2 (SRX1136016), respectively. The motif enrichment analyses were performed using the MEME-ChIP algorithm.

Results
The laboratory data of the patient at before and after timepoints are presented in Table 1. Immature granulocytes along with blast cells seen in the peripheral blood before the treatment, remained until day 4 (after). From the before and after specimens, 4.66 × 103 and 2.14 × 103 of CD34+ cells were isolated, respectively. They were subsequently analyzed using ATAC-seq. As expected, the signal peaks were concentrated around transcription start sites (TSS). After the treatment, greater than fivefold changed peaks were detected in 137 (upregulated) and 105 (downregulated) regions. Along with the affected regions, half of the regions (66 out of 137 upregulated and 37 out of 105 downregulated) were located in the intergenic regions that were assumed to serve as regulators for the adjacent genes. A GO analysis of affected genes listed the mitogen‑activated protein kinase pathway, consistent with the previous findings of intracellular signalling pathways potentiated by the FLT3 genetic mutations in leukemia cells. We then took a closer look at the loci of the listed genes associated with cancers. No alteration on the FLT3 gene locus was seen due to the treatment. On the gene locus of PPP2R2B (a subunit of tumor suppressor protein phosphatase 2A), the peaks were decreased, suggesting reduced chromatin accessibility. In contrast, upregulation peaks were observed on the gene locus and adjacent noncoding region of platelet-derived growth factor D (PDGFD) that is associated with the progression of various types of cancer, including AML. As the profiles of chromatin openness were affected, we tested whether de novo binding of DNA-binding transcription factors was generated by gilteritinib. By a motif enrichment analysis of DNA binding sites of transcription regulators in the open chromatin areas, no significant alteration of enrichment was seen between before and after treatment scenarios.