A 44-year-old female presented to the emergency department of our hospital with a history of right lower abdominal pain for 3 days associated with abdominal distention, a few episodes of vomiting, and anorexia. The pain was not associated with fever. The patient had a history of total abdominal hysterectomy (TAH) done 1 year back at a local hospital for abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB). The patient had no other significant medical comorbidities. She did not have a history of any psychiatric illness. On physical examination, her body mass index was 23.5 kg/m2, and her vitals were stable. The abdomen was distended with a Pfannenstiel scar present at the lower abdomen with tenderness over the right iliac fossa; rebound tenderness was present; however, there was no guarding or rigidity. Bowel sound was present but sluggish. On digital rectal examination, the rectum was empty, and no mass was felt. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. On blood investigation, hemoglobin was 8.5 g/dl, total leukocyte count was 11,000/cumm with neutrophils of 70 % and lymphocytes of 25 %. The rest of the blood investigations were within normal limits. The modified Alvarado score was calculated as 7/9. Ultrasonography of the abdomen showed features suggestive of acute appendicitis with an appendicular diameter of 8 mm with minimal peri-appendiceal collection. The X-ray abdomen erect view demonstrated multiple air-fluid levels suggestive of intestinal obstruction. With the preoperative diagnosis of acute appendicitis, open appendectomy was planned by Gridiron incision. The operative finding was an inflamed appendix with a healthy base. There was 50 ml of serous peri-appendiceal collection. The ileum was dilated with a doughy consistency. With suspicion of gossypiboma, an enterotomy was performed, and 30 cm × 30 cm long-tailed surgical gauze was present, about 25 cm proximal to the ileocecal junction, which was retrieved through the enterotomy. Enterotomy was repaired in two layers with an interrupted absorbable suture. Post-operative recovery was uneventful; an oral diet was started on the 2nd postoperative day, and the patient was discharged on the 6th postoperative day. On retrospective history taking, the patient denies ingestion of foreign bodies, and there was no history of pica in the past. On the 14th day's follow-up, the patient had no issues, and the wound was healing well. On 1-month, 3-month, and 6-month follow-ups, the patient showed no symptoms or signs of intestinal obstruction.