69-year-old woman with a history of hypertension, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, chronic headaches and smoking. She reported a week ago headaches, confusion and vomiting. The examination in the emergency room revealed coma (Glasgow coma scale 5), neck stiffness and absence of pupillary changes.

Computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse HSA, mild intraventricular hemorrhage and hydrocephalus. Computed tomography angiography demonstrated a supraclinoid right internal carotid artery aneurysm. Once admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), she received treatment with invasive mechanical ventilation, tranexamic acid, nimodipine and enteral VPA (400 mg, three times daily). External lumbar drainage and endovascular embolisation of the aneurysm were performed, with no evidence of angiographic vasospasm. Initial CT showed hydrocephalus, and external ventricular drainage was performed.

As an initial complication, the patient developed neurocardiogenic dysfunction, with an electrocardiogram showing diffuse repolarization changes and elevated troponin (716 ng/mL). The transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated systolic dysfunction (left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%) and regional parietal contractility abnormalities, which were interpreted as stress cardiomyopathy. During the stay in the ICU, despite withdrawal of sedation, the patient remained in a coma (Glasgow coma scale 5 on the sixth day). Subsequent CT scans were negative for hydrocephalus, ischemic lesions or other complications.

The liver, renal, and thyroid functions were normal, and she had no electrolyte imbalances. No extraneural complications were found. The external ventricular drain was removed with sterile cultures. The transcranial Doppler was negative for vasospasm and showed a normal pulsatility index. The MRI did not detect abnormalities. The standard EEG ruled out ictal patterns, but demonstrated a predominantly frontal DPG pattern, which was characterized as a continuous periodic discharge pattern with triphasic morphology and without spontaneous fluctuation, as seen in toxic and/or metabolic brain disorders. (4) Given these findings, the VPA dose was 65.3µg/mL (therapeutic range 50 - 100µg/mL), and the ammonia dose was 160.2µg/mL (normal range 18.7 - 86.0µg/mL). No hepatic insufficiency or gastrointestinal bleeding was observed. VPA administration was then discontinued, and hyperammonemia treatment with lactulose and a protein-restricted diet was initiated. The ammonia level decreased progressively to normalization (81.7ug/mL), which was correlated with a neurological improvement evidenced by response to command on Day 12.

Subsequent EEGs progressively improved to normal. The patient required tracheostomy for weaning from mechanical ventilation and had a tracheo-esophageal fistula as a complication. She died 85 days after admission.
