28-year-old male patient, a resident of a periurban area of Lima, who works as a motorcycle taxi driver. He has a history of complete individualized treatment five years ago for pulmonary tuberculosis resistant to isoniazid, streptomycin and ethionamide. He comes to the emergency department of the Edgardo Rebagliati Martins National Hospital with a 34-day illness characterized by persistent fever, chills, weight loss, dyspnea and leukocytosis.

The patient was initially seen by a private doctor with a clinical picture of moderate intensity left rib cage pain, palpitations and high intensity fever. The electrocardiogram was normal and the chest X-ray on day 4 of illness (day 4) was reported as normal, but the high intensity fever (38 °C), chills and leukocytosis with neutrophilia persisted. In addition, the patient had weight loss and abdominal pain. Serology for the immunodeficiency virus (HIV 1-2) and baciloscopy (BK) for the detection of the Koch bacillus were requested in three sputum samples, which were non-reactive and negative, respectively. The abdominal ultrasound and the faecal examinations showed no alterations. Due to the persistence of these symptoms, the patient was hospitalized.

Clinical findings
On physical examination, the patient was in fair general condition, emaciated, with a heart rate of 110 beats per minute, blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg, oxygen saturation of 96% without oxygen support, moderate dehydration and abolition of the vesicular murmur in the middle and lower third of the left hemithorax.

Calendar
During hospitalization, the patient persisted with fever, chills and marked increase in leukocytes and C-reactive protein (CRP). On day 9 of hospitalization (DH 9) or day 42 of illness (DE 42), thoracocentesis was performed plus placement of a thoracic drainage tube (TDT) in the left hemithorax. Initially, 600 ml of greenish, purulent secretion was drained, from which samples were obtained and sent to the laboratory for analysis. On DH 10 (DE 43), intravenous antibiotic coverage was initiated.

In DH 12 (DE 45), the patient no longer has a fever and the leukocytosis, neutrophilia and CRP have decreased. The secretion is no longer purulent. The tomography of DH 15 (DE 48) showed a decrease of the volume of the empyema by more than 50% and the chest ultrasound of DH 22 (DE 55) quantified it to only 73 ml.

Diagnosis assessment
The initial chest tomography showed the presence of an extensive pleural empyema in the left hemithorax. It was considered a probable case of tuberculosis in an immunosuppressed patient and new serological tests for HIV 1-2 and for human lymphotropic virus of T cells type 1 and 2 or HTLV 1-2 were performed, which were non-reactive. The culture and bacilloscopy tests for Mycobacterium tuberculosis in sputum and urine were also negative.

The samples of the empyema, obtained by thoracocentesis, were processed for the detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis and identification of common germs. For the first, the automated system in liquid medium MGIT (Mycobacterium Growth Indicator Tube) and the GeneXpert MTB/RIF automated real-time PCR test were used and were negative. For the second, the MALDI-TOF MS test was used and was positive to P. micra. In this case it was not possible to carry out an antibiogram.

The MALDI (Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/Ionization) technique, coupled to a TOF (time of flight) analyzer, is an ionization technique used in mass spectrometry, which allows the analysis of ribosomal proteins, typically between 2000 to 20 000 Da, from previously isolated bacteria, and compares them with ribosomal proteins from other bacteria in its database. This allows the identification of aerobic and anaerobic pathogens, quickly and reliably.

Therapeutic intervention
For the management of the patient, the taking of samples of the empyema for the etiological diagnosis, placement of the TDT, initiation of antibiotic coverage and dental evaluation were considered. Prior to the identification of P. micra, empirical treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam was initiated, at a dose of 4.5 grams intravenous every 6 hours. After two weeks, when a notable clinical, imaging and laboratory improvement was observed, the withdrawal of the TDT and the continuation of the same intravenous antibiotic treatment in an associated clinic was decided, until completing six weeks, and then, the possibility of decortication was evaluated.

The dental evaluation found scarce calcified plaque subgingival, predominantly in the posterior teeth, congestive gingiva, at the level of the lower third molars (teeth 38 and 48), partially erupted, which is compatible with chronic pericoronitis. The tomographic study of the facial mass evidenced the chronic infectious process and the retention of teeth 38 and 48, which will require, subsequently, defocalization by means of complex exodontia and comprehensive dental treatment.
