Presentation and initial treatment

A 67-year-old woman presented to the Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland, in June 2016 with a three-week history of increasing heart failure. The patient had New York Heart Association (NYHA) Functional Class IV symptoms that included dyspnea, weakness, and weight gain. The patient had a history of chronic heart failure due to dilated cardiomyopathy. She had a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 25% and severe mitral regurgitation. In 2015, she was diagnosed with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and hypothyroidism. She had been previously treated using the Mitralign percutaneous annuloplasty system (Mitralign Inc., Tewksbury MA, USA) for mitral regurgitation. She had also previously been treated with a cardiac resynchronization therapy device (CRT-D). However, she suffered recurrent pulmonary edema with episodes of pulmonary hypertension and required intubation and ventilation. The patient was admitted to the Intensive Care Cardiac Therapy Clinic for immediate medical treatment. An IABP with catheter access through a femoral artery was initially used. At this stage, because she had severe pulmonary hypertension, this was considered to be a contraindication for heart transplantation. During 115 days of hospital stay, the patient suffered from immobility associated with the siting of the IABP catheter.

In December 2016, following several unsuccessful attempts to remove the femoral artery IABP catheter, a decision was made to change the IABP access from the femoral artery to the external iliac artery. Following re-siting the IABP catheter, the aim was to combine optimal pharmacological management with active and passive physical rehabilitation.

A four-stage approach using the external iliac artery for IABP catheter placement

An innovative technique has recently been developed at our institution to address the problems resulting from long-term femoral IABP placement. The patient was informed about this new procedure and signed written informed consent for this treatment. The left external iliac artery was used for IABP catheter insertion and included an 8 mm diameter Gelsoft prosthetic conduit (Vascutek, Inchinnan, Scotland, UK). A bevelled 8 mm Dacron graft was anastomosed end-to-side to the artery with a 5-0 polypropylene suture. The catheter was subcutaneously removed from the left retroperitoneal space to the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. No complications occurred during the procedure.

The procedure developed at our institution included four main stages. Stage 1 began with a longitudinal lower left quadrant incision from the lower rib arch to the superior portion of the inguinal ligament. The skin, subcutaneous tissue, and muscles were incised to the peritoneal membrane to expose the external iliac artery. Using retractors, the intra-abdominal organs were moved medially to expose the iliac arteries. A side-to-end anastomosis was performed between the external iliac artery and the prosthetic graft. Stage 2 of the procedure involved a 1 cm incision in the right sight of the abdomen, 5–6 cm from the umbilicus, and 2 cm below it. A tunnel was created in the subcutaneous plane from the right side of the abdomen to the left side. Stage 3 of the procedure included advancing the proximal part of the IABP catheter from the right side of the abdomen through the subcutaneous tunnel to the left side. The catheter was placed in the descending thoracic aorta through the prosthetic graft, iliac artery, and aorta. The catheter was tied and sealed at the connection site with the graft using a prolene 2-0 suture. Stage 4 of the procedure included the closure of the retroperitoneal wound. The use of the vascular conduit allowed relative ease of removal of the IABP from a small incision in the lower left quadrant of the abdomen, which was closed with two stitches.


Patient outcome and follow-up

Following the IABP procedure, the patient was allowed to sit, stand, and ambulate with assistance and no neurological complications occurred. There were no episodes of sepsis-related to the insertion site. Following transiliac IABP, the patient had reduced serum levels of creatinine and total bilirubin. The patient had no limb ischemia during IABP counter-pulsation. The improvements noted during physiotherapy included walking for 290 meters during a six-minute walk test. The patient had significant improvement in cardiac function with reduced pulmonary hypertension and reduced pulmonary vascular resistance. By 195 days after changing the IABP access, the patient underwent successful cardiac transplantation.