61-year-old woman with a history of FIGO IIB stage cervical squamous cell carcinoma, diagnosed in February 2019, treated in a private hospital of fourth level of care, where outpatient and inpatient care is offered for patients with complex oncological and non-oncological conditions. At the time of diagnosis, radical hysterectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy was performed, which ruled out nodal involvement. The first-line adjuvant treatment included six cycles of chemotherapy with cisplatin, and brachytherapy and radiotherapy, achieving a complete tumour response. In 2021, after an isolated relapse was detected in the iliac region by tomography, cisplatin and 30 sessions of radiotherapy were administered, achieving a new complete response. In September 2022, a tomography revealed another relapse with left parametrium, ureter and ipsilateral iliac chain involvement, so first-line treatment for recurrent disease with carboplatin, paclitaxel and pembrolizumab was decided. During this regime, the patient presented hypersensitivity to platinum in the fifth cycle, managed with a desensitization protocol, continuing with pembrolizumab. In September 2023, in the face of a progression in images of a single retroperitoneal mass, due to the lack of optimal response, gemcitabine was initiated, according to management guidelines, second-line treatment for recurrent disease, receiving a cumulative dose of 8,544 mg/m2 until January 2024. However, she developed symptoms of digital ischemia in hands, so treatment was suspended after the second dose of the third cycle, accumulating 11,744 mg/m2 of gemcitabine.

In February 2024, the patient presented to the emergency department of the same hospital where she was being seen on an outpatient basis, referred by oncology due to progression of symptoms in her extremities. The patient reported lancinating pain and blue discoloration in fingers of hands; physical examination revealed necrosis in the second finger of the right hand, ochre discoloration and Raynaud's phenomenon in the fingers of the left hand. The lower extremities showed grade II edema in the left lower limb and pulses present. Studies for autoimmunity and vasculitis were negative, including anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAS), antinuclear antibodies (ANAS), anti-deoxyribonucleic antibodies (anti-DNA), cardiolipins, confirmatory test for lupus anticoagulant, extractable nuclear antigen (ENAS) antibody profile, anti-proteinase 3 antibodies, anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies and anti-DNA topoisomerase I antibodies (anti-SCL). In addition, rheumatoid factor and complement levels 3 (C3) and complement 4 (C4) were also normal. Serologic test for syphilis (VDRL - Venereal Disease Research Laboratory) negative, transthoracic echocardiogram without findings of a cardioembolic focus.

Anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin was initiated, along with acetylsalicylic acid, a statin, and a calcium antagonist. The hand surgery team amputated the second finger of the right hand, confirming liquefactive necrosis in the histopathological study.

Postoperatively, sildenafil was added to the treatment, achieving a progressive improvement in the ischemia signs of the remaining fingers. During hospitalization, the patient presented a complication of massive vaginal bleeding, requiring uterine artery embolization.

The rheumatology department used the Naranjo causality scale to determine the role of gemcitabine in the vasculitis, with a score of 8 indicating that the drug was likely the cause of the necrosis.

20 days later, she developed neurological impairment without significant findings on a skull scan. She was evaluated by palliative care and her functional status was rated 0/30 on the Barthel scale, 4 on the ECOG scale, and 10% on the Karnofsky scale, with a life expectancy of less than three weeks according to the Patient Prognostic Index (PPI: + 6 points). In agreement with the family, further studies were discontinued and comprehensive palliative management was implemented. The patient died after discharge from the hospital.
