An 82-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes mellitus and chronic renal failure was admitted to the hospital with a 7-day history of fever, delirium, and dyspnea. She had undergone an aortic valve replacement (Perceval sutureless bioprosthesis) 18 months prior due to aortic stenosis. The immediate post cardiac surgery period was complicated by paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, transudative left-sided pleural effusion, and oligoanuric renal failure. She did not present any infectious complications and the median sternotomy incision closed normally. Between 1 and 14 months after aortic surgery, she was admitted to the hospital five times because of severe clinical heart failure of unclear cause and some episode of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. No fever or other signs of infection were detected at all this time, and did not receive any antibiotic treatment. A transesophageal echocardiogram performed 3 months after surgery showed an aortic prosthesis without alterations. On physical examination, her temperature was 39 °C, she was confused and tachypneic. A 3/6 systolic ejection murmur in the aortic position and basal crackles were identified. She presented grade II uninfected pressure ulcers on heels and sacrococcygeal region. Laboratory tests showed a normal blood cell count, a serum creatinine of 2.14 mg/dL, and an increased C-reactive protein (13 mg/dL) and hyperglycemia (628 mg/dL). A chest X-ray showed bilateral pleural effusion and interstitial pulmonary edema. Two sets of aerobic and anaerobic blood culture bottles were drawn at admission, and empiric ceftriaxone (2 g daily) and levofloxacin adjusted to renal function (250 mg daily, intravenous) were started. After 26 to 80 h of incubation into the BACTEC FX system (Becton, Dickinson and Company), all four blood culture bottles were positive. Gram stain showed coryneform gram-positive bacilli with occasional branching forms. After incubation on CNA agar and chocolate agar, colonies were less than 2 mm in size, glistening and yellow. The colonies penetrated into the agar upon further incubation. On the 5th day of admission, blood cultures were again obtained, and the same organism grew in 1 of the 4 bottles. The isolates were initially identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS, Bruker Daltonics) as C. cellulans. Thereafter, the identification was confirmed by API Coryne strip (bioMérieux; code number 7572767), which was an “excellent identification” for C. cellulans with a reliability of 99.9%, and by sequencing the 16S rRNA (using the BLAST Sequence Analysis Tool of GenBank database), showing a 100% similarity with C. cellulans and 99.8% with C. funkei. Antimicrobial susceptibility tests were performed using a microdilution microtiter panel MICroSTREP plus 6 (MicroScan Walk Away, Beckman Coulter). Following EUCAST breakpoints criteria for Corynebacterium, the isolate was susceptible or presumably susceptible (for antibiotics without EUCAST breakpoints, but with low MIC) to amoxicillin-clavulanate (MIC = 2 mg/L), daptomycin (MIC = 0.5 mg/L), levofloxacin (MIC = 2 mg/L), linezolid (MIC≤1 mg/L), tetracycline (MIC≤1 mg/L), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (MIC = 0.006 mg/L) and vancomycin (MIC = 0.5 mg/L), and resistant or presumably resistant to amikacin (MIC = 32 mg/L), cefotaxime (MIC> 2 mg/L), ciprofloxacin (MIC> 2 mg/L), clindamycin (MIC> 2 mg/L), erythromycin (MIC = 1 mg/L), gentamycin (MIC = 4 mg/L), imipenem (MIC = 4 mg/L), meropenem (MIC = 8 mg/L) and rifampin (MIC = 1 mg/L). The MICs of amoxicillin-clavulanate, cefotaxime, meropenem, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and vancomycin were also determined by Etest® (bioMérieux) using Mueller-Hinton agar plus 5% blood, and similar results were found.

On the 7th day, a transthoracic echocardiogram did not show alterations. Therapy was switched to amoxicillin-clavulanate (1 g three times daily, intravenous), and new blood cultures obtained 24 h later were negative. A transesophageal echocardiogram performed on the 9th day of stay revealed an echogenic and mobile vegetation of 6 × 9 mm on the prosthetic aortic valve attached to the commissure between the right coronary cusp and the non-coronary cusp. Prosthetic valve function was otherwise normal. On the 11th day, amoxicillin-clavulanate was switched to vancomycin adjusted to renal function (750 mg daily) plus linezolid (600 mg twice daily, intravenous). Surgical replacement was considered inappropriate in this patient due to comorbidity, advanced age, limited mobility and family rejection. In the following days, she developed severe anemia, acute confusional state and refractory heart failure. End-of-life decision-making was implemented, prioritizing symptom control, and antibiotic therapy was switched back to amoxicillin-clavulanate on day 22nd of admission. On the 28th day, she was discharged to another hospital for palliative care, dying 7 days later because of sepsis and severe heart failure. A postmortem examination was not performed.