A 23-year-old male, with a history of LL who had been RFT, came to the emergency department with a chief complaint of painful red bumps accompanied by purulent blisters on both arms, hands, legs, and feet. He also complained of fever, joint, and body ache, rendering him to not be able to move properly. The patient had been diagnosed with leprosy in the past 17 months before admission and had finished the multibacillary leprosy treatment course with MDT multibacillary (MDT-MB). He had a history of ENL without pustules for seven months before admission and was treated with prednisone. A 40 mg prednisone was initially given, and the dose was tapered according to the World Health Organization (WHO) guideline. However, the lesions consistently recurred when prednisone was tapered at 10 mg daily, and did not experience complete remission for six months. The first pustules were discovered a month before admission. Skin biopsy was conducted for both histopathology examination and drug resistance test. Histopathology examination from pustular lesion revealed thinning of the epidermis with a massive number of foam cells deposition in the dermis. There was no RpoB and FolP gene mutation, indicating no rifampicin and dapsone resistance. He was diagnosed with pustular ENL and received 40 mg a day prednisone, but there was no improvement despite five weeks of treatment. Instead, the ENL worsened as pustules kept appearing, accompanied by systemic symptoms such as fever, severe arthralgia, and myalgia. Because of the severity of the symptoms, he came to the emergency department afterward and was hospitalized.

The patient admitted that he was in psychological distress due to his condition. Physical examination showed pendulous earlobes, moon face, and gynecomastia. There were pustules on the center of erythematous nodules on the extremities, erythematous nodules, and shallow ulcers. Neurological examination revealed that both ulnar nerves were enlarged and rubbery, without tenderness. There was hypesthesia of the skin lesions on both arms, hands, legs, and feet, without gloves and stockings anesthesia. On slit-skin smear, mean bacterial index (BI) and morphological index (MI) were 6+ and 0, respectively. Direct microscopic examination of the pus with Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) staining revealed acid-fast bacilli (AFB), and Gram staining revealed no bacteria. Upon hospitalization, the patient was initially treated with 60 mg prednisone once daily. After three days of prednisone administration, no clinical improvement was observed. Therefore, we substitute the prednisone with intravenous dexamethasone 10 mg once daily. Despite the administration of intravenous dexamethasone, new pustules still appeared. Therefore, oral minocycline 100 mg once daily was administered in addition to the intravenous dexamethasone on the seventh day of hospitalization. After a day of minocycline administration, no new pustule was observed. The patient was discharged on the ninth day of hospitalization, and treatment was continued with prednisone 60 mg once daily and minocycline 100 mg once daily.

At a 7-day follow-up after hospitalization in the outpatient clinic, the patient showed a significant improvement as the arthralgia and myalgia almost entirely subsided, and no new skin lesion was identified. The minocycline dose was sustained for four weeks, while the prednisone was able to be tapered without any recurring lesions. There were no adverse effects such as gastrointestinal disorders and skin discoloration during minocycline and prednisone treatment. As the pustules no longer recurred, the minocycline was discontinued while the prednisone was continued at 30 mg a day and tapered according to WHO guideline.