A 61-year-old patient with steroid therapy for rheumatoid arthritis and bilateral groin pain was diagnosed bilateral osteoarthritis of his hip joints [9]. He received bilateral intraarticular injection of hyaluronic acid and presented twelve weeks later to our emergency department with fever, reduced general condition and increasing immobilizing pain. Radiographs of the pelvis showed rapid progressive destruction of both hip joints with extensive osteolysis, concomitant subluxation and an acetabular bony defect of the left side. Joint aspiration showed pus in both hip joints and the diagnosis of rapid progressive bilateral septic arthritis was made. Bilateral resection of both femoral heads with debridement of the hip joint and implantation of antibiotic-loaded PMMA spacers was done via a minimally invasive antero-lateral approach.

Empirical systemic antibiotic therapy was started with vancomycin and ampicillin i.v. E. coli was detected in tissue samples of both hip joints and systemic antibiotic therapy was adapted to meropenem i.v. Two follow-up surgical procedures with exchange of the antibiotic-loaded PMMA spacers were undertaken for infection control due to persistent drainage.

Twelve weeks after resection of the femoral head and successful infection control, the patient received total hip arthroplasty with the additional use of a silver multilayer coating (HyProtect®, Bio-Gate, Nürnberg, Germany). This coating consists of an ultrathin siloxane layer directly on the implant surface (10 to 30 nm), from which silver ions are released.

12 weeks after resection of the femoral head, total hip arthroplasty on the right side with a cementless standard cup (Allofit®, ZimmerBiomet, Warsaw, USA) and a cementless femoral stem (Avenir®, ZimmerBiomet, Warsaw, USA) via the previously used minimally invasive antero-lateral approach with this ultrathin silver multilayer coating was performed. Both the back surface of cup and the entire femoral shaft were silver coated.

The left hip was treated 18 weeks after femoral head resection with a silver-coated reinforcement cage (Burch-Schneider®, ZimmerBiomet, Warsaw, USA) for a Paprosky type IIB acetabular defect and a cemented polyethylene cup (Durasul®, ZimmerBiomet, Warsaw, USA). The cementless femoral stem (Avenir®, ZimmerBiomet, Warsaw, USA) was also silver coated at its entire intramedullary part. This intervention was also performed via the previously used minimally invasive antero-lateral approach. The patient was put under systemic antibiotic therapy for an overall treatment period of 18 weeks after implantation of the right side. Ertapenem 1 g was applied intravenously for this time frame once a day, after dismissal in an outpatient setting. This allowed for antibiotic coverage of the right side of 18 and of the left side of 12 weeks of antibiotic treatment.

Partial weight bearing with 20 kg on the operated side and the use of crutches was advised for 6 weeks after the interventions.

The wounds on both sides healed uneventfully. The patient was seen regularly for clinical and radiological follow-up. Full weight-bearing without the use of crutches was achieved 7 weeks post-operatively on both sides. There were no signs of PJIs and no further revision surgery was necessary.

At a final follow-up three years after the implantation of silver-coated prostheses, the patient showed normal skin appearance with minimal scars after minimally-invasive antero-lateral approaches on both sides without any signs of argyria. There was excellent functional outcome of both hips with normal gait and a WOMAC Score of 6 on both sides (pain: 0, stiffness: 0, physical function: 6). Blood leukocyte count was 7.29/nl (reference: 4.23–9.1) and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was at 12.4 mg/l (reference: <5 mg/l). The slightly elevated CRP level is attributable to the underlying rheumatoid arthritis of the patient. Radiographs revealed well-integrated and non-loosened hip prosthetic components on both sides three years after implantation with correct articulation.