A 63-year-old woman with a medical history of chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and heart failure with preserved ejection fraction presented to the hospital with a 2-day history of increasing shortness of breath. The patient was diagnosed with CML 4 years perviously and was treated with dasatinib. The patient had two admissions over the past year for shortness of breath with bilateral pleural effusions, greater on the right. Diagnostic and therapeutic thoracentesis both times were consistent with exudative chylous effusions. On this admission, she reported dyspnoea unresponsive to inhaled albuterol, without symptoms of chest pain, orthopnea or pedal oedema. She had no significant surgical or family history. She was an everyday smoker of five cigarettes daily for 40 pack years. In the emergency department, she required 3 L of oxygen to maintain her oxygen saturation above 89% but did appear to be in significant respiratory distress. Physical examination was remarkable for diminished breath sounds on both lungs but more so on the right side.


Investigations

On admission, laboratory workup revealed elevated brain natriuretic peptide at 1131 pg/mL, haemoglobin of 9.5 103/μL; white blood cell count and electrolytes were within normal limits. Chest X-ray showed large right-sided pleural effusion, which was confirmed on CT angiogram of the chest. There was no evidence of pulmonary embolism, mediastinal lymphadenopatμhy or pulmonary lesions. Echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction of 61% with moderate to severely dilated right ventricle and right ventricular systolic pressure of 60 mm Hg. Thoracentesis was performed and 2.2 L of pleural fluid was removed. Pleural fluid analysis showed triglycerides 700 mg/dL, cholesterol 145 mg/dL, lactate dehydrogenase level (LDH) 125 U/L and total protein 4.2 g/dL. Serum LDH and total protein were 210 U/L and 8 g/dL, respectively. Pleural fluid white cell count was 1100 with 82% lymphocyte predominance, and fluid cytology was negative for any malignant cells.


Differential diagnosis

The differential diagnosis for recurrent pleural effusions is broad. Chylothorax due to lymphoma was ruled out as pleural fluid cytology was negative for malignant cells; chylothorax secondary to trauma was ruled out as the patient denied a history of trauma, specifically chest trauma, and thoracic surgical interventions, while chylothorax due to pulmonary sarcoidosis was low on the differential as CT of the chest did not show hilar adenopathy, bronchial wall thickening or ground glass opacities.


Treatment

On admission, the patient was treated with supplemental oxygen, ipratropium bromide–albuterol sulfate nebulised treatments, prednisone, doxycycline, ceftriaxone and furosemide. Due to persistent hypoxia, diagnostic and therapeutic thoracentesis was performed. Chylothorax was attributed to dasatinib in light of her recurrent effusions and the absence of an alternate explanation. On her prior admissions, the dose of dasatinib had been reduced from 100 to 80 mg to try to prevent reaccumulation of pleural fluid. Despite dose reduction, she had two hospital admissions in 3 months for symptomatic right-sided pleural effusion requiring thoracentesis. Dasatinib was changed to nilotinib.


Outcome and follow-up

The patient was followed up as an outpatient with her primary care physician for 1 year. Electronic medical records review and phone interview confirmed no evidence of recurrent chylothorax.