Female, 34 years old. History of benign tumour in the right submaxillary salivary gland and multiple fibroadenomas of the breast. Smoker. Consulted for sudden diplopia, altered coordination of the right upper limb, bradilalia and isolated anomalies. On admission, neurological condition improved with normal examination. Blood pressure and blood glucose normal. MRI of the brain was performed, which showed a restrictive image in the diffusion sequence at the level of the left thalamus. Admission to the cerebrovascular unit was decided for monitoring, screening studies and treatment. General laboratory, erythro-sedimentation, C reactive protein, beta subunit of hCG, HIV, VDRL, collagenogram and toxicological analysis in urine were normal. Acquired and genetic thrombophilias were negative. Angiotomography of intra- and extracranial vessels, with embryonic-fetal origin of the left posterior cerebral artery, without other relevant findings. 72-hour telemetry with no evidence of cardiac arrhythmias. Considering possible paradoxical embolism, a Doppler of the four limbs was performed without thrombosis, transcranial Doppler with contrast with spontaneous bubble passage in the form of a curtain in both the left and right carotid arteries and a transthoracic echocardiogram with contrast (ETT-c) that reported a right-left short circuit with moderate spontaneous passage before the second heartbeat. It was interpreted as a stroke associated with probable FOP and treatment was initiated with double antiplatelet therapy and statins. During the procedure prior to the closure of FOP, an intracardiac echocardiogram was performed with no evidence of atrial septal defect or intracardiac right-left short circuit. Selective arterial inflow catheterisation was performed and it was completely occluded with an endovascular device, preserving the normal arteries. During follow-up, clinical, gynaecological, oncological and rheumatological evaluation was performed with no relevant findings. The patient did not meet any of the Curaçao diagnostic criteria for hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (Rendu-Osler-Weber syndrome), i.e. recurrent epistaxis, cutaneous/ mucosal telangiectasias and multiple visceral involvement, nor did she have a first-degree family member with the disease. It was also decided to carry out a genetic study with a panel of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (genes: ACVRL1, ENG, EPHB4, GDF2, RASA1 and SMAD4), with a negative result. The finding was interpreted as a sporadic HHT. The patient is currently stable clinically and neurologically. The patient signed informed consent authorising the publication, reproduction and dissemination of the clinical case.
