A 49-year-old female reported to the clinical ophthalmic emergency room with complaints of decreased visual acuity, retrobulbar pain on eye movement and red color desaturation in her left eye. The ophthalmological examination revealed Snellen’s distance best-corrected visual acuity (DBCVA) of 1.0 in her right eye and 0.04 in her left eye, normal intraocular pressure in both eyes, left side relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD), normal anterior segment of both eyes and normal fundus of the right eye. However, the optic disc was slightly elevated with marked borders in the left eye and optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) confirmed increased peripapillary retinal nerve fiber layer thickness (RNFL) with a normal result for macular ganglion cell layer (GCL) thickness. Basic laboratory tests (sedimentation rate, c-reactive protein) were normal. Pattern visual evoked potentials (PVEPs, ISCEV Standard 2016) showed slightly increased latencies of P100 waves for a large (1° 4’) checkerboard in both eyes and a reduction of P100 amplitude for a large (1° 4’) and small (0° 16’) checkerboards in the left eye. The patient was referred for scheduled head and orbit imaging. The preliminary diagnosis was demyelinating ON for observation, no treatment was initiated. However, after two weeks, the patient was admitted to the hospital due to a visual acuity decrease to no light perception in the left eye and exotropia. Ocular examination showed an increase in left optic nerve disc edema, confirmed by examination of RNFL in SD-OCT. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed inflammatory thickening of the left optic nerve throughout its entire thickness involving the left side of the optic chiasm. The right optic nerve and the right side of the optic chiasm were normal. There were no specific changes in the brain and spinal cord imaging. The serological indirect immunofluorescence revealed a positive result for MOG-IgG. Treatment of 1 g per day of intravenous methylprednisolone for 3 days was initiated, followed by oral prednisone (1 mg per kg bw initially, with a reduction of 5 mg per week). Two weeks after treatment began, DBCVA of the left eye improved to counting fingers at 30 centimeters and the reduction of the optic nerve edema was visible, however, the eye was still in exotropia. A further two weeks later, DBCVA was 0.02, the angle of the exotropia decreased, there was no visible disc edema and RNFL was also within normal limits, but GCL reduction appeared. Kinetic perimetry performed at that time showed a narrowing of the visual field to central 10 degrees in the left eye. Three months after the beginning of the steroid treatment, DBCVA in the affected eye was 0.3 and only periodically did exotropia occur, no optic nerve disc edema was seen, however, a reduction of RNFL and GCL was observed in SD-OCT. To prevent the recurrence of ON, 20 mg of prednisone was planned to be maintained at least up to 6 months after the ON episode. However, the neurologist recommended maintaining treatment for up to one year and also added treatment with mycophenolate mofetil when the dose of 20 mg of prednisone was achieved. As there are currently no evidence-based guidelines for long-term follow-up in patients with MOGAD and some irreversible complications occurred in our case, treatment with mycophenolate mofetil will be continued till an undetermined point. At the examination of the patient’s left eye one year after the ON episode, DBCVA was 0.5, exotropia occurred only in moments of lack of concentration, and optic nerve neuropathy was visible at the fundus of the eye, which was confirmed by RNFL and GCL reduction in SD-OCT. In the PVEPs, the only abnormality was a prolongation of P100 latency for a small (0° 16’) checkerboard. The field of view has improved to 20 central degrees. All results from the patient’s right eye were normal and no episode of ON was observed during the one-year follow-up.