Medical/surgical intensive care unit (ICU) of a university teaching hospital.A 62-year-old man presented to a local hospital with mucous and bloody stool persisting for 1 month and worsening abdominal pain for 2 weeks. He had thrombocytopenia and renal dysfunction and was admitted with a diagnosis of sepsis due to intraabdominal infection. However, he did not respond to antimicrobial therapy, and after 7 days he was transferred to the Chiba University Hospital ICU.Antimicrobial therapy was continued, and continuous hemodiafiltration was initiated on ICU day 3, but the patient's condition deteriorated and he became anuric. Plasma exchange (PE) was initiated on ICU day 11, but anuria and thrombocytopenia persisted. Intravenous eculizumab therapy was initiated on day 26 and resulted in quick recovery of urine output and platelet count and successful discontinuation of renal support.The diagnosis of thrombotic microangiopathy was established by the presence of schistocytes on the peripheral blood smear on ICU day 9. A plasma sample collected prior to initiation of PE showed a disintegrin-like and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin type 1 motifs member 13 (ADAMTS13) activity level of >10% (25.1%). The absence of both Shiga-toxin producing E coli in feces and anti-Shiga-toxin antibody in blood led to suspicion of atypical hemolytic uremic syndrome (aHUS). Genetic test identified a nonsynonymous mutation (p.Ala311Val) in the membrane cofactor protein gene (MCP).Although the pathological significance is currently unknown, this mutation may have been the cause of adult-onset aHUS in our patient. In this case, eculizumab was successfully introduced and discontinued, and the patient remained relapse-free after 1 year of follow-up. The duration of eculizumab therapy for patients with aHUS should be determined on a case-by-case basis and possibly according to the causative genetic mutation, even though discontinuation of eculizumab therapy once initiated is not generally recommended.