A 66-year-old male patient slipped on an icy pavement and fell on his left hip, sustaining a comminuted fracture as a result of femoral head impaction into the acetabulum. The fracture was a transtectal T-fracture with an incomplete posterior stem through the ischial tuberosity. The patient had the following comorbidities: atherosclerosis, Type II diabetes, and hypertension.
The patient was referred to the authors' trauma centre. Upon admission to the facility, the patient was put on low-molecular-weight heparin, for thromboembolic prophylaxis. There was no evidence of neurovascular damage at the preoperative physical examination. He was operated on five days after the traumatic event.
The fracture site was approached via the ilio-inguinal route. The external iliac vessel segment was dissected free en bloc, and taken on silicone vessel slings. Anatomical reduction was facilitated by pulling the femoral head laterally, using a Schanz screw as a joystick. Internal fixation was performed with a spring plate for the quadrilateral surface and a curved plate (Matta Pelvic System; Stryker Trauma, Duisburg, Germany) spanning from the internal iliac fossa to the superior pubic ramus . The procedure did not involve the use of a reduction clamp.
In the recovery room, the patient's left lower limb was found to be cool and pale; no pulses could be palpated. The patient was therefore returned to the operating theatre; the external iliac artery on the operated side was explored and found to be thrombosed .
Open thrombectomy was performed. The removal of thrombus is shown in Fig. , respectively.
Postoperatively, an angiogram was obtained. The perfusion pattern was found to be unremarkable .
The patient made an uneventful recovery. Postoperatively, an angiogram was obtained as a routin practice. The perfusion pattern was found to be unremarkable At one year, a follow-up investigation with duplex ultrasonography, performed by an experienced radiologist, showed maintenance of the normal pattern.