A 12-year-old Pashtun female presented to our neurology unit for the evaluation of sudden bilateral painless visual loss. There was no history of headache, vomiting, seizures, or trauma. There was also a history of severe sensory impairment—the patient had been badly burned at age 7 years when she caught fire while standing near the stove, with no appreciation of pain until the fire reached the level of the neck. She has been diagnosed with Klippel–Feil Syndrome (KFS) previously due to spinal deformities that were noted after her second birthday by her parents; however, she was clinically assessed, and a definitive diagnosis of type III KFS with Sprengel’s deformity was made at the age of 4 years. There was no significant antenatal history of fever, hypertension, diabetes, or drug abuse. She was delivered vaginally at full term with no delayed cry. There was no delay in developmental milestones. She was assessed to have normal physical and mental development. The patient was one of the seven children of couple from a non-consanguineous marriage. There was no history of developmental abnormalities in her siblings.
On examination, visual acuity was noted as perception of light (POL) in both eyes along with bilateral optic disc edema on fundal examination. Anterior chamber examination was normal. There was a generalized decrease in the sensation of painful stimuli (hypoalgesia) during the pinprick test and thermal test; however, the patient could still localize touch. Vibration and joint position sense were normal. She had intact hearing, taste, and smell. She had extensive scarring of abdomen and chest secondary to burns. Her neck movements were restricted on passive flexion, extension, and tilting. She had winging of scapula bilaterally with Sprengel’s deformity and kyphoscoliosis. The other cranial nerves, speech, autonomic, and motor examination were unremarkable. There were no cerebellar signs.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with magnetic resonance venography (MRV) was unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pressure, measured by lumbar puncture, was 10 cm of H2O. Her hypoalgesia was further confirmed when she did not feel any pain during lumbar puncture. MRI cervical spine revealed hemi-vertebrae at the C4–C5 and D6 levels and hemivertebrae and partial fusion posteriorly at the C7, D1, and D2 levels . At the C6 level, there was a partial defect in left vertebral lamina with no evidence of bony spur/fibrous septa. It also showed evidence of double cord (split cord malformation). Cervical spine imaging was negative for syrinx. MRI of lumbar spine was consistent with spina bifida occulta at the S1–S3 level with tethered cord . Nerve conduction study (NCS) was unremarkable and showed no evidence of large fiber neuropathy.
During baseline investigations on the first visit (T0), patient showed microcytic hypochromic anemia with persistent hypocalcemia . Her vitamin D level was low, that is, 8.56 ng/ml; however, her serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) was within normal limits. We attributed her TBVL to low serum calcium, which is one of the causes of papilledema after excluding other causes.
Considering her vision loss to be secondary to hypocalcemia, we commenced oral supplements of calcium and vitamin D. During subsequent visits, her vision gradually improved. Initially, she had perception to light bilaterally on visual acuity assessment. A follow-up visit after 1 month (T1) showed improved visual acuity to 6/24 in the left eye and 6/9 in the right eye. On the second follow-up visit after 2 months (T2), she had 6/9 vision in her left eye and 6/6 vision in the right eye with resolution of papilledema.