A 66-year-old male had chest squeezing at rest for more than 30 years.
Thirty years ago, the patient had chest squeezing at rest which occurred most often from midnight to early morning lasting from 5 to 15 min, and was not usually induced by exercise in the daytime. Over the preceding 13 years, he had undergone coronary angiography 4 times and percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty procedures twice at other hospitals without a diagnosis of coronary artery spasm. In July 2006, 70% stenosis was found in the ostial left anterior descending artery and 90% stenosis was found in the mid left circumflex. The left circumflex was dilated by balloon without a stent as the left circumflex was small according to the previous angiography report. The patient was given various medications, such as beta blocker, aspirin, angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor, clopidogrel, and statin, but his chest symptoms were not relieved. Due to repeated similar complaints, angiography was performed again without percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty in November 2014 and August 2015. In August 2017, an electrocardiography was performed during a chest squeezing episode in the early morning at 6:08 in a hospital and ST-segment elevations in II, III, aVF and V2-V5 leads were observed. Subsequently, ST-segment depression in II, III and aVF, and ST-segment elevation in V2-V5 leads became apparent. The symptoms and ST-segment elevation or depression disappeared 3 min and 25 s after sublingual administration of nitroglycerin . However, the doctors did not realize that the symptoms were caused by coronary artery spasm. Coronary angiography was performed and showed severe stenosis in the proximal left circumflex which was dilated by balloon again without a stent. However, his chest symptoms occurred approximately 5 times/mo. The patient presented to the emergency room of our hospital with frequent chest squeezing episodes in March 2019.
The patient had a history of hypertension for 10 years.
The patient had a history of cigarette smoking for more than 40 years.
No family history of inherited diseases, autoimmune diseases or coronary heart disease was recorded.
Vital signs were stable and physical examination was unremarkable.
No elevation in high sensitivity troponin T was detected and the rest of his laboratory examinations were also completely normal.
Electrocardiography was performed during a chest pain episode and ST-segment elevations in I, aVL and V2-V3 leads were recorded which spontaneously resolved, accompanied by pain relief . Neither chest X-ray nor echocardiography showed any specific changes.
In order to evaluate the condition of the coronary artery, coronary angiography and IVUS were performed. An injection of acetylcholine into the coronary artery was administered to induce spasm. Coronary angiography was performed via right radial access. Intravenous injection of diltiazem and intracoronary injection of nitroglycerin were administered to prevent coronary artery spasm induced by the catheter or guidewire.
An initial coronary angiography showed mild atherosclerotic changes from the proximal to the mid segment in the right coronary artery. There were no obvious atherosclerotic changes in the left main trunk, left anterior descending coronary artery and left circumflex .
After intracoronary injection of 200 μg of nitroglycerin, each segment was examined using a mechanical IVUS system. During IVUS checking of the right coronary artery and left anterior descending coronary artery, the patient felt chest squeezing without the use of acetylcholine or ergonovine. Coronary angiography showed that a local coronary spasm occurred at the distal segment of the right coronary artery and a diffuse coronary spasm occurred at the proximal-distal segment of the left anterior descending coronary artery . Following an intracoronary injection of nitroglycerin (right coronary artery with 400 μg nitroglycerin and left coronary artery with 1000 μg nitroglycerin), the patient’s chest symptoms and coronary spasm were relieved .
IVUS images showed that the right coronary artery and left anterior descending coronary artery demonstrated increased media thickness .