A previously healthy, 12-year-old girl presented with low grade fever of one-month duration associated with a non-productive cough. She did not have night sweats. On examination, she was afebrile, pale and icteric without significant lymphadenopathy. Her abdominal examination revealed a firm mass on the left hypochondriac region. Other system examinations including musculoskeletal and neurological examination were unremarkable.
Her initial blood count revealed normal white cell count with significant eosinophilia (11%), normocytic normochromic anaemia (6.3 g/dl) and thrombocytosis (533 × 10^3/uL). Further investigations revealed reticulocytosis (6.58%), positive urine urobilinogen and positive Direct Antiglobulin Test (DAT). Detailed DAT profile demonstrated negative IgG and positive C3d. Blood picture showed red blood cell agglutination, reticulocytosis with polychromasia and occasional spherocytes. With these findings, it was concluded as a cold type autoimmune haemolytic anaemia which was supported by elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level [LDH- 450 U/L (120–330 U/L)]. She had elevated total (27 μmol/L) and direct (17 μmol/L) bilirubin levels, but the gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were within the normal range.
Serum ferritin (430 ng/mL), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (125 mm/1st hour) and C-reactive protein (234 mg/l) were elevated. Renal function tests and rest of the liver profile remained normal throughout the course of illness.
Concurrently, Ultrasound (US) scan of abdomen revealed a solitary mass confined to the left kidney with para aortic lymphadenopathy causing left ureteric compression and hydronephrosis. She was further investigated with CECT of chest and abdomen which concluded the same findings as in US scan [Fig. ]. Primary tumor markers such as Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and Beta human chorionic gonadotropin (ß-hCG) were normal.
Suspecting possibility of haematological malignancy, bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy were undertaken and that too did not reveal any abnormal cells or evidence of bone marrow infiltration. US guided tru-cut biopsy of the retroperitoneal lymph node showed epithelioid looking cells in sinuses with reactive background of lymphoid tissue which was indecisive. Therefore, excisional biopsy of perihilar lymph node and a tru-cut biopsy from the renal mass were performed. The features of both biopsies were compatible with SHML with S100, CD68 and CD1a positivity in immunohistochemistry [Fig. ].
Serum protein electrophoresis showed a polyclonal increase in gamma globulin without detection of any abnormal proteins. Her supplementary investigations showed hyperimmunoglobulinemia [IgG 2581 mg/dl (726–1085), IgA 338 mg/dl (70–229), IgM 130 mg/dl (35–72)] and hypoalbuminemia (23.7 g/L). Viral serology for EBV and CMV were negative. Furthermore, Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) and rheumatoid factor (RF) were also negative.
She was treated with oral prednisolone for three months but there was no significant response as assessed by a repeat CT. Subsequently she was commenced on multi-drug therapy consisting of mercaptopurine, methotrexate and vinblastine, however, she had marginal response to the therapy. She has been on regular follow-up to assess the progression of disease. Further treatment and follow-up will depend on her response to treatment.