A 72-year-old healthy male presented with mild, intermittent, non-radiating, epigastric pain, that was associated with nausea and vomiting. Pain was exacerbated by food intake and relieved by fasting. The rest of the history was unremarkable. Physical examination findings were unremarkable with no evidence of palpable abdominal mass.
PET-CT scan revealed a mass located in the GEJ extending to the cardia with heterogeneous thickening. The study also showed normal mediastinal structures with no evidence of lymphadenopathy or metastasis . Endoscopic Ultrasound showed a T1 mass and the pathology report for the endoscopic biopsy indicated a low-grade intestinal type adenocarcinoma. The mass was staged as T1 GEJ Carcinoma (T1N0M0).
On the 22nd of May, 2016, the patient underwent endoscopic submucosal dissection, the first of its kind to be performed in Saudi Arabia. There were no other lesions, suspicious masses or hiatal hernia. Dissection started from the proximal end and advanced deep within and below the mucosa. Then, parts of the mass were cut one by one using a circular cautery. The targeted tissues were retrieved carefully in the basket while maintaining adequate hemostasis. An intra-operative frozen section was sent to pathology that confirmed Gastric cancer intestinal type and satisfactory negative margins of each side that was taken separately. To ensure that adequate resection was achieved, and the mass was completely retrieved with negative margins, the scope was inserted multiple times and the targeted area was inspected thoroughly. As a first case, working in a retroflex position during the dissection of the distal part of the mass was our biggest challenge considering its difficult location. The procedure was carried out with minimal bleeding that was encountered and controlled. Suspicious micro-perforations were reviewed cautiously, yet, no significant adverse effects had been observed. At the 18 months follow up, no recurrence or metastasis were detected .