The patient presented as a 53 years old white male with anemia and fatigue. Previous history included no medications, distal left lower extremity venous thrombophlebitis 2 months prior, status post laparoscopic gastric Roux-en-Y bypass (for obesity and diabetes mellitus which had been untreated and resolved postoperatively) three years prior to presentation and a left ulnar nerve decompression nine years prior. Physical examination revealed no palpable lymphadenopathy, a fullness in the left upper quadrant and fecal occult blood positive stool. Laboratory studies showed a serum hemoglobin of 6 mg/dl. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed a 24 cm left upper quadrant mass with multiple liver lesions, splenomegaly and a 1 cm mass in the spleen . A laparoscopic liver biopsy was performed and histopathology was initially reported as hepatocellular carcinoma versus hepatoid carcinoma. One month later, serum hemoglobin was 4.4 mg/dl and gross melena was seen. Blood transfusions did not resolve the anemia. Serum albumin was decreased to 1.7 g/dl.
The patient underwent gastrectomy, splenectomy, distal pancreatectomy and resection of small bowel and a portion of colon that were adherent to the tumor mass. At the end of surgery, there was no gross tumor remaining except for the previously identified liver metastases. Pathology showed a tumor that originated in the pancreas with direct extension to the small bowel, colon, and stomach. The resected specimen weighed 3500 g and the spleen measured 14x7x10cm . On cut section, the spleen contained a 1.0 cm lesion consistent with a metastasis, which was then confirmed to be a metastatic lesion on histopathologic evaluation .
The final pathology report showed a pNET, well differentiated, stage T4N0M1 with 0/13 lymph nodes containing tumor. The lesion in the spleen was located near the edge of the spleen, but there was no direct invasion by the tumor mass grossly or histologically. Examination of the splenic vein showed no evidence of thrombosis with only minimal invasion by the tumor histologically. There were three mitoses per 50 high power fields, and Ki-67 < 1%. Perineural and lymphovascular invasion was seen. Immunostains for chromogranin A and synaptophysin are positive . Immunostains for CD56, OCGH1E5, AFP, glucagon, insulin, somatostatin, pancreatic polypeptide, alpha 1-anti trypsin, alpha 1 anti-chymotrypsin and lipase are negative. Blood chemistry studies showed that this was a non-functional tumor.
The patient was discharged home ten days after surgery and returned two weeks later with intra-abdominal sepsis treated with drainage of fluid and antibiotics. Diabetes mellitus recurred in this patient after pancreatic resection. Somatostatin administration, long-acting release 20 mg/month was started. Approximately 8 months after the resection of the primary lesion, repeat imaging studies (CT scan, magnetic resonance imaging) and an octreotide nucleotide scan showed no lesions outside the liver. Left lateral segmentectomy was performed with simultaneous resection of multiple hepatic nodules throughout the liver. All lesions were consistent with metastases from the previously resected primary tumor on histopathologic examination.
The patient was discharged without complications, and continued monthly somatostatin therapy as well as periodic CT scans to evaluate recurrence. About one year after liver resection, a new lesion appeared in the liver which was treated with percutaneous radiofrequency ablation (RFA). The patient did well until 14 months later when multiple liver lesions appeared. A second liver resection was completed, including resection of nine nodules (<1 cm size) and RFA of two central liver lesions. It was felt that all lesions visible were treated at that time. Seventeen months later, another liver lesion appeared which was centrally located and treated with percutaneous RFA. An octreotide scan showed no evidence of disease. About 20 months later another central area in the liver was treated with percutaneous RFA.
The patient is now seven-years status post resection of the primary lesion, treated with monthly administration of somatostatin long acting release 20 mg IM, and followed with periodic CT scans of the liver. Diabetes mellitus persists and is treated with insulin. At seven years, there is no evidence of residual disease in the abdomen, or within the parenchyma of the liver. He remains asymptomatic and is doing well. The patient’s clinical history is summarized in the Table , prepared in accordance with CARE guidelines .