A 57-year-old man with symptomatic paroxysmal AF was referred to our hospital for catheter
ablation. The patient has no previous history of heart disease or other health problems. For
the last 12 months, patient has been experiencing chest discomfort and palpitations
(European Heart Rhythm Association Class 3) correlating well with episodes of AF with
5–10 min duration and 2–3 times a month on average. Coronary computed tomography (CT)
angiography showed dextrocardia, but no coronary artery problems were found. He has
previously been tried on metoprolol, propafenone, and amiodarone without significant
improvement in his symptoms even with a high oral maintenance dose (metoprolol 100 mg twice
daily, propafenone 200 mg q8h, and amiodarone 600 mg per day). Patient was referred to a
local electrophysiology centre but was eventually referred to us due to the anticipated
technical difficulties. Physical examination revealed apical impulse located on the right
side of his chest. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a slightly dilated left atrium
(LA) with an anteroposterior diameter of 43 mm. Contrast-enhanced CT at our hospital
demonstrated that his IVC was completely obstructed at the infrarenal level. Abdominal
venous return occurred via the azygos vein draining into the superior vena cava (SVC)
. Therefore, SVC
approach was chosen for AF ablation.
After written informed consent was obtained, the procedure was performed under general
anaesthesia with midazolam, fentanyl, and propofol. Ablation was performed using
anticoagulation with a novel oral anticoagulant.
A phased array intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) catheter (10 Fr) was placed at the level
of the LA in the azygos vein and mid-right atrium to create the left and right atrial
anatomic map . The
steerable, navigation-enabled multi-electrode mapping catheter (DECANAV, Biosense Webster)
were successfully inserted into coronary sinus via right femoral vein cannulation without
fluoroscopy guidance .
We manually curved a Brockenbrough needle (BRK, St. Jude Medical, St Paul, MN, USA) with a
120° angle and an 8 cm curve to manipulate the tip towards the fossa ovalis horizontally
. An 8.5 Fr
transseptal long sheath (SL1, St. Jude Medical, Minneapolis, MN, USA) with a Brockenbrough
needle (BRK, St. Jude Medical) via the right jugular vein was introduced at the posterior
portion of the tricuspid annulus, maintaining the relative position of the sheath with the
tip oriented in the 1 o’clock position from the operator’s view. Next, we gently manipulated
the SL1 sheath and needle with 60° clockwise rotation and a 2 cm pull-back . Once correct positioning in
the fossa ovalis of the sheath/needle assembly was confirmed using ICE , the needle was advanced
almost to the tip of the dilator without exposing the needle beyond the dilator. A
SmartTouch Surround Flow (STSF) ablation catheter (ThermoCool, Biosense Webster) was brought
into contact with the proximal extremity of the needle as its tip was advanced out of the
dilator. At this point, unipolar radiofrequency (RF) energy of 30 W was transmitted from the
ablation catheter to the needle, the tip of which being still in contact with the fossa
ovalis . The
puncture of the septum occurred without further tenting of the septum. After successful
transseptal puncture, we added heparin intravenously to an activated clotting time of
300–350 s throughout the procedure. Next, we replaced the first 8.5 Fr SL1 sheath via the
right jugular vein using a VIZIGO bi-directional guiding sheath (Destino; Japan Lifeline
Co., Tokyo, Japan) in the LA.
RF energy was delivered with STSF catheters in power-controlled mode with 35 W for the
posterior wall and 40 W elsewhere. Ablation index (AI) targets were 350 for the posterior
wall and 450 elsewhere. Left pulmonary veins (PVs) (common trunk) were accomplished via a
direct approach by maintaining the sheath in the body of the LA and advancing the catheter
to map and ablate different aspects of the PVs . We accomplished right PVs by creating a
large loop with the sheath and catheter . Afterwards, to check the PV isolation, the STSF catheter
was exchanged for a Lasso catheter (Biosense Webster). As there were good contact force
achieved and high power guided by AI during procedure, all PVs electrical isolation were
achieved. The procedure time was 89 min and RF delivery time was 15 min.
At 6-month post-ablation, the patient was asymptomatic without recurrence of
arrhythmia.