A 9-year-old female patient reported to the private dental clinic with bleeding gums. She presented with a history of road traffic accident few hours back. On presentation, laceration of gingiva is seen from 21–22 and intruded 21 . Radiograph confirmed the clinical findings of intruded closed apex 21 with no root fractures . Since patient's guardian informed 22 is unerupted at the time of injury, it is not considered as intruded.
Labial and palatal infiltration with lidocaine with adrenaline is administered. No incision was given as there was a laceration. With the help of the periosteal elevator, palatal flap is reflected to expose the teeth . With a gentle outward force, it is pushed incisally by comparing the incisal edge of the adjacent teeth . Flexible splinting is done with a 28-guage stainless steel wire and a light cure composite. Access opening was done immediately after splinting and pulp was removed. Root canal is completely filled with calcium hydroxide with iodoform (Metapex, Meta Biomed Co. Ltd., Korea).
After 3 weeks, it was observed that there was a marked gingival recession suggesting bone loss labially . Calcium hydroxide is removed with an H file and irrigated copiously with sodium hypochlorite. Biomechanical preparation was done and obturated with gutta-percha by lateral condensation technique. At the same time, patient is prepared for managing bone loss with platelet-rich fibrin (PRF). Local anesthesia is administered labially, labial flap is raised from 11 to 22 to facilitate complete coverage of the root. To promote secondary healing, the edges of the labial flap are severed.
Blood is collected from child's cubital vein of volume 20 mL, collected in a glass test tube, and centrifuged at 4,000 rpm for 10 minutes in a centrifuge machine. PRF is collected with a nontoothed Adson forceps from middle of the test tube. After separating the fibrin clot, PRF is squeezed between two gauze pieces. This eliminates the fluids in the fibrin matrix, leaving fibrin membrane .
The root surface is treated with a doxycycline 100 mg vial for 5 minutes. After it has dried completely, fibrin membrane is placed onto the 11 and 22, sutured with a silk suture and coe pak is placed for 1 week . After 1 week, both coe pak are removed. Patient is advised massage gums in downward directions after 1 week. Patient was asked to review after 1 month, but reviewed after 3 months and checked for the amount of the bone deposited. There was an incomplete bone deposition . Gentle scaling and root planing were done. Splinting is removed and replaced with a complete acrylic crown and partial labial crown which distributes and reduces the forces transmitted. Patient is asked to review after 6 months. After 6 months, there was an evident reduction of gingival recession. Gingival curettage is done . Patient is asked to review after 6 months.
After 6 months, there is bone deposition evident in radiograph interdentally and labially with a gingiva completely covering till cervical line . Hence, no surgical entry was performed and there were no features of resorption.