Herein, we present a case of 2-year-old boy with clinical and genetic characteristics of ALPS-FAS and TCRαβ + CD4/CD8 double-negative T cell (DNT) elevation. He showed unexplained large-scale splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy, along with multi-lineage autoimmune cytopenia at 2 years of age. The patient had elevated IgG:16.1(5.0–13.0)g/L and IgE:935(≤60)IU/ml [tested before intravenous immune globulin (IVIG)]. The patient was unresponsive to steroids, IVIG, platelet transfusions, and recombinant human platelet growth factors. The elevated proportion (>1.5% of total lymphocytes or >2.5% of CD3 + lymphocytes) of DNTs/CD3 + (6.8%) and chronic (>6 months), non-malignant, non-infectious splenomegaly made us consider the diagnosis of the required criteria of ALPS. However, he was positive for anti-platelet antibodies, anti-Epstein–Barr viruses, rubella viruses, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus immunoglobulin G. In addition, the analysis of markers for measles virus, parvovirus B19, schistosomiasis, and Leishmania donovani infection was negative. T lymphocytes (CD3 + CD19-) and T helper cells (CD3 + CD4 +) in peripheral blood samples were slightly increased. However, Treg/CD4 + ratio 2.5% (4.5–10%) was significantly decreased. Moreover, the patient displayed amplified proportions of cytokines IFN-γ:2.48 (0.00–2.10), IL-10:5.59 (1.20–4.55), and IL-6: 2.6 (0.00–2.05) pg/ml, especially IL-10, as a part of the secondary accessory diagnostic criteria for ALPS. Histological analysis of the bone marrow and the spleen did not show signs of hemophagocytosis with obviously splenomegaly. Because of the severe clinical manifestation, we tried the mTOR signal pathway inhibitor before the NGS genetic results, after which the platelet count was restored and the spleen retracted quickly. In addition, the patient’s familial history was negative.
We sequenced the ALPS-related genes that may match the primary accessory criteria of ALPS (defective FAS-induced lymphocyte apoptosis somatic or germline pathogenic mutation in FAS, FASL, FADD, or CASP10) and the genes known to cause common variable immunodeficiency. We identified novel spontaneous germline heterozygous missense mutations on the FAS gene (c.857G > A, p.G286E) in exon 9 , causing an amino acid exchange and difference of hydrogen bond formation . Sanger sequencing verification of peripheral blood and nail confirmed the germline mutation. The identified variation, which has been previously observed, is the first disease-causing mutation detected in the intracellular domain of the FAS (neither in the 1,000 Genomes Project, the HapMap Project, Exome Variant Server data sets nor in the dbSNP database or the ExAC-Asian database). No mutations were detected by Sanger sequencing of the FASLG, CASP8, and CASP10 genes.
The patient displayed persisting T-cell lymphocytosis with an increased proportion of DNT, while Treg cells (CD3 + CD4 + CD25 + Foxp3 +) were reduced (compared to health control). After 4 weeks of rapamycin treatment, DNTs/CD3 + and DNTs/lymphocyte were decreased from 6.8 to 4.44% and 4.69 to 3.34%, respectively . Treg increased to a normal level from 2.5 to 4.12% .
Medical history, clinical presentation [chronic (>6 months), non-malignant, non-infectious lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly], and laboratory test (elevated DNT ≥ 2.5% of CD3 + lymphocytes) results led to the required criterion of ALPS. In addition, the autoimmune cytopenias (hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, or neutropenia) and elevated immunoglobulin G levels of this patient also met one of the secondary accessory ALPS diagnostic criteria.
Consequently, the sirolimus treatment (1.5 mg/m2, blood concentration 4.74–11.05 ng/L) was initiated with the probable diagnosis (both required criterion and one secondary accessory criterion) of ALPS. Subsequently, the patient’s platelets and hemoglobulin levels improved rapidly . The spleen length reduced from 7.5 to 1.3 cm. When the genetic findings came back, we gave a definitive diagnosis of ALPS-FAS (meet clinical required criteria for ALPS plus germline FAS mutation). Moreover, the DNT ratio continuously decreased during sirolimus application .