A 78-year-old obese female presented to the emergency room with new onset dyspnea of one day duration, which worsened in the past couple of hours. Her medical history included hypertension and a hemorrhagic stroke two years prior which left her bedbound. She denied any familial history of PE, leg pain, or palpitation. At admission, blood pressure, pulse rate and peripheral oxygen saturation were 116/78 mmHg, 135 beats/min and 88%, respectively. On physical examination, she had tachypnea (30 breaths/minute) and electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia. Arterial blood gas analysis on room air yielded pH 7.44, PCO2 33.9 mmHg, and PO2 72.9 mmHg. Routine blood tests demonstrated a normal cardiac troponin I levels and no evidence of electrolyte imbalances, while chest X-ray revealed no signs of heart failure. Nevertheless, D-dimer was highly elevated (> 4000 ng/dL) increasing the suspicion of PE. Computed tomography pulmonary angiogram was sought revealing bilateral PE . Lower limb Doppler was negative for deep vein thrombosis.
Twenty-four hours after diagnosing bilateral PE and stabilizing the patient with anticoagulation and hemodynamic support, the patient developed new onset palpitation, dizziness, and fatigue. Cardiac enzymes were repeated showing a mild elevation. Electrocardiography reveled new onset AF with slow ventricular response of 33 beats/min . She was not on any negative chronotropic drugs and no electrolyte imbalance was detected. Echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular systolic function and dimensions, left ventricular regional wall motion, and both left and right atrium dimensions. However, it highlighted dilated right ventricular dimensions with a basal diameter of 50 mm and evidence of McConnell’s sign (right ventricular free wall hypokinesia) with paradoxical septal wall motion. In addition, it revealed impaired right ventricular systolic function with tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of around 1.5 cm, flattening of intraventricular septum, and moderate tricuspid regurgitation with pulmonary artery systolic pressure around 50 mmHg. As the patient was developing hemodynamic instability, 48 h later, single chamber pacemaker was implanted in the left pre-pectoral pocket and the basal heart rate was set up to 60 beats per minute . After a 2-month follow-up, the patient showed normal vital signs and her electrocardiogram showed a paced rhythm with a heart rate of 60 beats per minute. She developed no further complications or clinical morbidities in spite her poor prognosis.