A 26-year-old female was referred to our department with dyspnea and mild chest oppression on exertion for more than 9 months, worsened for 1 month. She had no family history of hypertension, no history of chest trauma or other cardiac health comorbidities. Upon physical examination, a soft blowing murmur was auscultated in the second costal margin of the left sternum. No other significant clinical findings were noted during the examination. The trans-thoracic echocardiogram pointed out a marked intra-atrial septal mass with irregular margins. The electrocardiogram demonstrated first-degree atrioventricular block. The cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) demonstrated invasion of the left atrium and aortic sinus by an abundant solid tissue in the atrial septal with a clear boundary .
Upon admission, the patient underwent open-heart surgery. A regular median sternotomy incision was made, providing access to the surgical area. A 15 × 10 mm solid mass was found at the lateral to the ascending aorta near the root . With cannulation of the aorta superior to the mass, and separate cannulas in the superior vena cava and inferior vena cava, cardiopulmonary bypass was established as per standard protocol. Following the opening of the right atrium, the mass was found to locate inside the atrial septal, with body length 45 × 30 mm, exhibited a grayish-yellow color, and had a lobulated structure with a firm and smooth surface, upper limit reached the roof of left atrium and invasive to posterior aortic sinus and left outflow tract . Both the masses were completely removed and a bovine pericardial patch was used to rebuild the atrial septum and the posterior aortic sinus, another patch was used to fix the ascending aorta.
Cosmetically the two masses should be of the same origin, but it was not possible to determine the nature of the masses visually, pathologic examination and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene testing were subsequently performed. In both sections of the two tumors, a large amount of proliferative vitreous fibrous tissue infiltrated by lymphoplasmacytic cells and histiocytes and scattered adipocytes were seen under the microscope, plump spindle cells were arranged in a disorganized manner and were seen surrounding myocytes in a focal manner. Notably, a substantial influx of chronic inflammatory cells, including plasma cells , macrophages (CD68 + , Fig. C) are also present, suggesting fibrous histiocytoma-like hyperplasia. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed CK(-), CD20(+), CD38(+), SMA(+), DES(+), CD38(+), CD138(+), IgG4(+), CD34(-), S-100(+), P53(-). ALK staining through VENTANA(D5F3) method resulted positive in the positive controlling group but was negative in negative controlling group. To further confirm the absence of ALK-1 translocation, ALK break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) probe analysis was performed, resulting in a negative finding.
The postoperative outcomes were satisfactory. Three days following the surgery, echocardiography revealed complete removal of the mass, with normal functioning of the aortic valve. The patient did not experience any significant discomfort and was discharged from the hospital after 2 days. During the 1-month and 6-month follow-up period, no adverse events or unforeseen complications were reported. The echocardiography at 8-month post-operatively showed no hemodynamic abnormality , no metastasis and recurrence were found.