A 60-year-old man, with history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and alcoholism (in recovery), is admitted because of sudden episode of altered state of consciousness preceded by involuntary movements of the left upper limb, lasting less than five minutes, without motor asymmetries or sphincter incontinence. Neurological examination was normal, except for slowness of speech and difficulty in fixing attention. Vascular study revealed no significant changes and the electroencephalogram (EEG) showed no paroxysmal activity. Considering these results, the presumptive diagnosis of focal cryptogenic epilepsy was given. Patient was treated and discharged with VPA extended release 500 mg twice daily, esomeprazol 40 mg/day and insulin.
Three days after discharge (10th day of valproic acid), the patient was readmitted because of disorientation, speech slowness, somnolence and hemifacial myoclonus. Adherence to treatment and no use of alcohol were confirmed by family members.
Symptoms were interpreted as uncontrolled epilepsy due to quantitative inefficacy (presumptive prolonged post-ictal state), and two days after VPA dosage was augmented to 1000 mg twice daily. Symptoms worsened.
Medical tests revealead blood dyscrasias, glicemia 330 mg/dL and normal liver function. Serum electrolytes, creatinine, blood urea nitrogen and bilirubin were also normal. Serum concentration of total valproic acid was therapeutic (75 mg/L, therapeutic range: 50–100 mg/L).
Idiosyncratic possibilities were considered. Venous serum ammonia level was determined ranging 62,1 μmol/L (normal reference: 5–32 μmol/L) and a repeat EEG showed a generalized slowing with frequent frontocentral diphasic sharp waves, suggesting a metabolic encephalopathy. VPA was stopped and the clinical pharmacist was consulted for evidence based information. A search strategy formulation for Medline/Pubmed was applied: “valproic acid/toxicity” [Mesh]; “Hyperammonemia” [Mesh]. A National Medicines Information Centre was also consulted. Reviews and case reports were used. Critical Appraisal Skills Program was applied for critical analysis of literature (available in: ).
Treatment was initiated with lactulose 15 ml twice daily (and adjusted to achieve two-three soft stools/day), L-carnitine 1 g twice daily, metronidazol 250 mg four times daily, complex B vitamins and levetiracetam 500 mg twice daily. Patient improved his consciousness state within 24 hours. Past 11 days ammonia level was 7,1 μmol/L and his level of consciousness resolved. Adjustment in diabetes therapy was made and he was discharged after 2 more days.