An 86-year-old Caucasian woman was transferred to our medical intensive care unit from another medical facility to provide a higher level of care for thrombotic microangiopathy and acute renal failure. She presented to an emergency department with an acute onset of abdominal pain and bright red blood per rectum. She reportedly had some breathing difficulty. A computed tomography (CT) of her abdomen had shown nonspecific findings suggestive of colitis and therapy had been started with levofloxacin and metronidazole. Urine studies did not have features of urinary tract infection. She was intubated electively at the other hospital due to altered mental status and need for supplemental oxygen prior to her transfer. Also of note, her family reported that she had some difficulties with her speech; this was in the form of difficulties with word-finding alongside slurring of speech. She had no other neurological deficits at that time. A diagnosis of MAHA with a suspicion for thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) was made and she was transferred to our hospital for a higher level of medical care. On her arrival at our institution, she continued to receive metronidazole, cefepime, and tigecycline.
She had medical comorbidities of essential hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and hypothyroidism. She had no reported history of infectious, autoimmune, or hematologic diseases. On physical examination, remarkable skin findings of purpura and ecchymoses were noted. She was intubated and coarse breath sounds were appreciated on examination.
The laboratory data revealed an elevated creatinine, markedly elevated serum LDH, and markedly reduced haptoglobin levels. Her serum ferritin was 739.8 ng/mL, transferrin saturation was 42 %; her cobalamin and folate were within normal limits. A peripheral blood smear showed thrombocytopenia and features of MAHA .
We approached the case as MAHA with a high suspicion for TTP. However, STEC-HUS was also high in our differential diagnosis since she initially had bloody diarrhea. We decided to start plasma exchange (PLEX) alongside methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg twice daily while awaiting ADAMTS13 activity and Shiga-toxin assays. She also underwent hemodialysis for acute renal failure. After an initial improvement in hemolysis and thrombocytopenia, her laboratory and clinical parameters of MAHA failed to improve in subsequent days of hospitalization. Three days later, ADAMTS13 activity level was reported as 92 % (normal range, 68 to 163 % activity); her stool sample was positive for STEC and a culture was positive for E. coli O157:H7. These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of STEC-HUS; therefore we recommended discontinuation of corticosteroid and plasmapheresis. We had a lengthy discussion with the family members regarding the limited efficacy of available treatment options. Given her worsening clinical condition, the family decided on palliative measures; she died on her fourth day of hospitalization at our institution.