A 64-year-old man, with severe multi-valvular disease detected during preoperative evaluation for colon diverticulitis, was referred for heart valve surgery. He had suffered recurrent life-threatening diverticular bleeding and accompanying heart failure. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed severe aortic regurgitation classified as type II (cusp prolapse) according to the functional classification developed by El Khoury et al., and severe mitral regurgitation caused by degenerative bi-leaflet prolapse with multiple eccentric regurgitant jets, exacerbated by secondary factors, including mitral annular and left ventricular (LV) dilation. Secure mitral repair with a shorter cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) time would have been difficult due to the complex lesion; double valve replacement (DVR) was a safer and simpler procedure.
The anterior leaflet of the mitral valve was excised and its chordae cut at their insertion into the papillary muscles. The posterior leaflet and its subvalvular apparatus were preserved. A 29-mm bovine pericardial bioprosthesis was implanted in the intra-annular position and a 25-mm bovine pericardial bioprosthesis replaced the prolapsed aortic valve (Carpentier-Edwards Magna Mitral Ease Valve and Magna Ease Aortic Valve, respectively; Edwards Lifesciences; Irvine, CA, USA).
After DVR completion, extensive hematoma occurred surrounding the posterior atrioventricular groove during weaning from CPB. We suspected that deeply placed sutures around the posterior mitral annulus might have cut through the left ventricular wall. Full CPB support, aimed at a prompt reduction of the intraventricular pressure, was re-instituted immediately, and inotropic agents were tapered off to weaken the force of muscular contractions with the hope of suppressing the exacerbation of the injury. Routine intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) monitoring was not utilized in this case; stable left ventricular contractility without bleeding was confirmed only by direct inspection before choosing conservative management. The re-weaning process was performed without any hemodynamic instability. The sternum was closed under stable conditions after administration of protamine sulfate.
The patient was taken into intensive care and extubated 12 h postoperatively. Postoperative routine TTE was unremarkable, whereas contrast-enhanced, electrocardiography (ECG)-gated, multi-detector computed tomography (CT) imaging on postoperative day 18 revealed a pseudoaneurysm (20 × 12 mm) arising from the posterior wall of the left ventricle just below the implanted mitral valve . The fistulous tract of the pseudoaneurysm was 2 mm in diameter. We chose conservative management because the patient was asymptomatic, the pseudoaneurysm was not large, and the fistulous tract was narrow. After CT imaging confirmed aneurysm regression on postoperative day 32, the patient was discharged in good condition.
Six months postoperatively, the pseudoaneurysm had completely disappeared on CT imaging . Three years after spontaneous resolution of the pseudoaneurysm, the patient has no cardiac complications, no recurrence of lower intestinal bleeding after colon surgery, and remains in good clinical condition.