A 30-year-old woman, medically free, who had undergone a cesarean section (C-section) 2 months back in the other hospital. The patient presented to the emergency department complaining of continuous abdominal pain in the umbilical region for 2 days. The pain was associated with nausea, vomiting, and constipation and started about 2 months ago. Family, drug, and psychological history were unremarkable. Upon examination, the patient was lying on the bed in severe pain, and she was alert, conscious, and oriented. Her heart rate was 120/min, blood pressure was 113/74 mmHg, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, and temperature was 36.9°C. Upon inspection of the abdomen, a Pfannenstiel incision scar and abdominal distension were noted; upon palpation, the abdomen was soft and lax, along with periumbilical swelling. Laboratory workups revealed leucocytosis of 16.25×109/l, otherwise unremarkable results. For imaging, the abdominal radiograph showed dilated small bowel loops . A Computerized abdominal tomography (CT) scan showed a well-defined tubular hyperdense structure adherent to the anterior abdominal wall. It was anterolateral to the umbilical region that is exerting a mass effect on the adjacent small bowel loops. It was associated with well-defined heterogeneous wall enhancement and fluid collection. The jejunum and proximal ileal loops showed dilatation reaching a maximum diameter of 5.2 cm, and are fluid-filled with some focalization and multiple air-fluid levels. Subsequent collapsed distal ileal loops were noticed as well, suggesting an area of the transition zone. The transverse colon, descending colon, sigmoid, and rectum all collapsed. Furthermore, the findings were suggestive of partial small bowel obstruction . Following the CT results, an exploratory laparotomy revealed a granuloma at the connection of the small and large bowels with pus collection. Adhesiolysis was done to remove the granuloma, with resection and anastomosis of a small segment of the ileum. The content of the granuloma was a large abdominal surgical towel from the patient’s previous surgery. The patient was recovering well postoperatively; a complete diet was started on day five postoperation, and she was fit for discharge in good, stable condition on the 7th day. . The patient was followed up as an outpatient and rested asymptomatically before resuming her life activities.