A 54-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for a mass in RA on an echocardiography examination occasionally. There was no symptom or sign of fever, chest pain, dizziness, palpitations and no history of a heart disease and tumor. He was a teacher, running and training on a weekly basis. He also was a non-smoker and drank 50 ml Chinese liquor each day for 30 years. There was no other medical history of note and no family history of sudden death. Clinically, the patient has stable vital signs with no fever, a heart rate of 68 beats per minute and blood pressure of 128/79 mmHg. The serum tumor markers and D-dimer were normal. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm. The chest X-ray showed normal cardiac size and clear lungs.
The echocardiography (Siemens, ACUSON SC2000) showed normal left ventricular systolic function (ejection fraction 66%), normal left and right ventricular cavities and normal cardiac valves. Only mild tricuspid and aortic valve regurgitate. Incidentally, an apparently smooth mass-like echogenic structure (9*11 mm) attached to tricuspid valve was noted in the right atrium and suggestive of a thrombus or a tumor in four-chamber apical view .
Due to the limitation of acoustic window of echocardiography, the patient was arranged to our center of nuclear medicine for PET/MRI for diagnostic work up of the mass to be determined. Cardiac PET/MRI was performed with Siemens Biograph mMR (Software version B20P, Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany). The MRI showed the findings: Cine gradient-echo image in four-chamber view confirmed the presence of a banded structure (arrowhead) attached to the posterior wall of RA and the mass moved during systole and diastole period (See Additional file : Video S1). On T2-weighted short tau inversion recovery (T2-STIR) of the four chamber and short axis view , the mass (arrowhead) had similar signal intensity to myocardium revealing a myocardial structure. On T2-STIR with fat suppression of the four chamber and short axis view , the results were consistent with T2-STIR images. There was no abnormal enhancement about the mass (arrowhead) on late gadolinium enhancement (LGE)-MRI . Furthermore, PET/MRI indicated no obvious 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) uptake on the mass , which exclude malignant tumor. These typical findings detected by PET/MRI lead to the diagnosis of a prominent crista terminalis. The case follow-up hitherto had no special symptom.