A 75-year-old African American female with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, peripheral artery disease, and essential thrombocythemia, complicated by sequential bilateral central retinal vein occlusion, was seen for follow-up. She first presented to hematology in March 2015 with a history of left central retinal vein occlusion, stable claudication from peripheral arterial disease, and progressive thrombocytosis. She had quit smoking three months prior. Laboratory review revealed persistent increased platelet counts (>800 × 109/L) over the previous six months. Blood smear was notable for increased large mature megakaryocytes relative to red blood cells; no left shift, leukoerythroblastosis, or dysplasia was observed. Iron studies, lactate dehydrogenase, BCR-ABL translocation, and JAK2 V617F mutation studies were unremarkable. The patient refused bone marrow biopsy, and a presumptive diagnosis of ET was given, supported by calreticulin (CALR) mutation detected. Low-dose aspirin and hydroxyurea were initiated, and platelets were at goal (<400 × 109/L) two months later. Her history was further complicated by right central retinal vein occlusion in December 2016 during a period of poor compliance with cytoreductive therapy.
In May 2018, she reported progressive fatigue and 15 lb unintentional weight loss over the preceding three months. Laboratory evaluation was notable for a macrocytic anemia and platelets at goal (WBC 6 × 109/L; Hb 10 g/dL; MCV 101.7 fL; Plt 375 × 109/L). She agreed to bone marrow evaluation which revealed a normocellular marrow with an increased number of enlarged and hyperlobated megakaryocytes and variable mild reticulin fibrosis (less than MF-1); blasts were not increased. Fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis for BCR/ABL, PDGFRA, PDGFRB, and FGFR1 was negative. Peripheral blood molecular analysis revealed a mutation in the calreticulin (CALR) gene; JAK2 V617F, JAK2 exon 12, and myeloproliferative leukemia virus (MPL) oncogene mutations were not identified. These findings confirmed a diagnosis of essential thrombocythemia and excluded myelofibrosis as the cause of her fatigue and weight loss. Further evaluation with CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis demonstrated atherosclerosis and completely occlusive thrombosis of the infrarenal aorta, extending bilaterally into the common iliac arteries, with reconstitution of flow distally via collaterals . There was no splenomegaly. Subsequent CT angiogram of the abdomen showed redemonstration of the aortic thrombus without occlusion of the mesenteric arteries, the celiac trunk, or the hepatic, splenic, and renal arteries.
The patient's only symptom was mild chronic claudication which had not changed in quality; she denied lower extremity swelling or skin mottling. She reported compliance with her prescribed medications for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and ET. Lower extremity ultrasound and ankle brachial index were not significantly changed from prior studies. An evaluation for inflammatory disorders and thrombophilia, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, anti-phospholipid antibodies, factor V Leiden mutation, prothrombin gene mutation, and protein C and protein S, was unremarkable.
In light of her very mild symptoms and good collateralization on imaging, she was offered medical management with surgical intervention reserved for treatment refractoriness or acute ischemia. Clopidogrel 75 mg daily was added to the aspirin 81 mg and hydroxyurea 1000 mg she was already taking. Additionally, she was started on cilostazol 100 mg twice daily by her vascular surgeon to treat her claudication. She reported initial improvement in her symptoms one month after starting therapy. She did not return for follow-up until February 2019 due to temporarily relocating out of the state. She had been noncompliant with therapy for ET. Her platelet count was 948 × 109/L, and a CT scan showed no significant interval change in the occlusive thrombus of the infrarenal abdominal aorta and proximal common iliac arteries. She refused surgical intervention and was restarted on previous medical therapy.