The case involves a 58-year-old Caucasian man who presented to a regional hospital with a 24-hour history of severe PR bleeding. Our patient described the bleeding as being acute in onset, bright red with clots and associated with mild left iliac fossa pain. He had no other gastrointestinal symptoms prior to the bleed and had no history of colorectal disease. Of note, he had undergone a THA 31 days prior to his transfer from the regional hospital to our tertiary referral center and was taking oral rivaroxaban as a prophylactic anticoagulant in the postoperative period at a dose of 10 mg once daily. He was on no other medications and had no history of renal disease.
On arrival at the regional center, our patient had hemodynamic stability but his PR bleeding continued with multiple episodes involving an average of 250 to 500 mL in volume. His hemoglobin (Hb) level dropped from 12.0 g/dL on admission to 10.3 g/dL and subsequently to 7.4 g/dL over a 24-hour period. His coagulation profile and platelet levels were normal as was his renal function. An abdominal computed tomography scan revealed uncomplicated diverticular disease but no other abnormalities. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was also performed, which showed very mild gastritis but no source of hemorrhage. In the 24 hours between admission and transfer to our tertiary referral center, he received a total of nine units of packed red blood cells (PRBCs) in order to maintain hemodynamic stability.
Following transfer to our tertiary referral center, our patient had ongoing bleeding but remained hemodynamically stable. His vitals were as follows: heart rate, 98 beats/minute; blood pressure (BP), 134/71 mmHg; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/minute; oxygen saturation level, 98% on room air; and temperature, 36.0°C. On examination, he was pale but alert and chatty. His abdomen was soft with some mild tenderness in the left iliac fossa and there were no palpable masses, no evidence of organomegaly and bowel sounds were present. A PR examination was positive for fresh blood. His respiratory and cardiovascular examinations were both normal. His Hb level on admission was 8.3 g/dl (as shown in Table ). Our patient was kept strictly nil by mouth and commenced on eight hourly intravenous fluids. A group and cross-match was taken with four units of PRBCs on standby. He was to have repeat Hb levels taken if further hemorrhage occurred and his hemodynamic parameters were observed every two hours. After a further bleed overnight, he received one unit of PRBCs.
During the next 15 hours, our patient had a further two episodes of fresh blood PR whilst receiving three units of PRBCs. After the second episode his Hb level was 8.5 g/dL and he was prescribed a further two units of PRBCs as well as being commenced on an intravenous proton pump inhibitor. His BP subsequently dropped to 90/57 mmHg and his intravenous fluid regime was increased to 1 L every four hours with orders that he also receive Gelofusine (a succinylated gelatin solution) if his BP dropped again. He had four further episodes of bleeding over the following six hours and received two more units of PRBCs during this period. This was a total of eight units since his arrival to our tertiary referral center 24 hours earlier and 17 units in total since his presentation.
Due to the increasing frequency of these hemorrhagic episodes, our patient underwent emergency computed tomography mesenteric angiography. A consultant interventional radiologist could identify no obvious source of bleeding but ordered that our patient be returned immediately to the interventional radiology suite for embolization if further episodes of fresh blood PR occurred. His Hb level at this time was 11.4 g/dL and our patient was hemodynamically stable.
Over the next four days, our patient improved significantly with no further episodes of PR bleeding. He resumed a normal diet after three days and was discharged home well with a Hb level on discharge of 10.4 g/dL. His renal function remained within normal limits throughout his hospital stay.
Our patient returned six days later, having experienced no further symptoms, and underwent a colonoscopy that was entirely normal. When he was seen again six weeks later in the outpatient clinic; he was asymptomatic and reported feeling great. He was subsequently discharged from our service.