A 52 year-old man was admitted to our hospital 5 h after exploratory laparotomy for abdominal trauma. The patient’s abdomen was injured in a car accident more than 10 h earlier. He was first treated in a local hospital, abdominal computed tomography indicated liver rupture and peritoneal effusion . Emergency laparotomy was performed for hemostasis. At laparotomy, a Grade IV liver injury was seen with multiple lacerations of both the right and left liver lobes. After suturing the liver lacerations and removing the gallbladder, massive hemorrhage occurred in the gallbladder fossa and the first hepatic hilum. Gauze packing was performed for emergency hemostasis. However, the patient still had signs of active bleeding after surgery: (i) hypotension: systolic blood pressure fluctuated between 60 and 87 mm Hg; (ii) blood drainage fluid: 1000 ml of bloody fluid was drained out of the drainage tube of Wen’s hole in 3 h. Therefore, he was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. The patient had no previous underlying disease. Physical examination revealed hemorrhagic shock: the patient was in a coma, with endotracheal intubation mechanical ventilation to maintain respiration; pulse: 112 beats per minute, blood pressure: 71/42 mm Hg. A surgical incision of approximately 25 cm and three drainage tubes were visible in the right rectus abdominis. Routine blood test showed that the hemoglobin level was 58 (130–175) g/L. After anti-shock therapy, emergency surgery was performed, due to the large amount of blood loss and difficulty in dissociating the first hepatic hilum, only common hepatic artery ligation and liver repair were performed. A postoperative CT scan revealed no obvious perihepatic effusion or celiac vascular abnormalities . Some complications such as postoperative pulmonary infection, transient liver insufficiency, biliary leakage and peritoneal effusion occurred in the patient. After providing respiratory support, fluid replenishment, anti-infection and some other treatments, the patient recovered very well and was discharged home on the 20th postoperative day with a drainage tube in Wen's hole from which 100 ml of dark green liquid was drained every day. Approximately 3 months after the operation, the patient was readmitted to our hospital for abdominal distension accompanied by melena for two days. On the third day after admission, the patient had a sudden hematemesis of about 200 ml without obvious inducement, followed by 200 ml of melena and 800 ml of bloody fluid drained from the drainage tube of Wen's hole. Further selective angiography examination revealed the establishment of collateral circulation of the superior mesenteric artery—lower pancreaticoduodenal artery—anterior/posterior pancreaticoduodenal arch—superior pancreaticoduodenal artery—gastroduodenal artery—right hepatic artery. Moreover, a ruptured hepatic artery pseudoaneurysm was observed and transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was performed for hemostasis at the same time. The patients recovered very well after TAE treatment and no harmful events occurred during the follow-up period. The last follow-up was performed more than four years after the operation.