A 31-year-old Japanese man undergoing infliximab treatment for Crohn’s disease was admitted to our hospital with high fever and pain in the right upper abdominal region. He was diagnosed with Crohn’s disease 15 years ago when he had presented with an anal fistula, which was stable without resistant abscess for five years. Due to gradual exacerbation of the disease, he underwent an ileocecal resection with an ileostomy, and subsequent abscess drainage around the stoma 10 years ago. A second operation for ileal stenosis was performed with a partial ileum resection and a new ileostomy six years before the admission. He had not been treated with methylprednisolone, but underwent infliximab treatment two years before the admission to induce remission because of further exacerbation of the disease. Infliximab (five mg/kg) was administered every eight weeks for nine times, successfully suppressing the disease. The last infusion of infliximab was administered two months before referral to our department.
On admission, his mean arterial pressure, heart rate, body temperature, and respiratory rate were 76mmHg, 78/minute, 39.3°C, and 16/minute, respectively. After admission, his fever spiked up to 40°C each day, however, his circulatory and respiratory condition was stable without vasopressor treatment or oxygen administration. Laboratory data revealed severe inflammation with a white blood cell count of 20400/μL with 80% neutrophils, a serum C-reactive protein level of 25.0mg/dL, a serum fibrin degradation products level of 26μg/mL, and a serum D-dimer level of 11.6μg/mL. His liver function was slightly impaired with increased aspartate and alanine aminotransferase levels (87IU/L and 149IU/L, respectively); however, no other organ impairment was observed. The results of the arterial blood culture and serum anti-ameba shigella dysenteriae antibody tests were negative. Abdominal ultrasonography and abdominal computed tomography on admission revealed a huge heterogeneous lesion in the liver, 50mm in diameter, occupying Couinaud’s segment 8 .
An eight-French scale (Fr) percutaneous transhepatic abscess drainage (PTAD) tube was inserted and the patient received intravenous sulbactam sodium and cefoperazone sodium (four g/day) and subsequent meropenem (four g/day). The first microbial culture of the pus that drained from the PTAD revealed MRSA and Escherichia coli. MRSA was confirmed in MRSA screening agar. The minimum inhibitory concentration of vancomycin was one mg/L. Therefore vancomycin (one g/day) was started and continued for eight days, but the patient’s fever and laboratory and radiographic findings did not improve . Vancomycin was then changed to teicoplanin with an initial dose of 400mg/day and a maintenance dose of 200mg/day maintaining the target trough level at 11 to 13μg/mL. Additional interventional treatment with placement of another larger (12Fr) PTAD tube was performed, which failed to relieve the liver abscess, and the size of the abscess increased to 60mm in diameter on the follow-up computed tomography scan . During the course, additional blood cultures were taken twice and an abscess culture was performed which resulted negative for bacteremia but positive for MRSA abscess. Without any improvement in the patient’s general condition and clinical findings after seven days of teicoplanin treatment with additional interventional treatments, we decided to perform urgent radical resection of the abscess. Under general anesthesia, a liver resection of segment 8 was performed through an inverted T-shaped incision on day 30 after admission.
Meticulous guidance by intraoperative ultrasonography allowed us resection of segment 8 without exposing the abscess cavity. The operating time and intra-operative blood loss were 510 minutes and 900mL, respectively. A pathologic examination revealed a liver abscess, 65×45×36mm in size, weighing 200g, composed of irregular necrosis with epithelioid and fibrotic formations in a surrounding palisading pattern . The patient’s temperature returned to normal and the laboratory data also normalized immediately after the operation. The patient received intravenous teicoplanin and meropenem for seven more days after surgery. After that, 500mg/day of ciprofloxacin was administered orally. The postoperative course was uneventful, except for intravenous hyperalimentation catheter-related Candida parapsilosis, which was successfully treated with fluconazole. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 41. The treatment course of the patient is summarized in Figure with the changes in the laboratory data. So far, no evidence of recurrent liver abscess or Crohn’s disease progression has been observed in the four months after the resection, with oral administration of three g/day of PENTASA® (mesalamine) and 500mg/day of ciprofloxacin.