We report a case of giant cardiac lipoma in a 17-year-old female previously healthy while performing preoperative work-up for tonsillectomy.
A 17-year-old female with a known case of Prader-Willi syndrome since childhood was hospitalized for a preoperative tonsillectomy evaluation. She was referred for surgery due to several episodes of infective tonsillitis (> 6) in the last year. Physical exam was unremarkable for cardiopulmonary findings. The patient was asymptomatic with normal hemodynamic parameters. Laboratory studies revealed normal white blood cell count and C-reactive protein and electrolyte panel with normal renal and liver function. Electrocardiogram showed regular sinus rhythm with T waves inversion in all territories. Subsequently, Holter electrocardiogram found repetitive polymorphic ventricular contraction. Afterwards, an electrocardiogram stress test was performed with suboptimal results due to many premature ventricular contractions originating from the apex and inferior wall.
As a result, we proceeded with transthoracic echocardiogram, which revealed a giant mass located apically in the right ventricle and extended to the epicardium measuring transversally 8.4 cm on its maximal diameter . Computed tomography scan showed a well-circumscribed and homogenously hypodense mass obscuring the apical right ventricle . Searching for the etiology, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the diagnostic modality of choice, showed a right ventricular septate mass with fat signal transmission and homogenous contours that had normal gadolinium enhancement protruding to the apical epicardium without extracardiac structures involved The patient had normal biventricular function . In order to differentiate primary from secondary cardiac tumors and to search for secondary localizations, we performed a positron emission tomography scan that showed a nonfunctional mass .
Afterwards, percutaneous myocardial biopsy was done, and histopathological examination showed adipose tissue without malignant features confirming cardiac lipoma .