A 78-year-old Caucasian woman was referred by her dentist to our outpatient clinic, with a 4-week history of an oral ulceration. She mentioned that she had basocellular carcinoma in her face and stomach cancer. Extra-oral clinical examination showed facial symmetry and palpable, mobile, smooth and asymptomatic submandibular lymph nodes. A shallow ulcer with an erythematous border, measuring about 1.5 cm at its maximum diameter, was noted upon intraoral examination. The ulcer was located in the mucosa of the lingual region of the left lower premolars and was accompanied by painful symptoms.
Upon anamnesis, the patient reported the use of sertraline hydrochloride for the treatment of depression at an initial dose of 50 mg, which was subsequently increased to 100 mg when the occurrence of the lesion was first noted. After evaluation of the medication by the physician responsible, sertraline was replaced by 75 mg of venlafaxine and exfoliative cytology of the ulcer was performed.
Exfoliative cytology of the lesion showed superficial and intermediate pavement epithelial cells presenting diverse inflammatory and degenerative alterations, such as vacuolization, a perinuclear halo, an enlarged nucleus, binucleation and lysis, numerous mono- and polymorphonuclear leukocytes, thick and filamentous mucus, and cell remnants, in addition to a mixed flora consisting of bacteria and Candida hyphae .
Mouth rinsing with a betamethasone elixir three times per day for 3 minutes was initially prescribed for a period of 5 days. On her return visit, the patient presented with improvement of the clinical symptoms and was instructed to continue mouth rinsing for an additional 7 days. Two weeks later, she returned, complaining of persistent pain in the affected area. The patient returned after 21 days showing significant improvement of the clinical symptoms and re-epithelization of the ulcer. The patient was followed up for 4 months at weekly intervals and was discharged after this period. She presented with no further oral complaints over 2 years of follow-up.