The case was a female patient, aged 62, married, illiterate and housewife who were admitted to Emergency Department (ED) of Rasoul Akram hospital in the June of 2013. After abrupt discontinuation of zolpidem, she presented to ED with restlessness; sever agitation, crying, severe anxiety, impatience, loss of energy, insomnia, irritability, verbal aggression, distraction, increased appetite, physical symptoms such as headaches and lightheadedness, severe shivering, and increased craving for higher dosage of opium. Urging and pressure of her close relatives was the main reason to quit the zolpidem at once. Further evaluation revealed that she had been suffering from Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) since 5 years ago that had never been noticed and managed psychiatrically. Approximately since two years before this hospitalization, the patient had started taking 10 mg of zolpidem prescribed by a general physician for her insomnia. After several months of consumption, she herself titrated of dosage for her resistant insomnia up to 570 mg per day in divided dosage. According to her report, in addition of her insomnia, depressive and anxiety comorbid symptoms were improved by every step up the zolpidem dosage.
She used to take opium for one year and quitted for the next four years. However, to alleviate her discomfort from psychological symptoms, she had started to take it orally again during the last year.
As explained by the patient, opium and zolpidem had been consumed simultaneously for its relaxing and euphoric effects.
Although the patient had a history of MDD, nevertheless, the above mentioned symptoms were beyond the criterion which could be attributed to recurrent of MDD diagnosis, according to diagnostic criteria. The onset of symptoms in one month of quitting abusive substance, make the “withdrawal” diagnosis eligible. Thus the patient was formulated with diagnosis of: 1.Zolpidem withdrawal syndrome, 2. MDD, 3. Opium dependency according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 4th edition- Text Revision (DSM- IV-TR).
Complete Blood Count (CBC), biochemistry test, thyroid test, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) as well as electrocardiography, echocardiography and urine test were in normal range. Urine screening test was positive for opium.
The patient has been managed by 1) Gabapentin (900 mg in divided doses per day), sertraline (200 mg per day) and trazodone (100 mg at bedtime). Although both of them will increase the serotonin level, however it helped to overcome the insomnia of the patient without any side effect of serotonergic syndrome. 2) Patient’s oral consumption of opium was stopped and replaced by methadone, the dosage of the methadone gradually tapered up to 40 mg per day. Close monitoring did not show any cardiac side effect of methadone and trazodone combination. After three weeks of hospitalization, she has been discharged from hospital in good condition. She was on the same medication two months after discharge and her mental and physical conditions were stable without any craving for both opium and zolpidem.