A 76-year-old woman presented to the ED with sudden onset of chest pain and nausea after the euthanasia of her cat. Her medical history reported unmedicated hypertension and a previous depressive disorder. At presentation, her blood pressure was 149/105 mmHg, heart rate was 120 b.p.m., respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. The remaining physical examination was unremarkable.
Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia with ST-segment elevation in the anterolateral leads, pathologic Q-waves on V2–V4 leads, and a QTc interval of 401 ms (Fridericia formula, ). The patient was initially loaded with aspirin, clopidogrel, and heparin and underwent emergent coronary angiography, which ruled out obstructive coronary artery disease .
Transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated severely reduced LV ejection fraction (EF, 25%) with mid-to-apical hypokinaesia of all LV walls, apical ballooning, and no significant mitral regurgitation nor LVOTO . The right ventricular (RV) longitudinal function was mildly reduced, and the apical free-wall segment was akinetic (see , ). Contrast TTE was performed to exclude LV thrombus and rupture . Laboratory workup revealed elevated cardiac biomarkers with a characteristic dissociation between troponin and NT-proBNP elevations (peak high-sensitivity troponin T 2535 ng/L, peak NT-proBNP 18.900 pg/mL) and no other abnormalities.
Altogether, these findings supported the diagnosis of TTS, with an InterTAK score of 72 points (probability of TTS of 90.3%). The patient was admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit (CICU) and was started on neurohormonal blocking therapies for LV systolic dysfunction. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was not performed owing to the patient’s claustrophobia.
Five days after admission, she progressed to SCAI-C stage, becoming more hypotensive, oliguric, and displaying hyperlactataemia. Repeated TTE did not show new findings. An IABP was implanted, and levosimendan was started, allowing haemodynamic recovery and IABP removal after 4 days.
On Day 11, a harsh pansystolic grade II/VI murmur was heard at the lower left sternal border. Although the LVEF had improved to 40%, an apical VSR (∼19 mm) causing a left-to-right shunt (maximal gradient 60–65 mmHg) was identified . Right-sided heart catheterization revealed a ‘step-up’ in oxygen saturation from the right atrium (53.4%) to pulmonary artery (82.3%). The pulmonary–systemic flow ratio (Qp/Qs ratio) was 2.3, consistent with a significant left-to-right shunt.
After heart team discussion, the patient was deemed a good candidate for surgical repair, based on her few comorbidities and intermediate surgical risk (EuroSCORE II 8%). Nonetheless, as she was haemodynamically stable, surgery was deferred for 14 days to allow better defect healing.
Twenty-six days after admission, the patient underwent surgery. In vivo, the 30 × 10 mm VSR was located at the mid-apical interventricular septum (IVS). The surgeon used a bovine pericardial patch to close the defect and was able to properly attach it as the surround myocardium was already fibrotic, without residual shunt (Qp/Qs pre-closure 2.3, Qp/Qs after closure 1).
The post-operative period was uneventful, except for very frequent ventricular ectopic beats (>500/h) that were treated with bisoprolol and amiodarone. The TTE before discharge confirmed the absence of residual VSR and complete recovery of LVEF, despite apical and mid-wall IVS segment akinesia , and the ECG showed resolution of Q-waves on V2–V4 leads and only residual diffuse T-wave abnormalities (see , ). The patient was discharged on post-operative Day 16.
At 5-month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic and free of hospitalizations.