A 44-year-old woman (gravida 1, para 1, live 1), without specific comorbidities, was referred to the Emergency Department at a primary care facility for sudden onset vaginal bleeding, associated with pain of moderate intensity in the lower part of the abdomen. Her last menstrual period occurred two weeks before her presentation, and previous menstrual cycles were regular. She did not smoke or drink alcohol. The patient was otherwise fit and well, with no other significant medical history. She had no significant family history and she is married, with a 12-year-old daughter. The delivery was vaginal, uncomplicated, term pregnancy, without any known difficulties. Also, the patient denied intermenstrual bleeding, post-coital bleeding and recent changes in menstrual cycle.
The general condition of the patient appeared to be good. Bimanual examination revealed an anteverted uterus increased in size, firm consistency, painless. There were no masses palpated in the vaginal canal or adnexa. Abdominal-pelvic ultrasound showed an endometrial thickness of 8 mm and multiple hypoechoic intramural masses of different sizes. As the cause of bleeding could not be determined from any coagulation disorder or a scar site, a diagnostic and hemostatic uterine curettage was performed and histology showed poorly differentiated pleomorphic leiomyosarcoma.
In April 2020, the patient was submitted to our unit for treatment. After discussion at the oncology multidisciplinary team meeting (MTD), a second pathological opinion was requested.
Preoperative investigations and surgical treatment
Microscopic re-evaluation of slides in the biopsy curettage product was completed with the immunohistochemical examination that established the diagnosis of ETT.
Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium showed the presence of a large uterus measuring 51 (longitudinal) × 79 (max anteroposterior) × 91 mm (transverse), with inhomogeneous structure due to a fundic tumor mass measuring 23 × 32 mm with moderate hypo signal T1, with 2/3 myometrial invasion. The right ovary had multiple peripheral cysts measuring 17 × 12 mm .
For the systemic evaluation of the patient, a thoraco-abdominal CT-scan was performed which showed the absence of lesions suspected of secondary determinations.
The images and tumor results had been reviewed at the oncology MTD, and the recommendation was surgical treatment.
Laboratory tests showed mild neutrophilic leukocytosis (leukocytes—10,100 mm3, neutrophils—8160 mm3) and normal β-HCG (<2 ng/mL), α-fetoprotein (AFP) and CA125 levels (18.4 UI/mL).
After preoperative preparation was done, radical hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy (level I and II) was performed . The procedure was uncomplicated. The patient has had a good recovery after surgery and she was discharged on day 5 postoperatively.
Anatomopathological evaluation of the surgical specimen
The macroscopic evaluation showed the uterus with irregular contour. The uterine cavity is 4 cm long. At the level of the uterine fundus, with extension to the left horn, there were noted a tumor mass of 3.7/2.5/2 cm, well delimited, pearly white, fasciculate appearance and friable consistency. The tumor protrudes in the uterine serosa and infiltrates over 50% of the thickness of the myometrium. In the right hemibody of the uterus, intramural, there were found multiple nodular tumors, the largest being 2.3 cm in diameter, well defined, pearly white, fasciculate appearance and elastic consistency. The right ovary measured 4.2 cm × 5.1 cm × 1.7 cm with unilocular sero-cytrin ovarian cyst measuring 2.2 cm. The left ovary measured 2.9 cm × 2.2 cm × 0.8 cm with two unilocular sero-cytrin ovarian cysts measuring 0.8 cm.
The microscopic evaluation of the surgical specimen showed a uterine nodular tumor with dimensions of 3.5 cm × 2.5 cm × 2 cm developed in the uterine fundus area with extension to the left horn, apparently well delimited both macroscopically and microscopically—pushing type margin.
Intermediate trophoblast tumor cells are arranged in a fibrous eosinophilic material with vesicular nuclei. Tumor cells surround and sometimes completely replace the vascular walls in some medium-sized vascular spaces. Numerous atypical mitoses are identified—19 mitoses/10/high power field. At the level of the uterine serosa, near the tumor formation, an area of its rupture is identified with the exteriorization on the serosa of a small island of tumor cells accompanied by necrosis. The specimen margins were, notably, free of tumor . All the pelvic lymph nodes are with a preserved structure, without tumor metastases.
Immunohistochemistry staining of the tumor cells revealed SMA was negative in tumor cells, with positive internal control, desmin was negative in tumor cells with positive internal control, CKiT negative in tumor cells and positive in mast cells, CD 10 intense and diffuse positive in tumor cells and p63 weakly positive, zonal extended in tumor cells . The histology diagnostic was an epithelioid trophoblastic tumor of the uterus, pT1N0M0.
The FIGO prognostic score is 8, with high risk (age = 1, historical-term pregnancy = 2, interval of the previous pregnancy = 4, bHCG level = 0, tumor size = 1, no metastases = 0).
Sixteen months postoperatively, the patient remains disease free according to the paraclinical investigations. She is being monitored monthly with serum β-HCG.