A 25-year-old woman was referred to us with a 5 day history of moderate localized pain in her right lower abdomen that was not radiating to any other site and was not associated with nausea or vomiting. The patient had mild pyrexia (temperature 99.4°F). On examination of her abdomen, a well-defined mildly tender localized fixed lump 7×5cm in size was found in the right iliac fossa. The hemogram showed a total leukocyte count of 11,000/mm3, with 60% polymorphonucleocytes. Ultrasonography (USG) of her abdomen revealed an oval-shaped abdominal mass in the right iliac fossa, suggestive of an appendicular lump.
The patient was put on the Ochsner-Sherren regimen. However, recovery was found to be slow and incomplete, and a smaller non-tender lump 5×5cm in size was still present at the end of 4 weeks. Repeat USG was suggestive of an unresolved appendicular lump.
On exploratory laparotomy through a lower midline incision, a hard mass lesion was found on the inner side of the anterior abdominal wall of the right iliac fossa, to which omentum was firmly adherent. The appendix was found to be normal and a wide-based Meckel's diverticulum was also present at 2 feet proximal to the ileo-caecal junction. Wide excision of the suspicious lesion was carried out with a clearance margin of 2cm all round and the resultant fascio-muscular defect in the anterior abdominal wall was repaired with polypropylene mesh. The Meckel's diverticulum and the normal appendix were also excised.
The excised mass was bisected and, to our surprise, a copper-T IUCD was found embedded inside . The uterus was examined but there was no evidence of any perforation. The abdomen was closed and a tube drain was left in situ.
On cross-checking with the patient on the following day, she gave a history of copper-T insertion about 6 months previously.
The drain was removed after 48 hours, and the postoperative period was uneventful. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 7th day after removal of stitches. She was asymptomatic at 1-month follow-up.