A 69-year-old gentleman, presented with complaints of pain and swelling in left side of the lower jaw since 1 year. Extraorally a diffuse ovoid swelling was present on the left cheek region, measuring about 6 × 2 cm in size, extending anteroposteriorly from left commissure of the lip to 3 cm in front of left ear lobe and supero-inferiorly from infraorbital margin to 1.5 cm below the lower border of mandible. There was another well-circumscribed swelling in the neck on the same side measuring about 6 × 3.5 cm in size. Skin over the swellings was stretched without any secondary changes but was tender on palpation . Intraorally an ulceroproliferative lesion in the buccal mucosa of 36 region that readily bled, was seen extending anteroposteriorly from distal aspect of 34 to retromolar area and superoinferiorly obliterating the upper and lower gingivobuccal sulci.
Soft tissue window of the computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an ill-defined mass involving the gingiva, buccal mucosa and gingivo-buccal sulcus in the 36 region, extending into the retromolar trigone. Multiple enlarged nodes were evident (levels 1-4) with involvement of the submandibular region. Bony window revealed lesion infiltrating the mandible. Erosion of the alveolar ridge in 36 and 37 region with tooth displacement was also seen .
Based on the CT findings and incisional biopsy done elsewhere (reported as poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of mandible), surgical intervention was done. The excised radical neck dissection specimen was submitted to us for histopathological evaluation .
Histopathological evaluation of the hematoxylin and eosin (H and E)-stained sections from the lesional tissue revealed tumor cells arranged in multiple patterns. Among the various patterns observed like microcystic, follicular, organoid and papillary cystic; the organoid pattern predominated . Intercalated duct-like cells, identified by their amphophilic cytoplasm and large hyperchromatic nuclei and vacuolated cells, with clear cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei, were evident. However, majority of the cells were those arranged in syncytial sheets with ill-defined cell boundaries, large vesicular nuclei and occasional mitotic figures, identified as nonspecific glandular cells. Section showed several such areas with low-grade features; however, serous acinar cells were almost absent. Few areas showed frequent mitosis and tumor necrosis and tumor cells invading the vessels [Figure –].
The lesional tissue was subjected to periodic acid-Schiff and mucicarmine staining. Demonstration of the diastase-resistant periodic acid-Schiff-positive serous cells in the sections was subtle . No positivity to mucicarmine was noticed. Following this, sections were submitted for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (Philips-Christian Medical College, (CMC) Vellore). Though negligible in number, the electron microscopy picture could clearly reveal the serous acinar cells with electron dense secretory granules . Immunostaining of the lesional tissue with cyclin D1, p53, Ki 67, neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and the nodal tissue with thyroglobulin was done. Focal areas with few cells showing positivity to cyclin D1 , p53 and Ki 67 was noticed
Histopathological typing of the submandibular lymph nodes revealed replacement of the normal tissue by intercalated duct-like cells, few arranged in solid pattern and majority in follicular pattern . Lymph nodes from level 1 to level 4 were involved. Invasion of the tumor cells into the bone was also evident .
Based on these findings, it was diagnosed as a variant of AciCC from minor salivary gland with increased propensity for HGT. However, our patient died 2 months after the surgery from cardiac failure.