A 55-year-old woman with a 20-year history of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) was treated with basal-bolus insulin and oral hypoglycemic agents. She sometimes interrupted diabetic treatment, resulting in remaining high hemoglobin A1C (10%–14%) throughout her clinical course. She started intravitreal injection of aflibercept (2 mg every 4 weeks) for the treatment of DME 2 years previously. At initiation of aflibercept, her serum creatinine was 0.54 mg/dL and urinalysis showed no abnormalities. In 1- or 2-monthly monitoring of urinalysis, mild proteinuria (1 +) was found at 5 months after the first injection, but the injections were continued. Fourteen months after the first injection, she reported bilateral leg edema and hypertension (159/87 mm Hg) with a urine protein level of 4.9 g/gCr, urine red blood cells of 0–1/high-power field, and serum creatinine of 0.65 mg/dL; thus, amlodipine, telmisartan, and furosemide were added to the therapy. Nevertheless, urine protein continued to increase, to 10.0 g/gCr at 2 years after the first injection, and she was referred to our division for treatment of nephrotic-range proteinuria. A total dose of 44 mg of aflibercept was administered in 22 injections during the 2 years following the first injection, which halted the deterioration in eyesight. At the time of visiting our division, her other prescription medications included nifedipine, doxazosin mesylate, trichlormethiazide, spironolactone, rosuvastatin calcium, insulin glulisine, and insulin glargine. She had no family history of kidney disease or TMA.
The patient’s height was 155 cm, weight 64.3 kg, blood pressure 168/87 mm Hg, pulse 81/ min, O2 saturation 96% with room air, body temperature 37.4℃, and bilateral leg edema was noted. Computed tomography showed bilateral pleural and peritoneal effusions, but the kidneys were of normal size. Laboratory data revealed the following: white blood cell count, 4.59 × 103/μL; hemoglobin, 8.2 g/dL; platelet count, 21.3 × 104/μL; urine protein, 12.0 g/gCr; urine red blood cells, 10–19/high-power field; serum creatinine, 1.20 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate (using the 2021 CKD-EPI creatinine equation), 53.5 mL/min/1.73m2; serum albumin, 2.3 g/dL; hemoglobin A1C, 8.0%. No abnormalities were observed in IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, C4 levels, or autoantibodies. She had severe grade diabetic complication, such as proliferative diabetic retinopathy and diabetic neuropathy.
Two renal biopsy specimens were obtained for histological examination. There were 32 glomeruli in the light microscopic specimens, five of which were globally sclerotic. Glomeruli showed diffuse increase of mesangial matrix with nodular lesions . Mesangiolysis , duplication of the glomerular capillary wall , and expansion of the subendothelial spaces were also present in the glomeruli. There were no definite thrombi in the glomeruli. Interstitial fibrosis, interstitial inflammation, and tubular atrophy were mild. Arterial sclerosis was mild, and arteriolar hyalinosis was moderate. No narrowing of the lumen or thrombosis were observed in the interstitial arterioles. Immunofluorescence studies showed linear IgG staining along the glomerular capillary walls and negative staining for IgA, IgM, C3, and C1q. Electron microscopy revealed diffuse thickening of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and increased deposition of mesangial matrix in the glomeruli. Mesangiolysis, duplication of the GBM, and expansion of the subendothelial spaces were also seen (data not shown). Some expanded subendothelial spaces contained fibrin tactoids and platelets . There were no electron-dense deposits in the glomeruli and some endothelial swellings were observed in the interstitial arterioles. Collectively, these findings suggested a final diagnosis of diabetic nephropathy with renal TMA probably associated with VEGFI (aflibercept).
Intravitreal aflibercept injection was discontinued after the renal biopsy, then both urinary protein and serum albumin gradually improved. Six months after withdrawal of aflibercept, the patient no longer had nephrotic syndrome as indicated by improvement of leg edema and disappearance both of the bilateral pleural effusion and ascites. Ten months after ceasing aflibercept, her laboratory parameters (serum creatinine, 1.49 mg/dL; serum albumin, 4.0 g/dL; urine protein, 0.6 g/gCr) and blood pressure (123/54 mm Hg) had improved. Her eyesight maintained stable even after aflibercept discontinuation.