A 29 years old male patient was admitted at the outpatient clinic. He reported frequent falls since gait acquisition when he was one year old. After 20 years old, he noticed progressive gait disturbance with weakness in the lower limbs and tremor on the hands. No history of parental consanguinity or similar cases in the family were reported. Physical examination at admission revealed increased calf, difficulties performing extraocular eye movement and lower limb proximal weakness.
Clinical examination, included muscle strength testing as rated by the Medical Research Council scale. The degree of muscle involvement on image studies was evaluated according to a 5-point scale [,]. Stage 0 is normal appearance; stage 1 (mild) corresponds to traces of decreased density on CT (computed tomography) or increased signal intensity on the T1-weighted MR (magnetic resonance) sequences; stage 2 (moderate) reflects reduced density on CT or increased signal intensity (MRI) with beginning confluence in less than 50% of the muscle; stage 3 (severe) refers to decreased density (CT) or increased signal intensity (MRI) in more than 50% of an examined muscle; and stage 4 (advanced disease) to a state when the entire muscle is replaced by lower density (CT) or increased signal intensity (MRI).
Electromyography (EMG) disclosed a mixed pattern, neurogenic and myopathic, mainly myopathic, with mild muscle membrane hyperexcitability. We analyzed the right deltoideus, triceps, biceps brachialis and first dorsal interosseous, left vastus lateralis, bilateral tibialis anterior and right gastrocnemius medialis by conventional and quantitative EMG method with twenty motor unit potentials (MUP) quantification of each muscle studied. At rest, fibrillation and positive waves were detected in the right gastrocnemius medialis. At initial effort, all muscles studied showed low amplitude and/or short duration MUP (myopathic characteristics), mainly in the lower limbs. Right triceps brachialis, deltoideus and first dorsal interosseous muscles presented a mixed pattern (myopathic and neurogenic), showing besides myopathic motor unit potentials, many other potentials with high amplitude and/or long duration (neurogenic characteristics), with high MUP polyphasic proportion in all of them .
Serum muscle enzymes were increased with a total creatine kinase level of 1438 UI/L (7.5×) (reference value under 190 UI/L), and serum aldolase level of 10.1 (1.3×) (reference value under 7.6 U/L).Computed tomography of the pelvis, thighs and legs revealed advanced gluteus maximus, gluteus medius, and gluteus minimus involvement. At the thigh, there was advanced (grade 4) biceps femoris, semitendinosus, and semimembranosus involvement; severe (grade 3) vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, vastus intermedius, and adductor magnus involvement, with relative preservation and hypertrophy of the sartorius and gracilis. At the leg, there was asymmetric muscle involvement with advanced (grade 4) soleus, right gastrocnemius medialis, and left peroneus involvement, as well as tibialis anterior muscle sparing .Patient was submitted, when he was 31 years old, to a left vastus lateralis muscle biopsy that demonstrated abnormal architecture with areas of fibrous and fat replacement, endomysial fibrosis, fiber splitting, atrophic and hypertrophic fibers. There were groups of atrophic and groups of hypertrophic fibers , with type 2 fiber predominance (data not shown). Frequent rimmed vacuoles were observed. These rimmed vacuoles presented different sizes and shapes, peripheral or central locations, inside the sarcoplasm of both atrophic and hypertrophic fibers. Rimmed vacuoles were characterized by empty spaces with a rim of basophilic material . No lobulated fibers were observed on the muscle biopsy sample.Immunohistochemical studies demonstrated normal reaction for sarcoglycans (alpha, beta, gamma, delta), dysferlin, merosin, caveolin, myotilin, and emerin. Immunohistochemical studies for the three dystrophin epitopes (Rod, carboxy-terminus, amino-terminus), disclosed focal irregular reaction for the carboxy-terminus that was evident on serial sections of the same fibers . Immunohistochemical reaction for the anti-telethonin antibody showed total deficiency , consistent with telethoninopathy (Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy type 2G).Transmission electron microscopy demonstrated endomysial fibrosis, fiber and myofiber splitting, focal intrasarcoplasmic glycogen deposits, many degenerating fibers, very small atrophic fibers with or without degeneration signs, and autophagic vacuoles with numerous membrane and sarcoplasmic debris .
The molecular investigations were part of standard patient diagnostics, and included the search for Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, Spinal muscular atrophy, mitochondrial m.3243 A < G mutation, dystrophinopathy, and Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy type 2A (calpainopathy), which disclosed normal results. The FKRP gene dHPLC followed by direct sequencing to investigate the hypotheses of Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy type 2I (fukutin-related myopathy) revealed one single heterozygous exon 4 c.461G > T, p.(Arg154Phe) mutation in the FKRP gene with unknown significance. Sequencing of the 2 exons of the TCAP gene identified the common c.157C > T (p.Q53X) mutation in homozygous state.