A 40-year-old Chinese woman was hospitalized with a chief complaint of severe back pain without neurological symptoms for 3 mo. She had exhausted conservative measures and elected to proceed with surgery. Her baseline pain severity was 90 mm on a 100-mm visual analogue scale (VAS).
The patient had a past history of cervical squamous cell carcinoma with metastasis to T10 vertebrae and the lung. She had undergone chemoradiation but not surgery, and her most recent radiotherapy and chemotherapy were 6 mo and 5 mo prior to admission, respectively. She denied any recent travel, surgeries, or immobilization. Her body mass index was 27.3 kg/m2.
There was no other obvious abnormality or any past illness other than cervical cancer.
There was no special history or personal history. The patient had no known family history of DVT.
No abnormality other than low-back tenderness were noticed on physical examination. No sign of swollen lower limbs was noticed.
The routine blood and blood biochemical parameters of the patient were within normal limits. Her D-dimer level was 0.55 mg/mL, and her fibrinogen degradation product (FDP) level was 4.5 mg/mL.
X-ray and computed tomography (CT) showed grade 1 bilateral isthmic L5 spondylolisthesis. Dura sac/nerve root compression was not found on magnetic resonance imaging . Doppler ultrasound indicated mild left femoral vein dilatation and detectable blood flow in the distal part of the leg without thrombosis .
Preoperative thrombosis risk factor assessment indicated a high risk of DVT with a Caprini score of 6 because of obesity, history of chemoradiation, malignancy, and major surgery). The thromboembolic prophylaxis plan was thrombosis prophylaxis hosiery immediately after the surgery and application of low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) as soon as the bleeding risk became low enough for that to be acceptable.
The procedure included L5-S1 decompression, lumbar spondylolisthesis reset, L5-S1 pedicle screw fixation, and posterior-lateral lumbar fusion. The entire surgery lasted 135 min, and the estimated blood loss was only 50 mL.
Compression stockings were applied as planned. However, swelling and pain were noted in her left lower limb 4 h after the surgery. Laboratory tests and Doppler ultrasound were performed, and results showed elevated D-dimer level (2.15 mg/L), elevated FDP (12.5 mg/L) level, and left common femoral and deep femoral venous thrombosis. DVT was confirmed; the patient was immobilized and antithrombotic and thrombolytic therapy (LMWH and warfarin) were immediately administered. On review of preoperative examinations, an enhanced pelvis CT scan taken 2 wk before the operation for tumor follow-up showed that the LCIV was sandwiched between the RCIA and slipped vertebrae. MTS was therefore considered .