A 9-year-old boy presented with acromegalic features and rapid height growth discovered 4 months before presentation during school physical examination. He had complained of intermittent headache and had a recent history of snoring during sleep. The parents and siblings had normal height and physical features with no history of endocrinopathies. On examination, he had a height of 151.8 cm (more than 2SD for age), weight of 40.2 kg, and hypertrophy of the lips. The patient had a shoe size of 24.5 cm (corresponding to the size appropriate for a Japanese boy of about 15 years old). The patient’s visual assessment was normal. Examinations of the cardiovascular and other systems yielded essentially normal results.
Hormonal assay showed marked elevation of the levels of growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor (IGF-1). Random GH was 25.0 ng/ml, IGF-1 was 873 (99–423 ng/ml), with nadir GH during 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (75 g OGTT) of 15.9 ng/ml. Apart from the moderate increase in free T3 (5.27 pg/ml), other pituitary hormones were within the normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a pituitary tumor measuring 12 × 10 × 9 mm, without cavernous sinus invasion [ and ]. Radiography of the skull and extremities showed prominence of the jaw and cauliflower appearance of the hands [ and ].
A preoperative diagnosis of GH-secreting macroadenoma was made, and tumor resection was performed through an endoscopic endonasal approach (EEA). Although the working space during the nasal and sphenoid phase was very narrow due to the preadolescent age and acromegalic features, it was possible to manipulate surgical instruments smoothly during sellar phase. The tumor was whitish and soft, and internal debulking was done using a double-suction technique. The pseudocapsule was also removed, and finally gross total resection of the tumor was performed [-]. Intra- and postoperative courses were uneventful. The GH reduced to 0.9 ng/ml on postoperative day 6, with normalized IGF-1 (402 ng/ml) in the following week, and postoperative imaging showed satisfactory tumor resection . However, nadir GH level during 75 g OGTT remained insufficient with suppression of 1.3 ng/ml. Histopathological diagnosis was confirmed as GH secreting pituitary adenoma [-]. The results of genetic testing were negative for genetic diseases, including McCune-Albright syndrome. He has been followed-up by neurosurgeons and pediatricians with brain imaging and biochemical assay every 6 months for 2 years, and no recurrence was confirmed.