A 43-year-old man presented to the emergency room complaining of a headache from past 10 days, and right-sided facial palsy that had developed six days after headache onset and persisted thereafter. It was a throbbing type of headache accompanied by pain in the right ear. The patient had received seven days of antiviral and steroid treatment at another hospital due to suspected shingles, since the third day of the headache onset. At the time of admission to our hospital, the patient complained of a headache, which had slightly reduced compared to its first occurrence, along with right facial palsy, hypogeusia, vesicles and pain around the right ear, and hearing loss accompanied by dizziness and tinnitus. The following vital signs were recorded: blood pressure, 140/100 mmHg; pulse rate, 98/min; respiration rate, 20/min; and body temperature, 37.9 °C. He neither reported any underlying medical conditions nor was he under any medication.
Neurological examination revealed no abnormalities except for right-sided peripheral facial palsy. Blood tests including CBC, ESR, CRP, liver and renal function tests, and electrolytes revealed no specific findings. An abnormal enhancing lesion was observed in the right facial nerve on a brain MRI with contrast, suggestive of right facial neuritis . CSF examination revealed an intracranial pressure of 80 mmH2O, lymphocyte-dominant pleocytosis (53/mm3, lymphocytes 98%), increased CSF protein (61.0 mg/dL), and a CSF/serum glucose ratio of 70/117. A CSF PCR test confirmed VZV positivity. Bacteria, Mycobacterium tuberculosis or fungi were not detected in cultures, nor on staining for serum and CSF. A facial nerve conduction study revealed prolonged terminal latency and decreased CMAP amplitude of the right facial nerve upon its direct stimulation. Moreover, no ipsilateral R1, R2, and contralateral R2 responses were observed upon stimulation of the right supraorbital nerve in a blink reflex test. The overall findings were indicative of right-sided facial neuropathy . Pure tone audiometry revealed increased bone and air conduction thresholds in frequency ranges approximating 500 Hz, and exceeding 2000 Hz on the right side, suggesting sensorineural hearing loss .
Medication included 10 mg/kg intravenous acyclovir every eight hours to treat VZV meningitis and oral steroid administration to treat facial palsy for seven days considering the prior history of already seven days of antiviral treatment in the other hospital before visiting our clinic. The accompanying pain was treated symptomatically. At the time of discharge, the patient's headache and dizziness had subsided, and the remaining facial palsy, auditory symptoms, and pain around the ears were treated symptomatically. He is currently on follow-up at the outpatient clinic for the residual symptoms.