A 38-year-old Greek woman was transferred to the Emergency Department of our hospital in a comatose state. After intubation, an urgent computed tomography (CT) scan of her brain was performed, which revealed a 7.8 × 3.3 × 5.0 cm intracerebral hematoma located at her left occipitoparietal area with surrounding edema and a midline shift.
Our patient had a history of two pregnancies that were normal term Cesarean deliveries, the first four years ago and the second 10 months ago. The rest of her medical history was unremarkable.
An emergent craniotomy was performed along with evacuation of the hematoma. After surgery, she was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Our patient remained sedated and mechanically ventilated for neuroprotection, while an intraparenchymal monitoring device was inserted for continuous monitoring of her intracranial pressure. Intracranial hypertension was treated with osmotic diuretics, hyperventilation and hypertensive therapy, aiming to maintain a constant cerebral perfusion pressure higher than 60 mmHg.
A laboratory workup, including liver and renal function tests, coagulation screening, fibrinogen and full blood count, were normal. Due to the enlargement of the right hilus found on a chest X-ray, extensive CT imaging studies were performed, which revealed a space occupying lesion at the inferior pole of her right kidney (approximately 3 cm), a solitary nodule at the IVa part of her liver consistent with a metastatic lesion, a soft tissue mass situated in the right hilus of her lung enhanced by intravenous contrast and diffusely distributed chest nodules without intrathoracic lymph nodes.
Her serum level of β-chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) was over 200,000 mIU/mL and this value was repeatedly confirmed. Nonetheless, a pelvic examination was unremarkable and all the imaging studies (pelvic ultrasonography, including transvaginal ultrasonography and pelvic CT) revealed the normal appearance of her uterus and bilateral ovaries.
During the next two weeks, our patient demonstrated gradual improvement of her general status and she was able to open her eyes spontaneously.
Magnetic resonance imaging of her brain showed, apart from postsurgical lesions at the area of the hematoma, a metastatic lesion situated on her left temporal lobe, whereas a magnetic angiography did not reveal any vascular dysplasia.
On the 26th day of her ICU stay, our patient underwent an ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration of the hepatic lesion in order to establish a histological diagnosis for possible further treatment. Due to consequent intra-abdominal bleeding, she was given surgical radiofrequency ablation of the hepatic lesion. A right nephrectomy was also performed due to the size of the lesion with evidence of imminent bleeding.
On the 35th day she had a new episode of massive intracerebral hemorrhage, confirmed by CT, which was considered inoperable by our neurosurgeons. She died 10 days later, due to septic shock.
Macroscopic examination following the right nephrectomy revealed the presence of a grey-red tan encapsulated tumor, which measured 6 × 3.5 × 3 cm, situated at the inferior pole, invading the renal pelvis-pelvicalyceal system and extending to the renal capsule. The histological examination of this mass showed the presence of a malignant neoplasm composed of syncytiotrophoblastic and cytotrophoblastic cells in an extensively hemorrhagic and necrotic background with subsequent cystic degeneration and numerous neoplasmatic vascular emboli . Immunohistochemical staining revealed intense expression of β-hCG and placental alkaline phosphatase, although it was negative for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) expression. All above findings are indicative of a choriocarcinoma of the renal pelvis. The hepatic biopsy revealed neoplastic invasion of the liver by a tumor histologically identical to the choriocarcinoma of her renal pelvis.