We recently treated a 44-year-old Caucasian woman who presented to a regional hospital with abdominal complaints and pyrexia for the last 24 h. Past medical history revealed an allogeneic stem cell transplantation 12 years ago due to acute lymphoblastic leukemia, which was in full remission. At the time of infection, the patient had no ongoing immunosuppressive treatment. However, there was evidence of transplantation related functional asplenia by the repetitive detection of Howell-Jolly bodies in peripheral blood smears and a CT-radiographic small, atrophic spleen with a length of 3.8 cm. Four days prior to presentation, the patient was bitten by her dog on the index finger but did not seek medical attendance because there were no signs of infection. Solely, a small sensory deficit of the affected finger was reported. The patient then presented with sudden abdominal cramps, bilious vomiting, epigastric pain, pyrexia up to 40 °C and shivering.
Upon admission to the regional hospital, the clinical examination revealed a tachycardic, hypotensive, tachypneic, and febrile patient with a tense abdomen and two small skin lesions without any signs of infection on her index finger. An abdominal ultrasound showed a dilated small-bowel with pendular peristalsis, ascites, and gallbladder wall thickening.
For suspected abdominal infection, an empiric antibiotic treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam was started after collecting blood cultures. Hence, the patient was immediately transferred to our tertiary teaching hospital.
Our hospital’s initial laboratory work-up revealed signs of infection, coagulopathy, acute kidney injury, and severe lactic acidosis with normal liver/pancreatic parameters . The contrast-enhanced CT scan showed a reactive wall enhancement of the gallbladder, ascites, and bilateral ARCN by the “reverse rim sign” . Due to a high suspicion of cholecystitis causing abdominal sepsis, the patient underwent open cholecystectomy. However, interoperative findings and histological examination did not support this diagnosis.
Postoperatively, the disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) worsened, and transfusion of coagulation factors was inevitable, calling for liver packing due to uncontrolled bleeding from the surgical site. Further clinical manifestations of the DIC were profuse bleeding from puncture sites and drainages as well as purpura fulminans. The clinical course was further complicated by a critical hemodynamic instability with profound hypotension and septic cardiomyopathy requiring inotropes. Shortly after admission to intensive care, the laboratory reported identification of rod-shaped bacteria directly from the first peripheral blood smear done in the regional hospital , suggesting a high pathogen load. Later, blood cultures also revealed Gram-negative rods in Gram staining, which did not grow using standard culture conditions. Together with the clinical information about a dog bite, this raised suspicion for C. canimorsus. Bacterial growth was finally achieved on chocolate agar incubated under micro-aerophilic conditions and identified as C. canimorsus by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. C. canimorus was sensitive to penicillin (MIC = 0.004) and ceftriaxone (MIC = 0.023). The clinical course was further complicated by permanent hemodialysis and extensive acral necrosis, requiring amputation of several fingers and both thighs. After hemodynamic stabilization and prolonged weaning, the patient could be transferred to the ward after 6 weeks of intensive care and is currently making good progress in rehabilitation.