A 34-year-old Chinese woman was admitted with the chief complaint of repeated generalized body numbness and hand convulsions experienced for the last 13 years, which have worsened in the 2 months. Thirteen years ago, she presented to the hospital with the same symptoms and had been told that she had hypokalemia and hypocalcemia, but she had not taken potassium chloride supplementation regularly and no follow-up after discharge. During these 13 years, she only took potassium chloride supplements when her symptoms worsened and stopped taking them as long as they were relieved. Occasional tests suggested that hypokalemia persisted. Her symptoms worsened 2 months before the latest hospitalization, and potassium chloride supplements did not significantly alleviate the symptoms. She presented to a local hospital and was informed that she had hypokalemia with a serum potassium level of 2.9 mmol/L, accompanied by hypomagnesemia and hypocalcemia. She was diagnosed with medullary sponge kidney (MSK) based on intravenous pyelography (IVP) examination and renal tubular acidosis (RTA) type I by a local physician and was prescribed potassium citrate granules.
Although information on her antenatal course is not available, she was not a premature baby; she was delivered after a full-term pregnancy. There was no serious dehydration, electrolyte disorders or other symptoms that needed to be treated after birth. She developed normally, without any visible deformity, and had normal intellectual development. However, her parents revealed that she has experienced symptoms of thirst, polydipsia, and polyuria since childhood. Her medical history is unremarkable, and she has denied any medications, including diuretics and laxatives, alcohol, or other drugs. The parental family history is unremarkable, and she has no siblings. She is married and has one healthy child. No one else in the family experienced similar symptoms.
Her weight was 50 kg, height 162 cm, pulse 88/min, and blood pressure 130/80 mmHg. Physical examination results were normal.
Laboratory findings revealed hypokalemia with a serum potassium level of 3.43 mmol/L. In a 24-h urine collection, excretion of potassium was 88.36 mmol/d, suggesting renal potassium wasting as the source of hypokalemia. She had hypocalcemia with a calcium level of 2.03 mmol/L, but her 24-h urinary calcium excretion level was normal. She had hypomagnesemia with a serum magnesium concentration of 0.48 mmol/L. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.54, pCO2 of 31 mmHg, and HCO3 of 26.5 mmol/L, suggesting metabolic alkalosis. Urinalysis revealed a pH of 7 and specific gravity (SG) of 1.009. After 12 h of water deprivation, she had a reduced urine osmolality of 227 mOsm/kg at a plasma osmolality of 289 mOsm/kg, indicating impaired urine concentration function. There was proteinuria + - and no hematuria. However, her 24-h urinary protein quantification was 1.04 g/d. She also had hyperreninemia and hyperaldosteronism. The sodium and chloride levels were normal. Serum creatinine was 76.1 μmol/L [estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) (CKD-EPI) 88.03 mL/min], indicating normal renal function. Her parathyroid hormone level was normal. Ultrasound examination showed medullary nephrocalcinosis or medullary sponge kidney in both kidneys .