Discomfort during urination and frequent urination.
A 76-year-old man became conscious of urgency when urinating three months earlier and developed frequent urination. He also recognized food residue in the urine three days earlier and consulted a nearby clinic. Since a vesicosigmoidal fistula was found on abdominal computed tomography (CT), he was referred to our hospital and admit-ted for the purpose of intensive examination and treatment.
The patient had a history of spinal posterior fusion surgery for disc herniation. There was no history of trauma, abdominal disease, abdominal surgery, or urological disease. Moreover, there was no history of colonoscopy or upper esophagogastro-duodenoscopy.
The patient was taking Olmetec OD tablets (olmesartan medoxomil) for hypertension, Allopurinol tablets (Allopurinol) for hyperuricaemia, and Urief tablets (Silodosin) and Cernilton tablets (cernitin pollen extract) for prostate enlargement. His family medical history was unremarkable.
The patient’s abdomen was smooth and soft, with no tenderness and no palpable tumor.
The results of hematological examinations were: White blood cell count 8200/μL; C-reactive protein 4.635 mg/dL; Hb 11.8 g/dL; Plt 15.3 × 104/μL; BUN 19 mg/dL; Cre 1.00 mg/dL; and HbA1c 6.1%. Thus, there was a mild inflammatory response and anemia. The tumor markers were not elevated (CEA 1 ng/mL, CA19-9 15.3 U/mL). On urinalysis, the leukocyte reaction was 3+, and occult blood was 1+.
Enhanced abdominal CT showed multiple diverticula in the sigmoid colon, and an increased CT value of panniculitis was observed around the large intestinal tract. Inflammatory changes around the large intestinal tract continued to the left bladder wall, and the bladder wall was slightly thickened. Neither a tumorous lesion nor swelling of the para colic lymph nodes was seen . Similarly, enhanced abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a penetrating portion continuous with the sigmoid colon on the upper left side wall of the bladder. However, tumorous lesions were not seen . With an enema of a water-soluble contrast agent and colonoscopy, only multiple diverticula were found in the sigmoid colon. Cystoscopy showed inflammatory changes on the mucosal surface of the bladder, but there was no fistula; no intestinal fluid flowed into the bladder, and no tumorous lesion was seen.
Vesicosigmoidal fistula with diverticulitis of the sigmoid colon.