A 74-year-old male presented with a 2-month history of a painless lump in the left neck. He had no other associated symptoms. He had a past medical history of hypertension, and his family history was not significant. On physical examination there was a 2 × 2 cm firm swelling present in the left upper neck, the mobility of which was slightly restricted. There was no identifiable primary lesion. Sonograms showed that the mass was hypoechoic, 16 × 14 × 20 mm in size, and with a relatively regular border. Back echoes were enhanced, and internal echoes were dissimilar . Computed tomography showed an enhanced lesion in the left upper neck in contact with the carotid bifurcation and the jugular vein . Based on the fine needle aspiration cytological findings, a possible malignant tumor, such as epithelial-myoepithelial carcinoma or basal cell adenocarcinoma, was suspected, but no definitive diagnosis was given. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed FDG avidity in the left-sided neck at a level II lymph node, the size of which was 21 × 16 mm. There was no evidence of a primary lesion, including the parotid and submandibular glands, on PET-CT . Further, no tumorous lesions were detected in the mammary gland on PET-CT. Therefore, with a provisional diagnosis of suspected cancer of unknown primary site, he underwent left modified radical neck dissection. Intraoperatively, the level II lymph node invaded the internal jugular vein and superior thyroid artery, and these vessels were sacrificed. The parotid and submandibular glands were not involved. Poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma was suspected on the basis of an intraoperative frozen section. No random biopsy was performed as there was no possibility that it was a squamous cell carcinoma.
The gross resected specimen was yellow-white in color and formed lobular nodules . Histopathological examination revealed a metastatic tumor in the left-sided neck at a level II lymph node. The tumor consisted of tubular structures containing secretion, papillary-cystic structures, and a solid proliferative component . The papillary-cystic lesion showed many microcystic structures in the component cells . These morphologic findings suggested AciCC or MASC. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the neoplastic cells were negative for p63 and DOG1 but were positive for S100 protein and GATA3 . A fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) study with an ETV6 (12p13) break apart probe revealed split signals in 95% of the nuclei . The final histopathological diagnosis was MASC. No other pathologically positive nodes were detected at other levels in the neck, and there was no tumor in the submandibular gland. We, therefore, made the final diagnosis of a cervical lymph node metastasis of MASC from an unknown primary site. No adjuvant therapy was administered as our case showed solitary lymph node metastasis and complete resection was achieved. No local recurrence or metastatic disease has been detected during a follow-up of 9 months.