A 64-year-old obese male [weight 138 kg, height 180 cm, body mass index (BMI) 43] was admitted with unstable angina and congestive heart failure; blood pressure was normal and bilateral pulmonary rales, increased jugular venous pressure, and pretibial oedema were detectable; electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia with complete left bundle branch block; high sensitivity TnT was 135 mg/L [upper levels normal (ULN) <50 mg/L], with normal CK-Mb and total CK values. He was on treatment with aspirin, rosuvastatin, Lisinopril + HCTZ, lacidipine, metformin, and insulin. In 2001, he suffered from an inferior-wall acute myocardial infarction, and in 2013 and 2014 had several percutaneous revascularization procedures to his iliac and femoral arteries because of bilateral claudication. Comorbidities were type 2 diabetes mellitus (on insulin), Stage IV chronic kidney disease and obstructive sleep-apnoea syndrome. Coronary angiography via left radial approach revealed severe three-vessel coronary artery disease with critical involvement of the left main stem , total occlusion of right and circumflex arteries (Syntax I score: 54.5) and the left ventricular angiogram showed an ejection fraction of 42% with global hypokinesis. An echocardiographic evaluation detected also moderate, post-ischaemic mitral regurgitation and estimated pulmonary artery systolic hypertension (48 mmHg). As per our institutional policy in patients with multi-vascular involvement, particularly in those with chronic kidney disease, a selective angiography of the iliac-femoral axes was performed (at least 50% contrast medium sparing vs. angio computed tomography scan) during diagnostic cardiac catheterization; it showed a 100% ostial left common iliac (CI) artery and a 99% right CI and femoral arteries stenosis due to under expansion of previously implanted stents in severely calcified vessels. Cardiac surgery consultation concluded that the patient was too high risk for surgical revascularization (Euroscore II: 14.52%). Therefore, left main stenting with provisional rotational atherectomy was planned. Due to a ‘last remaining vessel’ situation with depression of left ventricular function, circulatory support with IMPELLA 2.5L was judged necessary. Surgical axillary access for the circulatory support device was not recommended by the vascular surgeon in consultation with the anaesthesiologist. Furthermore, percutaneous access was deemed too complex due to the body habitus of the patient, in particular regarding end-procedural haemostasis. Because an angiographic evaluation showed a 5..5 mm diameter left brachial artery with no atherosclerotic disease , we decided to insert, percutaneously, an IMPELLA 2.5L in the left brachial artery . The circulatory support device was easily navigated in the upper limb arterial system and was placed across the aortic valve ; the introducer was peeled away in order to reduce vascular luminal obstruction and minimize potential limb ischaemic problems. There was no bleeding or oozing during the entire procedure. Unfractionated heparin bolus (10 000 IU) was administered and subsequent doses were given to maintain activated coagulation time (ACT) ≥ 250 s. Through a 7 Fr right radial approach, left main stenosis was pre-treated with rotational atherectomy (1.75 mm burr) (Boston Scientific Europe, Galway, Ireland) and multiple inflations of a 3.0 mm Flextome cutting balloon (Boston Scientific Europe, Galway, Ireland); an Ultimaster Tansei 4.0 mm × 18 mm stent (Terumo Europe NV, Leuven, Belgium) was deployed at 14 ATM from the left main to the proximal left anterior descending artery. In order to obtain the most complete percutaneous revascularization, two Ultimaster Tansei stents (3.0 mm × 24 mm and 3.0 m × 8 m) were deployed at 14 ATM in the ramus artery with a T-stenting technique. Proximal optimization treatment was obtained with inflation a NC Euphora 4.0 mm × 9 mm balloon (Medtronic Inc., Galway, Ireland) in the left main stem with the good angiographic result and no complications. The circulatory support duration was 105 min. The IMPELLA 2.5L catheter, which repositioning sheath does not have a wire access port, was then retracted out of the body at the left elbow level until the outlet port was exposed in order to insert a wire to the vessel and obtain a protected manual or a mechanical haemostasis, as described by Omran et al. Unfortunately, the wiring was not successful because of the deviation of the wire at the inlet port and haemostasis was obtained with prolonged manual compression. The day after the procedure, no ECG changes were registered, hs-TnT rose, from normal values, to 222 mg/L with no change in CK-Mb or total CK. A Doppler ultrasound scan of the brachial–radial axis, while documenting normal distal perfusion at the radial level, revealed a brachial pseudo-aneurysmatic dilatation. Through a 6 Fr radial sheath, a 5 mm diameter, self-expanding covered stent was placed in the brachial artery with complete exclusion of the pseudo-aneurysm . The patient slowly recovered with no cardiac and/or limb ischaemic problem and was discharged on pantoprazole, aspirin, ticagrelor, bisoprolol, rosuvastatin, furosemide, and insulin treatment.
At a 3 month follow-up, he was in functional New York Heart Association Class I, free from angina and from symptoms or sign of upper limb ischaemia; left ventricular ejection fraction was 48%. A lower limbs revascularization procedure has been scheduled in the next weeks.