A 36-year-old female P5+2 from a rural area presented with a distended abdomen and chest pain that had lasted 10 months. The onset was gradual, and the patient reported palpitations, weight loss, shortness of breath, a non-productive cough, and orthopnea. She had menarche at 14 years old and has had a regular menstrual cycle in history, in the premenopausal period. There was no other significant history.
On physical examination, she was sick-looking and in respiratory distress with tachypnea of 32 cycles per minute. She weighed 50 kg with a body mass index of 15.6 kg/m2 and features of mild dehydration. The blood pressure was 100/69 mmHg, pulse rate of 115 beats per minute, peripheral oxygen saturation of 90% on room air with right-sided chest dullness, decreased vocal resonance, and decreased breath sounds. Abdominal examinations revealed a globally distended abdomen and a nonmobile mass with slight tenderness in the lower quadrants. Percussion revealed a shifting dullness.
The hemoglobin was 9.4 g/dl, white blood cell count: 2.500×109/μl, red blood cell count: 3.230×109/μl, platelet count: 693/mm3, AST (aspartate aminotransferase): 11.4 μ/l, ALT (alanine aminotransferase): 2.0 μ/l, urea: 11.78 mg/dl, and creatinine: 0.58 mg/l. The coagulation profiles were within normal limits, viral markers [HBsAg (hepatitis B surface antigen) and anti-HCV (hepatitis C virus)] were negative, and the CA-125 level was 43 IU/ml (positive). Chest radiography revealed a right-sided pleural effusion . Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography scan revealed a huge predominantly cystic abdominopelvic mass arising from the right adnexa measuring 16×14×18 cm with a thick peripheral septa plus mild free peritoneal fluid and right pleural effusion .
A definitive diagnosis of giant ovarian mass (fibroma) was made. At laparotomy, a giant right ovarian tumor was removed. A right oophorectomy was also done. The left ovary was normal. The tumor weighed 7.5 kg, measuring 12 cm in diameter . About 1500 ml of yellow fluid (ascites) was drained. Blood transfusion of 1 unit (250 ml of blood) was given during the operation. An abdominal drain was put in the right iliac fossa of the abdomen. Postoperatively, the patient received ceftriaxone 2 g once daily for 7 days, tramadol 100 mg twice daily for 2 days, and oxygen therapy 5 l/min for 2 days. The abdominal drain was removed on the 7th postoperative day. Thoracocentesis using an underwater seal drainage system was done for the management of dyspnea. There were no postoperative complications noted.
The histopathological analysis of the ovarian tumor revealed a fibroma (a benign tumor composed of bundles of spindle-shaped cells arranged in a whorling pattern). The cells had a fibroblastic appearance with abundant collagen. Cytology testing of the pleural fluid showed no malignant cells. Three months later, CA-125 was undetectable. Clinical resolution was marked by a complete recovery of our patient and no recurrence of pleural or peritoneal effusion.