A 5-month-old female presented to our hospital with a harsh S1 sound and a grade IV systolic murmur on the left sternal boarder. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed, which revealed a homogeneous mass measuring 26 × 22 mm , with a broad base from ventricular septum and the body protruding into the right ventricular chamber, causing an accelerated right ventricular outflow (Vmax = 4.0 m/s, PG = 64 mmHg) with an obstruction . At the time of admission, the overall pediatric evaluation was normal including the laboratory data, chest radiograph and electrocardiogram. The cardiac-magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the presence of a solid mass appending to the right side of ventricular septum . However, all of the radiological examinations did not reveal the pathological nature of the mass.
Considering the size and location of the mass as well as the potential complications, surgery was the best option for this patient. As soon as the pericardium was incised after median sternotomy, a tenacious mass was palpable on the right ventricular free wall. Under cardiopulmonary bypass, an incision was made on the free wall of right ventricle, exposing a white, tenacious, non-capsulated egg-like neoplastic growth protruding into the right ventricular chamber, with its base arising from interventricular septum. The body of the tumor was adjacent to the right ventricular outflow tract, causing an obstruction . The tumor was resected along with its base, measuring 27 × 25 × 22 mm , and the incision on the right ventricle was primarily closed. The intra-operative pathological screening reported that the specimen was consisted with fibroblasts along with collagen deposition, combined with the negative results reported from the microbiology, which confirmed the diagnosis of cardiac fibroma . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful and got discharged by the expected duration. There was neither any recurrence of the tumor nor any complications during the 3-month follow-up evaluation with a normal cardiac function.