A 78-year-old man was hospitalized to undergo TRUS-guided prostatic biopsy because he had a serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentration of 15.86 ng/ml. The TRUS-measured prostate volume was 41 ml. His medical history included coronary artery disease with previous intracoronary stenting. He received intravenous (IV) cefazolin 2 g daily as antimicrobial prophylaxis prior to the biopsy. The day after the biopsy, he had a fever (temperature 39.5 °C), but his vital signs were otherwise normal. Blood analyses revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 7100/μl. After 3 days, he was started on intravenous ceftriaxone and gamma-globulin 5 g because of a continuous fever and a high serum C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration . After 5 days, a gram-negative bacillus was grown on blood culture. A digital rectal examination revealed an enlarged prostate. Computed tomography (CT) of the pelvis showed mild enlargement of the prostate. Therefore, the patient’s antibiotics were changed to meropenem 1.5 g and clindamycin to treat the sepsis of prostatitis, and a transabdominal catheter was placed into his urinary bladder. However, his condition worsened 6 days later and he had difficulty breathing, with an oxygen saturation of 85%, according to pulse oximetry, and a low pO2 (32.4 mmHg), according to arterial blood gas measurement. A chest X-ray showed air-space consolidation. Therefore, he was transferred to the intensive care unit for the diagnosis of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
At this time, a further blood culture showed the presence of extended-spectrum-lactamase (ESBL)-producing Escherichia coli (E. coli), which was sensitive to imipenem; therefore, his antibiotics were changed accordingly. Twelve days later, rectal examination revealed a tender, fluctuant prostate consistent with a prostatic abscess. The CT images were consistent with the presence of three prostatic abscesses (< 1.5 cm each). Thirteen days after the prostate biopsy, his bacteremia had improved and his ARDS had resolved; therefore, he was transferred to the general ward. Twenty days after the prostate biopsy, an abdominal/pelvic CT scan was performed to identify any remaining prostatic abscesses. However, instead, the scan revealed the presence of an abdominal aortic aneurysm with surrounding periaortic inflammatory changes . Therefore, IV doripenem was administered. CT examination after 26 days showed no change in the prostatic abscesses, but the aneurysm had expanded to a diameter of 28.2 mm.
Transurethral resection of the prostate was planned as a means of controlling prostatic abscesses for day 27 after the prostate biopsy. During the surgery, a whitish purulent substance discharged from the prostate. After surgery, the patient made excellent progress. Postoperative CT (31 days after prostate biopsy) showed that the aneurysm had a satisfactory appearance (23 mm diameter). However, he had also been experiencing back pain for 4 weeks, from day 11 after the prostate biopsy. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar spine revealed contrast enhancement of the L2, L4, and L5 vertebral bodies . Therefore, he was diagnosed as having pyogenic spondylitis and this was managed using a lumbar corset. Sixty-four days after the original biopsy, the aneurysm had re-expanded to 30 mm , but as the patient’s condition was unsatisfactory, surgery was not attempted. Instead, he underwent endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) using a microcore stent graft at our hospital 82 days after the prostate biopsy . Four days after the endovascular treatment, he developed a stomach ache and CT revealed acute cholecystitis. Therefore, endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage (ERBD) was performed and the patient’s antibiotic was changed to ciprofloxacin. By day 160 after the prostate biopsy, all the complications had improved, and the patient was discharged. He then underwent active surveillance for prostate cancer 1 year after the original diagnosis.