Informed consent was obtained from this patient and this study was approved by the institutional review board of Tokyo Medical University Hachioji Medical Center.
A 70-year-old man presented with symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection including cough, sore throat, and rhinorrhea. A rapid influenza diagnostic test revealed a positive result for type A influenza. An oral antiviral agent, oseltamivir phosphate 75 mg (Tamiflu®; Chugai Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Chūō, Tokyo, Japan), was administered twice per day for 5 days, with a smooth course of recovery. At onset, he also developed ocular symptoms including blurred vision in the left eye and conjunctivitis in bilateral eyes.
At the initial ocular examination, his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/25 in the right eye and counting fingers in the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 8 mmHg in the right eye and 16 mmHg in the left eye. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy showed more than one cell in the anterior chamber, fine keratic precipitates and conjunctivitis in both eyes , and bilateral shallow anterior chamber. The presence of a relative afferent pupillary defect in the left eye was identified by performing the swinging flashlight test. Funduscopy revealed mild optic disk edema and disk hemorrhage in the left eye . Fluorescein angiography showed dye leakage at the optic disk . Visual field testing with a Goldmann perimeter showed central and paracentral scotomas in the left eye . On a full-field electroretinogram (ERG), reductions in the amplitude of oscillatory potentials and b-wave were observed . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed no abnormal findings in bilateral foveae . Magnetic resonance imaging of the head showed normal optic nerves. The other physical and neurological examinations were unremarkable. Immunochemical, hematological, and biochemical examinations were normal. No viruses including influenza virus (influenza virus A and B, herpes simplex virus-1 and -2, varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, human herpesvirus-6, -7, and -8, BK virus, JC virus, and Epstein–Barr virus) were detected by multiplex polymerase chain reaction performed in aqueous humor sampled from the anterior chamber of both eyes. Under a diagnosis of bilateral acute anterior uveitis and optic neuritis in the left eye, the patient was prescribed topical prednisolone acetate ophthalmic suspension every 5 hours and high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone 1,000 mg daily for 3 days. One week later, anterior chamber inflammation, disk edema, and hemorrhage in the left eye were resolved. Two months after onset, his BCVA improved to 20/50 with regression of visual field defects in his left eye . On a full-field ERG, recovery in oscillatory potentials was observed .