A 22-year-old woman was admitted with a blunt headache 1 h after intercourse. On general physical examination, the patient was clearly conscious, and her speech was fluent. There was no obvious swelling or injury on the head or face. A neurologic specialist's physical examination revealed that the Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 15 (eye-opening, 4; motor responsiveness, 6; and verbal performance, 5). There were no obvious positive signs of damage to the nervous system except for headaches and dizziness. An emergent non-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan (each layer with a 5-mm thickness) revealed a left temporoparietal EDH (the inner and outer diameters were 3 cm; the maximum diameter was >10 cm; the upper and lower diameters were 7.5 cm) with a rightward midline shift of 1 cm. Bone window imaging confirmed no fracture line . Preoperative coagulation tests showed that all coagulation parameters were within the normal range . Past medical history suggested that the patient had undergone a medical abortion 1 month prior, but the specific drug used was unknown.
During preoperative preparation, the patient became increasingly agitated and lost consciousness. Before the administration of anesthesia, the GCS score was 11 (eye opening, 2; motor responsiveness, 5; and verbal performance, 4). Bilateral pupils were equiround with a diameter of 3 mm, and the light reflex disappeared. Two hours after admission, the left temporo-occipital EDH was cleared under general anesthesia in the emergency operating room. No significant fracture lines or EDH-responsible vessels were found during the operation. The intraoperative blood loss was ~300 ml, and no blood transfusion was performed.
After the first operation, the patient's right pupil was dilated to a diameter of 5.0 mm and the light reflex disappeared, while the patient's left pupil was dilated to a diameter of 3.0 mm and the light reflex disappeared. Immediate CT examination showed right temporo-occipital EDH (the inner and outer diameters were 3 cm; the maximum diameter was >10 cm; the upper and lower diameters were 8.5 cm) with a leftward midline shift of 1 cm . The right temporo-occipital EDH was removed immediately under general anesthesia. Decompression with flap removal was performed considering the preoperative cerebral hernia and high intraoperative intracranial pressure (ICP). No significant fracture lines or EDH-responsible vessels were found during the operation. The intraoperative blood loss was ~300 ml. During the operation, 3U of red blood cells and 625 ml of plasma were transfused.
After the second operation, the patient's right pupil was retracted to a diameter of 3.5 mm, and the light reflex was sluggish. The third immediate CT examination showed bilateral frontal EDH (the inner and outer diameters of the right frontal part were 3.5 cm; the hematoma volume was >30 ml; the inner and outer diameters of the left frontal part were >2 cm; the hematoma volume was 20 ml) . The removal of the bilateral frontal EDH was continued in the emergency operating room. Similar to earlier CT images, no fracture line or EDH-responsible vessels were found during the operation. The intraoperative blood loss was ~ 350 ml, with 200 ml of plasma transfused.
After resuscitation from anesthesia, the patient resumed spontaneous breathing and regained consciousness. The GCS score was 14 (eye opening, 3; motor responsiveness, 6; and verbal performance, 5). The postoperative CT scan showed satisfactory hematoma clearance, and the midline did not shift . The patient was discharged 2 weeks after surgery with an mRS score of 0. There were no significant abnormalities in the CTA examination in the outpatient clinic 6 months after the operation , and the mRS score was 0.