A 60-year-old man was diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. He had previously received three cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone; however, the fourth cycle was canceled due to neutropenia. After 3 weeks, he was admitted to the surgical ward with the primary complaints of abdominal pain, vomiting, nausea, and abdominal distension. On the same day, he was diagnosed with ileus and he immediately underwent surgery. On the 3rd hospital day, he developed a persistent fever and rapidly progressing muscle weakness. The patient was then transferred to the intensive care unit.
Upon physical examination, he was conscious and his pupils were bilaterally reactive to light; however, deep tendon reflexes were absent in all four of his limbs. The power in his upper limbs was 2/5, and that in his lower limbs was 0/5, but there was no sensory loss. His pulse was 110/min, blood pressure was 130/70 mm Hg, and body temperature was 37.5 °C. His oxygen saturation was 92% with oxygen therapy. Subsequently, due to respiratory insufficiency, the patient required intubation and sedation. Mechanical ventilation was started on synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation mode with a tidal volume of 550 mL, positive end-expiratory pressure of 6 cm H2O, pressure trigger sensitivity of -2 cm H2O, fraction of inspired concentration of oxygen at 0.5, ventilatory rate of 16 breaths/min, and pressure support of 15 cm H2O. Tremors were a prominent finding in his upper extremities, and they also affected his face and lips (Video 1). Additional information about the patient’s history revealed that he had suffered from a mosquito bite-like rash 2 weeks before his presentation.
On the 5th hospital day, lumbar puncture revealed clear and colorless cerebrospinal fluid without white blood cells, 36 mg/dL of glucose, and 106 mg/dL of protein. His blood test results were as follows: 10.3×103/mL white blood cells, 73×103/mL platelets, and 10.1 g/dL hemoglobin. His cranial computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated only atrophic changes, and his spinal magnetic resonance imaging did not reveal any abnormalities.
Routine cerebrospinal fluid and blood cultures, acid-fast bacillus testing, and herpes simplex virus polymerase chain reaction were negative. On the 5th day of admission, his serum sample was sent to the National Arboviruses and Viral Zoonoses Reference Laboratory (Ankara, Turkey) for testing for arboviral infections. The West Nile virus real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (Anatolia Geneworks, İstanbul, Turkey) was positive, but indirect immunofluorescence test (Euroimmun, Luebeck, Germany) results were negative for both IgM and IgG. To demonstrate the seroconversion, a second serum sample was sent to the laboratory on the 9th day, but anti-West Nile virus antibodies were still negative.
He underwent a course of plasmapheresis in the second week of his hospital stay. The plasmapheresis regimen consisted of the removal of -1 plasma volume during each cycle for a total of three cycles on an every other day basis. After undergoing plasmapheresis, the patient’s motor strength recovered from grade 0 to grade 2/5 in his upper extremities and from grade 0 to grade 1/5 in his lower extremities. Over the course of the next month, the patient showed partial and progressive improvement, especially in the upper extremities, through physical therapy. He regained his strength to a grade of 3/5 in his upper extremities. A third serum sample was positive for anti-West Nile virus-IgG on day 42.
The patient remained dependent on mechanical ventilation and developed ventilator-associated pneumonia due to multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii and renal failure requiring continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration. The patient did not improve and succumbed to his illness on day 184 after admission to the hospital.