A 67-year-old South-Asian female who had been previously diagnosed with plaque psoriasis for the last 5 years and on topical treatment with emollient agents, coal tar salicylic shampoo and betamethasone cream presented with a complaint of abdominal distension associated with abdominal pain of four months duration in the absence of altered bowel habits. Her history was otherwise unremarkable and she denied any alcohol consumption, history of blood transfusion or sexual promiscuity and any long term oral drug treatment for her psoriasis, including the use of indigenous medication. There was also no history of neonatal umbilical vein cannulation and she denied any abdominal surgery or trauma.
General examination revealed well defined psoriatic plaque lesions on the forearms, elbows and in the scalp associated with scaling. The nails demonstrated dystrophy with pitting. Clinically she was found to be pale, but she had no lymphadenopathy, stigmata of liver disease or ankle oedema. Abdominal examination revealed ascites with shifting dullness and a firm, non- tender spleen extending 4 cm below the costal margin. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and nervous system examinations were unremarkable.
Whole blood analysis revealed a mild anemia with a haemoglobin of 9.8 g/dl (11–18) with a mean corpuscular volume of 88 fl (80–100). The white cell count was normal at 6.7 × 109/L (4–10) with 69% neutrophils and 29% lymphocytes, and the platelet count was reduced at 52× 109/L (150–450). Blood picture mirrored the whole blood findings and demonstrated a bicytopenia with a normocytic normochromic anemia and a moderate thrombocytopenia. Liver functions were within normal reference range. Aspartate amino-transaminase was at 20 IU/L (10–35) and alanine amino-transaminase was at 36 IU/L (10–40) while alkaline phosphatase levels were normal at 200 IU/L. Total serum protein was normal with a serum albumin of 36 g/L (36–48). Coagulation profile was normal. Imaging of the abdomen with an ultrasound scan confirmed a moderately enlarged spleen with the presence of varices, and thrombosis of the portal vein with cavernous transformation. A contrast enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen demonstrated multiple tortuous veins at the porta-hepatis, with an enlarged spleen and abnormally dilated tortuous vessels draining into the left renal vein with a normal sized liver with normal architecture. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed early oesophageal varices. The radiological diagnosis was that of chronic portal vein thrombosis with cavernous transformation and a spleno-renal shunt.
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate(ESR) was elevated at 58 mm (0–15) for the 1st hour, and the C-reactive protein(CRP) was minimally elevated at 8 mg/dl (<5). The anti-nuclear antibody titres were normal. Anti-phospholipid antibody screening demonstrated a strongly positive beta 2 glycoprotein level with negative lupus anticoagulant and anti-cardiolipin antibodies. The beta 2 glycoprotein level was repeated after three months and was found to be positive. Thrombophilic screening for inherited prothrombotic states demonstrated normal antithrombin III, activated protein-C, protein-S levels and an undetectable factor V Leiden mutation. Bone marrow biopsy revealed only a moderately hyper cellular marrow with active megakaryocytes and was otherwise normal. Ham test was negative and JAK 2 mutation was also absent. Screening for occult malignancy with upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, imaging of the chest, and mammogram failed to yield any positive findings. Retroviral screening was negative.