A 25-year-old immunocompetent Hispanic woman sustained a mechanical fall after slipping on ice and hitting her chin on the ground. Two weeks after the injury, she began to develop neck pain that was not present immediately after the injury. She presented to an emergency department and X-rays of her cervical spine were obtained. The X-rays were found to be normal and she was discharged with pain medication. After another 2 weeks of persistent, non-improving neck pain, she returned to the emergency department of the referring hospital for evaluation. Cervical spine X-rays, cervical spine computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast, and a cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with and without contrast were obtained. CT and MRI revealed a right-sided paraspinal soft tissue mass and an osteolytic lesion of the C6 vertebral body, causing a compression deformity. Given the imaging findings, she was admitted for further diagnostic testing to evaluate for possible malignancy.
A chest X-ray and a chest CT scan with contrast performed during her hospitalization revealed a 3.6×1.5 cm mass in the middle lobe of her right lung. She additionally underwent an ultrasound-guided biopsy of the mass in her neck and a CT-guided biopsy of the mass in the middle lobe of her right lung. The biopsy of her neck mass was negative for malignancy but revealed multinucleated histiocytes, neutrophils, and inflammatory cells. The specimen was sent for Gram stain, acid-fast bacilli (AFB)/fungal smear, and cultures: aerobic/anaerobic, fungal, and tuberculosis (TB); all of which were negative. The biopsy of the lung mass was deemed inadequate. The patient failed to follow-up in clinic for biopsy results and was lost to follow-up.
Four weeks later, she returned to the referring hospital’s emergency department complaining of a week of fevers, sweats, neck pain, as well as an enlarging neck mass with purulent discharge from the biopsy site. Repeat CT of the cervical spine and MRI of the cervical spine with and without contrast were obtained. Imaging revealed C6 osteomyelitis with significant vertebral body destruction and possible C5 involvement. The imaging also showed a prevertebral abscess at the C6 level with posterior subligamentous extension into her spinal canal, causing mild posterior displacement and compression of her cervical spinal cord . No indication of infarction, hemorrhage, or myelomalacia was found in her cervical spinal cord. Because the infectious diseases consultation service at the referring hospital suspected either TB or a bacterial infection, she was empirically started on anti-TB medications (rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) as well as broad-spectrum antibiotics (vancomycin and ceftazidime). While performing an incision and drainage of the prevertebral abscess, otolaryngology at the referring hospital discovered an abscess with a fistulous tract communicating to the C6 vertebral body. AFB smear, Gram stain, and cultures (aerobic/anaerobic, fungal, and TB) were taken intraoperatively. The patient was transferred to our tertiary institution for urgent surgical decompression the same day.
On admission, she was afebrile, with a heart rate of 88/minute, a blood pressure of 132/88 mmHg, a pulse oximetry of 98 %, and a respiratory rate of 14/minute. Laboratory testing found a white blood cell count of 8.9 g/dL, a hemoglobin count of 11.9 g/dL, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 94 mm/hour. On examination, she had 5/5 strength in all muscle groups in her upper and lower extremities bilaterally. She had a positive Hoffman sign on the left side and hyperactive bicep and knee reflexes bilaterally. She denied any exposure to wooded/forested areas; however, she did report that she was living in her parent’s unfinished basement where significant construction had taken place including the concrete floor being dug up.
She underwent emergency C6 ACCF to decompress her spinal cord and restore cervical spine stability. During the procedure, purulent material was expressed from under the prevertebral fascia and was sent for microscopy and aerobic/anaerobic bacterial cultures, fungal cultures, and mycobacterial cultures. Caspar posts were placed in the vertebral bodies of C4 and C7 and distraction was performed followed by exploration and decompression. The C6 vertebral body was found to be completely destroyed; however, the C5 body remained well preserved. After removing the infectious debris, remnants of the vertebral body, and C5 to C6 and C6 to C7 disk material, an 18 mm polyetheretherketone (PEEK) stackable cage (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) with demineralized bone matrix (DBM) allograft (Synthes, West Chester, PA, USA) was placed into the C6 space. A 35 mm Atlantis Vision anterior cervical plate (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was secured into the bodies of C5 and C7 with four 12 mm screws . No complications were encountered during the surgery and the patient had an uneventful postoperative course.
The histopathology was positive for budding yeasts consistent with Blastomyces species The anti-TB medications as well as broad-spectrum antibiotics were stopped. The infectious diseases consultation service recommended treating the patient’s osseous blastomycosis and presumed pulmonary blastomycosis with a loading phase of itraconazole 200 mg taken every 8 hours for 5 days followed by a yearlong course of itraconazole 200 mg twice daily. Urine antigen testing for Blastomyces species cultures (aerobic/anaerobic), AFB smear, TB QuantiFERON, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing were all found to be negative. Urine antigen testing for Histoplasma capsulatum was reported to be low positive. Fungal cultures obtained at the referring hospital and at our institution were positive for Blastomyces dermatitidis, confirming the histopathology findings. The infectious diseases consultation service ensured therapeutic levels were achieved by monitoring the patient’s serum levels during the year-long itraconazole course. A chest CT scan obtained 9 months postoperatively revealed resolution of the mass in the middle lobe of her right lung. At 17 months postoperatively, a cervical spine CT scan was obtained showing C5 to C7 fusion . At 4 years postoperatively, she had no recurrence and remained pain free.