An 87-year-old woman, whose past medical history was acute cholecystitis and hepatocellular carcinoma, underwent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) for acute myocardial infarction with a 3.0 × 28 mm drug-eluting stent (Xience Skypoint®; Abbott Laboratories, IL, USA), implanted in the LMCA. Concurrently, physical examination revealed a harsh systolic murmur at the aortic valve area. While transthoracic echocardiography showed an aortic root dimension of 26.5 mm, a left atrial dimension of 47.1 mm, a left ventricular end-diastolic dimension of 40.4 mm, a left ventricular end-systolic dimension of 27.8 mm, a left ventricular ejection fraction of 48.9%, and severe hypokinesis from the anteroseptal to the apex, it also revealed severe aortic stenosis evidenced by an aortic valve area of 0.29 cm2, peak velocity of 4.40 m/s, and a mean pressure gradient of 50.2 mmHg (see , ). Two months post-discharge, she presented with chest pain and syncope. Physical examination revealed haemodynamically stable with a heart rate of 68 b.p.m., blood pressure of 121/69 mmHg, respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 97%. The electrocardiogram showed no bradyarrhythmia causing syncope or no ST-segment change indicating stent thrombosis, so we judged that aortic stenosis had caused these symptoms and decided to perform TAVR.
Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a tricuspid aortic valve with an aortic annulus area of 345 mm2 and a perimeter of 67.0 mm. The diameter of the sinus of Valsalva measured 22.6 × 25.0 × 27.5 mm. The diameter of the sinotubular junction (STJ) measured 21.7 × 22.1 mm. Meanwhile, the diameter of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) was 16.4 × 23.8 mm, and it had an area of 320 mm2. Minimal calcification was observed in the STJ and LVOT . The right and left coronary heights from the annular plane were 14.4–16.5 and 14.1–17.5 mm , respectively. The CT also showed a 3.0 mm protrusion of the LMCA stent from the ostium with a distance of 20.3 mm to the opposite vessel wall . The access routes from the right and left femoral arteries were unobstructed. Based on these measured values, both a 23 mm balloon-expandable THV and a 26 mm self-expandable THV were considered suitable options. However, when considering postprocedural coronary events and coronary access, a balloon-expandable THV was the preferred choice. Additionally, given that we anticipated that the frames of a 26 mm self-expandable THV would definitely come in contact with the LMCA stent, potentially cause stenting fracture and flow limitation, a 23 mm balloon-expandable THV was finally chosen (SAPIEN 3®; Edwards Lifesciences, CA, USA). However, the potential THV contact and deformation of the LMCA stent prompted the combined use of the two-step inflation technique and the kissing-balloon technique during THV implantation.
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement was performed via percutaneous transfemoral approach under monitored anaesthesia care. A guiding catheter was delivered towards the LMCA via the left radial approach, and a coronary guiding wire was inserted through the LMCA to the left anterior descending artery. We implanted the THV 2 mL underfilled in the first step while dilating a 4.0 × 10 mm non-compliant coronary balloon (NC Kamui®; ASAHI INTECC, Aichi, Japan) in the LMCA stent ( and , ). Secondly, the balloon was deployed slightly towards the LVOT, and it was dilated 1 mL underfilled. The coronary balloon was also inflated ( and , ). Angiography and echocardiography showed improved THV expansion and reduced aortic regurgitation without compromised coronary flow. Intravascular ultrasound before and after THV implantation demonstrated an undistorted stent and THV implantation near the LMCA stent , while CT 3 days after TAVR also showed similar findings . Haemodynamics were consistently stable before and after THV implantation. After the second step of balloon dilation, left ventricular pressure was 167/21 mmHg and aortic pressure was 160/68 mmHg, indicating that the pressure gradient had disappeared. Postoperative echocardiography also revealed good THV mobility and improvement in aortic stenosis with a mean pressure gradient of 12.8 mmHg and an effective orifice area of 1.75 cm2 (see online, ). Her postoperative course was uneventful.