A 67-year-old man complained of edema in both lower extremities. His medical history revealed that he had been diagnosed with stage I clear cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and underwent radical nephrectomy 8 years ago. Three years after the surgery, the cancer recurred and metastasized to the lungs and pancreas. The metastatic cancer was removed by performing pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy and right upper lobectomy. The resected lung and pancreas indicated clear cell RCC. After metastasectomy, the cancer was classified as stage IV; he was administered with sunitinib (50 mg orally once daily), but 14 months later, the disease progressed. His medication was then changed from sunitinib to everolimus (10 mg orally once daily), but the disease continued to progress; therefore, pazopanib (800 mg orally once daily) was prescribed for mRCC for 17 months. When edema developed, immediate spot urine protein, albumin, and creatinine tests were performed. The albumin/creatinine (alb/cr) and protein/creatinine (prot/cr) ratios were 4300.64 mg/g and 5772.35 mg/g, respectively. A 24-h urine protein excretion test was performed and revealed 7484.58 mg/day of proteinuria, which was within the nephrotic range. Total cholesterol and serum albumin levels were 434 mg/dL and 2.9 g/dL, respectively. He was diagnosed with NS, and pazopanib treatment was discontinued. Other drugs to treat NS, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEi) or glucocorticosteroids, were not administered, and only pazopanib treatment was discontinued. He had been taking calcium channel blocker (lacidipine 4 mg once daily) for hypertension since he had undergone nephrectomy, and his systolic blood pressure was less than 120 mmHg and diastolic blood pressure was less than 80 mmHg when he started taking pazopanib. But 2 months before the diagnosis of NS, systolic blood pressure increased to 140 mmHg, lacidipine was changed to amlodipine (5 mg twice daily), and blood pressure was regulated to normal range. The baseline serum creatinine levels were between 0.99 and 1.43 mg/dL after nephrectomy, with an average value of approximately 1.2 mg/dL. Serum creatinine level was 1.14 mg/dL when NS was diagnosed. In order to determine the cause of NS, a kidney biopsy should be performed. However, in consultation with a nephrologist, we decided not to undergo renal biopsy. Because the patient had a single kidney due to nephrectomy and grade 3 chronic kidney disease with estimated glomerular filtration rate between 50 and 60 ml/min/1.73m2, so there was a risk of aggravation renal failure after renal biopsy.
Pazopanib was discontinued for 3 months without further cancer treatment and changed to temsirolimus (25 mg intravenously, weekly) after disease progression, 1 month later. Proteinuria improved 3 months after pazopanib discontinuation, spot urine prot/cr ratio decreased to 1776.84 mg/g at 3 months and 948.31 mg/g at 7 months after discontinuation, and serum cholesterol levels normalized to 186 mg/dL at 4 months . The patient had diabetes mellitus and exhibited trace proteinuria before pazopanib treatment; urine protein levels were completely restored to the previous levels. One month after discontinuation of pazopanib, blood pressure was lowered, and amlodipine was changed to lacidipine (4 mg once daily) again.
Temsirolimus was administered for 15 months, but as the disease progressed, nivolumab (100 mg intravenously, every other week) was administered for 11 months; however, the disease continued to progress. No anticancer agents were available that would be eligible for insurance coverage; thus, pazopanib was carefully re-administered for 7 months (800 mg/day as recommended dose), and the dose was not reduced. During this period, trace proteinuria was still present, and pazopanib was successfully administered without any NS recurrence. The spot urine prot/cr ratios upon resuming and discontinuing of pazopanib treatment were 69.05 mg/g and 318.88 mg/g, respectively. Serum creatinine levels were not significantly changed, and blood pressure was maintained in the normal range without any change in antihypertensive medication. Seven months after pazopanib retreatment, the disease progressed, and the patient participated in another clinical trial.