In 2003, a 63-year-old Caucasian man showed a right neck nodule of about 3 cm, diagnosed as benign nodule after cytological examination on fine needle aspiration (FNAC). The patient performed no more clinical and ultrasonographic evaluations over time. However, in 2010, due to the progressive increase in size of the right nodule (8 cm of maximum diameter) and evidence of another nodule in the left lobe (6 cm of maximum diameter) associated with onset of cervical pain, FNAC was repeated and showed a suspicious follicular lesion with oncocytic cells in both nodules. Therefore, a total thyroidectomy with prophylactic central compartment lymph nodes dissection was performed. Histology revealed a widely invasive bilateral oncocytic thyroid carcinoma, with infiltration of soft perithyroidal tissues and muscles, neoplastic emboli (number > 4), without lymph node metastasis (pT3mN0Mx according to TNM 7th edition). After surgery, a total activity of 331 mCi (12.2 GBq) of 131I was administered in three times for the presence of a right latero-cervical lymph node metastases (max diam 15 mm) detected by ultrasound and cytologically confirmed at FNAC, and small bilateral lung metastasis (maximum diameter 5 mm, characterized by CT scan), who showed radioiodine uptake. However, after the third 131I treatment, no radioiodine uptake was described anymore at the post-therapy Whole Body Scan (WBS) despite the persistence of the metastatic lesions.
Despite the recommended schedule of clinical, biochemical, and imaging evaluations every 6–12 months, the patient did not adhere to these medical guidelines. Instead, he returned to our institution after a gap of six years, complaining of a progressive increase in a right lateral-cervical mass and frequent episodes of hemoptysis.
Physical examination revealed a non-tender, fixed, nodular mass of about 3.5 cm in the right latero-cervical region. Serum thyroglobulin levels were significantly increased compared to those evaluated 6 years before (15,646 vs. 26.35 ng/mL).
Neck US showed three suspicious metastatic lymph nodes (53 mm, 13 mm and 20 mm) in the right latero-cervical region. A contrast-enhanced total body CT scan confirmed the presence of multiple confluent suspicious lymph nodes metastases, the largest of 58 mm, with the involvement of adjacent muscles and reaching neck superficial structures and another lesion of 47 mm in the right supraclavicular region, which determined compression and invasion of the internal jugular vein. Moreover, multiple nodular lesions in lungs and some mediastinal suspicious lymphadenopathies (the largest of 37 mm) were described in the thorax .
Due to the absence of radioiodine uptake at the previous treatment, the patient was considered refractory to radioiodine and according to the clinical evolution, after excluding potential contraindications, surgical treatment in the right lateral-cervical region was performed. Histology highlighted the presence of metastases of poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma (PDTC) (defined according to the Turin proposed criteria ) but with oxyphilic features, in 4 on 24 removed lymph nodes (max diam 75 mm), with extra nodal extension (ENE) .
Total body CT scan performed 6 months after surgery showed the persistence of the disease in the right lateral-cervical (16 mm) and paratracheal region (32 mm), and the slight increase in size of the mediastinal and lung metastasis. Due to the presence of multiple comorbidities (chronic liver disease with thrombocytopenia, uncontrolled arterial hypertension, and risk of trachea-esophageal fistula), systemic therapy with multikinase inhibitors was not performed and in February 2022 the patient was treated with external radiotherapy (30 Gy) in the neck region. The opportunity to perform external radiotherapy of thoracic lesions was excluded.
At the CT scan, 3 months after neck radiotherapy, a reduction in size of the right lateral-cervical (8 mm vs. previous 16 mm) lesion was documented. At the last follow-up in May 2023, the disease showed no further relevant progression.
Since the aggressiveness of the disease and the peculiar clinical behavior, to evaluate the molecular pattern of this tumor and to potentially find some actionable mutation, a NGS analysis was performed on the metastatic lymph nodes, derived from the second surgery. NGS analysis was performed using a thyroid-specific custom panel for single nucleotide variations (SNV) and small indels included BRAF, RET, H-, K-, N-RAS genes and hot-spot exons of other 12 genes involved in thyroid carcinogenesis, as previously described . Massively parallel sequencing was performed on a 520 Chip for tissue DNA with a GeneStudio S5 deep sequencer (Applied Biosystem—Waltham, MA, USA) and following the manufacturer’s instructions. Analysis was performed using Torrent Suite 5.6 and Ion Reporter 5.14 (Thermo Fisher—Waltham, MA, USA) software with proper bioinformatics workflows as previously described . The nucleotide substitution c.1801A> G (p.K601E) of the BRAF gene was found (allelic frequency: 15.2%). Despite the finding of SNV, that usually is mutually exclusive with other driver mutations, we searched also for RET, NTRK and PAX8/PPAR gamma rearrangements, but without finding any mutation. TERT promoter mutations C288T and C250T were evaluated by direct sequencing as previously described , but with a negative result. Moreover, PTEN and TP53 were also evaluated, but again with negative results.
In view of the absence of this mutation in OCA , the histology of the primary tumor in both thyroid lobes was re-evaluated. OCA with a mainly solid/trabecular pattern, extensively infiltrating perithyroidal tissues and muscles, with extensive vascular invasion (>4 neoplastic emboli) was confirmed in both primary tumors .
Also, NGS molecular analysis was performed on the primary tumor and the same BRAF K601E mutation was found (allelic frequency: 29.8%), without other molecular alterations in the evaluated genes, including TP53, PTEN and TERT promoter mutations.