A 54-year-old man visited his primary doctor with a fever. He was prescribed common cold medicine, but his fever persisted. After visiting several hospitals, he was referred to the department of general practice at our hospital due to a 1-month history of a spiking fever. He had a medical history of hypertension. On admission, his body temperature was 37.5 °C. The findings from a physical examination were unremarkable, and there was no abdominal pain, nausea, or abdominal distension. The white blood cell count was 17,600/μL (80.5% neutrophils), and the C-reactive protein level was 7.66 mg/dL. Serum bilirubin, aspartate aminotransferase, and alanine aminotransferase levels were within normal range. Chest and abdominal X-ray findings were unremarkable; however, abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed an abscess in the right lobe of the liver (segment 8) and a high-density linear object in the small intestine with fat stranding. There were no free air and other abdominal abscess . On admission, blood cultures grew Streptococcus oralis.
The general practitioner suspected this to be a case of fish bone bowel perforation with liver abscess, and a surgical consult was thus requested. The patient often ate fish but did not recall whether or not he had swallowed any fish bones. The liver abscess was about 5 cm in size, so we drained it by a percutaneous approach and administered ceftriaxone and metronidazole. Purulent fluid cultures from the liver abscess grew Streptococcus intermedius. He had no abdominal symptoms, so he underwent double-balloon endoscopy (DBE) before surgery. We observed the lower ileum with DBE and the intestine downstream from the ileal end by X-ray fluoroscopy, but we were unable to detect any foreign bodies, diverticula, or leakage.
We subsequently performed laparoscopic surgery due to suspicion of fish bone perforation. Laparoscopy showed that there was no ascites or abdominal abscess. Meckel’s diverticulum was located in the ileum approximately 50 cm upstream from the ileal end and had adhered to the ileal mesentery with inflammation. On peeling away the adhesion, we found a 2-cm fish bone perforating the top of Meckel’s diverticulum that had been covered by mesentery. There were no other abnormal findings of the intestine . We thus performed diverticulectomy. In addition, we did not need to drain the liver abscess laparoscopically.
The histopathological report showed Meckel’s diverticulum without ectopic tissues. Recovery after the surgery was uneventful, and he was discharged on the 13th postoperative day.