A 66-year-old male was admitted due to an evident neck lump for 5 d after approximately 40 years of gradually progressive neck mass.
On August 24, 2021, the patient experienced a 40-year history of a slowly progressive neck mass accompanied by gradually aggravated dyspnea and dysphagia. Due to sudden rapid enlargement for 5 d, he was admitted to our hospital thyroid and breast surgery department for diagnosis and treatment and was not treated before admission.
The patient had a 7-year history of type 2 DM and usually took metformin for treatment; his blood glucose was well controlled. The patient also had a history of left humeral fracture 20 years prior, underwent surgery and recovered well after treatment.
The patient had no history of family illness.
A third-degree enlargement of the left lateral lobe of the thyroid; the enlargement was palpated as an approximately 11 cm (upper and lower diameter) × 9 cm (transverse diameter) × 6 cm (anteroposterior diameter) tough thyroid mass of unclear contour that exhibited very limited movement up and down with deglutition. The trachea deviated obviously to the right and backward . Due to the large mass, neck movement was also limited.
Preadmission DM follow-up visit in June 2021 showed that hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 7%. Routine blood examination showed hemoglobin 92 g/L and red blood cells 3.2 × 1012/L, and the other indexes were basically normal. Abnormal blood biochemistry results included albumin 31.4 g/L and glucose 8.51 mmol/L. Thyroid function tests showed thyrotropin 0.48 μIU/mL, and the other indexes were normal.
Preadmission ultrasonography in June 2021 revealed that a hypoechoic solid nodule was in the lower left lobe of the thyroid gland. After hospitalization, preoperative neck and chest plain and contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans showed that in abnormally enlarged left lobe of the thyroid gland, a mixed-density mass (9.0 cm × 6.7 cm × 6.5 cm) containing extensively arc-shaped edge calcification and patchy calcification shadows within the mass, with mild to moderate inhomogeneous enhancement and blurred borders, were observed. The trachea, laryngeal cavity, esophagus, and right cervical blood vessels were compressed and shifted to the right side posteriorly, while the left common carotid artery and internal jugular vein and other surrounding tissues were obviously compressed and moved backward to the left lower side of the left thyroid gland, but no evidence of vascular involvement . Additionally, multiple enhanced enlarged lymph nodes were seen in the upper mediastinum and left neck.