A 35-year-old Caucasian man presented with a 3-year history of multiple brownish macules and papules on the head/neck region, trunk, and upper limbs, associated with occasional mild pruritus, creating discomfort to the patient in his social life. Dermoscopy of the cutaneous lesions was characterized by a dermatofibroma-like pattern, with a peripheral hyperpigmentation and a central pale amorphous and scar-like area. Clinical examination revealed also an enlargement of cervical lymph nodes. Laboratory tests showed high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (120 mm/h), C-reactive protein (85.7 mg/L), serum IL-6 (162 pg/mL), and polyclonal hyper-gamma-globulinemia. In vivo reflectance confocal microscopy (RCM) of one erythematous lesion showed no epidermal changes with hyper-reflective papillae and increased vascularization of the papillary dermis, with scattered hyper-reflective cells (corresponding to inflammatory cells), along with extended fibrotic areas (a–f). Two cutaneous biopsies showed a dermal perivascular plasmocellular infiltrate with an increase of vascularization, as well as a lymph-node biopsy showed hyperplastic follicles and an expansion of the paracortical areas of germinal centers with accumulation of mature polyclonal plasma cells. According to the clinico-pathologic correlation, a final diagnosis of CD was made in the setting of idiopathic MCD (iMCD). Systemic treatment with siltuximab (11 mg/kg every 3 weeks, one-hour infusion) was started. The patient initially showed a Dermatology Quality Life Index (DLQI) of 25. Routine laboratory tests were obtained before each infusion. In parallel, 1,927 nm fractional laser (Fraxel re:store DUAL, Solta Medical, Hayward, CA, USA) was performed on scarring lesions, with 20 mJ/mb at 4 W, 8 MTZ/cm2, resulting in 2.5–3.0% coverage and 500 mJ/cm2 total energy delivered per pass. The patient was treated with 8 passes, performing one session every 3 weeks for a total of 10 months. During siltuximab infusions and fractional laser sessions, the patient did not experience side effects, besides mild pain and transitory redness; a lenitive cream was always applied for the 10 days after each fraxel laser session, avoiding sun exposure. After 15 months of treatment, the patient showed a general improvement with normalization of laboratory tests, reduction of adenopathy, and, above all, a reduction in size and pigmentation of cutaneous lesions, leading to DLQI = 5. Dermoscopy was characterized by persisting, but reduced, dermatofibroma-like pattern with decreased pigmentation and erythema and reduction of the central scarring area, while RCM showed the thickening of dermal fibers with remodeling of superficial dermis and absence of dermal inflammatory infiltrate (a–f). Currently, after 23 months of follow-up, the patient shows no cutaneous or systemic signs of recurrence.