A 31-year-old Brazilian woman presented to our Surgery Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery for evaluation of cystic lesions in her teeth 13 and 15 and a swelling on her right maxilla . In her anamnesis, she reported that she had already had endodontic treatment for her teeth 13 and 15 without regression of the lesion. Her teeth 14 and 24 had been previously removed for orthodontic treatment. A radiographic and computed tomography (CT) examination showed a radiolucent lesion, diffuse, of approximately 20 mm, involving the teeth 13 and 15. The initial diagnosis was inflammatory periapical cyst .
She underwent preoperative laboratory tests and an excisional biopsy of the lesion was undertaken under general anesthesia. The choice of the use general anesthesia was due to the size of the lesion and possibility of enucleation without removal of the teeth involved. The collected material was sent for pathological examination. The result was compatible with CGCL , which differed from our diagnostic hypothesis. After the definitive diagnosis, she was advised to carry out regular monitoring because of the risk of recurrence.
She self-monitored for a period of 10 months; she then presented again with a complaint of swelling on the site, but without the presence of pain. A new CT scan was requested and indicated recurrence of the lesion, which now involved the region’s incisor, canine, and premolar . New laboratory tests were carried out: alkaline phosphatase, calcium, phosphorus, and parathyroid hormone (PTH). We ruled out the possibility of the lesion being compatible with Brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism. A possible loss of the four dental elements involved was not ruled out.
We proposed new treatment with intralesional corticosteroid injections to our patient in an attempt to reduce the lesion for a future enucleation. She was given a drug application schedule: nine applications in the affected regions with intervals of 15 days between applications. Infiltrations were composed of: Triancil® (triamcinolone hexacetonide) + Xylestesin® (lidocaine hydrochloride; Fig. ). On average, 1.5 ml of the solution per session was applied at different points. After 5 months, there was a reduction in the lesion. New imaging tests showed that her tooth 16 had external root reabsorption and we decided to carry out an extraction of this tooth during the enucleation of the remaining lesion. We also found the formation of a septum in the damaged area, indicating bone formation .
The enucleation of the remaining lesion was performed under general anesthesia. During surgery we removed tooth 16 as planned. Tooth 15 had no support because the buccal bone plate had been compromised, so we decided to extract it during surgery . A radiograph was performed 7 days postoperatively .
At 6 months postoperatively, she is on a quarterly follow-up, without recurrence of the lesion . A bone reconstruction of the region is planned for 1 year postoperatively.