A 4-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital with a history of “recurrent hemoptysis for one year and massive hemoptysis once”.
One year ago, the child suffered from recurrent hemoptysis symptoms, and was treated with anti-hemostasis and anti-infection therapies, but the condition continued to deteriorate. Massive hemoptysis occurred one hour before admission, with about 100 mL of blood loss.
The child suffered from recurrent coughing after birth, and was hospitalized for pneumonia with bronchiectasis 3-5 times every year. After hospitalization, the bronchoscopy performed during initial episodes of bronchiectasis showed chronic endobronchial inflammation.
No associated inherited metabolic disorders or familial clustering disease were identified. And there was no history of tuberculosis (TB) or any contact with TB patients.
The patient had shortness of breath, with positive three concave sign of nails and mild clubbing of the toes. The respiratory sounds of the right lower lung were weak, and no dry and wet rales were found.
Routine blood tests, biochemical function, electrolyte levels, and bleeding and coagulation related indicators were not abnormal.
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy showed multiple nodular protrusions in the right middle and lower lobar bronchial mucosa, local scar formation, rough and pale surface, and easy bleeding of the mucosa . Partial bronchial branch openings were deformed, with sputum bolt and old bleeding . Computed tomography (CT) showed uneven thickening of the bronchial wall of the basal segment of the right lower lobe, which was partially protruding into the lumen. The right bronchial artery was tortuous and thickened, and branched into a descending vessel, which was obviously dilated at the distal end and anastomosed with the vascular network of the right lower pulmonary artery . Selective angiography showed a dilated right bronchial artery, and anastomosis of its branches with the right lower pulmonary vascular network. The diameter at the beginning was 2.7 mm, and 2.6 mm at the entrance to the lung .