The study athlete was a male, 23-year-old, high-level moderate altitude athlete in the disciplines of trail running and ski mountaineering (Skimo). The athlete had an initial weight of 56 kg, with a height of 166.5 cm, a body fat percentage of 16.6%, and a cardiorespiratory fitness of 76.5 ml/kg/min. The athlete had more than 5 years of altitude training experience and in altitude competitions (from 1300 to 3400 m). Initially, the athlete was evaluated by a medical researcher with a precise anamnesis, a careful clinical examination, and routine tests. Furthermore, the study athlete was not on any prescribed medication, was a nonsmoker, and had not followed any nutritional intervention or dietary advice prior to his inclusion in the current study.
Briefly, the study athlete trained between 1 and 5 h/day, with a frequency of 5-6 days/week, and a total volume of 10-15 h/week in Sierra Nevada, Granada (≈2000-3400 m above sea level) involving both trail running and skimo disciplines. During the complete nutritional intervention, the athlete performed his autonomous (unsupervised) training sessions without experiencing significant changes in his training routine. Nevertheless, all training sessions were weekly registered in a training diary during the 11 weeks of the intervention (data not shown).
Before the intervention, an exhaustive nutritional anamnesis was performed by a registered dietitian to assess potential nutritional allergies, intolerances, preferences, lifestyle, training schedules, etc. Of note, the study participant had an EI of ≈4100 kcal/day, with a high intake of protein (2 g/kg/day), and fat (2 g/kg/day), and a low intake of CHO (4 g/kg/day) and fiber (13 g/day). The main food sources of his diet were ultra-processed foods (e.g. commercial pizza), and fried foods (e.g. French fries) providing the 15-20% of his daily energy intake.
The design of the current study is shown in . The nutritional intervention had a total duration of 11 weeks considering the athlete’s competition goals (Spanish Championship of Vertical Kilometer and Spanish Championship of Trail). During the whole intervention, the nutritional intake and ergogenic aids/supplementation were prescribed by a registered dietitian. All dependent outcomes were assessed before starting the nutritional intervention and after the 11 weeks of nutritional intervention, in the same research center (Granada, Spain; ≈738 m above the sea level) and following exactly identical procedures.
The participant provided written informed consent prior to participation in the current study and read the current manuscript before submission. The research procedures were approved by the Ethics Committee on Human Research at the University of Granada (1996/CEIH/2021) and were in accordance with the CARE guidelines.