An 82-year-old man presented to the Department of Surgery of the Hiratsuka City Hospital (Japan). He had no complaints and had continued to visit the hospital for routine postoperative follow-up examinations after esophagectomy for esophageal cancer.
The patient had undergone subtotal esophagectomy with gastric tube reconstruction via the posterior mediastinal route for esophageal cancer 13 years earlier. No recurrence was detected, but gastric tube cancer was found during a routine follow-up 13 years after the original subtotal esophagectomy.
The patient had hypertension, chronic renal disease, and a history of subtotal esophagectomy with posterior mediastinal reconstruction for esophageal cancer 13 years earlier. Pathological examination of the resected esophageal cancer revealed a basaloid carcinoma with invasion of the submucosa, diagnosed as pT1bN0M0, p-stage I according to the Union for International Cancer Control Tumor Node Metastasis Classification of Malignant Tumors, 8th edition.
No noticeable physical findings other than the previous surgical incision were observed.
A blood analysis revealed mild anemia (hemoglobin; 12.3 g/dL) with normal white blood cell and platelet counts. Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal. Blood biochemistry revealed chronic renal disease (creatinine, 1.09 mg/dL: Creatinine clearance, 46.7 mL/min) and increased brain natriuretic peptide 128.5 pg/mL (normal range: < 18.0 pg/mL).
An electrocardiogram showed ST-T abnormalities on leads II, III, aVf, and V4-6. Echocardiography revealed almost normal cardiac function with mild aortic stenosis. A pulmonary function examination revealed the following: Vital capacity, 72.6% of predicted; and forced expiratory volume in 1 s, 67.7% of predicted (1.57 L). A chest X-ray showed the reconstructed gastric tube in the mediastinum.
Endoscopic examination revealed a type 0-IIc tumor with an ulcer scar surrounding the pyloric ring and invading the duodenum. The lesion was not stained by indigo carmine . Computed tomography was unable to detect the primary tumor, and no obvious nodal metastasis was observed .