A 67-years-old Polish male patient was admitted to the Infectious Diseases Ward in Chorzów, Poland with symptoms of COVID-19 pneumonia . He had no comorbidities or any relevant information in his medical or family history. One week prior to hospitalization, the patient suffered from cough, fever. He felt weak and had problems with everyday activities. Before the admission he was tested positively for SARS-CoV 2. On admission physical examination revealed fever, tachycardia and oxygen saturation of 89% while breathing ambient air. Lung auscultation revealed crackles at the right lung. Chest X-ray showed the suspicion of bilateral pneumonia . The symptom of a frosted glass on CT of the chest has also confirmed this diagnosis . Laboratory data on admission demonstrated elevated levels of: D-dimer (2,97 µg/ml, the reference range: 0–0.5 µg/ml), C – reactive protein (CRP) – 186,80 mg/l (the reference range: 0–5 mg/L), aspartate transaminase (AspAT) – 68 U/L (the reference range: 10–50 U/L) and gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGTP) – 84 U/L (the reference range: 10–71 U/L), the procalcitonin (PCT) level of 0,34 ng/ml and random serum glucose – 196 mg/dl (the reference range: 70–99 mg/dl) . Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed onset of biphasic T-wave in V6 and left axis deviation. ECG changes were not clinically significant. The patient was treated with remdesivir (200 mg on Day 1 and 100 mg daily for 9 days), dexamethasone (6 mg per day), empiric antibiotic therapy (ceftriaxone – 2 g per day), low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) (40 mg/0,4 ml per day), passive oxygen therapy with a face mask. The symptomatic treatment was also applied (ketoprofen 50 mg twice a day).
Testing for SARS-CoV-2 by the method of reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction in real time (RT-PCR) was negative twice. Considering that, on the 15th day of hospitalization, the patient was transferred to the Pulmonology Department in Chorzów for further treatment of pneumonia with respiratory failure . The patient suffered from shortness of breath. Auscultation revealed crackling noises at the bases of the lungs. Gasometry showed hypoxemia on admission. CXR revealed bilateral lung consolidations. Laboratory data on admission demonstrated: CRP – 11,15 mg/l, AspAT – 20 U/L and random serum glucose – 217 mg/dl. A spiral computed tomography (CT) of the chest was performed. It showed irregular and advanced interstitial changes and ground-glass opacities in bilateral and peripheral areas of lungs (CO-RADS 4) . The patient received systemic steroids (dexamethasone – 20–10-0 mg) clarithromycin (500 mg every 12 h), bronchodilators, LMWH (40 mg/0,4 ml per day) and passive oxygen therapy.
The patient’s respiratory symptoms and general condition improved. He claimed that he feels much better. He had no dyspnea. There were no significant abnormalities in the condition of his skin or bedsores. The patient did not developed any hospital-aquired infections. He only lost his weight—5 kg from the state before the disease. There was no muscle wasting or any signs of peripheral neuropathy. Lung auscultation 26 days after hospital stay revealed no rhonchi and the patient was discharged from the hospital with recommendation to continue steroid therapy (prednisone 20–10-0 mg with scheme of doses reduction: 2–12.12.2020 10–10-0 mg, 13–23.12.2020 10–5-0 mg, 24–30.12.2020 5–0-0 mg).
Due to the patient complaints of both lower limbs oedema which endure for a few weeks and elevated level of D-dimer (3,89 µg/ml, the reference range: 0–0.5 µg/ml) on 20th day after discharge from hospital Doppler ultrasonography (USG) of the lower extremities was performed and revealed right-sided thrombosis of the popliteal vein, the distal part of superficial femoral vein and proximal part of posterior and anterior tibial vein. He was diagnosed with thrombophlebitis and impaired glucose tolerance (according to OGTT). The control laboratory tests after discharge from the Pulmonology Department are presented in Table .
The follow-up Doppler USG of lower extremities was performed and showed progressive recanalization of previously thrombosed veins. Rivaroxaban (20 mg per day) was administered on 15.12.2020 and the dose of prednisone was reduced.
On 35th day after hospital discharge the follow-up Chest X-ray revealed rare interstitial changes with outstanding improvement in comparison to the previous examination .
On 23th day after hospital discharge due to the problems with walking noticed by the patient and his family, he went to the Neurological Outpatient Clinic . The patient complained of numbness of toes and involuntary muscle spasms in hands, which appeared after discharge from the Infectious Diseases Ward.
Neurological examination revealed asymmetry of pupils – Adie syndrome (R > L, the pupillary light reflex and the accomodation-convergence reflex slower in the affected eye, photophobia, more miotic response in the eye after dilute pilocarpine test), weakened muscle strength of the right upper limb, decrease of deep tendon reflexes in lower limbs, decrease of exteroceptive sensation in right hand and toes, bilateral absence of quadriceps reflex, plantar reflex and reduced ankle-jerk reflex, steppage gait and bilateral peroneal nerve damage. Patient was diagnosed with bilateral paralysis of peroneal nerve.
A cranial and spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on 36th day after hospital discharge revealed supratentorial and infratentorial cortical atrophy, partial empty sella syndrome, retrograde vascular lesion (Fazakes scale: grade 1), discopathy in the cervical and lumbosacral (L2-S1) segment with stenosis of a spinal canal (L2-S1) . The patient has no previous history of imagining such as cranial and spine MRI. It is unknown if infratentorial cortical atrophy and partial empty sella syndrome had previously existed.
One month after diagnosis of peroneal nerve palsy (10.12.2021 r.) general condition of patient improved, but in physical examination he had still presented an unsteady, steppage gait. Neurophysiological examination revealed bilateral axonal mononeuropathy of the peroneal nerves accompanied by radiculopathic changes. The treatment consisted of motoric rehabilitation, orthotic footwear and control of the glucose level. Besides that, has continued steroid therapy (with scheme of doses reduction) and anticoagulant treatment (with rivaroxaban).