The patient was a 65-year-old Taiwanese woman with underlying hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and chronic hepatitis B virus infection. Her baseline activities of daily living (ADLs) and instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs) indicated complete independence. The patient lived with her husband, and their son lived nearby.
On presentation, the patient had acute onset of dizziness and right otalgia 15 days before admission. Several vesicles emerged from the patient’s right auricle 1 day later. She was diagnosed with herpes zoster infection in the right ear, and an oral antiviral agent (acyclovir 800 mg QID) was prescribed for 7 days at a local clinic 5 days after initial symptoms. Unfortunately, the dizziness and right otalgia did not improve with treatment. Upon experiencing acute right-sided facial palsy 13 days after initial symptoms, the patient visited the emergency department, where physical examination revealed right peripheral-type facial palsy, presenting as an asymmetric mouth and incomplete closure of the right eye. Oral steroids (prednisolone 5 mg BID) were prescribed for emergent treatment of facial palsy. She was subsequently referred to the neurology clinic. As RHS with 7th and 8th cranial nerves involvement was suspected, the patient was immediately admitted to the neurology department for further evaluation. After admission, the patient’s right peripheral type facial palsy was estimated as Grade V severity on the House–Brackmann Facial Paralysis Scale . The Romberg test failed because of the patient’s inability to stand steadily while closing her eyes. The result of the vestibular function test was compatible with right vestibular dysfunction. The otorhinolaryngology fiberoscope displayed two crusts at the right auricle without any other lesions in the right external auditory canal. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium administration revealed increased enhancement in the distal right internal auditory canal . A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) study demonstrated lymphocyte-predominant pleocytosis. Herpes simplex virus and VZV were not identified in the viral nucleic acid polymerase chain reaction of the CSF. No pathogens were detected in the CSF by virus isolation or bacterial culture. Under the suspicion of aseptic meningitis, an empirical intravenous antiviral agent (acyclovir 750 mg Q8H) was administered for 14 days. Artificial tears (hypromellose/dextran 1 gtt QID OU) were prescribed for the patient’s lagophthalmos in the right eye. Physiatrist-arranged electrical stimulation and physical therapy, including self-facial exercises, facial stretches, and mirror visual feedback, were used to treat the patient’s facial palsy. Despite completing the treatment course of intravenous antiviral agents, the patient still experienced dizziness and imbalance and could not ambulate by herself. The patient required assistance or needed to hold a handrail when getting out of bed. After 15 days of hospitalization, the patient was discharged with a stationary clinical manifestation.
After discharge, the patient fell three times at home within 1 month. Due to repeated falls, she visited the geriatric clinic 22 days after discharge and completed a comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA). The Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) revealed poor balance (1/4), poor gait speed (1/4), and fair chair stand (3/4) . The patient completed the Timed Up and Go (TUG) test in 9.4 seconds, which was within the normal range for older adults . FOF was confirmed through the positive response to the questions on the FOF and activity restriction (SQ-FAR) questionnaire, which asked, “Are you afraid of falling?” and “If YES, did your FOF lead you to restrict some of your activities?” . The patient was referred to a physical therapy center for rehabilitation and balance training. The physical therapist educated her on home-based self-balance training. The second CGA was conducted 3 months after the first CGA. The patient had had no further falls since the last CGA. However, she still had FOF and refused to go outdoors. The patient’s SPPB revealed resumed balance (4/4) and walking speed (4/4) but deteriorated chair stand (2/4). The patient’s TUG test time increased to 14.1 seconds. At the third CGA performed 3 months after the second CGA, the patient’s TUG test time increased to 16.2 seconds. At the same time, the patient’s IADLs showed new impairments in three aspects: shopping, transportation, and handling of finances. She required family members to accompany her when she left home. The fourth CGA, performed 6 months after the third CGA, showed that the patient’s TUG test time increased to 17.6 seconds, which was higher than in any of her previous TUG tests. The IADLs assessment still showed an impairment in shopping. The patient’s EuroQol-visual analog scales (EQ-VAS) score, which represents a patient’s self-rated health on a vertical visual analog scale, was between 55 to 80 throughout the four CGAs . The patient reported no additional falls between the follow-up appointments, and her handgrip strength was intact throughout the serial CGAs. The patient reported that physical therapy and balance training were useful, and she felt grateful because no incident of falls had occurred afterward. However, even though her SPPB improved, especially during the balance test, the patient’s FOF persisted, and she was too afraid to walk by herself. This consequently caused her to become less socially active due to the fear of going out independently, even though her facial palsy had considerably improved 1 year after the onset of RHS .