A 73-year-old male presented with painless decreased visual acuity, floaters and flashes in the right eye for 2 weeks. The right eye did not have any previous history of trauma, surgery, cryotherapy or laser photocoagulation except for an uneventful cataract surgery 15 years ago. His left eye had undergone vitrectomy with retained silicone oil to treat retinal detachment for 8 months from another hospital. The left eye was now aphakic with retinal redetachment under the silicone oil, secondary glaucoma and band keratopathy. His medical underlying diseases were essential hypertension and hyperlipidemia. His systemic medications included amlodipine, losartan and simvastatin.
At presentation, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.6 logMAR and counting fingers in the right and left eyes, respectively. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 14 mmHg in the right eye and 12 mmHg in the left eye. Ocular examination of the right eye showed normal conjunctiva and sclera, clear cornea, mildly shallow anterior chamber with no cell or flare and the eye was pseudophakic. The pupil was dilatable to 5 mm. Dilated fundus examination revealed corrugated inferior bullous retinal detachment with shifting of subretinal fluid . No definite choroidal detachment or a retinal break was identified with a wide-field contact lens. Optical coherence tomography (SPECTRALIS, Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) of the macula showed subretinal fluid, a small juxtapapillary pigment epithelial detachment and intraretinal cysts . At this point, rhegmatogenous retinal detachment with a very small retinal break versus exudative retinal detachment were to be differentiated. The patient was then worked up for possible etiologies of exudative retinal detachment including choroidal inflammation, choroidal tumors and atypical central serous chorioretinopathy.
Ocular B-scan ultrasonography (Aviso, Quantel Medical, Clermont-Ferrand, France) demonstrated ocular wall thickening with peripheral choroidal elevation in the right eye. No tumors were identified and no subtenon fluid collection to suggest posterior scleritis was detected. The axial length measurement (IOL Master 500, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Jena, Germany) was 22.59 and 22.94 mm in the right and left eyes, respectively, which was not compatible with nanophthalmos. Fluorescein angiography (FA) (SPECTRALIS, Heidelberg Engineering) showed granular hyperfluorescence, consistent with window defects, at the mid-periphery and peripapillary areas. No dye leakage was detected to explain the subretinal fluid, which made central serous chorioretinopathy unlikely . Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) (SPECTRALIS, Heidelberg Engineering) demonstrated diffuse early hypercyanescence especially in the posterior pole and superotemporal vortex veins that persisted to the late phase in the peripapillary area . FA and ICGA showed no evidence of chorioretinal inflammation, which made choroiditis such as sympathetic ophthalmia unlikely. Blood tests including complete blood count, blood chemistries, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, serological test for human immunodeficiency virus, venereal disease research laboratory test for syphilis, Treponema pallidum haemagglutination test, interferon gamma assay for tuberculosis, antinuclear antibodies test and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies test were all within normal limit. The chest x-ray was also performed and showed no pulmonary infiltration. After excluding the infectious etiologies, 1 mg/kg/day of oral systemic steroid was challenged to the patient for 7 days without clinical responses. UES was now high in the differential diagnosis. The ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) (Aviso, Quantel Medical) was then performed and revealed edematous thickening of the anterior choroid and thickening of the anterior sclera measuring up to 1.26 mm , leading to the diagnosis of UES (normal scleral thickness at the corneoscleral limbus is 0.53 ± 0.14 mm ).
Partial thickness sclerectomy and sclerotomy was then performed based on the technique described by Gass, 1983 . In brief, two-thirds thickness scleral flaps of 5 mm × 7 mm were created centering at 2 mm anterior to the equator in each of the 4 quadrants. Full thickness sclerotomy (scleral window) of 2 mm × 2 mm was then made on each of the remaining scleral beds under the flaps. The scleral flaps from inferonasal and inferotemporal quadrants were excised and sent for histological examination.
At 2-week post-operation, the BCVA improved to 0.2 logMAR in the right eye with the IOP of 16 mmHg and the subretinal fluid progressively reduced. At 4 months, the retina was completely attached, revealing a typical leopard spot pattern described in UES . One year after the surgery, follow-up ICGA revealed less choroidal hyperpermeability . Histologic findings of the excised sclera revealed neither inflammation nor disorganization of collagen fibers. Special stains including periodic acid–Schiff, periodic acid–Schiff–diastase, alcian blue, alcian blue with hyaluronidase, mucicarmine, congo red and reticulin showed no demonstrable proteoglycans or other abnormal substance deposits.