A 61-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital for "bilateral osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) for 1 year after long-term use of glucocorticoids".
The patient was diagnosed with bilateral ONFH one year prior because of the long-term use of glucocorticoids. When the patient was admitted to the hospital, the control of the primary disease was stable . She underwent right total hip arthroplasty in the orthopaedic department. Hydrocortisone (50 mg) was administered through intravenous drip 1 d before, during, immediately after, and 1 d after the operation. The patient resumed 8 mg of oral methylprednisolone on the second postoperative day. On the fifth day after surgery, the patient suddenly developed dyspnea when walking, accompanied by chest tightness, palpitation, and blood in the sputum.
The patient had a history of anti-melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5)-positive dermatomyositis and interstitial pneumonia for 3 years. She had was administered 8 mg of methylprednisolone daily and 50 mg of cyclosporine every 12 h to control her condition.
She was born in Shenyang and has lived there almost all her life. The patient’s living conditions were good, and she has no bad personal habits or customs. Her parents have both died.
The patient's temperature was 38.3 °C. She had tachypnea (respiratory rate: 30 breaths/min) and tachycardia (heart rate: 115 beats/min). Her blood pressure was 126/78 mmHg, and her blood oxygen saturation was 86%. She was conscious and able to answer questions correctly. Heart sounds and abdominal examinations were normal, and there was no increase in lower extremity edema and facial rash.
Laboratory tests showed a high white blood counts (WBC) count of 16.14 × 109/L, a high absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) of 0.81 × 109/L, a high C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 7.54 mg/dL, a high erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 75 mm/h, and a normal creatinine level of 85.9 μmol/L. The results of arterial blood gas analysis showed the following: pH 7.49, PaCO2 of 32 mmHg, PaO2 of 47 mmHg, HCO3- of 26 mmol/L, BE of 2.1 mmol/L, and Lac of 1.5 mmol/L.
The computed tomography (CT) scan showed diffuse grid shadows and ground glass shadows in both lungs, and left pleural effusion was distributed throughout the upper lobe of both lungs.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was positive for Pneumocystis jiroveci.