A 34-year-old, gravida 2 para 1 parturient was scheduled for Cesarean section at 38 weeks of gestational age. At age 19, she presented with paresthesias, headaches, neck pain, and poor balance, and Type I ACM with an extensive syringomyelia from the cervical to the lumbar area. Over the next several years, she had undergone surgical treatments, including suboccipital craniectomy, duraplasty with fascia lata graft, and decompressive C1–C6 laminectomies with placement of a syringopleural shunt. As a consequence of the laminectomies, the patient had residual cervical xyphosis with limited extension and continued to have symptoms related to Type I ACM, such as headaches, neck pain, stiffness, poor balance, and bilateral paresthesias of the upper and lower extremities (left side worse than right). Her symptoms were worsened by straining, coughing, and neck movements. Due to her residual Type I ACM, her neurosurgeon recommended avoiding normal vaginal delivery. The preoperative anesthetic evaluation showed a Mallampati grade III airway, limited mouth opening to 4 cm, and limited neck movement, with an anticipated difficult airway intubation. Recent MRI imaging of the cervical spine demonstrated worsening of the post-laminectomy cervical kyphosis, spinal cord atrophy, and a residual syrinx. The spinal cord was deviated posteriorly, the MRI of the thoracic spine demonstrated a syrinx in the entire thoracic cord, and the MRI of the brain showed structures of the hindbrain protruding through the foramen magnum [Figures –].
The anesthesiology team, in conjunction with the obstetrical team, decided to perform awake fiberoptic intubation and utilize a multimodal general anesthesia. The patient and her husband were informed of an anticipated difficult orotracheal intubation. On the day of surgery, the patient was brought to the operating room with fetal heart rate monitoring in place. She received 0.2 mg IV glycopyrrolate, famotidine 20 mg IV, and 30 ml Shol's solution pre-operatively. Standard American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) monitors and a Bispectral Index (BIS) monitor were applied. The neck was maintained in a neutral position. Adequate local anesthetic topicalization with Cetacaine (Cetylite Industries, Inc., Pennsauken, NJ, USA) topical oral spray (benzocaine 14%, butamben 2%, and tetracaine 2%) and 5 ml of lidocaine 2% jelly (Uro-Jet, International Medical Systems, Ltd., South El Monte, CA, USA) as a gargle solution were given in preparation of awake fiberoptic intubation. The patient received butorphanol 1.5 mg IV for sedation. Transtracheal 4% lidocaine 4 ml was administered. As the operative field was prepped and sterilely draped, the patient was properly prepared to undergo awake fiberoptic intubation with the head in the neutral position and with no neck movement. Utilizing an Ovassapian fiberoptic airway (Hudson RCI, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA), a pediatric bronchoscope (preloaded with a 6.5 endotracheal tube (ETT)) connected to an O2 source was advanced into the trachea. It was noticed that the epiglottis was “floppy,” angulated, the glottic opening kinked, and was cephalad and anterior due to the significant cervical kyphosis. No coughing or gagging was encountered, and the ETT was advanced to the supracarinal position and was secured.
General anesthesia with the neck in the neutral position was induced with propofol (2 mg/kg) IV as soon as proper ETT placement was confirmed by identifying breath sounds plus end-tidal CO2 (EtCO2) in addition to the fiberoptic visualization. Sevoflurane 2.0% end-tidal was initially used until the baby was delivered and then anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane 1.0% end-tidal, plus an intravenous infusion of propofol (100 mcg/kg/min), midazolam 5 mg, and fentanyl (3 mcg/kg). A deep balanced anesthetic level was used without neuromuscular blockade. A healthy baby boy with Apgar scores at 1 and 5 min of 9/9 was delivered. The remainder of the case was without incident. The surgical team noted excellent uterine tone, and hemorrhage was less than average estimated blood loss ((EBL) < 700 ml). Post-intubation neurological assessment was performed and a prolonged in-house neurological observation was conducted. The patient had no complaints of headache or pain in the post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) or evidence of recall of the intraoperative events. She was discharged home after 4 days. Neurological exam showed no change in the patient's strength, sensation, or gross coordination. The patient remained stable at the outpatient clinic visit (2 weeks after Cesarean section), and she was advised to follow-up with her neurosurgeon with regards to progressive cervical kyphosis.