A 89-year-old male patient, farmer, not vaccinated against COVID-19, was admitted to the Observation and Infectious Diseases Department District Hospital due to fever, cough, weakness, and low exercise tolerance. Symptoms exacerbated during last 14 days prior to hospitalization. He was treated empirically with oral antibiotics in standard doses (amoxicillin and clavulanic acid, levofloxacin) without clinical improvement. Rapid test for qualitative detection of SARS-CoV-2 antigen (Panbio™ COVID-19 Ag Rapid Test Device, Abbott), performed from nasopharyngeal swabs during admission in the Emergency Room, was positive. In medical history patient reported bronchial asthma, hypertension, and heart failure. No neurodegenerative condition or dementia have been diagnosed previously.
During admission, the patient was conscious and in logic contact. Physical examination revealed dehydration, prolonged exhalation phase, numerous crackles and single wheezes during lung’s auscultation, finger pulse SpO2 was 85% without oxygen supplementation. Laboratory tests showed increased concentration of C-reactive protein (CRP) with normal procalcitonin (PCT) values, high interleukin 6 (IL-6) and lactic acid value, increased activity of transaminases . Severe hypoxemia was found in blood gas analysis. The chest X-ray revealed bilateral, diffused interstitial opacities, especially in the left lower lobe . High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of chest confirmed typical for COVID-19 pneumonia radiological findings. In total, right lung was affected in 40%, and the left in 60% . The treatment included tocilizumab (single dose of 600 mg), low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin 1 mg per kg bodyweight daily), glucocorticosteroids (dexamethasone 6 mg per day), bronchodilators (SABA + SAMA), fluid therapy, passive oxygen therapy via a mask with an oxygen reservoir with a flow of 6 L/min. Stabilization of the patient's condition, normalization of blood saturation and inflammatory parameters in laboratory tests were achieved . Fever was not observed.
On the 9th day of hospitalization, in the early morning hours, the patient's condition deteriorated. He was unconscious, with no reaction to external stimuli, rated at 5 points on the Glasgow scale. The physical examination revealed fever up to 38.2 °C, tachypnea (respiratory rate was 30 breaths per minute), high blood pressure values, right hemiparesis, the neck stiffness, a positive Babinski sign on the right sight. Due to the suspicion of a stroke, resulting from thromboembolic complications of COVID-19, a brain CT was performed. No signs of intracranial bleeding were observed . Laboratory tests revealed a significant increase in inflammatory parameters . Blood and urine samples were collected for microbiological tests. Empirical antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone (2 g twice a day intravenously) and ciprofloxacin (400 mg twice a day intravenously) was implemented. Six hours after the onset of consciousness disturbances, the patient developed apnea. He was intubated and mechanical ventilation was started. Control brain CT performed 12 h after first brain imagining excluded intracranial hemorrhage. Blood and the bronchial wash cultures were positive for S. pneumoaniae after 48 h. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) for ceftriaxone was ≤ 0.12 μg/mL. Urine culture was negative. Lumbar puncture was performed after stabilization of the patient's condition. Based on the result of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tests, bacterial neuroinfection was confirmed . CSF culture was negative. No PCR and rapid latex agglutination tests of CSF were performed because of the small amount of the collected fluid. Despite the multidisciplinary treatment, the patient's condition deteriorated. Symptoms of multiple organ failure increased. On the 13th day of hospitalization, the patient died.