A 52-year-old woman was admitted to the hematology department of our hospital in November 2019 with dizziness and fatigue for 8 years and right lower limb swelling and pain for 6 d.
The patient felt dizziness and fatigue in January 2011, and these symptoms worsened after activity and were aggravated gradually without treatment. She first presented at a local hospital in August 2011. Routine blood examination revealed the following: White blood cells (WBCs) 4.0 × 109/L, hemoglobin (Hb) 55 g/L, PLTs 20 × 109/L, and reticulocytes 2%. The bone marrow morphology was characterized by nucleated cells with active proliferation. Erythroid hyperplasia was noted in 48% of erythroid cells. Megaloblastic erythrocytes and 20 megakaryocytes were found. Bone marrow biopsy showed that hematopoietic tissue accounted for approximately 75% of the biopsy. Small megakaryocytes were noted with reticular fiber (+). Chromosome analysis revealed 46 XX. The patient was diagnosed with MDS with refractory anemia and treated with androgen, cyclosporin, and intermittent blood transfusion support. Hb was maintained at 100-120 g/L, and the PLT count was 50-80 × 109/L. However, in 2014, she stopped taking cyclosporine due to renal damage. As she was no longer dependent on blood transfusion, the patient had stopped taking the medicine and her follow-up treatment on her own. In November 2019, the values for the peripheral blood factors decreased as follows: WBC 2.9 × 109/L, Hb 70 g/L, and PLT 20 × 109/L. She began treatment with 200 mg danazol quaque die (qd) and 50 mg thalidomide quaque nocte. Unfortunately, the patient presented with right lower limb swelling that had gradually become aggravated 1 mo later, and the patient gradually lost the ability to exercise. However, blisters were scattered on the skin of the right lower limb, and her temperature increased . The patient underwent an emergency transfer to the hematology department of our hospital on November 25, 2019.
The patient had type 2 diabetes for 5 years, which was controlled well by taking acarbose tablets (50 mg three times a day). She had a history of blood transfusion but no blood transfusion allergy response.
Her parents had died, and she had an older sister with parkinson’s disease and a healthy son. She denied any history of family genetic disease.
On admission, the patient presented with anemia, and occasional bleeding spots were seen on the skin. The skin of the right lower limb was red and swollen with several transparent soybean-sized blisters, and the temperature of the skin was elevated. Her limb showed extreme tenderness with mild concave edema, which resulted in dysmobility of the right lower limb.
The complete blood count analysis revealed pancytopenia (WBC 2.8 × 109/L, neutrophils 1.6 × 109/L, Hb 88 g/L, PLT 15 × 109/L), and her D-dimer was 16.48 mg/L. Screening analysis of anticoagulant proteins demonstrated a markedly low level of PS activity (25%, reference value: 55%-130%), whereas antithrombin (AT) Ⅲ and PC levels were normal. Lower extremity vascular ultrasound revealed extensive acute incomplete thrombosis in the right lower extremities, including the external iliac vein, common femoral vein, superficial femoral vein, deep femoral vein, popliteal vein, and posterior tibial vein of the right lower limb (November 6, 2019). Bone marrow morphology revealed nucleated cells with active proliferation. Primitive cells accounted for 3% of cells, and 12 megakaryocytes were found. Bone marrow biopsy showed that hematopoietic tissue accounted for approximately 70% of the biopsy. Activated nucleated cell hyperplasia was noted, and a small number of mature lymphocytes and plasma cells were observed. The chromosome analysis revealed 46 XX.
Deep venous ultrasound of the right lower extremity showed that extensive acute incomplete thrombosis in the right lower extremities in November 26, 2019. While, it showed that old thrombosis in the common and superficial femoral veins of the right lower limb in January 2, 2020.
Whole-exome sequencing detection: Figure shows the gene sequencing results of the patient and the patient’s son. A heterozygous mutation of the PROS1 gene was found in the patient (c.1351C > T), but the same mutation was not observed in the patient’s son.
Bone marrow cell examination (December 23, 2019): Obvious proliferation of the erythroid cell line with poor platelet production function was observed in the megakaryocyte line .
Bone marrow biopsy (December 31, 2019): Bone marrow hematopoiesis of the “posterior iliac spine” revealed approximately 70% fat. In addition, active nucleated cell hyperplasia was noted in 30% of cells. Granulocyte proliferation was still active. Granulocytes in the mature stage was slightly reduced. Erythroid hyperplasia was obviously active, mainly in the middle and late stages of erythroblasts, with some cells of different sizes. The number of megakaryocytes was reduced (0-2/high power field), and the morphology was roughly normal. A small number of mature lymphocytes and plasma cells were observed.