A 51-year-old Iranian man who was a farmer residing in a rural region in the southwest of Iran presented to our surgery unit with history of recent abdominal pain. The patient had no history of previous surgery for hydatid cyst excision. Moreover, he had the following vital signs on physical examination: body temperature of 36.5 °C and blood pressure of 120/60 mmHg. Also, two abdominal masses were palpated during abdominal examination. Laboratory investigations revealed hemoglobin of 11.9 g/dL and white blood cell (WBC) count of 10.4 × 103/µL, including 68% neutrophils and 32% lymphocytes. Also, the patient underwent enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for native antigen B (AgB), which was positive. Abdominal ultrasound and CT scan revealed six cystic lesions in the patient's abdomen, including two in the right hepatic lobe, one in the left hepatic lobe, one in the subhepatic region, one in the pelvic, and one in the omentum . Following general anesthesia, a midline abdominal incision was made, and the abdomen was explored. The hydatid cyst on the omentum was resected by Harmonic scalpel, while the subhepatic cyst attached to the gallbladder was completely drained. Also, the one in the pelvic area was gently drained while checking the urinary bladder and rectum after packing the surrounding area with several sponges soaked in 0.5% silver nitrate. Subsequently, the germinal layer of the cyst was removed, and a Jackson–Pratt (JP) drain was inserted into the pelvis. Afterward, the cyst in the left hepatic lobe was drained, and a JP drain was inserted into the left hepatic lobe after suturing the bile duct. Finally, the two cysts in the right hepatic lobe were fully drained as well, and a JP drain was placed in the right hepatic lobe .
Examination of a direct smear of fluid from the hydatid cysts revealed brood capsules and protoscoleces of E. granulosus . In addition, histological examination of the cystic lesions confirmed hydatidosis. Therefore, the patient underwent albendazole therapy (400 mg/kg/day) for 4 months and was asked to return for follow-up 4 months after discharge until 2 years later.