An 18-year-old man presented with abdominal pain, distension and constipation. His past medical history included VP shunt and a craniotomy with a supracerebellar infratentorial access to a pineal mass that had a histological diagnosis of germinoma in April 1994. Postoperatively, he was submitted to radiotherapy (5400 rads).
Physical examination revealed stable vital signs. Heart and lung auscultation revealed no abnormalities. Abdominal exam showed a large, solid mesogastric mass associated with pain and distension. On neurological exam, the patient was alert, oriented, with Parinaud syndrome and left oculomotor nerve paresis. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a large solid and cystic abdominal mass around the VP catheter. The tumor produced pyelocalyceal ectasia and bowel distention and was accompanied by moderate ascites. During the admission, peritoneocentesis was performed. Aspiration cytology revealed no abnormalities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a pineal irregular mass occupying the superior cerebellar and quadrigeminal cisterns with hyposignal on T1, medium signal on T2 and heterogeneous enhancement after gadolinium injection . Based on the size and diffuse abdominal infiltration of the tumor, surgery was not carried out. A specimen was taken for histology by abdominal computed tomography (CT)-guided puncture.
The histopathologic analysis revealed cells of various shapes, from polyhedral to prismatic, arranged in a lobular manner. Thin-walled blood vessels surrounded by a fibrous trabeculae framework with variable thickness were noticed. They were arranged in cords and sheets and exhibited an eosinophilic cytoplasm with intervening epithelial and intracellular mucin containing cells . Immunohistochemical staining using immunoperoxidase technique was characteristic of chordoma with positive results for AE3 and vimentin and negative results for AE1, EMA, S100, HHF35, enolase, placentary alkaline phosphatase. Based on these findings, the previous histopathologic diagnosis was revised and established as chordoma. However, during the admission, the patient presented with systemic clinical complications and he died. The primary pineal origin of the chordoma was confirmed by autopsy.