The patient, a 60-year-old man, first noticed pain in his right foot in 2007. In 2008, he came to the primary hospital presenting with low back pain, gait disturbance, and muscle weakness in the right lower limb. Radiological examination did not reveal any pathologic change in the lumbar vertebrae, whereas a bone scan revealed markedly increased bone uptake at the whole skeleton, and positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) revealed mild increased uptake at multiple ribs and right femoral trochanter. No regular treatment was performed. Then the patient’s symptoms were progressively worsened and he became disabled. In 2010, blood examination revealed hypophosphatemia (0.5 mg/dl; normal range 0.98 to 1.62 mg/dl), hypocalcemia (2.17 mmol/L; normal range 2.25 to 2.75 mmol/L), reduced 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (10.5 pg/ml; normal range 11.1 to 42.9 pg/ml), and elevated β-C-terminal telopeptide of type I collagen (CTX) (1426 pg/L; normal range 100 to 650 pg/L). Osteomalacia was initially diagnosed and treated with phosphate, calcium, vitamin D, and calcitriol. Although blood examination still revealed hypophosphatemia (0.55 mg/dl), symptoms got better progressively. In 2012, an 111In pentetreotide scintigraphy (octreotide scan) was performed, and the result revealed a markedly increased uptake at the right forearm. The tumor was resected totally, and the histopathology revealed a mesenchymal hamartoma, but we noticed that hypophosphatemia wasn’t corrected after the tumor resection. In 2013, the patient suffered paraplegia and then a PET/CT scan was performed. Unfortunately, PET/CT scan did not locate the tumor, and thus, he underwent to a whole-body magnetic resonance imaging (WB-MRI), which revealed tumorous tissues at the right T1 vertebral pedicle.
The 60-year-old man was presented to our spine tumor center for consultation regarding resection of the tumor in the right T1 vertebral pedicle. On presentation to our center, the patient had signs of severe osteomalacia, and the patient’s most outstanding complaints were diffuse bone pain throughout the whole skeleton, limb weakness, hypaesthesia, and disabled walking. Physical examination revealed that motor strength was graded as 3/5 in the upper limbs and 1/5 in the lower limbs. Sensation decreased slightly throughout, with hyporeflexia. The Hoffmann sign and the Babinski sign were negative.
Blood tests revealed hypophosphatemia (0.51 mg/dl), hypocalcemia (2.15 mmol/L), elevated levels of parathyroid hormone (PTH) (72.3 pg/mL; normal range 12 to 65 pg/mL), normal serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels (313 U/L; normal range 115 to 359 U/L), and normal levels of 1,25-dihydroxy vitamin D (21.01 pg/ml).
Radiological exams demonstrated osteolytic changes of the T1 right vertebral pedicle and mild collapse of the T1 vertebral body. In addition, some fractures were detected in multiple ribs. MRI revealed a tumor in the T1 vertebral body and right vertebral pedicle . The tumor showed iso-signal intensity on a T1-weighted image (T1WI), high-signal intensity on T2WI, and was heterogeneously enhanced by gadolinium.
Written informed consent was obtained. We decided to remove the whole metabolically active tissue via an en bloc method, and bilateral vertebral pedicles were used to accomplish spinal reconstruction. Care was taken to resect the tumor around its margins, and cuts were made in the bone outside of the tumor margin to minimize spillage of tumor. A titanium mesh cage was placed in the position of the T1 vertebral body and was packed with recombinant human BMP-2 matrix. A gross total resection was performed without intraoperative complications, and the specimen was sent for pathologic diagnosis .
The cells appeared spindled with normochromatic, small nuclei, and indistinct nucleoli. No significant nuclear atypia and mitoses were found. The tumor cells were focally embedded in a myxochondroid and osteoid-like matrix and contained cystic spaces of many sizes, including large dilated spaces filled with blood . The tumor was well-vascularized, and bone invasion was focally present . Immunohistochemical staining was positive for CD34 , Vimentin, and S100, with a quite low proliferation index (Ki-67 1% to 3%). Phosphaturic mesenchymal tumor (PMT) was diagnosed in the patient.
After surgery, the patient stayed in bed for 1 month, and 1.5 μg/day of calcitriol was orally administered. The clumsiness and muscle weakness in both legs of the patient gradually improved, with motor strength graded as 4/5 in the lower limbs at the 6 months follow-up and the grade remained at this level thereafter . When he walked, he wore a cervicothoracic brace. The patient experienced no multiple bone pain or new neurologic deficits during the 1-year follow-up period. One year after the surgery, the patient had normal neurologic function, normal triceps, biceps knee, and ankle jerks, and he returned to work. Serum phosphorus levels slightly fluctuated, but the levels remained within the normal range . Bone union without loss of cervicothoracic physiological curvature was confirmed by radiological examination at the 1-year follow-up. No evidence of recurrent tumor was detected in the MRI. The patient had no osteomalacic symptoms, and no new fractures were detected. In addition, we confirmed the accurate bony union of the fractured ribs.