A 66-year-old male presented to his general practitioner with a two-month history of an increasing painful mass in his left groin associated with medial thigh paresthesia. He denied any fevers, infective symptoms and was otherwise systemically well. His past medical history included ankylosing spondylitis for which he was on long-term prednisolone (5 mg mane), and had commenced Infliximab infusions (400 mg 6-weekly) 10 months prior. Other significant medical history included ischemic heart disease with four coronary stents, and an open repair of an abdominal aortic aneurysm. On assessment he was hemodynamically stable and afebrile, and examination of his left groin revealed a tender pulsatile mass, with no overlying skin changes. Biochemistry revealed a normal white cell count.
A duplex ultrasound showed a dilatation of the left common femoral artery suggestive of a possible pseudoaneurysm or mycotic aneurysm. This was further evaluated with a CT angiogram of the lower limbs which showed bilateral common femoral artery aneurysms associated with areas of arterial dissection. The left aneurysm extended 5.5 cm cranio-caudally, 4 cm transversely and 3.5 cm antero-posteriorly. The left distal common femoral artery was markedly stenosed as it draped over the aneurysm. The right aneurysm was 1.5 mm in maximal diameter and 2 cm in cranio-caudal length with moderate stenosis of the right distal common femoral artery. The CTA did not show any features suspicious for a mycotic aneurysm The patient underwent an uncomplicated resection of the left common femoral artery aneurysm with repair performed using an 8 mm Dacron tube graft. Intraoperatively the vessel wall appeared normal, with no evidence of oedema or suppurative material in the surrounding tissue therefore an infective etiology was not suspected. The aneurysmal tissue specimen was sent for histopathological and microbiological testing. L. monocytogenes was cultured from this tissue. Histopathological examination of the aneurysmal wall and contents demonstrated hyaline fibrosis and focal dystrophic calcification accompanied by amorphous debris containing cholesterol crystals, foamy histiocytes, acute and chronic inflammatory cells, focal hemorrhage and neovascularization. There was also inflammation and fibrosis extending into the fatty tissue surrounding the large blood vessel.
Perioperatively the patient was administered 2 g of cephalothin for surgical prophylaxis, with nil further antibiotics continued post operatively. With the isolation of L. monocytogenes, the patient was commenced on IV ampicillin 2 g QID and gentamicin 1 mg/kg/tds in accordance with the therapeutic guidelines. Due to the risk of prosthetic graft infection, the Dacron patch was replaced with a venous bypass of the aneurysm in a second operation. Microscopy and culture of the specimens taken at the second operation (femoral wall tissue, groin tissue, left groin swab and graft specimen) showed no residual evidence of L. monocytogenes. Post-operatively, the patient was continued on a total of 6 weeks of ampicillin. The contralateral aneurysm was treated at a later stage with excision and venous bypass. Microbiological testing of the aneurysmal tissue again demonstrated L. monocytogenes, which was treated in a similar manner with a prolonged course of oral antibiotics post-operatively.