A 58-year-old East Asian man presented to the emergency room. He complained of tiredness and weight loss for the past 6 months, after a period of high fever, but did not seek any medical help. He had a history of bladder surgery at the age of 20 years and no known cardiac history.
Upon admission, the patient was haemodynamically stable, his temperature was 37.6, and his body mass index was 16.02 kg/m2. During auscultation, there was a holosystolic heart murmur grade 3 of 6 at the apex. Blood testing showed C-reactive protein values of 56 mg/L (ref: <10 mg/L), a haemoglobin level of 3.7 mmol/L (ref: 8.0–10.2 mmol/L), and severe kidney dysfunction, with a glomerular filtration rate according to the CKD-EPI formula of 30 mL/min/1.73 m2 (ref >90 mL/min/1.73 m2). Blood cultures were collected and were positive for Streptococcus species 1 day after admission. He was given continuous treatment with penicillin 12 million units/24 h and gentamycin 3 mg/kg once daily. Due to severe kidney dysfunction and a minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC) <0.064 mg/L for penicillin, only three doses of gentamycin were given.
Transthoracic and additional transoesophageal echocardiography revealed a large irregular vegetation covering the complete atrial side of the posterior mitral valve leaflet, additionally, there was a small mobile structure attached to the aortic root, all supporting the diagnosis of infective endocarditis lenta. There was a severe mitral insufficiency and a global good function of the heart including the left ventricle (, and , Video S1).
All four blood cultures [two BacT/Alert 3D aerobic FA and two BacT/Alert 3D anaerobic FN (Biomerieux)] were positive with Gram-positive cocci. The strain was identified as S. sinensis by the MALDI Biotyper Massa Spectrometer (Microflex) (Bruker), with a score value of 2.28. The MALDI Biotyper identifies microorganisms using MALDI-TOF (Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time of Flight) Mass Spectrometry measuring highly abundant proteins to determine the identity of the microorganism. The MALDI biotyper software compares the peak profile of the tested strain with database entries and calculates a logarithmic score between 0 and 3. In several blood cultures obtained from our patient, the score was consistently over >2.0, which implies a reliable identification on genus and species level.
The isolate grew as tiny grey α-haemolytic colonies on 5% sheep blood agar (COS plate) after incubation of 24 h at 35°C in 4% CO2-enriched atmosphere. Antimicrobial susceptibility for penicillin and other antibiotics were tested by the EUCAST (European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing) standardized disk diffusion method. The disk diffusion method was performed on Mueller-Hinton agar +5% defibrinated horse blood and 20 mg/L β-NAD (MH-F), with an inoculum McFarland 0.5 and incubated in 5% CO2, 35 ± 1°C for 18 ± 2 h. We performed the susceptibility tests both on direct material from the blood culture as well as the bacterial colony. The S. sinensis was penicillin susceptible (MIC 0.064 mg/L). The results were interpreted according to EUCAST criteria for alpha-haemolytic streptococci.
No changes to the antibiotic regime were made. Considering the severity of the mitral insufficiency and the size of the vegetation, the ‘Endocarditis team’ decided that urgent surgery on this valve would be the best treatment and advised to correct the anaemia first. The patient, however, did not wish to receive blood transfusions or surgery out of religious considerations. For this reason, a mental caretaker and psychiatrist were consulted. Although the evaluation of the patient’s decision-making capacity was not concluded, there were no indications for psychiatric problems.
After 6 days, the patient developed a different mental state. For this reason, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain was performed in search for cerebral abscesses or infarction. A large infarction of the right frontal hemisphere was found. The neurologist was consulted and he advised us to start with clopidogrel 5 days after the event because there was thrombotic occlusion of the M3 segment of the right middle cerebral artery. However, 3 days later, he developed epileptic seizures and a repeat CT scanning showed a large bleeding in the left hemisphere, probably due to haemorrhagic transformation of a new cerebral infarction . Shortly after this event, the patient died due to brain herniation. The neurosurgeons decided he was inoperable due to his poor condition and the infaust prognosis.