A 54-year-old man with a history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia was admitted to our hospital complaining of abdominal pain and vomiting. He showed abdominal bloating but no signs of peritoneal irritation. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed local thickening of the small bowel wall, which was assumed to be due to an inflammatory reaction . We diagnosed inflammatory disease, administered conservative treatment, which was effective, and did not perform further checkups. After resuming oral intake, he was discharged 10 days after admission. A few days after discharge, however, his abdominal symptoms recurred, and he was readmitted to our hospital.
Blood tests showed a mild inflammatory reaction and dehydration. The white blood cell count was 8200/μl, with 62.3% neutrophils, 28.3% lymphocytes, 0.7% eosinophils, 0.5% basophils, and 8.3% monocytes. Other laboratory tests showed the following: hemoglobin 14.5 g/dl, platelets 265,000/μl, CEA 7.5 ng/ml, CA19-9 4.5 U/ml, and sIL-2R 313 U/ml. After insertion of an ileus tube, a small bowel series revealed severe obstruction in the jejunum with upstream dilatation . CT showed that thickening of the jejunal wall was still causing obstruction. Because of the results of those assessments, we performed a laparoscopic exploratory examination for a more accurate diagnosis. The laparoscopic views revealed a hard mass at the stenotic site, prompting us to perform small bowel resection with mesenteric lymph node dissection in consideration that the tumor might be malignant. The surgical view showed a palpable, elastic, hard mass in the jejunum, necessitating partial resection of the jejunum with 10-cm margins from the tumor on both sides and mesenteric lymphadenectomy. During the lymph node dissection of the small intestinal mesentery, we removed seven lymph nodes, none of which showed signs of metastasis.
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed a tumor approximately 60 mm in diameter that had caused stenosis of the entire jejunal circumference . Histologically, hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining showed diffuse infiltration and expansion of immature, atypical cells but without tissue destruction . Immunochemical staining revealed that the cells were positive for myeloperoxidase (MPO) and CD34 and negative for CD20 (L26), CD3, CD30 (Ki1), CK (AE1/AE3), CK (MNF116), desmin, CD56, HMB-45, and S-100-protein . These results confirmed the diagnosis of isolated jejunal MS. The patient’s postoperative recovery was uneventful, and he was discharged from the hospital 9 days after the surgery.
Although the bone marrow aspiration evaluation was negative for cytological findings of leukemia, and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed no abnormal uptake, the patient was started on systemic chemotherapy for AML 6 months after his surgery.