A 12-year-old boy with his mother presented to our outpatient department with complaints of pain, and swelling at the right wrist since 1 year. Patient also had complaints of tingling numbness on and around palmar aspect of index and middle finger since 6 months. Patient had no history of trauma/fall on the affected wrist. Patient was apparently alright 1 year back, when he started complaining of pain and started noticing a firm swelling on the volar aspect of his right wrist. Pain was insidious in onset, dull aching in character, not associated with any other symptoms, aggravated by movements and reduced by rest. Swelling was initially the size of a small pea (1 cm × 1 cm), which later increased to the current size of 3 cm × 2 cm. Patient also companied of finding it difficult to hold a pencil/pen for long, as he would then start experiencing tingling numbness on and around palmar aspect of index and middle. Patient had no associated symptoms and family history was non-significant.
On examination of the right wrist joint, swelling (3 cm × 2 cm) was noted on the volar aspect of distal radius . Skin over the swelling was normal and pinchable. Patient had localized tenderness over and around the swelling. Swelling was firm and bony in consistency. Swelling was non-translucent and non-mobile. Patient had a restricted range of flexion due to pain. Tinel’s sign was positive. Phalen’s test could not be elicited due to pain. Radial pulse was regular, normal in volume, rhythm, and consistency.
On investigating, his blood counts were within normal limits, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein too were within normal limits. X-ray showed an exostosis of 3 cm × 2 cm on the volar aspect, arising from the metaphysio-diaphyseal area of the wrist . Magnetic resonance imaging showed a well-defined, bony excrescence (3 cm × 2 cm × 2 cm) with a STIR hyperintense cartilaginous cap of maximum thickness of 4 mm involving the antero-medial aspect of radial diaphysis . Growing away from the joint, indenting the posterior aspect of flexor digitorum superficialis and flexor carpi radialis. The lesion was also minimally displacing the neurovascular bundle on the radial side. The distance between the cartilaginous cap and the neurovascular bundle was around 1.5 mm. The findings were suggestive of osteochondroma. Electromyogram nerve conduction study revealed a normal study.
An excision biopsy was planned. The whole mass was excised leaving behind fresh healthy bone, which was sent for histopathology . Carpal tunnel release and median nerve decompression were done. Post-surgery, the tumor was cleared off the bone . Histopathology confirmed the diagnosis of osteochondroma. Post-operative management was as regular and the patient was discharged on post-operative day 5. Postoperatively wrist range of motion (ROM) was started on day 1 and continued throughout the stay. Patient’s symptoms of pain and tingling numbness disappeared after surgery. Patient was then followed up at 1 month with full wrist ROM, showing no recurrence.