A previously healthy 2-year-old Emirati boy presented to our emergency department (ED) with a history of cold, cough, and runny nose of 1-week duration. He developed fever of 39.5 °C at home a day prior to presentation responding to antipyretics. Earlier on the day of presentation, he vomited four times at home along with two episodes of loose stools. His parents took him to another ED, where he was treated with antiemetics and intravenous fluids for acute viral gastroenteritis. He was discharged in the late afternoon. On his way back, he vomited once again and appeared very drowsy. He was then brought to our ED. According to the parents, he was alert and responsive throughout the day. They also denied any neck pain, neck stiffness, rash, or photophobia. By the time, he arrived at ED, he had fluctuating levels of consciousness and fever. Most importantly, his parents admitted that he did not receive any immunizations after the age of 4 months. There was no history of sick contacts, or any recent travel. There was no significant past medical, surgical, or family history.
On examination, he was drowsy but arousable [Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) fluctuating between 10 and 11], and had low-grade fever (38 °C), tachycardia (137 beats/minute), hypotension (80/50 mmHg), and capillary refill time of 4 seconds. Both pupils were of size 3 with slow reaction to light and accommodation. He had no neck stiffness or any signs of meningeal irritation. All other systematic examination was normal except ear, nose, and throat, which revealed erythematous mildly enlarged tonsils.
Due to presentation of child with fever and fluctuating level accompanied with raised capillary refill time (CRT), hypotension, and tachycardia, a diagnosis of septic shock secondary to meningitis and encephalitis was highly suspected. He was promptly treated with intravenous ceftriaxone, acyclovir, dexamethasone, and fluids within the first hour of his arrival in ED. Computed tomography (CT) head was performed immediately after the administration of antibiotics, which revealed mild diffuse cerebral edema with no signs of raised intracranial pressure .
Initially, he was admitted to pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) for 6 days before being moved to general ward. CSF and blood cultures confirmed beta-lactamase-negative ampicillin-resistant (BLNAR) Haemophilus influenzae type b meningitis susceptible to ceftriaxone, meropenem, and cefotaxime, so it was decided to continue with intravenous ceftriaxone (200 mg/kg/day) and dexamethasone. First MRI (on day 2) depicted meningeal enhancement consistent with meningitis .
As the child was still spiking fever on day 7, second blood culture was obtained, which manifested BLNAR strain sensitive to meropenem and resistance to ceftriaxone; hence, antibiotic was changed to meropenem (120 mg/kg/day). He responded well to change of antibiotic and became afebrile. Owing to continuous irritability of the child, a second MRI was performed on day 8 of admission, which demonstrated small pockets of pus in subdural area, for which neurosurgical opinion was sought . Neurosurgeon advised to carry on with intravenous antibiotics and repeat MRI in 1 week’s time (or earlier in the case of further deterioration). A follow-up MRI (prior to discharge) was reassuring as it confirmed resolution of small pockets of pus .
Antibiotics were given for 14 days after consultation with infectious disease team. All blood investigations (including infection markers and blood cultures) and hearing tests performed before discharge were normal. The child was discharged on day 17 after satisfactory recovery and no immediate complications.