A 31-year-old male soldier presented with a 2-month history of brief involuntary jerking of the left shoulder and arm, which persisted during sleep. In retrospective, he developed subacute weakness of his right lower limb one year ago. He had been using a cane to support his walking. He denied any associated neck pain, limb or facial parasthesia, bulbar or sphincteric symptoms. His past medical and family histories were unremarkable. At presentation, neurological examination revealed myoclonic jerks at left shoulder involving both agonist and antagonist muscles along with wasting of supraspinatus, infraspinatus, subscupularis, triceps, biceps, deltoid, and brachioradialis muscles. Weakness of proximal muscles of left upper limp (grade 4/5 on the Medical Research Council “MRC”) and distal muscles of right lower limb (grade 3/5 on MRC) were noted. There were bilateral leg spasticity and exaggerated deep tendon reflexes and extensor planters. Cerebellar and sensory examination were unremarkable apart from positive Romberg’s. Gait was spastic.
Routine hematological and biochemical laboratory investigations including serum calcium, copper, ceruloplasmin levels, thyroid hormone levels, and sedimentation rates were within normal limits. MRI brain and spine revealed multiple demyelinating lesions in the brain, cervical and thoracic spine satisfying Barkoff criteria [Figure ]. There were intramedullary demyelinating plaques at C3 and C4-5 spinal levels corresponding to the involuntary movements. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed normal cell counts, protein and glucose but positive for oligoclonal bands. Secondary causes of myoclonus such as infectious disease (HIV, HSV, syphilis, HTLV 1 & 2) were excluded. Autoimmune profile including ANA, ENA, and serum ACE along with screening tests for leukodystrophies and paraneoplastic disorders were negative. Nerve conduction study (NCS) was within normal limits whereas needle electromyography (EMG) revealed rhythmic irregular burst discharges with a rate of 1–3 Hz in motor units of muscles expanding from the third to the sixth cervical region. Electroencephalogram was normal. Visual-evoked potential (VEP) was delayed in both eyes and somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) showed low cervical but well-defined cortical responses after stimulation from the left side.
The history along with the involvement of multiple neuroaxis on clinical examination and paraclinical tests, were supportive of a demyelinating disorder. The patient was diagnosed as primary progressive multiple sclerosis (PPMS) according to the revised 2010 McDonald diagnostic criteria . The patient refused treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone and elected to have symptomatic treatment. He showed a good response to oral levetiracetam 500 mg twice daily and oral baclofen 10 mg twice daily in helping myoclonus and spasticity respectively.