A 30 year old primigravid woman has been hospitalized in Kashan in year 2013 due to minimal vaginal bleeding and low abdominal pain. She had history of 2 years of primary infertility. She had been under different treatments including sequential treatment with clomiphene, FSH and HMG in previous cycle. Her last menstrual period was 8 weeks ago. In admission, vital signs were normal. The first transvaginal ultrasound revealed a suspicious gestational sac without yolk sac in uterus and normal adnexal area was reported. Due to high level of β-HCG (16000 mIU/ml), without normal viable intrauterine pregnancy, dilatation and curettage had been done to clarify existence of intrauterine pregnancy or its complications or EP. Due to high level of β-HCG, gestational trophoblastic neoplasm was considered in differential diagnosis besides ectopic pregnancy and it resulted in gyneco-oncology consultation. Pathologic report of endometrial sample revealed the existence of decidual tissue. The rise of β-HCG level to 21770 mIU/ml, 9 days after operation resulted in referral and admission of patients to gynecology-oncology ward of our center in Tehran.
Positive findings in this admission to gynecooncology ward in Tehran were low abdominal pain, minimal vaginal bleeding with stable vital signs similar to the ones observed in previous admission. Through re-checking the β-HCG level, titer of 19435 mIU/ml was observed. The next ultrasound reported a normal uterus with endometrial thickening up to 11 mm, a heterogeneous mass measuring 49 mm in left adnex, suspicious to ectopic pregnancy and two simple cysts, 69 mm in left ovary and 50 mm in right ovary. There was no free fluid in the pelvic cavity. Because of persistently high level of β-HCG, surgical intervention was done. Atypical findings and diagnosis of GTN besides FP led to choice of laparatomy instead of laparascopy. Surgical findings were two bluish, 5 cm in left side and 2 cm in right side, swelling in both ampullary parts of fallopian tubes with minimal bleeding from fimbria. Two simple cysts, about 5 cm in right ovary and 4 cm in left ovary were seen. Aspiration was done before surgical incision and clear serous fluid was aspirated from cyst. Bilateral salpingostomy was performed and some trophoblastic-like tissue was extracted and sent for pathologic evaluation separately. The patient received 50 mg/m intramuscular methotrexate due to bipateral FP and non-radical approach. Trophoblastic tissue was reported in pathologic exam of sample sent from tubal ampullar lumen. β-HCG titrage revealed a decreasing trend in subsequent examinations.