A 67-year-old man with untreated diabetes mellitus developed dizziness, followed by dysarthria and dysphagia, 4 days before admission to our hospital. On admission, he was fully conscious, and the physical examination was almost normal except for hypertension and tachycardia in a regular rhythm. Neurological examination revealed equal and round pupils with a normal light reflex. His extraocular movements were full range without diplopia, but he showed gaze-evoked horizontal nystagmus, dysarthria, and dysphagia. He had no complaint of dysgeusia. Muscle tonus was normal without obvious paralysis in all four limbs. Examination of the sensory system revealed hypothermia and hypoalgesia with normal tactile sensation over the left side of his face and right half of his trunk and limbs. Vibration and position sensation were normal in all four limbs. He presented with ataxia in his left upper and lower limbs. Tendon reflexes were normal in his upper limbs and absent in his lower limbs without the extensor plantar reflex. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated hyperintensity in the left side of the dorsolateral medulla with diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) with hypointensity on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC)-map . He was diagnosed as having lateral medullary syndrome and was treated with oral clopidogrel (continued during admission), intravenous argatroban for 3 days, edaravone for 9 days, and hydration with normal saline (1.5 L/day).
Hematological examination showed normal serum sodium levels of 139 mEq/L on admission, however, the serum sodium levels decreased gradually, and 9 days after admission (13 days after onset), he developed asymptomatic hyponatremia (109 mEq/L) with a decreased serum osmolarity of 223 mOsm/L (normal range, 275 – 295 mOsm/L). The turgor in all four limbs was normal, and he did not present with obvious thirst. Thyroid, renal, and adrenal functions were normal, but increased serum levels of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) (6.9 pg/mL; normal range, 0.3 – 4.2 pg/mL) were observed. Urine osmolarity was 668 mOsm/kgH2O (normal range, 100 – 1,300 mOsm/kgH2O), and urine sodium was 121 mOsm/L (normal range, 40 – 90 mOsm/L). Thoracoabdominal CT images showed no abnormalities, such as mass lesions or lymphadenopathy. He was diagnosed as having SIADH based on the diagnostic criteria of Bartter and Schwartz . He was treated with fluid restriction and intravenous furosemide injections.
Laboratory examination on the 23rd day after admission showed almost normal serum sodium levels (136 mEq/L) with normal serum ADH levels (1.2 pg/mL). His neurological symptoms, such as dizziness and dysarthria, also gradually resolved, and thereafter, hyponatremia was not observed.