An 80 year old Caucasian male presented to an arthroplasty review clinic 8 and a half years following the insertion of a primary DePuy PFC Sigma Posterior Stabilised (PS) TKA (size 3 tibial tray, size 3 femoral component and 15mm tibial stabilised insert).
The initial procedure had been uneventful and the post operative x-rays were deemed satisfactory. He had complained of some anterior knee pain, 1-2 years post operatively. This was attributed to sight overhang of the patella laterally. The patient declined any further surgery at that time as he was extremely mobile, managing long walks and cycling. His range of movement at that time was from 0-120 degrees flexion. As a precaution, his inflammatory markers were checked and found to be within normal limits.
At 5 years follow up, he had no complaints and was pain free. He was given a review appointment for a further 5 years. He represented early, however, at 8 and a half years post operatively, complaining about pain in the knee, with episodes of swelling and instability. Interestingly, he was able to sublux his knee posteriorly, using his hamstrings Radiographs showed an inverse shadow of the polyethylene liner protruding anteriorly over the tibial tray. There was no sign of loosening of the tibial tray or femoral component . This suggested anterior polyethylene subluxation: this subtle sign has been described as indicative of failure of the locking mechanism in posterior-stabilized prostheses .
He was operated on one month later. On making the arthrotomy of the knee, it was apparent that the polyethylene liner had dissociated from the tibial tray and was protruding anteriorly . On removing the tibial insert it was found that the anterior locking flange on the under surface had fractured from the liner, allowing it to dissociate from the tibial tray. There was a line of wear along the base of the anterior aspect of the stabilising peg, as well as the posterior aspect of the tip of the peg . This was attributed to abnormal articulation with the femoral component in the dissociated position. The femoral and tibial components were securely attached and undamaged. They were, therefore, left in-situ and the polyethylene liner was replaced with a new size 3, 15mm stabilised insert.
The patient continued to do well at over 12 months postop. He had a stable knee with similar range of movement to that prior to this episode.