A 54-year-old man with a history of systemic arterial hypertension was admitted to the hospital because of a sudden onset of the severe persistent occipital headache of 2 months of evolution accompanied by vertigo and cerebellar ataxia. The neurological examination revealed the presence of hypotonia of the right hemibody, limitation to infraduction and adduction of the right eye, and multidirectional nystagmus in both eyes. Signs and symptoms compatible with increased intracranial pressure were also found, such as headache, nausea, and vomiting; no clinical data were found such as macroglossia, polydactyly, gigantism, or hydromyelia. Initial brain MRI showed a right cerebellar hemisphere sharply defined mass of 7.6 cm × 7.6 cm × 8.9 cm, with a prominent striated foliar pattern, causing obstructive hydrocephalus. The T1 appeared a hypointense, and T2 was a hyperintense-weighted image with parallel linear striations with a characteristic “tiger-striped appearance” visible on T2-weighted imaging [ and ]. It was considered a distortion of the fourth ventricle along with a compression of the bridge and medulla oblongata is also observed. From the classical findings on neuroimaging, a diagnosis of LDD was made. Surgery was planned in a Concorde position. A right lateral sub-occipital craniotomy was performed to expose the tentorial surface, incising the midline to the edge of the foramen magnum. The dural opening was performed in a Y-shape and the cisterna magna was subsequently drained. On surgical exposure, the right cerebellar hemisphere was pale to grayish in color with an enlarged and widened folium with appearance of venous ingurgitation. The lesion was diffuse and moderately vascular with poorly defined margins under magnification using a Kinevo 900 surgical microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany). The resection was completed using bipolar forceps and conventional suction. During the surgical procedure, we perform volume reduction with preservation of the integrity of cerebellar nuclei as much as possible, thus keeping the patient’s functionality and resolving symptomatology. An intraoperative frozen section analysis in open biopsy of lesion was performed, reporting chronic inflammatory tissue. The surgical specimen measuring 4.5 cm × 2.5 cm × 1.3 cm was sent to the neuropathology area for analysis, and 24 h later, a histopathological report was obtained describing the presence of a solid neoplasm expanding the cerebellar folia at the expense of proliferating dysplastic ganglion cells with large nuclei of granular chromatin with the presence of positive glial fibrillary acidic protein in reactive astrocytes and positive neuronal specific enolase in dysplastic neurons . These neurons were highlighted by NeuN immunohistochemistry consistent with a dysplastic cerebellar gangliocytoma, also called LDD, as the World Health Organization (WHO) Grade I according to the 2016 WHO Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System. A genetic diagnosis was not obtained. However, it is not part of a diagnostic criterion for the disease; suspicion was mainly based on histopathology and imaging for topographic and definitive diagnosis.[,] He was discharged on the 5th postoperative day with significant improvement in his symptomatology. At 1-month follow-up, the ataxia had disappeared, and the headache was minimal.