A 30-year-old woman, gravida 1, para 0, was admitted to our hospital for ultrasound examination in January 2023 at 26+ 3 weeks’ gestation. She completed the third dose of the COVID-19 vaccine, produced in China, in December 2021. Twenty-one days prior, her COVID-19 nucleic acid test was positive, and she had mild symptoms, including fever (38.3 °C), headache, chills, ankle pain and cough. After receiving symptomatic treatment, she fully recovered. Prenatal ultrasound revealed that the placenta was diffusely distributed with punctate echogenic foci , and the volume of bilateral lungs decreased significantly, with enhanced echo. The sizes of the left and right lungs of the fetus were 1.6 cm×0.8 cm×1.0 and 2.2 cm×1.0 cm×1.3 cm, respectively . In addition, we found that the surface of the fetal brain demonstrated widened gyri with a flattened surface . A subependymal cyst was seen in the posterior horn of the left and right lateral ventricles, with sizes of 0.6 cm×0.6 cm×0.5 and 1.0 cm×0.8 cm×0.7 cm, respectively. The fetal liver was enlarged, with a vertical diameter of approximately 4.2 cm . The patient underwent the prenatal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination in the external hospital, and the MRI confirmed these fetal abnormalities . After careful consideration, the pregnant woman decided to terminate the pregnancy. Amniotic fluid was tested for SARS-CoV-2 at 27+ 2 weeks’ gestation, and the sample tested was positive for the virus. TORCH was negative for IgM in the venous blood of pregnant women, while herpes simplex virus (HSV)-IgG, rubella virus (RV) IgG, and cytomegalovirus (CMV)-IgG were slightly higher than the upper limit value, and toxoplasma gondii (TOX)-IgG was negative. However, we performed the CMV and TOX DNA quantification in amniotic fluid using CMV and TOX nucleic acid detection kits, respectively, and the results were negative. After induced labor, the fetus was delivered through the vagina at 27+ 3 weeks’ gestation. After the delivery of the fetus, we immediately collected the venous blood of the pregnant woman and the fetal heart blood for quantitative detection of SARS-CoV-2 IgG/IgM, and the results showed that the IgG of both was significantly higher than the normal value. Their values were 11.925 S/CO and 8.609 S/CO respectively (reference value < 1.000 S/CO). Placental histological examination revealed perivillous fibrin deposition and multifocal calcification in the villi . Other findings included acute chorioamnionitis (stage 1). With the written consent of the pregnant woman, we conducted an autopsy on the induced fetus. Gross anatomy showed significant reduction in bilateral lungs, especially in the left lung . Results in fetal liver , there were a large number of inflammatory cells infiltration in the portal area, including neutrophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells. Pathological examination of the lung showed that interlobular septa were poorly formed and some alveoli were poorly developed, which indicated pulmonary hypoplasia .