The subject was a 34 years old female. She was known case of hepatic hemangioma from two years ago. Also, she had fatty liver and had come to our clinic for following up her problem by Fibroscan. The body mass index of patient was 23.7. In her first Fibroscan, median fibrosis score of her liver was 17.1 kilo Pascale (Kpa) which was compatible with F4 on Metavir histological index . Her cap score for liver steatosis was 201. The finding was unexpected; the patient was referred for liver sonography. Sonography confirmed her mild fatty liver, hepatic hemangioma (7.5×5.5 mm) in right lobe of liver, but there was no other abnormal finding. Liver function tests were normal. We tested autoimmune diseases and viral hepatitis markers for finding the reason; but all of them were normal. Based on our previously literature review, we thought hepatic hemangioma might leads to overestimation of liver fibrosis. So, we repeated Fibroscan (Echosens 502 device, France) from other sides; upper and lower to the hemangioma. Also, from her left lobe of liver by forth fold increasing of probe shuts. The findings was interesting, median fibrosis score was 4.4 that was compatible with F0 but cap score of liver steatosis was near to our previous finding (210 dbl/m). We confirmed our guess, but more evidences were required. In the second Fibroscan we attend more to liver echogenicity and we excluded the mixed echogenicity parts for shutting.
Interestingly, another patient came to our office for her fatty liver treatment follow up. We reviewed her medical documents for our new decision. We found that she is a known case of hepatic hemangioma. We demanded her to accept Fibroscan test. There was no problem for Fibroscan performance and patient’s BMI was 24.1. Then, Fibroscan was done. Her fibrosis assessment by standard approach (right lobe) was normal and stiffness score of her liver was 5.6 Kpa which was equal with F0-F1 . Also, her cap score for liver steatosis was 323 dbl/m. For evaluation of hepatic hemangioma effect in Fibroscan results, we repeated the procedure by forth fold increasing of probe shuts in left lobe of liver that the hemangioma was exist. Interestingly, result of Fibroscan was the same as cirrhotic patients; Fibroscan score was 11.8 Kpa (F3-F4) . But, the cap score for liver steatosis did not change much more and was 335 dbl/m. Sonography and CT scan have confirmed hepatic hemangioma (50-60 mm) in left lobe of patient’s liver. Also, cavernous hemangioma has been reported in her liver biopsy.