We present the case of a 58-year-old female patient with complaints of bilateral knee pain for 4 years. The pain severity increased on the left side, accompanied by the onset of stiffness and deformity that progressively worsened over time. At present, the patient experiences severe limitations in the range of motion and has been reliant on a wheelchair for the past year. There is no history of inflammatory arthritis.
During the clinical examination, the patient exhibited a fixed flexion deformity of 40° in the left knee with an additional free flexion up to 60°. Radiograph revealed end-stage arthritis on the left side in the anteroposterior view . However, it should be noted that the anteroposterior view did not provide an accurate representation of the sagittal plane deformity, which was approximately 40°. Pre-operative investigations for inflammatory arthritis yielded negative results.
The patient presented with poor knee scores, including an Oxford Knee score of 11, a Knee Society score of seven, and a Kujala score of 38. After evaluation, we determined that a total knee replacement using the Stryker Triathlon system, with the assistance of Mako Robotic Technology, was the most appropriate course of action. As part of the robotic planning process, a pre-operative computerized tomography scan was done to facilitate precise surgical planning .
The surgical procedure was carried out with the patient under combined spinal and epidural anesthesia, with the application of a tourniquet. A medial parapatellar approach was utilized to access the left knee joint. Extensive intra-articular and patellofemoral adhesions were observed . These adhesions were carefully and gradually released, resulting in the restoration of flexion up to 90°. After performing all possible releases, it was observed that the static limb deformity of the patient was 7° of varus and 32° of flexion deformity . As per the Mako Robotic design, capturing medial and lateral gaps in extension is only feasible if the limb flexion is < 20°, which was not the case for our patient. Hence, we decided to implement the mid-resection workflow. Although the pre-operative distal femur cut was planned to be eight millimeters (mm), we performed a preliminary distal femur cut of 4.5 mm to reduce the flexion deformity of the knee, which allowed us to capture the extension gaps .
Following the assessment of gaps, we proceeded with knee balancing in both flexion and extension and set the tibial component in 3° of varus and 3° of posterior slope in functional alignment. The femur was positioned at 5° of external rotation with respect to the transepicondylar axis and 8° of flexion. To correct the varus, we performed a deep medial collateral ligament release and posteromedial release. After balancing, we noted a residual limb flexion deformity of 13°, which we corrected by performing a posterior capsular release .
The knee trial components were found to be stable in both flexion and extension. We used Stryker Triathlon system which included a femur component of size 3, a tibial component of size 3, a stem extension in tibia of size 12 mm × 50 mm, and a liner of size 11 mm. To reconstruct the defect in the posterolateral tibial condyle, we used a 3.5 mm × 30 mm cortical screw . Before cementing the final prosthesis, pulse lavage was administered, and the components were found to be stable in both flexion and extension. We performed a non-resurfacing patelloplasty, and patellar tracking was optimal. The wound was then closed in layers.
The patient received antibiotics and deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis post-operatively. Physiotherapy was initiated on the 1st day after the surgery, and the patient was permitted to bear full weight with the aid of a hinged knee brace. Range of motion exercises was encouraged as much as possible, along with quadriceps strengthening and stretching exercises. At the end of 6 weeks, the patient achieved a knee flexion of 100°. After 1-year follow-up, patient achieved 110° flexion and good functional outcome.