An 18-month-old boy of Hellenic origin was initially admitted to another hospital because of fever up to 39.9°C lasting for five days, a mild cough, one to two vomits and two to three yellowish diarrheas per day. On examination, apart from fever (38.8°C) no other pathological findings were present. Laboratory evaluation revealed leukocytosis (26,500/μl) with 47% neutrophils and an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (57 mm/1st hour) and C-reactive protein (CRP) (100 mg/l) . Tests for infections were negative except for the detection of a rotavirus antigen (immuno-chromatographic test). The cultures from skin lesions were negative. On day one of hospitalization a papulo-nodular rash with lesions of up to 2 cm in diameter, some of them with central ulceration, appeared on the trunk and extremities. The child remained febrile and in the following days new crops of similar skin lesions erupted, while blood neutrophilia and elevated ESR and CRP persisted. On day six a restriction of the spontaneous movements of the left hip, indicative of underlying arthritis was added to his clinical picture, however, without corresponding pathological findings in X-ray and ultrasound imaging. Because of the clinical suspicion of a staphylococcal infection the child was initially treated with intravenous amoxycilline-clavulanic acid, which was later changed to acyclovir, vancomycin and ceftazidime, considering the possibility of disseminated herpes virus infection with secondary bacterial super-infection of the skin lesions, although the relevant cultures were negative.
On the 11th day of hospitalization, and having shown no substantial improvement, he was transferred to our hospital. On admission he presented with a fever of 39°C, movement restriction of the left hip and multiple, polymorphous skin lesions: deep ulcers, up to about 1 cm in diameter on the buttocks, bullous lesions on the face and extremities, purulent ulcerations on the knees and elbows as well as numerous crusted erosions on the face, extremities, the perianal area and the oropharynx . Blood leukocytosis (25,050/μl) with neutrophilia (71%) and elevated ESR (100 mm/1st hour) and CRP (30 mg/l) were the main laboratory findings . Remarkable was the pathergy-like eruption of cutaneous lesions at sites of minimal skin trauma, like intravenous catheter placement. Initial clinical differential diagnoses included Sweet's syndrome as well as a superficial bullous variant of pyoderma gangrenosum, Behcet's disease and bacterial superinfection of varicella lesions. Thus the antibiotic and antiviral treatment was continued and the child was re-evaluated by extensive serological tests for infectious agents and an immunology profile, Tzank smear, microbiological cultures of lesional tissue samples and skin lesion biopsy. On the second day in our department stridor suddenly appeared, an X-ray revealed an airway constriction and intravenous dexamethasone (0.6 mg/kg body weight) was immediately administered. The child responded promptly with improvement of the fever, of the stridor and of his general condition.
Skin lesion biopsy revealed a dense inflammatory infiltration of the dermis consisting mainly of mature neutrophils and an intense edema on the upper dermis, findings consistent with the clinical differential diagnosis of Sweet's syndrome . Of the rest of the laboratory evaluations, besides the serological confirmation of a recent rotavirus infection (immuno-chromatographic test), all tests were either negative or within normal ranges. Based on the clinical and laboratory evidence as well as the immediate response to the treatment with corticosteroids the diagnosis of Sweet's syndrome was established (Appendix). The vesicobullous features of the rash, which are not common presentations in Sweet's syndrome, led the differential diagnosis to a superficial bullous variant of pyoderma gangrenosum, probably associated with an emerging hematological malignancy . Therefore, a screening for a concomitant malignancy (bone marrow aspirate and trephine, chest X-ray and an abdominal ultrasound) was performed with no abnormal findings.
Antibiotic and antiviral medications were discontinued and intravenous prednisone (1 mg/kg body weight/24 h) was administered for 10 days with immediate cessation of the fever and gradual improvement of the skin lesions, the hip complaints and the laboratory findings . Thereafter, prednisone was continued orally and tapered off slowly over a period of 40 days. After six months of follow-up no recurrence has been observed and the child is thriving.