A 72-year-old Japanese woman perceived protrusion on her back. She had a history of appendectomy, diabetes, cholecystectomy, hypertension, and transverse colectomy. At approximately 40 days before the surgery, a subcutaneous tumor-like lesion 65.0 mm in diameter in the patient’s left back was identified through magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Fig. a). The tumor-like lesion was rapidly growing, and she was scheduled to undergo elective resection.
She was admitted to our institution 2 days before the surgery (postoperative day minus 2 [POD-2]). Body temperature was 36.7 °C. Any symptoms indicating infection were not observed. MRI revealed an increase in size to 95.6 mm in diameter . Hemorrhagic bursitis, which is one of the differential diagnoses, was suspected based on the following MRI findings: low-signal intensity and partly high-signal intensity on T1-weighted images and heterogeneous high-signal intensity on T2-weighted images inside the majority of the tumor consistent with intratumoral bleeding. We consulted a hematologist because preoperative blood examination revealed a decrease in platelet count and fibrinogen level and an increase in D-dimer, fibrin/fibrinogen degradation product (FDP), indicating DIC. DIC with a fibrinolytic phenotype was diagnosed by abnormal results of additional blood examination: increase in thrombin–antithrombin complex, and plasmin-α2-plasmin inhibitor complex (PIC) (Additional file : Table S1). Any other underlying disease that could have caused DIC, except for the tumor, was not identified. Antifibrinolytic therapy with tranexamic acid (TA) was subsequently started after consulting a hematologist, given that DIC, especially the fibrinolytic phenotype, causes excessive bleeding and hemostatic difficulty during surgery. Accordingly, 2 g/day of TA was administered perioperatively . Moreover, 3 g of concentrated fibrinogen product, 10 units of platelet concentrates, and 4 units of packed red blood cells were transfused before and during the surgery.
After general anesthesia was induced, the patient was placed in the prone position. The skin over the lesion area had been raised by the tumor . The tumor adhered to the thoracic wall and surrounding tissues and was partly rich in vasculature. A smooth membrane covered the tumor , while the inside was filled with hematoma . The condition of the fibrinolytic system was analyzed using thromboelastometry (ROTEM Delta) during the surgery. A coagulation test was also performed to maintain a fibrinogen level of > 150 mg/dl. Thromboelastometry results during the surgery revealed an improvement in enhanced fibrinolysis resulting from continuous TA administration and fibrinogen transfusion. The surgery, which lasted for 53 minutes, was completed without critical bleeding or complications, during which the amount of bleeding was 370 ml. After the procedure, the patient was transferred to the surgical ward until she was discharged.
Blood examination was performed to evaluate the status of DIC at POD 0 (after the operation), 1, and 2 . FDP, D-dimer, and PIC levels had decreased after antifibrinolytic therapy with TA. After the operation, the patient completely recovered from DIC, indicating that DIC in this case was caused by the tumor.
The pathological reports on POD 10 showed that the tumor was a cyst containing a hematoma and that synovial cells comprised the cyst wall . The cyst wall was abundant in fibrin deposition and exhibited neovascularization , which was suspected as bleeding and reactive angiogenesis to the inflammation. Accordingly, a pathological diagnosis of chronic hemorrhagic bursitis was established.