A 70 year old male presented to The Oral Surgery Department at The Glasgow Dental Hospital and School in November 2014, three weeks following an urgent referral from his general dental practitioner.
The gentleman reported having an asymptomatic purple/blue lesion present on the roof his mouth. This was an incidental finding at his most recent 3 monthly regular dental appointment, not having been recognised prior to this.
The medical history was remarkable in that the patient had suffered from partial onset seizures from the age of 17 years as a consequence of right sided mesial temporal sclerosis. At the time of referral the patient was prescribed a drug regime of, retigabine 300 mg three times daily, primidone 250 mg in the morning and 125 mg in the evening, zonisamide 200 mg in the morning and 300 mg in the evening and clobazam 20 mg at night, to manage his partial onset seizure. The gentleman had initiated retigabine therapy in April 2012 and it had substantially improved his seizure control. Despite reporting falling asleep easily, he otherwise functioned well and thus was maintained on this drug regieme. Additionally, the patient had a diagnosis of osteoporosis, for which he was receiving alendronic acid and calcichew. He was also prescribed omeprazole in order to manage the dyspepsia associated with a hiatus hernia. He has never smoked or used tobacco products and consumes 10 units of alcohol per week. He regularly attends the dentist and does not wear an intra-oral prosthesis.
Extra-oral examination revealed a purple/blue discolouration of the nail beds of both the left and right hands and the lips were tinged with a bluish hue extending to the vermillion border. No alteration in the pigmentation of the retina of the eyes was observed on examination. No other skin abnormalities were reported by the patient or observed by the examining clinician.
Intra-oral soft tissue examination revealed the mucosa of the hard palate was dyspigmented being a purple/ blue colour . The colour observed was identical to that noted in the nail beds of the hands. The discolouration of the palate observed was uniform, extending symmetrically across the mucosa from the median palatine suture to the gingival margins on the palatal aspect of the teeth. The epithelium was intact and showed no other signs of abnormality other than the altered colour.
On further detailed questioning the gentleman reported that he had been aware of the discolouration of the nail beds but as they had caused him no symptoms he was unconcerned. The patient was able to recall that this altered colouration had developed within the previous 3 months. The timing of the appearance of the pigment within the nail beds is consistent with the development of the blue pigmentation within the oral mucosa, as the patient had received an oral examination 3 months ago where no changes in the oral mucosa were reported by the oral health professional.
No further special investigations were undertaken at this stage as the appearance of the mucosa observed was consistent with the skin pigmentation observed and corresponded with available reports. Temporal factors were important to the formulation of the diagnosis as the pigmentation observed only became evident subsequent to the patient beginning therapy with the drug retigabine. Furthermore, the accepted side effect of pigmentation of the nail beds appears to have occurred within the same time period as the discolouration of the oral mucosa. The notable similarity in colour of the dyspigmented skin and oral mucosa further supported the diagnosis.
Other possible diagnoses were excluded based on clinical expertise. A vascular cause was considered however, no blanching was observed when pressure was applied to the mucosa nor was there any increase in cellular number or size which would clinically present as an abnormal lump or growth.
Melanoma, typically presents as invasive or raised lesion with a dark-brown or bluish-black pigmentation. The lesion observed was notably distinct from this in both colouration and the intact nature of the mucosa.
Similarly, Kaposi’s sarcoma, a lesion synonymous with H.I.V., was ruled out as a possible diagnosis as typical features such as a reddish purple pigmentation and nodular surface were absent. Furthermore, the patient did not report having a blood borne virus nor did he display any signs of being in a high risk group for a blood borne virus.
It is the belief of the authors that blue pigmentation was an extension of the previously reported skin alteration. Biopsy was considered however when taking all factors into consideration surgical sampling was deemed not to be justified. The clinical features observed were considered to be consistent with the appearance of pigmented change as a consequence of retigabine’s use at other sites reported within the medical literature and together with the absence of confirmatory diagnostic histopathological criteria for retigabine induced dyspigmentaion a clinical decision not to biopsy the mucosa was made . Other possible systemic pathological causes were excluded on clinical grounds and recent blood sampling showed no irregularities indicating the need for further investigation.
The patient was reviewed six weeks following initial examination. There were no notable changes in the patient’s symptoms or the clinical appearance of the mucosa. A further six month review is scheduled when the clinical appearance of the oral mucosa will be re-evaluated.