The patient, a 38-year-old male previously undiagnosed with FAP despite a strong family history, initially presented to the surgical service following a syncopal episode in December of 2017. Workup revealed severe anemia and a hemoglobin level of 3.8 g/dL (reference range: 12–16). Colonoscopy revealed innumerable colonic polyps beginning at the cecum and extending to the sigmoid colon, with sparing of the rectum, and the patient was diagnosed with FAP. A total abdominal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis was performed without complication . Pathology subsequently revealed a T3 adenocarcinoma of the ascending colon with 1 positive lymph node out of 75 examined. The patient subsequently received 12 cycles of adjuvant FOLFOX.
Surveillance CT scanning in late 2019 revealed a suspicious mass in the superior perirectal soft tissue . The patient exhibited no related symptoms at that time. Follow-up PET scanning revealed a PET-avid mass within the left superior mesorectal soft tissue, corresponding to the mass noted on the CT scan . No other suspicious lesions were identified. An examination under anesthesia was conducted, revealing an extrinsic nodular mass in the area of the left superior rectal wall, approximately 2 cm below the level of the ileorectal anastomosis. Colonoscopy and biopsy revealed 2 tubular adenomas, but no mucosal mass corresponding to the lesion noted on imaging. The patient underwent completion proctectomy with an ileoanal anastomosis and diverting loop ileostomy in January of 2020. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged without complication. Pathology revealed a metastatic tumor deposit within the mesorectum 1.5 cm distal to the ileorectal anastomosis, with no evidence of mucosal or nodal involvement . The lesion had been resected in its entirety. There was no evidence of a primary rectal cancer, nor was there evidence of involvement of the ileal mesentery. After discussion at a multidisciplinary tumor board, the patient was subsequently returned to surveillance without further plans for adjuvant therapy.