A 58-year-old male patient without any other past medical history and a CHADS-VASc score of 0 was referred to CB-guided catheter ablation due to a 3-year history of drug-refractory paroxysmal AF. Preprocedural transthoracic echocardiography revealed a severely dilated CS raising the suspicion of a PLSVC. This diagnosis was confirmed from cardiac magnetic resonance imaging the day before the procedure . The patient was informed and enlightened about the anatomical variant and its related elevated risk in the context of AF ablation. Catheter ablation was performed under deep sedation and continuous monitoring. Invasive blood pressure monitoring was performed during the entire procedure. A steerable multipolar 6-Fr catheter was positioned in the CS. Afterwards, an angiography of the CS was assessed to visualize the PLSVC and to guide transseptal puncture . A single transseptal puncture was performed with fluoroscopic guidance using a modified Brockenbrough technique and an 8.5-Fr transseptal sheath (SL1, St. Jude Medical, St.Paul, MN, USA). The transseptal sheath was exchanged over a wire for a 15-Fr steerable sheath (Flexcath Advance, Medtronic, Eatontown, NJ, USA) . Heparin was administered to target an activated clotting time of >300 s. Thereafter, selective PV angiography was performed to identify the individual PV ostia. An antral isolation of the pulmonary veins (PVs) by using a 28 mm Arctic Front Advance Balloon (Medtronic) was performed without complications.
After retracting the 15-Fr sheath into the right atrium, consistent clinical signs suggestive for a cardiac tamponade were observed within minutes: the movement of the left-sided heart margin in left anterior oblique projection became depressed and afterwards absent, accompanied by a rapid drop in blood pressure measurement, compensatory sinus tachycardia, and blood flow stasis in the internal jugular vein. Cardiac tamponade was confirmed by immediate transthoracic echocardiography.
Urgent pericardiocentesis and placement of a 7-Fr pigtail catheter into the epicardial space were performed and initially 800 mL of haemorrhagic pericardial effusion were aspirated. Autotransfusion was performed by a filter system via right femoral vein access. Despite aggressive fluid and inotropic therapy, the patient continued to deteriorate rapidly. Within 10 min, 1200 mL of haemorrhagic pericardial effusion were aspirated and the effusion remained unchanged indicating a massive perforation. Consequently, the patient was presented for urgent cardiac surgery. An immediately performed angiography of the CS revealed the perforation site by a leakage of contrast agent. As a last resort strategy, we advanced the 15-Fr steerable Flexcath Advance sheath (Medtronic) to the CS ostium followed by introduction of the 28 mm CB (Arctic Front Advance, Medtronic). The balloon was carefully railed over the achieve catheter to the anatomical location of the suggested perforation and inflated at the superior aspect of the CS ostium. Contrast agent was applied by the Flexcath sheath and the tip of the balloon in order to visualize a wedge position of the inflated balloon at the transseptal puncture site. Angiography with contrast agent showed a complete occlusion of the perforation site and incomplete occlusion of the CS, which assured a sufficient venous flow for cardiac reperfusion ( and ). After 45 min of CB-guided occlusion, we deflated the balloon and no additional blood was aspirated over the following 20 min. Afterwards, 5000 IE of protamine sulfate were injected via the femoral vein to antagonize the effects of periprocedural anticoagulation and all sheaths except the pericardial 7-Fr pigtail catheter were removed. Sedation was stopped and the patient woke up at the end of the procedure. The patient was transferred to intensive care unit for 24-h-monitoring. Serial echocardiograms confirmed the absence of any further pericardial fluid. Four hours after, oral anticoagulation had been initiated, we removed the pigtail catheter. Two days later, the patient was discharged without any sequelae. At the time of follow-up, the patient was free from an AF episodes as well as from any other symptoms suggestive for arrhythmia recurrence.