A 50-year-old woman with no known medical history presented with a 2-year history of double vision and left facial numbness that started 6 months before presentation. On examination, she had a left sixth cranial nerve palsy manifested by the left eye esotropia with limited abduction on lateral gaze, paresthesia over distribution of ophthalmic and maxillary divisions of the left trigeminal nerve. There were no other positive signs on examination with no stigmata of neurofibromatosis. An ophthalmologist conducted a formal ophthalmological examination that did not reveal any additional deficit. Magnetic resonance imaging showed heterogeneous T2 hyperintense lobulated mass at the left cavernous sinus extending into Meckel’s cave with bony remodeling. The mass also extended into left prepontine cistern, with avid contrast enhancement no imaging evidence of intratumoral cystic degeneration or dural tail. The images are shown in .
Considering the clinical status of patient and imaging findings, we decided to proceed with surgery. Lumbar drain was inserted preoperatively, and 40 cc of CSF was drained before craniotomy. Then, the patient underwent left frontotemporal craniotomy, through the peritoneal approach, drilling of lateral sphenoid wing was performed. Initially, the extradural approach was utilized but the dura was tense. A decision was made to open the dura and drain some CSF through the Sylvian fissure. After carful retraction, the wall of the cavernous sinus was coagulated and opened. Initially, the meningeal dural layer was opened followed by endosteal layer. The lesion was identified immediately underneath, and we performed internal debulking while the capsule was rolled over and removed after gentle dissection circumferentially. The abducens nerve was not visualized during resection. Pathology confirmed tumor to be a schwannoma WHO Grade I .
She had a stable postoperative course, with immediate improvement of the left facial paresthesia. Left sixth cranial nerve palsy was gradually improving at 3 months follow-up. No postoperative MRI is performed yet.