A 58-year-old man suffered from severe lower back pain, getting worse over the last 4 months, which affected his walking. He was admitted to the Central Clinical Hospital of the Ministry of Interior. He also complained of lack of appetite, weight loss (25 kg in 3 months), constipation, and increased urinary frequency. His previous medical history was irrelevant.
Physical examination revealed cachexia, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status 3, and a soft mass in the right iliac fossa and left umbilical region. In addition, a nontender tumor was palpable on digital rectal examination. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis showed atrophic left kidney and normal right seminal vesicle and detected a large, multicystic mass measuring 125×115×110 mm, growing from rectovesical excavation, compressing the bladder, sigmoid, and rectum , probably arising from the left vesicle. Multiple bone metastases were present on visualized bones as well.
Laboratory tests showed anemia, thrombocytosis, hypercalcemia, and hematuria. Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels were normal. CA19-9 was slightly elevated at 52.1 IU/mL (normal range 0–34 IU/mL) and so was CA125 at 36.1 IU/mL (normal range 0–35 IU/mL). Chest X-radiograph disclosed multiple round opacities consistent with metastases. Sigmoidoscopy revealed a slightly narrowed lumen of the sigmoid and rectum, caused by external compression, but otherwise was normal. Ultrasound-guided transrectal biopsy of the tumor was performed. The histopathological evaluation confirmed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the seminal vesicles.
Owing to the disseminated stage of the disease and the patient’s poor performance status, antiandrogen therapy with flutamide was offered together with supportive care. However, the patient passed away in a few weeks following beginning of the treatment.
Since the patient had died, the consent for publication was signed by the patient’s wife.