A 21-year-old male cocaine drug abuser presented to the emergency department with a 1-week history of fever, asthenia and dyspnea. There were no other respiratory symptoms including sore throat or cough. Despite drug addiction, his past medical history was unremarkable, with no evidence of underlying cardiac disease or known immunosuppression condition. He also denied intravenous drug use. Additionally, he presented an updated vaccination record, including the diphtheria-pertussis-tetanus (DPT) vaccine. On examination, he was febrile at 38 °C, hypoxemic (SpO2 85%), tachypneic (28 breaths per minute), tachycardic at 120 bpm and with severe arterial hypotension (80/40 mmHg). On auscultation, there was a grade III mitral systolic murmur and diffuse crackles in all lung areas. Physical examination also revealed signs of acute arterial occlusion of the left lower limb. Blood tests revealed a white cell count of 27.050/mm3 (normal value 4.0–11.0), neutrophils of 22.452/mm3 (normal value 2.0–7.5), hemoglobin of 8.2 g/dL (normal value 13.5–17.5), creatinine of 2.99 mg/dL (normal value 0.7–1.3), arterial lactate of 50 mg/dL (normal value 4–14) and C-reactive protein was 320 mg/L (normal value 0.0–5.0). HIV testing, through enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, was negative. The 12-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. Chest x-ray findings were compatible with pulmonary congestion (Kerley’s B lines and bilateral reticular opacities). Vascular ultrasound of the left lower limb showed anterior tibial artery occlusion at the proximal segment. The severity of the clinical presentation on admission, imposed prompt orotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation, vasoactive drugs, empiric antimicrobial therapy and emergency endovascular treatment with mechanical thrombectomy of the left anterior tibial artery for clot retrieval. The clinical suspicion of acute infective endocarditis was confirmed by transesophageal echocardiography, demonstrating a large mitral vegetation (18 × 15 mm) associated with severe mitral regurgitation caused by leaflets perforations . Abdominal ultrasound was normal with no hepatic, renal, or spleen abscess. Serial blood cultures and thrombus culture, obtained in the vascular procedure, identified non-toxigenic C. diphtheriae, with antibiotic therapy adjustment to monotherapy with ampicillin. Pathogen identification was achieved through automated blood culture - BD BACTEC FX (Becton Dickinson Diagnostics, Sparks, USA), manual seeding on 5% sheep blood agar (abundant bacterial growth in less than 24 h) and confirmed by Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization-Time of Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). Polymerase chain reaction assay, using the colonies from the agar plate, did not detect the tox gene, characterizing a non-toxigenic strain. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was not performed due to the absence of standardized procedures for C. diphtheriae evaluation. Obtained cultures were exclusive positive for C. diphtheriae.
The case met two majors’ conditions of the Duke’s modified diagnostic criteria for infective endocarditis: echocardiogram evidence of vegetations and positive blood culture . Since the patient had a severe septic shock with sustained fever, despite guided antimicrobial therapy, urgent cardiac surgical intervention was planned after 4-days of hospitalization. The intraoperative anatomical findings were compatible with an aggressive endocarditis: numerous vegetations on the mitral valve and perforated leaflets, requiring mitral valve replacement for a biological prosthesis. The histopathological analysis confirmed a bacterial infective endocarditis, demonstrating Gram-positive bacilli with positive valve culture for C. diphtheriae. Postoperative transthoracic echocardiography exhibited a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction and proper functioning of the mitral bioprosthesis. During the postoperative period, regardless of an initial clinical recovery and successfully weaning from mechanical ventilation, the patient presented with a recrudescent daily fever (39 °C) and lower left back pain. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed a hypoattenuating and extensive splenic lesion suggestive of abscess. Sonographically guided bridging percutaneous catheter drainage was performed, with removal of 100 mL of purulent secretion. Even though, daily fever still remained, requiring surgical splenectomy 5 days after. The macroscopic analysis of the spleen confirmed the presence of a large abscess . Cultures obtained from splenic samples were also positive for C. diphtheriae. The patient had a good post-procedure clinical recovery and fever resolution after 2 days. However, despite early left limb revascularization, a forefoot amputation was required due to distal gangrene . Despite all these challenging complications, the patient had a good clinical recovery and received hospital discharge after fulfilling 4-weeks of antimicrobial treatment. Table presents a timeline with the main events and respective medical interventions.