A 42-year-old woman with Marfan syndrome experienced acute chest pain while asleep and was sent to the Emergency Department of National Taiwan University Hospital-YunLin Branch at midnight. Ten years prior, the patient underwent the modified Cabrol procedure due to an aortic root aneurysm at Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital. The procedure interposed a 25-mm St. Jude’s mechanical aortic valve for progressively severe aortic regurgitation, a 28-mm graft for ascending aorta dilation and a button-in for the orifice of the right coronary artery to the 28-mm composite graft. An 8-mm-diameter Dacron graft was anastomosed end-to-side to the composite graft and end-to-end to the orifice of the left main coronary artery. The patient had no complications for 10 years after the operation. Anticoagulation therapy with warfarin sodium was started on the first postoperative day, and the target international normalized ratio was 1.8–2.5. In the latest follow-up, 1 month prior to this chest pain episode, echocardiography showed normal wall motion of the patient’s heart. Due to the previous medical history, she was transferred to Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital. Electrocardiogram on arrival showed inverted T waves over lead I, aVL and V4–V6 . Initial cardiac biomarkers showed elevated troponin I of 14.89 ng/mL, CPK of 1183 IU/L and CK-MB of 138 ng/mL. She was diagnosed with acute non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction.
Contrast computed tomography revealed a thrombosis in the Dacron graft . Due to persistent chest discomfort and the above findings, coronary artery occlusion was highly suspected, even though she had no risk factors, such as hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes mellitus or smoking.
We instantly arranged a percutaneous coronary angiography, and many thrombi were found in the graft. Left main artery (LM) 100% stenosis and slow flow were both also noted in the left descending artery (LAD) and left circumflex artery left circumflex artery (LCX) . The right coronary artery was patent and collateral to the LAD and LCX. We used an Export aspiration catheter to the LAD and LCX for intracoronary suction. After thrombus aspiration, blood flow to the LAD and LCX improved. We further utilized an Accuforce balloon of 2.0 × 15 mm to dilate the LM distal to the LAD with a maximum of 16 atm. Despite improvement of the blood flow from the graft to the LM, LAD and LCX, residual thrombi remained in the graft between the orifice of the LM and distal LM . The anastomosis site of the Dacron graft and natural left main coronary artery was uncertain because of the residual thrombus after aspiration during the first percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI); therefore, the placement of the stent was intervened. In addition, as the diameter of the Dacron graft (8 mm) and the natural left main coronary artery (4–5 mm) were different, the size of the stent was unclear. For the above reasons, thrombolytic therapy and a second PCI were chosen despite a lack of previous experience. After PCI, thrombolytic therapy was initiated with urokinase for 3 days and heparin continuous infusion for 2 days. Warfarin sodium was maintained, and the target international normalized ratio was 2.0–2.5. The second angioplasty was arranged for 6 days later, and there were no complications during this period. Thrombolytic agents successfully dissolved much of the thrombi in the graft; thus, the second percutaneous coronary intervention for LM was performed with no issues . Predilation was performed using a 5.0 × 15-mm NC Euphoral, and a 5.0 × 15-mm Onyx (Drug-eluting stent) was deployed at the LM. The entire lesion was dilated using a 5.0 × 15-mm NC Euphoral. An optimal angiographic result was obtained with thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) grade 3 flow . The patient was then stabilized in the intensive care unit.
Considering that the patient was 42 years old and that she had no hypertension or prior bleeding history, bleeding risk was regarded as low, however, the patient’s prior stent thrombosis indicated a high thrombotic risk. Based on the above, we prescribed dual therapy with oral form anticoagulants (warfarin sodium) and antiplatelet agents (ticagrelor) after the stentings. She was discharged five days after the second PCI without complications.