A 61 year old lady was referred by the General Practitioner as an emergency with a rapidly enlarging fungating mass around her end-colostomy site. She had undergone an abdomino-perineal resection 14 years earlier for a Duke's B rectal cancer. She had initially presented 14 years ago with features of large bowel obstruction secondary to a large rectal tumour. She had a defunctioning loop colostomy constructed followed by adjuvant radiotherapy to shrink the rectal tumour. At the time of the Abdomino-perineal Resection, the tumour was adherent to the uterus and she underwent hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oopherectomy with partial vaginectomy to achieve full surgical clearance. Histopathology of the original specimen revealed a T4 tumour with clear margins and no lymph node involvement. No chemotherapy was given after surgery.
She was lost to follow-up till she re-presented with this peristomal mass. On clinical examination, she was found to have a large 12 × 12 cms mass, eroding through the skin in two areas, around the stoma, which appeared stenosed but was functioning normally . There was no history of loss of weight or appetite and the mass had reportedly grown rapidly over a period of four weeks. Trucut biopsy of the mass gave a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma of colonic origin. Her serum CEA level was elevated at 11.1 μg/L and her Haemoglobin was 9.9 g/dL (MCV – 82.8 fL). A staging CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis demonstrated the 8 × 5 cms mass adjacent to the stoma lying mainly in the subcutaneous fat with no invasion into the muscles . There was no evidence of any metastatic disease elsewhere.
At operation, the mass and the adjacent colostomy were excised wide with generous margins and placed in a bowel bag to avoid any tumour seeding . A midline Laparotomy was then performed. There was no evidence of any intra-abdominal metastasis and a curative resection of the mass with en bloc completion colectomy was performed . The large 17 × 14 cms defect was covered with V.A.C® (KCI) dressing and an end ileostomy was constructed in the right iliac fossa . She made an uneventful post-operative recovery and after 19 days of V.A.C® therapy a meshed split skin graft was harvested from the anterior thigh and used to resurface the abdominal wound.
The histopathology of the specimen showed complete excision of the subcutaneous mass with clear margins and the microscopic examination showed extensively necrotic and inflamed, well-differentiated colonic adenocarcinoma invading into the subcutaneous fat. There was no mucosal abnormality in the resected colon and there was no evidence of lymphovascular invasion. She was offered adjuvant chemotherapy but she declined it.