A 64-year old woman who presented with a 9-month history of persistent, non-productive cough, bilateral lower extremity edema, and multiple spider angiomata extending from umbilicus to ankles. The patient was otherwise healthy with no significant past medical, surgical, or family history. She denied recent weight loss, fevers, chills, nausea, vomiting, abdominal or back pain, and she had no difficulty with ambulation. Physical exam also was significant for hepatomegaly extending 4 fingerbreadths below the costal margin. There was no jaundice or virilization. Routine laboratory studies were unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 13 × 6.5 × 6.6 cm heterogeneous mass arising in the region of the right adrenal gland and extending into the IVC and the right atrium .
CT of the chest and magnetic resonance imaging with arterial and venous phases (MRA/MRV) revealed evidence of a filling defect within the most inferior portion of the right atrium at the confluence with the IVC. Twenty-four hour urine collections for cortisol and catecholamines were normal, as were serum aldosterone, renin, potassium, and ACTH levels. Multiple tumor markers also were normal, including dehydropepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), carcinomembryonic antigen (CEA), alpha-feto protein (AFP), CA-125, and CA-19-9; only an elevated CA-125 was identified (130, normal < 35 U/mL). There was no evidence of metastases on chest CT, brain MRI, and bone scan.
The differential diagnosis included adrenocortical carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma, retroperitoneal sarcoma, or hepatoma. The patient was brought to the operating room for a planned adrenalectomy, possible right nephrectomy, cholecystectomy (for cholelithiasis), and tumor resection via IVC cavotomy under DHCA. Diagnostic laparoscopy revealed no evidence of peritoneal or hepatic metastases. Exploratory laparotomy was performed through a midline incision, followed by a Köcher maneuver. The adrenal lesion was noted to be separate from the right kidney. Intraoperative ultrasound confirmed that the tumor did not involve the caudate lobe of the liver.
A median sternotomy was performed, and the diaphragm was divided in the midline anteriorly. The adrenal gland was mobilized from the liver, and the IVC was fully exposed. The patient was then placed on cardiopulmonary bypass with DHCA, and her core body temperature was lowered to 19°C. The IVC was incised, and intramural tumor was dissected free from the walls of the IVC and excised en bloc with the adrenal gland . There was no evidence of residual disease within the IVC or right atrium on transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE). After completion of the IVC cavotomy, the patient was taken off DHCA and re-warmed. Total circulatory arrest time was 14 minutes, with a bypass time of 115 minutes. The aorta was cross-clamped for 25 minutes. She required 6 units of packed red blood cells, 4 units of fresh frozen plasma, 4 units of platelets, and 5 liters of crystalloid. The total procedure time was 7 1/2 hours.
The patient required pharmacologic cardiovascular support for the first 12 hours postoperatively, but was awake within 24 hours. She was extubated on the morning of first postoperated day and displayed no neurocognitive deficit. The balance of her postoperative course was complicated by the development of a symptomatic pulmonary embolus, diagnosed by spiral CT of the chest. An ultrasound of the IVC also was performed to exclude tumor embolus; no evidence of thrombus was seen. She was discharged on 12th postoperative day on oral anticoagulation. Pursuant PET-CT showed no evidence of uptake in the lungs, providing further confirmation that this was a pulmonary embolus, and not tumor thrombus.
On pathological examination, the specimen measured 14.2 × 9.5 × 5.5 cm. Cross-sections of the tumor revealed a firm, nodular and trabeculated tan-white mass with focal areas of cystic degeneration and hemorrhage . The tumor was surrounded by a thin rim of fibrous tissue and abutted, but did not penetrate, grossly identifiable adrenal gland . On microscopic evaluation, the tumor was markedly cellular, composed of spindle cells arranged in intersecting fascicles. Tumor cells showed moderate atypia with hyperchromasia, nuclear enlargement and occasional giant cells. Three to five mitoses per 10 high power field were identified, with occasional atypical mitotic figures . Areas of coagulative necrosis were present. Immunohistochemically, neoplastic cells were negative for c-kit, S100 and HMB45 (Dako®), but showed strong reactivity for desmin and smooth muscle actin (Dako®) . This finding was consistent with leiomyosarcoma, most likely arising from adrenal vein; however, on multiple sections, no residual vascular wall was detected. Primary adrenal leiomyosarcoma was considered unlikely due to clear-cut separation of tumor from the morphologically unremarkable adrenal gland by a thin rim of fibrous tissue .