A 24-year-old woman known to have APS presented to the emergency department (ED) with shortness of breath and right-sided pleuritic chest pain of a few days duration. She was diagnosed with deep vein thrombosis in the right profunda femoris vein 6 days before the ED visit and was started on therapeutic low molecular weight heparin. In the ED, computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) protocol was performed and revealed new pulmonary emboli in the right lower lung. Initial electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia . She got admitted to the hospital and the anticoagulation was switched from low molecular weight heparin to heparin drip. Initial transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was done and showed normal ejection fraction (, ). However, after 5 days of hospitalization, her condition suddenly deteriorated, and she required more oxygen. Chest X-ray was done and showed pulmonary oedema . She also started to develop high-grade fever with worsening of her oxygenation to the point that she required high flow nasal cannula. She was started empirically on broad spectrum antibiotics, but the infectious workup was negative including respiratory virus panel, blood cultures, urine, and sputum culture. She was transferred to the medical intensive care unit (MICU) due to acute hypoxic respiratory failure secondary to acute pulmonary embolus and pulmonary oedema. In the first day of her MICU stay, CTPA was repeated and ruled out any new pulmonary emboli. The TTE was repeated and showed a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40–45%, global hypokinesia, and McConnel Sign, a distinct feature of acute pulmonary embolus; therefore, she was given tissue plasminogen activator (, ). Troponin level suddenly elevated from 103 to 4100 ng/L, so the cardiology team was consulted for the possible acute coronary syndrome. The ECG showed sinus tachycardia with an indeterminate axis and low QRS voltage in precordial leads . The emergent coronary angiogram showed non-obstructive coronary artery disease. On the second day, she developed acute kidney injury (creatinine increased from 0.7 to 2.2 mg/dL in 2 days, then 4.8 mg/dL) with metabolic acidosis (pH = 7.1) and persistent hyperkalaemia not responding to medical treatment requiring continuous renal replacement therapy. She became hypotensive, shocked, and was started on vasopressors. The discolouration of the feet was also observed. Her liver enzymes suddenly elevated with alanine transaminase >2000 IU/L and aspartate aminotransferase >8000 IU/L, suggesting a shock-like pattern. The respiratory condition started to deteriorate, became more tachypneic, and required more oxygen that she needed to be intubated with mechanical ventilation. This multi-organ failure occurred during her first 48 h in the MICU. Given the sudden deterioration of the patient's condition in 48 h with multi-system involvement in the setting of her history of APS, the medical team in the MICU considered CAP as the probable diagnosis (more than three systems involved in less than a week with positive antibodies).
Her reports showed increased troponin levels, white blood cells (WBCs), elevated prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT) with severe transaminitis. Blood cultures were negative. Liver ultrasonography showed patent hepatic vasculature, so this ruled out portal vein thrombosis. Given that the patient was not improving with very rapid deterioration, the constellation of elevated troponin, WBC, PT, PTT, patent hepatic vasculature, negative infectious workup, lack of schistocytes on peripheral smear, and normal fibrinogen level, diagnosis of the CAPS was concluded. Due to the rapid deterioration and the severity of the condition, the medical team decided to treat immediately without waiting for histopathological confirmation as the patient met the criteria for probable diagnosis. She was started immediately on IV plasmapheresis along with pulse steroids 1 g daily and therapeutic anticoagulation with heparin drip. Within 24 h, the patient showed significant clinical improvement: she defervesced, the discolouration of the right foot improved, and she slowly weaned off pressors. She was eventually extubated and transferred to the floor after 5 days of plasmapheresis therapy. This confirmed the diagnosis of the CAPS after adequate response to the treatment. Bedside echocardiography was repeated after the plasmapheresis course was finished and showed LVEF of 50–55% with resolution of right ventricular function. Unfortunately, no video imaging was stored on our system for this bedside echocardiography, but it was mentioned in the cardiology team notes. She was transitioned to oral prednisone and discharged on the prednisone taper and oral anticoagulation with warfarin. The symptoms resolved during the follow-up appointment; however, no TTE was performed again as the patient was completely asymptomatic. The patient completed the prednisone course and was regularly taking the warfarin for APS.