A 42-year-old man (weight: 78 kg, height: 175 cm) underwent an elective functional endoscopic sinus surgery and revision of septoplasty under general anesthesia. He had well-controlled diabetes mellitus and reported no allergies except to cat hair. He had undergone general anesthesia 10 years prior, but it was uneventful. Preoperative laboratory findings, chest radiography, electrocardiography, and pulmonary function tests were normal. The patient received 1.5 mg/kg of propofol for anesthesia induction and 0.5 mg/kg of rocuronium bromide to facilitate tracheal intubation. Anesthesia was maintained with 1.5–2.0 vol% sevoflurane and target-controlled infusion of remifentanil. During the surgery, the patient was breathing over the ventilator due to surgical stimulation, additional 0.13 mg/kg of rocuronium was administered. One μg/kg of palonosetron and 0.4 mg/kg of ketorolac were administered intravenously 10 minutes before the surgery finished. The surgery ended in 55 minutes and 2.5 mg/kg of sugammadex was administered to reverse the neuromuscular blockade. The interval time between administration of rocuronium and sugammadex was 50 minutes. Five minutes after sugammadex administration, we confirmed that the patient could lift his head and sustain hand grasp over 5 seconds with adequate spontaneous breathing over 6 L/min, so we decided to extubate a tracheal tube. Last blood pressure was 86/48 mmHg and heart rate was 123 beats/min. Then he was transferred to the postanesthesia care unit (PACU). However, on arrival at the PACU, the patient exhibited redness in the anterior chest, swollen eyes, facial edema, and wheezing sounds in both lungs. Additionally, he complained of anxiety with dyspnea and dizziness. His blood pressure checked right after arriving PACU was 31/19 mmHg and heart rate was 130 beats/min. Under suspicion of an anaphylactic reaction, the patient was treated with rapid intravenous crystalloid and colloid fluid-loading and intravenous phenylephrine (1.3 μg/kg bolus, 500 μg cumulative dose). His blood pressure remained 56/44 mmHg; thus, we used intravenous epinephrine (0.25 μg/kg bolus, 140 μg cumulative dose), 60 μg/kg of dexamethasone, and 50 μg/kg of chlorpheniramine. Immediate laboratory tests showed that his blood glucose level was 186 mg/dl; arterial blood-gas analysis revealed PaO2 of 81 mmHg and PaCO2 of 40.9 mmHg. After 80 minutes of treatment in the PACU, his blood pressure recovered to 114/76 mmHg. Bilateral wheezing sounds and facial edema gradually improved; he was then transferred to the general ward . Laboratory tests two hours after the event showed that serum tryptase and total IgE levels were significantly increased (46.9 ng/ml and 1632 IU/ml; normal ranges < 11.5 ng/ml and 0–100 IU/ml, respectively). On the basis of clinical presentation and laboratory tests, we diagnosed anaphylactic shock due to an agent used during the surgery. To identify the causative agent, intradermal skin tests were performed four days later with all agents that had been used during the surgery: rocuronium, propofol, palonosetron, ketorolac, and sugammadex. However, all agents showed negative results . The patient was discharged without any complications. One month later, he visited the Department of Allergy Medicine; the allergist strongly suggested that the anaphylactic shock after the surgery might have been triggered by sugammadex administration. However, sugammadex was not a causative agent of the anaphylactic shock, according to the previous intradermal skin test results. Thus, we suspected that the sugammadex-rocuronium complex might have led the patient to experience anaphylactic shock; we prepared intradermal tests with a sugammadex (100 mg/ml) and rocuronium (10 mg/ml) mixture at a 1 : 1 volume ratio to make complexes of sugammadex-encapsulated rocuronium. The patient underwent intradermal skin tests with 1 : 1000 and 1 : 100 diluted solutions of the sugammadex-rocuronium mixture. He showed a positive reaction to both test solutions: 8-mm wheal and 32 × 30-mm flare to the 1 : 100 solution; 7-mm wheal and 28 × 26-mm flare size to the 1 : 1000 solution . We concluded that the sugammadex-rocuronium complex was the causative agent of anaphylaxis for this patient. Authors took an informed consent from the patient.