A 45-day-old boy presented to the Outpatient Clinic of Dermatology at King Abdul Aziz Medical City, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, with a flat scalp lesion on the space of the anterior fontanel . He was a product of a full-term, spontaneous vaginal delivery, after an uncomplicated pregnancy. His parents were second-degree relatives. He received all his vaccines. The mother was negative for group B streptococcus when investigated during pregnancy.
There was a positive family history of such condition in his older brother's scalp, which resolved spontaneously within 3 weeks after labor, without any medical intervention. There was no previous history of hospitalization to the child.
At delivery, the baby's scalp lesion was 0.5 × 0.5 cm. During the first 25 days of his life, the lesion kept on raising and growing to become an isolated yellowish cyst 2 × 3 cm, after which it stopped growing . There were no associated hemangiomata or other congenital defects in his body.
On examination, the baby looked well and alert. He was in the 25th percentile for both height-for-age and weight-for-age. Culture from the site of the lesion showed Gram-positive cocci, consistent with Staphylococcus aureus. Ultrasound of the head showed bullae over the anterior fontanel, well-defined complex cyst, and an isolated subcutaneous lesion, with no evidence of intracranial extension. During the whole time of hospital admission, the baby was vitally stable.
The baby was started on intravenous infusion of vancomycin (67 mg in dextrose 5% in water) for 3 days. Blood culture became negative, but no improvement occurred to the scalp cyst.
The baby started to receive 15 g of 2% mupirocin ointment, three times daily, a small amount on the lesion. After 2 days of applying mupirocin ointment, the scalp cyst gradually decreased in size and became dry within 1 week.
The baby was discharged and his mother was advised to continue applying the mupirocin ointment 3 times daily for 1 month. Follow-up after 3 months showed that the scalp lesion completely healed leaving a very small atrophic scar and no further management of the lesion was needed.