The patient is a 17-year-old male with asplenia syndrome (complete endocardial deficiency, double outlet right ventricle, and pulmonary artery stenosis) as a congenital heart malformation, although his symptoms are only mild cyanosis, and he is independent in activities of daily living (ADL). His parents were healthy and he was an only child. He was referred to our hospital with a sudden episode of transient left hemiparesis. He suddenly became aware of weakness and sensory disturbance on the left upper and lower limbs while defecating. The symptoms gradually improved within 3 h, but the sensory disturbance remained. There was no marked family history and his parents were healthy.
We suspected cerebrovascular disease, because he had a cardiac malformation that could cause a right-to-left shunt. The brain MRI showed cerebral infarction on the right temporo-parietal lobe, and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed no vessel abnormalities . Based on the findings of MRI, we concluded that the patient had an embolic mechanism through cardiac malformation. Abdominal Computer tomography (CT) scan showed visceral heterotaxy . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed endocardial cushion defect (ECD) . We were not able to perform transesophageal echocardiography. No atrial fibrillation was reported on standard electrocardiogram (ECG) and Holter ECG.
After admission at the age of 17, blood tests showed slightly low activity of antithrombin III (61%) and protein C (63%), and the presence of congenital coagulopathy was suspected, although genetic testing for SERPINC1 and PROC were negative. In addition, there was no evidence of antiphospholipid antibody syndrome or hyper-homocystinemia, which could cause juvenile cerebral infarction. There were no signs of infectious endocarditis and of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). However, the level of D-dimer FDP was slightly elevated 0.6 μg/ml (normal range: 0–0.5 μg/ml) and the Risk of Paradoxical Embolism (RoPE) score was high (score = 10). Therefore, we diagnosed him as a paradoxical cerebral embolism caused by ECD and potential DVT with right-to-left shunt.
To further investigate the cause of his stroke, whole-genome sequencing (WGS) was performed on the patient . WGS of the patient revealed a novel heterozygous variant NM_018055.5: c.1016 T > C: p.(Met339Thr) (chr10:70,432,964–70432964 in the genomic coordinate of GRCh38) in the NODAL gene (NM_018055.5, MIM#601,265) , which is responsible for autosomal dominant visceral heterotaxy (MIM#270,100) . The obtained coverage of WGS was 33.5 x. The unaffected father also had this variant, suggesting incomplete penetrance as reported . The father underwent an abdominal CT scan that was completely normal. Sanger-sequencing validated the variant . This variant has not been reported in the gnomAD database or the WGS database of 9850 Japanese control individuals . The missense variant was predicted to be damaging with CADD-PHRED score of 26.2. This variant was located in the evolutionally-conserved Nodal active ligand (110 aa) and showed high conservation scores (GERP of 5.84, SIFT of 0, PhyloP of 4.603, PolyPhen-2 of 0.998, and PhastCons of 1). MutationTaster prediction was “Disease causing”. Alteration of the same amino acid, c.1015A > G, p.(Met339Val), was reported to cause a mild reduction in nodal signaling by using activin-responsive ARE-luciferase reporter assay in a zebrafish embryo, although detailed clinical description of the patient with the Met339Val variant was unavailable . Protein structure of homodimerized Nodal and its co-receptor CFC1 (CFC1-EGF domain) was modeled by AlphaFold2 , which showed that Met339 and other previously reported pathogenic variants were located at the Nodal-CFC1 binding site . We further searched for pathogenic variants of the PROC gene in the WGS data that may explain the decrease in Protein C in this patient, but were unable to find any candidate variants. Furthermore, we did not identify any pathogenic variants that were responsible for monogenic stroke panel genes .
Anticoagulation therapy was started with continuous intravenous unfractionated heparin and switched to warfarin. The patient showed no recurrence of ischemic stroke for one and a half years as of now.