A 42-year-old male patient, with a body mass index of 28.75, was transferred from a regional hospital, to our University Surgery Clinic, due to right hypochondria pain and suspicion of a hydatid cyst of the liver.
The patient confirmed a one-month history of right hypochondria pain, without any other significant symptoms.
The patient was known to have chronic cholecystitis and mild hepatic steatosis. He declared himself a social drinker.
No significant diseases or other information were confirmed.
During physical examination a large abdominal mass was palpated in the right hypochondria and the inferior edge of the liver, located 2.5 cm below the rib cage.
The serum lymphocyte level was 16.4%, with a neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR) of 4.42. The serum levels of tumor-specific markers such as α-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and human choriogonadotropin were not evaluated but their positivity was denied by IHC staining.
The primary imaging investigation included ultrasonography, which described a non-homogeneous round mass 119.2 mm × 108.3 mm in size, with increased echogenicity. The encapsulated mass was located in the 8th segment of the right liver. Based on the patient’s personal history, the presumptive diagnosis was a hepatic cyst, associated with hepatosplenomegaly and hepatic steatosis. A right renal malrotation, with the right kidney localized in the epigastrium, was also suspected. The ureteral jet from the right side of the bladder was not visible.
A CT scan was also carried out. The scan confirmed the hepatomegaly and presence of a well-defined 126 mm × 121 mm × 146 mm macronodular encapsulated cystic lesion. The wall thickness was estimated to be approximately 6 mm. The fluid content was estimated to be clear, with a density of 10 HU. The cystic mass was thought to involve the convex side of the right kidney, with the upper limit at the visceral face of the liver, the lateral limit at the abdominal wall and the inferior limit at the bifurcation of the abdominal aorta. It displaced the right kidney in the anterior and medial direction . Hydronephrosis or signs of disorders of secretion or excretion of the right kidney were not described, neither were modified lymph nodes. Free abdominal fluid was observed. As the cystic lesion was classified as Bosniak type III, with a 50% potential of malignancy, surgical excision was planned.
Macroscopic examination confirmed the presence of the encapsulated cystic mass, which involved the renal specimen. On the cut section, a blackish-brown appearance was evident.
The microscopic findings revealed the presence of tubular and papillary-like structures. The nuclei predominantly showed Fuhrman grade 2; the stroma did not show obvious desmoplastic areas, although it was infiltrated with neutrophils . Based on histological findings, a papillary carcinoma was initially diagnosed. As foamy macrophages were seen within the fibrovascular core, a variant of CDC was taken into account, for differential diagnosis. The tumor extended into both the cortical and medullary area, exceeded the renal capsule and infiltrated the perirenal adipose tissue (pT3 stage). No lymph nodes were identified in the surgical specimen. No clear cells or sarcomatoid dedifferentiation was identified.
Tumor cells showed diffuse positivity for CD15 (clone: Carb-3, Dako) CTK AE1/AE3 (clone AE1/AE3, ImmunoLogic), alpha-methylacyl-CoA racemase (AMACR clone 13H4, Dako), and vimentin (clone V9, Leica Biosystems), focal positivity for CTK7 (clone OV-TL 12/30, A. Menarini Diagnostics) and CTK19 (clone RCK 108, Dako). No positivity was revealed for antibodies CD10 (clone Ab-2 56C6, Thermo Fisher Scientific), HER-2 (clone c-erbB-2, Dako), inhibin (clone Inhibin A, Leica), CD68 (clone KP1, ImmunoLogic; it marked the foamy macrophages within the fibrovascular core), Melan-A (clone A103, Cell Marque), Calretinin (clone Dak-Calret 1, Dako), human choriogonadotropin (polyclonal, Dako), carcinoembryonic antigen (polyclonal, Dako) or α-fetoprotein (polyclonal, Dako). The Ki67 (clone Mib-1, Dako) index was below 5% .