A 65-year-old male presented to the emergency department on the night of October 19 reporting high-grade fever and body aches for 3 days. The patient acutely developed dizziness and abdominal pain and complained of a new-onset headache. On arrival, he was hypotensive, tachycardic, with a temperature of 39.8°C, and oliguric. His Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) was 15/15, and examination revealed no focal neurology. Dengue fever was suspected, and an ultrasound revealed pericholecystic edema and free fluid in the patient’s abdomen. The patient was managed adequately with fluid resuscitation, admitted for observation, and managed according to our national guidelines by the Punjab Dengue Expert Advisory Group.[,]
Soluble nonstructural protein 1 (test method – dengue NS 1 Antigen, detection window day 1–5) Dengue viral RNA (test method – dengue real-time polymerase chain reaction, detection window day 1–5) Dengue IgM antibodies indicating an acute or recent infection Dengue IgG in high levels indicating a secondary infection.
The patient was clinically stable over the next 3 days but developed a sharp progressive decline in his platelet count and eventually severe thrombocytopenia. Changes in platelet counts and deterioration of important biochemical parameters are summarized in and . In the early hours of October 24, a blood count revealed platelet count of 26 units=×109/l (reference range 150–400). The following morning after breakfast, the patient suddenly collapsed, and his GCS dropped to 3/15 with bilaterally fixed and dilated pupils. He was shifted to the intensive care unit, intubated, and put on mechanical ventilation with supportive management. Computed tomography (CT) head revealed a large acute left parietal SDH with significant mass effect and midline shift . The patient’s attendants were thoroughly counseled and opted for surgical intervention. An emergent SDH evacuation was performed with a left parietal craniotomy. Peroperatively, two units of platelets were transfused, and the hematoma was evacuated without complication. Postoperatively, two additional units of platelets were transfused to maintain a platelet count of above 50. Same day CT scan showed a marked decrease in the midline shift and air in the evacuated hematoma cavity. Over the next few days, his platelets gradually rose to the normal range .
The patient developed signs of a chest infection on October 28 and was diagnosed with ventilator-associated pneumonia, for which he was treated. Compared to the previous interval scans, his final CT scan performed on November 3 showed complete resolution of the subdural hemorrhage and midline shift and resorption of residual air . He was discharged on November 11. The patient remained in our follow-up, and at his last clinic visit in April 2022, he felt well with minor left-sided weakness. His Extended Glasgow Outcome Score was deemed to be 7.