An 81 year-old-woman visited the department of internal medicine in our hospital complaining of an upper abdominal mass, loss of appetite, and abdominal distention. An elastic and hard tumor was palpated in the right hypochondriac region. Other than hypertension, she had a history of left breast cancer 11 years ago. She had no family history of breast cancer. Left breast-conserving operation therapy along with axillary lymph node dissection and postoperative radiation therapy were performed in May 2000. Histopathological examination revealed invasive ductal carcinoma, including papillotubular carcinoma with pT2N0M0 (pStageIIA). Specific immunostaining revealed results of estrogen receptor (ER)-positive staining of 80%, progesterone receptor (PgR)-negative, human epithelial growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) of 0. These stainings were done at the time of relapse . The endocrine therapy was not performed because the patient did not select it. Ultrasonography and CT scan revealed a tumor about 16 × 10 cm in the duodenum and the head of pancreas compressing the duodenum. Malignant lymphoma in particular was suspected based on the CT image . Diagnostic biopsy to the surgical department was requested and an exploratory laparotomy was performed. No abnormal values were obtained in the blood biochemical test. Serum tumor marker test concerning breast cancer was not performed preoperatively. Operation under general anesthesia was performed to retrieve biopsy samples and explore the inner abdomen. Among examination of the abdominal cavity, nodules and relatively large tumors were scattered all over the peritoneum. The largest tumors were mainly observed in the greater omentum. The tumors had unevenly raised surfaces and covered a large area from the greater curvature of the pylorus to the transverse colon. A 40 × 30 mm tumor was resected. The sample was diagnosed as an adenocarcinoma by intraoperative rapid pathological diagnosis. The operational diagnosis was peritoneal dissemination of a cancer of an uncertain origin rather than malignant lymphoma. Ductal carcinoma was suspected due to the following histopathological analysis of the sample performed postoperatively . Specific immunostaining resulted in ER-positive staining of 70%, PgR-positive staining of 5%, HER2 of 1+, Ki-67-positive staining of 5%. In consideration of the patient’s history and intra-abdominal search through radiological images, surgical exploration, and pathological finding, it was diagnosed as peritoneal metastasis of recurrence breast cancer. All other candidates for the primary sites, including the ovary were ruled out. A whole-body evaluation was performed postoperatively, and pleural metastasis and pleural effusion were observed in the chest CT scan . Other local recurrences, or distant recurrences in bone or brain were not observed. Tumor marker results showed normal CEA values (4.4 ng/ml), but elevated values for BCA225 (4300 U/ml), CA15-3 (214 U/ml), and NCC-ST-439 (7.4 U/ml) were obtained. In consideration of breast cancer subtype (luminal A like) and the patient age (81 years), the endocrine therapy using letrozole was introduced.
Course of treatment with 2.5 mg of daily letrozole was prescribed to the patient. In the first year of endocrine therapy, recovery from pleural metastasis and pleural effusion could be confirmed by chest CT scan . Abdominal CT scan also showed reduction in the intra-abdominal metastasis . Regarding tumor markers, no abnormal CEA value was obtained. CA15-3 and BCA225 values gradually declined from the time of recurrence and returned to normal levels 2 years later. NCC-ST-439 value gradually increased up to 49 U/ml 6 months later, with a gradual decline there after along with the other tumor markers . The patient was currently receiving treatment in the outpatient. Six years have passed, and no relapse of the malignancy was evident and the patient is still alive on the same medication.