A 54-year-old African-American man presented to our resident clinic at Johns Hopkins Hospital for discharge follow-up after admission for wrist pain and a suspected viral gastroenteritis. He did not have a primary care physician due to lack of health insurance and had been seen in our emergency department several times over the past year.
He had been well until 7 months earlier when he developed unilateral pain and redness of his right eye. An ophthalmologic evaluation in our emergency department revealed anterior uveitis, which resolved with topical steroids. Five months later he sought care for right ear pain. Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed inflammation of his pinna, consistent with auricular chondritis. This resolved spontaneously without treatment. Two months later, he again returned to our emergency department with pain and redness of his right wrist. He was diagnosed with cellulitis and empirically treated with oral clindamycin for 7 days with minimal improvement. Just 3 days later, he was admitted for sudden onset of fever and diarrhea. A viral etiology was suspected given the quick resolution of his symptoms and management with conservative therapy. He was discharged home within 48 hours with follow-up in our internal medicine resident clinic.
At his out-patient visit a few days after discharge, he had persistent swelling of his right wrist that limited his ability to operate motor vehicles at his job as a valet. Further questioning revealed a 27 kg (60 pounds) unintentional weight loss over the past 6 months. He denied epistaxis, cough, hemoptysis, chest pain, dyspnea, recurrent ocular symptoms, rash, low back pain, abdominal pain, frequent stools, melena, or hematochezia. He had no significant past medical or surgical history. His family history was unremarkable. He did not smoke tobacco, drink alcohol, or use illicit drugs.
On examination, he was a well-developed well-nourished black man who appeared comfortable. He was alert and fully oriented. His vital signs were within normal limits. He had no rash, oral ulcers, or cutaneous nodules. There was no lymphadenopathy. Sclerae were not injected. A comprehensive musculoskeletal examination revealed mild synovitis of his right wrist without overlying erythema but limited range of motion due to pain. Cardiac, pulmonary, abdominal, and neurologic examinations were unremarkable.
A laboratory evaluation during admission revealed iron deficiency anemia with hemoglobin of 10.1 g/dL, and a white blood cell count of 12,100 cells/mm3 with a normal differential. His albumin was low at 2.9 g/dL, alkaline phosphatase was elevated at 182 U/L, and there was mild transaminitis. There was microscopic hematuria: red blood cells (RBC) 55/high-power field (hpf); he had normal creatinine and no proteinuria. His inflammatory markers were elevated with C-reactive protein 11.1 mg/dL and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 124 mm/hour. His fecal lactoferrin was positive. A chest radiograph showed a small ill-defined patchy infiltrate in the upper lobe of his right lung. An infectious workup included the following negative studies: bacterial stool and blood cultures, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) viral load, cytomegalovirus (CMV) serum polymerase chain reaction (PCR), gonorrhea and chlamydia urine PCR, stool Clostridium difficile toxin, and stool ova and parasites. Anti-nuclear antibody, anti-mitochondrial antibody, anti-smooth muscle antibody, rheumatoid factor, and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide were negative. His complements were normal. C-ANCA was positive at a titer of 1:40 with elevated proteinase 3 by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA; 102.6 units). Perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (p-ANCA) and myeloperoxidase by ELISA were negative.
With infection effectively ruled out, his clinical picture seemed most consistent with GPA. He was seen in consult by rheumatology, and started on prednisone 60 mg daily with marked improvement in symptoms and laboratory abnormalities.
However, 8 weeks later he developed hematochezia, left lower quadrant pain, and a perirectal abscess and fistula. A colonoscopy was performed and multiple biopsies were taken. Histologic examination of the biopsy from his descending colon showed cryptitis and crypt abscesses. A biopsy from his rectum showed early crypt distortion and basal plasmacytosis. In the absence of an infectious etiology, these findings were suggestive of a chronic colitis and/or IBD. There were no granulomas, vasculitis, or dysplasia.
Treatment for IBD was initiated with azathioprine and infliximab with healing of his fistula and continued clinical improvement. Therapy was well tolerated. For the past 1.5 years, he has been doing well on the same therapy with no further GI or extraintestinal manifestations of IBD.