The patient was a Japanese woman with a past history of left ovarian endometrioid carcinoma (grade 2, FIGO stage IC1) that had been resected by salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy and retroperitoneal lymph node biopsy (fertility sparing surgery) when she was 31 years old. She had a history of multiple thyroid goiters (maximum 2 cm), bilateral breast fibroma treated by surgical resection at age 15, endometriosis (at age 28) and myoma, and salpingitis treated by peroral medications (at age 28). She was intellectual enough to evaluate her IQ over 75. While in her 30s, she sometimes complained of lower abdominal pain and melena. A colonoscopy revealed colorectal polypoid lesions that were histologically diagnosed by forceps biopsy as hamartoma polyps and ectopic endometrial implants . An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy screening demonstrated multiple esophageal papillomas and glycogenic acanthosis . A gluteal subcutaneous lipoma, 55 mm in size, was detected by screening magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The patient’s mother died of breast cancer in her 40s, and her father had a pathology-confirmed cutaneous papilloma on his head and neck. The patient had no smoking or drinking habits.
The patient had been undergoing surveillance for the endometriosis by yearly pelvic image examinations, and a right ovarian tumor was detected at age 39. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a heterogeneously enhanced mass, 9 cm in size, while 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed abnormal uptake by the ovarian tumor (SUVmax: 8.33). She underwent abdominal total hysterectomy, right salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy and para-aortic lymphadenectomy. Endometrioid carcinoma (grade 1, FIGO stage: IC2), partially accompanied with components of squamous metaplasia and low-grade adenofibroma, was detected in the resected ovary. Immunostainings of the right-ovarian endometrial carcinoma revealed high expression of estrogen receptor, PI3K, and Ki-67 (labeling index approximately 40%), but TP53 showed no overexpression, and PTEN, WT1, Napsin A, and HNF-1β were not expressed . Immunostainings of PI3K showed diffuse expression, but PTEN was not expressed, as also determined in the left ovarian tumor.
All resected lymph nodes were negative for cancer (0/120). Her uterus specimen confirmed myomas and endometriosis.
Upon full informed consent, the patient participated in genetic research at the time of surgery. Peripheral blood and a 4–5 mm3 area of fresh right-ovarian cancer tissue were taken at surgery for whole exome sequencing (WES) to compare germline DNA and cancer DNA using a next-generation sequencer [, ]. An exome library, including 723 cancer-associated genes and 49 genes responsible for hereditary cancer syndromes, was prepared using the Ion AmpliSeq Exome RDY kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, USA). Exome sequencing of the right endometrioid carcinoma revealed a pathogenic mutation of hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase/glucose 1-dehydrogenase (H6PD), TFAP2D, MYO7A, TGM1, SEMA6B, ZNF99, and SIGLEC1. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in the 10q.23.3 (PTEN) locus was not recognized by copy number variation analysis in this tumor DNA. Her blood DNA demonstrated a splice-donor site variant of PTEN (c.1026 + 1G > T) , that had been reported to be causative of intellectual disability. This sequence was confirmed by the Sanger sequencing . No other germline mutation or incidental pathogenic finding was recognized.
Despite a number of characteristic findings in her demographics, images and pathologies, the clinicians did not approach the diagnosis of Cowden syndrome (CS) until the detection of germline PTEN variant. At the counseling, multiple (> 6) palmar small papules, buccal papillomas, and macrocephaly (head circumference: 60 cm, > 97th percentile) were further recognized by the physical examinations, fully meeting the clinical criteria of CS. She received clinical surveillance of the organs associated with PHTS . Her father also underwent genetic test, but the variant of PTEN was not recognized. Three years have passed since the last surgery. No recurrence has been detected.