In January 2011, a Caucasian 49-years-old man, drinker and heavy smoker (≥20 cigarettes/day), was diagnosed at the Maxillofacial Surgery and Stomatology Unit, of the Coimbra Hospital and University Centre, CHUC, EPE, Portugal, with a primary squamous cell carcinoma in the left side of the tongue. The diagnosis was confirmed by a biopsy and the well differentiated tumor was classified in advanced stage (IVa), cT4, cN2, cM0. Microscopically, the hematoxylin-eosin staining demonstrated the tumor formed by polygonal-shaped cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and mild nuclei showing pleomorphism and hyperchromatic chromatin (photomicrograph unavailable). The treatment was three-cycles of chemotherapy (cisplatin 75mg/m2 x 1day, docetaxel 75mg/m2 x 1 day and 5-fluorouracil 1000mg/m2 x 5 days, on days 1, 22 and 43)) followed by three-cycles of chemoradiotherapy (cisplatin 75mg/m2 before the radiation – 60Gy/30 fractions on days 1, 22 and 43). One month after the completion of treatment the patient did not have any sign of neoplasm, achieving an apparent clinical and radiological complete response as evaluated by computed tomography scan. In July 2015, 49-months after the conclusion of treatment, the clinician observed a small suspicious lesion (5mm) in the left side of the tongue, in the same localization of the primary tumor.
In September 2015, a squamous cell carcinoma recurrence of the primary tumor in the left side of the tongue was diagnosed in this patient, according to the Warren and Gates criteria . In October 2015, the patient underwent surgery and the tumor was completely removed. Microscopically, the hematoxylin-eosin staining showed tumor cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm, pleomorphic nuclei and numerous mitoses . The tumor showed a high mitotic index and areas of necrosis with vascular and neural invasion. All resection margins were negative for neoplastic involvement. The tumor was classified as early stage (II), rpT2, cN0, cM0. The patient stopped his smoking habits after the primary tumor diagnosis but kept the alcohol consumption.
In December 2015, a second primary tumor at the posterior wall of the pharyngoesophageal junction was diagnosed at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, Coimbra Hospital and University Centre, CHUC, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal. The diagnosis was confirmed by a biopsy and the well differentiated squamous cell carcinoma was classified in advanced stage (IVa), cT4b. Microscopically, the hematoxylin-eosin stain demonstrated a presence of dyskeratotic cells, polygonal-shaped cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and nuclei showing mild to moderate atypia . The therapeutic decision was palliative care. In April 2016 the patient died.
This study was approved by the Committee on Ethics in Research of the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Coimbra and written informed consent from the patient was obtained, performing all the experiments according to the regulations in the Declaration of Helsinki. Tumor tissue samples were obtained of the primary tumor and SPT from biopsies and of recurrence from the surgical resection. Additionally, macroscopically tumor-free tissue was also obtained from recurrence and SPT. This tissue, in the case of recurrence was collected from surgery resection margin and from an identical distance of the tumor in the case of SPT. The tissue samples were immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen after resection and stored at −80 °C until use. DNA from fresh frozen tissues was extracted using a High Pure PCR Template Preparation Kit (Roche GmbH, Mannheim, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. We analyzed copy number alterations (CNAs) of the three tumor samples through array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) using Agilent SurePrint G3 Human Genome microarray 180K, (Agilent technologies, Santa Clara, CA) as previously described . Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) and Methylation Specific MLPA (MS-MLPA) using the P248 and ME002 SALSA probemixes (MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) were performed in tumor and non-tumor tissue samples in order to simultaneously evaluate the CNAs and methylation patterns in a specific set of genes as we previously described [, ]. DNA from gender-matched gingival tissue of healthy subjects submitted to wisdom teeth removal was used as controls. The same three controls were used for MS-MLPA and MLPA techniques and one of those controls was used for aCGH technique.