An asymptomatic 26-year-old male diver was nominated to attend an overseas naval diving course. Prior to this, he had been medically certified to participate in, and had successfully completed other military and recreational diving courses. He had also completed several hyperbaric bounce dives up to a depth of 50 m (~ 164 ft) and 45 recreational dives up to a depth of 30 m (~ 98 ft). He had been well and did not have a history of diving-related injuries or complications such as decompression illness or barotrauma. He had never smoked and did not have any known medical or congenital conditions, specifically recurrent respiratory infections. There was no past surgical history, or family history of respiratory or congenital conditions.
As part of pre-course screening requirements for his overseas course, a physical examination, blood tests, as well as posteroanterior (PA) and lateral Chest X-rays (CXR) were performed . The physical examination findings were unremarkable. The results of the blood tests were also noted to be normal. However, the lateral CXR revealed a left lower lobe pulmonary nodule adjacent to the vertebral body. This was not reported on his previous PA-only CXRs taken in 2011, 2012, and 2018. A low dose Computed Tomography (CT) Thorax was performed, which revealed a 3 cm serpiginous lesion in the left lower lobe. A CT Pulmonary Angiography which was subsequently performed to rule out any pulmonary arteriovenous malformation, revealed a 9.7 × 9.1 mm left lower lobe intralobar bronchopulmonary sequestration (ILS) instead. This comprised a cavity, receiving a direct arterial blood supply from the descending aorta and draining into the inferior left pulmonary vein . There were no other abnormalities noted. As the lesion was noted to be small, and the patient was asymptomatic and well, functional tests such as a lung function test were not done. The patient was referred to a pulmonologist for evaluation on fitness to dive, as well as for further management of his lung lesion.
The diver remains asymptomatic and well at the time of writing this case report and has been accepted to participate in another overseas course involving only dry diving in a hyperbaric chamber (with immediate access to a resuscitation trolley and a pleural catheter set). There are no course prerequisites for him to undergo surgery.