A 58-year-old male patient who belongs to Jharkhand was admitted to our hospital with painful swelling and stiffness in his right ankle.
The swelling was present in a smaller form for many years but past three to four years there was progressive swelling at the back of ankle joint and now he was unable to walk properly. He was not able to walk more than 200-300 metre at a stretch. He is farmer by profession. He ignored the symptoms many a times, and had been taking analgesics as prescribed by the local doctor but was never investigated properly before except an X-ray of ankle joint. Since last two weeks, the pain had increased tremendously without any precipitating reason along with inflammatory sign over the ankle joint. At the time of presentation, pain was severe and he was unable to stand, and there was enough pain at rest also. No family history of such type of condition was noted. No past history of trauma or any other illness which can affect its course was observed.
On physical examination, about 3.5 × 2 cm stiff, immobile, painful mass placed between tendoachilis and plafond of tibia was palpated. Mass was tender, fixed with calcaneus, boggy swelling. Skin over swelling showed features of inflammation. Movements at the ankle were severely compromised. Knee joint was clinically normal. Clinical features and X-ray picture suggested metastatic calcification, ostrigonous or osteochondroma. The antero- posterior and lateral view plain X-ray radiography and plane computed tomography (CT) revealed a bony prominence 31 × 17 mm (cartilage cap thickness: 5 mm app) in size raising from superior part of the calcaneus near posterior margin of talo calcaneus joint and reported as a higher possibility of an osteochondroma (, , ). However, features suggestive of malignancy were not seen. Ankle and other joints of foot were normal except for inflammatory reactive effusion. In addition, retrocalcanealbursitis features were observed. As the pain was of moderate to severe grade and caused major limitation in activities of daily living, it was decided to excise the osseous mass. Complete surgical excision of the bony mass was planned. Intraoperatively, it was observed that the lesion rose from the posteromedial side of the calcaneus and grew through the surface pushing the soft tissues more posteromedially. Posterolateral approach chosen as it was safer and mass was pushing all the soft tissue on lateral side and it was easy to remove adhesion on posterolateral approach. The bony mass was excised as much as possible from its attachment to calcaneus; stalk was not differentiated as this was very compressed. Bony material along with soft tissue was sent for pathologic examination, inflamed bursa was also removed. Histopathological examination of the bony mass reported it as osteochondroma (cartilage cap 4mm) but there was no evidence of malignancy. Report was re-evaluated and confirmed by another histopathologist. Intraoperative and post operative period was uneventful. After surgery, patient was put on below knee slab which was removed after 21 days to get adequate soft tissue healing. Wound healed well. At 6 months follow up, there was no recurrence of lesion and patient was comfortably walking without pain. Currently, the patient is asymptomatic and has no pain, but there is limitation of motion at the ankle joint.