A 53-year-old male with a past medical history significant only for hyperlipidemia, was brought in by ambulance to the emergency department (ED) with a six-day history of malaise and fever (Tmax 101°Fahrenheit [F]), and one day of cough. The day before presentation, he was seen in an outside ED and discharged home with a diagnosis of viral upper respiratory syndrome. On presentation to our ED the next day, he reported a brief episode of chest pain with palpitations that resolved spontaneously after 30 minutes. He denied shortness of breath, nocturnal dyspnea or lower extremity swelling. Vitals at triage were notable for temperature of 100.2°F, heart rate 140 beats per minute, blood pressure 97/55 millimeters of mercury, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 100%.
Exam was notable for diaphoresis, with clear breath sounds bilaterally, tachycardia with irregular pulse with no murmurs, and no lower extremity edema. Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated a wide-complex, irregular tachycardia with a left bundle branch block (LBBB) morphology not meeting modified Sgarbosa criteria (Concordant ST elevation > 1millimeter [mm] in leads with a positive QRS complex; concordant ST depression > 1 mm in V1–V3; discordant ST elevation [or depression] relative to the preceding S-wave [or R-wave] with 1) at least 1 mm of ST elevation (or depression) AND 2) an ST/S(R) ratio ≤ -0.25) that was favored to be atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response or sinus tachycardia with frequent premature atrial contractions, as well as a corrected QT interval (QTc) of 563 (Reference [Ref]: ≤ 440, in males). No comparison ECG was available. Laboratory work-up was significant for hypokalemia (K+ 2.8 milliequivalents per liter [mEq/L] [Ref: 3.3–5.0 mEq/L]), normal creatinine, white blood cell count of 5.5 thousand per cubic millimeter [K/mm3] [Ref: 4.5–11 K/mm3] with lymphopenia (absolute lymphocyte count, 0.7 K/mm3 [Ref: 1.0–4.8 K/mm3]), mild transaminitis (aspartate aminotransferase 63 units/L [Ref: 15–43 units/L], alanine transaminase 72/L [Ref: 6–63 units/L), negative serial high-sensitivity troponin T (< 99 percentile) and BNP 588 picogram (pg)/mL (Ref: 1–100pg/mL). Chest radiograph (CXR) showed a left lower lobe consolidation. His potassium was replaced, he was given an amiodarone load, started on ceftriaxone/azithromycin for presumed community-acquired pneumonia, and admitted to the cardiology service.
During his hospitalization, he converted to normal sinus rhythm with electrolyte replacement and amiodarone load, but LBBB morphology and prolonged QTc persisted. Azithromycin was changed to doxycycline due to concerns of potentially worsening QTc prolongation from azithromycin. Rapid flu test, respiratory viral panel (RVP), legionella urine antigen, and blood cultures were all negative. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was performed which showed mild left ventricular (LV) dilation with hypokinesis (ejection fraction 15%). There was no comparison TTE available. Cardiac catheterization did not reveal significant coronary artery disease. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with contrast confirmed LV dilation with global hypokinesis, increased T2 signal, hyperemia, and edema consistent with viral myocarditis. In the setting of these MRI findings, the patient’s CXR infiltrate, and the absence of an additional viral etiology for myocarditis (negative RVP), radiology recommended dedicated COVID-19 testing.
The patient was tested using a qualitative ribonucleic acid polymerase chain reaction assay (via nasopharyngeal swab) and resulted positive. However, since LV dilation (defined as LV end diastolic diameter [LVEDD] >3.3 centimeters per meter squared [cm/m2]) is only present in approximately 50% of patients with acute myocarditis, and the range of LVEDD reported in one study of myocarditis patients with LV dilation was 3.4–6.1cm/m2, the patient’s initial LVEDD (5.96 cm/m2) approached the upper range for LV dilation expected in myocarditis, leading the cardiology service to suspect a chronic undiagnosed cardiomyopathy. The patient had no evidence of ischemic heart disease, history of alcohol or methamphetamine use, or any other obvious etiology of cardiomyopathy. Further investigation revealed that the patient had spent time in Mexico, so he was tested for Chagas disease. This was a send-out lab and would not result for several days. The patient was discharged in stable condition on hospital day four with new prescriptions for metoprolol succinate, losartan and spironolactone.
Three days later, the patient returned to the ED with acute expressive aphasia without other neurological deficits. MRI and MR angiography of the brain revealed an acute left middle cerebral artery stroke involving Broca’s area. He was treated with tissue plasminogen activator and admitted to the neurology service. ECG demonstrated a stable LBBB with no acute ST-T wave changes. Troponin T was elevated at 66 nanograms per liter (ng/L) (Ref: <19ng/L), and peaked at 373ng/L, 11 hours later. Emergent computed tomography angiography of the neck, did not reveal any carotid lesions, but did show ground-glass infiltrates in bilateral lung apices, consistent with COVID-19 infection. CXR showed bilateral peripheral airspace opacities (left greater than right). Repeat TTE showed a new LV thrombus (not visualized on TTE or cardiac MRI from previous hospitalization) and worsening LV dilation (diastolic diameter increased from 5.96 cm to 6.53 cm, compared to previous echocardiography six days earlier). He was started on anticoagulation therapy with warfarin with a heparin bridge, and transferred to an outside hospital for continued care and rehabilitation.
The patient’s Trypanasoma cruzi (T. cruzi) immunoglobulin G (IgG) was found to be positive at 1.8, suggesting active or past infection. The patient was notified of this finding, and infectious disease follow-up was arranged.