A 90-year-old man was admitted to our hospital due to an accidentally discovered painless mass in the right lower abdomen 2 wk before admission.
The painless mass in the right lower abdomen had been identified 2 wk previously. The mass showed no redness and ulceration and could not be returned to the abdominal cavity. No signs of abdominal pain or abnormal defecation, and no symptoms such as fever, marasmus, or night sweat were reported. B-ultrasound examination showed a hypoechoic mass with irregular morphology. The boundary between the mass and iliac vessels was unclear.
The patient had a history of atrial fibrillation for more than 30 years and a pacemaker was implanted 28 years prior. His current medication included digoxin and metoprolol, which helped to maintain his heart rate at 60-80 beats per min, and general low-intensity physical activity did not cause excessive fatigue or asthma. He had hypertension for more than 30 years, and his blood pressure was well controlled on amlodipine, irbesartan and hydrochlorothiazide, ranging from 140-150 to 60-70 mmHg. He also had diabetes for more than 20 years; however, his blood glucose levels were only mildly elevated. He did not adhere to his hypoglycemic therapy, and stopped taking medicine whenever self-monitored glucose levels were within normal ranges.
The patient did not have a history of alcohol consumption or smoking. He had no family history of hereditary disease.
During physical examination, a mass (approximately 50 mm × 30 mm) located in the middle of the right inguinal area was found. The mass was fixed with a hard texture.
Laboratory studies showed that the red blood cell count was 3.3 × 1012/L, hemoglobin was 117 g/L, and blood platelet count was 93 × 109/L. White blood cells and the neutrophil ratio were within the normal range. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 4 mm/h. Myocardial markers showed cardiac troponin T (cTnT) of 0.05 ng/mL and plasma N terminal pro-B type brain natriuretic peptide (NT-Pro BNP) of 672.8 pg/mL. Serum tumor markers showed that cytokeratin 19 fragment (Cyfra21-1) was 6.4 ng/mL, and the others were all within the normal range.
CT showed a soft tissue mass near the right inguinal region closely connected to the right external iliac artery. Multiple small lymph nodes were observed in the abdominal cavity, posterior peritoneum, and right inguinal area. A mild pericardial effusion (10 mm behind the left ventricular posterior wall) was seen on echocardiography. There was no obvious change in cardiac structure and ejection fraction at that time. On PET-CT, enlarged lymph nodes were found in the left abdominal cavity, right-iliac fossa (56.2 mm × 31.1 mm), and in the left lobar thyroid (55.6 mm × 46.3 mm). In addition, involvement of the pericardium could not be excluded .
An ultrasound-guided fine needle biopsy of the painless mass was postponed for approximately 10 wk after his first admission as the patient and his family members worried about possible suffering following the procedure. On histological examination, the biopsy specimen contained massive proliferation of lymphoid tissue. Proliferation of B lymphocytes was obvious in this area. Lymphatic follicular structure was revealed in some parts of the biopsy specimen . Immunohistochemical test results showed B-cell lymphoma (Bcl-2)(+), Bcl-6(+), cluster of differentiation 10 (CD10)(+), CD20(+), CD21(+), CD3(+), CD5(+), CD56(-), CD79α(+), c-Myc(-), cyclin-D1(-), Ki-67(30%positive), multiple myeloma oncogene-1(50%+), CD15(-), CD30(scattered+), and anaplastic lymphoma kinase(-). His cTnT was 0.06 ng/mL and NT-Pro BNP was 2922 pg/mL.