A 25-year-old male, labourer, inhabitant of Hyderabad, India, presented with history of abnormal behaviour, delusions, hallucinations, and aggression beginning a few hours prior to presentation. The onset was acute and progressive in nature. According to his wife, he suddenly stood up and started picking at his clothes and searching for something in a drawer; at the same time he was not responding to her calls. He was also reported to be sniffing like a dog. When she intervened, he became aggressive and physically assaulted her. He was confused and did not seem to respond to the surroundings. No history of fever, fall, head trauma, or substance abuse was reported. On examination, patient's vitals, and all systems including neurological system were normal. Rapport could not be established as the patient appeared confused and perplexed and was not responding to any questions. He appeared to be agitated and hallucinating as he was talking to self. He was admitted and on further evaluation it was revealed that although his speech was sparse, on many occasions he said God was talking to him and he could also see Him; hence he has the power to do anything. He only intermittently recognized family members. His orientation to time, person, and place was lost on many occasions. However, there were bouts of aggressive behaviour which was nondirected and seemed purposeless. All routine investigations were within normal limits including electrolytes, computed tomography (CT) brain, and electroencephalogram (EEG). The patient was diagnosed as acute transient psychotic disorder according to the tenth revision of the International Classification of Mental and Behavioural Disorders (ICD 10) criteria. He was given intramuscular, haloperidol 10mg IM twice for 2 days. Improvement was noticed in terms of sleep, control of aggression, and orientation. Surprisingly, all the psychotic symptom improved within 2 days. Later he was switched to oral olanzapine 10mg OD due to mild extrapyramidal side effects and was discharged after 3days. He returned after 15 days with complaints of abnormal behaviour. According to his wife he was aggressive, entered a restaurant, and broke the furniture. Patient had no memory of aggressive behaviour. On history taking it was revealed that the present episode lasted only for few minutes. The nature of symptoms as described by patient is feeling of twisting in the abdomen and felt that the bubbles of rain had become very large since it was raining that day. At the same time, he had a thought of infidelity about his wife and did not remember the subsequent episode of aggression which was reported by the wife. On examination the vitals were normal and mental status examination (MSE) seemed to be absolutely normal. Moreover, on further enquiry the wife recollects several such episodes of short-lived abnormal behaviour for the last two years. Video EEG monitoring was recommended in the higher level medical care facility, which he could not do due to financial constraints. He was started on oral carbamazepine 200mg BID on clinical suspicion of CPS, which was later increased gradually to 1000mg per day. Simultaneously olanzapine was tapered off. The patient has been maintained on 1000mg oral carbamazepine per day for the last 2 years with no relapse in the symptoms.