A 65-year-old man was admitted with diffuse abdominal pain and distention. The pain was constant and dull, and started 2 hours prior to admission with no obvious inducible factor. The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable except mild weight loss during the recent 5 months. Physical examination revealed a palpable abdominal mass in the left upper abdominal quadrant with tenderness, and the patient’s hemodynamic condition was unstable with systolic arterial blood pressure only 85 mmHg and heart rate 110 beats/minute. After initial fast fluid resuscitation (1,000 ml hetastarch 130/0.4 NaCl), the hemodynamic status of the patient became stable. Peripheral blood count revealed anemia (hemoglobin 10.0 g/dl) and thrombocytopenia (platelets 90 × 109/l), but it did not reach disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. Results of other laboratory examinations had not been reported to us before the operation due to the emergency. Abdominal ultrasonography showed an enlarged spleen filled with irregular nodules, multiple hepatic solid lesions and moderate accumulation of peritoneal fluid. Abdominal paracentesis was performed with blood fluid aspirated from the peritoneal cavity. These findings were further confirmed by an abdominal computed tomography scan (Figure
), demonstrating a heterogeneous, low-density signal within the splenic parenchyma, with variable degrees of contrast enhancement as well as intra-abdominal hemorrhage originating most possibly from the spleen. Meanwhile, there were multiple low-density lesions with enhanced rim in the liver.
Laparotomy revealed a huge spleen actively bleeding and an abnormal liver with several metastatic foci. We did observe a fissure of the capsule of the spleen with a size of 6 cm (length) × 2.5 cm (depth) in the lower pole of spleen. Two liters of blood had been collected from the peritoneal cavity. Splenectomy was performed. During the procedure, the patient received 4 units of concentrated red blood cells and 2 units of fresh frozen plasma.
The spleen was 1,650 g in weight, 19 cm × 16 cm × 11 cm in size, with nodular appearance and bleeding. The pathology diagnosis of the excised spleen was angiosarcoma originating from the spleen (Figure
). Immunohistochemical staining was positive for vimentin (Figure
), CD31 (Figure
), CD34 (Figure
), factor VIII (Figure
), a1ACT (Figure
) and SMA (Figure
), and was negative for lysozyme (Figure
). The Ki-67 proliferation index was less than 10% (Figure
).