An asymptomatic 17-year-old woman was referred to our institution when an abnormality on chest radiography was noted during her routine medical check-up. The x-ray showed a nodular shadow at the left upper lung field . Chest computed tomography revealed a 29-mm, homogeneous, intrathoracic nodule in the left chest wall, attached to the second and third ribs . At this stage, we suspected a neurogenic tumor but we decided to perform exploratory surgery because of the possibility of malignancy without additional close examination, according to the patient’s and her family’s intention.
Three-port video-assisted thoracic surgery was performed using single-lung ventilation, with the patient in the right lateral decubitus position. Skin incisions of 5-mm were made in the second and fourth intercostal space along the anterior axillary line and a 10-mm skin incision was made in the sixth intercostal space along the middle axillary line. The uneven, solid tumor was visualized in the second intercostal space . The mass was encapsulated and well-defined under the parietal pleura. There was no visible rib invasion and the tumor could be detached by parietal pleural incision . However, the tumor had penetrated the intercostal muscle . The intercostal vessels were first excised to reduce bleeding. Thereafter, we dissected the tumor using an ultrasonic scalpel, together with the surrounding intercostal muscle and nerve, to achieve a sufficient margin of excision . Because rapid histopathologic diagnosis did not show obvious malignant findings, the surgery was completed without additional resection of the surrounding tissues.
Histopathologic examination of the surgical specimen revealed negative surgical margin and proliferation of small blood vessels within the surrounding striated muscle using hematoxylin-eosin staining . Tumor cells were positive for CD31 and CD34 . Immunostaining of Ki-67 showed a low proliferative rate (< 1%) . The final diagnosis was small-vessel type IMH. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and there has been no evidence of recurrence for more than 18 months after surgery.