A 36-year-old Eritrean man who had lived in Denmark for the past 3 years presented to the hospital with complaints of 4 months’ history of abdominal pain and back pain, intermittent fever, productive cough with hemoptysis (just once), nausea, vomiting, and weight loss of 12 kg. The abdominal pain was mild to moderate, crampy in nature, and generalized. The patient neither had skin rash, chronic diarrhea, or rectal bleeding nor had he traveled/been to Eritrea for the past 3 years. Cardiac and pulmonary examinations were unremarkable while the abdominal exam showed signal of low-grade ascites. There was white blood cell elevation, high levels of CRP, and liver enzymes. Serologies for HIV and hepatitis virus B and C, gonorrhea, and syphilis were negative. Chest X-ray was completely normal without infiltrations or effusions. Abdominal ultrasonography reported fluid accumulation and periportal fibrosis with normal conditions in the liver and spleen and normal portal pressure. Expectorant culture and blood culture were negative for infections. Tuberculosis quantiferon PCR for differential diagnosis was positive, but direct microscopic examination of ascites fluid revealed no tuberculosis bacilli, and acid-fast stain was negative. Computed tomography (CT) of the thorax and abdomen reported normal conditions in the lungs but thickening of the terminal ileum with surrounding inflammatory change. Biopsy from the terminal ileum showed ulcer without necrotic granuloma in intestinal mucosa. Examination of stool and urine for ova was positive for Schistosoma. FDG-PET/CT scan showed enlarged lymph nodes below the diaphragm, widespread foci in peritoneum, omentum majus, and terminal ilium with increased metabolism as well as ascites with up to moderately increased metabolism.
In our study, a diagnostic protocol including routine clinical, biochemical, microbiological, serological, and radiological examinations was performed and ultimately the patient followed up FDG-PET/CT scan in order to determine the etiology of the patient’s complex clinical feature. Patient data were retrieved from the hospital records .
Injected dose 18F-FDG was 224 MBq, uptake time 58 min. The PET scan was performed on a Discovery STE PET-CT scanner from GE (Chicago, IL). The PET scan was decay- and attenuation-corrected using simultaneously and reconstructed using 3D iterative reconstruction with 28 subsets, 2 iterations into 2.5-mm slices. The uptake value (SUV) was standardized using decay-corrected injected dose and total body weight and the low-dose CT (120 kV) was performed .