A 69-year-old North African Caucasian female patient presented to the Urology department at Alexandria Medical Center, Egypt, with complaints of right loin pain and hematuria. The patient's medical history was notable for hypertension, which had been managed with lisinopril 10 mg once daily for the past eight years. Prior to this medication, her blood pressure had been controlled through dietary and lifestyle modifications, including salt restriction and exercise. There was no significant surgical history. The patient was G1P1, with one living offspring. She is a homemaker and does not smoke or consume alcohol. Her father had hypertension, but otherwise, her family history was unremarkable.
On admission, her vitals were within normal range, including a blood pressure of 135/90 mmHg, a pulse rate of 88 beats per minute, and a temperature of 36.7°C. Abdominal examination showed only right flank tenderness without a palpable mass. Otherwise, the physical examination was unremarkable, and there were no abnormalities found during the neurological examination.
The lab results showed anemia, indicated by a hemoglobin level of 9.5 g/dL, and a normal serum creatinine level of 0.7 mg/dL [, ]. Liver function tests were within normal ranges, and urinalysis showed trace protein and numerous red blood cells without casts. Multi-slice computed tomography (MSCT) revealed two right renal masses. The first one was an upper polar mainly anterior, totally endophytic, enhancing soft tissue mass lesion measuring 6.5 cm and invading the middle calyx with a RENAL score of 11A . The other smaller mass was a lower polar exophytic lesion measuring 1.3cm . An apparent left paraaortic lymph node measuring 10 × 8.3 mm was detected. Multiple calyceal filling defects at the delayed phase suggesting blood clots were also reported. Metastatic workup was free.
Considering the history of hematuria, diagnostic cystoscopy, and right retrograde contrast study were done intraoperatively to exclude upper tract urothelial tumor , the latter showing no filling defect of the pelvicalyceal system. The patient then underwent laparoscopic right radical nephrectomy with a presumptive clinical diagnosis of multicentric neoplastic renal process, mostly RCC.
Serial sectioning of the specimen grossly revealed two distinct well-circumscribed masses. The larger mass extended from the upper pole to the midzone of the kidney and measured 4.6 × 4 × 4 cm. Its cut surface was solid hemorrhagic brown with few yellowish areas. The tumor did not invade the renal sinus, renal vein, pelvicalyceal system, or perinephric fat grossly . Microscopic examination of the larger mass revealed a well-circumscribed nonencapsulated neoplastic growth formed of sheets and trabeculae of polygonal cells having abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and well-defined cell outlines with plant-like cell borders. The cells had round to oval nuclei, showing mild to moderate pleomorphism with occasional prominent nucleoli. Irregular raisinoid nuclei with irregular nuclear membranes and occasional perinuclear halos were also noted . No necrosis, sarcomatoid, or rhabdoid features were detected. The tumor was morphologically diagnosed as ChRCC, confirmed by immunohistochemical positivity for CK-7 and CD117 .
The second smaller mass was located at the lower pole of the kidney, it measured 1.3 × 1 × 0.8 cm and was partially exophytic. Its cut section was light brown with minute cystic spaces. Again, no invasion of the renal sinus, renal vein, pelvicalyceal system, or perinephric fat was detected grossly . Histopathological examination revealed a different histologic subtype of renal cell carcinoma forming a well-circumscribed neoplastic growth and having a fibrous pseudo-capsule. It was formed of clear cells arranged in solid sheets as well as nests / alveolar pattern separated by delicate vascular spaces. Focally, a tubular pattern was also seen. The cells had clear cytoplasm and mildly pleomorphic nuclei with conspicuous nucleoli at high power examination. No necrosis, rhabdoid, or sarcomatoid features were noted . This tumor was morphologically diagnosed as ccRCC, with a nuclear grade of 2 (according to the WHO/ISUP grading system) and was confirmed by negative immunohistochemical staining of the neoplastic cells for both CK-7 and CD117 . Both tumors did not invade the renal sinus, renal vein, renal pelvis, or perinephric fat microscopically. One unit of packed red blood cells was administered intraoperatively.
After surgery, the patient received 500 mL of isotonic saline every 12 h for one day and intravenous ceftriaxone 1 gm every 12 h for five days, along with paracetamol as needed for pain management. Her postoperative recovery was favorable, with a repeat hemoglobin level of 10.4 g/dL and serum creatinine level of 0.8 mg/dL. No specific adjuvant therapy was prescribed, and she was discharged one week later with prescriptions for levofloxacin 750 mg once daily for two weeks and ibuprofen tablets for pain relief as needed.
She was scheduled for 3 monthly follow-up visits. During the 3-month and 6-month follow-up appointments, laboratory and imaging tests, including complete blood count, renal function tests, and computed tomographic (CT) studies of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis were all unremarkable.