The patient, a 24-year-old nulliparous female, had a sudden onset of generalized abdominal pain at 33 + 4 weeks gestation. The patient was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital at 7:43 am on March 03, 2022. The pain was moderate and continuous and had lasted for 5 h before admission. The emergency foetal heart rate was 150 beats per minute, and abdominal palpation and uterine contraction were irregular and of moderate degree. Abdominal ultrasonogram was immediately performed and showed a single intrauterine, live foetus in a head-first presentation and an internal cervix with a U-shaped expansion.The functional cervical length was 11 mm. The working diagnosis at that time was"threatened preterm labour" at 8:27, and the patient was admitted to the obstetrics ward. The physical examination after admission showed a temperature of 36.5°C, heart rate of 100 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 17 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 130/74 mmHg, normal vital parameters, no yellow staining of the skin or sclera, no difference in heart or lung auscultation,no palpable liver or spleen, and no oedema of the lower limbs.The special prenatal examination showed a uterine height of 30 cm, abdominal circumference of 94 cm, foetus in the left occiput anterior (LOA) position, and a foetal heart rate of 140 beats per minute. The patient did not have vaginal bleeding or fluid leakage, had irregular contractions of moderate intensity, and transvaginal examination showed that she was 0.5 cm dilated with a soft cervix. After admission, we communicated with the patient and informed her of her condition. The patient requested continuing the pregnancy;an atosiban intravenous drip was selected to inhibit uterine contractions and 12 mg of betamethasone was given via intramuscular injection to promote foetallung maturation. At 9:23 am, atosiban was given intravenously. During the process of intravenous infusion, irregular contractions could still be felt, but the intensity was weaker than before.At 13:30, the patient still had abdominal pain. Physical examination by the doctor showed tenderness in the abdomen without rebound pain, and irregular contractions of moderate intensity couldbe felt. At 15:18, emergency re-examination by abdominal ultrasound indicated the following: 1. Single foetus in the head-first position, 2. normal umbilical artery blood flow, and 3. ascites (maximum located in the left paracolic sulcus, maximum anteroposterior diameter 60 mm) and flocculent echo in the liver and kidney crypts suggesting the presence of a blood clot (see Fig. ). Ultrasound suggested that the abdominal effusion could not be excluded as abdominal haemorrhage. Ultrasound-guided abdominal puncture was performed after urgent surgical consultation at 15:22. Dark red bloody fluid was withdrawn, and abdominal haemorrhage was considered. At the same time, ultrasound examination of the liver, gallbladder, pancreas, spleen, kidneys, bladder, and bilateral appendage showed ascites. At 15:35, the multidisciplinary team (MDT) provided a diagnosis and treatment plan. An emergency exploratory laparotomy and caesarean section were performed. During the laparotomy, the volume of bleeding and blood clots in the abdomen was approximately 500 ml. After delivery of the baby, the right ovarian tear was measured at 4*3 cm, and no obvious active bleeding was observed. Along the ovarian tear to the right side of the posterior wall of the uterus, a 10*3 cm parametrial venous plexus was permeated and ruptured, and an obvious active bleeding point was seen within. A 5*2 cm blood clot was observed on the surface of the intestinal tube below the tear, and no obvious active bleeding was observed (see Fig. ).During the operation, the active bleeding points were ligated in a figure-8 pattern through 3/0 absorbable sutures. After the operation, an abdominal drainage tube was placed, and the volume of total bleeding was 800 ml. The result was G1P1 at 33 + 4 weeks of an LOA preterm live infant after a pregnancy complicated with foetal dystocia and ovarian rupture and uterine venous plexus haemorrhage complicated with pelvic inflammatory disease sequelae. After the operation, the patient was given symptomatic treatment to prevent infection and promote uterine contraction and was discharged 5 days after the operation.
Postoperative pathological examination revealed a parametrial vascular plexus consisting of fibrous smooth muscle tissue with hyperaemia and haemorrhage (see Fig. ).