A 31-year-old Japanese woman presented to our hospital with approximately a 2-month history of intermittent fever and night sweats. She had delivered a baby by cesarean section in a local hospital 3 months prior to admission. These symptoms appeared within a few weeks of her labor. A month prior to admission, she reported edema of her lower limbs and dizziness. She was transferred to our hospital for general fatigue, chest pain, and dyspnea. She had no significant medical history and no relevant history of dental procedures, exposure to animals, travel, or drug abuse. She had no congenital heart disease; this was checked by echocardiography in former hospital for cesarean section.
Her body temperature was 37.8 °C, respiratory rate was 24 breaths/minute, systolic blood pressure was 70 mmHg, and she had pale conjunctivae without petechiae and no signs of Osler nodes or Janeway lesions. A laboratory workup revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 8.5 × 109/L, hemoglobin 9.9 g/dL, and serum creatinine (Scr) 0.83 mg/dL; her C-reactive protein (CRP) was elevated at 20.5 mg/dL.
Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a mobile, 20 × 15 mm vegetation attached to the anterior mitral valve; mitral valve replacement with a prosthetic valve was urgently performed because of the severe mitral regurgitation and worsening symptoms of heart failure.
Two sets of blood cultures drawn on admission and valve tissue culture yielded Enterococcus faecalis. The Enterococcus faecalis in this case was susceptible to benzylpenicillin G, amino-benzyl penicillin (ampicillin), and vancomycin . The gentamicin minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) was 8 mg/L, which was not high-level resistance as detected by E-test® strips (AB Biodisk, Sweden; Fig. ). The diagnosis of IE was confirmed with two of the major items of the modified Duke criteria: positive blood culture and echocardiogram with an oscillating intracardiac mass on the valve. She was placed on antimicrobial therapy with intravenously administered ampicillin (2 g every 4 hours) and gentamicin (1 mg/kg every 8 hours) for 6 weeks. During the 6-week treatment period, we monitored WBC, Scr, and CRP . We also checked the serum concentration of gentamicin in pre-dosing 0.4 mg/L on the fifth day after initiation of gentamicin therapy. Her renal function, with a creatinine clearance of nearly 100 mL/minute at the end of the treatment period, did not deteriorate.
Vegetation was not detected by transthoracic echocardiography after the mitral valve replacement. She was discharged from our hospital without any complications on the 42nd day of hospitalization. She did not have any sequelae related to the disease 19 months after discharge.