A 79-year-old man was referred to our department for TACE-refractory HCC in the S2/3 area after two TACE treatments failed to control the disease. In August 2021, the contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed re-enlargement of the TACE-treated area of the S2/3 and appearance of PVTT . The PVTT extended from the left portal vein to the main trunk, and it was determined that the resection of the left portal vein would be difficult to perform with R0 status. The patient was diagnosed with unresectable advanced HCC of stage IIIB (T 4 N 0 M 0) based on the eighth edition of the Union for International Cancer Control. Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and des-gamma-carboxyprothrombin (DCP) levels were 3.2 ng/ml and 20 mAU/ml, respectively. The patient’s condition was graded as follows: Barcelona clinic liver cancer stage C, Child-Pugh class A (6 points), and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status 0. He was started on a 3-week course of atezolizumab (1200 mg) plus bevacizumab (15 mg/kg) therapy. Contrast-enhanced CT after the second course showed reduced extent of intratumoral arterial enhancement without reduction of tumor size , and the PVTT had regressed from the main trunk to the peripheral side of the left portal vein . The patient was diagnosed with the stable disease based on the response evaluation criteria for solid tumors (RECIST), and partial response to the modified RECIST. R0 resection of the left portal vein was considered feasible with enough surgical margin. At the same time, the patient developed a grade 3 skin disorder as an immune-related adverse event, and it was judged that continuation of chemotherapy would be difficult. His tumor marker levels remained within normal range (AFP 6.4 ng/ml and DCP 24 mAU/ml). With the consent of the patient, hepatectomy was planned. Preoperative liver function was graded as Child-Pugh class A (6 points). CT volumetry showed a liver volume of 861 ml, an effective liver resection rate of 19.6%, and a residual liver volume of 692 ml. Four weeks after the second course of atezolizumab plus bevacizumab administration, in October 2021 left lobectomy was performed. During the left portal vein resection , intraoperative ultrasonography was used to confirm the location of the tumor thrombus, and a sufficient surgical margin was obtained. The duration of surgery was 5 h 43 min, blood loss was 2030 ml, and intraoperative and postoperative blood transfusions (red blood cells: 6 units and fresh frozen plasma: 10 units) were performed. The resected specimen showed that the left lobe of the liver was atrophic owing to TACE and the PVTT . The PVTT was located approximately 1.5 cm from the resection line of the left portal vein . The pathological diagnosis was moderately differentiated HCC. The histopathological findings showed that the primary tumor and the PVTT were mostly composed of necrotic lesions with residues of viable tumor cells observed in some areas. The liver background was A1/F4 (new Inuyama classification). The resection margins were negative, and R0 resection was confirmed. The patient was discharged 15 days after surgery without postoperative complications. There was no recurrence through 5 months after surgery.