A 56-year-old African woman presented with symptoms of severe abdominal pain and brownish foul smelling vaginal discharge that had lasted for one month after UAE. She had associated symptoms of nausea and persistent vomiting but reported no fever or any other flu like symptoms. She had an associated nonproductive cough but no other respiratory symptoms.
She had a UAE done a month prior due to symptomatic uterine fibroids with her symptoms being menorrhagia and a feeling of an abdominal mass for a duration of one year. Her Pre-UAE MRi had shown multiple enhancing uterine fibroids numbering around 15 with the largest being around 6.5 centimeters. The UAE had been done with Spongostan Gelfoam slurry and she was discharged home after an overnight stay. Her discharge meds after UAE included antibiotics (cefuroxime and clindamycin for a week), analgesics (diclofenac and paracetamol), and metoclopramide as an antiemetic. She had been seen 2 weeks after the UAE with no major complaints with abdominal pain being minimal. This pain worsened afterwards and was associated with a fever that resolved after an antibiotic course (clindamycin and metronidazole).
Her known comorbidities were diabetes mellitus for a duration of 3 years and hypertension for a duration of 5 years for which she was being treated with lorsartan 50 milligrams once daily. She had not had any prior surgeries and had no other significant history in her past.
On examination she was in good general condition and was oriented in time and place. Her vitals revealed a tachycardia with a pulse of 107 beats per minute with a normal blood pressure of 104/67 millimeters of mercury and a temperature of 36.2 degrees Celsius. Abdominal examination revealed lower abdomen tenderness with a palpable pelvic mass at 14 weeks. The rest of her systems were normal in signs.
Investigations done included a full blood count which revealed a low hemoglobin level at 9.4 grams per deciliter with a normal white cell and platelet count. Her urea, creatinine, and electrolytes were all within normal limits. She had a chest X-ray done that revealed interstitial edema with borderline cardiomegaly and a subsequent computed tomography pulmonary angiogram revealed no evidence of pulmonary embolism.
In view of her worsening condition with first-line treatment and nonremitting abdominal pain, it was decided that a surgical intervention would be appropriate and since she was postmenopausal, a total hysterectomy was advised. She was subsequently scheduled for the surgery which was done on day 2 of admission. Intraoperatively we found a Necrosed uterus with a thin serosal separation that was adhered to small and large bowel . Necrosed Myomas were found as a distinct single matted mass of around 12 myomas . Multiple small pelvic abscesses were also found. A general surgery team was invited to assist in her surgery at this point. The surgery done entailed drainage of the pelvic abscesses, separation of the adhered uterine wall serosa from small bowel, and a subtotal hysterectomy. Peritoneal lavage was done with around 10 liters of 0.9% sodium chloride solution. Bilateral Jackson Pratt drains were left in situ in both pelvic gutters to drain the pelvis.
Postoperatively, she was started on intravenous antibiotics (piperacillin, tazobactam, and clindamycin) and analgesia and thromboprophylaxis with enoxaparin. She required a relook laparotomy on day 4 after surgery due to wound sepsis in which she had abdominal washouts and fascial closure. Her skin incision was left open for subsequent dressing and secondary wound closure. Her wound swab had a positive culture of Klebsiella pneumoniae sensitive to Meropenem which she was started on postoperatively. She recovered as an inpatient for a further 10 days and was subsequently discharged after 16 days of admission.
At her follow-up at the clinic 2 weeks afterwards, she reported marked improvement with no major concerns. She underwent subsequent wound dressing and the wound healed well and did not require secondary closure. She was discharged from follow-up care about 3 months after the surgery.