A 71-year-old Caucasian man complained of memory difficulties and resting tremor of the right upper limb in the previous 2 years. He had difficulty learning new tasks like using a different mobile phone. His wife took care of his medication. He still bought the newspaper and did simple shopping in the neighborhood with the aid of a shopping list, but no longer handled financial or other important matters. There were neither hallucinations nor clear clinical fluctuation at this time. Regarding personal history, the patient suffered from controlled arterial hypertension and diabetes mellitus, angina pectoris, obstructive sleep apnea, benign prostatic hyperplasia, and major depression. He also had cataract surgery in the left eye, as well as hearing loss. Neurological examination showed positive Myerson’s sign, tongue tremor, resting tremor, and cogwheel rigidity of the right arm, mild dystonic posture of the right hand, Parkinsonian gait with mild alteration of postural reflexes, and writing tremor, and confirmed the hypoacusia. Neuropsychological examination identified deficits in executive functions (Trail Making Test B) as well as memory tests, namely logical memory (stories from Wechsler Memory Scale), associative learning (Word Pairs), and word list learning (California Verbal Learning Test). Other cognitive functions were maintained. The patient had mild depressive symptoms scoring 6 on the Geriatric Depression Scale (15 items) and was clearly deteriorated according to the Blessed Dementia Scale score (5.5 points) . Brain computerized tomography and nuclear magnetic resonance scans showed mild cortical and subcortical atrophy. The clinical diagnosis of possible dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) was established. The patient’s medication comprised: propranolol 10 mg twice daily, metformin 700 mg twice daily, dutasteride 0.5 mg daily, association of levodopa 100 mg and benserazide 25 mg twice daily, paroxetine 20 mg twice daily, and lorazepam 2.5 mg (at night). Rivastigmine (transdermic patch, 4.6 mg/24 hours) was started.
Five years later, the patient began complaining of auditory hallucinations, exclusively of musical choral nature, folk songs, nursery rhymes, well-known religious hymns, and even a popular football chant. These songs were present all the time, and were only to a certain extent attenuated by environmental noise. The patient initially thought the music was being played outside, but came to realize it was an odd phenomenon somehow generated in his brain. The patient was moderately upset and would like to be relieved, but did not attribute any frightening or persecutory meaning to the symptoms. There had been no change in levodopa, rivastigmine, antidepressant, or other medication before the musical hallucinations appeared. The psychiatry consultant prescribed low-dose risperidone (1 mg daily), but the patient became deeply sedated with urinary retention. Because of the auditory symptoms, the patient looked for the opinion of an otorhinolaryngology specialist, who diagnosed age-related hearing loss and prescribed bilateral hearing aids. Remarkably, after using the hearing aids, he did not hear the bothering songs any longer, only some tinnitus, described as a whistle. Even when he temporarily removed the hearing aids, the songs remained absent. However, at the same time, the patient began having visual hallucinations for the first time, namely he would see small spiders everywhere. Clozapine (6.25 mg daily) was initiated, with noticeable improvement of these visual hallucinations. Unfortunately, the general condition of the patient declined, he entered a nursing home, and died 1 year later.