A 67-year-old woman came to the hospital with 1-month paroxysmal palpitations and 1-week bilateral lower limb edema with aggravation for 2 h. The patient presented with paroxysmal palpitations with a heart rate of 110 beats per minute 1 month ago and received no treatment. The patient had a 5-year history of hypertension and a 4-year history of diabetes mellitus, with a maximum blood pressure of 160/100 mmHg, and usually took oral antihypertensive medication to maintain her blood pressure. Physical examination revealed that the patient had no symptoms of dyspnea, hemoptysis, cyanosis, or abnormal sensation. Urine catecholamine and methoxyepinephrine levels were significantly increased . An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia and echocardiography found an enlarged left atrium and a hypoechoic mass of about 4.6 cm × 4.6 cm at the top of the right atrium near the superior vena cava, with clear borders and uniform internal echogenicity. Compression of the right atrium and superior vena cava is demonstrated in . Computed tomography (CT) examination indicated a soft tissue mass in the right atrium, about 4.7 cm × 4.4 cm in size, with a CT attenuation value of about 46 HU in plain view and a significant heterogeneous enhancement with a CT attenuation value of about 142 HU after enhancement.
Its blood was supplied by the left circumflex branch of the coronary artery with a nutrient vessel visible in the lesion and a draining vein connected to the superior vena cava . The patient then underwent cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging. The lesion was found in the right atrium with the inferior border reaching the entrance of the inferior vena cava, with inhomogeneous iso signal on T1-weighted image (T1WI), patchy low signal inside, and inhomogeneous slightly high signal on T2 fat-suppression image, ranging from approximately 5.2 cm × 5.0 cm × 6.0 cm [Left right diameter (LR) × Anteroposterior diameter (AP) × Superior and lower diameter (SI)]. The lesion displayed inhomogeneous high signals on the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) image. Heterogeneous and significant enhancement was shown in the first-perfused and delayed phases after intravenous contrast injection . However, abnormal signals were surprisingly found in the patient’s right lung, so an F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) scan was performed to rule out metastatic lesions. A soft tissue mass with a high fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake was seen in the right atrium, with the maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) at about 15.2 and a maximum dimension of approximately 4.1 cm × 5.9 cm, which was poorly demarcated from the pericardium. In the upper lobe of the right lung, a mixed-density nodule shadow with a mild FDG uptake was seen near the pleural, with an SUVmax at about 5.8 and a size of about 1.7 cm × 2.3 cm, surrounded by a multi-density nodular shadow with a slightly radioactive uptake with an SUVmax at about 1.7. Inflammatory lesions were considered. Furthermore, high FDG uptake of brown fat was demonstrated symmetrically along the bilateral intermuscular neck, posterior cervical triangle, mediastinum, intrapericardial, sternum, spine, parasternal, perirenal, and retroperitoneal area with the SUVmax at about 34.4, which were typically related with the high secretion of catecholamine hormones from paragangliomas . Therefore, based on the clinical symptoms and multiple imaging findings, a CPGL in the right atrium was considered. The patient underwent a surgical resection under general anesthesia and extracorporeal circulation after preoperative blood pressure control with the α-blocker phenibutramine and metoprolol tartrate-extended release tablets. During surgery, the tumor was found to be grayish-yellowish-red in color, partially located in the atrial wall and the right atrium. The tumor had a short tip connected to the interatrial septum and a smooth and intact membrane, with a size of approximately 7.5 cm × 6.0 cm × 3.5 cm. Histopathological examination showed that the tumor cells were organoid and glandular vesicle-like in arrangement, with indistinct boundaries, an eosinophilic cytoplasm, round-like nuclei, rare nuclear fission images, abundant interstitial vessels, fibrous tissue hyperplasia, and collagenization with pigmentation. Immunohistochemistry showed Cytokeratin (CK) (−), Epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) (−), Neural cell adhesion molecules (CD56) (+), Synaptophysin (SYN) (+), Chromogranin A (CgA) (+), S-100 (+), Ki-67 (3% +), Melan-A (−), and Homatropine methyl bromide-45 (HMB45) (−). Based on the results of pathological morphology and immunohistochemistry, the tumor was diagnosed as CPGL . The patient showed a good prognosis after surgery with normal blood pressure and no complications or tumor recurrence.