A 70-year-old woman, 162 cm tall, weighing 105 kg, suffered from paralytic ileus after surgical removal of an abdominal mass. Pathology revealed a follicular non-Hodgkin lymphoma grade 1–2. After severe aspiration, she was admitted to our ward. She was stabilized and her trachea was intubated; bronchoscopy confirmed severe aspiration of gastric contents. The patient developed moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome and was treated with kinetic lateral rotational therapy (Rotorest™ bed, KCI, San Antonio, Texas, USA).
After approval of the ethics committee (Landesärztekammer des Saarlandes; reference 199/09) and informed consent by the legal representative, later confirmed by the patient herself, sedation was switched on day four from midazolam/sufentanil to desflurane, 3.3–3.8 vol%, administered with the Mirus™ for 24 h . Sufentanil was decreased from 0.95 to 0.38 µg kg−1 h−1.
A desflurane specific version of the Mirus™ was connected to an Evita 4 ICU ventilator as prescribed by the manufacturer . The Mirus™ interface, inserted between the Y-piece and the endotracheal tube, consists of two parts: the “Mirus Reflector”, which comprises an anesthetic reflector and endings of cables for direct gas injection, for measuring pressure, flow, and gas concentrations; and the “Mirus Filter” for conditioning of breathing gas (heat moisture exchanger) and removal of bacteria, viruses, and particles.
The control unit displays respiratory pressure and flow continuously. The end-tidal desflurane concentration is controlled automatically to a set target value. The speed of control can be chosen as slow (symbol: tortoise), moderate (symbol: hare), or high (symbol: cheetah), leading to higher inspiratory concentrations during wash-in. We selected moderate speed of control.
Thereafter, isoflurane, 0.5–0.7 vol%, was applied with the AnaConDa™ and the Vamos gas monitor. Setup was according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Liquid isoflurane was delivered by a syringe pump (Perfusor fm; Braun Melsungen AG, Germany). The same Evita 4 ICU ventilator and the same ventilator accessories were used.
End-tidal concentrations, the bispectral index (BIS™, Aspect Medical Systems, Newton, MA, USA) and the Richmond Agitation and Sedation Scale (RASS) score were recorded manually once every hour.
During gas application with both systems, RASS scores were between -4 and -5 and the bispectral index between 35 and 55. While deeply sedated, our patient breathed 9.0–12.0 l min−1 spontaneously. There were no major problems during the sedation, no relevant increase in arterial carbon dioxide tension, and no relevant changes in hemodynamics. During 24-h sedation with the Mirus™, 1261 ml desflurane were consumed as opposed to 96 ml isoflurane per 24 h with the AnaConDa™.
In two sedation windows, after 24 h desflurane and 24 h isoflurane respectively, wash-out of both gases was recorded with the Vamos gas monitor. The Mirus™ interface and the AnaConDa™ respectively were replaced by a heat moisture exchanger with a gas sampling port (Humid-Vent Filter Compact S, Teleflex Medical GmbH, Kernen, Germany). Sedation recovery was monitored by an observer calling the patient’s name every 30 s.
Wash-out of desflurane after 24 h was considerably shorter than that of isoflurane. With the Mirus™, we observed the patient’s first response 5.08 min after stopping desflurane at an end-tidal concentration of 0.7 vol% as opposed to 17 min after stopping isoflurane at a concentration of 0.4 vol% using the AnaConDa™ system .
Oxygenation improved under lateral rotational therapy (from day 4 until day 12 after ICU admission). Until day 12, the patient was sedated with the AnaConDa™ (Isoflurane), and thereafter with sufentanil and bolus doses of midazolam. Invasive ventilation was continued intermittently until day 29; the patient was transferred to the ward on day 68 and discharged to a rehabilitation center on day 87.