A 27-year-old man presented with chronic severe headaches with a history of pharmacological treatment without improvement and a 3-month history of progressive deterioration in visual acuity with blurring of his left-sided vision. On neurological examination, visual acuity in the right eye was reported to be 20/60 and 20/80 in the left eye with 2 mm isochoric pupils, normal light reflex, and bitemporal hemianopia. Extraocular movements were of full range, and fundus examination was within normal limits.
A pituitary hormonal assay was carried out, revealing panhypopituitarism. MRI was deemed necessary, showing an intrasellar cystic image with peripheral enhancement with an intracystic nodule without a septum or compartments. Displacement of the optic chiasm and the anterior communicating complex were observed, as well as intralesional fluid level . The cystic lesion was classified independently by three neurosurgeons (J.J.C.H, E.C.O, and L.A.P.R). According to the Tavakol classification, a Type I lesion was defined as a well-circumscribed lesion with no solid components noted. As for the Park’s diagnostic model, midline location, a negative fluid-fluid level, and the presence of an intracystic nodule made the diagnosis of an RCC most likely. Both tools were employed by the three authors independently with the unanimous agreement on the diagnosis of an RCC. A surgical plan was defined and carried out.
The patient underwent a transsphenoidal endoscopic endonasal approach, allowing the identification of a cystic intrasellar tumor with thickened walls and viscous xanthochromic content with displacement of the pituitary tissue without sellar diaphragm compromise. The tumor was fully resected without complications or incidents . Histological examination revealed a chronic xanthogranulomatous process with a fibrous wall and epithelial lining compatible with Rathke’s pouch cyst . Immunohistochemistry was negative for Beta-catenin and cytokeratin AE1/AE3. The postoperative course was uneventful, with the improvement of the visual fields leading to discharge three days after surgery. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic with improvement of visual acuity and resolution of the bitemporal hemianopia. The patient remained with hormonal therapy with a progressive lowering of dosage requirements. The patient will continue on follow-up, but no worsening of the symptomatology is expected.