A 69-year-old male presented to our hospital with intermittent painless gross hematuria for 3 d.
Gross haematuria was observed in the urine and presented as bright red, accompanied by blood clots, intermittent attacks, frequent micturition, no urgency, pain and discomfort, no cramping pain, no fever, and chills. On the third day after admission, the patient's haematuria suddenly became worse, and the color was bright red for a total volume of about 500 mL. The bladder was continuously washed.
He had a history of “abdominal aortic stenosis”. Therefore, abdominal aorta and iliac vessel replacements were performed in 2011, and the patient has taken aspirin regularly. Following the operation, left hydronephrosis was caused by artificial blood vessel compression, and a left ureteral stent was implanted, during which the ureteral stent was replaced regularly. In 2020, transureteral ureteroscopy holmium laser lithotripsy for left ureteral calculi was performed “left ureteral calculi”. The surgical records showed that the calculi were located at the junction of the ureter and iliac artery. A holmium laser fiber lithotripsy was performed, with a small amount of bleeding occurring during the operation, and the ureteral stent was indwelling after the operation.
The patients denied any family history of similar diseases.
Upon admission, physical examination demonstrated that vital signs were stable, and no obvious abnormality was found in the cardiopulmonary physical examination.
Hemoglobin was 130 g/L on admission on April 11, platelets and white blood cells were within the normal range, and urine routine showed red blood cell 92/HPF. At 06:55 on April 14, hemoglobin dropped to 98 g/L, and the hemoglobin concentration rose to 104 g/L after interventional therapy.
The results of contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the urinary system, computed tomography urography, and computed tomography angiography (CTA) examination showed that the left renal pelvis and left ureter were dilated, and patchy high-density shadow could be seen inside . However, no enhancement was found in the enhanced scan, except for the possibility of bleeding. At the same time, clots were considered due to the high-density shadow in the bladder. Dilatation and pseudoaneurysm may be seen in the lower abdominal aorta. Cystoscopy showed bright red blood spraying from the left ureteral orifice.