In February 2018, a 46-year-old man was admitted to our center with chief complaints of increased stool frequency and occasional bloody stool lasting for over 1 month. A neoplasm with a distance of 4 to 7 cm from the anus was found in his colonoscopy, and liver multiple occupancies were detected in his abdominal computed tomography (CT). Subsequently, the patient was diagnosed with middle rectum adenocarcinoma with liver metastasis after conducting a pathological biopsy and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the liver and rectum , accompanied with elevated CA199 (>1000.00 U/ml) and CEA (229.70 ng/ml), suggesting a stage of cT3NxM1a, stage IVA according to National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) staging criteria. He had been generally fit, except for 5 years of chronic gastritis.
Based on the standard principles, the patient initially received first-line chemotherapy with FOLFIRI. No obvious adverse events were observed during chemotherapy. Then target region sequencing concluding 1406 targeted genes for his plasm ctDNA was conducted by NovaSeq, indicating that RAS and BRAF mutations were absent while the KRAS copy number of 3.31 copies was abnormal. Additionally, the status of microsatellite instability (MSI) or mismatch repair (MMR) was defined as proficient mismatch repair (pMMR). Therefore, one anti-EGFR monoclonal antibody (mAbs), cetuximab, was added. After two cycles of therapy, his tumor shrank remarkably, and partial response (PR) was assessed , followed by stable disease (SD) based on Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST); simultaneously accompanying with reduced CA199 (30.73 U/ml) and CEA values (21.18 ng/ml) in blood after four cycles. However, disease progressed in November 2018, mainly referring to the liver metastasis . Of note, before CT scanning, the level of CA199 decreased while the copy number of wild-type KRAS and APC p.R499* (a gene encoding tumor suppressor adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) protein) mutation increased , indicating the potential resistance to cetuximab in combination with chemotherapy. From November 2018 to June 2019, the patient then received second-line XELOX chemotherapy plus bevacizumab. During six cycles, his metastasis lesion size in the liver remained stable, and even shrunk , with the copy number of KRAS decreasing to 2.69 copies and mutant frequency of APC p.R499* decreasing to 8.9% . After finishing the second-line therapy, abdominal enhanced CT scanning showed that the size of the liver lesion had enlarged . The patient was subsequently treated with third-line regorafenib. Unfortunately, it failed to control the tumor growth . Then, we decided to choose FOLFIRI chemotherapy combined with cetuximab again after a discussion. On 4 October 2019, his last genetic testing reports showed the copy number of KRAS was 3.48 copies, and the mutant frequency of APC p.R499* was 15.1% . And tumor markers of CA199 and CEA decreased gradually. Although his liver lesions enlarged and the number of lesions also increased after six cycles, the physician considered that it might be due to the prolonged treatment interval . Thus, he received one cycle of FOLFIRI plus cetuximab again. The patient decided to stop the treatment and never returned to the hospital after the last outpatient follow-up in March 2020. presents the whole process and dynamics in tumor-related markers.