A 32-year-old Colombian male, resident of an urban area, heterosexual without a stable partner. His medical record was notable for transfusion of fresh frozen plasma 4 years ago due to a consumption coagulopathy caused by sepsis secondary to perforated appendicitis. The patient consulted for 6 months of diarrhea with abundant 4 to 5 foamy, foul-smelling stools per day, no blood or mucus were present in feces. It was associated with asthenia, anorexia, and non-productive dry cough, nocturnal diaphoresis, fever and weight loss of 12 Kg (body mass index, BMI, 15.22 Kg/m2). In the last month, he presented a reddish generalized non-confluent maculopapular rash without compromise of palms and soles . Physical examination showed painless hepatomegaly, without other abnormalities.
A fourth-generation human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) assay was positive, and viral load was 636.000 VIH-1 RNA copies/ml, Log10: 5.80, CD4 T lymphocyte cell (CD4) count was 2 cells/mm3. Modified Ziehl–Neelsen stain in feces showed oocysts of Cryptosporidium spp, and a Multiplex Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) FilmArray test in feces identified Cryptosporidium and enteropathogenic Escherichia coli. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy were performed and did not show macroscopic abnormalities; several biopsies were taken from the third portion of the duodenum, cecum, transverse and sigmoid colon; they did not reveal any abnormalities either. Serum Cytomegalovirus (CMV) viral load was negative. The patient received treatment with Nitazoxanide 500 mg PO B.I.D for three days with resolution of the diarrhea.
On admission blood cultures were taken. Fungi grew in blood cultures. A preliminary Gram stain exhibited budding yeasts, India ink test was positive for Cryptococcus spp. The blood culture final report confirmed Cryptococcus neoformans. Lumbar puncture was performed to rule out central nervous system involvement. Cerebrospinal fluid tests were taken: cytology, chemistry, routine stains, and Multiplex PCR FilmArray were negative. Induction treatment with amphotericin B at a dose of 1.0 mg/kg Q.D and fluconazole 800 mg Q.D were given for 2 weeks.
A chest X-ray and a thorax computed tomography (CT) scan showed a random distribution of micro-nodular lesions, with a preference for peripheral areas of the lungs . Given these findings, we decided to perform a bronchoscopy with optical fiber with findings of lesions compatible with candidiasis in oropharynx and laryngopharynx, without other lesions present in the rest of the study. The fluid extracted from the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was negative for routine stains: KOH test, Gram and Ziehl Neelsen. Fungi and Mycobacteria cultures and a GeneXpert assay for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) were negative. Cytological studies of the fluid did not exhibit cellular atypia.
Other laboratory tests showed hyperferritinemia (patient value = 1000 ng/mL, reference value 23–336 ng/mL) and mild elevation of alkaline phosphatase (patient value = 152 U/L, reference value = 38–126 U/L) which raised suspicion for histoplasmosis due to the findings of hepatomegaly, skin rash and the random micronodular compromise seen in the chest images. A galactomannan antigen test for Histoplasma capsulatum was performed in urine (with enzyme immunoassay (EIA), Immuno Mycologics IMMY) and was positive with 137 ng / mL (reference value < 0.5 ng / ml), which confirmed the diagnosis of disseminated histoplasmosis. Due to these findings, fluconazole was stopped and maintenance therapy was initiated with Itraconazole 200 mg T.I.D for three days and then B.I.D at least for 1 year.
The patient had a satisfactory outcome, with resolution of his diarrhea, disappearance of his rash by the end of the induction phase, and the respiratory symptoms also improved. Patient was discharged with the indication to start HAART with Tenofovir/Emtricitabine 300/200 mg Q.D and Raltegravir 400 mg B.I.D four weeks after induction therapy.