A 38-year-old man presented to a local hospital in April 2017 with pain throughout his body that had been occurring for a month. He was diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) at stage IV and had an international prognostic index (IPI) score of 3. The patient was started on induction chemotherapy with four courses of R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and carboplatin) and then attained partial remission by positron emission tomography-CT. He then underwent two courses of R-ICE (rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide), two courses of DHAP (dexamethasone, high-dose-Ara-C, and platinol) and one course of R-MA (rituximab, methotrexate, and Ara-C). He did not achieve CR.
To pursue CAR T-cell therapy, the patient was referred to our hospital in January 2018. The multiparameter flow cytometry results showed that 2.9% of nucleated cells expressed surface CD20, CD19, CD10, CD38, and CD22, as well as intracellular CD79a and TdT (terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase), while Igκ and Igλ were negative. The immunophenotypic analysis is partially illustrated in a–d. In addition, immunohistochemistry staining also showed that the bone marrow sections were TdT positive . According to these phenotypes, the patient was newly diagnosed with relapsed/refractory acute B-LBL.
Hematological malignancy-targeted deep sequencing was performed on his plasma cell-free DNA and revealed a TP53 c.818G>A (p.R273H) mutation with a mutation allele fraction (MAF) of 88.8% by droplet digital PCR. To test whether the patient harbored a germline TP53 mutation, we analyzed his saliva samples and cells obtained by buccal swabbing. The TP53 germline analysis revealed the same mutation. Family studies were initiated, and the patient’s father, sister and brother had died from rectal carcinoma, an unknown tumor and ALL, respectively. Additionally, the same TP53 variant was also detected in one of the patient’s sons, who suffered from ALL 18 months later. Given these results, the patient was considered to have LFS .
To stop tumor progression, the patient was given decitabine (25 mg/m2) and liposomal doxorubicin before CAR T-cell therapy. Then, he received lymphodepleting chemotherapy with fludarabine (25 mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (300 mg/m2) for 3 days (days −4 to −2). Subsequently, he received murine monoclonal anti-CD19 and anti-CD22 CAR T-cell “cocktail” therapy . Autologous CD22-targeted CAR T-cells (CAR22) (2*106 cells/kg) were infused on day 0, day +1, and day +2, followed by CD19-targeted CAR T-cells (CAR19) (1*106 cells/kg) on day +3 and day +5 . After day +5, he suffered a serious case of cytokine release syndrome (CRS) of grade 4 according to the grading system published by Lee et al, which lasted for 4 days and was characterized by a sustained high fever at 39°C to 40°C and hypoxia. At the same time, he also developed headache, dizziness, aphasia, dyscalculia and delirium lasting for a week, which fit the criteria for immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity, grade 3. These symptoms were attenuated after plasmapheresis and steroid treatment. Both the CAR19 and CAR22 transgene copy numbers were tracked . At day +27, the patient achieved CR with negative MRD, as assessed by morphology and multiparameter flow cytometry of bone marrow aspirate samples.
Fifteen months after CAR T-cell “cocktail” therapy, the patient’s B-LBL unfortunately recurred. In June 2019, he received fully human anti-CD22 CAR T-cell therapy after lymphodepleting chemotherapy with fludarabine and cyclophosphamide . The cells carrying the fully human CAR transgene exhibited efficient expansion. The Cmax (maximum expansion) value reached 1.1*105 copies/µg genomic DNA at day +8 . At day +30, the patient achieved CR again ( e–h, C). He is currently in remission 4 months after fully human CAR T-cell therapy and continues to be followed.