A 48-year-old man who was previously diagnosed with a seminoma 25 years earlier visited an otorhinolaryngologist with a history of hoarseness, resistance to treatment headache, dysphagia to solids, odynophagia, hearing loss, and tinnitus of the right ear all started 1 month before admitting to hospital. The patient had a history of left orchiectomy, and adjuvant chemotherapy 25 years ago. Over the course of 2 months, the patient underwent four cycles of chemotherapy with bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin. The tumor had gone into complete remission after the therapies and during these years the patient did not experience any related complaints. Before the pathologic examination was completed, the patient and his family did not inform the healthcare professionals about his previous history.
After undergoing multidetector computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, the patient showed some mass-like lesions at the base of the skull and in the right cervical region that also included lymph nodes. Prior to a pathologic examination, radiologic findings pointed to several potential diagnoses, such as lymphoma or kidney-originated tumors that had metastasis to the base of the skull and neck (shown in , ).
A computed tomography scan revealed a 30 × 26 mm ellipsoid, hypodense mass in the lower pole of the left kidney. Yet, no images of this imaging technique are available. Initial tumor markers including AFP, B-HCG, and LDH were all negative.
Histologic and immunohistologic findings include the following:
Pathology laboratory guidelines recommend storing and archiving paraffin blocks and slides for a minimum of 20 and 10 years, respectively . As a result, the laboratory’s initial data on seminoma from 25 years ago was unavailable.
Histology showed complete manifestations of seminoma in both metastatic sites, but the skull sample was unsuitable for imaging due to higher necrosis and crashing; therefore, the kidney sample was selected for presenting this morphology due to its better quality. However, morphologically, they both exhibit the same pattern and are identical to a classic seminoma.
The neoplastic proliferation of malignant tumoral cells is visible as a diffuse pattern in the left kidney mass core needle biopsy (shown in a, b). These cells range in size from medium to large, with a high N/C ratio, pale to eosinophilic cytoplasm, and hyperchromic nuclei that are rounded.
A mass incisional biopsy of the right skull base reveals a broad pattern of medium to large cells with neoplastic growth. These cells exhibit pleomorphism, high mitotic rate, high N/C ratio, and crashing.
It needs to be mentioned that, in contrast to our case, the histological appearance in some metastatic situations is out of the ordinary . The same immunohistochemistry was performed on two metastatic locations. PLAP, CD117, CD10, Ki67, and OCT IHC staining are all positive in renal tumor cells (c) and skull tumor cells. In contrast to vimentin, which was exclusively positive in renal cells, CK was only dot-like positive in skull cells.
The patient underwent surgery of canal-wall-down and a complete radial mastoidectomy was done. Canal wall was drilled completely up to the facial ridge and middle ear mass was removed. The patient was offered chemotherapy, but his condition rapidly deteriorated, and he died before he could receive it.
Unfortunately, the patient passed away 1 month after receiving a diagnosis of metastatic seminoma. The cause of his death was metastatic invasion to the brain since the skull tumor rapidly progressed to the intracranial, and the patient died as a result of the effects of these invasions.