A 24-year-old woman of African descent with prior normal vision was referred to us from a specialized ophthalmic center for a preoperative cardiovascular assessment. She had chief complaints of gradual decline in visual acuity in both eyes for 3 years and unintentional weight loss (17 kg) within the past 1 year. Her past medical history was unremarkable except for a self-reported history of pulmonary tuberculosis at the age of 4 years. Her progressive loss of vision which initially started in her left eye and later involved her right eye was associated with intermittent pain, redness, tearing, and headaches. Within the first year, she completely lost vision in her left eye. She denied any history of arthralgias, claudication, skin lesions, chest pain, convulsions, or syncope. She had several out-patient visits in the past 3 years all due to her ongoing visual impairment. She was prescribed gentamycin eye drops, carbimazole, propranolol, furosemide, and multivitamin capsules at different points in time with no relief of her deteriorating vision.
Her physical examination revealed feeble brachial and radial arterial pulses on her left side, whereas pulses on her right side and in both lower limbs were normal. Her blood pressure was 85/59 mmHg on her left and 134/82 mmHg on her right side. She had a pulse rate of 136 beats/minute which was regular and of good volume, body temperature of 37.0 °C, and a body mass index (BMI) of 19.6 kg/m2. On ophthalmic examination, she had no light perception in her left eye but she could count fingers at a 2-meter distance using her right eye. Bilateral microaneurysms, dot and blot hemorrhages, and multiple ischemic areas of retina together with neovascularization in her right eye were noted during a funduscopic examination. These ophthalmic findings are in line with a bilateral ocular ischemic syndrome.
Laboratory results revealed an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 56 mm/hour and 25.4 mg/L respectively. Electrolytes, liver, renal, and thyroid function tests were normal. Serology for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and C, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test for syphilis, rheumatoid factor, anti-double-stranded DNA (dsDNA), and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) were negative, however, antinuclear antibody (ANA) was positive. A tuberculin test was negative. There were no aneurysmal formations, bruits, ventricular hypertrophy, or any other cardiac abnormalities apart from a sinus tachycardia and trace aortic regurgitation. We did not perform coronary angiography or computed tomography (CT) angiography of her head and neck due to her financial constraints. A CT angiogram of her thoracic and abdominal aorta revealed irregular narrowing with variable degrees of stenosis, tapering, and corrugated appearance . Based on the clinical presentation, physical findings, and angiographic features, she fulfilled the American College of Rheumatology criteria for Takayasu’s arteritis. However, we could not rule out temporal arteritis in this case as our patient refused a temporal artery biopsy procedure. Nevertheless, based on the age of onset (that is, <40 years) and the clinicoradiographic picture (decreased pulsation of brachial artery, difference of over 10 mmHg in systolic blood pressure between arms, and arteriographic narrowing of aorta) we entertained a diagnosis of TA. She was counseled and treated with dexamethasone (60 mg per day), methotrexate (10 mg per day), and low-dose aspirin (75 mg once daily). She was discharged home on self-request after 9 days of hospitalization. We reviewed her as an out-patient after 3 months but there was neither improvement nor further deterioration in her visual acuity despite self-reported good adherence.