An 81-year-old woman with known hypertension presented with an acute inferior wall ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Emergent coronary angiography revealed the three-vessel diseases ( and and , ). Calculated SYNTAX score Ⅰ was 15. Subsequently, primary PCI for the culprit lesion of the occluded mid-circumflex artery was successfully performed . Statins and dual antiplatelet therapy were initiated. The post-operative course was uneventful.
After 10 days, an elective PCI for the residual RCA lesions was performed through the right radial artery. After the engagement of a 6 Fr Short Amplatz Left 1.0 guide catheter (Launcher, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) and wire crossing with a 0.014 inch floppy wire (Runthrough NS, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), the IVUS (OptiCross HD 60 MHz, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) system could not pass the proximal RCA stenosis. We dilated the narrowed proximal RCA with a 3.0 × 8 mm non-compliant balloon (NC Emerge, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) . Angiography revealed dissection of the proximal RCA ( and , ). The IVUS revealed a longitudinal intraluminal tear of the proximal RCA with an accompanying aortocoronary intramural haematoma. Right coronary artery ostium had a circumferential haematoma. ( and , ). We identified iatrogenic ACD and planned for preventing further dissection by stent implantation of the entry tear. Additionally, we planned a one-stent implantation covering the entry tear and mid-RCA lesion simultaneously. After dilation of the mid-RCA by a 2.0 × 8 mm non-compliant balloon with the support of a 6 Fr guide extension catheter (HIKYAKU, Kaneka, Tokyo, Japan), angiography showed an ACD extending to the right coronary cusp and new coronary dissection of the right ventricle branch . The IVUS showed an extended intramural haematoma of the mid-RCA (, ). The position of stent deployment was determined using IVUS marking without contrast injection. The proximal- and distal-patent lumens were positioned using a radiopaque marker. A 2.75 × 38 mm drug-eluting stent (DES) (Synergy, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was deployed at the proximal RCA to seal an entry tear and mid-RCA lesion . The IVUS revealed a stent-distal intramural haematoma. Therefore, a 2.5 × 38 mm DES (Synergy, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was additionally deployed at the mid-RCA ( and , ). The IVUS revealed a stent-distal intramural haematoma at the distal RCA (see , ). Angiography revealed a remaining contrast inflow to the false lumen of the right coronary cusp (see , ). Considering the good coronary flow without angiographic obstruction at the distal RCA, conservative treatment of stent-distal haematoma was selected. A 3.25 × 12 mm non-compliant balloon (NC Emerge, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was dilated at the proximal RCA to reduce the coronary inflow towards the false lumen by stent expansion. The IVUS revealed an expanded in-stent luminal area ( and , ). Final angiography showed good coronary flow except for the right ventricle branch, with a remaining but not worsening ACD ( and , ). The contrast injection was minimized to a total volume of 33 mL, and the haemodynamic status was consistently stable during PCI. The activated clotting time was maintained at 200 s during the procedure. Intraprocedural and post-procedural transthoracic echocardiography revealed good left ventricular wall motion without pericardial effusion or aortic valve regurgitation. The patient was monitored in the cardiac care unit on that day.
The following day, coronary computed tomography (CCT) revealed an aortocoronary intramural haematoma without pericardial effusion . The post-operative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged one week after PCI for RCA. Follow-up CCTs (2 weeks and 6 months after the initial CCT) revealed regression and eventual disappearance of the haematoma . Elective PCI for the residual left anterior descending lesions was performed 3 months later. No cardiac events have been recorded during the 18-month follow-up period.