The subject was a right hand dominant 14-year-old female with right shoulder pain that began six months prior to her evaluation. She participated as a pitcher in softball, a thrower in track and field, a middle hitter in volleyball, and as a basketball athlete. The subject does not recall a distinct mechanism of injury but noticed her pain after pitching one day. At rest her pain is 0/10, however, she reports achiness with symptoms at 4/10 after pitching, with symptoms lasting for the rest of the day and returning to baseline in the following day. She is unable to point to a specific point of pain but feels it in her shoulder when pitching, typically when the shoulder is in the 12 o’clock position. Currently, her symptoms are alleviated with rest and exacerbated with activity, reporting “feeling tired” with activity. The subject had radiographs taken by her orthopedist without any significant findings. She was referred to physical therapy with a clinical diagnosis of “scapular dyskinesis”.
At the initial examination no atrophy was noted and there was no tenderness to palpation in the glenohumeral or periscapular region, and no obvious scapular malpositioning was noted in a resting posture. Active range of motion was normal bilaterally with passive internal rotation being limited on the right, with a glenohumeral internal rotation deficit (GIRD) presentation. Right shoulder passive internal rotation was 45 degrees with 154 degrees of a total arc of motion, while the left shoulder passive internal rotation was 75 degrees with 185 degrees of a total arc of motion. The subject had slight hypermobility (grade four glenohumeral mobility) in the posterior and inferior directions of the right glenohumeral joint, which was assessed through a standard joint play assessment.
Manual muscle testing was performed at the initial evaluation, as well as isokinetic testing of the external rotators (ER’s) and internal rotators (IR’s) and the Athletic Shoulder Test (ASH) testing occurring at the next visit six days later. presents manual muscle testing outcomes, performed in standard positioning. presents isokinetic testing data at 90 and 270 degrees per second and shows decreases in strength of the right IR’s and ER’s at 270 deg/sec. ASH testing indicated equal and good strength without any significant deficits. The subject reported pain with strength testing.
Upon visual assessment of scapulohumeral rhythm via the Scapular Dyskinesis Test, the subject demonstrated reduced upward rotation of the scapula with increased anterior tilt on the right during active flexion and abduction. Pitching was pain-free at lower intensities, with symptoms present at about 50% throwing intensity. Special testing was negative for the scapular assist test and the Biceps Load II test. The hospital-specific outcome measure used was Focus on Therapeutic Outcomes (FOTO) and the subject scored 64/100, which indicates moderate dysfunction in the subject’s physical functional status. FOTO was used because it captures the breadth of health concerns associated with a subject’s perception of their functional status. The report also helps determine the subject’s individual preferences, needs, and values to help ensure that these values guide clinical treatment decisions.
A throwing assessment was performed three weeks after the subject’s initial evaluation. An iPhone with slow-motion camera mode was used to assess the subject’s pitching mechanics. There are multiple biomechanical risk factors documented in the literature that put softball pitchers at increased risk for upper extremity injury: greater shoulder horizontal abduction at foot contact, less trunk lateral flexion towards the throwing side, increased stride length, increased trunk rotation away from the throwing side, and increased center of mass posteriorly. None of the following were demonstrated during the throwing assessment. Figures and show images of the subject’s pitching mechanics during initial foot contact from posterior and lateral views, respectively.
This case is particularly unique because of the discrepancy in the literature and the novelty of upper extremity injuries in youth softball. Differential diagnoses following the initial evaluation included scapular dyskinesis, labral pathology, multidirectional instability, rotator cuff pathology, cervical pathology, and thoracic outlet syndrome. The initial working diagnosis was multidirectional instability and scapular dyskinesis based on initial findings. Since there were deficits in the subject’s peak torque of the internal and external rotators along with scapular dyskinesis, the first objective was to improve the subject’s impairments of the muscle groups associated with her altered scapular movements including the middle trapezius, lower trapezius, serratus anterior and address rotator cuff strength deficits.