A 54 year-old African-American male with long-standing back pain presented to the rheumatology clinic for evaluation. He was healthy except for chronic hypertension, hyperlipidemia, depression, and chronic back pain. He had no prior surgeries and did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol. Family history was negative. History of back pain dated back 20 years. Over the past ten years, he had been treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications which he took for several weeks at a time when his pain flared. In the last three months, his back pain had been worsening, now with deep left gluteal pain. The patient denied any trauma to the area or recent falls. He initially had relief with oral diclofenac 75 mg twice daily but in the last two months had had pain which was not controlled on that dose. In addition he noted limited mobility. He reported morning stiffness for 30 min daily. His pain did not improve with exercise. He denied eye redness or pain, sexually-transmitted infections, chronic diarrhea or bloody stools, psoriasis, enthesitis- or dactylitis-like episodes presently and in the past.
On examination, his heart rate was 59 beats per minute and regular, his respiratory rate was 12, and blood pressure was 158/94. He was generally comfortable and well-developed and well-nourished. His cardiac and pulmonary examination was within normal limits. Joint examination revealed no synovitis, enthesitis or dactylitis. His occiput to wall measurement was zero. There was some thoracic spinal and paraspinal tenderness with excruciating left SI tenderness to palpation. The Schober maneuver exhibited more than 5 cm of excursion. The FABER exam elicited pain in bilateral SI joints. Neurologic exam revealed no sensory deficits, normal motor strength, and normal deep-tendon reflexes.
Available laboratory data at the time of presentation are summarized in Table . His complete blood count, complete metabolic panel and inflammatory markers were all within the reference ranges except for a mild anemia which had been long present, as well as elevated sedimentation rate. A previous X-ray of the pelvis from nine years earlier reported coarsened trabeculae with sclerosis of the sacrum and left ilium with ankylosis of SI joints (film unavailable). The current pelvic film showed thickened trabeculae and sclerosis in addition to bony ankylosis of sacroiliac joints bilaterally. The trabecular pattern appeared to partially extend into the left medial iliac region.
The patient’s pain was thought to be due to Paget disease and he was treated with zoledronic acid. His pelvic pain improved with the treatment. Six months after the infusion of zoledronic acid, however, back pain recurred. An MRI was done to further delineate the cause of the pain. The MRI of the pelvis revealed bony fusion of the bilateral sacroiliac joints with thickening of the cortex of the left iliac bone and bony trabeculation of the sacrum and left iliac bone . Degenerative changes were seen in the visualized lower lumbar spine. There was a hyperintense signal in the left sacral ala which was likely due to micro-trabecular insufficiency fractures. A timeline of the patient’s presentation and findings can be found in the Case Timeline Additional file .