We present the case of a 64-year-old male former smoker with IPF. He presented to our hospital complaining of dry cough in September 2005. Chest computed tomography (CT) at that time revealed subpleural reticular shadow predominantly in the lower lobes, without apparent honeycombing . Surgical lung biopsy showed patchy distribution of dense fibrosis, fibroblastic foci, and normal lung with microscopic honeycombing . Thus, the diagnosis of IPF was confirmed. Although pirfenidone was administered as the first-line treatment, his FVC gradually decreased. Therefore, in October 2010, we added nintedanib to the ongoing pirfenidone therapy. Nintedanib was administered at a dose of 50 mg twice daily for 28 days as part of a phase 2 dose escalation trial .
From October 2011, nintedanib was initiated and continuously administered at a dose of 150 mg twice daily. He developed dyspnea 65 days after initiating the treatment dose of 150 mg twice daily and presented to our hospital on day 68. Chest CT showed newly developed diffuse ground glass opacities . He had hypoxemia with a resting partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood of 53.6 torr on room air. Laboratory investigation revealed high serum levels of Krebs von den Lungen-6 (1114 U/mL), surfactant protein D (269.5 ng/mL), and lactate dehydrogenase (258 IU/L). The possibility of infection was eliminated based on the results of sputum and blood culture, serum β-D glucan, and cytomegalovirus antigen testing. The possibilities of left-sided heart failure and pulmonary embolism were also ruled out, thus we diagnosed an acute exacerbation of IPF. In accordance with the study protocol, nintedanib was immediately discontinued and intensive treatment comprising methyl prednisolone pulse therapy, direct hemoperfusion using a polymyxin B immobilized fiber column, intravenous cyclophosphamide, and cyclosporine was initiated. Subsequently, his clinical symptoms, PaO2/FiO2 ratio, and imaging findings gradually improved.
Under careful observation, nintedanib was readministered at a dose of 150 mg twice daily, 30 days after it had been stopped. Although his FVC temporarily decreased after the acute exacerbation, it remained stable from May 2012 to January 2013 (2.11 L to 2.10 L) . Nintedanib was safely continued without the recurrence of acute exacerbations until he died of a bacterial infection in February 2014.