An 80-year-old Danish man was admitted to hospital because of a 2-day history of increasing abdominal discomfort and constipation. Ten days earlier he had been hospitalized and treated for a penetrating knee injury, and had received a 5-day course of intravenous cefuroxime. Baseline comorbidity consisted of essential hypertension, mild sequelae after a minor stroke, and prostate cancer without proven dissemination. Previous surgical procedures were limited to appendectomy for perforated appendicitis 3 years earlier. The patient’s regular medications were bicalutamide, solifenacin, tamsulosin, simvastatin, losartan and clopidogrel, medications not known to be related to Clostridium difficile infection. While walking in the countryside, he had been hit by a small piece of metal from an agricultural machine. The object was removed surgically from the knee joint, and a ruptured collateral ligament was resutured. He was treated prophylactically with IV dicloxacillin 2 g at admission and IV cefuroxime 1.5 g during operation, followed by 750 mg q.i.d. for 5 days postoperatively. He was discharged on day 6 with oral cephalexin 1 g t.i.d (5 weeks’ treatment was scheduled). At the time of readmission (day 10), he was constipated and suffered from increasing abdominal discomfort, but he was clinically stabile, body temperature 36.9°C, serum C-reactive protein 296 mg/L (<10 mg/L), and white blood cell count 10.6 *109/L (<10.0 *109/L). However, his condition deteriorated rapidly to severe sepsis with high fever, hypotension and renal failure, and he was transferred to the intensive care unit. A CT scan of the abdomen revealed colitis, and sigmoidoscopy showed PMC affecting the distal colon up to the left colic flexure (Figure ). Treatment with oral vancomycin and metronidazole was commenced, but repeated CT scans showed progression to the transverse and ascending colon. Four days after initiation of vancomycin and metronidazole (day 14 after surgery and initiation of cephalosporin treatment), a total colectomy was performed that left the patient with a permanent ileostomy. Stool culture was positive for CD 027, with genes for toxin A, toxin B and binary toxin.