A 36-year-old man, right-handed, manual worker, without medical background or hyperlaxity presented himself to the emergency room after an injury of the upper right limb. The patient was a sportsman, martial arts competitor. Trauma was related to an accident on the public road (electric scooter). Fall was described as wrist in pronation and hyperextension. On arrival, the patient reported a severe localized pain in the DRUJ. Wrist was in pronation . Mobility in flexion-extension was preserved. Pronation and supination were blocked and painful. The patient did not have a neurovascular deficit. Edema helped diagnosis. The ulnar head, palpable, was prominent in volar side. Diagnosis was supposed on the AP wrist and lateral views and confirmed with a computed tomography (CT)scan . A radiological series including forearm and elbow X-rays confirmed the isolated character of the lesion.
The patient was managed in the operating room under general anesthesia. Reduction by a closed manipulation was performed. In forced pronation, the operator maintained volar pressure on the ulnar head. The reduction was confirmed by the perception of a jerk. Post-reductionX-rays(AP, lateral, and dynamic pronosupination) made at the operating room confirmed the reduction. The test was performed in full flexion-extension and full pronation-supination. The perfectly stable aspect of the DRUJ made it possible to allow a non-operative management and avoid temporary stabilization with K-wire.
The patient was immobilized in an above-elbow plaster cast for 6 weeks with the wrist in supination.
At 8 days, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to complete the assessment of ligament injuries. No lesions of the interosseous membrane were found. A disruption of the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) at the ulna styloid and injury to the ligamentum subcruentum was found without the need for surgical intervention .
The patient was clinically and radiographically reassessed at the 2nd, 4th,and 6th weeks. At the control X-rays, ulna was in a satisfactory position allowing the plaster to be removed at the 6thweek. An active physiotherapy was started at a rate of 3 sessions per week.
The patient was seen again at the 12thweek. Wrist was painless and stable both in flexion-extension (80°–50°) and pronation-supination (70°–70°). Control X-rays showed a non-arthritic wrist. The patient began to work at the 9thweek. Martial arts began at the 14thweek without limitation.
The patient was assessed at the 6th month and 1 year. Ranges of motion at each assessment are resumed in . There were no sequelae and no evidence of arthrosis on the X-ray.QuickDash at the last follow-up was equal to 0.