Following a motor vehicle accident, a 38 year-old male patient presented at the emergency room of our hospital. He was alert and in stable condition with a GCS-score of 15. On clinical examination the patient showed mild neck tenderness to palpation as well as a slightly restricted range of motion. No sensomotor deficits of the neck or arms were present. The patient commented that he had been suffering from similar neck pain for many years prior to the accident.
According to Canadian C-Spine rules and due to the mechanism of the accident radiography of the cervical spine was indicated. Antero-posterior and lateral radiographs as well as 45° oblique views of the cervical spine were taken as a first imaging study . Radiographs showed slightly incongruent articular pillars of C5 and an enlarged, elongated right C4-C5 neuroforamen with absence of the right C5 pedicle. The opposite lamina projected through this space and the articular pillar was dorsally displaced. In addition, a vertical gap in the midline of the C5 arch was seen on the antero-posterior radiograph. No anterolisthesis of a vertebral body was detected. Independently from each other, both the emergency medicine physician as well as the radiology resident on-call suspected a fracture of the right pedicle and median arch of C5. The patient was therefore scheduled for an emergency operation.
According to established guidelines at our hospital, computed tomography (CT) with multiplanar reconstructions in the sagittal and coronal plane was performed preoperatively. It revealed absence of the right C5 pedicle with dysplasia of the ipsilateral transverse process and spina bifida occulta at the same level, dorsal displacement of the articular pillar, reversal of the ipsilateral facet articulation with the supra-adjacent vertebra, as well as hypoplasia of the pillar of the supra-adjacent and hyperplasia of the pillar of the infra-adjacent vertebra . There were also some degenerative changes at the level C4-C5 with formation of a subchondral bone cyst in the body of C4 . No anterolisthesis of a vertebral body, fracture or hematoma were detected. Based on all CT imaging findings, diagnosis of a congential ACSP with associated osseous spinal abnormalities was established. The patient was discharged from the emergency room without surgical intervention.
He was informed and gave informed consent that data concerning his case would be submitted for publication.