A 66-year-old man without any prior cardiac history presented to the hospital with a 1-month history of dyspnoea on exertion, orthopnoea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, and 4 kg unintentional weight loss. On admission, he had a blood pressure of 103/81 mmHg, heart rate 90 b.p.m., respiratory rate 20 b.p.m., and an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. Jugular venous pressure was elevated at +4 cm, and he had bilateral peripheral oedema to the knees. Auscultation revealed a pansystolic murmur at the apex with a third heart sound, and bilateral crackles at the lung bases. Initial laboratory tests showed an elevated N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide [2056 pmol/L (reference range <35)] and normal troponin I [21 ng/L (reference range <40)]. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, left axis deviation, inferior Q-waves, and no ST changes. He was referred for transthoracic echocardiography which revealed dilated left and right ventricles. The LV internal diameter end diastole and systole were 64 mm and 61 mm, respectively, with a LV ejection fraction (LVEF) calculated by Simpson’s biplane method of 17%. There were moderate mitral and tricuspid regurgitation secondary to the dilated ventricles. The pulmonary artery systolic pressure was 34 mmHg, and the estimated mean right atrial pressure was 10–15 mmHg, as evidenced by an inferior vena cava (IVC) diameter of 17 mm which collapses less than 50% on inspiration. There were masses in both apices and two further masses in the right atrium suspicious for type B thrombi . The cardiomyopathy and intracardiac masses were further analysed with cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (, Video S2), which showed the intracardiac masses had high signal intensity on T1- and T2-weighted sequences . They were low-signal on first pass imaging following gadolinium administration. The LV and RV end-diastolic volumes were 385 mL and 305 mL, respectively. The calculated LVEF was 19% and RV ejection fraction (RVEF) 20% . Additionally, there was evidence of fluid overload with small bilateral pleural effusions and an IVC diameter of 29 mm. Delayed enhancement sequences showed near full thickness scars in the lateral and inferior walls, consistent with prior myocardial infarctions . Coronary angiography revealed severe triple vessel disease, including occlusion of the left circumflex and right coronary arteries. The presence of suspected right heart thrombi led to the investigation of hypercoagulable states. His weight loss raised the suspicion of underlying malignancy, but a subsequent computed tomography of his body and pulmonary angiogram was negative for malignancy or pulmonary embolism. His weight loss was therefore attributed to cardiac cachexia. Review of the admission blood work identified elevated liver enzymes; aspartate aminotransferase 106 U/L (reference range <45), alanine aminotransferase 406 U/L (reference range <45), gamma-glutamyl transferase 64 U/L (reference range <60), and hyperbilirubinemia 60 μmol/L (reference range <25). His coagulation profile revealed a prolonged prothrombin time [24 s (reference range 10–14)], prothrombin ratio [2.0 (reference range 0.8–1.2)], and activated partial thromboplastin time [43 s (reference range 25–38); which fully corrected with the addition of normal plasma]. It was likely that these derangements were due to hepatic congestion from his RV failure, as his abnormal liver enzymes and coagulation profile normalized following diuresis. The patient was started on warfarin with bridging enoxaparin, for the likely diagnosis of multiple intracardiac thrombi. Revascularization was postponed until resolution of the thrombi to avoid increased bleeding risk from triple antithrombotic therapy, due to risk of further hepatic congestion and coagulopathy. The patient was discharged home on warfarin, lisinopril 10 mg daily, frusemide 40 mg daily, and carvedilol 12.5 mg twice daily. He returned 1 month later for a follow-up MRI, which showed the LVEF was still significantly reduced at 22%, but the RVEF had improved to 46%. There was complete resolution of the all the intracardiac masses, therefore confirming the diagnosis of thrombi . Unfortunately, the patient had an aborted out of hospital cardiac arrest shortly thereafter, which led to percutaneous coronary intervention to his left anterior descending artery, and subsequent insertion of an implantable cardiac defibrillator.