A 37-year-old man with a past medical history of poorly controlled hypertension was brought to the emergency department due to severe headache, worsening confusion, and right-side weakness for 2 days. On examination, the patient was in a stuporous condition with a Glasgow coma scale of 8/15 (eye-opening 2, verbal response 2, motor response 4). He had right-side weakness and mixed aphasia (global aphasia with preserved repetition), muscle strength was 0/5 in the right. Pupils were symmetrically equal to normal size and reactive to light. He had no other significant past medical or surgical history. He had no family history of diabetes, hypertension, coagulopathy or any neurological disease. The patient had no history of drug abuse, anticoagulation or trauma.
A non-contrast brain CT was obtained, which demonstrated bilateral basal ganglia hemorrhage (BBGH). Hematoma measured 5x3cm in the left basal ganglia and 3x1cm in the right basal ganglia (see and ). A subsequent brain MRI later revealed a bilateral basal ganglia hematoma with minimal edema (3.5 cm in the left and 2 cm in the right basal ganglia) ( and ). MR angiography (MRA) was negative for aneurysmal rupture. On admission, blood pressure was 220/120. Other vital signs were normal. The patient’s complete blood count, comprehensive biochemistry profile, and coagulation markers were all within normal limits. An ECG showed a normal sinus rhythm. A chest x-ray and CT scan did not reveal any acute cardiopulmonary disease. The patient was admitted to the ICU and conservatively managed with blood pressure-lowering drugs, mannitol (5 days) and other supportive medications. After 2 days, Glasgow coma scale of the patient improved from 8 to 11 (eye-opening 4, verbal response 3, motor response 4), blood pressure was controlled with multiple antihypertensive medications; and he was transferred to the neurology ward on the fifth day.
After another 5 days of neurology inpatient unit, the patient clinically improved (GCS 14/15) and was referred to the rehabilitation department.