A 33-year-old male triathlon athlete, during a bicycle training fell on his right side, hitting his shoulder on the ground, but with no other trauma associated. He presented an altered sternoclavicular skin profile with a swollen and bruised area on the lateral surface of his shoulder. He suffered pain in the sternoclaviular joint and in the shoulder, while the abduction and extension of the upper limb was impossible (pre-operative DASH Score: 90.9). No definite neurovascular abnormalities of the upper extremity were reported.
The initial radiographs showed an extrarticular displaced fracture of the medialend of the clavicle (Robinson Type 1B.1), acromion (Kuhn Type II) and coracoid process (Ogawa type I) fractures. These bone lesions were also confirmed by a computed tomography (CT) scan with 3D reconstruction. The images showed a displaced comminuted extrarticular medial-end clavicle fracture with anterior dislocation, an undisplaced fracture of the coracoid and acromion processes ( and ).
On the 3rd post-injury day, the patient underwent surgical treatment. Prior to the fixation of SSSC injuries, we treated the clavicle. Under general anesthesia, with the patient in beach chair position with Mayfield headrest, we performed a skin incision directly on the medial-end of the clavicle, respecting the sternoclavicular joint. We exposed the displaced fracture and fixed bone fragments with a T-shape plate 2.5 mm with 5 locking screws (Intrauma®). After the clavicle fixation, we performed percutaneous acromion fracture fixation with two cancellous bone screws with washer (ASNIS®, Stryker™ 5 mm x 55 and 60 mm length) . We achieved a good clavicle and acromial fixation, while the coracoid process was satisfactorily stable without any other surgical step. After a meticulous reattachment of the platysma, the wound was closed in layers. After that the patient was immobilized in a sling. Thus, the day after surgery, he started active and passive movements of the elbow, wrist and hand. Five days later he started indoor cycling training without load on right upper extremity. Two weeks after the patient started active shoulder mobilization (Codman’s pendulums). One month post-operatively, the patient underwent X-Ray that showed fractures in healing. The patient started water rehabilitation with isometric shoulder exercise, active and passive abduction, adduction, flexion and extension shoulder movement, wall crawl, and elastic resistance exercise. He also began running and doing outdoor bike training. He referred no difficulty in performing activities which required little efforts, mild difficulty to performing overhead movements and severe difficulty in performing activities which needed high efforts of the shoulder and the arm (DASH score: 52.3).
After two months, the patient performed a new X-Ray control that proved bone consolidation. The patient recovered full ROM of the shoulder without stiffness and reported no pain in performing active movements, mild efforts of the shoulder and during sport activities, such as running and riding a bike, but on the other hand, he reported persisted moderate pain during swimming training (DASH Score: 29.5). In spite of this, he returned to sport activities. The clinical evaluation at the follow up 12 months after the operation showed the patient had recovered full shoulder function (no limitation if compared with contralateral side) and was able to perform triathlon races with no pain or limitations (DASH Score: 11.4)