A 68-year-old man presented to the emergency department with syncope. He had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidaemia but was not on any treatment. At admission, the patient had regained consciousness, and complained of an intermittent chest discomfort. His blood pressure was 88/64 mmHg, heart rate 94 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation 100%. On physical examination, jugular veins were clearly distended. Chest auscultation revealed no murmurs. Chest X-ray was normal. An electrocardiogram showed abnormal Q waves, inverted T waves in lead aVL, and flattened T waves in lead I . Initial transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed preserved left ventricular ejection fraction, mild pericardial effusion of 6 mm in diastole, mild mitral regurgitation, and dilated inferior vena cava without respiratory variation. Blood tests showed an elevated troponin I level of 1784 pg/mL (reference range: 0–26 pg/mL) and C-reactive protein level of 1.74 mg/dL (reference range: 0.00–0.14 mg/dL). Creatinine kinase, creatinine kinase myocardial band, and white blood cell count were within the normal range. CCT revealed circumferential pericardial effusion, and an unexpected aneurysmal cavity (18 mm × 13 mm) in the inferolateral wall of the left ventricle (LV) with a thin wall and a narrow neck, suggestive of SEA . Repeat TTE confirmed an aneurysmal cavity in the basal-inferolateral LV. Doppler colour flow imaging showed blood flow within the aneurysmal cavity (, Videos 1–3). Subsequent coronary angiography demonstrated a narrowed first obtuse marginal branch (OM) with coronary slow flow (, ). Considering anatomical relationships, the aneurysmal region corresponded to the perfusion territory of the first OM. Therefore, we clinically diagnosed FWR derived from SEA after MI of the first OM.
The patient underwent an emergency cardiac surgery immediately. Intraoperatively, the pericardial space was found to have a small blood clot. The aneurysmal cavity and pericardial space were separated by the thinning myocardium layer with a small liner wound, where blood oozing was identified. After incising the wound from the outside, the connection between the aneurysm and cardiac lumen through a narrow orifice was confirmed. The first OM branch was ligated. Left ventricle around the aneurysm was sutured and fixed by surgical glue . The surgery was completed successfully without any intraoperative complications. Follow-up TTE confirmed the disappearance of SEA. The post-operative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on post-operative Day 20. Currently, no cardiac events have been recorded in the 6-month follow-up period.