A 29-year-old Caucasic male presented to neurological evaluation with a 2-month history of episodic vertigo associated with tachycardia and intense sweating, especially in concomitance with head rotatory movements and postural changes. In addition, 2 weeks from admission, he experienced mild cervical pain and bilateral auricular fullness. He underwent ear–nose–throat (ENT) evaluation, which revealed a bilateral audiometric perceptive deficit of acute tones; a 7-day course of oral prednisone, a brain MRI with and without gadolinium, and a further neurological evaluation were prescribed. The brief course of oral prednisone ameliorated the clinical symptoms. Brain MRI revealed multiple lesions, many of them showing contrast enhancement. The neurological examination revealed mild left ataxic hemisyndrome. The patient was admitted to ward for further investigations. He reported a medical history of asymptomatic Mediterranean anemia. Family history was negative. MRI of the brain and spinal cord with and without gadolinium showed left thalamocapsular/periventricular, right fronto-opercular white matter, left middle cerebellar peduncle T2-FLAIR hyperintense lesions, nodular leptomeningeal contrast enhancement along the skull base and the spinal cord, and enhancement of the II–III cranial nerves and the cauda equina. Lab analysis revealed a negative thrombophilia and autoimmune panel, reduced levels of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE), no hypercalcemia, and no hypercalciuria. A blood lymphocyte typing evidenced a mild lymphopenia and a high CD4/CD8 ratio (2.67). Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed a moderate pleocytosis with lymphocyte predominance and elevated proteins, oligoclonal bands profile 3, elevated immunoglobulin G (IgG) index, and negative microbiological testing including tuberculosis and West Nile polymerase chain reaction (PCR); the cytofluorimetric analysis of the lymphocytes revealed a T-cell predominance (65%) with elevated CD4/CD8 ratio (CD4 85%/CD8 15%) in absence of monoclonality. Body imaging (chest, abdomen, and pelvis PET/CT scan) revealed lung and mediastinal lymphadenopathies. Samples of the affected lymph nodes were obtained through bronchoscopy, and the histological examination revealed noncaseating granulomatous inflammation.
After pneumologist and rheumatologist consultations, according to the 2018 Neurosarcoidosis Consortium Consensus diagnostic criteria, a diagnosis of probable NS was made. An oral therapy with 50 mg/die prednisolone was started with complete clinical recovery and discharge from the ward.
At a 1-month follow-up evaluation, prednisone was tapered to 37.5 mg/die. In the weeks following the decalage, the patient developed intense headaches and slowdown. The follow-up neurological examination resulted negative. A 3T brain MRI showed lateral ventricular dilatation, periventricular seepage, and contrast-enhancement of the ependyma at Monro, Luschka foramina, and cerebral aqueduct. The patient underwent ophthalmologist evaluation with evidence of bilateral papillary edema and enlargement of the dead spot. Again, he was readmitted, and in the first day of hospitalization, a generalized epileptic seizure was reported and treated with intravenous diazepam; a standard electroencephalography documented left frontal sporadic epileptic abnormalities . Prompt administration of a 5-day course of intravenous 1 g methylprednisolone, acetazolamide, and levetiracetam was followed by a rapid clinical recovery sparing neurosurgical intervention. After the acute phase, subsequent oral prednisolone 75 mg/day and methotrexate 15 mg/week were started. Following serial MRI controls of brain and spinal cord, with and without gadolinium, documented progressive reduction of the lateral ventricle dilatation and of the periventricular seepage; absence of contrast-enhancement at the foramina of Monro and Luschka and minimal residual contrast-enhancement at the cerebral aqueduct were documented. The nodular leptomeningeal, cranial nerves II and II, and cauda equina enhancement remained stable; the T2-FLAIR hyperintense brain lesions were less visible. New ophthalmologist evaluation documented bilateral papillary atrophy with mild enlargement of the blind spot; new standard electroencephalography revealed a quantitative and qualitative reduction of the epileptic abnormalities. Given radiological recovery and clinical stability, the patient was discharged.
After 1 month, a new ophthalmological evaluation revealed reduction of the enlargement of the dead spot, and a new MRI of the brain and spinal cord, with and without gadolinium, documented a further reduction of the ventricular and cerebral aqueduct dilatation and of the periventricular seepage, as well as absence of contrast-enhancement at the cerebral aqueduct. At the neurological evaluation the patient resulted asymptomatic, and the neurological examination was negative for focal deficits. A progressive tapering of oral prednisolone was started to maintain only methotrexate as long-term immunosuppressive treatment. Accordingly, acetazolamide was progressively tapered and levetiracetam maintained. The medical treatment ensured prolonged clinical and radiological stability.