A 75-year-old man underwent resection for lung cancer. At 3 years after surgery, follow-up enhanced CT revealed a mass with strong enhancement from just above the UVJ extending 30 mm length in the left ureter. We performed ureteroscopic biopsy and the histopathological diagnosis was urothelial carcinoma. No metastatic lesions were found on whole-body CT scan. He was diagnosed with left ureteral cancer (cT2N0M0). He underwent retroperitoneoscopic radical nephroureterectomy with bladder cuff excision and lymphadenectomy of the ipsilateral common iliac, external iliac, internal iliac, and obturator lymph nodes. The tumor was 43 mm in diameter, and the histopathological diagnosis was invasive urothelial carcinoma, mainly composed of well-differentiated SCC (pT3N0) . The resection margin was negative and lymph node metastasis was not detected. At 3 months postoperatively, follow-up CT showed a lymphocele (43 × 60 × 67 mm) with a small solid component in the wall, in the left pelvic region . The solid component area was distant from the primary lesion located in the UVJ . At that time, the solid component was considered to be only lymphocele wall thickening. At 6 months postoperatively, the patient underwent transurethral resection for recurrent bladder cancer. The histopathological diagnosis was invasive urothelial carcinoma (pT1). At 7 months postoperatively, he was admitted to our hospital because of sever fatigue. CT showed that a solid mass had replaced the lymphocele in the left pelvic region . We suspected an infectious cyst or tumor metastasis, and MRI was performed for further analysis. MRI showed that the mass was isointense on T1- and T2-weighted imaging and hyperintense on diffusion-weighted imaging . CT-guided biopsy was performed and histopathological diagnosis was well-differentiated SCC . The histopathological findings were similar to those of ureteral cancer; therefore, we diagnosed the pelvic mass as ureteral cancer metastasis. Unfortunately, his general condition deteriorated, so he chose not to receive any additional therapy for the metastatic tumor.