A 51-year-old unemployed Asian man sustained a thermal burn affecting 60% of his total body surface area (TBSA) in a gasoline fire. He arrived at our hospital 4 h after injury (day 0). Upon initial examination, he was in shock and found to have inhalation injury. He had third degree burns on his face, head, neck, chest, back, bilateral upper extremities, abdomen, and bilateral thighs. Fluid resuscitation and artificial ventilation with tracheal intubation were started. According to his family, he did not have any obvious comorbidities. The patient’s history of VZV vaccination and VZV infection were unknown. Despite fluid resuscitation and catecholamine support, he had persistent oliguria and hypotension. Continuous hemodialysis and filtration (CHDF) combined with polymyxin B-immobilized fiber column direct hemoperfusion (PMX-DHP) was started on day 1 to treat his renal failure, reduce cytokine storm, and remove endotoxins in an attempt to prevent development of multiple organ failure (MOF). Multiple eschar debridements and autologous and allogeneic skin grafting were performed. Almost complete escharectomy was achieved by day 13. However, throughout the treatment period, the patient’s general condition remained critical. He could not be weaned from artificial ventilation and CHDF, and he continuously needed catecholamine circulatory support. On day 10, he developed cardiac arrest that was treated by cardiac massage and intravenous adrenaline, with return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC).
Engraftment of skin grafts and epithelialization of the skin donor sites were poor, and on day 15, multiple-drug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa (MDRP) was detected in specimens from his burn wound and blood. His burn sepsis was refractory to treatment, and he developed multiple organ failure (MOF). On day 31, compact aggregations of small vesicles appeared on the intact skin of his left knee and left buttock. The vesicles were located within the 4th lumbar (L4) spinal dermatome . From day 32 to day 34, similar new vesicles arose on his intact skin and epithelializing split-thickness skin graft harvested sites on both legs, both knees, entire abdomen, both buttocks, and entire face and neck. The vesicles ruptured sequentially and became multiple skin ulcers. On day 34, the patient was evaluated by dermatologists, and was diagnosed with disseminated zoster caused by reactivation of latent varicella zoster virus (VZV), based on the patient’s age, characteristic pattern of aggregations of vesicles initially limited to the left L4 dermatome, and positive Tzank smear (Giemsa-stained vesicular content positive for multinucleated giant cells). Because disseminated zoster can be transmitted via an airborne route, the patient was isolated in a negative-pressure room to avoid airborne spread of VZV. On day 36, the patient’s serum levels of anti-VZV immunoglobulin (Ig) G, anti-VZV IgM, anti-HSV IgG, and anti-HSV IgM antibodies were measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits (Denka Seiken, Tokyo, Japan). The antigen in the measuring kits of anti-VZV IgG and anti-VZV IgM is isolated from Vero cells infected with VZV HS strain. The antigen in the measuring kits of anti-HSV IgG and anti-HSV IgM is isolated from RD cells infected with HSV H-S1 strain. The antibody titers calculated from a standard curve using ELISA OD values. The results showed a high anti-VZV IgG antibody titer of 128 (> 4.0 is defined as positive according to the manufacturer’s insert) and low anti-VZV IgM antibody titer of 0.46 (< 0.8 defined as negative by the manufacturer’s insert). The anti-HSV IgG antibody titer was indeterminant at 2.5 (> 4, positive; < 2.0, negative; 2.0–3.9, indeterminant by the manufacturer’s insert), and the anti-HSV IgM antibody titer was negative at 0.47 (< 0.8 defined as negative by the manufacturer’s insert). Intravenous acyclovir, 500 mg daily, was started. Despite intensive care and acyclovir for 14 days, the patient’s general condition worsened. On day 48, most vesicles had not healed and had become skin ulcers , and not much skin was available skin for skin grafts. Therefore, treating the burn was impossible. On day 52, the patient died of multiple organ failure. No cases of VZV infection occurred in other ICU patients or ICU personnel during the treatment period.