A 16-year-old male with a past medical history of Marfan syndrome with severe pectus excavatum, significant scoliosis, and generalized anxiety disorder presented for PSIF from T3 to L4 to correct his scoliosis deformity. Preoperative evaluation demonstrated a left lumbar curve of 64 degrees and lumbar kyphosis of 14 degrees. His curve corrected to 40 degrees with a fulcrum bend. Evaluation 1 year prior to the surgery revealed no cardiovascular abnormalities with a normal ejection fraction of 56%.
Induction of anesthesia and intubation were uncomplicated. His preprocedure vitals were stable and within a normal range. The patient was placed in a prone position. Due to the ongoing hemodynamic instability and need for abundant amounts of vasopressor support, the chest pads were repositioned which improved his hypotension for a time. The surgical aspects of the procedure proceeded uneventfully. The patient had transverse process pedicle hooks placed bilaterally at T3 and had navigated pedicle screws placed T4-L4. Facetectomies were performed at each level and a Cortrel-Dubousset derotation maneuver was performed to correct the scoliosis. Sequential distraction and compression was performed to correct the deformity in combination with in situ rod bending in both the coronal and the sagittal plane. Throughout the procedure, he had a significant vasopressor requirement. The patient received adequate crystalloid and colloid in addition to 4 units of fresh frozen plasma and approximately 600 cc of cell saver. The case lasted 10 hours and was complicated with 1.4 L of blood loss.
At the conclusion of the case, the patient was flipped supine and transferred to the postanesthesia care unit (PACU) intubated and on mechanical ventilator support in hopes to later extubate once his anesthetic dissipated. He was slow to emerge from anesthesia, and initial vital signs showed significant hypotension (systolic blood pressure 66 mmHg with a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of 54) and tachycardia into the 140s. The patient was started on phenylephrine and was transferred to the Surgical Intensive Care Unit (SICU) for ongoing management.
Over the next few hours, the patient became interactive and was extubated uneventfully; however, his hypotension continued despite phenylephrine which resulted in a transition to a norepinephrine infusion. His vitals continued to demonstrate a narrowed pulse pressure with hypotension and tachycardia, concerning for cardiac tamponade and/or active postsurgical bleeding. Laboratory investigations demonstrated a hemoglobin of 12.5 g/dL, international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.6, activated partial thromboplastin (APP) time of 30, and a fibrinogen of 155 mg/dL which improved to 187 mg/dL without intervention. He was given fluid boluses and continued on norepinephrine with minimal improvement. His initial postoperative labs were significant for a lactate of 3.6 mmol/L and a creatinine (Cr) of 0.8 mg/dL. His lactate peaked at 5.0 mmol/L. Given continued concern for myocardial depression, tamponade physiology, or active bleeding, he was assessed with an emergent formal bedside transthoracic echocardiogram and CT angiogram of the chest and abdomen. These demonstrated no active sources of bleeding, no pneumothoraces, and a relatively unfilled, hyperdynamic left ventricle with a postoperative Haller index that increased from 8.7 to 11.3 .
Over the next several hours, surveillance labs showed an evolving acute kidney injury and signs of global hypoperfusion as his lactate continued to rise. We suspected that his pectus excavatum had compromised his cardiac function by mechanical obstruction and that this compromise was exacerbated by significant intraoperative blood loss, fluid deficit, and residual effects of his anesthetic. Cardiothoracic surgery was consulted and gave consideration to immediate surgical intervention should the patient not improve with medical management. We utilized fluid boluses and vasopressor support over the course next 24 hours . He slowly improved hemodynamically. His acute kidney injury, lactate, and urine output improved, and he was ultimately transferred out of the ICU on postoperative day two without additional surgical intervention. Preoperative and postoperative radiographs demonstrating the spinal instrumentation and deformity correction are provided .