The patient was a 25-year-old married male at the time of the accident. He was working in an office (indoor) as an assistant manager in a government firm. He had an unusual mechanism of injury when he slipped from his two-wheeler in rain and hit his left side of the body to a tree. The patient sustained an injury of left hip joint and was admitted in a hospital at his hometown where initial evaluation, and first aid treatment was done. The patient came to our hospital 4 days after injury. A pelvic radiograph showed a Pipkin type III fracture . Trauma series radiographs of the patient ruled out fractures of other parts of the body. There was no comorbidity. Computed tomography revealed that the femoral head split into two parts almost vertically in a sagittal plane one fragment was lying posterior and the other one is in the joint. The associated femoral neck fracture was displaced anteriorly, sub-capital, and has irregular fracture line rotated externally. Tosounidis et al. observed that in these injuries, the femoral neck fracture is always of vertical or irregular configuration and always displaced (, ).
After, X-ray (anteroposterior view of pelvis with both hips) and computed tomography (CT) scan with 3D reconstruction, pre-operative assessment and planning, pre-anesthetic checkups, patient was posted for surgery on next day. The patient had been positioned in a floppy lateral position. Kocher-Langenbeck approach was used first to retrieve the posterior head fragment, which was lying free in the posterosuperior part of acetabulum just under the gluteus maximus, having come out through the ruptured short external rotators. Following this, a trochanteric flip osteotomy was done and the anterior part of the neck exposed. The free piece of the head fragment from the hip joint was delivered out . Frayed chondral tissue attached to the base of the femoral head fragment was debrided. The two fragments of the head were reduced and fixed using 3.5 mm locking head screws from the small fragment LCP set . Following this, the head fragment was reduced to the neck in as anatomical a position as possible. A fairly good match was achieved. We then use three long 5.5 mm titanium locking head screws to fix the reconstructed head to the neck from articular side of the head, through the fractured neck to the shaft (two from one fragment of the femoral head and one from other) . The reason for doing this was to avoid the screws fixing the femoral head. The reduction of the well-fixed proximal femur was done into the acetabulum by gentle manipulation. Reduction and provisional fixation of the osteotomized trochanter was done with Kirschner wires followed by definitive fixation using two 3.5 mm cortical screws.
The patient was encouraged to do range of motion exercise after the first post-operative dressing on day 2. This was followed by toe-touch weight-bearing with a walker and he was discharged from the hospital on day 7. Suture removal was done on day 12. Toe-touch weight-bearing was continued up to 6 weeks. Partial weight-bearing was allowed with a walker after 6 weeks. Full weight-bearing with active range of motion exercises against gravity, and cycling started at 12 weeks. The patient was allowed running and normal activity after signs of the radiological union at 6 months.
After 3 months, the patient started using a bicycle for outdoor activity and joined his office. At the 6 months follow-up, he could walk freely and perform activities of daily living, incomplete squatting, difficulty in sitting crossed legged and had a normal sexual function. The patient has no pain but terminal restriction of range of motion (flexion of left hip joint 0-80°) at 2 years follow-up. The patient was able to use an Indian toilet with difficulty. There were signs of AVN on X-rays (, ). Computed tomography was done which showed artifacts due to screws , although titanium is bound to produce lesser artifacts on radiological imaging. He was advised to continue physiotherapy and started on alendronate 70 mg weekly for 2 years.
Evaluation of the patient at 5 years showed similar functional status and range of motion of involved hip joint . He was doing his job normally and managing quite well. The patient was able to walk without any restriction and was also able to go jogging, although he developed mild pain after running about 200–400 m. This mild pain can be correlated with minimal collapse of femoral head with other signs of AVN, although the patient was able to do his day-to-day activity with minimal difficulty. When comparing the imaging at 4th year follow up with the previous one at the 2nd years, femoral head appeared smoother in outline, with no progression of collapse (, ). It is noted here that the patient was on alendronate during this period. There is no change in functional status and minimal radiological change on final follow up at 5th year, like little more reduction of joint space, minimal collapse of femoral head and osteophyte lipping on both femoral and acetabular sides (, ). There was no heterotopic ossification.