A 56-year-old female presented to emergency department with history of fall at home 2 weeks back. The patient was managed at home for 2 weeks and brought to hospital when patients’ condition started deteriorating and she developed bed sores. On physical examination, right lower limb was shortened, externally rotated and the patient was not able to do hip flexion. Joint line tenderness and swelling was present on right hip. The patient also complained of chronic back ache and bilateral knee pain from past 10 to 15 years due to which she had difficulty walking without support. On plain radiograph of pelvis, we found fracture neck of femur right side . Spine and knee radiograph showed fused vertebrae with scoliosis left side and grade 4 osteoarthritis bilateral knee, respectively . Skin traction applied on left leg and patient planned for surgery. As the patient was neglected for 2 weeks after history of injury, had bed sores and patient belongs to low socioeconomic status, so the patient was planned for bipolar hemi-arthroplasty instead of total hip replacement.
The patient was prepared for surgery hip joint opened with posterior-lateral incision. Subcutaneous tissue and abductor muscle with tensor fascia latae dissected. Some black nodules were observed in subcutaneous tissue while dissection. Femur rotated internally to exposed external rotator muscle. There was stiffness which was felt while internal rotation of femur and there was popping sound during exposure. Even after dissection of external rotators exposure of joint and retraction of tissue was difficult. Incision was increased and more soft-tissue dissected to visualize joint capsule. The capsule of joint was also contracted and after taking incision on capsule, cavity was dry and there was no joint fluid. Removal of femur head from acetabulum was more difficult than usual. There was brown-black pigmentation seen on head of femur and acetabulum . Femur head removed, measured, and femur canal prepared for cementing. Rotation of femur was also restriction due to tightening of muscles and tendons. Ultimately, femur canal prepared and bipolar implant were inserted with bone cement. After that, wound washed and closed in multiple layers. No other complication was observed during surgery.
After finding black head of femur, sample was sent for histopathology and for staining to rule out fungal infection. Again history was taken and thorough examination was done post-operatively, there were brown-black spots in sclera and dark pigmentation was observed on hands and ears .
The patient was advised in-bed mobilization next day after surgery and full weight walking was tried on 2nd day after surgery. She faced difficulty in doing normal post-operation physiotherapy regimen and was unable to walk. Hence, she was kept on in-bed mobilization exercises till 2 months.