A 57-year-old woman was admitted to our emergency department due to sudden onset of left low back pain and left lower limb paralysis. Her past history included vascular EDS. Her daughter and son were both diagnosed with vascular EDS when they underwent genetic screening. On examination, she was in hypovolemic shock and had cold extremities and impaired consciousness (Glasgow coma scale 14). An urgent abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a left-sided retroperitoneal hematoma and left external iliac artery dissection.
Stent graft repair was performed under general anesthesia, which was induced with propofol, fentanyl, rocuronium, and tracheal intubation. The GORE EXCLUDER leg stent graft (16 × 70 mm; W. L. Gore and Associates, Inc., Flagstaff, AZ) was deployed, covering the left external iliac artery. Just after stent grafting, her blood pressure decreased (arterial blood pressure, 50/30 mmHg; heart rate, 91 beats/min); digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed a rupture of the left external iliac artery distal to the stent graft. Thus, the GORE EXCLUDER leg stent graft (12 × 100 mm) was deployed to cover the site of rupture. However, she developed hypovolemic shock (arterial blood pressure, 39/27 mmHg; heart rate, 80 beats/min) soon after the second stenting attempt, and DSA revealed rupture of the left external iliac artery distal to the second stent graft. Therefore, the GORE EXCLUDER leg stent graft (12 × 100 mm) was deployed from the end of the second stent graft to the puncture site. A completion angiogram revealed the arrest of hemorrhage from the left external iliac artery and run-off to the left popliteal artery.
Five hours postoperatively, abdominal distention increased progressively, leading to hypovolemic shock. Soon after the decision was made to attempt stent graft repair again, cardiac arrest occurred, and resuscitation attempts failed.
The 32-year-old daughter, a pharmacist, was notified of the death of her mother during the customary end-of-life conference. She experienced a sudden onset of left low back pain 6 h after her mother’s death and was admitted to our emergency department. Her past history included genetically diagnosed vascular EDS with left external iliac artery dissection, abdominal aortic aneurysm, and ileostomy after strangulating obstruction 4 years ago. On examination, she was not in hypovolemic shock: Glasgow coma scale was 15, heart rate 74 beats/min, arterial blood pressure 116/66 mmHg, oxygen saturation 100% (room air), and respiratory rate 24/min. She had marked tenderness in her lower back, and weak pulses were palpable in the bilateral dorsalis pedis. Her initial blood tests showed hemoglobin of 12.9 g/dl and a prothrombin time international normalized ratio of 1.03. An urgent abdominal CT scan revealed a right-sided retroperitoneal hematoma around the right external iliac artery and left external iliac artery dissection. Upon admission to the ICU, the only sickroom available for her was the one in which her mother had died several hours ago. As we found this inauspicious and were afraid of making her uncomfortable, we exchanged the sickroom with that of another patient. She underwent conservative therapy consisting of bed rest and antihypertensive therapy with nicardipine in the ICU. She developed no further vascular complications requiring surgical intervention, remained stable in the ICU, maintained palpable bilateral dorsalis pedis pulses throughout her hospital stay, and was discharged on the 21st hospital day. No evidence of re-bleeding was noted after discharge.