A 50-year-old female presented with complains of painless progressive swelling in right cheek region of two months duration. Examination revealed a 6 × 4 cm bony hard swelling in right zygomatic region near and below lateral canthus of right eye Roentgenogram of the paranasal sinuses showed a lesion arising from right maxilla and right zygoma. Computerized tomographic (CT) scan revealed two separate masses one in right orbit and other infiltrating zygoma and maxilla , radiographic picture was suggestive of osteogenic sarcoma or Ewing's sarcoma. A fine needle aspiration was carried out that showed typical polygonal and spindle cells with moderate amount of cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei with nucleoli, many with intracellular pigment; seen singly and clusters, the picture was suggestive of malignant melanoma . The ophthalmologic consultation revealed that there was no useful vision in the right eye. A B-scan of the right eye showed an organized mass within the vitreous cavity indicating vitreous haemorrhage . A detailed clinical examination failed to show any other melanocytic lesion on skin and other mucus membranes.
With a provisional diagnosis of melanoma of the maxilla and zygoma with vitreous haemorrhage and no useful vision in right eye a wide excision of the lesion including anterolateral maxillectomy, zygomectomy, and removal of superolateral wall and floor of orbit with en bloc exenteration of the right eyeball was carried out . Histopathological examination of the resected eyeball specimen showed a neoplasm in choroid, filling posterior chamber with no extraoccular extensions, composed of sheets, nests and cords of polygonal cells and vesicular nuclei. Prominent nucleoli and eosinophilic cytoplasm containing abundant melanin pigment were noted . Similar tumours were seen in the extra ocular soft tissue and resected maxilla and zygomatic bones. A final diagnosis of choroidal melanoma metastasizing to maxillofacial bones was made. Differential diagnosis of primary bone melanoma with metastasis to choroids was kept.
Surgical excision was followed by 40 Gy./15 fractions of radiotherapy to right face using lateral portal. Patient is on regular follow-up two years after surgery and is free of any local or systemic recurrences.