A 14-year-old Thai girl was born via cesarean section due to premature rupture of the membrane with a birth weight of 2500 g. She is the first child of a consanguineous (second-degree relatives) couple. Both parents are healthy and have never had fractures. During her first year of life, she had delayed motor development and growth failure. At one year of age, she could not sit by herself and weighed 7.5 kg (< 3rd centile). She presented to our hospital at 14 months of age with fractures of both femora without a history of significant trauma. She was found to have ptosis of both eyes with normal teeth but no blue sclerae. She was small for her age. Her weight was 7.8 kg (3rd centile) and her length was 68 cm (< 3rd centile). Skeletal survey showed diffuse osteopenia, multiple healed fractures of the right humoral shaft, both tibiae and fibulae. Spine radiograph showed flattening and indentation of vertebral bodies . A diagnosis of OI was made and intravenous bisphosphonate therapy (pamidronate 1 mg/kg/dose for 3 days) was initiated and given every 3 months. However, she sustained 1–2 long bone fractures per year from minor trauma. She required multiple corrective osteotomies to correct her deformities. At the last follow-up, she was 14 years old, weighing 20 kg. She could not walk due to her long bone deformity . Remarkably, although she was in a special education class due to physical disabilities, her cognition was appropriate for age. She could talk fluently and do mathematics properly.
Prenatally, her younger sister was found to have a dilated fourth ventricle by an ultrasonography. She was born at term via cesarean section because of previous cesarean section and was diagnosed with hydrocephalus at birth. At 4 months of age, she had her first fracture without a history of a significant trauma, leading to a diagnosis of OI. Physical examination revealed a head circumference of 38 cm (> 95th centile) with a wide anterior fontanelle (3 × 3 cm.) and blue sclerae. She had global developmental delay (could not hold her head) and hypotonia. MRI of the brain demonstrated a large posterior fossa cyst connecting with the fourth ventricular system, moderate hydrocephalus, hypoplasia of cerebellar hemisphere with absence of cerebellar vermis, and hypoplasia of corpus collosum. She was also diagnosed with vesicoureteral reflux grade V and gastroesophageal reflux requiring tube feeding. The patient had multiple hospitalizations because of recurrent urinary tract infections and pneumonia. She expired at the age of one year.
Sixteen known OI genes, BMP1, COL1A1, COL1A2, CREB3L1, CRTAP, FKBP10, IFITM5, LEPRE1, PLOD2, PPIB, SERPINF1, SERPINH1, SP7, TMEM38B, WNT1, and MBTPS2, were amplified from 200 ng of genomic DNA using the Truseq Custom Amplicon Sequencing kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA). 286 amplicons which covered all the 226 exons (28 kb) of the target genes were sequenced by Miseq (Illumina, San Diego, CA) using 2 × 250 paired-end reads. SNVs and Indels were detected by Miseq reporter software. The proband was found to harbor a homozygous mutation, c.6delG, p.Leu3Serfs*36 in WNT1. The mutation has never been reported in Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD; ) . The mutation was subsequently confirmed by PCR-Sanger sequencing. Segregation analysis was performed by using primers, WNT1-E1F: GGT TGTTAAAGCCAGACTGC and WNT1-E1R: ACCAGCTCACTTACCACCAT. The results revealed that the patient was homozygous, while her mother was heterozygous for the mutation .