The patient, a 50-year-old Asian man diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia when in his late twenties, had been treated with a variety of first generation antipsychotics for several years. Whilst an inpatient at age 42 years, he had been prescribed SGAS. He was medically fit, apart from suffering from hypertension controlled with perindropril 4 mg/day. He was discharged once clinically stable on olanzapine 20 mg/day. His records revealed that at age 48 years, whilst on 20 mg olanzapine, his random glucose levels were 17.6 and his glycosylated haemoglobin was 10.9%. He was started on oral hypoglycaemic agents by his general practitioner, a combination of gliclazide MR 30 mg/day and metformin 500 mg twice daily, which was later increased to 1 g twice daily because of poor response.
His diabetes mellitus was under control, but as his mental state continued to deteriorate, olanzapine was increased to 25 mg/day and subsequently changed to aripiprazole reaching a dose of 20 mg/day. After 2 months, the patient experienced gradual weight loss associated with episodes of hypoglycaemia. Gliclazide was consequently discontinued and he remained on metformin 1 g twice daily.
The patient was re-admitted to hospital 7 months later owing to poor compliance with medication and exacerbation of his psychiatric symptoms. Whilst in the community, his general practitioner restarted his diabetic medication (gliclazide 30 mg/day and metformin 500 mg twice daily) and combined it with a lipid-regulating drug (simvastatin 20 mg/day) and antihypertensive treatment (amlodipine 10 mg/day and perindropril 4 mg/day). On admission, his fasting glucose levels were between 3.7 and 6 mmol/l and he was overweight with a body mass index (BMI) of 27. Risperidone was added to the medication regime reaching a dose of 6 mg/day. His fasting glucose levels were between 4.2 mmol/l and 6 mmol/l. After 3 months, despite controlling his psychiatric symptoms, risperidone use resulted in intolerable side effects in the form of urinary incontinence, therefore it was discontinued and aripiprazole restarted reaching a dose of 15 mg daily. Six weeks later, the patient presented with symptomatic episodes of hypoglycaemia with fasting glucose levels between 2.1 and 3 mmol/l with no changes in body composition or other metabolic parameters. In consultation with his diabetologist, the oral hypoglycaemic medication was discontinued. The patient remained physically well with fasting glucose levels within normal range (3.5 to 6 mmol/l) during the 6 months that he remained in the unit.