A 19-year-old woman was diagnosed with TSC after presenting with intractile epilepsy at 3 months of age. Seizure prophylaxis included carbamazepine, topiramate, lamotrigine, and a neurostimulator. She also presented with developmental delays, severe facial skin lesions asymptomatic lymphangioleiomyomatosis and obesity (body mass index 32.2 kg/m2). She had multiple renal AML, including one exophytic AML sized 6 x 5 x 4.5 cm at the upper pole of the right kidney , which required treatment.
An initial conservative approach consisted of progressively increasing doses of the mTORi sirolimus, up to 3 mg/day, over a 12 months period. After 6 months of maximal dose with sirolimus (plasma levels achieved: 2–3 ng/ml), the AML size was reduced to 4.5 x 4 x 3.5 cm . The reduction in size was substantial, although it was considered insufficient to reduce the bleeding risk and it was decided to proceed with. Percutaneous cryotherapy was selected as a treatment due to the available expertise at the treating institute and the favorable location of the AML.
Under general anesthesia, three cryoprobes were positioned in the AML from a posterior approach using computed tomography (CT) guidance . Cryoablation was performed with a standard protocol of 10 minutes freezing (−180°C) then ten minutes passive thawing and 10 minutes refreezing. The procedure was uneventful and complete coverage of the AML by the ice ball was achieved. Evaluation at 1 month confirmed the complete devascularisation of the AML. CT scans at 12 months post-cryoablation showed no sign of the treated AML , the other disseminated lesions within the two kidneys remained infracentimetric. Sirolimus treatment was maintained at the same level and subsequently replaced by everolimus, 5 mg/day, based on local drug agency approval. Everolimus residual plasma concentration remained within the range 2–3 ng/ml, which was below the recommended target of 5–10 ng/ml. However, after 12 months of treatment, the AML treated with cryotherapy showed no sign of recurrence and the size of the other AML lesions remained stable.
Renal function remained normal and stable throughout follow up, although a mild proteinuria (0.13 g/g of creatinine) occured. Hypercholesterolemia present pre-treatment increased slightly from 2.64 to 2.77 g/l, while triglycerides remained normal. Blood count was normal as well as the level of gammaglobulins. No side-effects of the treatment were reported.