An otherwise healthy 36-year-old woman was diagnosed with placenta Percreta and previa at 32 weeks of pregnancy. She was referred to the obstetrics and gynecology department of a tertiary care Hospital in Tehran, Iran, to be managed by a multidisciplinary team.
Upon admission, a comprehensive history was obtained, and a thorough physical examination was conducted. She had no significant past medical history, with a gestational age of 32 weeks, G5P4L2 (gravida 5 para 4 live 2 death 2), including two previous cesarean sections and one preterm delivery due to membrane rupture. She reported no abdominopelvic pain or vaginal bleeding and remained hemodynamically stable. Bimanual and vaginal examinations were not performed, but all other physical examinations were within the normal range.
Color Doppler sonography revealed a complete placenta previa with multiple large lacunae, a non-existent hypoechoic retroplacental zone, and abnormal vessels extending from the placenta to the bladder. To assess myometrial invasion of other organs thoroughly, an MRI was performed, revealing abnormal vascularization and lacunae of the placental bed, along with a few areas of intrusion into the posterior wall of the bladder with serosal loss. Since the invasion of lacunae to other organs was seen, the case was classified as placenta percreta.
Considering the patient's condition, a decision was made to preserve the uterus with the placenta left in situ after delivering the fetus. Following general anesthesia, a midline abdominal incision was made, and a healthy neonate was delivered via a cesarean section. To minimize the risk of hemorrhage and possible nearby organ damage, the umbilical cord and bleeding vessels of the uterus were ligated, and the placenta was left in the uterus. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to the interventional radiology operating room for angioembolization, using polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) particles (500–700 μm) loaded into 10 mL syringes containing a contrast medium. Under Angiographic guidance, a 5-Cobra catheter was placed into both the bilateral uterine artery (UA) and bilateral internal iliac artery (Waltman loop technique for ipsilateral artery). Angiography revealed dilated vascular channels and contrast blush at adhesion sites, which were successfully embolized with PVA until a marked slowing of blood flow was observed. This procedure took about 30–60 min [, ].
Post-operatively, antibiotics were administered intravenously for seven days, and the patient was discharged with instructions for weekly complete blood count (CBC) and beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (B-hCG) tests, as well as biweekly color Doppler ultrasonography.
During six months of follow-up, the patient did not resume her menstrual cycle. B-hCG levels gradually decreased and were undetectable after one month. No leukocytosis was observed, and although there was some shrinkage in placental tissue observed during continuous ultrasonography, it was not fully absorbed.
The patient was readmitted to the hospital twice due to abnormal vaginal discharge and tissue disposal. On the last admission, she presented with fever, persistent vaginal bleeding, and malodor vaginal discharge. Ultrasound revealed shrinkage of the placenta and residual heterogenous hypoechoic areas indicative of placental remnants, the bladder wall showed impairment. Laboratory results revealed an elevated white blood cell (WBC) count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP). Vaginal culture revealed Acinetobacter colonization.
Subsequently, the patient underwent Total Abdominal Hysterectomy (TAH) and Bilateral Salpingectomy, with the urology team assisting in removing and repairing a portion of the bladder dome due to multiple adhesions. After the operation, the urethral Foley catheter remained for 10 days, And the patient was discharged in stable condition.
Pathology confirmed the diagnosis of placenta percreta with necrotic tissue.