A 70-year-old, 54-kg male presented with cough and blood-stained sputum. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed a tracheal lesion in the middle trachea (Shown in Fig. ). Bronchoscopy showed a tumor encroaching into the left tracheal wall of the middle trachea. A biopsy was positive for an adenoid cystic carcinoma of the trachea. Routine laboratory investigations were normal. The patient’s electrocardiogram showed changes of ST-T in the anterior lateral wall and the inferior wall. Coronary CT angiography confirmed that the left anterior descending branch was mildly-to-moderately stenosed with atherosclerosis. Cardiac function was at NYHA classification level II. To avoid the stress response of open thoracotomy, the patient was scheduled for tracheal resection and reconstruction under VATS.
After arrival in the operating room, routine monitoring including electrocardiography, blood pressure, and pulse oximetry were applied. Preoperative vital signs included a blood pressure of 138/82 mmHg, heart rate of 70 beats per minute and pulse oximetry of 99%. Catheterization of the radial artery was performed under local anesthesia for continuous blood pressure monitoring as well as blood gas analysis.
After preoxygenation, anesthesia was induced with intravenous sufentanil (Yichang Humanwell Pharmaceutical Company, China), propofol (AstraZeneca S.P.A., Italy), and cis-atracurium (Hengrui Medicine, Jiangsu, China). Under visual guidance of the imaging camera in the tip, an internal diameter (ID) of 7.5 mm VivaSight™ SLT was intubated through the glottis and placed above the tracheal tumor (Shown in Fig. ). The tube was then rotated until carina and tumor were both visualized on the monitor simultaneously. A 9F bronchial blocker was placed in the right main bronchus under the guidance of VivaSight™ SLT. The cuff of the bronchial blocker was inflated with the volume necessary to seal the bronchus (8 mL air). (Shown in Fig. ). General anesthesia was maintained with continuous intravenous infusion of remifentanil (Yichang Humanwell Pharmaceutical Company, China) 0.1–0.15 mcg•kg− 1•min− 1 and propofol (AstraZeneca S.P.A., Italy) 6–8 mg•kg− 1•h− 1. The depth of anesthesia was adjusted according to the Narcotrend index (MonitorTechnik, Bad Bramstedt, Germany). Cis-atracurium was intermittently administered to maintain muscle relaxation by the guidance of TOF-Watch (Organon, Netherlands).
The patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus and the position of the bronchial blocker was continuously monitored. Right video assisted thoracotomy was performed uneventfully to separate the trachea. Right lung collapse was achieved by deflating the cuff of the bronchial blocker and disconnecting the tube from the ventilator just before the surgeon broke the pleura. After a few seconds, the cuff of the bronchial blocker was inflated with the same volume of air and one-lung ventilation was achieved.
After the trachea was well exposed, the bronchial blocker was withdrawn, and a sterile SLT of ID 6.5 mm was placed to the left main bronchus through the incision of the trachea by the surgeon. One-lung ventilation was then performed through this tube. Following previous report , the lesioned tracheal was resected. During tracheal anastomosis, the patient was intermittent ventilated through the endobronchial tube, which was inserted from the incision of tracheal by the surgeon. As tracheal anastomosis was not easily performed under VATS. When the surgeon was doing the tracheal anastomosis, the SLT was removed and the ventilation was interrupted. For a while, the SLT was re-inserted and the patient was ventilated to restore oxygenation. Until the completion of tracheal anastomosis, the patient was ventilated again through the VivaSight SLT. After surgery, the patient was transferred to the thoracic ICU with a trachea tube. He was extubated at 24 h post-operatively.