A 34-year old male presented to our ophthalmology clinic with the sensation of a foreign body in his left eye. While performing his job as a blacksmith, he suddenly felt something hit his left eye. Ophthalmological examination showed visual acuity of 20/20 with pinhole correction in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was 11 mmHg in the left eye and 14 mmHg in the right eye. Both pupils were round, regular and equally reactive to light and accommodation.
Slit-lamp biomicroscopic examination of the left eye showed that there was an intrastromally embedded metallic foreign body with a free posterior edge extending outwards at the 1 o’ clock position. Significant eye redness was noted over the entire bulbar conjunctiva, which was more prominent in the limbus just behind to the entry site of the foreign body. An overlying corneal epithelial defect and localized surrounding corneal edema were noted at the point of foreign body entry. The foreign body had a free exit edge that was protruding outwards. It was not possible to visualize the entire route of the foreign body through the cornea because of localized surrounding corneal edema. The inside edge of the foreign body appeared to enter the anterior chamber via completely penetrating the cornea . Gonioscopic examination was not performed due to the potential for the free posterior edge of the foreign body to be pushed into the anterior chamber. There was no apparent iris or lens damage, and no aqueous cells or aqueous flare were observed in the anterior chamber. Right eye slit lamp examination and fundoscopy findings in both eyes were unremarkable.
AS-OCT was performed on the patient’s left eye using a Cirrus SD-OCT device in high-definition anterior segment 5-line raster scan mode. Details regarding scan protocol can be found elsewhere (Rodrigues et al. ). AS-OCT showed shadowing of the corneal layers that corresponded to the location of the foreign body . A hyper-reflective lesion was observed quite close to the inside edge of the cornea, indicating that the foreign body did not completely penetrate the cornea .
After explaining the treatment options and possible related consequences to the patient, he provided informed consent to undergo removal of the foreign body in an operating room under topical anesthesia. Based on the AS-OCT findings, the foreign body was removed via the external route, as it did not completely penetrate the cornea. Toothed grasping intraocular forceps was used to remove the foreign body via the same route as which it had entered. After removal of the foreign body, the Seidel test was administered and it did not show any fluorescein leakage. Based on the foreign body’s small size, site of entry, and its oblique route, post removal the entry site was not closed with sutures, but the eye was tightly covered with a bandage. Postoperative treatment was applied with lomefloxacin q.i.d and tobramycin ointment b.i.d. During the postoperative period the patient was asymptomatic and the left eye’s cornea healed with scar tissue . AS-OCT performed 3 weeks after, showed hyper-reflectivity corresponding to the corneal scar tissue along the wound-healing line .
The signed informed consent from the patient for the use of the unidentified personal and medical information and any accompanying images for the publication of this case report was obtained.