A 57 years old male patient was examined at the outpatient department of Neurology Clinic and by our muscle disorder specialist genetic counselors. Relevant history of the patient are summarized on a timeline . In the medical history he had unilateral nephrectomy due to traumatic injury at the age of 26. Atrial septum defect (ASD) was known since his childhood and it was closed via endovascular route when he was 52 years old.
The family history was unremarkable. In the case of his parents, 3 siblings and his daughter neuromuscular disease was not reported.
His symptoms indicating muscle disorder appeared at age 7. Neck muscle weakness, especially inability of anteflexion was pronounced since the beginning of the disease. In the last few years the neck weakness worsened and he was unable to bend his neck at all. His head tended to fall backwards and he must hold his head with his arms in standing position and walking. Weakness of the extremities was not significant. Recent neurologic examination showed markedly increased cervical lordosis and retroflexion contracture. The neck anteflexion was severely weak (MRC 2/5), the retroflexion was almost normal (5−/5). The facial and the anterior neck muscles were atrophic, bilateral scapular winging was present. Generalized muscle hypotrophy was seen in lower extremities, and distal hypotrophy in upper extremities. The muscle strength was generally decreased (MRC 4–4+/5) without characteristic distribution, deep tendon reflexes were absent in all extremities. There was no sensory deficit, dysphagia or involvement of ocular, cardiac and respiratory muscles.
Imaging studies showed atlanto-axial instability without spinal cord lesion. Brain MRI was normal. Electromyography (EMG) of proximal muscles resulted in small, myopathic unit potentials and increased polyphasy. Electroneuronography (ENG) was negative. Laboratory tests were normal including creatine kinase (CK). MRI of thigh muscles showed degenerative changes in the posterior compartment and adductor magnus on T1-weighted images. In the calf level anterior (extensor) muscles showed degenerative changes and the medial gastrocnemius muscle showed hyperintensity on STIR study resembling edema and fatty infiltration on T1 . The pronounced degeneration of anterior tibial muscles observed on MRI showed the main characteristic of MYH7-related myopathies .
Biopsy of deltoid muscle showed round, markedly atrophic muscle fibers, increased ratio of internal nuclei and proliferation of connective tissue corresponding to myopathy. In certain muscle fibers subsarcolemmal cytoplasmic body was recognized with eosinophylic appearance on HE, blue staining with modified Gomori and increased enzyme activity with nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide dehydrogenase (NADH) enzyme histochemistry. Few cytochrome-c oxidase (COX) negative fibers were present. Central loss of enzyme activity was seen in several fibers with all oxidative enzyme reactions. Immunohistochemistry for proteins involved in muscular dystrophies was unremarkable. Electron microscopy showed core structures in the central part of some fibers and moderate accumulation of mitochondria in the interfibrillar space. Huge amount of granular sarcoplasmic material was accumulated in the periphery of several fibers . This histological pattern suggested congenital myopathy with sarcoplasmic storage material.
Diagnostic Sanger sequencing of the MYH7 gene revealed a heterozygous adenine-timine base transversion, which involves the next to last base in the coding region of exon 40 and causes the elongation of the protein sequence by 31 amino acids due to the loss of the termination codon, resulting in a leucine coding triplet (c.5807A > T; p.X1936LfsX32). Although no functional studies were performed to investigate the mutation, it was tested applying various prediction software. Mutation Assessor and MutationTaster confirmed its termination signal loss effect [–]. MutationTaster predicted also the probable alteration of splicing, the elongation of the gene product and the failure of the coiled coil forming process in the rod region of MyHCI. Analyzing further the probable splice site alteration effect, we applied the Human Splicing Finder v3.0 (HSFv3.0) software, which predicted the formation of an exonic splicing silencer site . The Paircoil2 software was used to further investigate the predicted defect of coiled coil forming function of the rod region . According to Paircoil2, the probability of coiled coil formation was less than 10−5. The mutation was evaluated also with the Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD) tool . CADD predicted the mutation to be deleterious with a significant C-score, which was 21.3. Besides this pathogenic mutation, two additional heterozygous single nucleotide variations in exon 40 were also detected . One of them was a synonymous variant (c.5805G > A; p. E1935E), the other was a 3-prime UTR variant following the coding region of exon 40 (c.5808 + 1C > A). None of the further detected two variants were reported or could be found in genetic databases dbSNP , ClinVar , in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) or in the Leiden Open Variation Database (LOVD) . Therefore we applied the HSFv3.0 and NetGene2 software in order to test whether the variants could be responsible for probable splice site alteration [, , ]. Results showed that these variants are likely not affecting the splicing process. The two variations were also investigated using CADD. According to CADD results, the synonymous variant was likely neutral. It showed also the probable deleteriousness of the 3-prime UTR variant. Although this variation, found in the untranslated region, is actually involved in the encoding of the elongated gene product caused by the detected stop-loss mutation.
This case report was prepared according to the CARE guidelines.