A 9-year-old boy [weight = 35 kg, body mass index (BMI) = 17.9 kg/m2, and body surface area (BSA) = 1.2 m2] was electively admitted for workup after he complained of exertional chest pain and dyspnoea during his outpatient visit. There were no other associated symptoms. At 13 months of age, he was diagnosed to have ALCAPA as a workup of severe left ventricular systolic dysfunction and underwent corrective surgery with coronary re-implantation of ALCAPA. Initially, he was started on heart failure medications which were stopped after complete recovery of left ventricular function.
On clinical examination, he was vitally stable with a pulse rate of 84 beats/min and blood pressure of 112/62 mm/Hg. He was afebrile, and oxygen saturation at room air was 98%. Cardiac examination revealed the normal character of the first and second heart sound with an ejection systolic murmur at the left upper sternal border. His electrocardiography showed normal sinus rhythm with incomplete right bundle branch block with ST-segment depression and T-wave inversion in inferior leads . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a mildly dilated right ventricle (RV) [proximal right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) = 24 mm and RV base = 30 mm] with normal systolic function with mild RV hypertrophy. There was significant SVPS with a peak gradient of 74 mmHg. The left ventricle was normal in size (left ventricular internal diameter end diastole [LVIDd] = 36 mm, left ventricular internal diameter end systole [LVIDs] = 20 mm, and ejection fraction 60%) and functions without any regional wall motion abnormalities ( and , ). The diagnostic left and right heart catheterization showed significant SVPS (peak gradient 75 mm/Hg) with normal size and distribution of pulmonary artery branches (see , ). A non-selective angiogram showed the high takeoff of re-implanted LMCA with significant ostial stenosis with dilatation of the shaft (post-stenotic dilatation).
The patient was offered surgical intervention but the family was reluctant and requested alternate percutaneous therapy. After a multidisciplinary team discussion between adult and paediatric interventional cardiologists and cardiothoracic surgeons, the decision was made to proceed with further assessment of the LMCA followed by the percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and staged balloon dilatation of supravalvular stenosis.
During the percutaneous intervention under general anaesthesia, a 6 Fr femoral sheath was inserted with ultrasound guidance and then semi-selective imaging with contrast confirmed the presence of significant disease in the ostial LMCA (see , ). The intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) showed severe luminal area reduction at the ostium due to a fibrous band without any evidence of atherosclerosis . After pre-dilatation using semi-compliant and non-compliant balloons, a 4.5 × 12 mm Onyx drug-eluting stent (DES) was implanted and post-dilated with a non-compliant balloon (5.0 × 8 mm) at 20 atm ( and , ). The IVUS images showed good expansion and apposition with a minimum luminal area of 11 mm2 at the ostium. The available stent with the best radial strength was chosen to avoid recoil. The patient was started on dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 81 mg daily and clopidogrel 75 mg daily).
On follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic. A repeated echocardiogram showed normal left ventricular systolic function (LVIDd = 38 mm, LVIDs = 21 mm, and ejection fraction 60%) and mildly dilated RV (proximal RVOT = 23 mm and RV base = 31 mm) with normal function. The supravalvular pulmonary gradient was stable (around 75 mm/Hg). About 10 months after the PCI, a cardiac CT was done to assess suitability for pulmonary valvuloplasty. It showed a patent stent in LMCA with an under-expanded area in the mid-segment . The proximal part of the LMCA stent was located very close to the stenotic segment of the main pulmonary artery . The case was discussed in the heart team meeting again and due to the proximity of the LMCA stent to the suprapulmonary stenotic area, the percutaneous angioplasty of SVPS was considered high risk due to the high likelihood of compression of the LMCA stent during the procedure. Currently, the patient is completely asymptomatic and under regular follow-up, and surgical intervention of SVPS is delayed to allow the somatic growth of the patient.