A 43-year-old man visited our hospital in May 2019, presenting with backache for over 1 month. The relevant medical history included a smoking history of 20 packs/years. No alcohol consumption or history of diabetes or hepatitis. A physical examination revealed no abnormalities.
The patient underwent abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan. The CT showed a 5.5×5.3 cm solid mass in the liver with a close relationship to the left portal vein and had no extrahepatic lesions . No abnormalities were identified in other abdominal organs such as the pancreas, spleen, kidneys, and adrenal glands. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 5.0 cm-sized well-defined solid mass with a cystic component, which was adjacent to the middle hepatic vein and left portal vein with peripheral biliary ductal dilatation and compression of the left branch of the portal vein . The solid mass showed arterial hyperenhancement and washout on delayed imaging, strongly indicating HCC.
His preoperative laboratory data were as follows: direct bilirubin (DBIL) 6.0 umol/L (normal range 0.00–5.10), indirect bilirubin (IBIL) 13.0 umol/L (normal range 0.0–11.97), triglyceride (TG) 2.57 mmol/L (normal range 0.45-1.69), high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-CHO) 0.86 mmol/L (normal range 0.90-1.45), and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-CHO) 3.62 mmol/L (normal range<3.34). Serum levels of tumour markers such as alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were within normal ranges.
The patient underwent oesophagogastroduodenoscopy and chest CT examination to identify extrahepatic lesions, which revealed normal findings. Because of the lack of obvious characteristics of the preoperative diagnosis, the patient underwent an ultrasound-guided core biopsy needle of the liver lesion 1 week after admission. Microscopic examination of the biopsy specimen (diameter: 0.3 cm) from the intrahepatic mass revealed tumour cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and uniform round nuclei. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumour cells were positive for cytokeratin AE1/AE3, cytokeratin 18, synaptophysin (Syno), and chromogranin A (ChrA). Ki67 index was approximately 5%. A final diagnosis of NET (grade 2) was established.
We recommended a PET-CT scan for systemic evaluation to rule out metastatic neuroendocrine carcinoma. One month later, the patient underwent somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (gallium 68 PET-CT scanning) at an outside hospital (Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China). The results revealed high somatostatin expression inside the liver, and no abnormalities were found outside the liver, confirming the PHNET diagnosis.
Considering the extent of the tumour lesions in both the right and left hepatic lobes, as well as the left portal vein, a multidisciplinary team (MDT) consultation showed that the lesion was uPHNET but could be potentially treated by conversion surgery.
To downsize tumours and convert uPHNET to resectable tumours, the patient was initially administered four cycles of chemotherapy with temozolomide, 5-fluorouracil, and ondansetron on July 16, 2019. MRI re-examination was performed after chemotherapy on October 9, 2019, revealing no change in the tumour size, which was evaluated as stable disease (SD) according to RECIST 1.1 .
Because of the limited clinical benefit, we decided to administer TACE with lipiodol embolism (5 ml) and suitable polyvinyl alcohol particles. The procedure was performed by an experienced vascular surgeon. After surgery, the CT results showed visible lipiodol deposition and necrosis of a few tumour masses, but some active lesions remained. TACE was possibly beneficial for patients in clinical evaluation. Therefore, the patient subsequently received three TACE treatments with lipiodol embolism (8 ml) and suitable polyvinyl alcohol particles for the same tumour lesion after the first TACE. CT re-examination or MRI results revealed further reduction in tumour size and marked tumour necrosis. Partial response (PR) status was evaluated according to the RECIST 1.1 criteria. Meanwhile, liver function and tumour marker levels were within normal ranges during the treatment and follow-up periods.
Imaging results showed that the lesion had shrunk to an ideal size for surgery. Approximately 1 month later (September 16, 2020), the patient underwent left hepatic lobectomy, caudate lobectomy, and cholecystectomy and had an uneventful postoperative course. The resected specimen revealed a solid tumour measuring 3.2 cm × 3.0 × 2.8 cm, and the cut surface of the tumour was gray-yellow in colour with large regions of necrosis. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumour cells were positive for AE1/AE3, CK18, Syno, and ChrA, with a Ki67 index of 5% . After treatment, the patient was regularly followed up, and each 3-monthly CT confirmed CR, exhibiting no signs of tumour progression . No abnormalities were observed in any of the laboratory examinations. Moreover, the possibility of a metastatic tumour from an extrahepatic primary site was ruled out by radiographic examination during the follow-up.
The patient was in CR at the 15-month follow-up and remained disease-free. The timeline of the patient is summarised in . Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of potentially identifiable images or data included in this article.