A 42-year-old male was referred for left wrist drop, finger drop and a tingling sensation over the lateral dorsum of the left hand. The patient reported that he was well until 4 days prior when he was intoxicated and awoke with the symptoms. For 4 days, slight improvement of weakness occurred. He had no history of antecedent trauma, injury, infection, or mononeuropathy. Neurologic examination revealed weakness of the left wrist and finger extension (Medical Research Council grade II). Finger abduction appeared weak, but strength improved when the hand was passively extended to the neutral position. Wrist and finger flexion was intact. On sensory examination, there was a well-demarcated area of hypoesthesia and a tingling sensation over the lateral dorsum of the left hand between the thumb and index finger extending into the proximal phalanges of the 2nd finger. In addition, reddish skin color and slight edema were observed in the same area . There was no definite change in skin temperature and no pain. Reflexes were normal at the biceps and triceps brachii muscles, but the left brachioradialis reflex was absent. Routine blood analysis showed white blood cell count, C-reactive protein level and uric acid level were normal. According to the clinical information and neurologic examination, he was diagnosed with compressive radial neuropathy. After approximately two weeks of observation without specific treatment, the skin color recovered along with a marked improvement of the weakness and aberrant sensation. A nerve conduction study and electromyography were performed 2 weeks after the onset of the symptoms . On the affected left side, a normal radial compound motor action potential (CMAP) was recorded over the extensor indicis proprius muscle with the forearm and elbow stimulated. When stimulated above the spiral groove, the CMAP was reduced by 34% compared to that of distal stimulations. The contralateral radial motor nerve study and sensory nerve conduction were normal. Electromyography revealed that the left extensor indicis proprius, extensor digitorum communis, extensor carpi radialis and brachioradialis showed increased insertional activity, fibrillation potentials, and positive sharp waves and reduced recruitment pattern.