A previously healthy 3-month-old male child of Congolese origin was admitted to the pediatric department with a seven-day history of fever, unilateral lower leg swelling and dyspnea. There was no known history of contact with a COVID-19 patient and all the family members were asymptomatic.
On physical examination, he was afebrile but dehydrated, prostrated, and with a painful tumefaction of the left lower limb. We noted tachypnea and hypoxemia, with saturation of 93.5%. The infant’s body temperature was 36.5 °C, and his heart rate was 140 beats per minute, with a respiratory rate of 52 breaths per minute. Laboratory tests showed anemia (hemoglobin 7.9 mg/dL, hematocrit 22.5%), 42,110 leukocytes/mm3 (82% polymorphonuclear), and 899,000 platelets. Inflammatory markers and d-dimer were high (CRP of 27.1 and 5200 ng/mL respectively). Hemoglobin electrophoresis showed hemoglobin (Hb)A1, HbBA2, HbF, and HbS of 46.2%, 2.5%, 19.9%, and 38.4%, respectively. Doppler ultrasound of the left lower limb showed a recent total femoropopliteal venous thrombosis, the head of which was located at the level of the external iliac vein, as well as subcutaneous edema and dermal thickening related to venous obstruction.
Chest X-ray showed retrocardiac pneumonia in the left lung. The patient received oxygen therapy to maintain an oxygen saturation level above 92%, red cell concentrate, cefotaxime for 7 days concomitantly with lincomycin, vitamin C, zinc, and dexamethasone for 5 days, and heparin sodium from the second day of hospitalization.
On the fourth day of hospitalization, the patient remained irritable and his left lower limb painful. C-reactive protein (CRP) rose to 40.9 mg/L. Chest radiograph showed a slight increase in the cardiac area, suggestive of pericardial effusion. Chest tomography could not be done. Nasopharyngeal swabs at admission and on the eighth day of hospitalization, processed at the provincial reference laboratory, did not detect SARS-CoV-2. However, serology tests for SARS-CoV-2 antibodies were positive for IgM and negative for IgG, indicative of COVID-19 seroconversion. White blood cells decreased to 20,730 leukocytes/mL, but CRP increased further to 138 mg/dL. Initial international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.4 and anti-streptokinase antibodies of 91 UI/mL were found. Doppler ultrasonography of the left lower limb showed a partially regressive crural deep vein thrombosis.
On day 10 of hospitalization, the patient was hemodynamically unstable and had classical signs of cardiac tamponade; urgent echocardiography showed a voluminous pericardial effusion, associated with signs of cardiac tamponade. Pericardiocentesis yielded an outpouring of approximately 100 mL serofibrinous exudation fluid. The patient died on day 10 from heart failure. No autopsy was done.