The patient was a 67-year-old woman who was severely malnourished (height: 145 cm, weight: 35 kg, BMI: 14.27 kg/m2). She had a 30-year history of POP, 20-year history of chronic bronchitis, and a 5-year history of hypertension. The patient was diagnosed with “uterine prolapse IV and coloptosis III” according to the POP-Q indexing at a local regional hospital. Gynecological examination showed severe prolapse of the anterior and posterior vaginal walls, mucosal thickening of the vaginal wall, surface ulceration, and complete uterine protrusion from the vaginal orifice. The patient had undergone vaginal hysterectomy combined with colporrhaphy for anterior–posterior repair. During the operation, the anterior and posterior fornices were opened along the cervix through the vagina, and the sacral ligament, main ligament, uterine artery and vein, round ligament, and ovarian ligament were cut and gradually sutured. The vaginal stump was sutured with 2–0 sutures. The bulging bladder fascia was sutured 2 times with a purse string, and the anterior vaginal wall was sutured continuously. The redundant posterior vaginal wall was removed and gradually repaired. She experienced urine leakage 1 week after discharge from the hospital; however, she paid no attention to it and did not visit the office.
It was not until 3 months after the operation that she presented with a mass (size 3 × 3 cm) bulging out of the vagina, in addition to notable coughing from chronic bronchitis. She noted that the vaginal bulge could be pushed back manually at the beginning. However, the mass gradually became larger with continuous coughing and could not be pushed back manually 3 days later, and was accompanied with notable abdominal pain and hematuria. Evenutally, the patient presented to the regional hospital because of a congestive and hyperemic edematous mass (size 10 × 12 × 10 cm) that protruded from the vaginal orifice about 3 months after the operation. The mass had a tough texture with mild bleeding and urine leakage on its surface during the physical examination. The tip of the catheter was passed through the surface of the mass after inserting it into the urethral orifice for about 5 cm . An emergency abdominal CT scan showed that the bladder was not visible in the pelvic cavity. She was then referred to our hospital after unsuccessful manual reduction of the mass under epidural anesthesia at a local regional hospital.
She was diagnosed with post-hysterectomy bladder prolapse, rupture, and extrusion after a detailed medical history and physical examination. An emergency exploratory laparotomy was collaboratively performed by gynecologists and urologists after relevant consultations and preoperative tests. The bladder could not be found in the original pelvic location except for the fundus of the bladder. A ureteral catheter was successfully inserted into the ureter (left), while catheter insertion was unsuccessful on the right side of the ureteral orifice because of valgus extrusion and edema of the internal bladder surface .
The patient underwent reparation of the bladder after a successful manual reduction of the vaginal bulge. We confirmed that the patient was not involved in any sexual activity. The patient selected the procedure after considering available treatment choices and their advantages and disadvantages. We opted to excise the partial bladder tissue during the reduction and to repair the ruptured bladder after returning it to its anterior pelvic compartment. A suprapubic cystostomy with a small incision was made above the pubic symphysis. The transurethral and transvaginal methylene blue test demonstrated no related urine leakage, indicating the integrity of the bladder wall after the above procedures. Finally, partial colpocleisis was performed to strengthen vaginal support .
The pelvic drainage tube and vaginal stump were removed 5 days after the procedure, followed by transurethral catheter removal 1 week after the procedure. The patient recovered and was discharged with a suprapubic cystostomy 10 days after the procedure. She maintained the cystostomy with no bulge symptoms for up to 35 months after the procedure . The patient had a well-supported vaginal wall in all compartments and no evidence of prolapse according to a pelvic examination during her last office visit. However, the patient complained of being unable to completely void urine. This could have been due to impaired bladder contraction. We have considered closing it to allow her void substantially or to encourage her to perform intermittent self-catheterization.