We present the case of a 53-year-old Caucasian male who was admitted to the hospital owing to fatigue and black stools. His vital signs on the admission were: temperature 36.8 °C, heart rate 70 beats per minute, respiratory rate 17 breaths per minute, and blood pressure 120/80 mmHg.
The patient was pale but with good nutrition status [body mass index (BMI) 23.1 kg/m2]. He did not consume alcohol or tobacco. He was married and had two children aged 15 and 19 years.
He was taking no medication and had no other underlying disease. Moreover, his medical history was free of any previous surgical interventions. During the clinical examination, there was no sensitivity or tenderness in the abdomen and the bowel sounds were normal. Digital rectal examination revealed the presence of black stools. Clinical examination of cardiopulmonary and urogenital systems showed no abnormal signs. Apart from fatigue, there were no other findings on physical and neurological examination.
The blood tests depicted anemia (hemoglobin 6.0 g/dl with normal values between 13.4 and 17.4 g/dl, and hematocrit 20% with normal values between 41% and 53.8%). The results of all other markers were within normal range .
During his admission to the hospital, the patient was transfused with 4 units of blood and 1 unit of fresh frozen plasma, and a Computerized Tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen was performed. The CT scan of the abdomen revealed a mass with vague limits (dimensions 6.8 × 5.7 cm) between the pylorus of the stomach and the first part of the duodenum. Around that mass, there were several lymph nodes with diameter up to 1.6 cm. Furthermore, the presence of appendiceal mucocele was indicated as an incidental finding.
On the third day of his hospital stay, the patient underwent EUS and upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, in which the biopsies showed morphologic and immunochemical features compatible with glomus tumor. Twelve days after his admission, the patient underwent open laparotomy with a midline incision. An antrectomy with Roux-en-Y anastomosis and appendicectomy were performed owing to suspicion of appendiceal mucocele from the CT scan .
The postoperative period was without any incident, and the patient was released in good condition 5 days after the operation. After the surgery and during his hospital stay, he was receiving intravenously 3 g cefoxitin/day for 3 days, 1.5 g metronidazole/day for 3 days, 4 g paracetamol/day for 4 days, and 200 mg tramadol/day for 3 days. The initial postoperatively intravenously administration of fluids was followed by oral feeding after 3 days.
Pathology examination showed a 5.5 × 5 × 4.2 cm intramural gastric mesenchymal neoplasm compatible with glomus tumor. Although there was no prominent nuclear atypia, and no mitotic activity or any atypical mitosis, because of the tumor’s size, > 2 cm, and the location, deep in the layers of gastric wall, the final diagnosis was glomus tumor with uncertain malignant potential . Also, the examination showed appendiceal mucocele with elements of previous rupture.
After discharge from the hospital, the patient underwent regular follow-up meetings with clinical examination, blood tests, and computerized tomography of the brain, the chest, and the abdomen. His last follow-up was in January 2021, 20 months after his admission to the hospital, in which he was found in good clinical status and with no signs of recurrence. There were no findings of pathological entity on the CT of the chest and the abdomen. He was scheduled for a meeting again after 6 months.