A 65-year-old Turkish man presented to the hospital for clarification of dyspnea. Computed tomography (CT) showed a small tumor in the lower lobe of the left lung. Subsequent bronchial lavage was non-contributive concerning possible viral, bacterial (including mycobacteria) and fungal causes or malignancy. It was decided to perform a follow-up CT in three months.
Our patient had a medical history of heart transplantation 10 months previously due to biventricular heart insufficiency, chronic atrial fibrillation and multi-vessel coronary heart disease. Additionally, he had known chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; smoking history of 40 pack years), hyper-cholesterinemia, substituted hypothyroidism, articular gout, normocytic normochromic anemia, steroid induced myopathia and obesity, hypertrichosis (following therapy with cyclosporine) and a recently polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-confirmed cytomegaly virus infection. Follow-up CT after three and four months displayed three progressively growing tumors in the upper and lower lobe of the left lung (up to 1.6 cm) and in the lower right lobe . Physical examination revealed no relevant findings. There were no palpable lymph nodes, no signs of tumors on the extremities and the skin.
Since the above described lesions were not thoracoscopically detectable, an open thoracotomy was performed. The tumors in the left upper and lower lobe were surgically removed by wedge resection. One of the tumors was sent for intra-operative frozen section. Macroscopically, the tumor was red-brown and well demarcated from the surrounding parenchyma. Histologically, the frozen section revealed an intra-pulmonary spindle-cell tumor. Intra-operatively the dignity of the tumor could not be definitely determined. On paraffin sections, the hematoxylin and eosin staining in all obtained specimens displayed rather monomorphic spindle-cell tumors with slit-like vascular clefts, entrapped erythrocytes and evidence of older hemorrhages. Tumor cells were positive for vascular molecular markers (CD 31, Figure ), moderately proliferating, and showed a fine granular nuclear positivity for HHV8 (LNA-1, Figure ). These findings were diagnostic for Kaposi's sarcoma.
In the post-operative course our patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for two days for short-term intubation owing to pulmonary edema and reduced diuresis. He recovered well and was transferred back to the normal ward. Heart and lung function were normal. Our patient was able to leave hospital on the tenth post-operative day. Immunosuppressive therapy was changed from cyclosporine to everolimus and a follow-up CT in three months was arranged. In the meantime the immunosuppressive therapy might be further adapted to a possible chemotherapy.