An 81-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital due to progressive gait disturbance and appetite loss.
His medical history included partial resection due to brain tumor, four times, starting when he was 74 years old, and 50-Gray radiation therapy when he was 77 years old, at another hospital. In addition, he was phlebotomized three times due to polycythemia vera when he was 81 years old, and was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s disease. He was given 90 mg of phenobarbital, 500 mg of hydroxycarbamide, and 5 mg of donepezil on a regular basis. He had no history of smoking or drinking alcohol, and no history of exposure to asbestos. He did not undergo regular medical exams. The patient was unemployed, and had no food or drug allergies. However, he needed full assistance for everyday life activities. He presented no family history of malignant disease.
The patient was 158 cm tall and weighed 52 kg. His vital signs were abnormal, with blood pressure of 94/77 mmHg, heart rate of 80 regular beats/min, body temperature of 36 °C, oxygen saturation of 97% in ambient air, and respiratory rate of 16/min; his glasgow coma scale score was 15 (E4V5M6) points. He complained of right hemiparesis, and manual muscle testing for the right half of the body had a grade of 2. On the other hand, nothing else abnormal was detected upon physical examination, including skin or neurological findings.
Routine laboratory examination revealed increased values of white blood cells, red blood cells, hemoglobin, hematocrit, aspartate transaminase, alanine aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, alkaline phosphatase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, C-reactive protein, and plasma glucose, and decreased values of creatine phosphokinase, creatinine, and sodium. However, other values were normal, including complete blood count, biochemistry, and tumor marker for diagnosing lung cancer .
An unenhanced head computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an 8 cm × 5.1 cm × 6.5 cm mixed-density mass at the left frontal lobe, accompanying a midline shift . An unenhanced chest-abdomen CT scan revealed a 6 cm × 4.1 cm × 6.5 cm low-density mass in the left chest wall at the superior segment, namely S6 .