A 65-year-old Caucasian man was diagnosed in February 2017 with a stage IVD BRAF wild-type cutaneous melanoma of the scalp with six intracranial metastases, innumerable bilateral lung metastases, and a peritoneal metastasis. He underwent bilateral craniotomies for excision of left temporal and right frontal lobe lesions with pathology showing melanoma with spindle cell and clear cell features. The day after corticosteroids were weaned off, combination nivolumab 1 mg/kg and ipilimumab 3 mg/kg was initiated.
In April 2017, 2 days after the first dose of nivolumab and ipilimumab, he developed cough productive of yellow sputum and dyspnea that persisted over the next 5 days. One week into ICI therapy, physical examination was notable for bilateral upper lung crackles without fever, hypotension, tachycardia, or hypoxia on room air. CT of the chest confirmed known pulmonary metastases superimposed by new diffuse ground glass opacification with slight central and upper lobe predominance . On hospital day 2, evaluation of respiratory viral pathogens with nasopharyngeal swab revealed the presence of coronavirus HKU1 (non-COVID-19). Complete blood count showed white cell count (WCC) 7.2 (109/L), hemoglobin 12.9 (g/L), and platelets 252 (109). Blood and sputum cultures revealed no growth and normal respiratory flora, respectively. The patient was initially diagnosed with CIP and treated with high-dose corticosteroids. Due to the patient’s rapid symptomatic benefit and our inability to exclude a role for the ICIs in exacerbating the newly diagnosed coronavirus infection, steroids were tapered off over a week rather than immediately discontinued.
In May 2017, a follow-up chest CT demonstrated resolution of ground glass opacification at which time nivolumab 3 mg/kg monotherapy was initiated and continued for 25 doses until April 2018 without recurrence of pneumonitis. In April 2018, brain MRI showed postsurgical changes without evidence of metastases and chest and abdominal CT scans showed interval additional decrease in size and number of pulmonary nodules and right peritoneal nodule . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/CT scan showed no evidence of FDG-avid disease, supporting the likelihood of a metabolic complete systemic and cerebral response. Nivolumab monotherapy was discontinued after informed discussion of the known risks and benefits of both continuing and stopping therapy.
He was followed with clinical evaluation, brain MRI and torso CT scans every 3 months. At most recent follow-up in February 2020, 3 years after initial diagnosis and nearly 2 years of treatment he remains free of disease progression.