A 26-year-old male was descending stairs when he skipped two steps and jumped to the third. He lost his balance and fell forward, with a twist of his left knee. The patient was brought to the hospital within 30 minutes of the trauma, with severe knee pain and loss of range of motion. He denied any systemic illness or prior trauma to the knee. Upon physical examination, his left knee was in full extension, with tenderness over the lateral and medial aspects of the knee. The patella was palpable and visibly rotated vertically in the intercondylar region of the femur, with tenting of the skin. The articular surface was palpable facing laterally . There was mild swelling and ecchymosis, and his distal neurovascular status was normal.
The radiograph showed vertical dislocation of the patella in the intercondylar groove, with the medial border facing into the groove .
Closed reduction without anesthesia was attempted by manipulating the patella and attempting to rotate and translate it superomedially at the same time, with the knee in full extension and the hip in flexion to relax the quadriceps. Since this maneuver is painful and the patient was apprehensive, he was transferred to the emergency surgical theater, where spinal anesthesia was given and another attempt was made at closed reduction using the push up and rotate method, which was successful. Post-reduction knee range of motion was full passively, and patellofemoral tracking was normal. Postoperative radiographs showed normal position of the patella without any osteochondral fracture fragments . The knee was immobilized in a posterior plaster slab for three weeks, and static quadriceps exercises were started immediately. After three weeks, gradual range of motion was initiated in a hinged knee brace. After six weeks of reduction, the patient achieved pain-free full range of motion of the knee, with minimum discomfort. The patient was a hard laborer and returned to his activities. There were no signs of ligament laxity. At one year of follow-up, the patent was comfortable, with no patellar tenderness, no apprehension, and normal patellar tracking .