A 57-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for a cervical mass which was incidentally detected during physical examination. She presented no abdominal pain, abdominal distension or gastrointestinal bleeding. Physical examination revealed multiple cervical masses with the maximum diameter of 3 cm. The masses were hard and presented poor mobility.
Laboratory examination showed elevated levels of CEA (15.59 ng/ml, normal range, 0–5), CA19-9 (42.78 ng/ml, normal range 0–37) and CA242 (22.50 U/ml, normal range 0–20). Serum levels of CA125, CA15-3 and AFP were within the normal range. The complete blood count, thyroid function and liver function were normal. Cervical ultrasound showed normal thyroid gland and multiple left supraclavicular lymph nodes enlargement with the maximum diameter of 3.3 cm . The patient underwent chest computed tomography (CT) and whole gastrointestinal tract barium X-ray radiography. The CT scan revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the bilateral submandibular region, bilateral carotid sheath and intermuscular space of the cervical root . Whole gastrointestinal tract barium X-ray radiography revealed no obvious lesion .
The patient underwent lymph nodes biopsy. Intraoperative frozen section analysis showed metastatic adenocarcinoma cells with marked atypia arranged in nests and cribriform pattern within the lymph nodes. Necrosis and scattered calcification were present within tumor foci . Based on the histological morphology, the metastatic adenocarcinoma most likely arose from breast or gastrointestinal tract. Given that a mammary nodule was detected on palpation, resection of the mammary nodule was performed during this operation. However, intraoperative frozen section analysis showed mammary gland hyperplasia. After the operation, immunohistochemical examination of the cervical lymph nodes biopsy was performed and showed that the tumor was positive for GCDFP , CK19 , CK20 and CDX-2 , but was negative for actoglobulin, ER, PR and TTF-1.
After the operation, the patient underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy but no esophageal or gastric tumors were detected. In order to identify the primary tumor location, pelvic enhanced CT scan was performed and it revealed uneven thickening and enhancement of the rectal wall. The subsequent lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a mucosal bulge lesion located at rectus and biopsy revealed rectal adenocarcinoma. The patient underwent rectal cancer resection. During the operation, we found that the tumor was located at rectum above the peritoneal reflexion. The tumor was hard and the size was about 3 × 4 cm. The rectal tumor penetrated rectal serosa and invaded the surrounding adipose tissue. Metastatic adenocarcinoma was detected within peri-intestinal lymph nodes. Based on intraoperative exploration and previous medical history, rectal cancer resection was performed and the patient recovered uneventfully. Eventually, based on the patient's postoperative pathologic results, the tumor was diagnosed at stage IV A (T3N2bM1a). The patient recovered uneventfully and no evidence of recurrence or new tumors was found during 2 years follow-up.