We present a 6-year-old boy, born at 37 weeks of gestation (weight 3,350 g and height 53 cm) after a second normal pregnancy. After birth, he was diagnosed with congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma. On the fifth postnatal day, the child was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit with a neonatal infection and poor general health. Due to aggravation of the condition, occurring as severe erythema, edema, and leakage of serous exudate from the skin, he was treated intravenously with antibiotics, human albumin 200 g/L solution, systemic antihistamines, and topical corticosteroids and emollients. Despite the treatment, the skin remained red and very dry, covered with erosions and yellowish foul-smelling scales, including areas of the capillitium and external auditory canals. After discharge of the patient, daily topical therapy with emollients and follow-up was administered. At the age of six, the child was in good general health, with normal neuropsychological development and slightly delayed physical development, and he was 109.5 cm tall and weighed 19 kg with a body mass index of 17. Cardiovascular and respiratory systems were normal. The dermatological examination revealed pathological skin changes on the scalp, face, thorax, and extremities, presented by diffuse erythema and lamellar desquamation. Well-contoured, erythematosquamous plaques covered by large yellowish scales on the extensor surface of the upper limbs, the thighs, and the posterior surface of the lower legs were detected (a, b). Squamous crust plugs were found in the area of the external auditory canals. Ectropion of both eyes was found. There were no pathological changes on the nails. The child had fragile and brittle hair (c). Trichoscopy of the scalp revealed hair shaft changes typical for trichorrhexis invaginata (TI) (d). Eyebrow hairs and some eyelashes were missing. Complete blood count and biochemistry laboratory test results were normal, except for 25-OH vitamin D serum deficiency (39.99 nmol/L), insulin-like growth factor, thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyroxin-free, cortisol, and somatotropic hormone showed values within normal ranges for his age. Immunological test results for IgA, IgG, and IgM were normal, except for an increased IgE value above the upper reference limit (173 IU/mL, average norm <90 IU/mL for individuals aged 6–9 years). Histopathological examination of the skin showed hyperkeratosis with parakeratosis and psoriasiform epidermal hyperplasia . Microbiological skin examination showed Proteus mirabilis. A right palm and wrist radiograph showed evidence of delayed ossification. In addition, an X-ray of the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae (face and profile) was taken to determine the bone age; it corresponded to the age of 4. Genetic testing and counseling of the patient and his family were performed. The pedigree (including 40 relatives from four generations) did not identify any other affected relatives with a similar disease or skin manifestation as the proband. After obtaining written informed consent from the parents for DNA analysis, EDTA-anticoagulated venous blood samples were collected from the patient, parents, and siblings. DNA extraction was done using MagCore Genomic Whole Blood Kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. The genetic testing was performed by next-generation sequencing. TruSight One Expanded Sequencing Panel (Illumina©) containing oligo probes targeting exons and exon-intron boundaries of 6,699 genes with clinical significance was used. Qualified libraries were sequenced on the Illumina NextSeq 550 platform with a 2 × 150 bp configuration. Reads were aligned to the reference human genome hg19. Data output files (gVCF) were imported into BaseSpace Variant Interpreter (Illumina©), an analysis software, which uses tool GATK for variant calling. Custom filters (including a minimum read depth of 20× per variant and excluding silent variants) were created to improve variant annotation and interpretation. The five-tier terminology system of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) was used (Richards et al. , 2015). The variants automatically annotated by the software were manually checked in the main human genome databases: ClinVar , dbSNP , and Ensembl . The genetic testing of the proband revealed two genetic variants with clinical significance in the SPINK5 gene. The first one was pathogenic variant c.1530C>A (p.Cys510Ter) (NM_006846) and is shown in a. The second likely pathogenic c.420del (p.Ser141ProfsTer5) (NM_006846) is shown in b. Segregation analysis of the family confirmed that the first variant was inherited from the mother and the second from the father. The proband’s elder unaffected brother was tested and confirmed to be a heterozygous carrier of the father’s variant only – c.420del (p.Ser141ProfsTer5). Based on the data from the medical history, dermatological status, paraclinical examinations, genetic consultation, and DNA analysis, the NS diagnosis was accepted with two genetic variant with clinical significance in the SPINK5 gene. Consultations: a pediatric endocrinologist revealed growth retardation and bone maturation: height at the 10th percentile, body weight at the 25th percentile. The child has discrete dysmorphic stigmata, including a large thumb, male genitalia, normal penis size, and both testicles in the scrotum. An ophthalmologist found ectropion of both eyes – the upper eyelids do not cover the eyeballs well (lagophthalmos). The right eye’s upper eyelid had slight ptosis, and the lower eyelid was slightly retracted. Fluorescent staining revealed keratitis: the right and left eye corneas had two paracentral defects in the area of the palpebral fissure. Both eyes had transparent lenses and fundi without pathological changes. An otorhinolaryngologist revealed otitis externa diffusa, attributable to the main disease. Treatment with gentamycin 40 mg i.m./daily for 7 days, levocetirizine dihydrochloride sol. 2 × 5 drops/daily, cholecalciferol oral drops solution 2,000 IU/daily was started. Systemic treatment with acitretin at 0.5 mg/kg/day was initiated. Topical skincare was carried out with an emollient cream prepared from 50:50 white soft paraffin and liquid paraffin, applied several times daily to the face and whole body, and baths of the whole body with sodium bicarbonate twice a week. Keratitis was treated with tobramycin eye drops solution, dexpanthenol 5% eye gel, and artificial tears. The child was discharged with a slight improvement. A long-term course with acitretin was recommended against the background of monitoring bone age, values of biochemical tests, and complete blood count every 2 months. After 3 months of systemic therapy with acitretin in the above dose, we found worsening with severe thinning and erosion of the skin due to persistent erythroderma. The treatment with this medication was discontinued. The child is followed up.