A 49-year-old Guinean male was diagnosed with hepatitis C, genotype II in 2007. He was given a 6-month trial of ribavirin and interferon without improvement in his viral load. Recently, the patient was found to have a liver mass on screening magnetic resonance imaging. The 4 cm mass was located in segment 6 and demonstrated hyperattenuation on arterial phase and hypoattenuation on venous phase, consistent with hepatocellular carcinoma . The patient's past medical history is significant for hypertension and history of intermittent lower extremity skin lesions. previous biopsy of these skin lesions demonstrated leukocytoclastic vasculitis.
When evaluated by the surgical oncology service, the patient reported a recent weight loss of 10 lbs, occasional fevers, and decreased appetite. Physical examination was unremarkable, and there were no signs of ascites, malnutrition, or hepatomegaly. Liver transaminases were mildly elevated (aspartate aminotransferase 70 U/L, alanine transaminase 89 U/L) with a normal total bilirubin (0.7 mg/dL). Platelet count was 271 × 109/L, and albumin and coagulation factors were within normal limits.
In preparation for surgical resection, the patient underwent a right portal vein embolization with coils in order to hypertrophy the liver remnant. The patient was discharged the following day in a stable condition. Five weeks following the right portal vein embolization the patient underwent a computed tomography scan that demonstrated significant hypertrophy of the left lobe.Subsequently, the patient underwent an uneventful right hepatectomy. The patient tolerated the procedure well and did not require blood transfusions. His postoperative course was uncomplicated, and he was discharged home on postoperative day five at which point his liver enzymes and bilirubin had returned to their preoperative baseline. Pathologic evaluation of the specimen confirmed the presence of a 3.5 cm hepatocellular carcinoma without vascular invasion. In addition, evaluation of the gallbladder revealed incidental histologic evidence of leukocytoclastic vasculitis.
On postoperative day 10, the patient presented to the emergency department with abdominal pain, nausea, and an episode of hematemesis. He denied fevers, chills, or diarrhea. On examination, the patient was found to have right 4th fingertip erythema and edema. The patient's liver transaminases were elevated relative to discharge (aspartate aminotransferase 450 U/L, alanine transaminase 662 U/L), suggesting an acute hepatic insult. A computed tomography scan demonstrated focal areas of small bowel thickening and splenic infarcts, which were suggestive of embolic disease. The patient underwent an emergent exploratory laparoscopy to rule out small bowel ischemia. Findings included diffuse patchy areas of hemorrhagic serositis along the small intestine; however, there was no evidence of bowel ischemia and no bowel resection was performed. Cultures of the peritoneal fluid were negative for growth.
Given the patient's presentation with four sites of ischemic injury (small intestine, liver, spleen, skin), the diagnosis of embolic disease or systemic vasculitis was considered. Embolic work-up with transesophageal echocardiogram was negative, and computed tomography angiography revealed a patent abdominal aorta and major branch vessels without evidence of thrombus.
Given the patient's history of hepatitis C infection as well as that of skin lesions with evidence of leukocytoclastic vasculitis on biopsy, he was also evaluated for hepatitis C virus-related vasculitides. The patient's laboratory results were significant for an elevated rheumatoid factor (104 IU/m), C3 and C4 were within normal limits (112 mg/dL, 14.9 mg/dL, resp.), Anit-Nuclear antibodies and Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies were negative, urinalysis was within normal limits, and the cryocrit was ≥3% on days 1 and 5. This led to a diagnosis of hepatitis C virus-related cryoglobulinemia. The patient's abdominal pain was self-limited, and he recovered with supportive care and had normal resumption of bowel function. His digital ischemia persisted but remained stable. He was discharged home on hospital day 10.
On outpatient follow-up, twelve days after discharge, patient's right 4th fingertip had developed into a dry area of eschar . Concerns regarding the progression of the vascular insult to the patient's finger lead to the initiation of therapy consisting of prednisone 30 mg once a day as well as 10 days of amoxicillin/clavulanate and aspirin. Seven weeks after discharge, the patient is improving and the digit is healing.