A 48-year-old female school principal suffered an injury to the right elbow. The patient was involved in a car accident while traveling through Africa. The car landed on the side, her arm hanging out the window and scraping the tarmac. Resulting from this trauma, she had an open displaced olecranon fracture, with the proximal end of the olecranon completely missing up to the level of the coronoid. The distal humerus was also fractured and soft tissues were extensively damaged. She was admitted to a local hospital, where doctors performed a debridement of the elbow. Later, she presented in our centre (UZA, Antwerp University Hospital, Belgium) for assessment and further treatment. There was some remaining debris in the elbow, with a possibility of active infection. Antibiotics were given. We performed a debridement with anterior capsule release, by which a nearly full arc of motion was made possible. A dynamic joint distractor (DJD) external fixation system was applied to minimize infection risk, with the option of doing reconstructive surgery later. The DJD preserved the axis of rotation, while allowing early mobilisation of the joint, although non-weight-bearing and with a restricted ROM. The patient soon started with physiotherapy and basic revalidation. After 2 months, external fixation was removed and physiotherapy intensity increased. During follow-up, she reported no pain and clinically no signs of major instability were present. Therefore, we agreed not to perform additional surgery. We went for a watchful waiting strategy instead.
The patient reported alteration of sensitivity due to ulnar nerve damage caused by the initial trauma. Electromyography (EMG) confirmed a denervation of the ulnar nerve along with some motor impairment. In the years following, the patient experienced persistent loss of dexterity in the right hand. She reported intermittent cracking of the elbow during active motion and avoided putting pressure on the arm, because of a feeling of instability. However, she did not seek medical advice.
Annual follow-up radiographs ( and ) showed progressive degeneration and remodelling of the elbow joint. At the time of this report, at age 59, 11 years after the initial trauma, we observe the surprising result of this joint remodelling : A functional elbow joint; a reversed elbow, similar to the reversed shoulder prosthesis. The humeral bone functions as the joint socket, shaped by osteophytes. The eroded ulna and radius together function as a joint ball component. With the patient's full consent, we further examined the elbow's anatomy using computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Its clinics and kinetics were tested by performing a thorough clinical examination.
The section below is a description of the functional outcome.