A 24-year old male with chronic rhinosinusitis was admitted for an elective Functional endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS) procedure under general anesthesia. During the operation, the surgeon applied several tampons soaked in 1:1000 dilution epinephrine to the nasal mucosa. Ninety minutes into the surgery, unexpectedly, blood pressure rose to 210/130 mmHg followed by pulseless electrical activity. CPR was initiated, with the administration of 2 mg of IV epinephrine in consecutive doses, leading to the return of spontaneous circulation. ECG showed sinus tachycardia and a prolonged QTc interval of 486 ms, Inverted T waves in leads I and aVL, and no signs of acute ischemic changes . A chest x-ray demonstrated pulmonary edema and a borderline enlarged cardiac silhouette .
The patient was placed on mechanical ventilation. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed a dilated left ventricle with an increased end-diastolic dimension (124% of normal value) with a mild reduction in LV mass, a severe reduction in systolic function, apical akinesis, and hyperdynamic base. The estimated systolic left ventricular ejection fraction was 30% . Cardiac troponin and CPK were elevated. NT or NT pro-BNP were not taken. A head CT was performed and demonstrated mild global cerebral edema, with multiple maxillary sinus fractures .
Medical information gathered from family members indicated no family history of heart diseases. The patient did not smoke, use illegal drugs nor consumed alcohol on daily basis. The patient was diagnosed with dilated cardiomyopathy and admitted to the intensive cardiac care unit. Upon arrival, upload titration of ACE inhibitors, β-blockers, and diuretics initiated. The following ECG strips indicate normal sinus rhythm, QTc interval of 420 ms, and normal T wave in lateral leads. We decided not to perform a diagnostic coronary catheterization since the patient's risk profile for ischemic cardiomyopathy was low. Objectively, there were no ischemic changes on ECGs strips and no regional wall motional abnormalities were seen on TTE upon arrival.
Three days later, a second echocardiogram was performed which showed a normal-sized left ventricle, with preserved systolic function .
The patient was discharged in full functional capacity. An ambulatory cardiac MRI performed two weeks after discharge revealed mildly dilated LV cavity, good global systolic function, and no signs of late gadolinium enhancement or edema.