A 63-year-old homeless Hispanic man diagnosed with lung cancer 5 months previously in our hospital presented with ongoing sharp chest pain of 2 weeks’ duration, shortness of breath, chronic dry cough, and weight loss of 20 pounds within 2 months. The patient also had experienced physical activity limitations for the previous 2 months. He denied experiencing diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain, and he did not have anorexia, fever, chills, or phlegm production.
The patient’s past medical history included a cerebrovascular accident with residual left-sided weakness, bronchial asthma, lung adenocarcinoma (stage IIIB) diagnosed by computed tomography (CT)-guided right upper lobe biopsy 5 months previously. He was receiving adjuvant cisplatin-based chemotherapy. His social history included 55 pack-years of smoking and a family history of cancer; his mother had colon cancer, and his brother had an unknown type of cancer. He had no environmental exposures. He was taking aspirin and atorvastatin and was using an albuterol inhaler and a fluticasone inhaler.
The patient was cachectic and afebrile on physical examination, with a blood pressure of 146/84 mmHg, and his oxygen saturation was 94% with administration of 2 L of oxygen by nasal cannula. He had bilateral grade 3 clubbing and a bronchial breath sound in the right upper lobe. Cardiovascular examination revealed normal heart sounds, and the patient’s abdomen was soft with no organomegaly. In addition, laboratory analyses of the patient’s peripheral blood and urine were normal, although his sodium levels were low.
A chest x-ray showed a persistent right upper lobe mass . This was further evaluated by review of a chest CT scan , which showed a large, rounded consolidation of the right apical parenchyma measuring 5 × 4.7 × 4 cm without necrosis or calcification. A right hilar soft tissue mass measuring 3.7 × 2.1 × 3.6 cm, consistent with focal adenopathy, was also seen. He had undergone a CT-guided lung biopsy of the mass in the right upper lobe during a previous admission, which had revealed the following immunochemical characteristics: thyroid transcription factor-1-negative, napsin-negative, cytokeratin 7 (CK7)-positive, and CK20-negative. In addition, the patient had negative test results for epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), K-ras, and anaplastic lymphoma kinase mutations, all consistent with adenocarcinoma . A bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage from the right lower lobe revealed clusters of poorly differentiated carcinoma cells, which supported the diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma . The patient was receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy.
In view of the patient’s new symptoms of acute chest pain and shortness of breath, repeat chest CT was done, which ruled out pulmonary embolism but showed a persistent right upper lobe mass with new mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Positron emission tomography (PET) was performed, which revealed hypermetabolic activity in the 6-cm mass in the right upper lobe (standardized uptake value [SUV] 14.4), right hilar nodes (SUV 2.8), and 1.5-cm left hilar lymph nodes (SUV 4.9) . No hypermetabolic foci were found within the neck, abdomen, or pelvis. Results of other tests, including a brain magnetic resonance imaging scan, were negative. A pulmonary function test revealed a reduced forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)/forced vital capacity ratio, moderately decreased FEV1, and moderate obstruction.
The patient underwent bronchoscopy for further evaluation prior to the planned mediastinoscopy. An endobronchial lesion in the left main stem was an incidental finding during the procedure. The endobronchial biopsy revealed the following immunohistochemical results: neuron-specific enolase-positive, synaptophysin-positive, CD56-positive, CK7-negative, chromogranin-negative, napsin A-negative, p63-negative, and CK5/6-negative, consistent with high-grade mixed small and large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma . The patient was started on chemotherapy with cisplatin and etoposide. After completing four cycles of chemotherapy, he had no significant response to the treatment. Owing to functional decline, he finally chose hospice care.
We identified a rare case of triple SLC, including adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and mixed small and large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma.