We examined a 58-year-old man with no underlying medical conditions. He presented with progressive back pain and 6 months of weakness in the proximal parts of all four limbs. There was no diplopia, chocking, swallowing difficulty, drop neck, respiratory distress or other symptoms of heart failure while tracing back his history. Physical examinations showed he was short in stature, with a height of 164.4 cm and a weight of 79.1 kg. He had a dysmorphic face with hypertelorism, midface hypoplasia, and chin protrusion . He had received orthodontic surgery due to dental abnormalities while he was young. Neurological examinations revealed sloping shoulders, atrophy of the shoulder girdle muscles, and symmetrical weakness in the proximal parts of the arms and legs. There was no facial weakness or limitation of extra-ocular movement. The deep tendon reflex and sensory systems were normal. Radiological examinations revealed wormian bones in the skull, the absence of the right clavicle, hypoplasia of the left clavicle, and mild scoliosis. These signs were consistent with the clinical diagnosis of CCD . Electromyography (EMG) revealed myogenic polyphasic waves of small amplitude and short-duration polyphasic waves at 400–500 μV in the bilateral biceps brachii, deltoid, infraspinatus, trapezius, and rectus femoris muscles. However, the EMG findings were normal in bilateral first dorsal interosseous, tibialis anterior and facial muscles. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the upper extremity showed atrophy associated with fatty infiltration of right deltoid and biceps brachii muscles without acute edematous changes, suggesting a chronic muscle insult . These findings indicated a limb-girdle distribution of chronic myopathy. Laboratory data, including the serum creatine kinase level, were normal. The thyroid function, tumor markers, and autoimmune profiles for survey of common metabolic and inflammatory myopathy were within normal limits. Muscle biopsy of right biceps brachii muscle was suggested but this suggestion was declined by the patient. The patient did not have symptoms of respiratory distress or heart failure sign. Cardiac echo showed normal cardiac contractility and the heart ejection fraction is within normal limits. The patient’s family history showed that his father and eldest daughter had similar skeletal, dental disorders and proximal weakness of upper extremity . EMG findings of bilateral deltoid, biceps brachii and rectus femoris muscles of the proband’s elder daughter also showed myopathic polyphasic waves. These observations suggest that the myopathy is not a sporadic condition associate with the patient but segregate with the skeletal problems within his family.
The patient initially presented with facial dysmorphism, sloping shoulders, atrophy, and weakness, predominantly over the shoulder girdle. Therefore, we analyzed the double homeobox DUX4 gene for facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy. In addition, the radiologic findings and the patient’s autosomal-dominant family history were consistent with CCD. Therefore, we also analyzed the RUNX2 gene after the patient provided informed consent. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral whole blood for PCR analysis. We amplified exons 1 through 8 and the flanking intronic sequences of the RUNX2 gene with eight pairs of PCR primers, designed as previously described . Genetic analysis for the DUX4 gene was performed as previously described . The purified PCR products were sequenced in both directions at our on-site biochemistry sequencing facility with Big Dye Version 3.1 and a 3730 XL sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). We found that the patient carried a heterozygous missense mutation (c.G674A, p.R225Q), located at the C-terminal end of the RUNX2 protein. This mutation was predicted to inactivate the protein, and it might also affect protein structural stability and interactions with other proteins. The reference sequence and base-pair numbers refer to GenBank accession numbers AF001443-AF001450 and NM_001024630. This mutation co-segregated with the disease phenotype in the patient’s family . Research protocol was reviewed by the institutional ethics board committee of the National Taiwan University Hospital and all subjects gave informed consent.