A one day old female child, product of second degree consanguineous marriage, born by normal vaginal delivery with history of meconium stained amniotic fluid and birth asphyxia. On examination the child showed extensive bluish discoloration of the body involving trunk and extremities in both anterior and posterior aspects associated with bluish discoloration of the tongue. Child has normal weight for the age (2.75 Kg), height for the age (47.5 cm), but the heart rate (160 beats/min) and respiratory rate (66 cycles/min) are increased. Peripheral pulses were palpable. General condition of the baby was poor with reduced oxygen saturation (SpO2 80% in room air). The baby did not have organomegly and the fundus examination was normal. Routine blood investigations showed a total white cell count of 14000/cu mm, differential count: neutrophils-87% with band forms of 3%. Blood was sent for culture and sensitivity treated with ampicillin and gentamycin. Three hours after admission the discoloration of tongue (cyanosis) had disappeared but there was persistent bluish discoloration of the body excluding face, palms, soles, external genitalia, and area around the nipples and areola . Blood culture did not reveal any growth. Hematological, urine and radiological (skeletal survey and ultrasound abdomen) examination workup for inborn errors of metabolism did not reveal any abnormality. Child recovered completely and was discharged after seven days.
A detailed family history revealed that most of the family members were manifested with extensive bluish discoloration of the body soon after birth as depicted in the Pedigree chart which faded in the first few years of life and completely disappeared by puberty. The fading extensive Mongolian spots were also seen in the first cousin of the patient . None of the family members had developmental delay or history suggestive of metabolic disorders. Thus in view of characteristic family Pedigree presentation of the bluish discoloration of the skin, which fades away in the later life, it was diagnosed to be extensive Mongolian spots of an autosomal dominant inheritance.