The patient was a 52-year-old white female who had noticed a gradually enlarging lump in her left breast for the past five years. On physical examination, the mass was well-circumscribed, non-tender to palpation, and freely mobile. Subsequent mammography revealed a complex 7-cm mass in the upper outer quadrant of the left breast. Fine needle aspiration, core needle biopsies, and finally a simple mastectomy with sentinel node biopsy were performed over the next several months. The patient's past medical and family histories included fibrocystic change of the breast, to which she attributed the lump.
Three air-dried smears were stained with Diff-Quik while three alcohol-fixed smears were stained by the Papanicolaou method. Approximately 60 ml of cystic fluid drained from the same area of the breast was prepared as two smears, fixed with alcohol, and stained by Papanicolaou stain. These last two smears showed an abundance of macrophages and acute inflammatory exudate. The other six smears all showed high overall cellularity including multiple, scattered islands within a varying background of fat necrosis and a fibrillary, metachromatic stroma . These cell groups were composed of a haphazardly arranged mixture of large epithelioid, plasmacytoid cells with increased nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratios . A distinct population of spindle cells with high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratios was also identified. The nuclei were finely vesicular with distinct nucleoli and showed considerable pleomorphism ranging from irregular, globoid forms to elongate, cigar-shaped objects. Several mitotic figures were identified, but necrosis was absent. The case was diagnosed as suspicious for malignancy, with metaplastic carcinoma of the breast as a differential diagnosis.
The mammotome biopsy samples were comprised of 19 fibrofatty tissue cores while the simple mastectomy specimen was a 21 × 17 × 5 cm portion of fibrofatty breast parenchyma with an overlying, unremarkable skin ellipse and areola-nipple complex. Serial sectioning of the mastectomy revealed a 6 × 4 × 4 cm biopsy cavity within the upper outer quadrant of the specimen. The periphery of the cavity had a firm, fibrous border and extended to within 0.7 cm of the deep surgical resection margin. The tissue from the biopsy cavity was sampled en toto. Microscopic examination of the core biopsy tissues and, subsequently, of the mastectomy specimen revealed irregular dense proliferations of plump spindle cells with moderate cytologic and nuclear pleomorphism . The majority of the nuclei showed prominent nucleoli. Mitotic figures were frequent (12 mitotic figures per 10 high power fields) and could be identified throughout the lesion. Additionally, tissue from the biopsy cavity demonstrated scattered, spotty foci of necrosis as well as both perivascular and perineural invasion. The edges of the lesion clearly infiltrated the surrounding breast parenchyma . All surgical resection margins were uninvolved by the neoplastic process. Other findings included atypical ductal hyperplasia, sclerosing adenosis, and periductal mastitis. The sentinel axillary lymph node was negative for malignancy.
The proliferating spindle cells revealed diffuse positivity for the myoepithelial markers smooth muscle actin, CD10, and p63 while showing focal positivity for S-100. Vimentin positivity was strong and diffuse. Additionally, increased positivity for Ki-67 provided evidence for a high proliferation index among the neoplastic cells. The immunohistochemical markers glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), desmin, estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR) did not highlight cells from the lesion. Lastly, positive staining with the pancytokeratin marker [AE1/AE3 + 8/18] ruled out the possibility of a sarcoma with myoepithelial differentiation.
The histology and accompanying immunohistochemical staining patterns were consistent with an infiltrating myoepithelial carcinoma of the breast.
Approximately three months later the patient was seen at an outside institution, whereupon imaging studies revealed multiple bilateral lung lesions. A biopsy from the apex of the right lung and from the left lung confirmed pulmonary metastasis by the breast MEC. The patient died several months later.