A 41-year-old man was presented with a 1-month history of progressively worsening cough, chest tightness, and dyspnea after exercise, which could be relieved following rest. He denied any history of smoking, radiation exposure, known lung disease, or a personal or family history of malignancy.
The patient visited the Department of Respiratory Medicine for treatment due to the rapid development of dyspnea and worsening cough. Upon admission, he presented a dry cough and slight fever without chest pain, hemoptysis, palpitations, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, or other symptoms. Physical examination revealed unpalpable lymph nodes in the supraclavicular fossa bilaterally. Laboratory examinations were normal, including complete blood count, liver and kidney function, and electrolyte levels. The abdominal ultrasonography did not reveal any abnormality.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a 7.4 cm × 4.9 cm heterogeneous mass in the anterior mediastinum, where a large area of cystic liquid existed, and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum . The mass was considered to be a malignant tumor. Pleural effusion was drained and collected for an exfoliative cytology test, but no tumor cells were found. Meanwhile, EBV-DNA was less than 400 copies/ml (reference range <400 copies/ml), and β2 MG was 1.9 mg/l (reference range 1.0–3.0 mg/l) . Needle biopsy showed fibrous tissue and hyperplasia of granulation tissue with chronic inflammatory cell infiltration, including neutrophils and eosinophils.
Two times, Flexirigid thoracoscopy biopsies did not obtain the tumor parenchyma due to the inflammation and hyperplasia around the mass. Then, the patient was transferred to the Department of Thoracic Surgery. Middle thoracotomy was performed under general anesthesia. Surgical findings included obscure boundaries and consistent tumor stiffness with pericardial and pleural invasion. The whole mass invaded tissues, and adjacent enlarged lymph nodes were eradicated . Intraoperative consultation showed R0 resection. Postoperative histology showed nodules separated by collagen fibers in the tumor. There were two morphologically and immunophenotypically distinct components–T- and B-cell mixed hyperplasia ( and ). Further pathological examination combined with immunophenotype and gene rearrangement test found the mass composite of angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) and B-cell lymphoma. Immunophenotypic analyses showed the lymphocytes were CD5+, CD3+, CD10 (partial +), PD1+, CD43+, BcL2+, CD21 and CD23 (FDC net irregular hyperplasia), MUM1−, CD30+ (scattered in large cells), TdT−, CD56−, PCK+ (thymic epithelium), CD15−, CyclinD1−, Bcl6−, IgD−, Kappa−, Lambda−, CD20+ and PAX5+ (B cells), and CD43+ (diffuse, B cells with abnormal expression) ( and ). Gene rearrangement test revealed TCRG and TCRB, but not IGH, IGK, or IGL, cloning rearrangement .
The patient recovered well after R0 resection and received chemotherapy with four cycles of CHOP combined with Chidamide 2 weeks after surgery. The test of EBV-DNA, β2 MG , and CT showed they were less than the standard limit in half a year follow-up. The patient has had a complete response (CR) for over 60 months.