A 67-year-old man was referred to our facility for extensive left lower extremity (LLE) venous ulcers. He reported an increase in the size and number of LLE venous ulcers, which initially developed 6 months prior. He failed previous wound and compressive management with plastic surgery as well as multiple oral and intravenous antibiotic regimens. He was Clinical-Etiology-Anatomical-Pathophysiology (CEAP) Class 6 upon referral. Initial vitals were normal. Physical exam revealed significant bilateral leg oedema, with purple discolouration and increased skin pigmentation on both sides, most pronounced in the calf area. Findings were worse on the left side with 4+ LLE oedema and multiple large ulcers with diameter up to 7 cm involving the anterior, posterior, and medial aspects of the left calf with associated warmth to touch and tenderness. The right lower extremity (LE) was asymptomatic and without venous ulcers. Peripheral pulses in the bilateral LE were 2+. The remainder of the physical exam was normal. He denied chest pain, dyspnoea, claudication, trauma, palpitations, syncope and any history of pulmonary embolism, pulmonary artery hypertension, chronic heart failure, and smoking.
The patient has a history of hypertension, sleep apnoea on continuous positive airway pressure therapy (CPAP), hyperlipidaemia, obesity, chronic atrial fibrillation on apixaban 5 mg BID, chronic venous insufficiency (CEAP Class 6), and bilateral chronic femoral DVT.
Initial labs were unremarkable (Hgb 14.2 g/dL, WBC 7.9 × 109 per L, Plt 329 × 10−3 per μL, Na 142 mEq/L, K 4.5 mEq/L, Glu 94 mg/dL, Cr 0.95 mg/dL, INR 1.2, CRP 2.5 mg/L). Lower extremity venous ultrasound (US) revealed evidence of chronic DVTs involving the bilateral proximal, mid and distal femoral (FV), popliteal (PV), and left peroneal veins (PerV). He had evidence of reflux within the common FVs and the PVs. Lower extremity arterial US showed no significant peripheral artery disease with normal toe-brachial indices.
With non-healing LLE venous ulcers related to severe venous hypertension exacerbated by chronic DVT involving the LFVs and LPVs, we suspected PTS with superimposed left leg venous stenosis/compression. We considered Left femoral vein (LFV) and left popliteal vein (LPV) mechanical thrombectomy as an option during catheterization, keeping in mind that this intervention in this context is technically difficult with mixed odds of success given his chronic thrombus burden. He was taken to the catheterization lab where US-guided LPV access was undertaken.
Selective LFV venogram revealed extensive organized thrombus within the LFV below the left common FV (LCFV) confluence with the saphenous and profunda veins. There was complete occlusion of the proximal and mid-LFV (Video 1). Furthermore, the proximal and mid-LFV demonstrated chronic thrombus and PTS changes. Thereafter, intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) Visions PV.035 Digital IVUS Catheter (Philips, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) of the left iliolumbar vein (ILV) confirmed its patency without evidence of compression, stenosis, or DVT. It demonstrated significant scarring and a ‘rubbery’ appearance of the venous walls throughout the LFV. Using IVUS imaging, the superior and mid-distal portions of the LFV appeared most impacted with chronic thrombus . Subsequently, he underwent high pressure venoplasty of the LCFV and entire LFV with 10 × 40 mm Dorado balloon (Bard, Tempe, AZ, USA). The mid-LFV had an area of very high-grade stenosis that would not yield. AngioSculpt balloon 6 × 40 mm (AngioScore, Brandin Court Fremont, CA, USA) was used similarly without success. The high-grade LFV occlusion demonstrated a persistent ‘dog-bone/waist’ appearance . We then decided to perform intravascular shockwave lithotripsy (IVSL) empirically. Shockwave balloon 7 × 60 mm (Shockwave Medical, Fremont, CA, USA) was therefore positioned at the level of the mid-LFV and 180 pulses at 2, 4, and 6 atmospheres were delivered to prime the lesion for further intervention. Subsequently, TurboHawk LX extended tip device (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was empirically used for multiple passes of ad hoc ‘venous atherectomy’ along the affected segment, resulting in retrieval of a significant amount of red, rubbery organized material suggestive of chronic DVT. Venoplasty with 7 × 20 mm cutting balloon (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, US) finally yielded the mid-LFV culprit lesion successfully .
Post-intervention venogram revealed improved flow, but with high-grade stenosis at the level of the LCFV and superior portion of the LFV. Therefore, further venoplasty was performed using 10 × 40 mm Dorado balloon.
Subsequent IVUS demonstrated patent LCFV and LFV with significantly improved luminal diameter and gain. However, we visualized both residual organized and fragmented thrombus. Mechanical thrombectomy with FlowTriever device (Inari Medical, Irvine, CA, USA) then yielded the thrombus fragment. Intravascular ultrasound-guided venoplasty using Cook Advance 12 × 40 mm balloon (Cook Medical LLC, Bloomington, IN, USA) was performed on the affected superior portion of the LFV at the level of the initially occlusive cap and within the mid-LFV at the level of the aforementioned high-grade occlusive stenosis. Final post-intervention IVUS and venogram demonstrated patent LFV with improved lumen and recovered anterograde LFV flow throughout, and towards the LCFV (, Video 2). He tolerated the procedure well without complications and received aspirin and IV heparin with activated clotting time maintained at therapeutic levels.
The patient was seen in an office visit at 2, 8, and 12 weeks post-intervention. Symptoms had improved with resolution of LE oedema to +1 and resolution of venous ulcers. He continued wound care, chronic anticoagulation, and compressive therapy. Repeat US at every follow-up showed no re-occlusion of the LFV.