A 35-year-old man with a history of epigastric pain, fullness after eating, and vomiting during the previous month was admitted to our hospital. He had experienced weight loss of 12 (kg) in the past year. He came to Japan from Myanmar four years ago. He had no history of chronic cough, fever, or diseases requiring immunosuppressants, and his family had no history of TB. Blood test results were normal, and anti-human immunodeficiency virus antibodies were negative. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed gastric dilatation, thickening of the duodenal wall with luminal narrowing, and multiple enlarged low-density abdominal lymph nodes. Furthermore, portal vein stenosis was observed due to a low-density area along the hepatoduodenal ligament .
The patient underwent an upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy several days after the nasogastric tube placement. Endoscopic examination revealed a near-pinhole stricture in the D1/D2 portions of the duodenum . The narrowed area showed an edematous and reddish mucosa and a 5.8-mm-diameter scope could pass through, but a 9.7-mm-diameter scope could not. No distinct ulcers are observed. A biopsy of the mucosa revealed histopathological features consistent with ulcer scars. Upper GI radiography revealed a short stenotic segment in D1/D2 .
Our initial impression was duodenal stenosis caused by peptic ulcers. Therefore, intravenous omeprazole therapy was initiated immediately after admission. However, chest CT revealed cavitary lesions in both the lung apices . We suspected tuberculosis and believe that there is a need for further detailed investigation of the abdominal lesions. A QuantiFERON-TB Gold (QFT) blood test revealed a positive result. However, sputum and gastric juice samples were negative on smear microscopy, acid-fast bacilli cultures, and Mycobacterium tuberculosis polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests. A second-look endoscopy showed no improvement in duodenal narrowing despite the continuous administration of omeprazole. We identified a new ulcerative lesion in the lesser curvature of the upper gastric body and performed multiple mucosal biopsies. Concurrently, we planned EUS-FNA to obtain biopsies from deeper layers. EUS revealed that the lymph nodes adjacent to the gastric wall had penetrated and formed a gastric ulcer. Therefore, EUS-FNA was performed . Unfortunately, the duodenum could not be observed using EUS because it was too narrow to allow scope insertion. Histopathological examination revealed granulomatous inflammation in the biopsied tissues of the duodenal mucosa and gastric ulcers . Furthermore, granulomatous inflammation with caseating necrosis and multinucleated giant cells were identified in the lymph node tissue obtained from EUS-FNA . Ziehl–Neelsen staining confirmed the presence of acid-fast bacilli ; however, the bacterial culture did not confirm the presence of tuberculous bacilli.
The repeat sputum PCR test was positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The patient was diagnosed with duodenal TB with duodenal stenosis, tuberculous abdominal lymphadenitis, and pulmonary TB. Due to the difficulty in eating caused by GOO, surgical intervention was prioritized over ATT. The patient underwent laparoscopic bypass surgery. To prevent the airborne transmission of TB bacteria, we employed a closed-circuit insufflation management system (AirSeal® System; CONMED Corporation, Florida, USA). The laparoscopic observation revealed that the area around the hepatoduodenal ligament, antrum, and duodenum D1/D2 was shrunk with redness and the stomach deformed into a horseshoe shape . We performed laparoscopic gastrojejunostomy and Braun anastomosis using an automatic stapler . The operation time was 211 min, with minimal bleeding.
The postoperative course progressed smoothly. The patient resumed eating on the 3rd day after surgery and no longer required intravenous fluids on the 4th day. The patient was transferred to a specialized hospital on the 11th postoperative day. Because drug-resistant TB was not detected, ATT was initiated with isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol. After receiving ATT for 6 months, follow-up endoscopy and CT were performed. In the follow-up endoscopy, the duodenal stricture showed slight improvement, but the 9.7-mm-diameter scope still could not pass through , and upper GI radiography also indicated the presence of residual stenosis . CT showed an improvement in the duodenal edema; however, the reduction in the size of the enlarged lymph nodes and improvement in portal vein stenosis were only marginal . The pulmonary cavitary lesions decreased in size and were mostly scars. To achieve further improvement, isoniazid and rifampicin continued for an additional 3 months. Despite persistent duodenal stricture, the bypass procedure functioned effectively, enabling the patient to eat easily. The patient's body weight showed steady and consistent recovery.