A pediatric patient who was male, 7.5 years old, 19 kg, and 133 cm in height underwent surgical correction of a complete atrioventricular septal defect 7 years ago in another hospital. Postoperative echocardiography showed that there was no residual shunt in the atrial or ventricular septum and no mild mitral or tricuspid valve regurgitation. After discharge, the patient was not regularly followed up and was reexamined by echocardiography. Symptoms of shortness of breath after activity appeared 3 months ago. Symptoms of shortness of breath after activity worsened, combined with cough and sputum 1 week prior. There was no fever, cyanosis, chest pain, facial edema, abdominal distension, or other symptoms. Physical examination revealed a few rales in both lungs, normal rhythm, no murmur in the precordial area, no distension of the jugular veins, and no edema in either lower limb. Echocardiography showed that the right atrium was significantly enlarged, and the right ventricle was small. Tricuspid valve stenosis was severe. The tricuspid annulus was small, with a diameter of 1.03 cm and a valve opening distance of 0.64 cm. The flow velocity of the tricuspid valve was 258 cm/s, and the peak pressure gradient was 27 mmHg. The tricuspid regurgitation was moderate to severe, with a regurgitation velocity of 201 cm/s and pressure of 16 mmHg. The estimated pulmonary artery pressure was 26 mmHg. Mitral regurgitation was mild, the diameter of the mitral ring was 1.88 cm, and the valve orifice velocity was 101 cm/s. The Z score of the tricuspid annulus was − 3.78, and the Z score of the mitral annulus was 0.227 . Cardiac CT angiography showed that the right atrium was enlarged, the right ventricle was small, and the diameter of the tricuspid annulus was 1.03 cm . The results of cardiac catheterization also showed that the right atrium was significantly enlarged, the right ventricle was small, the ring of the tricuspid valve was narrow, and the atrial septum and ventricular septum were intact. The pulmonary trunk and the left and right pulmonary arteries were well developed, and the pulmonary small vessels were also well developed. The pulmonary capillary wedge pressure was 16/10 mmHg with an average pressure of 12 mmHg. The pulmonary vascular resistance index was 1.21. Abdominal color Doppler ultrasound showed hepatomegaly. According to the clinical manifestations and auxiliary examination results, the diagnosis was as follows: severe tricuspid valve stenosis with moderate to severe regurgitation, mild mitral valve regurgitation, cardiac function insufficiency, right ventricular dysplasia, respiratory tract infection, and surgical correction of complete atrioventricular septal defect. According to the patient’s condition, the surgical protocol included tricuspid mechanical valve replacement, Glenn procedures, atrial septostomy and right pulmonary artery banding.
After general anesthesia and median resternotomy, extracorporeal circulation was established using ascending aorta and bicaval cannulation. The right atrium was opened after aortic occlusion, and we found that the tricuspid valve was dysplastic, the fibrous tissue around the tricuspid valve ring was hyperplastic and the valve leaflets were contracted, which led to severe tricuspid valve stenosis and insufficiency . All the leaves and subvalvular tissues of the tricuspid valve were removed, and the 17 mm valve was passed . Sixteen sutures were placed along the valve ring, and a 16 mm Medtronic mechanical mitral valve was implanted . A 3 mm defect was created in the atrial septum, and then the right atrial incision was sutured. An end-to-side cavopulmonary anastomosis was created on a beating heart . The open right pulmonary artery was banded to a size of 4 mm. Extracorporeal circulation was gradually removed. After hemostasis, the sternum was closed, and the skin was sutured.
After the operation, the patient was treated with mechanical ventilation, adrenaline and dopamine, furosemide, nitric oxide, heparin sodium, and cephalosporins. Color ultrasound examination indicated that the fenestrated atrial septal defect was a left to right shunt. Three days after the operation, the ventilator was removed. Treatment with cardiotonics, diuretics and anti-infectives was continued. Bosentan was used to reduce pulmonary vascular resistance, and warfarin was used for anticoagulation. Diuresis was induced with furosemide tablets combined with spironolactone tablets, pulmonary vascular resistance was reduced with bosentan, and anticoagulation was induced with warfarin and continued after discharge. At 1 month, 3 months, and 6 months after the operation, shortness of breath after activities was gradually relieved. Echocardiography showed good tricuspid valve function and patency of the gallbladder anastomosis.