A 27-year-old Japanese primigravid woman was admitted to our hospital because of slight uterine contractions at 38+6 weeks of gestation. Her past history was unremarkable. She had received no uterine surgery or procedure. There were no symptoms or history suggesting the presence of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in either herself or her family members. We did not perform drug screening, including cocaine (a possible cause of uterine rupture). She had received regular pregnancy checks on up to 14 occasions and an ultrasound examination had been performed at every visit, according to our institute protocol. An ultrasound had revealed no abnormal uterine structure, although special attention had not been paid to the uterine wall. On admission, a speculum examination revealed that her cervix was normally positioned and not ventrally located. A digital examination revealed a cervical ostium opening of 2.0 cm with 1.5 cm effacement. A cardiotocogram showed a normal fetal heart rate (FHR) pattern with weak uterine contractions of 20 second duration once per hour. There was no tenderness or palpable mass. An attending doctor performed an ultrasound examination, which revealed normal placentation without myoma and an amniotic fluid index of 15 cm (normal range: 5-25 cm). However, he did not comment on the uterine wall thickness. Although she preferred to remain in hospital, the irregular contractions occurring only once per hour led to her decision to discharge at 39+2 weeks of gestation. During her time in our hospital, a cardiotocogram was performed six times and mild variable decelerations with normal variability were observed on two occasions. Otherwise, FHR patterns were normal. Prior to her discharge, the cervical ostium opening was 3.0 cm with 1.0 cm effacement, with -2 station of the presenting part, the head. This roughly indicated that active labor had not yet begun. The attending doctor palpated her abdomen and incidentally noted a hard thumbhead-sized mass protruding at the midline, 10 cm below her umbilicus. An abdominal ultrasound revealed a bulging thin uterine wall of <1 mm with a fetal minor part beneath it , which corresponded to the hard palpable mass. Slight tenderness was observed at the thin uterine wall. Although primigravidity, an unscarred uterus and the absence of regular contractions reduced the possibility of an impending uterine rupture, ultrasound findings led us to suspect it and an emergent Cesarean section was performed.
Her vesicouterine fold was located in the normal position and her bladder did not overlay the lower uterine segment. Cephalad to the vesicouterine fold, an approximately 8 × 8 cm area of the uterine anterior wall was thin and a fetal hand and head were visible through it . A transverse incision was made cephalad to this thin wall area, and a 2604 g (appropriate-for-date according to the Japanese standard) female baby was delivered with Apgar scores of 8 and 9 at one to five minutes, respectively. The placenta was delivered spontaneously. We excised the thin part of the uterine wall and reconstructed the site with a total blood loss of 370 ml. The uterine body was located normally, without distortion or posterior incarceration. A histological examination of the excised uterine wall was not performed. An abdominal and vaginal ultrasound seven days post-partum revealed a well-involuted uterus and the absence of discernable uterine anomalies. Her post-partum course was unremarkable. Considering that a short inter-delivery period of <18 months would increase the risk of rupture of the scarred uterus , we advised her to avoid further pregnancy for at least one year. The patient and her baby were healthy six months after the birth.