A 2-years-old white Caucasian female affected by Down Syndrome (DS) and surgically corrected at 3 months of age for a subaortic intraventricular defect (IVD), with a history of 2 episodes of pneumonia, was admitted in the emergency room of our hospital due to a cardiac arrest during her varicella illness. She had never been vaccinated up to the moment, that’s why she contracted the disease from her sister. The night before her admission to the hospital, she began to manifest episodes of hypotonia associated to periods of crying. At 4 o’clock she began to show signs of a generalized hypotonia and she was taken to our hospital by her parents, where she arrived in cardiac arrest. After Cardio-Pulmonary Resuscitation (CPR-PALS) her spontaneous breathing was restored. The clinical course was characterized by complete areflexia, with bilateral mydriasis. Breathing pattern was characterized by ARDS that required high frequency mechanical ventilation and Nitric Oxide with transient improvement.
We proceeded to perform a chest X-ray (CXR), which revealed multiple foci of parenchymal spread to both lungs and pleural effusion obliterating share of the breast-phrenic cost . An abdominal ultrasound showed the presence of abdominal effusion in all quadrants and laboratory tests revealed the presence of IgM antibodies against varicella, positive PCR for varicella antigen, absence of bacterial infections (coltures of blood and urine), prolonged PT and PTT, and altered D-Dimer. Tests for immunological functions were performed .
The next day, the respiratory condition didn’t improve and a new CXR showed an impairment of the spread, and a massive pulmonary hemorrhage. In the absence of recovery of the main indicators of organ perfusion, she was declared dead.
At macroscopic examination the lungs were heavy, firm and plum-colored, with diffuse areas of hemorrhage and necrosis.
Histologically there are interstitial pneumonitis, diffuse necrosis and hemorrhage in the pulmonary parenchyma .