A 20-year-old woman presented with visual loss in the right eye. She had high myopia bilaterally (−6D). A normal prior retinal examination was documented 5 years prior to presentation. A routine contact lens exam 1 year prior to presentation recorded 20/20 vision. Review of systems was notable for confirmed EBV positive mononucleosis 2 months prior to the development of ocular symptoms. At that time, she had headaches, fatigue, sore throat and lymphadenopathy. No eye pain, redness or light sensitivity was noted. EBV mononucleosis was confirmed using the heterophile antibody (Monospot) test. The patient reported trouble with distance vision 2 months after the mononucleosis was diagnosed.
At presentation 6 months after her symptoms began ophthalmic examination of the right eye revealed quiet anterior chambers with scant anterior vitreous cells only in the right eye. Retinal examination showed punched out nummular chorioretinal lesions admixed with patchy areas of coarse pigmentation overlying subretinal fibrosis. The completely unilateral placoid lesions of variable age were associated with an overlying fibrinous band in the macula and a peripheral Schlaegel line . The left eye was pristine and completely unaffected . Fundus autofluorescence of the right eye revealed nummular hypofluorescent lesions, many of which had extensive areas of hyperfluorescence along their perimeters. Fluorescein angiography revealed active leakage, especially in the parafovea, suggestive of ongoing inflammation . ICG angiogram showed hypofluorescent lesions in the right eye on initial presentation . SD-OCT demonstrated sub-RPE nodular deposits, some of which were confluent with overlying intraretinal fluid and indistinct margins. Overall global retinal function of the right eye was preserved as evident by kinetic perimetry and full field electroretinography , suggesting a local rather than diffuse process.
Extensive systemic workup was performed. Given the history of EBV and the presence of sub-RPE deposits, lymphoma was ruled out with a chest CT scan. It only revealed reactive cervical lymph nodes. No hepatosplenomegaly was noted. Complete blood count with differential demonstrated a slight increase in lymphocytes (59.9% reference range 10–50%). The rest of the differential was within normal limits. RPR was non-reactive and the FT-ABS was negative. Interferon-Gamma release assay (QuantiFERON-TB gold) was negative. West Nile antibodies were negative, Brain MRI was negative for any CNS lesions or cerebral vasculitis. Liver enzymes were mildly raised: ALT 94 IU/L (reference range 7–52 IU/L) and AST 62 IU/L (reference range 15–40 IU/L). The pattern of elevated aminotransferases and lymphocytosis in the setting of EBV positivity was considered to be consistent with infectious mononucleosis .
Given the activity of the MFC, the patient was started on an initial empiric high dose trial of prednisone. As the prednisone was tapered, she was switched to the immunosuppressant, azathioprine. There was significant interval resolution of the inflammatory nature of the lesions in the right eye. Over the following 8 months dramatic improvement was demonstrated resulting in consolidation of the subretinal lesions and decreased inflammation . Vision correspondingly improved from 20/200 to 20/40. The left eye remains unaffected.
During the patient’s course, she self-discontinued the azathioprine. During that three-month interval, there was an increase in the activity of the multifocal lesions evident on her exam and new areas of inflammation and a consequent drop in her vision. When azathioprine was resumed, these lesions resolved, and her vision improved. After 2 years of follow up, there has been continued evidence of reduced chorioretinal inflammation and consolidation of her retinal lesions on the azathioprine . The left eye has fortunately remained pristine even after 2 years of follow up.