A 61-year-old Chinese man with hypertension presented with memory disorders, falsification, time and space disorientation, visual hallucinations, rapidly progressive dementia, akinetic mutism, and myoclonus.
Four months prior, the patient experienced memory disorders, falsification, and time and space disorientation without any identifiable triggers. In the second month after the symptom onset, the patient developed rapidly progressive dementia and visual hallucinations. By the third month, the patient experienced akinetic mutism combined with myoclonus. Hyperthermia occurred in the fourth month after the onset of symptoms.
The patient had a 10-year history of hypertension.
Vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.5 °C; heart rate, 76 beats/min; blood pressure, 119/71 mmHg; and respiratory rate, 20 beats/min. The patient exhibited spontaneous eye opening but was unable to follow commands or exhibit eye tracking. Passive muscle tension, positive pathological reflexes, and myoclonic movements were also observed.
The initial electroencephalogram (EEG) test conducted in the fourth month after symptom onset showed basic rhythmic activity with moderate-potential 8-Hz a waves. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was colorless and transparent without clots or flocculation. Perthes test and oligoclonal bands were negative. CSF analysis revealed normal white blood cell count and immunoglobulin (Ig) G, IgA, IgM, total protein, glucose, and chloride ion levels. Tests for herpes simplex virus, toxoplasmosis, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, and Epstein-Barr virus in the CSF yielded negative results. Vitamin B1 and B12 levels and thyroid function test results were within normal ranges. Human immunodeficiency virus and syphilis antibody tests were negative. Antibodies associated with autoimmune encephalitis and paraneoplastic syndrome were not detected in the serum and CSF. Rheumatoid and autoimmune disease-related parameters, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies, glucose phosphate isomerase, antinuclear antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, and anti-neutrophil antibodies, were within normal limits.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed hyperintense signals on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) sequences in the bilateral occipital, parietal, temporal, and frontal lobes, particularly in the right cortex. These hyperintense signals are referred to as cortical ribbons . Positron emission tomography/computed tomography showed a diffuse decrease in fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism in the right cerebral cortex .
Considering rapid cognitive decline, diffuse brain damage, and hyperthermia, a probable diagnosis of CJD was made. Viral encephalitis, which can be treated, could not be ruled out. Antiviral therapy was attempted by intravenous administration of gamma globulin (300 mg/day) for five days. Physical cooling and benzodiazepines were used to manage the fever and myoclonus.
Despite gamma globulin treatment, the patient's condition did not improve. EEG performed in the fifth month after symptom onset showed bilateral persistent 4-5 Hz q waves, 2-3 Hz d waves, and sharp slow waves. In the sixth month after symptom onset, the EEG showed bilaterally symmetrical low-to-moderate-potential 8-Hz a waves with a large number of moderate-to-high potential 4–6 Hz q waves. Repeated examinations of serum and CSF for autoimmune encephalitis-related antibodies yielded negative results. Other potential diagnoses were ruled out, and CJD remained a potential diagnosis. Although the 14-3-3 protein was not detected in the CSF, the combination of the patient's clinical manifestations and imaging findings further supported the suspicion of CJD. Sequencing of PRNP revealed a heterozygous c.A587C base change in the second exon, resulting in a glutamate-to-alanine substitution at E196A that indicated a potential pathogenic mutation .