An 82-year-old male was admitted to the emergency department for worsening shortness of breath and hypoxia. He was admitted a week after he was diagnosed with a left ninth rib fracture secondary to a fall. He had long-standing history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, coronary artery disease, and peripheral vascular disease. Chest radiographs revealed a left pleural effusion and possible infiltrate. The patient was initially treated with a nebulizer, prednisone, and empiric antibiotic coverage with ceftriaxone and azithromycin. The patient failed to improve with the medical interventions and a therapeutic thoracentesis was performed. The thoracentesis was completed with ultrasound guidance, with the puncture made above the 11th rib at mid chest on the left. The pleural effusion was found to be frank blood. No immediate complications were noted, and the patient was taken to recovery. The next day the patient was found to be in respiratory distress. A chest x-ray revealed an opaque left hemithorax that was likely rapid accumulation of pleural fluid . A follow-up contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest performed during the arterial phase revealed a left intercostal pseudoaneurysm with hemothorax and adjacent compressive atelectasis . Ultrasound of the left chest wall was performed directly over the thoracentesis site and doppler flow revealed bidirectional fluid flow, indicating the presence of a large pseudoaneurysm .
Following identification of the left intercostal pseudoaneurysm, the patient underwent a thoracic aortogram and multiple-level left intercostal angiogram under IV conscious sedation. Selective catheterization of the T5, T6, and T7 intercostal arteries was unsuccessful in identifying the pseudoaneurysm. Selective catheterization of T10 and T11 intercostal arteries was performed with a C2 Cobra catheter, following multiple catheter exchanges due to the patient’s atherosclerotic vessels. The pseudoaneurysm was ultimately found to have a left T10 origin and the C2 Cobra catheter was exchanged for a microcatheter. Once access was gained, coil embolization of the pseudoaneurysm was performed with a series of 15 Axium micro coils. Significant room was left on both sides of the pseudoaneurysm and a follow-up angiogram was performed via the microcatheter, then a 5-French Cobra catheter. The follow-up angiogram demonstrated no further filling of the pseudoaneurysm . The catheter was removed and a Perclose device was placed in the left groin for hemostasis. Following completion of the procedure, the patient was taken to recovery. The patient proceeded to return to his baseline following medical management during the remainder of his hospital stay and was discharged home after 5 days.