A 35-year-old male presented with low back pain of 6 months’ duration which radiated into both lower limbs. His clinical examination revealed motor deficit (MRC 3/5) in the L4 and L5 distributions, with accompanying decreased sensations (50% loss).
X-rays revealed degenerative changes in the lower lumbar spine with evidence of instability at L4-5 on dynamic imaging . The MR revealed lumbar canal stenosis at L4-L5, a left L5-S1 HNP with inferior migration, and a left sided facet cyst . The preoperative hematological investigations including ESR and total leukocyte count (TLC) were normal. The patient underwent a L4-L5 minimally invasive transforaminal lumbar interbody fusion (TLIF) with L5-S1 micro-discectomy .
The initial postsurgical course was uneventful; the patient was mobilized the next day, and discharged the following day.
However, on the 10th postoperative day, he developed recurrent back pain (VAS 8), a high grade fever, difficulty in walking, and was readmitted. The following laboratory studies were abnormally elevated; CRP-115.18 mg/dl, ESR-99/1 h, and TLC-10200 with Absolute Neutrophil Count-8410. The fever profile, including tests for dengue fever, and malaria were negative. He was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics and his symptoms were partially relieved with Meropenem 1 g thrice a day. Blood cultures showed B. cepacia sensitive to meropenem, and clindamycin. The diagnosis of B. cepacia from blood culture specimens was established utilizing Bactec Model 9240 (Becton-Dickinson) or BacT/ALERT 3D. Vitek II automated antibiotic susceptibility system was utilized to detect the relevant sensitive antibiotics. VAS score for back pain reduced to two and fever subsided. Patient was discharged and advised 6 weeks of IV antibiotics.
Subsequently, 3 weeks’ post surgery, patient represented with back pain (VAS 8) and left lower limb radiculopathy. He had remained on appropriate antibiotic therapy and laboratory investigations showed improvement in the ESR (99 down to 64), and CRP (115.18 mg/dl down to 34) levels. The MR was suggestive of spondylodiscitis at the L5-S1, and he underwent a TLIF L5-S1 with insertion of Titanium Cage [ and ]. Notably, the right-sided L5 screw was removed as a medial pedicle breach was suspected (e.g., impingement on the L5 nerve root but not the site of the radiculopathy). The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was mobilized with an LSO brace. Pain (VAS score 3 for back pain, and 2 for left lower limb radiculopathy) improved and the patient was afebrile. Patient was discharged on 6 weeks of IV Meropenem 1 g TDS, followed by oral antibiotic Clindamycin for 6 more weeks. Repeat investigations following completion of antibiotic course revealed ESR-34, CRP-11 mg/dl. At present, patient is symptom free on 6-month follow-up.