An 11-year-old male was referred to our institution for a mechanical valvular replacement surgery on CPB due to a diagnosis of native aortic valve endocarditis and embolism in the left lower extremity. CPB needed anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin. On postoperative day 10, the patient developed fever and increased eosinophil levels. This eosinophilia increased until it reached 9.02 × 109/L eosinophils on postoperative day 17, accompanied by a pruritic rash with erythematous papular lesions on postoperative day 23. During the following days, the patient experienced warm shock along with an abrupt elevation of ALT and AST, with levels peaking at 1081 U/L and 773 U/L, respectively . Based on the clinical and laboratory findings, the patient was diagnosed with DRESS syndrome. Methylprednisolone treatment was initiated, and a significant decrease in transaminases and eosinophil levels was observed during the following week, reaching a count of 0.16 × 109/L eosinophils . Finally, the patient was transferred to the general ward for hospitalization and discharged upon complete resolution of the condition. The patient was readmitted 7 years later due to the presence of a thrombus in the prosthetic aortic valve with signs of valve dysfunction with altered mobility and stenosis of one of the mechanical leaflets secondary to subtherapeutic levels of INR. Anticoagulation therapy was initiated with unfractionated heparin. Ten days after admission, the patient developed an extensive erythematous-edematous plaque on the anterior and dorsal trunk, along with elevated transaminases (ALT 454 U/L and AST 150 U/L) and eosinophilia (6.48 × 109/L eosinophils) . Due to the patient’s history, a recurrent case of DRESS syndrome was suspected, possibly triggered by the use of unfractionated heparin. Consequently, unfractionated heparin was discontinued, and low-molecular-weight heparin was initiated as an alternative. Treatment with hydrocortisone, oral prednisone, loratadine and topical betamethasone was established .
Subsequently, the patient presented an increase in erythema and the appearance of edematous morbilliform plaques affecting approximately 50% of the body surface, including the face, neck and limbs. A possible cross-reaction was considered and enoxaparin was discontinued; this was replaced with fondaparinux. The patient continued to receive topical and intravenous antihistamines. After starting treatment, transaminases and eosinophils gradually decreased. Twelve days after initiation of the treatment, there was a complete resolution of DRESS syndrome symptoms. Considering the current stability of cardiovascular symptoms and the persistence of valvular dysfunction, regardless of optimum anticoagulation, a scheduled Ross surgery was indicated.
Finally, in May 2023, 14 months after the resolution of DRESS, the patient underwent CPB surgery, requiring systemic anticoagulation with bivalirudin. The approach adhered to the institutional clinical practice guidelines concerning the administration protocol of bivalirudin and anaesthetic considerations. These guidelines recommend an initial dose of 1 mg/kg when the surgeon is ready to perform cannulation for CPB, an infusion rate of 2.5 mg/kg/h during extracorporeal circulation, and monitoring every 15 min. The goal of this regimen is to maintain an activated clotting time between 2.5 and 5 times the baseline value . As ACT is altered after the procedure, it is important to note that the half-life of bivalirudin is approximately 25 min, depending on renal function, suggesting that the increase in ACT may be due to factors other than the administration of the drug.
The intraoperative complication was coagulopathy, which was effectively managed through comprehensive hemostasis techniques and the administration of four units of fresh frozen plasma, 20 units of cryoprecipitate, and two units of apheresis platelets, which is significantly higher than that used in a similar procedure performed under heparin anticoagulation at our institution.
Heparins were not used during the intraoperative and postoperative periods. Fondaparinux was used during the postoperative period as the anticoagulant of choice. During the hospitalization, no dermatologic manifestations were observed. The patient did not present eosinophilia and his ALT remained stable, with elevated AST levels coinciding with the period of vasoplegic shock. After appropriate management of concurrent infectious process (pneumonia), the patient was discharged with a satisfactory postoperative outcome.