A 47-year-old woman from Addis Ababa presented to Saint Paul’s Hospital Millennium Medical College (SPHMMC) medical outpatient clinic in January 2020 with a compliant of bilateral lower limb weakness of 4 days duration. She gave history of significant reduction of vision in both of her eyes before 7 years for which she visited an ophthalmologist. At that time, optic neuritis was considered, and she was given systemic prednisolone for about 2 months after which her vision improved, but the patient was lost from follow-up. Four months ago, she developed complete loss of vision of both eyes for which she visited SPHMMC ophthalmology department when recurrent optic neuritis was again considered and restarted on systemic prednisolone. With subsequent follow-ups, her vision and oculomotor palsy in her left eye improved after 2 months of prednisolone therapy. Seven weeks later, she experienced right lower limb weakness followed by left lower limb weakness within 1 day and became bedridden. She also experienced radicular back pain, urinary retention, and constipation. She had no upper limb paresthesia or weakness. She had history of hypertension of 18 years and dyslipidemia of 1-year duration. For these, she was taking amlodipine, hydrochlorothiazide, alpha-methyldopa, and atorvastatin regularly. She had no history of joint pain or skin rash. She had no history of gastrointestinal surgery or chronic diarrhea. She reported no history of recent vaccinations or diabetes mellitus. She used to work as a janitor for a wine factory until 7 years ago when she lost her job because of her vision. She has two children (one male and one female).
She was conscious and alert. Her ophthalmic evaluation revealed vision of no light perception in both of her eyes. Intraocular pressure was 16 and 14 mmHg in her right and left eye, respectively. Slit lamp examination showed afferent pupillary defect and optic nerve atrophy in the right eye and sluggishly reactive pupil but relatively normal optic nerve appearance on the left eye. She had also bilateral oculomotor nerve palsy. Several weeks later, additional systemic findings were observed including bilateral lower limb weakness with muscle power of grade 0 on the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale, with depressed reflexes at the knees and ankles. In addition, the plantar reflexes were equivocal bilaterally. She had symmetrical sensory deficit below T4 to fine touch and pressure. Coordination test was normal.
Her blood work-up showed normal complete blood count, liver and renal function tests, fasting blood sugar, and serum electrolytes. Echocardiography showed mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy. Serologic tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and syphilis were negative. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed clear and colorless appearance, and normal blood glucose level (82.4 mg/dl). However, the CSF protein content was elevated at 24.8 mg/dl, while the WBC count in the CSF was less than 5 cells/µl. Gram staining on her CSF was negative. The MRI of her cervicothoracic spine revealed expansible long segment T1 hypointense, T2 and short T1 inversion recovery (STIR) heterogeneously hyperintense lesion extending from C3 to T12 with no contrast enhancement , suggesting probable myelitis or demyelination. There was no cord compressive lesion. Her brain MRI showed prominent sulci and cortical volume loss at the left parietotemporal lobe, and few punctuate T2/fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) hyperintense lesions within the deep white matter of the frontal and parietal lobes suggestive of nonspecific white matter lesion. Pattern reversal visual evoked potential (PRVEP) with electromyography revealed prolonged bilateral P100 latency (> 100 ms), more on the right side, suggesting bilateral (severe on the right side) anterior visual pathway dysfunction of demyelinating pathophysiology . As a result, a diagnosis of neuromyelitis optica was made based on the diagnostic criteria without the NMO-IgG-antibody assays .
The patient was started on intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g per day for 5 days followed by prednisolone 60 mg daily and subsequently discharged with azathioprine 75 mg daily. On discharge, she had left eye vision improvement.
On her follow-up, prednisolone was tapered and patient was discharged on azathioprine 75 mg daily. One year after discharge from the hospital, prednisolone was tapered to 7.5 mg daily and azathioprine reduced to 50 mg daily. Her vision in the right eye does not have light perception, but her left eye was 6/24. She showed complete recovery from oculomotor nerve palsy on her left eye. The lower limb weakness improved with power 3/5 on MRC scale. Additionally, there was resolution of urinary retention and sensory loss. Her recent visual evoked potential showed complete improvement of her left eye vision when compared with her previous visual evoked potential; however, her right anterior visual pathway dysfunction is still present.