An 80-year-old woman with a history of diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, and hypertension was admitted to our center due to effort angina and a positive stress test with anterior wall ischemia. A coronary angiogram revealed diffuse severe calcification of the coronary tree. Severe stenoses were identified in the mid and distal portions of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and in the distal left circumflex artery (LCX) . The decision then was to proceed with PCI in the LAD. Using an XB 3.5 guiding catheter (Cordis, Miami, FL, USA) via right radial access, a Whisper ES (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was advanced into the distal LAD. After predilatation with an Emerge 2.25 – 15 mm balloon (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) and a Scoreflex balloon 2.5 – 10 mm (Orbus Neich, Fort Lauderdale, FL, US), a stent SYNERGY 2.25x38 mm (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was successfully implanted in the mid-LAD lesion . Thereafter, an attempt to perform a plain balloon angioplasty in the distal LAD stenosis was carried out . However, after inflation with the Emerge 2.25 – 15 mm, a type III perforation was noted . Immediately, the balloon was inflated again to prevent bleeding. Thereafter, we tried to deploy a 2.8 – 16 mm GraftMaster stent (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA), but the stent was unable to cross the previously implanted stent.
At this point, we inserted a 7Fr EBU guiding catheter (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) via the right femoral artery. While the previous balloon was inflated to prevent the development of pericardial effusion, the prior guiding catheter was retracted and dislodged from the left main artery, and the latter guiding catheter was engaged. The patient did not experience any hemodynamic disturbances, and no significant pericardial fluid was noted during this maneuver. A new Whisper ES wire was advanced distally to the perforation . We performed high-pressure balloon inflations to over expand the mid-LAD stent and, using the wire trapping technique, we gained enough support to advance the covered stent to the target lesion . Eventually, the stent was deployed, and the perforation was sealed .
The patient experienced an uneventful evolution with a minimal amount of pericardial fluid and was discharged home three days after the procedure.