A 37-year-old Hispanic male was hospitalized after being involved in a motorcycle crash. The patient suffered blunt chest and abdominal trauma as well as concussion without loss of consciousness. Upon arrival, the patient had a Glasgow Coma scale score of 15 and was hemodynamically stable. His abdomen was soft, nondistended, and nontender to palpation with no guarding. Labs were significant for hemoglobin count of 14.2 g/dL (normal 13.5–17.5 g/dL), white blood count of 11.8 1000/μL (normal 4.5–11 1000/μL), and lactate of 1.7 mmol/L (normal 0.7–2.1 mmol/L), which remained stable throughout his hospital course.
Initial intravenous contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen/pelvis was performed 10 minutes after patient presentation. The CT scan was interpreted by a radiology resident 15 minutes later and final interpretation by a board-certified emergency radiologist was completed in an additional 1 hour and 25 minutes. The initial CT interpretation indicated nonspecific wall thickening of the proximal jejunum, and occult small bowel injury could not be excluded. Given these findings, a repeat CT of the abdomen/pelvis with intravenous and oral contrast was ordered by the trauma service as per our institution’s standard protocol for evaluation of possible occult bowel injury in blunt abdominal trauma.
The follow up CT performed after midnight, 8 hours after the initial CT, demonstrated trace pneumoperitoneum, possibly originating from the splenic flexure of the colon without evidence of extravasation of oral contrast . The time from repeat CT scan completion to initial interpretation by a radiology resident was 30 minutes. The resident made the surgery team aware of these findings immediately. A board-certified emergency radiologist reviewed and provided another preliminary interpretation for the study 10 minutes later, confirming the presence of pneumoperitoneum. Based on the presence of pneumoperitoneum in a patient with blunt abdominal trauma, the patient was taken to the operating room as per standard protocol at our institution. Six hours after the follow up CT was performed, an academic board-certified abdominal radiologist provided a final interpretation.
On laparoscopy, cyst-like structures projecting from the wall of the distal transverse colon and splenic flexure were noted. Due to the patient’s body habitus, the surgery team did not feel that they could adequately explore the area and the decision was made to convert to exploratory laparotomy. No evidence of bowel perforation was found. A segmental section of the diseased portion of the colon was taken and sent to pathology. Pathology results showed multiple enlarged cystic nodules ranging from 0.5 to 3 cm in the bowel wall .
Subsequently, the radiologic studies were reviewed by a panel of abdominal radiologists. The panel concluded that the proximity of the pneumoperitoneum to the pneumatosis cystoides intestinalis suggested that the pneumoperitoneum may have been caused by incidental atraumatic or traumatic rupture of the cysts. However, they could not rule out bowel perforation based on imaging alone.
The patient had an uncomplicated postoperative course and was transferred to an acute care facility of equal acuity for further medical management as per the patient’s health insurance request.