A 50-year-old Caucasian man, who was a chemical factory worker, presented to our accident and emergency department, Countess of Chester Hospital, Chester, with sudden onset of slurred speech, double vision, heaviness on the right side of his body and unsteadiness of gait. These symptoms had started two days prior to his admission. He also reported having headaches, which got worse with time.
On admission, his vital signs were at a normal range except for an elevated blood pressure (BP) of 180/60 mmHg and raised temperature of 38°C, which stabilized subsequently. He also had some shortness of breath and an initial non-productive cough, but his condition had improved at the time of his presentation to the hospital. Neurological examination showed a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 14 to 15, a bilateral grade 2 nystagmus, slurred speech, past pointing on the right, and a broad-based ataxic gait. However, he demonstrated no objective motor weaknesses or sensory deficits. An examination of his chest, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal systems were unremarkable. In view of the above history and clinical findings, a diagnosis of cerebrovascular accident (CVA), possibly involving the vertebrobasilar territory, was made and was further investigated.
Investigations included computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain, which all yielded normal results. A routine blood investigation including full blood count, renal functions, liver function tests and thyroid functions also showed normal results. His lipid profile showed raised random cholesterol (6.2 mmol/L) and triglycerides (2.68 mmol/L) levels. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) studies performed on our patient in view of his fever and neurological symptoms were normal.
Due to these negative test results and the presence of a small alkali burn on the extensor aspect of his right wrist, our patient's occupational history was considered. He had recently started working with methyl iodide and had spillage of the chemical through his suit and on to his hand a week before the onset of his symptoms. His wife subsequently reported that he was sleepier and less interactive. He also complained of visual and auditory hallucinations.
We discussed our patient's case with the National Poisons Center and they suspected that his symptoms were due to methyl iodide poisoning. He was observed on the ward and discharged on the third day with an advice to stay off work until the neurological symptoms had cleared. He was reviewed in out-patient clinic two weeks later and was noted to have made an improvement in hallucinations and slurred speech. He was, however, still ataxic. Subsequent review at six weeks revealed an improvement in his cognition and ataxia. At three months, he showed only minimal deficits in coordination.