A 29-year-old African American woman was admitted with sudden onset of substernal chest pain. She was three weeks post-partum and this was her fifth baby. Her pregnancy and delivery was uneventful. Pain started while she was feeding her newborn. It was sharp, substernal, associated with shortness of breath (SOB) and diaphoresis. She also noticed left arm numbness and tingling. She had no past medical history of chest pain, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, connective tissue disease or heart failure. There was no family history of premature coronary artery disease (CAD). On admission, her electrocardiogram showed bigeminy without any ST-segment or T-wave changes. Cardiac enzymes were elevated with the peak troponin level of 31ng/ml. Based on this presentation, diagnosis of non-ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) was made and the patient was started on heparin, clopidogrel (Plavix), beta-blocker, and nitrates. To rule out pulmonary embolism (PE) the patient underwent a computerized tomographic angiogram (CTA) of her chest, which was found to be normal. The patient was transferred to our facility for further management.
She underwent left heart catheterization (LHC) that revealed dissection of the first obtuse marginal branch (OM1) of the left circumflex artery extending from the proximal to mid-distal end. At the very distal end of the vessel, the lumen was of normal diameter with good distal flow . Left main artery, LAD including its all three diagonal branches and RCA were without any significant disease. To assess the cardiac function left ventriculography was performed that showed left ventricular global hypokinesis with an ejection fraction (EF) of 30% to 35%. There were no regional wall motion and valvular abnormalities. The diseased area of the involved vessel was too long for stenting so the decision was made to manage her conservatively with aspirin, clopidogrel (Plavix) and a beta- blocker. She remained stable throughout her hospital stay and recovered without any symptoms. She was discharged home on day three of admission with clopidogrel (Plavix), nitrates and a beta-blocker with close outpatient follow-up.