A 58-year-old woman presented with dyspnea on exertion of 2 months’ duration and 2 episodes of syncope on January 20, 2020. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a well-defined heterogeneous, large, round mobile mass with attachments to the atrial side of the anterior mitral valve leaflet (26 × 20 mm), suggestive of an atypical myxoma . In addition, the patient had a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 55%, severe mitral stenosis, severe mitral regurgitation, mild-to-moderate tricuspid regurgitation, and a pulmonary arterial systolic pressure (PASP) of 42 mm Hg. Coronary angiography revealed normal epicardial coronary arteries. Brain computed tomography (CT) and neurologic evaluations were unremarkable.
The patient was scheduled for surgical mass excision. On January 24, the LA mass (20 × 25 mm) was removed completely, and the mitral valve was replaced with a St Jude Medical prosthetic valve given the destruction of the anterior mitral valve leaflet and chordal involvement. The histopathological examination illustrated diffuse fibrosis in the mitral valve, as well as cellular pleomorphism and high mitotic activity in the removed cardiac tumor. The evaluation of the surgical margin was rendered impossible by the fragmentation of the specimen. Postoperative echocardiography revealed that the prosthetic valve had good leaflet motion with an acceptable gradient. An LVEF of 45%, mild tricuspid regurgitation, and a PASP of 28 mm Hg were also reported. No residual mass was detected. The patient was discharged thereafter on February 3.
Seventy-nine days later, on April 22, 2020, the patient was readmitted with a 1-week history of dyspnea, palpitation, fever (body temperature = 38 °C), and a sore throat. The time in therapeutic range assessment revealed that the international normalized ratio was acceptable during the mentioned period. In the emergency department, transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated the fixation of the prosthetic mitral valve in 1 leaflet, with a mean pressure gradient of 12 mm Hg, an LVEF of 50%, moderate-to-severe tricuspid regurgitation, and a PASP of 63 mm Hg. The mitral valve fixation was evident in fluoroscopy. Laboratory examinations demonstrated a high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) level of 9.9 mg/dL and a white blood cell count of 7100/μL, with a lymphocyte percentage of 18.8%.
In the COVID-19 pandemic era, our focus was diverted to the thrombotic event of the prosthetic valve in the context of coronavirus infection, and we performed a spiral chest CT scan to exclude lung involvement. No evidence of COVID-19, except for a mild pleural effusion, was detected in the chest CT. Hence, empiric antiviral treatment with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin was initiated with respect to the patient’s symptoms and high hs-CRP. The blood culture examination result was negative. Transesophageal echocardiography depicted a very large nonhomogeneous LA mass (40 × 40 mm) on the lateral LA wall that seemed to be an organized thrombus with restricted mitral valve leaflet motion . The reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) test was negative for COVID-19. Believing that the mass was a thrombus, we scheduled the patient for the surgical removal of the mass. The mass was surgically resected on April 27, and its gross appearance was not compatible with that of a thrombus or a pannus. Postoperative echocardiography on May 2 revealed an LVEF of 40% with acceptable motion of the prosthetic mitral valve without a visible residual mass. The microscopic evaluation of the LA mass sections revealed a neoplastic tissue composed of cells with vesicular nuclei, moderate pleomorphism, and moderate amounts of clear-to-eosinophilic cytoplasm. Some of the mentioned cells exhibited uni/multi vacuolated cytoplasm (lipoblast-like cells). A few multinucleated tumor giant cells and some inflammatory cells were also seen. The stroma showed areas of fibrosis, myxoid changes, and necrosis. Further assessment illustrated a high-grade sarcoma, a high mitotic count (8–9/10 high-power fields), necrosis below 50% of the tumoral lesion, and histologic Grade II according to the French Federation of Cancer Centers Sarcoma Group. The size and margin of the tumor could not be assessed due to the fragmentation of the specimen. Based on the immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of the specimen, a dedifferentiated liposarcoma with a high-grade sarcoma and smooth muscle differentiation topped our differential diagnosis list. The IHC findings disclosed that smooth muscle actin (SMA) and mouse double minute 2 (MDM2) markers were positive in the majority of the tumor cells; additionally, high-molecular-weight caldesmon (h-caldesmon) and Friend leukemia insertion-1 (Fli-1) markers were positive in some tumor cells. Consequently, the IHC study established the diagnosis of liposarcomas. Once the primary origin of the tumor was determined, the patient was referred to the oncology department.