A 73-year-old female with a long-standing history of systemic hypertension presented to the Emergency Department with a recent onset of progressive headache, dizziness, and breathlessness. She denied experiencing cough, wheeze, chest pain or ankle swelling. She was a lifelong non-smoker and did not have any history of chronic respiratory illnesses, recurrent urinary tract infections, or long-term use of fluoroquinolones.
She was alert, oriented, and only mildly distressed despite severely reduced peripheral oxygen saturation (69%) on physical examination. She was tachycardic (pulse rate 102/min) and hypotensive (92/60 mmHg). Peripheral cyanosis was observed in the absence of clubbing. No change in peripheral oxygen saturation was observed with postural changes. Although saturations improved to 78% when oxygen was administered via high flow nasal cannulae, normoxia was not achieved. Neurological examination did not reveal any abnormality. Given her presentation, initially, respiratory consultation was requested, and she underwent CT angiogram of the pulmonary arteries as well as high-resolution CT which excluded pulmonary thromboembolism and lung parenchymal abnormalities. Ascending aortic dilatation was observed on the initial CT scan, but the contrast was timed to opacify pulmonary arteries. Blood profile demonstrated polycythaemia (Hb 174 g/L) with otherwise normal complete blood count, inflammatory markers and biochemical panel.
Right to left cardiac shunting was suspected on the basis of significant systemic desaturation that was not corrected after administration of high flow oxygen. Transthoracic echocardiography was initially attempted but was unfortunately limited by poor acoustic windows. We proceeded to transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) with minimal sedation. Transoesophageal echocardiography demonstrated a dilated, unfolded ascending aorta coursing anteriorly and superiorly to the TV annulus (, , Video). The aortic valve was trileaflet with mild regurgitation. A stretched PFO with persistent right to left shunt was visualized (, , Video). The dilated proximal ascending aorta was seen to course superior to the TV causing significant narrowing (<1 cm) of the TV annulus. Colour flow Doppler demonstrated flow acceleration across the TV (, , Video) with a mean gradient of 5 mmHg in the presence of a PFO. No intrinsic TV leaflet abnormality was visualized. Continuous-wave Doppler interrogation of the TV demonstrated prominent ‘a’ waves.
Following TOE, coronary angiography as well as right and left cardiac catheter was undertaken to exclude significant coronary artery disease and assess haemodynamics. Coronary angiography demonstrated unobstructed epicardial vessels. The data from the haemodynamic study are summarized in . The right atrial (RA) pressure trace demonstrates a prominent ‘a’ wave consistent with the TV Doppler on TOE. The mean diastolic pressure gradient between the right atrium and right ventricle was 8 mmHg despite the presence of a decompressing right to left shunt across the PFO which indicated a haemodynamically significant obstruction across the TV. Right ventricular (10/1 mmHg) and pulmonary artery (14/6 mmHg) pressures were significantly reduced. Cardiac index was also reduced (1.8 L/min/m2) with a Qp: Qs of 0.6 indicating a significant right to left shunt. In summary, the haemodynamic data confirmed significant obstruction at the level of the TV with reduced cardiac index and a right to left shunt across the PFO.
To determine the morphology and extent of the thoracic aortic aneurysm, CT aortogram was obtained. This demonstrated fusiform dilatation of the ascending aorta measuring 5.3 cm in maximum diameter. The aortic root itself was 3.4 cm in maximum dimension. The aneurysmal ascending aorta coursed antero-superiorly to the TV annulus compressing it (, , Video). The aortic arch and descending aorta were normal in calibre with mild calcification. There was no haematoma, thrombosis, or dissection. Furthermore, tortuosity of the descending aorta and kyphoscoliosis were also observed.
Based on the echocardiographic, cardiac catheter and CT data, it was clear that the dilatation and configuration of ascending aortic aneurysm caused extrinsic compression of the TV annulus and persistent, significant right to left shunting via the PFO. The patient was advised to have the ascending aorta replaced and the PFO closed but after careful discussion of the risks and benefits, she declined the procedure. The patient continues to be followed up in the clinic and despite restricted mobility and hypoxaemia, continues to manage her daily activities inside the house.