A 64-year-old Han Chinese male patient presented with primary multi-HCC. He had tumors located in Couinaud’s segments III and V, which were treated with local resection. After surgery, he received transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE). After 10 months, he was referred to our hospital in September 2012 with right upper abdominal pain and an abdominal wall mass . He tested negative for the hepatitis B virus but was positive for hepatitis B core antibody. A physical examination revealed the abdominal wall mass to be 7×8cm. Results from routine blood chemistry tests were normal. Levels of tumor markers, such as alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9, were all within the normal range. The functional status of his liver was assessed as class A on the Child-Pugh scale. Abdominal computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging scans demonstrated a mass with ill-defined borders in the left lobe of his liver and revealed abdominal wall invasion . The maximum diameter of the lesion was 10cm. Because of the extrahepatic tumor invasion and the recurrence of the HCC directly invading his abdominal wall, a hepatectomy and surgical resectioning of his abdominal wall were considered as the procedure of choice.
The second surgery was performed in July 2013. An incision was made between the original incisions, over a colored mass in the abdominal wall . Intra-operative findings included a 10cm tumor involving the left lobe (Couinaud’s segment IV) of his liver. The tumor was invading his abdominal wall. The trunk of his left portal vein, left hepatic artery and left bile duct were divided and ligated. The common venous trunk of his left and middle hepatic veins were then divided and ligated. A liver parenchymal transection was performed without using Pringle’s maneuver. Liver resection was carried out by a clamp-crushing method. Great care was taken to protect his stomach and intestinal wall. Subsequently, a left lobectomy with en bloc removal of the abdominal wall was performed. The cut surfaces of his liver were immediately covered by the greater omentum and absorbable hemostatic gauze; because of the large wound (the cut surface), local gauze packing was applied to avoid postoperative bleeding. The operation lasted 2 h. The intra-operative blood loss was 1200mL with six units of red blood cells and four units of fresh plasma transfused during the operation. Continuous abdominal double cannula lavage and low negative pressure drainage were used to drain his abdominal cavity. The abdominal drain and gauze packing were loosened and removed on the third and fifth day after the operation respectively.His postoperative course was uneventful. There were no postoperative complications. Histologic findings were consistent with moderately differentiated HCC invading the abdominal wall. Our patient had a recurrence six months after the second surgery, refused treatment, and died two months later .