A 36-year-old male patient presented with periodic headaches for 6 years. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the head and neck revealed a contrast-enhanced lesion measuring 20 × 17 mm located at the nasopharynx wall and the posterior choana on the right side. Additionally, a decline of the sphenoid bone on the right side was found on the contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan. Histopathological examination showed low-grade ACC. The patient underwent additional examinations (chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound), which showed no distant metastases. Based on imaging tests and nasofibrescopy, the clinical stage was determined as cT2N0M0 . The patient's case was presented at the Head and Neck Unit, where he was disqualified from surgery due to the inability to perform radical resection with appropriate operating margins. Afterwards, during the case conference, our team qualified the patient for radiation therapy. To intensify the radiation therapy and increase the chance of achieving local control, the patient was qualified for a stereotactic radiotherapy boost before the beginning of conventional treatment. An immobilization mask was fitted, and a CT scan without intravenous contrast in the supine position and MR scan with gadolinium intravenous contrast and 1 mm slice thickness for both methods were performed to accurately identify and contour the gross tumour volume (GTVboost = 6.18 cm3). A 3-mm margin was added to the GTVboost creating the planning target volume (PTVboost = 14.95 cm3). The clinical target volume (CTV50Gy = 88.24 cm3) included the nasopharynx, the posterior 1/3 of the nasal cavity and nerve pathways (pharyngeal nerve, glossopharyngeal nerve and branches of cranial nerves IX and X) to the base of the skull. As before, the planning target volume (PTV50Gy = 133.21 cm3) was created by adding a 3-mm margin to the CTV50Gy. The radiotherapy planning process consisted of preparing two treatment plans: a stereotactic radiotherapy plan in the MultiPlan v.4.6.1 system (Accuray, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and a conventional radiotherapy plan in the Eclipse system (Varian Medical System, Palo Alto, CA, USA). The next phase of planning included the fusion of both of the abovementioned plans in the Eclipse system. The stereotactic single-dose boost (18 Gy) was planned at a reference isodose of 90% with the application of Iris collimators (15.00 mm, 20.00 mm) and 175 6 MV flattening filter-free photon beams. The conventional plan was calculated for a fraction dose of 2 Gy and a total dose of 50 Gy. The volumetric modulated arc therapy technique was used for two 6-MV flattening filter-free arcs with the use of a high-definition multi-leaf collimator. The dose distribution in the target volumes and organs at risk for the stereotactic and conventional radiotherapy are shown in the tables below . We decided to accept minimal doses of conventional radiotherapy in the CTV and PTV as a result of the air in the maxillary sinuses included in the target volumes .
The treatment began with the stereotactic radiosurgery boost, realized on a Cyber Knife with a single dose of 18 Gy delivered to the PTVboost. The duration of the therapeutic session was 41 min. A few hours after the boost, the patient reported a headache. Dexamethasone 2 × 4 mg i.v., paracetamol 1 × 1 g p.o., ketoprofen 1 × 100 mg i.v., ranitidine 1 × 50 mg i.v. and mannitol 1 × 250 mL i.v. were administered. The headache subsided 1 h after administration of these drugs, but the pharmacological treatment was continued prophylactically for 5 days at the abovementioned doses. The steroid dose was reduced and changed to the oral route, and after 2 weeks from the beginning of treatment, steroids were discontinued. Conventional radiotherapy started 4 days after the stereotactic radiosurgery boost and was conducted at a total dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions delivered to PTV50Gy on a linear accelerator. The treatment was completed without any interruptions. Laboratory tests performed before treatment revealed increased levels of alanine transaminase (G1) and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (G1), most likely due to dietary error or alcohol consumption. The abdominal ultrasound showed no pathological changes, and L-ornithine L-aspartate 3 × 100 mg p.o. as a hepatoprotective treatment was administered, achieving normalization of those parameters. Grade 2 mucositis of the nasopharynx and nasal cavity according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) occurred as acute side effects during conventional radiotherapy.
We performed two flexible nasal endoscopies (FNEs), the first 14 days after the start of treatment, and the second on the day before the last day of conventional radiotherapy. In both examinations, stagnation of tumour growth was observed with respect to the findings from nasal endoscopy performed before the treatment. In the first follow-up visit 2 months after the end of the treatment, a partial regression of the primary tumour in the FNE was observed; approximately 30% of the tumour remained. No evidence of acute side effects was found. Ten months after the end of the treatment, FNE demonstrated a normal nasopharynx and choanae region, indicating the complete remission of the part of the tumour that was visible in the previous FNEs.
More than 3 months after the end of treatment, the tumour dimensions on gadolinium-based MRI were stable, simultaneously indicating evident response to radiotherapy due to the reduced diffusion restriction and the appearance of necrotic components in the tumour. Six months after the end of treatment, the tumour dimensions were similar to those on the previous MRI, 20 × 14 × 11 mm. The radiologist suggested necrosis in the central part of the lesion as before and further reduction of diffusion restriction. Thirteen and 19 months after the end of the treatment, an abnormal 18 × 15 mm area with low contrast enhancement was described on MRI, although there was no diffusion restriction on the MRI performed after 19 months, which can be interpreted as complete regression of the tumour with radiation-induced changes . Chest X-ray and abdominal ultrasound revealed no distant metastases at the time. The patient underwent anterior tympanotomy and ventilatory drainage insertion 15 months after ending radiotherapy due to bilateral hearing impairment and chronic exudative, adhesive otitis media; this was the only late side effect of the treatment. Five months later, he reported significant improvement in hearing.