A 39-year-old woman noted a lump in her left breast for 13 months that had increased rapidly for 2 months. In May 2017, the patient was first admitted to our hospital. She had no past history of malignancy and no family history of breast carcinoma.
On physical examination, a hard, painless and palpably bossed mass approximately 12.0 cm in diameter occupied most of the left breast with fixation to the overlying skin . No abnormalities were present in the right breast. An MRI scan revealed a focal, high-density mass of 12.0 × 11.0 cm, which was graded as BI-RADS IV . Breast ultrasonography revealed a sizeable mass of 11.0 × 11.0 cm, regularly shaped in the left breast and a hypoechoic mass approximately 2.8 × 1.0 cm in the left axilla. Ultrasonography examination also graded the breast mass as BI-RADS IV . The resulting pathological diagnosis following needle biopsy was secretory carcinoma. According to the AJCC Cancer Staging Manual , the disease in this patient was staged as T4N1M0 (Stage IIIB). Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was subsequently performed with 4 cycles of Epirubicin/Cyclophosphamide (EC) regimens and 2 cycles of Docetaxel/Carboplatin (DC) regimens. Routine physical examination was performed following each cycle of chemotherapy. As shown in Table , tumor size gradually decreased in the first 4 cycles of EC regimens. However, subsequently the tumor increased in size following 2 cycles of DC regimens. Figures of physical examination, MRI scan and ultrasonography during the whole course of neoadjuvant chemotherapy also revealed that the tumor was partially responsive to EC regimens therapy but progressed after DC regimens .
This patient completed modified radical mastectomy (left breast mastectomy and left axillary lymphadenectomy) and consecutive latissimus dorsi breast reconstruction in October 2017. Four cycles of Fluorouracil/Epirubicin/Cyclophosphamide (FEC) regimens were continuously administered. Radiotherapy was carried out on the chest wall and drainage areas (50 Gy/25 f). The patient was switched to intensive chemotherapy with oral Capecitabine for 8 cycles.
In October 2018, the patient was hospitalized again with complaints of headache and ataxia. A brain MRI scan showed multiple metastases in the left occipital lobe, bilateral frontal lobe, and left side of the cerebellum, with the largest mass having a maximum diameter of 3.5 cm . Whether there were metastases in other organs was unclear. The patient ended treatment and died in March 2019. The disease-free survival and overall survival for this patient were 10 months and 19 months, respectively.
On gross examination, the needle biopsy specimen pre-chemotherapy was strip-like, gray-red, slightly hard in texture, with no special features otherwise apparent. The mastectomy specimen following chemotherapy was covered with skin, and the nipple was submitted for examination. The cut surface showed a mass of approximately 8 × 7 × 5 cm, with white-gray multiple nodules accompanied by prominent bleeding and necrosis. No nipple or periareolar lesions were seen . A total of 15 lymph nodes were detected in the separate axillary tissues.
Microscopic examination of the biopsy specimen pre-chemotherapy revealed tumor cells arranged in combinations of microcystic and solid patterns , which characteristically contained abundant extracellular secretory material. The cells had abundant granular eosinophilic cytoplasm with round moderate grade nuclei. There was no perineural or vascular invasion. The result of this biopsy therefore suggested secretory carcinoma of the breast. Examination of the mastectomy specimen showed that the tumor also displayed a combination of microcystic and solid patterns and a pushing border near to the skin , accompanied by massive necrosis and hemorrhage. Responding to neoadjuvant chemotherapy, the tumor cells showed obvious morphological changes in certain areas, such as nuclear concentration and fragmentation of tumor cells, in addition to pleomorphic giant tumor cells with eosinophilic and foamy cytoplasm . An isolated tumor cell was detected in one enlarged axillary lymph node .
Immunohistochemistry of the biopsy specimen showed that the tumor cells had positive cytoplasmic staining for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), S-100 , vimentin, and positive cytomembrane staining for E-Cadherin while it was triple-negative for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2 (HER2). The specimen was also negative for androgen receptor (AR), gross cystic disease fluid protein 15 (GCDFP-15), and smooth muscle actin (SMA, Fig. j). The Ki-67 proliferation index of tumor cells was 40 % . The secretory material was found to be positive for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining .
Fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) analysis indicated the fusion translocation t(12;15) of the ETV6-NTRK3 gene. As shown in Fig. L, the red signal represents the ETV6 gene, while the green signal represents the NTRK3 gene. A number of ETV6-NTRK3 fusion signals were detected by FISH analysis.