A 36-year-old woman, gravida 6 para 6, presented during her 13th week of gestation with a painful enlarged cervical node on the right side of her neck, along with rigors, difficulty in moving her right arm, fatigue, and anorexia. She had a history Hashimoto's thyroiditis (TSH 9.7ulU/ml) for the last 6 years and underwent a C-Sect. 7 years ago. Family history included a father with colon cancer and a mother with Hashimoto's thyroiditis. The physical examination showed enlarged posterior cervical lymph nodes located laterally to the right sternocleidomastoid muscle. Complete blood count (CBC) and chemistry panel were normal. Negative Tuberculin test excluded TB. However, there were elevated levels of anti-toxoplasmosis IgG antibodies 112 IU/ml. The cervical ultrasound revealed right-sided lymph nodes between 10—20 mm .
As the patient was pregnant, Computed Tomography (CT) Scan was contraindicated. Although TB was excluded by lab results and the IgG levels indicated a prior exposure to Toxoplasma, other more serious diseases should be excluded from the differential diagnosis including malignancies especially Hodgkin's lymphoma. Therefore, an excisional cervical node biopsy was performed, and a 2 cm lymph node was obtained for pathological evaluation. As a result, microscopic findings demonstrated necrotic areas containing abundant apoptotic debris including crescentic histiocytes, with the absence of neutrophils and heterogeneous mononuclear cells. Overall features suggested Kikuchi–Fujimoto disease.
Our patient received corticosteroids for 20 days, then stopped the treatment on her own, because she was worried about the health of her fetus, despite the doctors' attempts to reassure her that the drug was safe. The patient underwent a C-section without any complications and had a healthy 3000 g male. The clinical picture improved after delivery, but the cervical ultrasound showed no remarkable change. CT scan was preformed after delivery and showed enlarged lymph nodes on the right side of the neck .
As a result, the patient will continue with corticosteroid treatment for the next two months after which she will be re-evaluated.