A 61-year-old man presented with chronic drug-resistant seizures since the age of four. After video-electroencephalogram (EEG) analysis, he was found to have complex partial seizures arising from the left temporal lobe. The seizures started with an unforced, nonversive head turning to the left, followed by a dystonic posturing of the right hand. Impairment of consciousness and apprehension together with dysphasia occurred. Postictally, the dysphasia continued and frequently there was nose wiping with the left hand. When he was considered a candidate for surgery, the patient had 1–2 seizures per month with a duration of 1 min. The seizures were treated with oxcarbazepine 1200 mg/day and valproic acid 1500 mg/day. The medical history was negative for epilepsy-associated risk factors such as febrile seizures, meningitis, and head trauma. The family history was negative with regard to epilepsy. Neurological examination demonstrated no abnormalities. A 3-Tesla magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed a cortical lesion in the medial and superior temporal gyrus of the anterior left temporal lobe, which appeared partially cystic and partially solid.
The solid part and the cyst wall enhanced after gadolinium administration. Signs of calcification or hemosiderin products were seen in the cyst wall [Figures and ]. Ictal and interictal EEG showed an epileptiform focus in the left temporal lobe, congruent with the clinical semiology and the lesion on MRI. The surgical treatment consisted of an awake craniotomy (Penfield procedure) with a maximal left-sided temporal lobectomy plus amygdalohippocampectomy and gross-total lesionectomy. The histological diagnosis was a mixed ganglioglioma-DNET, WHO Grade I. One part of the lesion had a nodular myxoid, mucinous aspect with axonal bundles surrounded by oligodendrocyte-like cells. Between these bundles, an eosinophil matrix with neurons was found. The lesion stained positive with synaptophysin and S100, but was negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP). A Ki-67-staining showed no elevated proliferative activity. This part of the lesion matched the diagnosis of a DNET, WHO Grade I. The other part of the lesion had a clear neuronal and glial component and showed large and polymorph ganglion cells in a fibrillary matrix with glial cells and perivascular lymphocytic infiltrates. The neuronal part stained positive with synaptophysin and some ganglion cells were CD34 positive. Glial cells stained positive with GFAP, and Ki-67-staining was negative. Hence, this part of the lesion was compatible with a ganglioglioma.
In the first two postoperative weeks, the patient had mixed speech disturbances most probably due to manipulation-induced edema. Three weeks after operation, these disturbances had disappeared completely. Until now (60 months after operation), the patient is seizure-free.