The patient was a 29-year-old male with a 2-year history of diabetes. He was admitted to the hospital because of right back pain for 5 days. A doppler ultrasound showed bilateral renal calculi and bilateral mild hydronephrosis. The size of the right kidney stone was approximately 2.5*2.2 cm, and the size of the left kidney stone was approximately 2.2*2.3 cm. A CT scan showed double renal calculi with mild hydronephrosis, double renal pelvis and upper ureteral inflammation . Routine examinations were basically normal before the operation. The patient underwent one-stage right FURS and holmium laser lithotripsy and double ureteral stent implantation under general anesthesia. During the operation, an ultraslippery hydrophilic guide wire (0.35 mm, Cook, USA) and a ureteral access sheath (inner diameter: 12 Fr, length: 46 cm, Laikai Medical, China) were inserted into the right ureteropelvic junction. Using hand-pump irrigation, a flexible ureteroscope (8.5 Fr, Karl Store, Germany) showed a yellowish-brown stone in the right renal pelvis approximately 2.0*2.5 cm in size. The holmium laser energy was adjusted to 0.8 J, and the frequency was 25 Hz. The stone was crushed into powder, and the double J tube was indwelled. The operation time was approximately 60 min, and no active bleeding was observed during the operation. The patient’s urine was clear, and he was discharged on the second day after the operation.
The patient came to the emergency department of our hospital 28 days after the operation due to severe gross hematuria with urinary retention. A CT scan indicated multiple stones in the bilateral kidneys with mild hydronephrosis, and massive blood clots were considered in the right renal pelvis and bladder . The hemoglobin level decreased sharply from 165 to 68 g/L. First, 8 units of red blood cells were transfused to maintain the patient’s vital signs, and the bladder blood clots and bilateral double-J tubes were removed in emergency surgery. A large amount of blood clots in the bladder and intermittent bloody urine in the bilateral ureteral opening could be seen. After the operation, the bladder was continuously irrigated with three cava balloon urinary catheters, the urine was clear, and the hemoglobin level was not further decreased. This patient refused angiography and was discharged after the operation for one week.
He was hospitalized again 47 days after the operation due to complaints of fever and hematuria. A CT scan demonstrated a large amount of blood clots in the right renal pelvis and bladder and right perirenal fascia thickening . Considering the recurrence of active bleeding, angiography showed a pseudoaneurysm of a small branch of the right renal artery . After selective arterial embolization with microcoils, the patient recovered and was discharged one week later. No obvious abnormality was found during the 2-month follow-up, and the patient did not consider the operation for a left kidney stone for the time being.