A 55-year-old male was admitted to our hospital complaining of intermittent left-sided abdominal pain for two weeks. Vital signs were within normal and examination was unremarkable except for mild abdominal tenderness in the left upper quadrant. Urine analysis revealed mild hematuria, and abdominal ultrasound was performed which showed two stones in the lower pole of the left kidney measuring about 4 and 12 mm with an absence of hydronephrosis and normal right kidney. As a treatment for his condition, extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) was performed with a total of 3,000 shocks were delivered at 15 kv. The patient tolerated the procedure well, and there were no complications during the procedure.
One day after ESWL, the patient started complaining of mild to moderate epigastric pain radiating to the back, the pain decreased with ibuprofen administration and the patient didn't seek medical advice. About seven weeks after ESWL, the patient presented to the emergency department with severe epigastric pain associated with nausea, vomiting, and early satiety. The patient had free past medical and surgical history and he is off medication and no history of alcohol consumption. On general examination, he was not icteric or feverish and an abdominal exam revealed epigastric fullness with severe tenderness. Laboratory investigations revealed markedly elevated serum amylase (6320 U/L). Complete blood count (CBC), liver enzymes, serum electrolytes, and lipid profile were within normal limits. An abdominal CT scan with contrast showed a giant multiseptated cyst measuring about 10 × 11 cm occupying the body and the tail of the pancreas . Few small stones in the lower calyx of the left kidney also were found. The gallbladder, intrahepatic and extrahepatic biliary systems were completely normal.
Endoscopic ultrasound- (EUS-) guided drainage was performed as a therapeutic procedure for giant symptomatic pseudocyst using a Pentax linear echoendoscope (EG-3870UTK 3.8). On the EUS, there was a huge pancreatic pseudocyst with internal septation ( (a)). The Niti-S SPAXUS stent (from Taewoong Medical) with 16 mm diameter, 20 mm length was placed with excellent drainage of >1500 cc of fluid and debris . The patient tolerated the procedure well, and there were no complications. One day after the procedure, a CT scan showed excellent results with regression of the pseudocyst, and the patient was discharged home on levofloxacin 750 mg for five days.
On 4 weeks of follow-up, the patient reported disappearance of symptoms. Repeated EUS showed resolution of the pseudocyst and SPAXUS stent was removed without complications ( (b)).