A 73-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for macroscopic hematuria. Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a sigmoid colon tumor which protruded into the urinary bladder lumen. Neither nodal metastasis nor distant metastasis was detected. Enhanced abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also revealed a solid tumor in the sigmoid colon and the urinary bladder, both of which were connected to each other by a fistula. Both the CT and the MRI presented a characteristic dumbbell-shaped appearance . Colonoscopy showed a type 1 tumor and multiple diverticula in the sigmoid colon. The pathological diagnosis of the biopsied sigmoid colon tumor was well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Barium enema examination showed a tumor and multiple diverticula in the sigmoid colon, but could not clarify a communication with the urinary bladder lumen . Cystoscopic examination showed a tumor in the urinary bladder lumen. The pathological diagnosis of the biopsied bladder tumor was well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, not transitional cell cancer, deriving from the sigmoid colon cancer. The laboratory data, including inflammatory reaction and tumor markers, were within normal limits. On the other hand, occult hematuria was detected due to the urinary bladder tumor. Thereafter, the diagnosis was established as sigmoid colon cancer with involvement of the urinary bladder (cT4N0M0, cStageIIB according to the UICC TNM classification). The therapeutic strategy was explained to the patient, who decided to undergo a surgical resection. We performed sigmoidectomy and total resection of the urinary bladder with colostomy and urinary tract diversion. The postoperative period was uneventful. Pathological examination of the resected specimen revealed well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma without nodal metastasis of the regional lymph node (pT4N0M0, pStageIIB), confirming the preoperative diagnosis. Macroscopic cross section of the resected specimen exhibited a dumbbell-shaped appearance, just as was shown in the MRI findings . Histopathological findings showed the presence of a colovesical fistula due to extramurally growing colon cancer. However, the intraperitoneal space was not exposed to cancerous tissue because the colovesical fistula was completely covered with a fibrous tissue layer . In addition, around the colon cancer, the normal colon mucosa was depressed sharply with a thin-walled muscular layer, suggesting the presence of a colon diverticulum. The cancerous tissue protruded from the base of the inverted mucosa of the diverticulum to the colovesical fistula. The surrounding muscular layer was not involved in the process of the tumor progression. Thereafter, it was demonstrated that the colon cancer had arisen from the mucosa of the colon diverticulum . The unique radiological findings of the present case were based on the histological findings of the progression via the colovesical fistula derived from a colon diverticulum. No evidence of recurrence was found at 12 months follow-up.