We report the case of a 58-year-old male who presented at the emergency department with an increasing right sided cervical tumour and occipital pain .
The HIV-1-infection was diagnosed in 1999, resulting in an antiretroviral therapy from 1999 to 2005 and resumption of this therapy again from 12/2009 combining Emtricitabin and Dolutegravir. In 2010, an atypical mycobacteria-related infection was diagnosed which presented as ulcerating pangastritis (specific medication was given).
His past medical history includes coronary artery disease, myocardial infarction, and the history of percutaneous coronary intervention.
Further, the patient had undergone multiple procedures for peripheral arterial disease. After repeated percutaneous transluminal angioplasties for the left superficial femoral in 2015 a femoral endarterectomy and femoro-crural bypass was performed. Because of bypass-occlusion in 2019, an interventional revision without success was followed by a redo bypass, which was again occluded in October 2020 without any further options for revascularization. The patient had a history of heavy smoking for decades (30 py).
Before admission the patient had noticed an increasing right sided cervical tumour without any neurological impairment. No specific abnormalities of the cardiovascular system were found with normal cardiac biomarkers. Contrast computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a normal supraaortal vascular anatomy with a large pseudoaneurysm (38 × 31 × 35 mm) originating from the right proximal ICA , distal of the aneurysm the ICA was thrombotic occluded.
On an interdisciplinary vascular board, the decision for surgical reconstruction was made. After exposing the ICA and the carotid bifurcation the pseudoaneurysm was incised, the destructed posterior vessel wall was excluded and a recanalization of the thrombosed ICA was performed via embolectomy. Finally the anterior wall was reconstructed using a bovine pericardial patch .
The postoperative course was uneventful. He was discharged on the 4th postoperative day with a recommendation for warfarin for the next 3 months.
Microbiological examination of the intraoperative specimen was negative, as well as the blood cultures.
A CT-scan 14 days later showed an effective exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm and a partly recanalized ICA with a small indistinguishable carotid siphon (differential diagnosis pseudo-occlusion). Four weeks later, the patient was readmitted with a retrobulbar haemorrhage. After urgent canthotomy an invasive neuroradiology imaging revealed a carotid cavernous fistula (CCF) (right carotid internal artery—cavernous drain per ophthalmic vein). The right distal ICA was re-occluded. Therefore, coil-embolization of the fistula (eight coils) and final occlusion of the distal right ICA with an Amplatzer device (8 mm, Abbott USA) were performed. The next day the patient was discharged without any neurological impairment.
The patient was last seen at HIV outpatient department 22 months after the first operation without any procedure-related neurological abnormalities, but in overall significantly reduced general and nutritional condition.