A 29 years old gentleman was referred from the emergency department with the complaint of sudden painless vision loss of his left eye for the past 1 week. Since onset, he experienced progressive generalized blurring of the central vision. There was neither photopsia nor floaters. Systemic review was not significant. He has no symptoms and signs of systemic vasculitis such as rashes, joint pains or mucosal surface ulcers. He was diagnosed of bipolar mood disorder in 2008, and was treated with oral quetiapine fumarate 100 mg daily. His bipolar mood disorder responded well to quetiapine fumarate without any side effects. Sexual history was not significant and he has no history of substance abuse or smoking. There was no family history of vascular events as well.
He was a medium built individual with a body mass index of 24.83 kg/m2 (height 165.5 cm, body weight 68 kg). His body weight prior to quetiapine treatment was 62 kg. Blood pressure was 122/74 mmHg with a regular pulse rate of 80 beats per minute. The visual acuity of his left eye was 0.33, with near visual acuity of N24 at 33 cm. The right eye had visual acuity of 1.0 and near vision of N6 at 33 cm. Confrontation test revealed a left central scotoma. Relative afferent pupillary defect was absent. Anterior segment examination for both eyes was normal. The intraocular pressure was 16 mmHg bilaterally.
Posterior segment examination of the left eye revealed flame-shaped retinal haemorrhages along an arcuate course, corresponding to the supero-temporal retinal nerve fibre layer. Macular oedema involved the fovea and was associated with partial macular star due to hard exudates deposition. Intraretinal pigmentary spots with adjacent typical red blot hemorrhages believed to be resolving blot hemorrhages were seen. The patient has never had any laser treatment before. The supero-temporal retinal vein was dilated and tortuous along its entire course . The arterio-venous ratio was 2:3 infero-temporally but was 1:3 supero-temporally. There were increased arteriole reflexes with arterovenous nicking which was confined only to the supero-temporal retinal artery of the left eye. The optic disc was pink with well-defined margin and cup-disc ratio of 0.5. There was another area of flame-shaped retinal haemorrhages, two-disc diameter temporal to the fovea. The retinal haemorrhages were oriented along the distal infero-temporal retinal nerve fiber layer but did not begin at the retinal artery-vein intersection. The infero-temporal retinal vein was neither dilated nor tortuous . There were no cotton wool spots, the vitreous was clear, and there was no evidence of retinal periarteritis or periphlebitis. Posterior segment findings of the right eye were not significant .
Optical coherence tomography (Heidelberg Spectralis ® Tracking Laser Tomography) revealed the thickness of the superior half of the fovea was increased, with central serous neurosensory retinal detachment . Full blood count, renal profile, liver function test and thyroid function test were all normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 3 mm/hour, C-reactive protein was 0.05 mg/dl. Connective tissue screening test (antinuclear antibodies, anti double-stranded DNA antibodies, rheumatoid factor), Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for human immunodeficiency virus were all negative. Fasting blood sugar was 4.7 mmol/L. However, annual lipid profile showed progressive derangement. The total cholesterol, triglyceride and LDL-cholesterol levels showed an increasing trend. While the HDL-choleterol levels were progressing in the opposite direction . Chest radiography was normal.
The patient was diagnosed to have left major superior temporal branch retinal vein occlusion complicated by macula oedema. The cause of the RVO was attributed to dyslipidaemia secondary to quetiapine fumarate. The condition was conveyed to his psychiatrist, and he was subsequently referred to the internist for the management of his dyslipidaemia. The patient was treated with oral lovastatin 20 mg daily. His lipid profile normalized after 2 months but the final visual acuity remained 0.33 and near visual acuity N24 at 33 cm due to the presence of hard exudates at the fovea.