A 70-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with sudden diffuse abdominal pain and hematuria of six hours duration. The patient denied any prior history of trauma or intoxication. Her past medical history was significant for type 2 diabetes mellitus from 15 years ago, multiple episodes of urinary tract infections (UTI) in the past five years, and urinary frequency. Her drug history was only metformin, two grams per day from 15 years ago. Upon arrival, vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, heart rate of 100 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute, and body temperature of 38 °C.
On physical examination, generalized rebound tenderness and abdominal guarding were detected. Laboratory results were as follows: leukocytosis of 14 × 109/L with neutrophilia, serum creatinine of 2 μmol/L, urea of 55 mmol/L, the elevated blood sugar of 400 mg/dL, serum potassium of 4 mmol/L, serum sodium of 130 mmol/L. Urinary catheterization drained 150 mL of bloody urine. Microscopic urinalysis revealed many RBCs, WBCs, and bacteria per high power field. Multi-slice abdominal and pelvis CT scans showed free air and fluid in the abdominal cavity and air in the bladder wall . Although, the latter was noticed retrospectively after surgery. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with generalized peritonitis secondary to hollow viscous perforation. After proper resuscitation with 2 l of IV crystalloids, the patient was transferred to the operating room for exploratory laparotomy by a senior general surgeon with about twenty years of experience in an academic center in a general hospital.
Under general anesthesia, the abdominal wall was opened with a midline incision. Over a liter of purulent fluid was found in the peritoneal cavity. Despite a thorough investigation, no gut perforation was found. Two large hemangiomas were found at the right and left liver lobes. A 2 cm full-thickness bladder rupture was noted at the dome of the bladder . The region surrounding the rupture was thin, but the remainder of the bladder was in good condition. A bladder biopsy was collected from the perforation's edge. A two-layer closure with a 2/0 Vicryl suture was performed to repair the bladder wall rupture then a suprapubic catheter was inserted because the main catheter could get blocked due to bleeding and clot formation.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and she was completely cooperative. Based on postoperative re-examination of the CT scan and symptoms, the patient was diagnosed with EC. The patient completed antimicrobial therapy with intravenous ceftriaxone (based on antibiogram results that demonstrated E-coli more than 100,000 CFUs/ml) and was discharged from the hospital one week after surgery in good condition with an indwelling urinary catheter and a suprapubic catheter. Two weeks after discharge, she was returned for a follow-up visit, and the suprapubic catheter was extracted. A follow-up cystoscopy was performed one month later and noted only mild to moderate trabeculation, and there was a scar at the site of perforation. Pathology came back as transmural infiltration of mixed inflammatory cells with surface ulceration . During the last follow-up (two months after surgery), she was in good condition without any abdominal and urinary signs and symptoms.