A 48-year-old Sindhi woman, from a middle class household of Karachi, Pakistan, presented to our clinic with sudden onset of loss of consciousness followed by severe headache and nausea. There was no history of trauma, fever, fits or blurring of vision. Her past medical history did not reveal any comorbid medical conditions and she had not had any similar episodes in the past.
On examination she was drowsy. She had a pulse of 90 beats per minute, her blood pressure was 165/90 mmHg and her temperature was 37.5°C. Her Glasgow Coma Scale was 14 out of 15. Both her pupils were equal and reactive to light. A fundoscopic examination was within normal limits. She had mild neck rigidity but no other signs of meningeal irritation. There were no other neurological deficits. She was clinically diagnosed with a subarachnoid hemorrhage with Hunt and Hess grade 2.
Her baseline hematological work-up was normal except for a raised total leukocyte count of 16,000 cells/microliter. A computerized tomography scan showed diffuse hemorrhage in her subarachnoid spaces with a small area of focal hyperdensity in the prepontine area, raising suspicion of an aneurysm of the basilar artery .
Digital subtraction angiography showed a normal origin of the common carotid and vertebral arteries; however, both ICAs were hypoplastic from 1 cm to 2 cm above the carotid bifurcation. The vessels ended in her cranial cavity after feeding her ophthalmic arteries. Her anterior and middle cerebral arteries could not be visualized on the angiograms ; however, her external carotid arteries and their branches were normal. A selective angiogram of her vertebral arteries showed collaterals to her anterior and middle cerebral arteries on both sides through enlarged posterior communicating arteries. A fusiform aneurysm of the right posterior communicating artery was also noted at its basilar end .
Subsequent management via microsurgical techniques was proposed to our patient. However, considering the absence of major symptoms and the increased risk of surgery, she refused any therapeutic procedure. Unfortunately, our patient died of a rebleed six weeks after her initial presentation.