A 43-year-old man sustained an injury to his left foot in a road side accident. He sustained this injury following his left foot entrapped in a deep pit followed by sudden twisting strain due to sudden inversion and plantar flexion. The patient presented with severe pain in left foot and was unable to bear weight in his foot. The initial clinical examination of his foot revealed swelling and tenderness on dorsomedial aspect of the right foot. There was no open injury on foot. There was no other associated injury aspect of the dorsum of foot. Plain radiographs including anteroposterior, oblique, and lateral were obtained with showed dorsal dislocation of the intermediate cuneiform bone and a displaced fracture at the medial cuneiform . The patient was discussed regarding his injury and decision was made for surgical fixation.
The patient was operated within 6 h of injury. An attempt of closed reduction was attempted after putting patient under general anesthesia but it was not possible to maintain appropriate reduction. Hence, decision was made to put a JESS distractor, to create space between base of metatarsal and navicular with two proximal pins in talus and two dorsal pins in metatarsal head. On applying distraction with JESS assembly fracture of medial cuneiform fell back in place. Further on downward pressure reduction of intermediate cuneiform was achieved but it was very unstable as it came out on slight plantar stress. Therefore, it is further secured provisionally with 2.7 mm K-wire. Single 3.5 mm cortical lag screws were used for intermediate cuneiform with purchase of distal threads in medial cuneiform which was already being stabilized with K-wire. An additional intercuneiform K-wire was also applied ( and ).
Post-operative radiographs showed good alignment with no distraction of fracture fragment of medial cuneiform with well aligned 2nd medial and middle column of midfoot. A below knee removable splint was given for 3 weeks. The patient was allowed non-weight bearing mobilization from 2nd post-operative day. K-wire and removable splint were taken out at 3rd week. Distractor and K-wire were removed after 6 weeks. The active range of ankle motion started at the same time. The patient was mobilized with weight bearing as tolerated and he started full weight bearing at 8 weeks following surgery. At 3 months of follow-up, plain radiographs revealed fusion of the medial cuneiform and no recurrence of the intermediate cuneiform dislocation. At the final follow-up 18 months after injury, the patient had painless foot with normal range of motion .