A 66-year-old woman presented with a history of sudden onset of excruciating pain in her right eye. She had undergone phacoemulsification and posterior chamber intraocular lens (PCIOL) implantation in the right eye a week before. Her systemic history was otherwise normal except for osteoarthritis for which she occasionally used analgesics. On examination, her visual acuity was 20/160 and 20/60 in right and left eyes, respectively. Slit lamp examination showed few Descemet's folds and PCIOL in the right eye and cataract in the left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 14 and 16 mm Hg by applanation tonometry. Fundus showed a localized dome-shaped elevated choroidal mass temporal to the fovea with no orange pigment changes or subretinal fluid, with a diameter of about 5–6 disc diameters (DD), with overlying choroidal folds, and the presence of a few retinal hemorrhages in the temporal periphery in the right eye [Figure 1 (A)]. The retina of the left eye was normal. The patient was treated with topical steroids (prednisolone acetate eye drops 1% six times a day) and oral paracetamol 650 mg thrice a day. Keeping a differential diagnosis of melanoma, choroidal granuloma, choroidal hemangioma and posterior scleritis in mind, the patient was referred to the oncology clinic. The patient underwent multimodal imaging and systemic workup. FA showed normal fluorescence pattern, except for minimal disc leakage and overlying choroidal folds in the right eye [Figures 2 (A–C)]. ICG showed normal fluorescence pattern [Figures 2 (D–E)]. The fundus autofluorescence was normal in both eyes. Ultrasound B scan showed a well-defined mass with high surface reflectivity and low to medium internal reflectivity without sub-Tenon's fluid [Figure 1 (B)]. OCT showed an elevation of retinochoroidal complex over a hyporeflective space in the outer choroid with a smooth anterior surface, pushing the inner choroid, along with minimal subretinal fluid [Figures 1 (C, D)]. The absence of intrinsic circulation and a normal FA and ICG ruled out choroidal melanoma and hemangioma. Systemic workup showed a positive Mantoux test (24 mm), and the chest X-ray showed lung consolidation in the upper lobe. The differential diagnoses considered were of either SCH or choroidal granuloma. She was referred to an internist to start antitubercular therapy (ATT). The patient came for a review at one month and had not taken any treatment for her eye other than topical steroids and paracetamol tablet. The lesion had spontaneously regressed and visual acuity had improved to 20/30 with a normal OCT [Figure 2].
In retrospect, a choroidal mass with no changes on FA or ICG, which was dome shaped, optically lucent in OCT and B scan, showing high surface reflectivity with low internal reflectivity and a spontaneous resolution were suggestive of a localized SCH. The typical FA and ICG features of choroidal granuloma[ (early hypo and late hyper-fluorescence in FA and persistent hypo-fluorescence in ICG) were not seen in this patient, but the disc showed minimal leakage in the late phase.