A 27-year-old Gravid5Para4 pregnant woman presented at the emergency department of our university hospital with spontaneous onset of labour. The patient was at the 33rd week of gestation estimated on the basis of the last menstrual cycle date. Upon presentation, she had regular uterine contractions that occurred every 3–4 minutes. Ultrasound examination did not identify any abnormal findings such as oligohydramnias or fetus growth restriction. The patient did not experience neither abdominal trauma nor preeclampsia. She had earlier experienced a light, intermittent vaginal bleeding at the second trimester that was managed expectantly. The patient was not on regular visits during pregnancy, so her antenatal care was poor. Otherwise, the patient was healthy and had an unremarkable medical, drug, and family history.
Vaginal examination revealed intact membranes, 3.5 cm cervical dilation, and 65% effacement of the cervix. Transabdominal ultrasonography demonstrated a normal fetal heart rate.
We decided to administer calcium channel blockers to stop her active labour while monitoring fetal heart rate on cardiotocography. The patient did not respond to the treatment and the preterm labour progressed with a spontaneous rupture of membranes. The amniotic fluid was bloody and contained medium-sized blood clots. Although the patient and the fetus status were reassuring, we decided to stop the administration of tocolytics and allow normal delivery to occur. However, the fetal heart rate decelerated suddenly to 40 beats per minute. Therefore, an emergency lower transverse caesarean section was performed, and a healthy baby boy was delivered successfully. The placenta was extracted and retromembranous old looking blood clots were found . These findings in addition to the history of intermitted vaginal bleeding during pregnancy indicate chronic placental abruption. The uterus was closed in one layer.
The patient complained of sudden abdominal pain prior the caesarean, which was different in character from labour's pain. During the operation and upon the examination of the pouch of Douglas, a transverse 6 cm tear in the posterior vaginal wall was found. The rupture did not extend into near organs or vessels. The uterine cervix protruded through the tear toward the pouch of Douglas. We repaired the ruptured vagina with continuous Vicryl sutures in two layers, with caution to repose the cervix in its normal position . A drain was left in the pouch of Douglas, and the abdomen was closed after ensuring haemostasis. She received two blood units intraoperatively. In general, the intervention was tolerable by the patient.
Postoperative intravenous antibiotics were given for 48 hours and continued orally for 2 weeks. The patient was hospitalized for two days and followed up for six weeks. Her recovery period was uneventful. Repeated vaginal and ultrasound examination revealed anteverted uterus and normal anatomy of the cervix and vagina . Eventually, the patient was happy with the results.