A 6-month-old Asian Bangladeshi girl was brought to our hospital in 2012. She was the third-born child of her non-consanguineous parents and had been delivered normally at home. She was exclusively breast-fed from birth to 2 months of age and then received diluted formula with breast milk. She had received immunizations as per the national Expanded Program on Immunization schedule and did not have any unusual previous illnesses. Her developmental milestones were age-appropriate. Her father was a petty businessman, and her mother was a housewife. The family’s household monthly income was $150 to $200, which is considered middle-class in Bangladesh.
At triage, the initial reported symptoms were acute watery diarrhea with no sign of dehydration; however, as the baby appeared abnormally ill to the attending nurse, she was transferred to the longer-stay ward (LSW). Shortly thereafter (within 2.5 hours), she was relocated to the ICU by the attending physician in the LSW for management of extreme lethargy. In the ICU, her mother reported her child had experienced passage of moderate volumes of watery stool for the previous 2 days, fever for the same duration and lethargy for the past 12 hours. Her bowel movement frequency was 12 to 15 times per day. The stools did not contain visible blood or mucus. Her axillary temperature was 39.4°C. No vomiting, rash or convulsions were observed. For the child’s issues, the mother initially consulted a physician at a nearby community clinic and was advised to provide ORS solution and paracetamol. The parents did not receive any demonstration of appropriate ORS preparation. As the child had received inappropriate treatment, she became restless, extremely thirsty and lethargic, which prompted the mother to bring her child to the Dhaka Hospital of the International Center for Diarrheal Disease Research. Further inquiry of the mother in the ICU revealed that her baby had received excess amount of ORS instead of her routine diet, as the child had excessive thirst. The child received less than one-half of her normal diet, 5 packets of rice-based ORS inappropriately prepared (1 packet of rice powder dissolved and boiled in 500ml of water, instead of 1100ml of water) and 5 packets of properly diluted, glucose-based ORS prior to admission. The child passed urine a few hours prior to admission.
The patient’s physical examination revealed that she was lethargic and irritable upon touch. Her axillary temperature was 39.4°C, her pulse rate was 134 per minute with normal volume, her blood pressure was 100/50mmHg, her capillary refilling time was 3 seconds and her respiratory rate was 54 breaths per minute. She weighed 5.9kg and had a recumbent length of 63cm. According to her anthropometrics, her Z-scores for weight for age, weight for length and length for age were −1.29, −0.40 and −1.21, respectively. She did not present with any pallor or signs of dehydration, edema or cyanosis. Although she was mildly tachypneic, other related clinical signs were normal (breathing, heart sounds), and there was no observable lower chest wall indrawing or adventitious sounds in lungs. Her abdomen was soft, not distended and not tender, and her bowel sounds were active. Her blood glucose was 11.9mmol/L (measured at bedside), and her arterial oxygen saturation was 99% in room air.
On the basis of our patient’s history and physical examination, we determined that her initial problems were acute watery diarrhea, lethargy with excessive thirst and sepsis. On the basis of her lethargy and excessive thirst, our differential diagnoses were hypernatremia and encephalopathy.
The results of our initial investigations are given in Table . The chest X-ray, stool routine microscopic examination (RME) and urine RME revealed normal findings. Her blood culture showed growth of Enterobacter spp, but a rectal swab culture showed no growth of any organism.
Initially, the child was treated with intravenous (IV) ampicillin and gentamicin for probable sepsis. Within a few hours of admission, her serum electrolyte report became available, which revealed extreme hypernatremia (208mmol/L) and hypocalcemia (1.86mmol/L). Correction of hypernatremic dehydration was achieved by administering ORS via a nasogastric tube, owing to lack of an absolute indication for IV fluid for this child. The required volume was calculated by using the formula [10 ÷ (molecular concentration of sodium in a given solution − measured serum sodium)/(0.6 × weight in kilograms + 1) = liters/24 hours], with the goal of not reducing serum sodium by >10mmol/L over the course of 24 hours . Her ongoing serum sodium loss with each purging was also adjusted by ORS administration as required. Her hypocalcemia was corrected by administering a single bolus of IV calcium gluconate (0.5ml/kg after dissolving with the same volume of normal saline) over 10 minutes, followed by oral calcium supplementation. However, her fever remained unresponsive. Her blood culture (sampled on day 1 of admission and confirmed by report on day 3) showed growth of Enterobacter spp that were resistant to some antibiotics but sensitive to co-trimoxazole, ciprofloxacin, imipenem and meropenem. Thus, at approximately 96 hours of our patient’s admission, her antimicrobial therapy was changed to IV ciprofloxacin on the basis of clinical unresponsiveness and an antibiogram.
After approximately 24 hours of hospitalization, our patient’s serum sodium level was 174mmol/L and decreasing at a rate of >0.5mmol/L/hr. The correction was readjusted after we recalculated the volume of ORS. The ORS regimen and subsequent serum sodium levels are presented in Table . To prevent further decline of her serum sodium level, we added salt to her diet (1g/L). On day 3 (approximately 63 hours after admission), she experienced a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. The seizure was difficult to control and required two doses of IV lorazepam (0.1mg/kg/dose, 10 minutes apart), followed by a loading dose of IV phenobarbitone (20mg/kg) and IV phenytoin (20mg/kg). Simultaneously, maintenance doses of phenobarbitone and phenytoin were administered to prevent further attacks of convulsion. After cessation of convulsion, we reevaluated the patient and found no signs of meningisms. Her fundoscopic examination revealed no signs of cerebral hemorrhage or edema. Around 72 hours after her hospital admission, her serum sodium concentration had returned to a normal level (145.8mmol/L). As she experienced no further convulsions, anticonvulsants were gradually tapered over a period of 7 days, following a seizure-free period of nearly 48 hours, with phenytoin followed by phenobarbitone. Simultaneously, her general condition gradually improved, and her diarrhea resolved by day 6. She became alert and responsive with no apparent neurological deficits, and she was discharged to home on day 12.
To look for any neurological complications associated with hypernatremia, electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed before discharge. The EEG findings revealed a focal slowing that was restricted to the left posterior temporal and occipital regions. MRI showed edema in the internal capsule, thalamus and parieto-occipital cortex of both cerebral hemispheres . Follow-up EEG and MRI performed 3 months after discharge appeared normal, with complete resolution of edema.