A 41-year-old man, a native of Cangnan County in the Zhejiang province of southeast China, was admitted to our hospital because of a 3-week history of daily hyperpyrexia and sputum-coughing in April 2017. The first time that multiple pulmonary nodules and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy were found in chest CT was 7 years ago. The patient was diagnosed with pulmonary sarcoidosis according to the results of a transbronchial needle aspiration (TBNA) and transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB), which revealed lymphocytes, columnar epithelial cells and a cloud of epithelial-like cells. In the following years, he received follow-up chest CT examination and corticosteroid treatment irregularly. The patient met the ATS/WASOG diagnostic criteria for sarcoidosis because there was no progression of the lesions in recent years. With the pre-existing pulmonary sarcoidosis, he had been diagnosed with the progression of pulmonary sarcoidosis in a certain hospital in Shanghai 12 days prior. At that time, he was examined with chest CT and central ultrasound bronchoscopy. The chest CT showed space-occupying lesions of the right superior lobe, probably a malignant tumour, mediastinal and right hilum lymphadenopathy, and plaques and nodules disseminated throughout the bilateral lung, probably pneumoconiosis and metastasis (MT) . Compared to the initial chest CT performed in 2015 , Fig. shows increased miliary pulmonary nodules and a new pulmonary consolidation. Central ultrasound bronchoscopy revealed that a nodular projection was on the surface of both superior lobar bronchus and that stenosis appeared in the right superior lobar bronchus, especially the right apical segment . The patient received transbronchial needle aspiration (TBNA) 6 times when the ultrasound probed a tumour outside of the right primary bronchus and lymphadenectasis in 11R and 10 L. The pathology exam found fibrous tissue hyperplasia accompanied by apparent infiltration of monocytes and lymphocytes. There was no evidence of non-caseating epithelioid granuloma. Moreover, eosinophils were infiltrated in some areas. After 3 days of prednisone and levofloxacin, the fever and cough persisted, and there was no clinical improvement; even worse, skin lesions erupted on his back.
The patient was pale and had intermittent high fever on the day of admission to our hospital. Born and raised in Cangnan, he denied a residential history in any epidemic regions. After his admission, imipenem cilastatin was promptly used against the infection. Immediate HRCT revealed bilateral lung diffuse miliary nodules, multiple patchy exudative shadows in the bilateral superior lobes and right inferior lobes, air bronchogram in the consolidation of the right superior lobe, multiple hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathies and local pleural thickening . The image did not change much compared to the previous one. The results of the following laboratory routine examinations are shown in Table . Microbiology analysis showed that repeated sputum smears, sputum culture, and blood cultures were negative. Combining these clinical manifestations and biochemical analyses, the chance of tuberculosis diagnosis could not be excluded. However, the T-spot was negative, and acid-fast bacilli were not present. It was difficult to explain the extremely elevated IgE and eosinophils in the blood as well as the eosinophil infiltration in the bronchus on the monism of tuberculosis. After providing informed consent, the patient underwent bronchoscopy again, which revealed an unevenness of the trachea in the subglottic region as well as protrusions on the tracheal wall, especially in the right superior lobar bronchus . A subsequent (1/3) -b-D-glucan (G) assay was positive, and a smear was positive for fungus in the BAL. All the evidence above was associated with a higher likelihood of fungal infection. Along with the evidence that there was no clinical improvement after 4 days of antibacterial therapy, the patient was suspected of pulmonary aspergillosis because it was endemic in the region of Cangnan. He was immediately treated with voriconazole at a dosage of 200 mg/dL every 12 h via intravenous administration starting on April 14, 2017. Ultimately, the fungal culture of bronchoalveolar confirmed the diagnosis of T. marneffei infection on April 20 . His fever returned to normal, and his respiratory signs disappeared gradually after an 8-day treatment, as well as his skin lesions. The results of the chest CT re-examination showed that the lung lesions were markedly absorbed after 3 months . He continued to receive follow-up antifungal treatment.