A fit and healthy 12-year-old white boy (height 150cm, weight 40kg) underwent elective removal of a 2×2cm benign skin lesion from his anterior abdominal wall. He had no past medical history and was not on any medications. His physical examination preoperatively was normal. Surgery was scheduled for the late afternoon. He was fasted for 6h for solids and 2h for clear fluids. The World Health Organization surgical checklist for safety in the operating room was complied with intraoperatively, which included the prohibition of jewellery and other constrictive clothing items worn during surgery. After establishing intravenous access with a 22-guage cannula in a vein in the cubital fossa of his left arm, anaesthesia was induced with propofol (140mg) and fentanyl (50ug). A size 3 classic laryngeal mask was inserted for airway management, and spontaneous ventilation was maintained with 1 minimum alveolar concentration sevoflurane in a 50% oxygen to air mixture. Five millilitres of a local anaesthesia solution (lignocaine 2% with 1:200,000 adrenalin) was injected into the surgical area for local anaesthesia and postoperative analgesia. During surgery both of his arms were positioned by his side in a neutral position, supported by foam padding on the operating table to minimise pressure. The abdominal lesion was removed uneventfully and the procedure took 22min. Continuous electrocardiography, pulse saturation monitoring, and intermittent blood pressure measurements every 3min were normal. After uneventful emergence from anaesthesia, the laryngeal mask was removed, and he was transferred to the postoperative recovery unit for a 30-min observation period. He was haemodynamically stable, with normal arousal to voice and command. He required no further analgesia and was transferred to the ward at 1830 hours. On the ward his observations remained stable. After a light meal and when completely conversant and cooperative, he was discharged home under parental supervision.
He presented with his parents to the emergency department the following morning complaining of severe pain, paraesthesia and weakness of the right hand. A clinical examination revealed a circumferential wristwatch pressure imprint over his anterior and posterior distal right forearm , as a result of sleeping with his wristwatch on. His hand was erythematous, swollen and painful to touch. There were complete sensory and motor deficits involving his right hand in a glove and stocking distribution from the wristwatch pressure imprint distally, including involvement of all five digits. A neurological examination showed inability to differentiate cooling and heat, sharp and dull, and there was a deficit in 2-point discrimination in the radial, median and ulnar nerve root distributions, most severe in the territory of the superficial cutaneous branch of the radial nerve. In addition there was complete motor deficit in the median, radial and ulnar nerve distributions.
He was admitted to the overnight short stay unit where his hand was elevated. A non-steroidal anti-inflammatory analgesic (ibuprofen 400mg) was prescribed 8 hourly for analgesia. Movement of his left hand was encouraged, and over the following 12h the oedema and erythema resolved completely, with complete return of motor function. After 18h, the sensory deficit had also completely recovered. In view of the rapid neurological recovery, quantitative nerve function assessments, for example nerve conduction studies, were not performed. He was discharged home and reviewed 24h later at the surgical out-patients clinic where his hand function examination remained normal.