A 76-year-old man complained of coldness, numbness and purple color change in his left foot for 7 d. He had a feeling of fatigue, constipation, foamy urine, poor appetite and sleep, but no fever, headache or abdominal pain. His urine output was normal.
A 76-year-old man complained of coldness, numbness and purple color change in his left foot for 7 d. And he came to our hospital for treatments.
The patient had a lacunar infarction for five years and took three Fufang Xueshuantong capsules three times daily. He also had hypertension (maximum blood pressure: 189/102 mmHg) for 9 mo and took one tablet of amlodipine, atorvastatin calcium and fosinopril sodium tablets 10 mg once daily. There was no history of surgery.
Physical examination upon admission showed no abnormalities.
Laboratory findings showed elevated eosinophils, triglycerides, serum creatinine and urea. The 24 h urine analysis showed increased proteinuria.
Doppler ultrasonography showed carotid atherosclerosis with carotid plaque formation and both kidneys were of normal size; however, kidney parenchymal thickness (approximately 13 mm) was slightly thinner . Liver, spleen and pancreas were normal. A renal biopsy showed glomerulus ischemic globular sclerosis in all 41 glomerulus; and mesangial cells and stroma showed slight hyperplasia in the rest of the glomerulus, one small cell fibrous crescent, and some of the glomerular capillaries were ischemic and wrinkled. With regard to the renal tubules, epithelial cells showed cavitation and granular degeneration, crystal nucleation within some renal tubules, a few renal tubules demonstrated cavity expansion, disappearance of brush border, multifocal and atrophy (shrinkage area of approximately 60%); diffuse and patchy infiltration of the kidney interstitium by lymphocytes, plasma cells and a few eosinophils; small artery wall thickening with a narrow lumen, endometrial hyperplasia, and cholesterol embolism filling several small arteries. Congo and oxidized Congo red were negative. Immunofluorescence showed no deposition of immune complexes.