A 23-year-old Asian man was referred to the ER of Xiamen Chang Gung Memorial Hospital with a 1-day history of right-sided chest pain that had been aggravated for 1 hour. He had no known medical illnesses and was well until the evening prior to presentation, at which time he developed obvious right-sided chest pain radiating to his ipsilateral shoulder with persistent chest tightness. This tightness was described as sticking in nature, significantly worse on deep inspiration and with movement, and relieved by leaning forward or lying down. There was an associated dry cough but no hemoptysis. There was no history of trauma, injury, difficulty in breathing, or palpitations. He was tall and thin and described himself as otherwise quite healthy. He had never previously been admitted to a hospital. He reported no significant chronic medical history, such as primary hypertension, any type of heart disease, disturbed microcirculation, peripheral neuropathy, diabetes mellitus, an impaired immune system, malignancies, leukemia, the long-term administration of corticosteroids, liver cirrhosis, renal failure, urinary tract infection, or hemodialysis. He also reported no history of infection, such as tuberculosis, any type of hepatitis, or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). There was no prior history of traumas, blood transfusions, surgical procedures, or other serious events in his medical history. He had not lived in an epidemic area and had no history of toxin or radioactive exposure. He denied a personal or family history of bleeding diathesis but reported a 10-year history of smoking 8–10 cigarettes per day. He was an office worker by occupation. He had experienced similar symptoms on one occasion 4 years previously. No abnormalities were detected at that time, and his symptoms resolved.
A physical examination (PE) revealed a young man who was awake and alert but in mild to moderate painful distress. His respiratory rate was 22–26 breaths/minute with an oxygen saturation of 97%. His pulse was 96 beats/minute, his blood pressure was 115/74 mmHg, and his temperature was 36.7 °C. The examining physician noted slight tenderness along the right posterolateral chest wall along the eighth and tenth ribs. Breath sounds and percussion were documented as normal. An electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm with a normal axis. PSP was considered, and a standing chest X-ray (CXR) was requested. The radiographic findings revealed a right-sided PSP (approximately 30%) with a small amount of pleural effusion . A right thoracostomy tube (28-F, straight) was immediately placed under sterile conditions; approximately 50 mL of light red pleural effusion flowed out from the chest tube after placement, and good fluctuation of the water column in the drainage reservoir was observed. Another CXR was performed to evaluate the position of the thoracostomy tube and re-expansion of his right lung . Our patient’s vital signs stabilized, and his right-sided chest pain was apparently alleviated after chest tube placement; therefore, he was referred to the respiratory service with parenteral analgesia.
While in the respiratory department, approximately 420 mL of blood was drained from the thoracostomy tube over 15 minutes. He developed obvious hemodynamic instability with hypovolemic shock (his blood pressure dropped from 110/70 to 75/50 mmHg), and he was subsequently admitted to the cardiothoracic surgical ward after fluid resuscitation. During the 4 hours after admission, 750 mL of blood was drained through the thoracostomy tube. His hemoglobin level dropped from 12.6 g/dL to 9.2 g/dL. A prolonged prothrombin time (PT) of 19 seconds was noted (normal reference of 14 seconds). Packed red cells and fresh frozen plasma were administered to our patient. Vitamin K (10 mg) and tranexamic acid (1 g) were also administered parenterally. He was unable to undergo an emergency chest computed tomography scan as his vital signs remained unstable after fluid resuscitation. Alternatively, a bedside supine CXR was performed when he was temporarily hemodynamic stable . A primary SHP associated with right TP was considered based on the radiographic findings. A re-examination of his chest revealed markedly decreased air entry on the right side with mild tracheal deviation.
An emergency limited posterolateral thoracotomy was performed for resection of the bullae, ligation of the bleeding adhesion, and irrigation of the pleural cavity, and mechanical pleurodesis was implemented. Approximately 800 mL of blood and clots and a collapsed right lung with several apical bullae were observed. There was a small (less than 1.0 cm) tan lesion noted on the dome of the right side of his chest. Bullous apical tissues of the right lung adhering to the thoracic wall and adhesions at the region of the subclavian artery were identified as the source of bleeding. Aberrant blood vessels growing from the chest wall through the adhesion bands into the pleural lesion were thought to be torn once the lung collapsed. These bleeding blood vessels may also have arisen from the surface of ruptured bullae. Histopathology revealed that the bullous and string-like tissues were rich in blood vessels and were granulomatous.
Subsequently, the drainage from his chest tube became minimal. A standing CXR performed on day 6 of admission after removal of the thoracostomy tube showed complete re-expansion of his right lung. His hemoglobin level rose to 10.1 g/dL after a transfusion of two units of packed red blood cells, and his PT normalized. He remained stable and was discharged within 1 week (6 days postoperatively). He returned to an out-patient department for follow-up two times. The right-sided posterolateral surgical incision had healed on the 14th postoperative day. Full expansion of lungs was confirmed using a standing CXR on the 14th postoperative day and at 3 months after discharge. He was healthy as usual with no complaints or illness.