Case: A 15-year-old boy.
Medical and family history: Nothing particular to note.
History of present illness: Pain in the right hip and right Perthes disease was detected at 10 years of age (classified as lateral pillar classification group B, Catterall group 3). Varus femoral osteotomy was performed on the right side.
Left hip pain and left Perthes disease was detected at 12 years of age (classified as lateral pillar classification group B, Catterall group 2, Initial stage) . Varus femoral osteotomy was also performed on the left side .
The patient walked on crutches postoperatively to relieve load on the left leg. Limited ROM of the left hip was evident at 15 years of age. He limped and had difficulty sitting but did not have pain when he was referred to our department.
Physical findings: The patient's height was 165 cm, weight 75 kg, and body mass index 27.5. Limited ROM of the left hip: His ROM in the left hip was 30° flexion, 10° abduction, 70° external rotation, −20° internal rotation, and Drehmann sign-positive . His hip score on The Japanese Orthopaedic Association (JOA) was 18 out of 100 points.
Imaging findings: Stulberg group V was noted on plain radiography . Poor congruency of the joint surfaces at maximum abduction and adduction was also detected on functional image of plain radiography. Computed tomography (CT) showed collapse of the load-bearing part of the femoral head on the coronal plane ( a), but the ball-shape was maintained in the posterior femoral head on sagittal and transverse sections (b and c).
Preoperative plan: Salvage operation was planned to improve ROM. 30° flexion osteotomy for the restricted flexion ( a), 30° internal rotation osteotomy for restricted internal rotation, and 20° valgus osteotomy ( b) for restricted abduction were planned. Anterior displacement of the collapsed part of the femoral head and displacement on the load-bearing surface of the posterior part with retained ball shape was identified on three-dimensional CT (3DCT) simulation ( c).
Operative findings: The adductor longus and gracilis muscles were completely cut through a medial approach in the lateral decubitus position. Next, 10 × 10-cm resection of the fascia lata was performed through a lateral approach. Twenty degrees valgus, 30° flexion and 30° internal rotation osteotomy and distal advancement of the greater trochanter were performed according to the preoperative plan . The operation time was 4 hours and the bleeding volume was 126ml. The senior author (S.M), who had more than 20 years of experience, performed the operatiom.
Postoperative course: ROM improved from flexion 30°to90°, abduction 10°to20°, external rotaion 70° to 50°and internal rotation −20° to 40° immediately after the surgery. The limp persisted, but walking was possible at 10 months postoperatively. Plain radiography showed that collapse of the femoral head's load-bearing surface was not progressing. However, the limited ROM of the left hip remained at 60° flexion.
Chondroplasty was performed during plate removal surgery at 10 months postoperatively. Hip flexion improved to 100° immediately after the surgery, but a limited hip ROM of 60° flexion, 20° abduction, 60° external rotation and 15° internal rotation remained at the final observation. However, the JOA hip score improved to 64 out of 100 points. Plain radiography showed gradual remodelling of the femoral head's load-bearing surface . In addition, CT showed gradual remodelling of the femoral head's load-bearing surgace (a and b).