In January 2007, we admitted a 64-year-old woman with acute abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting in Ghaem Hospital, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Iran. She had low appetite and inability in passing stool and gas in the recent week. On physical examination, she had a distended abdomen and on abdominal radiography, there were multiple air-fluid levels, suspected of bowel obstruction. At laparotomy with a large midline incision, there was adhesion of omentum and bowels on a large heterogeneous pelvic mass. After releasing the adhesions, right ovarian tumor was revealed. Cytoreductive surgery by transabdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingoopherectomy (TAH + BSO) and complete surgical staging was done. Histopathologic examination of Hematoxylin-eosin stained tissue samples revealed MMMT in right ovary ( and ) with metastasis to the left adnexa and omentum.
According to the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging system , the patient was in stage IIIA. The serum CA-125 was elevated (386 IU/mL) but the level of CEA and CA19-9 were within normal limits (3.5 IU/mL and 9 IU/mL, respectively).
The patient received six courses of chemotherapy consisting of carboplatin 6AUC and paclitaxel (270 mg/m2) regimen every three weeks. After six courses of chemotherapy, abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) findings were normal and there was no evidence of residual tumor in the pelvic cavity. CA-125 reverted to normal levels after surgery and six courses of chemotherapy. The patient was followed up every three months by pelvic examination, abdominal and pelvic sonography, and CA-125 tumor marker. After 31-month disease-free survival, a nodule of about 1.5-cm diameter was palpated in presacral region on rectal and vaginal examination. In July 2010, a round, hypoechoic solid mass of 16 × 18 mm at the posterior right part of the rectum was found in transvaginal ultrasonography. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the existence of a mass of 17-mm diameter, compatible with a lymph node. CA125 level was increased (65 IU/mL). We recommended transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy but the patient did not accept. In May 2011, a CT scan showed persist lymphadenopathy of 21 × 11 mm in the presacral region. In June 2011 and after 42 months from the primary surgery, a CT-guided biopsy of the presacral mass was performed and histopathologic examination revealed a metastatic carcinoma. The patient underwent chemotherapy with primary regimen again (carboplatin 6 AUC and 270-mg/m2 paclitaxel) every three weeks and 50.4 Gy radiotherapy in 28 fractions to a standard pelvic box field with photon of 15 mV. After 26 months follow-up, she became progression free with normal abdominopelvic CT findings and normal levels of tumor marker (CA-125) .