A 43-year old man was referred to our cancer center in October, 2001 with stage IIb undifferentiated nasopharyngeal carcinoma (T2N1M0). He completed radical radiotherapy in December, 2001, and achieved complete remission afterwards. Although baseline plasma EBV DNA was not available, patient had undetectable plasma EBV DNA which was measured within one week after radiotherapy.
Upon a routine follow-up in August, 2002, the patient developed with an asymptomatic rise in the plasma EBV DNA level at 129,437 copies/ml. A subsequent FDG-positron emission and computered tomography fusion scan (FDG-PET-CT) showed a 4 cm hypermetabolic solitary metastasis in the right lobe of liver with a FDG standard uptake value (SUV) of 7.6 . Following treatment with six courses of paclitaxel and carboplatin chemotherapy, his plasma EBV DNA level fell to undetectable level, and a subsequent PET-CT performed immediately after completion of chemotherapy confirmed a reduction in the size and SUV of the liver metastasis . A right hepatectomy was performed at two weeks after the end of chemotherapy, and pathological examination of the resected specimen showed necrotic tissues without any evidence of viable malignant cells.
The patient enjoyed a disease-free period of about nine months until a second disease relapse in September, 2003, when he was found to have asymptomatic rise in plasma EBV-DNA level to 678 copies/ml. A subsequent PET-CT confirmed multiple hyper-metabolic recurrences in the liver, lung and pancreatic head . After 2 courses of second-line chemotherapy with gemcitabine and carboplatin, his plasma EBV DNA level fell to undetectable level which coincided with complete disappearance of metastatic lesions (i.e. complete remission) on PET-CT in October, 03 . He completed a total of 4 cycles of gemcitabine and carboplatin and remained disease-free until 4 months later in February 2004, when he developed a third relapse which was heralded by an asymptomatic and progressive rise in plasma EBV-DNA levels from 56 to 329 copies/ml over a 2 month period. A PET-CT performed in April 2004 confirmed recurrence in the liver and pancreatic head. He was re-treated with 6 cycles of gemcitabine and carboplatin chemotherapy, and again, his plasma EBV-DNA level became undetectable and PET/CT showed complete remission. Upon his last follow-up in November 2004, he remained disease-free for 7 months following the last chemotherapy treatment in 2004.