A 78-year-old man was referred for painless visual acuity decrease in the right eye. The patient had a long-follow-up for RP. Best-corrected visual acuity was 20/125 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable except for a mild cataract. Fundus photography and fundus autofluorescence were performed with a Topcon 50-TRX fundus camera (Topcon, Tokyo, Japan) using Spaide filters for autofluorescence. Fundus examination of both eyes revealed optic disc pallor, peripapillary atrophy, arteriolar attenuation, and typical bone spicules involving the mid-peripheral retina. In addition, a macular edema was present in both eyes, more prominent in the right eye. There was no hemorrhage and no sign of CNV.
Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (CIRRUS; Zeiss, Jena, Germany) revealed cystoid macular edema and epiretinal membrane in both eyes. However, in the nasal part of the fovea of the right eye, a disruption of the Bruch membrane/retinal pigment epithelium complex overlying a retinal pigment epithelium detachment was observed. It was associated with a vascular structure which appeared to originate from the deep capillary plexus and to be connected with the subretinal pigment epithelium space.
These findings supported a type 3 neovascularization in the right eye. Nevertheless, given the unusual clinical picture, we decided to perform OCTA (Optovue, Inc., Freemont, CA, USA). Fluorescein angiography was not performed in order to avoid exposure to strong light flash. OCTA showed a high-flow vessel infiltrating the outer retinal layers in the deep capillary plexus segmentation and a tuft-shaped, bright, high-flow network characterized by a retinal-retinal anastomosis in the outer retinal layer segmentation .
Thanks to OCTA, a noninvasive diagnosis of type 3 neovascular lesion complicating an RP with cystoid macular edema could be made. The patient was subsequently scheduled for 3 consecutive monthly intravitreal injections of ranibizumab. He received 8 intravitreal injections during the first year of follow-up.