A 16-year-old female patient presented to the outpatient department of a tertiary care hospital with 6 months history of dyspnea on exertion and easy fatiguability. The dyspnea was gradual in onset and was relieved with rest. On further inquiry, there was no cough, fever, chest pain, orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND). She does not have any history of epigastric discomfort, Malena, or previous history of hepatitis B or C infection. She was taking a balanced diet and there was no history of body aches, numbness, or tingling sensation in the body. Her medical history was significant for recurrent otitis media, frequent falls at night, and the need for support for walking during the night. There was no history of gastrointestinal surgery or food allergy. The patient was born at term through normal vaginal delivery as a result of consanguineous marriage, and there was no family history of a similar condition. The patient did not attain menarche or pubarche.
On examination, she was active with a height of 150 cm and weight of 74 kg having a body mass index (BMI) of 32.8 kg/m2. She had a pale conjunctiva and vital signs of blood pressure of 110/80 mm of Hg, pulse rate of 88 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 17 breaths per minute and there was no postural drop. She had a moon face, high arched palate, truncal obesity flat feet, and polydactyly as shown in .
The rest of the clinical examination and assessment was normal except for mild cognitive impairment having a mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score of 19/30.
An ophthalmological and audiological evaluation was requested and the fundoscopy revealed bony spicules suggestive of retinitis pigmentosa in both eyes as shown in . Ear examination revealed bilateral tympanic membrane perforation.
Laboratory investigations were unremarkable except for macrocytic anemia and raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) as shown in .
Peripheral blood smear showed macrocytosis, poikilocytosis, and anisocytosis while bone marrow showed megaloblastic changes with hyper-segmented neutrophils. She was further investigated and anti-intrinsic factor antibodies were positive which further supported the diagnosis of pernicious anemia that led to vitamin B12 deficiency. An ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis was done on the fetal lobulated cortical margins, the volume of ovaries was small for age (1.5 mL volume against a normal value of 3). The patient was diagnosed as a case of Bardet- Biedl syndrome according to the clinical diagnostic criteria suggested by Forsythe & Beales [2013] in which our patient had 4 major and one minor features. The patient has transfused 3 pints of red cell concentrates and 1 mg hydroxycobalamin IM 3 times per week for 2 weeks. On 6 weeks of follow up her symptoms improved and her hemoglobin raised to 10.3 g/dL she was further continued with the same treatment but her hydroxocobalamin was switched to once monthly for 3 months.