A female patient, 72 years old, was admitted for “retrosternal pain for 4 days during eating” with a healthy history before. Four days ago, the patient had a foreign body sensation in the pharynx after eating freshwater fish. Then she ate as usual but felt retrosternal pain when eating. One day ago, the pain worsened after eating rice cake and was accompanied by severe irritant dry cough without fever, hemoptysis, or hematemesis. The patient was admitted to Regional medical center for National Institute of Respiratory Disease, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University. Chest plain computed tomography (CT) scan suggested “flat esophagus and bronchial bifurcation with a high-density shadow, a foreign body was considered with the length of 2.8 cm that crossed the left main bronchial wall, and the local bronchial wall mucosa thickened” . Treatment was supportive with fasting, fluid infusion, monitoring and so on. During the operation, a rigid esophagoscope (S121; Hangzhou Tonglu Medical Optical Instrument Co., Ltd, Zhejiang, China) was used under general anesthesia with endotracheal tube. It was observed that the mucosa ulcer was at the 2 o’clock direction in the esophagus 26 cm away from the incisors, with hyperemia and swelling of the surrounding mucosa. No obvious foreign body was found in the cavity. Under a fiberoptic bronchoscope (BF-260; Olympus Optical Co., Ltd, Tokyo, Japan) via the endotracheal tube, a needle-shaped foreign body (considering fish bone in combination with medical history) in the proximal part and near the entrance of left main bronchus could be seen intraoperatively, and penetrated the bronchial wall. Local bronchial wall showed granulation tissue hyperplasia, mucosal swelling and easy bleeding . After the granulation tissue was cleaned intraoperatively and the fish bone was exposed, the holmium laser (VersaPulse 80/100 W PowerSuite; Lumenis Ltd, Israel) with the settings of 1 J and 8 Hz was used to broke the fish bone in the middle which was located in the left main bronchus, and foreign body forceps (JHY-FG-18-120-A4; Jiuhong Medical Instrument Co., Ltd. Changzhou, China) were used to remove the two segments, respectively. There was no significant active hemorrhage in the bronchus after operation . The entire operation under the fiberoptic bronchoscope lasted for 20 min. The foreign body was a sharp and hard fish bone about 3 cm in length . A jejunal nutrition tube was indwelling during the operation, and nasal-feeding nutrition as well as gastrointestinal decompression were given postoperatively. Secondary infection and leakage were also monitored. No obvious leakage was noted in upper gastrointestinal contrast half a month after the operation. Then, the jejunal nutrition tube was removed, and there was no obvious discomfort when having semi-fluid food through the mouth.