The patient was a healthy 58-year-old woman. She was not overweight nether sporty. She worked as a janitor in a hospital and used daily a floor scrubber. The medical history began in August 2017 when the patient presented with a painful right hallux and a stiff right heel. The clinical examination confirmed the heel pain and a dynamic varus hallux deformity. The hallux deformity was only present with weight-bearing. Initially, there was not any lateral foot pain.
We made weight-bearing radiography of the two feet and a foot magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). On the right foot, there was a calcaneal spur. The Djian-Annonier angle was 129° (range between 120 and 130°). The talocalcaneal divergence was 17° on the face (range between 15 and 20°) and 27.6° on the profile (range between 20 and 30°). The calcaneal-fifth metatarsal angle was 0° . There was no sign of tibiotalar, midfoot, or metatarsophalangeal joints arthrosis. There was no sign of hallux valgus or varus deformation. There were signs of plantar fasciitis and fibular and posterior tibial tenosynovitis on foot MRI but no sign of lesion of the calcaneocuboid ligaments .
As a conservative treatment, we prescribed a sole with medial arch support and heel recess and we performed an infiltration of the first metatarsophalangeal joint. The patient came back in June 2020, complaining of the right hallux pain again. A new clinical examination revealed tenderness at the CCJ palpation. There was an increase in CCJ motion compared to the contralateral foot and pain increased with midfoot inversion. A foot CT scan in a supine position was performed and showed a CCJ subluxation with an inferior tilt of the cuboid. There was an osseous avulsion on the calcaneal-apophysis but no arthrosis either in the hindfoot or either in the midfoot . We did not perform an infiltration of the CCJ as a diagnostic or therapeutic use. Indeed, the localization and the joint source of pain were obvious and any infiltration was needed to confirm it.
Although the patient was initially consulted for a painful hallux deformity, the anamnesis, clinical examination, and foot CT scan pointed to a Chopart joint injury. Because of the joint instability and the risk of joint degeneration, a surgical approach was indicated. A CCJ ligamentoplasty was planned to treat this subluxation. Given the absence of joint arthrosis, arthrodesis was not indicated.
The patient was followed with control at 2, 6, and 12 weeks then 6 months and 1 year post-operative. Radiography was done at 6 weeks . The evolution was excellent, without any pain, and a complete return to her work and her activities at 1 year post-operative.