An 8-y-old boy presented to the emergency department with complaints of anemia for 6 years and worsening abdominal pain and scleral yellowing of the skin for 2 days. This patient was diagnosed with HS 6 years ago at a local hospital by routine blood count, bone marrow and peripheral blood cell morphology, and erythrocyte permeability fragility test, and then was treated with red blood cell infusion and discharged. This boy has not followed up regularly in recent years. Two days ago, this child suddenly developed worsened abdominal pain and scleral yellowing of the skin, this patient had no fever, cough, sputum, blood in the stool and other symptoms. The parents denied that their son had any history of infectious diseases, food or drug allergies, genetic or congenital disorders. On physical examination, the patient’s face was pale and yellow, with severe yellowing of the skin and sclera. The abdomen was soft, with mid-upper abdominal tenderness and no rebound pain. The spleen was enlarged to approximately 5 cm below the left ribcage and was slightly hard to palpate.
The complete blood count showed total leukocyte count: 7.86 × 109/L, hemoglobin: 57 g/L, and spherical red blood cells accounted for 15% of peripheral mature red blood cells. The erythrocyte permeability fragility test was positive. Reticulocyte count: 645.83 × 109/L (normal range 17 × 109/L-70 × 109/L). Total bilirubin: 679.2 μmol/L (normal range 0–20 μmol/L); conjugated bilirubin: 447.6 μmol/L (normal range 0–5 μmol/L); unconjugated bilirubin: 231.6 μmol/L (normal range 0–19 μmol/L). Genetic analysis revealed a de novo mutation in the ANK1 gene (c.1405-9G > A, splicing mutation in exon14, Fig. ) and no abnormalities in the UGT1A1 gene. Abdominal CT showed biliary obstruction that obstructed the bile flow , confirming the diagnosis of biliary obstruction in this pediatric HS.
After the surgery of bile duct exploration and T-tube drainage, the patient’s abdominal pain and the jaundice gradually resolved, but the bilirubin level was only slightly lower than before (hemoglobin: 71 g/L, total bilirubin: 534.2 μmol/L; conjugated bilirubin: 318.3 μmol/L; unconjugated bilirubin: 215.9 μmol/L). As the patient’s unconjugated bilirubin level was still high and associated with hypersplenism, there was still a risk of causing biliary obstruction. After completion of vaccination, splenectomy was performed 40 days after the first surgery, and postoperative infection prophylaxis and symptomatic treatment were given. This child is now 13 months post-splenectomy and is still being followed in the stable condition (the bilirubin level of 1 year after the splenectomy: hemoglobin: 134 g/L, total bilirubin: 15.5 μmol/L; conjugated bilirubin: 4.1 μmol/L; unconjugated bilirubin: 11.4 μmol/L).