In November 2018, a 58-year-old man was admitted to the ICU with acute respiratory failure. The patient presented with dyspnea, cough, chest pain and acute respiratory insufficiency. Arterial blood gases revealed isolated hypoxemia (pAO2: 46 mmHg) without hypercapnia or acidosis. He had a history of multiple diseases, including asthma-COPD overlap, diabetes mellitus, ischemic heart disease, arterial hypertension and atrial fibrillation. The patient had been a non-smoker for seven years but had a smoking history of 15 pack-years. Bilateral crackles were present, predominantly in the basal segments of the lungs during chest auscultation; there were no other relevant findings upon physical examination. Blood tests showed an elevated white blood cell count with high blood inflammatory markers (C-reactive protein was 178 mg/L) and the absolute eosinophil count was in the normal range (410 eosinophils/µL). Finally, a chest x-ray revealed infiltration of both lower lobes of the lungs .
The findings suggested pneumonia and we treated the patient with a combination of antibiotics (clarithromycin and amoxicillin-clavulanate) and supplemental oxygen therapy. After one week, the antibiotic treatment had no effect and the patient developed a high fever. A chest radiograph indicated pulmonary infiltrate progression, although we had switched to piperacillin-tazobactam. Sputum cultivation was repeatedly positive for C. albicans. The material (sputum) was inoculated with a calibrated 10 µL loop (manufacturer: Copan, Italy) on Sabouraud’s agar with antibiotics (manufacturer: Conda, Spain). The plates were incubated for 5 days at temperatures ranging between 35 and 37 °C. The obtained cultures were inoculated on chromagar (manufacturer: Biolife, Italy) and subsequently identified by the MALDI-TOF method (manufacturer: Bruker, Germany). Thus, we initiated fluconazole treatment at a higher dosage (200 mg twice daily for 28 days). We didn´t perform pulmonary function tests concerning patient dyspnea and increasing oxygen dependency.
His general condition remained poor, as he had high fever, fatigue, and progressive respiratory failure into hypercapnia (pH: 7.46; pCO2: 51 mmHg; pO2: 44 mmHg; HCO3: 35.7 mmol/L; Sat. O2: 81%). Therefore, we performed a CT scan and bronchoscopy. The CT scan showed almost complete consolidation of both lower lobes and several smaller consolidations in the rest of the lungs . There were no pathological macroscopic findings during the bronchoscopy. The cultivation of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) was negative for the presence of any bacteria. We obtained the levels of galactomannan (GM) and (1,3)-β-d-glucan (BD) from both BALF and blood serum, and all results were within normal ranges; exactly BALF GM was 0.12 (normal range < 0.5), BALF BD 0.0 pg/mL (normal range < 0.08 pg/mL), blood GM 0.07 (normal range < 0.5) and blood BD 0 pg/mL (normal range < 0.08 pg/mL). However, significant increase in eosinophils was present in the BALF differential count (6% of eosinophils; normal range ˂2%) and high total IgE serum levels (IgE 1575 IU/mL; normal range < 150 IU/mL) were found. Thus, we tested for Aspergillus and Candida-specific IgE. The results were negative for the specific IgE for Aspergillus; however, they were strongly positive for Candida-specific IgE (3.17 IU/mL; normal range ˂ 0.35 IU/mL). The institutional laboratory of the University Hospital Brno used the Immulite® 2000/2000XPi immunoassay system (manufacturer: Siemens Healthineers AG, Erlangen, DE), the kits catalog numbers were M3L4 and M5L4. A skin prick test for Candida (and other fungi) was not undertaken due to its non-availability at our center.
Having confirmed our suspicion regarding ABPC, we immediately started treatment with prednisone (0.5 mg/kg/day). We also continued fluconazole therapy to reduce the fungal antigen burden. After two weeks of corticosteroids, we observed rapid regression of the pulmonary infiltrates . Consequently, both clinical status and respiratory failure started to improve rapidly; thus, we discontinued oxygen therapy. The peripheral blood eosinophil count decreased from 410 to 0 cells/µL within 4 days since the corticosteroid treatment was initiated and remained in normal range (varying between 0 and 80/µL cells) both during the course of corticosteroid therapy and during the following 3 years. After more than five weeks of hospital stay, the patient was discharged with no need for ventilatory support and no exertional dyspnea. Altogether, we administered fluconazole for four weeks and corticosteroids for eight weeks. After the initial course of prednisone (6 weeks at 0.5 mg/kg/day), we tapered the dose for two weeks before discontinuing treatment.
In summary, a definitive diagnosis of ABPC was established based on the clinical presentation, peripheral blood and BALF eosinophilia and elevated serum total IgE and specific anti-C. albicans IgE. Moreover, rapid clinical improvement occurred in response to the combined corticosteroid and antifungal therapy.