A 30-year-old Caucasian woman was followed by a pneumologist due to an insidious dyspnea on exertion and even when resting. She had been a smoker for 18 years (30 pack-years) and had her first child at the age of 20 as a vaginal delivery. There was no history of any chronic medication intake or any prior drug or food allergies.
Her disease was monitored thoroughly and, initially, through a lung CT scan, several cysts were identified, suggesting bullous emphysema associated with fibrosis in the lower lobes. In the meantime, the patient developed polyuria and polydipsia (with the consumption of more than 5 liters of water per day), so, as her anti-diuretic hormone levels were low, LCH was considered a possible diagnosis, and intranasal desmopressin was administered with symptomatic improvement. A lung biopsy was performed without any complications, and LCH diagnosis was confirmed through the expression of CD1a and S100 protein.
As the patient had developed symptoms of a diabetes insipidus, a cranial magnetic resonance was performed that confirmed the existence of a lesion located in the posterior lobe of the pituitary gland. Finally, a positron emission tomography was performed, which revealed diffused liver and skeletal lesions besides the pulmonary and pituitary lesions. So, the patient was diagnosed with a disseminated LCH, and she was followed closely in the rare disease consultation and was started on cytarabine (5-day treatment every month for one year) with significant improvement in respiratory distress and dyspnea. Pulmonary function tests (PFT) were repeated yearly and showed a mixed pattern that remained stable during follow-up. Afterward, the patient manifested the will to have another child so, she was followed at the high-risk pregnancy consultation and became pregnant 14 months after the last treatment with cytarabine.
Her pregnancy progressed normally, without any complications or symptoms, and in terms of medication she was only taking iron and folic acid besides her usual dose of desmopressin (2 nasal sprays every morning, 20 µg daily) associated with a water restriction of about 750 ml/day that the patient managed according to her urine output.
At her 28th week of gestation, she began to feel tired and had to increase the desmopressin dosage to a total of 40 micrograms daily divided into two doses due to overwhelming polydipsia. Her PFT and carbon monoxide diffusing capacity (DLCO), which were stable for her whole pregnancy, were at this time slightly worse .
At 37 weeks and 2 days of pregnancy, the patient presented to the emergency department due to unbearable dyspnea that made it impossible to perform any type of effort. She had no painful contractions or other evidence of being in labor. At the obstetric evaluation, the patient had a firm cervix with a 3.5 cm dilation. The fetus had a cephalic presentation and showed no signs of distress. As the patient’s symptoms were worsening, labor was induced using misoprostol, and she was brought to the delivery room. An arterial blood gas test performed at that moment showed a respiratory alkalosis (pH = 7.47, paO2 90.6 mmHg, and paCO2 29.3 mmHg) with an oxygen saturation of 96%. She was monitored, and oxygen was administered at a flow of 2 liters/minute through nasal prongs.
An epidural catheter was placed at the L3-L4 interspace preventively to facilitate the administration of analgesia when labor began or, in the worst-case scenario, if there was a need for epidural anesthesia if a cesarean section had to be performed. A bolus of 15 mg of ropivacaine and 10 µg of sufentanil were administered, and an anesthetic sensory bilateral T10 block was successful after testing. Ropivacaine (0.2%) was then administered continuously. The patient was stable, and the expulsive phase began 2 hours after arriving at the delivery room and lasted only 20 minutes. Although forceps had to be used to progress the labor, there were no further complications during this procedure. The baby was born with 3.07 kg with normal APGAR scores. Respiratory symptoms reverted completely 12 hours after labor, and the patient was admitted to the ward without dyspnea. She was discharged three days later.
The patient was re-evaluated three months after childbirth and did not present any symptoms of polyuria or polydipsia (with her usual desmopressin dose) or any sort of respiratory distress. Her PFT had improved to her previous stable values before pregnancy.