An 18-year-old female was admitted to our emergency department with mental confusion, blurred vision, headaches, and vomiting. Congenital kidney hypoplasia had been discovered late and had resulted in end-stage renal disease (ESRD) with anuria, thrice-weekly hemodialysis, and arterial hypertension [controlled with bisoprolol (5 mg/d) and urapidil (120 mg/d)]. On the day before admission, the patient had self-medicated with a dose of oral decongestant containing 60 mg pseudoephedrine (PDE) and 500 mg acetaminophen.
The patient's vital data on admission were as follows: systolic/diastolic blood pressure: 210/100 mmHg: body temperature: 37.1°C; body weight: 48 kg; height: 1.63 m; capillary blood glucose: 0.9 g/L. The patient's cardiac and respiratory signs were unremarkable. We noted the presence of purulent discharge at the hemodialysis catheter's insertion site. A neurological examination showed bilateral vision loss and altered mental status, with agitation and delirium. No limb weakness or irritative pyramidal signs were seen. Blood tests showed normal levels of sodium, potassium and magnesium. As expected, the serum creatinine level was elevated (768 μmol/L). We observed type B lactic acidosis, with an elevated blood lactate level (8 mmol/L; normal range: 0.5–2 mmol/L), a low pH (7.24; normal range: 7.38–7.42), and a low serum bicarbonate level (18 mmol/L; normal range: 24–32 mmoL/L). The serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level was slightly elevated, and the liver function tests were normal. A blood culture seeded with a sample taken from the hemodialysis catheter at admission was positive for Enterobacter cloacae.
To complete further examinations, the patient had to be sedated and ventilated. An analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) did not evidence signs of infection, inflammation or pleocytosis. The CSF protein and glucose levels were within the normal range.
Although the brain computed tomography results were normal, T2, FLAIR and diffusion cerebral MRI sequences evidenced bilateral hyperintense occipitotemporoparietal lesions and thickening of the cortex. These observations were consistent with vasogenic edema .
A toxicological analysis (high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry) on admission detected acetaminophen, PDE and norpseudoephedrine (norPDE). The plasma concentrations of acetaminophen, PDE and norPDE were, respectively 4.4 mg/L and 111 and 46.8 μg/L .
After admission to the intensive care unit (ICU), the patient was given a continuous intravenous infusion of nicardipine for close blood pressure control. Renal replacement therapy (intermittent hemodialysis; 4 h, 3 times a week) was initiated on admission. The lactic acidosis had resolved 2 h post-admission. The plasma PDE and norPDE levels fell, respectively to 44.9 and 19.3 μg/L after the first intermittent hemodialysis session and to then 19.7 and 10.4 μg/L 37 h later. Assuming single-phase exponential decay of the plasma concentration, we estimated that the elimination half-lives of PDE and norPDE were normal during hemodialysis (6.1 and 6.3 h for PDE and norPDE, respectively, compared with 5–8 h in healthy volunteers) and greatly lengthened in the absence of hemodialysis (31.1 and 41.5 h, respectively) .
Continuous piperacillin-tazobactam infusion was also initiated, with a switch to piperacillin alone for treatment of the Enterobacter cloacae bloodstream infection. The hemodialysis catheter was replaced 4 h after ICU admission, and the hemodialysis sessions were continued. Neurological symptoms started to improve from day 2 and the patient was discharged from the ICU 6 days after admission to hospital. After 6 days of follow-up after ICU discharge, the patient's blood pressure was under control and the results of a neurological examination were unremarkable. MRI did not evidence any signal abnormalities and showed that the vasogenic edema had completely regressed.