A 34-year-old man was hospitalized for preemptive living KT. He was diagnosed with end-stage renal disease secondary to IgA nephropathy 1 year prior. He underwent ABO-incompatible living KT. The donor was his brother, and his right kidney was selected for allograft because the 99 m-Tc-diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid renogram revealed that the glomerular filtration rate of the right kidney was > 10% of that of the left kidney. The allograft had three renal arteries and four renal veins . The renal arteries and veins were cut at the dotted line shown in Fig. b and d. The donor’s gonadal vein was harvested for vascular graft because of vascular complexity. The diameter of gonadal vein was approximately 3 mm. The renal arteries and veins were trimmed and prepared on the back table, as shown in Fig. a, b, and c. The renal arteries were reconstructed into one piece using the internal iliac artery graft obtained from the recipient by interrupted 7/0 Proline stitches. The two arteries, both had a diameter approximately 5 mm, at the middle of the renal hilum were reconstructed into one piece using the conjoined method by interrupted 7/0 Proline stitches. The superior renal artery was too short to anastomose to the internal iliac artery graft. The inferior epigastric artery was insufficient for anastomosis to the renal artery or interposition. The diameter of inferior epigastric artery was approximately 1 mm, compared to that of superior renal artery was approximately 3 mm. Although an interposition method using an artificial blood vessel graft was also considered, we decided to use the gonadal vein graft obtained from the donor for long-term patency of the graft. The superior renal artery was lengthened using the donor’s gonadal vein and subsequently anastomosed to the internal iliac artery graft . The internal iliac graft was anastomosed to the original internal iliac artery using 6/0 Proline suture in an interrupted fashion. The renal veins were anastomosed to the external iliac vein and the recipient’s gonadal vein . Intraoperative Doppler ultrasonography (US) revealed that the blood flow in each renal artery was adequate, resulting in sufficient blood flow throughout the allograft. Urine output was observed immediately after the blood flow returned. Doppler US showed no evidence of anastomotic stenosis, obstruction, or aneurysm of the renal arteries on postoperative day (POD) 10 , 17, 24. There were no surgical complications, and the patient was discharged on POD 32. The renal arteries and allograft were evaluated annually by Doppler US . The renal graft function has been maintained with a serum creatinine level of approximately 0.9 mg/dL, and there was no evidence of vascular complications on Doppler US performed 3 years after KT.