A 14-year old white male, was transferred to our hospital in June 2012 from the Paediatric department of a district hospital because of arthralgias, myalgias and chest pain. The patient was well until 48 hours prior to admission when he started to complain of pain mainly in the upper limbs and chest. The next day he developed fever, rash, malaise and worsening chest pain. A few hours before his visit to the Accident and Emergency department of the district hospital he had a short syncope episode. On the same day he started to feel weakness in both upper and lower limbs, he was unable to walk and was admitted to the district hospital.
The child’s medical history was significant for oral antibiotic therapy for an infected epidydymal cyst. Initially he was prescribed ciprofloxacin for 10 days, then cefuroxime for 7 days and co-trimoxazole for another 7 days. The antibiotic therapy was completed one week before the described health problem. In the two years preceding the episode he had reported two episodes of non-specific allergic rashes.
The laboratory work-up performed on admission at the tertiary referral hospital revealed elevated creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) 7,643 U/L and CK-MB isoenzyme 75.8 U/L. Troponin levels were < 50 mg/dl, alanine aminotransferase 180 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 253 U/L, γ-GT 72 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 146 U/L, total bilirubin 3.14 mg/dl with direct component 1.04 mg/dl. International normalised ratio (INR) was 1.34, and lactate dehydrogenase 760 U/L.
On the third day of hospitalization the child was transferred to our hospital as a referral and on admission he was relatively well with normal vital signs and temperature 37.6°C. On examination, he had an erythematous rash over the face with relative circumoral pallor. An erythematous maculopapular rash was also present over the entire trunk and the extremities. His muscle strength on the upper and lower limbs was decreased (2/5), and the muscles, especially the calves, were slightly painful on palpation, but there was no swelling. The child was unable to walk even after 6 days of hospitalization. In addition, he was complaining of arthralgias especially of the elbow joints but no findings suggestive of arthritis were detected. No abnormal findings were detected from cardiac, respiratory and abdominal examination.
The rash disappeared on the 7th day leaving the lower limbs with a reticulated or lacelike rash more visible during standing and after bathing. His workup included cardiology evaluation with normal ECG, echocardiogram and serial laboratory tests for re-evaluation of his liver function and CPK .
In summary, the liver enzymes and CPK normalized by day 11. Additional laboratory tests included anti-streptolysin titer 237 IU/ml (normal 0 - 350 IU/ml), negative anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), negative Mycoplasma IgM, and negative viral studies for IgM antibodies for EBV, CMV, Adenovirus, Measles, and Rubella. Antibodies for hepatitis A, C and Hepatitis B surface antigen were also negative. Serum, lymphocytes and stools were negative for enterovirus RNA and adenovirus DNA as detected by TaqMan based RealTime PCR methods (qualitative assays). Parvovirus B19 DNA as detected by TaqMan based RealTime PCR method was positive in the serum and lymphocytes. No quantitative PCR was done. IgG for Parvovirus B19 were strongly positive, whereas IgM negative.
During hospitalization the patient was treated with penicillin 100,000 IU/kg/24h IV for two days and then switched to cefotaxime 100 mg/kg/24h and azithromycin 500 mg/day to complete a 3-day regimen because of high-grade fever, cough and malaise. Blood culture was negative. On day 8 he became afebrile, while his muscle strength returned to normal levels at day 9, when he was able to walk without pain and at day 11 he was discharged home afebrile and in good condition.