A 50-year-old female complained of right lung synovial sarcoma more than 6 years after surgery, and a left lung nodule was present for 6 mo.
The patient visited our hospital for "right chest and back pain for more than 2 mo" more than 6 years before admission and underwent "thoracoscopic-assisted wedge resection of the upper lobe of the right lung + resection of the middle lobe of the right lung + internal fixation of a rib fracture" on February 29, 2016. The postoperative pathology report showed a "right upper lobe lung mass" monophasic (spindle cell) synovial sarcoma. On December 13, 2016, "right thoracic adhesion decomposition + right residual pneumonectomy + total pleurectomy + mediastinal lymph node dissection" was performed. On July 24, 2020, the patient underwent thoracoscopic-assisted right chest wall tumor resection and postoperative camrelizumab immunotherapy. Six months previously, an external examination revealed a nodule in the lower lobe of the left lung, and computed tomography (CT) of the lung (May 9, 2022) revealed the following: Right chest wall tumor + right lung lesion changed by total pneumonectomy. The patient had a nodular shadow in the lower lobe of the left lung, suggesting lung metastasis and right pleural encapsulated effusion. She was admitted to the outpatient clinic with "right lung synovial sarcoma after comprehensive treatment and a left lung lower lobe nodule".
Six months before presentation, she was diagnosed with hypothyroidism at the local hospital and started oral levothyroxine tablets (75 µg qd) and prednisone (2.5 mg bid).
Locally born and long-term resident, the patient had no history of tobacco, alcohol, drugs or other substance use, and no industrial poison, dust, or radioactive material contact history. Her parents, brothers and sisters are in good health, and there are no similar diseases in the family.
A surgical scar approximately 20 cm in length was seen on the right chest. The patient had an asymmetric thorax, there was no pressure pain on the sternum, and no breath sounds were heard in the right lung. The respiratory motion of the left lung was normal, the respiratory sound of the left lung was clear on auscultation, and no abnormal respiratory sound was heard.
Complete biochemical examination (2022-05-26) showed the following: total protein: 55.8 g/L ↓, albumin: 34.2 g/L ↓, the remaining examinations were normal. Plasma D-dimer and fibrin degradation products (D-Di+FDP) measurement + coagulation screening (2022-05-26) showed: Fibrinogen: 4.68 g/L ↑, D-dimer: 0.82 mg/L ↑, the remaining examinations were normal. Thyroid function was normal. Blood gas analysis + lactate measurement (2022-05-30) showed total CO2: 52.6 mmol/L↑, lactate: 2.6 mmol/L ↑, and all other measurements were normal.
Lung CT (2022-05-09) showed the following: (1) Right chest wall tumor + right lung lesion with total pneumonectomy changes; and (2) Nodular shadow in the lower lobe of the left lung, suggesting lung metastasis. The patient had right pleural encapsulated effusion (for details, see Figure ). Positron emission tomography (PET-CT) indicated no metastasis in the rest of the body except the left lung nodule.
Cardiac ultrasound (2022-05-10) showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 63%, stroke volume (SV) 48 mL, small left atrium, and tricuspid regurgitation (mild). An ambulatory electrocardiogram showed the following: (1) Sinus rhythm; (2) Occasional premature atrial contractions; (3) Occasional premature ventricular contractions; and (4) Reduced heart rate variability.