A 63 year-old man presented to the Emergency Department in ketoacidosis with an ulcerating, necrotic defect of the left hard palate with left facial ecchymosis and left scleral chemosis with extraocular muscles and diplopia (A, A).
Patient reports no medication use. Family and psychosocial history is noncontributory.
After soft tissue and bone biopsy confirmed mucormycosis, the patient underwent a left infrastructure maxillectomy with orbital sparing and two subsequent debridements. Extensive resection of the left zygomatic arch, left hard and soft palate and the surrounding soft tissues was performed . During the procedure, severe involvement and necrosis of the left side lateral nasal wall, floor, and septum were visualized. Osteolysis involving the bony walls of the left maxillary sinus, portions of the bony walls of the left paranasal sinuses, left bony orbit, the inferior aspect of the orbital floor and left greater and lesser sphenoid wings was apparent.
Surgical resection resulted in a large hard palate defect with an oral-nasal-maxillary continuity. Surgery was performed by the Head and Neck surgeon on call. Post-operative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed residual enhancement of the inferior rectus muscle as well as subtle asymmetric enhancement along the optic nerve sheath on the left compared to the right. as increased caliber with signal intensity changes within the nerve.
Pathological exam of intraoperative specimens identified the presence of broad nonseptate hyphae under special stains such as hematoxylin and eosin (H and E), Periodic acid–Schiff (PAS). These features were consistent with deep fungal invasion of bone. In the inpatient setting, the patient was given an infusion of isotonic saline with dextrose to stabilize cardiovascular status and 20 milliequivalents/ h of IV potassium chloride with IV regular insulin for management of the ketoacidosis. The patient had a gastrostomy tube placed and was discharged with subsequent outpatient treatment including three months of Amphotericin B and improved diabetic management. Post-surgically he was fitted with a palate obturator which was well tolerated and allowed normal speech and nutrition by mouth.