The emergency medical services brought in a 37-year-old Asian man with an unremarkable past medical history or cardiovascular risk factors because of shortness of breath and palpitations. His symptoms started a few months ago and progressed to the point that he became dyspnoeic at rest. He also had occasional haemoptysis and chest discomfort—no history of chest pain or loss of consciousness.
On examination, he looked sick, cyanosed, and in respiratory distress. He was afebrile; his respiratory rate was 42 breaths/min, pulse rate was 140 b.p.m. and irregular, blood pressure was 94/77 mmHg, and oxygen saturation was 98% on BiPAP pressure support 6 cm H2O, positive end-expiratory pressure 5 cm H2O, and 100% FiO2. He had diffuse crackles bilaterally, raised jugular venous pressure, and cold extremities with peripheral oedema. His electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation (AF) with a rapid ventricular response . Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly and pulmonary oedema .
As he was in severe respiratory distress, rapid sequence intubation was done with ketamine 100 mg and rocuronium 100 mg. Then, he received 40 mg IV furosemide, 2.5 mcg/kg/min norepinephrine, and 5 mcg/kg/min dopamine for haemodynamic support. He also received two transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE)-guided direct current shocks of 200 joules without a response and 150 mg amiodarone and 0.5 mg digoxin for the AF, after which sinus rhythm was restored with tachycardia without much improvement in the haemodynamics. The initial laboratory findings showed multiple organ failures with acute kidney injury (AKI), acute liver injury with transaminitis, and a deranged coagulation profile . He also developed anuric AKI, for which continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was started.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed moderately reduced systolic left ventricular (LV) function, moderate global hypokinesis of LV, an ejection fraction (EF) of 38%, severe rheumatic mitral stenosis (MS) [mitral valve area (MVA) 2D of 0.7 cm2, mean diastolic gradient of 17 mmHg, Wilkins score 7], aneurysmal left atrial (LA) dilatation [left atrial end-systolic volume (LAESV): 92 mL/m2, left atrial diameter (LAD): 6.5 cm], and moderately reduced right ventricular (RV) function EF 37% (see , and ).
The CS persisted and became refractory, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions (SCAI) D, he was placed on ECMO and intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) with prompt improvement in his haemodynamics and a decrease in the requirements of dopamine from 10 to 2 mcg/kg/min and norepinephrine from 3 to 0.1 mcg/kg/min. His Society of Thoracic Surgery (STS) score and EuroScore were 50.1% and 12.1%, respectively, for MV replacement. The invasive haemodynamics showed a pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) of 21 mmHg and a mean pulmonary artery pressure of 22 mmHg.
On Day 5, the patient underwent PTMC after the multidisciplinary team discussion determined that he had extreme surgical risk and his valve was pliable for percutaneous intervention. The procedure was performed with transoesophageal guidance. Due to the shortage of dedicated PTMC balloons, the procedure was performed with a 26 mm × 40 mm Numed balloon over Safari wire after obtaining transseptal access using a steerable guide sheath. After one balloon inflation, his mean LA pressure (LAP) and mean diastolic MV improved from 17 to 9 mmHg and from 9 to 2 mmHg, respectively , without significant mitral regurgitation (MR). A follow-up TTE on the same day demonstrated MVA 2D improvement to 1.9 cm2 and tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion (TAPSE) improvement to 1.2 cm, indicating residual mild RV function impairment and LV EF improvement to 48%. His haemodynamics improved afterward, and he was weaned off ECMO, decannulated on Day 6, and extubated on Day 14. His CRRT was switched to intermittent haemodialysis, and eventually, his renal function fully recovered on Day 23, and he did not require haemodialysis or diuresis afterward. He was then transferred to the rehabilitation centre for physical therapy as he developed critical care myopathy during his hospital stay. After 2 months of his stay in the rehabilitation centre, the patient was discharged home with normal cognitive function and independent mobility (ambulation and stair climbing). He was discharged on bisoprolol (dose) for rate control, warfarin for valvular AF to target international normalized ratio (INR) level of 2–3, and amlodipine (dose) for hypertension and planned to further optimize his heart failure medications during his follow-up clinical visits. The patient will be followed up in the structural cardiology and heart failure clinics with repeated transthoracic echocardiography and further workup for a reduced EF if it persisted.