A 36 years-old lady, of Indian descent, presented to our clinic in September 2019 with a complaint of chronic left-sided nasal obstruction for one year. This was associated with ipsilateral headache and intermittent facial pain, with mucoid rhinorrhea and anosmia. She also complained of epiphora of the left eye and mild visual disturbances. She had frequented her local practitioner and was regularly treated for chronic rhinosinusitis. Upon review, there was an inapparent asymmetry of the left nasal bridge with fullness medial to the left medial canthus. On nasoendoscopy, there was a large left nasal mass arising from superiorly, occupying nearly the entire left nasal cavity . A 4mm scope managed to bypass the mass along the floor to visualize a normal-appearing nasopharynx showing no extension of the mass inferiorly to the oropharynx. The right nasal cavity was narrowed with a significantly deviated nasal septum, likely due to mass effect. Otherwise, there were no enlarged neck nodes. The visual acuity was 6/9 bilaterally with no papilloedema. There was no ophthalmoplegia or other cranial neuropathies.
The patient had earlier performed computed tomography (CT) of the paranasal sinus which reported an extensive lobular mass along the left lateral nasal wall predominantly centred in the middle meatal region with breeching and destruction of the medial wall of the left maxillary sinus and possible extension into it, with soft tissues densities occupying the ethmoid and frontal sinuses, extending superiorly with breaching of the skull base and laterally eroding the lamina papyracea into the extraconal orbit. There were also soft tissue densities occupying the left sphenoid sinus .
In view of the extension into the anterior skull base, the patient was further evaluated with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain. MRI brain revealed the presence of heterogeneously enhancing mass measuring 4.7x4.9x3.5cm (CCxAPxW) occupying the left ethmoid sinuses extended medially to both left and right nasal cavity with obliteration of nasal septum noted. The left lamina papyracea was eroded by the mass with extension to the medial part of the extraconal space of the left orbit compressing the left medial rectus, with no abnormal enhancement. The mass also extended superiorly to the left frontal sinus and erosion of frontal bone was seen with intracranial extension to the left frontal region with mass effect into the left frontal cortex and focal thickening of intact dura in the region. There was no abnormal enhancement or focal lesion of the left frontal lobe or other intraparenchymal lesions. There was mucosal thickening in the left maxillary and sphenoid sinuses . The imaging performed suggested a possibility of inverted papilloma with intracranial extra-axial extension.
The decision was made for a biopsy of the left nasal mass to be performed in the clinic for histopathological evaluation. This was performed twice, over a week, however, with both samples yielding only granulation tissue. No deeper biopsies were performed due to significant bleeding during the procedure which was controlled with compression.
The decision for surgical intervention endonasally, was made after further discussions and consultations with the local neurosurgical team. The patient was subjected to a left medial maxillectomy and resection of the left sino-nasal mass via a combined endoscopic and open (lateral rhinotomy) approach, with subsequent reconstruction. No peri-operative embolization was performed. Intra-operative findings showed a large firm, lobulated mass occupying the entire left nasal cavity and partially extending into the left maxillary sinus and bulging into the medial wall of the left orbit with a severely thinned out lamina papyracea. The tumour was excised en bloc with no significant bleeding encountered. A significant posterosuperior septal perforation was noted. There was a presence of skull base defect located posteromedial to the left frontal sinus opening, measuring 2cm x 1cm. After complete resection of the tumour, the dura was inspected and appeared to be intact. The skull base defect was reconstructed using a segment of fresh septal cartilage and mucosal flap from the lower left lateral wall of the nose pedicled to the posterior stump of the inferior turbinate. Polypoidal mucosae were also removed from the maxillary and sphenoid sinuses. The left lacrimal sac was marsupialized. Post-operatively the nasal cavity was packed in BIPP impregnated nasal packing which was removed after a week. The post-operative period was uneventful.
Histopathological evaluation of the resected left sino-nasal mass , measuring 65mm in aggregate (with 25x15x3mm bony fragments) showed submucosal proliferation of spindle cells arranged in a vague sweeping fascicle embedded in a dense collagenous keloidal stroma. The spindle cells exhibited bland hyperchromatic nuclei with indistinct cytoplasm with interspersed staghorn-like and congested blood vessels. The tumour was seen entrapping and invading the bone fragments. Mitosis was scattered, less than 4 mitoses per 10 high-power fields were observed. No necrosis was seen. On immunohistochemistry, it showed positive CD34, bcl-2, vimentin and beta-catenin (patchy) and was negative for SMA, Desmin, Myogenin, S100, TLE-1, and CD56 with Ki67 positivity of about 2%. A final impression was in favour of a solitary fibrous tumour was given.
Post operatively, she was reviewed on regular intervals with surveillance nasoendoscopies performed up to one year later. There was no clinical evidence of local recurrence, (refer to ) with MRI surveillance.