A 4-year-old female neutered domestic longhair cat with a chronic history of intermittent
vomiting and fluctuating appetite was referred following a 4-week history of progressive
lethargy, hyporexia and increased respiratory effort. Thoracic radiographs and blind
thoracocentesis of a suspected pleural effusion were performed prior to referral, removing
150 ml of straw-coloured high protein transudate (total nucleated cell count,
1.8 ×109 cells/l; total protein, 40 g/l). Complete blood count and minimum
database biochemistry detected no abnormalities. After centesis, respiratory signs and
appetite improved; no further treatment was administered.
At presentation to the referral hospital, 7 days after centesis, physical examination
abnormalities included tachypnoea (60 breaths/min), increased inspiratory effort,
tachycardia (220 beats/min), diffusely muffled heart and lung sounds and a lean body
condition (score 3/9, weight 4.43 kg)
Thoracic ultrasonography identified large-volume PE and cardiac tamponade . Electrocardiogram (ECG) was
consistent with electrical alternans. The patient was anaesthetised (butorphanol 0.2 mg/kg
IV; propofol IV induction and inhaled isoflurane maintenance) to reduce movement and allow
for control of ventilation during pericardiocentesis. Ultrasound-guided pericardiocentesis,
using a 14 G fenestrated polyurethane catheter (MILACATH extended use; MILA International)
inserted at the fifth intercostal space, removed 300 ml straw-coloured effusion (low
cellularity, high-protein transudate; total protein 45 g/l). Subsequently, tachycardia and
ECG abnormalities resolved, repeat ultrasound identified a cystic mass caudal to the heart
, subjectively normal
cardiac structure and contractility and small-volume pleural effusion.
CT of the thorax and abdomen, pre- and post-intravenous iohexol contrast (Omnipaque; GE
Healthcare), was performed (GE Healthcare Lightspeed 16 slice CT scanner, reconstructed
using bone, soft tissue [pre- and post-contrast] and lung algorithms), and identified a
large defect in the ventral diaphragm with herniated right lateral and quadrate liver lobes
(PPDH). Arising from the herniated liver was a 4.5 cm diameter, well-defined cavitary mass,
directly compressing the right cardiac chambers and causing left lateral displacement of the
heart . The mass was
thought to represent either necrosis, inflammatory change or neoplasia. Other abnormalities
included small-volume pleural effusion, mild lymph node enlargement, absent gallbladder and
transitional T13 vertebrae.
The following day the patient underwent herniorrhaphy via a ventral midline coeliotomy.
Anaesthesia included fentanyl 3 µg/kg, ketamine 0.5 mg/kg and midazolam 0.2 mg/kg IV
premedication, alfaxalone 2 mg/kg IV induction, fentanyl 3 µg/kg/h and ketamine 0.1 mg/kg/h
constant rate infusions (CRIs) with inhaled isoflurane for maintenance. The diaphragmatic
defect was enlarged radially, adhesions to the pericardium were manually dissected and
herniated contents retrieved. Right lateral and quadrate liver lobectomy, including
associated mass, was performed with a DST Series TA V30 linear stapler (Medtronics). Partial
pericardiectomy was also performed to reduce the risk of future restrictive pericarditis,
pericardial cyst formation or recurrent tamponade. 3/0 Polydioxanone (PDS) suture (Wego-PDO;
Foosin Medical Supplies) in a continuous pattern apposed diaphragm edges for herniorrhaphy.
A 14 G thoracostomy tube (Guidewire Inserted Chest Tube; MILA International) was placed in
the left hemithorax, as per the manufacturer’s instructions, and secured with 3/0 PDS
suture. The patient recovered uneventfully; fentanyl and ketamine CRIs were weaned with
regular assessment of pain scores. The thoracostomy tube was removed after 8 h as it was
non-productive, with no recurrence of effusion. The patient was discharged home the
following evening.
Histological examination, with routine haematoxylin and eosin staining, of the resected
liver lobe and mass found a moderately well circumscribed but locally infiltrative
proliferation of neoplastic polygonal-to-spindle cells with scant supporting stroma . The large cystic space
contained necrotic debris, haemorrhage, aggregates of mineral and sloughed cells with
abundant mucous in some sections. Around the periphery was a thick wall of reactive
fibroplasia within which were proliferating bile ducts. The neoplastic cells had variably
distinct cell borders and typically a moderate amount of eosinophilic fibrillar cytoplasm
and round-to-oval nuclei with stippled chromatin and large size nucleoli. The cells had
moderate anisokaryosis with scattered large size nuclei and occasional multinucleation.
Twenty-two mitotic figures were counted in 10 high-power fields.
Liver adjacent to the mass had severe loss of normal architecture and marked, mixed
inflammation. There was extensive bile duct hyperplasia with atypia and scattered mitoses in
some biliary epithelial cells; in some areas, the hepatocytes were pleomorphic with
enlarged, atypical nuclei. Atypical spindle cells were dispersed throughout the sinusoids
. Immunohistochemical
stains (vimentin, cytokeratin 7, HepPar-1, factor 8) were applied to the sections. All
atypical cells in the mass and dispersed in sinusoids stained strongly with vimentin
(mesenchymal cell marker; )
but did not stain with factor 8, cytokeratin 7 or HepPar-1 (endothelial, biliary epithelial
and hepatocyte markers, respectively). Staining confirmed the mass was consistent with a
poorly differentiated sarcoma rather than carcinoma.
Two weeks after surgery the patient was gaining weight and the clinical signs had resolved.
Repeat thoracic ultrasound found no pleural or pericardial effusion, and ultrasonographic
evaluation of the remaining liver was unremarkable.
Two months postoperatively the patient re-presented with reduced appetite, weight loss and
vomiting. Abdominal ultrasound identified a hypoechoic splenic nodule and a mass in the
right cranial abdomen, both of which were aspirated. Cytological evaluation of smears from
both sites (stained with Wright–Giemsa ) contained low-to-moderate numbers of atypical spindle cells, with a
moderate amount of wispy basophilic cytoplasm that was often finely vacuolated. Nuclei were
round to oval, with coarsely stippled chromatin and large prominent nucleoli. Occasional
binucleated cells were present, the cells displayed karyomegaly, a high
nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio and moderate anisocytosis and anisokaryosis. Combined with the
clinical history, the features of the smears were diagnostic of sarcoma and presumed to be
metastatic disease.
The owners declined further surgical intervention or chemotherapy, electing to palliate
with prednisolone (1 mg/kg PO q12h) until euthanasia 2 months later.