A 36-year-old male with history of surgically corrected atrial septal defect in his childhood and Ebstein's anomaly (EA) was receiving periodic ambulatory levosimendan infusions due to congestive right-sided heart failure (RHF). Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed features of EA Carpentier type D with severe right atrium (RA) dilation (36.5 cm2), atrialization of right ventricle (atrialized RV 45.3 cm2 and functional RV 12.4 cm2) with severely reduced contractility, adherence to the underlying myocardium, and downward displacement of the septal (17 mm/m2) and posterior leaflets with no outflow tract obstruction and massive tricuspid regurgitation (TR) . The left ventricle (LV) was normal, with leftward shift of the septum due to volume overload of RV.
Despite intermittent inotropic therapy, he presented in January 2020 in the emergency department with ‘circulatory driven’ syncope and worsening of functional class requiring three re-admissions for intravenous diuretic treatment of congestive RHF within 2 months. After evaluation, he was finally listed for heart transplant in elective status.
Later in June, his course was complicated by readmission to the intensive care unit again due to congestive RHF now refractory to medical treatment in INTERMACS profile 2. At admission, the patient was hypotensive with signs of systemic congestion, such as jugular ingurgitation, peripheral oedema, and liver congestion. The NT-proBNP plasmatic level was 3500 pg/mL; other laboratory values are on . After presentation of the case to the ‘Heart-Team’, we evaluated options of mechanical circulatory support (MCS) between (i) surgical right ventricular assist device (RVAD) placement (re-sternotomy, direct connection of inflow and outflow cannulas to right atrium and Pulmonary Artery (PA), periprocedural bleeding and infection risk) and (ii) less invasive percutaneous MCS with Abiomed Impella RP (Abiomed Intl.) device.
A 3D biomodel of pulmonary artery, right ventricle, subvalvular apparatus, right atrium, and inferior vena cava was segmented from the end-diastolic phase of an electrocardiographically gated computed tomography scan using software Mimics innovation 23 (Materialise, Leuven, Belgium). Further, processing and modelling of Impella RP device was performed with Rhino 7 (Rhino, Robert McNeel and Associates for Windows, Washington DC, USA). A virtual Impella RP device was virtually implanted with outflow point above pulmonary valve. It was possible to place virtually device with location of outflow 27 mm above pulmonary valve in the pulmonary artery trunk. Based on the competence of pulmonary valve and suitability in the 3D reconstruction of the RV , we decided to proceed with Impella RP implantation, having surgical RVAD options as back-up strategies in case of procedure failure. Regardless of the challenging anatomy, the device was correctly and uneventfully fluoroscopic-guided deployed, so as to position the inlet within the dilated RA and the outlet within the main PA . Transplant status of the patient was improved based on country regulations to ‘high urgent’. The patient experienced significant improvement in haemodynamics after Impella RP insertion ; cardiac index (CI) increased from 1.7 to 3 L/min/m2 and central venous pressure (CVP) decreased from 19 to 8 mmHg after 8 days with Impella RP support. Responsiveness to diuretics and laboratory values of end-organ function also improved ; diuretics were tapered down and serum creatinine and bilirubin steadily decreased . Impella RP was set to motor level of P6 with approximately 3–3.2 L/min calculated flow [Impella motor purge required continued infusion of unfractionated heparin (UFH) 650 IU/h given through the pump motor]. Repeat TTE showed normal LV with leftward septal shift, dilated RA and RV with the Impella RP at the level of PA, massive TR and competent pulmonary valve with device placed . Systemic UFH was continued for the duration of Impella RP support with an activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) goal of 60–70 s. Similarly, platelets course and lactate plasma dehydrogenase daily controls were stable . No thrombotic dysfunction nor device-related haemolysis occurred within 2 weeks of support. There were no patients or device-related complications, including absence of vascular thrombosis, local haemorrhage, vascular injury to the PA or displacement, as monitored by TTE, and chest X-ray within 2 weeks of support. At 15th day of support patient presented drop off in the calculated flow and increase of energy consumption with laboratory signs of haemolysis (platelets 80 × 103/mL and LDH 700 U/L). After 24 h volume loading and increase of anticoagulation to aPTT of 80 s with aim to decrease blood viscosity, we observed full normalization of all parameters (flow, energy consumption, platelets 200 × 103/mL, and LDH 230 U/L), excluding changed position of the pump, displaced more towards right ventricular outflow tract but still having outflow above pulmonary valve.
Based on clinical benefits for the patient, we decided to continue with ‘compassionate use’ of device apart of its certification. After 30 days of support device migrated to RV and after reposition failure, it was bed-side removed without any local complication. Patient kept stable and presented partial recovery of the RV function. Fortunately, the patient's clinical situation remained stable and he could be still included on the elective transplant waiting list. On 10th December 2020, 3 weeks after Impella RP explant, the proBNP plasmatic level was 200 pg/mL. Finally, after 4 months in clinical stable situation without increased demand of diuretics and free of inotropic support, the patient underwent heart transplantation on 12th March 2021.