A 49-year-old Caucasian woman presented with an acute deterioration in her allograft function seven years after she underwent a deceased-donor kidney transplant for end-stage kidney disease, secondary to autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Her transplant was a three human leukocyte antigen (HLA) mismatch to an unsensitised recipient. The initial therapy was standard immunosuppression at that time (cyclosporin, mycophenolate mofetil and prednisolone). The transplantation was complicated by acute rejection after one year due to steroid withdrawal, which was treated with reinstitution of steroids and conversion to tacrolimus therapy one year later. This was some five years prior to her current presentation. Her serum creatinine concentration then stabilized at 125 μmol/L. She subsequently developed osteoporosis and was commenced on calcitriol and alendronate. She was prescribed HRT in the form of estradiol and norethisterone for both the symptoms of menopause and for protection of her bones. In 2002 after the publication of the WHI study , she approached her general practitioner and requested to be withdrawn from HRT, which subsequently occurred over the next two months.
In early 2007, she presented to our transplant centre with lethargy, difficulty sleeping and anxiety over a period of one week. She had no recent illness. Her medications at this time included: tacrolimus 1.5 mg in the morning and 2 mg at night, prednisolone 4 mg daily, mycophenolate mofetil 500 mg twice daily, atorvastatin 20 mg daily, alendronate 70 mg weekly, omeprazole 20 mg daily, citalopram 20 mg daily, calcium carbonate 600 mg daily, calcitriol 0.25 μg daily and folic acid 5 mg daily. The only change to her medications had been the addition of tibolone therapy (2.5 mg per day) for the symptoms of menopause 10 days prior to presentation. On examination she was apyrexial, but was noted to be extremely tremulous and was newly hypertensive with a blood pressure of 144/96 mmHg (previous blood pressure: 118/74 mmHg). She was hyperglycemic with a blood sugar of 12.1 mmol/L, having not been diabetic previously (fasting glucose: 4.5 mmol/L). There was no abnormality found on examination of her cardiovascular, respiratory or gastrointestinal systems. She was found to have worsening graft function with a serum creatinine level of 177 μmol/L (previously 120 μmol/L) and to have tacrolimus toxicity with a level of 17.9 μg/L (liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) performed at the transplant centre, see Figure ), having previously been 5.2 μg/L (enzyme immunoassay (MEIA) performed at a local pathology centre). She was serologically positive for BK virus but below the threshold of clinical significance (1 × 103 at our institution), with a quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) level of 1.7 × 102, which had been noted for several months previously and had not changed.
Management included ceasing tibolone and reducing the tacrolimus dose to 0.5 mg in the morning and 1 mg at night until the concentration reduced to target level, which occurred over the next six days. Her creatinine level slowly returned to baseline over a period of three months, at which time her tacrolimus level was 4 μg/L at a dose of 2.5 mg per day; a similar dosage and drug level to where she had started.
The differential diagnosis of acute kidney injury included tacrolimus toxicity, BK nephropathy, acute rejection and chronic allograft nephropathy. Tacrolimus toxicity was consistent with the acute nature of the presentation, explained all of her symptoms and signs and was borne out by the resolution of her kidney injury as her tacrolimus level and allograft function returned to the previous baseline. It was noted that the baseline and recovery tacrolimus concentrations were measured by MEIA, compared to LC-MS/MS in our centre. However, previous studies have shown that MEIA overestimates tacrolimus concentration in the blood of kidney transplant recipients by 16 to 20 percent . Therefore the different assay methodologies would be likely to underestimate the true size of the effect. BK nephropathy, acute rejection and chronic allograft nephropathy were all considered unlikely due to her clinical presentation and the investigations performed. Although a kidney transplant biopsy was not performed (due to her rapid improvement with reduction in tacrolimus dose and cessation of tibolone), none of these three possibilities would have resolved in this time-frame had they been the true cause of her kidney dysfunction.
The differential diagnosis of tacrolimus toxicity included interaction with new medications, overdose of tacrolimus tablets (either inadvertent or deliberate) and diarrhea. She had no history of a diarrheal illness or loose bowel motions. It was considered unlikely that she accidentally overdosed on the tablets as she was known to be adherent with very consistent blood levels of both tacrolimus and cyclosporin before that. There had been no recent dose changes to cause confusion. The only recent medication had been the tibolone, and although there are no reported drug interactions with tacrolimus and tibolone, we considered it possible that the initiation of tibolone had precipitated the tacrolimus toxicity by some unrecognised mechanism.