A 36-year-old primigravidae African woman presented with an umbilical lump that had bluish discoloration for 2 years. She reported a history of cyclic monthly pain associated with bleeding from the umbilicus. Her past medical involves appendectomy for the past 16 years, but her family history was uneventful. On physical examination, she had a 1×2 cm purplish nodule at the umbilicus . It was not tender, and there were no signs of infection. There was a 2.0 cm healed surgical scar on the upper right-side part of the abdomen as a result of an appendectomy that was done 2 years ago.
Abdominopelvic ultrasound was essentially normal. Abdominal computed tomography scan revealed hydronephrosis of the right kidney. However, the rest of the intra-abdominal organs were normal. The provisional diagnosis included Sister Mary Joseph’s nodule and hemangioma. Fine needle aspiration cytology of the umbilical nodule was highly suspicious for the diagnosis of endometriosis .
After a thorough discussion between the patient and a team of gynecologists with the patient regarding the need for surgical removal of the umbilicus and the possibility of recurrence, she consented to the removal of the umbilicus. Before the removal of the lesion, she was first managed medically using analgesics for 2 months; however, she did not show total improvement. Then the nodular umbilicus mass was completely excised, and the defect was repaired. Excision of the mass was done under general anesthesia by a gynecologist together with a master’s student. She was prescribed analgesics and antibiotics and discharged home on second day postoperatively. The mass was taken for histological evaluation. Microscopically, the tissue sections from the umbilical mass revealed the proliferation of typical endometrial glands in a nonreactive endometrial stroma. The glands are lined by columnar epithelium that resembles the endometrial glandular epithelium. The subepithelium is composed of small round cells that resemble the endometrial stroma. This confirmed the diagnosis of umbilical endometriosis . Therefore, it took ∼2 years from the initial presentation of the signs and symptoms until when the definitive diagnosis was obtained.
The patient was followed up for 1 year postoperatively, and she denied any pain from the operated site, and there was no recurrence after the clinical evaluation was done. Moreover, for 1 year after management, she could not conceive despite her current condition being stable. This work has been reported in line with the SCARE (Surgical CAse REport) 2020 criteria.