A 51-year-old male patient was presented to the orthopedic clinic at King Saud University Medical City on July 11, 2023. He presented with a chief complaint of right foot pain at the plantar aspect, accompanied by the observation of swelling between the first and the second metatarsal shafts. His complaint of pain and swelling started 10 and 4 years prior, respectively. Since their onset, both symptoms have progressed in nature. Prior to his presentation, the patient had been surgically and medically free, and able to walk and undergo regular daily activities with no limitations. Throughout the years, he had been taking non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), including meloxicam, for pain relief. A year prior to his presentation, the pain started impeding daily activities, and he found no further relief with the use of analgesia. The patient denied prior instances of swelling in other areas in his body. Additionally, he denied any history of trauma, or constitutional symptoms such as fever, fatigue, night sweats, weight loss or loss of appetite. Furthermore, the patient denied any history of smoking.
Physical examination of his right foot revealed obvious swelling between the 1st and 2nd metatarsal shafts, extending to plantar aspect of the foot and the medial aspect of the first metatarsal shaft . The swelling was 6*3 Cm in size, displaying an irregular shape accompanied by erythema. It was nonmobile, firm in its consistency, tender, and hot.
The patient demonstrated normal plantar flexion and dorsiflexion of the ankle joint with no pain, as well as pain-free and normal eversion and inversion of the subtalar joint. However, due to pain in the first and second phalanges of the first and second rays, there was limited range of motion in that area. He was neurovascularly intact and exhibited an antalgic gait while mobilizing. Plain radiographs demonstrated soft tissue swelling with a medial surrounding of bone density .
Further investigation was deemed necessary, prompting the indication of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI revealed a large mass between the first and third metatarsal shafts, extending to the plantar aspect of the foot. The mass exhibited a nonhomogenous composition of fibrous tissue and bony structures, and surgical intervention was indicated .
The operation was performed under general anaesthesia, with the patient in the supine position. A 350 mmHg torniquet was applied, and a medial incision was made . Following dissection of the fascia, the mass was observed to be large, composed of fibrous and chondral tissues, and reaching between the first and third metatarsal bones . Total excision was performed, and triple washout with hydrogen peroxide, iodine, and saline was performed. The mass was sent to histopathology for confirmation of the diagnosis. The wound was sutured in layers with vicryl 1 and vicryl 0 the vicryl 2.0, the skin was closed with monocryl 4.0., and pressure dressing was applied. The patient was in stable condition and had intact vascularity. The excisional biopsy measured 5.5 × 3.5 × 3.0 cm. The lesion was observed to contain mature fatty tissue with areas of fibrous and cartilaginous tissue and was negative for malignancy. The intraoperative radiograph is shown post-excision .
Postoperatively, the patient had intact neurovascularity and experienced no complications. He was discharged home in stable condition with appropriate analgesia and a course of prophylactic antibiotic. He was advised for toe touch ambulation and further follow-up in the clinic, and had been on an ankle brace for two weeks. After the two weeks, the wound demonstrated appropriate healing, and sutures were removed. There had been no signs of infection or wound dehiscence. The patient commenced gradual range of motion two weeks postoperatively and had reached full range within one week. He returned to his normal activities four weeks following the excision. Radiographic imaging on the 8-month follow-up are shown