A six year old female child was brought by her parents with flexion deformity of both the thumbs. The deformity was noticed when the child was six months old, but the finger could be extended to the neutral position at that time. Since one year, extension has not been possible and the finger becomes painful if it is tried. The child did not have any other anamoly. There was no history of trigger thumb in maternal or paternal families.
On examination, IP joints were in 40o of fixed flexion. A 2*2 cm tender nodule was found at the crease of MCP joint. There was no triggering, but minimal extension at IP joint was possible when thumb was flexed at MCP joint. There was no associated MCP joint laxity. Both thumbs presented with similar findings. Figs , - The child was diagnosed of having bilateral trigger thumb. Surgical management was decided upon. Under General anaesthesia, with tourniquet applied to the arm, transverse skin incision was made opposite the MCP joint crease. Neurovascular bundles were retracted on either side. The thickened A1 pulley was split longitudinally. But full extension of IP joint could not be achieved. Another constricted annular pulley was found just proximal to A1. It too was released, and IP joint was completely extended. The nodular thickening of FHL was left undisturbed. - Complete active extension of IP joint was possible post-operatively, but the joint tended to be in flexed position. A removable extension splint was given and the patient was asked to do active finger movements atleast thrice a day after removing the splint. The deformity subsided after two weeks and the splint was removed. Neurovascular function was intact. Figs , - After two months of physiotherapy, the patient had following movements:
Patient has minimal restriction of IP joint flexion of right thumb and minimal MCP joint hyperextension of left thumb. The child is followed for two years during which she did not develop any complication. There is no functional impairment.