A 36-year-old male, without significant medical history, presented to our emergency department in severe respiratory distress after a confirmed suicide attempt involving bleach ingestion. On arrival, his blood pressure was 70/50 mmHg, oxygen saturation was 90% with a non-rebreather mask, and his respiratory rate was 40 breaths per minute. His examination revealed bilateral lung base crackles, distant heart sounds with regular tachycardia, pleuritic friction rub, and crepitus upon anterior neck palpation. Due to his critical condition, immediate intubation and haemodynamic support with norepinephrine and vasopressin were required. An initial 12-lead ECG showed sinus tachycardia with PR depressions and downward sloping TP segments in specific leads (Spodick’s sign), suggesting acute pericarditis . A subsequent transthoracic echocardiogram showed a trace pericardial effusion with preserved left ventricular function and no acute valvular abnormalities.
His initial lab results showed a high-sensitivity troponin of 65 ng/L, a white cell count of 29 × 103 cmm (normal range: 4–11 × 103 cmm), lactic acid level of 3.3 mmol/L (normal range: 0.5–2.2 mmol/L), an anion gap of 17, and a serum creatinine of 2.6 mg/dL, compared to a baseline of 1 mg/dL . Computed tomography revealed a defect in the right lateral oropharyngeal wall, with gas and contrast material tracking into the retropharyngeal space, mediastinum, bilateral pleural spaces, and a small pericardial effusion . Thoracic surgery was consulted, and bilateral chest tubes were placed with suction. Pleural fluid cultures grew extended-spectrum beta-lactamase Klebsiella pneumoniae. The patient received ceftolozane–tazobactam infusion. On the second day of hospitalization, his blood pressure and respiratory status improved, and he was weaned off vasopressors and extubated to nasal cannula.
In the following days, the patient experienced three episodes of acute atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter immediately after drinking small amounts of fluids. These arrhythmias were either self-limited or responded to a 5 mg intravenous metoprolol dose in one instance. On the fifth day of hospitalization, a barium swallow study was performed to evaluate oesophageal perforation, revealing a large pharyngeal leak extending into the mediastinum adjacent to the proximal oesophagus. Immediately after image acquisition, the patient developed sustained atrial flutter with a heart rate of 150 b.p.m. and a mean arterial pressure of 55. He was treated with intravenous metoprolol tartrate and amiodarone, but the arrhythmia persisted, leading to worsening haemodynamic compromise. Ultimately, synchronized cardioversion with 200 J successfully restored sinus rhythm .
The following day, he underwent left-sided video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery, which included debridement of the pleural space, drainage of the anterior and posterior-superior mediastinum through a cervical incision, flexible endoscopy, and nasoenteric feed tube placement. Due to the severe consequences of drinking, a jejunostomy tube was placed, effectively preventing further arrhythmias. The rest of his hospitalization was extended due to persistent infection and recurrent effusion, necessitating prolonged chest tube placement. He remained free from arrhythmia thought this time and antiarrhythmic medication was discontinued. He was discharged on the 61st hospital day with close follow-up with the thoracic surgery team. Roughly 1 month following discharge, he appeared for a follow-up appointment in outpatient clinic. There was no evidence of arrhythmia at this time and an EKG was obtained which demonstrated normal sinus rhythm.