An 11.5-year-old boy was admitted to the authors' institute for shortening of the right lower extremity observed for 8 years. On physical examination, the patient had congenital shortening of the thigh and leg, genu valgus, and was missing lateral feet in an equinovalgus position. On anteroposterior (AP) radiographs, the length of the right femur and tibia were 39.0 and 30.0 cm, respectively, while on the left they were 42.4 and 35.4 cm, respectively . Additionally, a three-rayed foot and talocalcaneal fusion were present. Based on history, clinical evaluation, and radiograph, the boy was diagnosed with type-1C congenital fibular deficiency . The short tibia in the leg gave the utmost functional defect.
He was managed by limb lengthening on the right femur and tibia in a single setting using the Ilizarov technique. Double-Ilizarov frames of appropriate size were prepared and assembled preoperatively. The femoral segment of the frame consisted of a half ring on the proximal femur, a 5/8 ring on the distal femur, and one complete ring in the middle. Lengthening of the femur was performed between the complete ring and the 5/8 ring. The tibial segment consisted of a 5/8 ring and one complete ring on the proximal tibia, a half ring for the calcaneus, and one complete ring in the middle. Lengthening of the tibia was performed between the two complete rings. The femoral and the tibial segments were connected with two straight/flexure devices on the level of the knee joint to stabilize the tension of ACL and the soft tissue of the knee joint so as to prevent against knee dislocation during lengthening . Intraoperatively, blunt dissection and incisions were operated to expose ring sites when needed. The fibular osteotomy was performed transversely with a sharp osteotome. The double Ilizarov frame was applied to the right limb using percutaneous 1.8 mm K-wires and drop wires according to the Ilizarov principle. After stabilizing the external fixators and tensioning the wires, osteotomies on the right femur and tibia were performed with a bone knife after drilling. Then the wounds were closed with the application of a drainage tube.
The duration of the surgery was 110 min, and approximately 50 ml of blood was lost during the entire surgical procedure. Oral antibiotics were prescribed, and the dressing was changed regularly. Seven days after the surgery, lengthening was started at the rate of 0.25 mm per time on the right femur and tibia four times daily. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were taken every 2 weeks during the lengthening process and every 4 weeks afterward. It is very important to estimate the leg length discrepancy at the end of the growth according to Paley's multiplier method, during the lengthening schedule, in stages, and during the growing period of the child . The lengthening lasted for 5 weeks on the femur and 8 weeks on the tibia. The half-ring of the proximal femur and half-ring of the calcaneus were removed upon complete consolidation of the bony callus at 28 weeks. The connecting rods between the femoral and tibial segment of this double-Ilizarov frame were also removed and a plantigrade foot was achieved . The Ilizarov frames were completely removed at 40 weeks . Superficial infection and pin-site infection were resolved after the removal of pins and a course of oral antibiotics. The knee joint range of motion was reduced to 30° on flexion compared with the normal side in physical examination, but no other delayed complication was evident. At follow-up, the limb length discrepancy was 0.3 cm, 0.96 cm, and 1.5 cm at 1 year, 2 years, and 3.5 years postoperatively, respectively (, ). The patient's right foot deformity corrective surgery was performed 3 years after the lengthening operation, but the equinus deformity of the foot was not part of the compensation for LDD. The LLD, at the last follow-up, was acceptable and did not require a further lengthening procedure. The flexion functional examination of the right knee showed moderate restriction .