A 7-month-old male, intact, 18 kg (39.6 lb) Labrador mix presented for acute vomiting, rigidity, and dull mentation. The owners had not been home for 14 h prior. When they returned, they found the dog laterally recumbent, rigid, but conscious, with vomit, and a chewed lamotrigine (GlaxoSmithKline plc, Lamotrigine [Lamictal XR Extended Release], Brentford, London, UK) bottle nearby. The dog ingested approximately fifty 100 mg tablets. The estimated oral dose ingested was 278 mg/kg (611.6 mg/lb). There were no other animals in the household. The dog had been healthy with no previous illnesses.
On presentation, the dog had a rectal temperature of 39.4°C (103.0°F). On physical examination, the dog had good body condition. He was tachypneic at 60 breaths per minute with clear lung fields. The mouth was rigidly closed. Abdominal palpation was soft with no intra-abdominal masses. Rectal examination revealed normal, brown stool. Neurological examination revealed a dull mentation, vertical nystagmus, severe alligator rolling with extensor rigidity in all four limbs. Cardiac examination revealed a heart rate of 160 beats per minute, and he had pale pink mucous membranes with a capillary refill time of 2 s. An intermittently irregular heart rhythm was noted.
Diagnostic testing upon presentation included an electrocardiogram and blood pressure measurement. This identified the arrhythmia as multifocal ventricular tachycardia . The blood pressure was found to be 104 mmHg. An intravenous (IV) catheter was placed, and a balanced electrolyte solution (Plasmalyte A; Baxter International Inc, Deerfield, IL, USA) was started at three times maintenance (180 mL/kg/day). Because of the patient’s abnormal mentation and neurologic status on presentation, oral medication could not be administered and also an IV catheter could not be placed safely initially. Methocarbamol (Auxilium Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Chesterbrook, PA, USA) was administered (100 mg/kg [220 mg/lb], rectally) mixed with 3 mL of saline. A lidocaine (Lidocaine hydrochloride; Amphastar Pharmaceuticals, Inc, Rancho Cucamonga, CA, USA; 2 mg/kg [4.4 mg/lb], IV) bolus was administered IV soon thereafter converting electrocardiogram to a normal sinus rhythm.
The dog was hospitalized for supportive care and monitoring. After the single methocarbamol and lidocaine doses, three times maintenance IV fluid therapy was continued; however, no further methocarbamol doses or lidocaine boluses were administered. Two hours after presentation, the patient was able to stand and ambulate with mild ataxia. A mild head tremor lastinĝ45 s was recorded at that time, which resolved on its own. Three hours after presentation, another electrocardiogram was taken, which revealed a normal heart rate, 136 beats per minute, with occasional ventricular premature complexes. Blood gas was evaluated to be normal . Low–normal potassium was noted at 3.7 meq/L (reference range 3.6–4.9 meq/L). The dog began to eat within the first 4 h of presentation and had no further vomiting.
Three times maintenance IV fluids were administered until that evening when they were decreased to two times maintenance (120 mL/kg/day). The following day, another blood gas was taken, which revealed that all values remained within the normal limits . An electrocardiogram was also repeated and found to have normal rate and rhythm . By 48 h after presentation, fluids were decreased to 60 mL/kg/day, and the patient was discharged soon thereafter.
The dog was presented for recheck 72 h after original presentation. He was presented with a rectal temperature of 39.6°C (103.2°F). On physical examination, the dog was found to be in good body condition. He was panting at 60 breaths per minute. His heart rate was 125 beats per minute, and he had pink mucous membranes with a capillary refill time of 2 s. Neurological examination revealed normal mentation, normal spinal reflexes, and placing reflexes. Cardiac examination revealed normal sinus rhythm. No further arrhythmias were noted on electrocardiogram.