A 36-year-old male with no known comorbidities presented to the emergency room with the complaints of sudden onset aphasia, persistent vomiting, and bilateral lower limb weakness for the past 1 day. On examination, he had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 11/15 (E3V2M6). His proximal and distal lower limb powers were 3/5. Rest of the examination was unremarkable. His history was significant for an episode of seizure 1 month back, with symptoms of altered mental state during the fit that resolved spontaneously within a few minutes. Computed tomography (CT) angiogram revealed a compact AVM in the left frontal lobe, three aneurysms in the DACA distribution, intraventricular hemorrhage involving the 3rd and 4th ventricles, venous drainage to large vein draining the superior sagittal sinus, and poor vascular blush in the territory of the left ACA, suggestive of an infarct. He was admitted to a high dependency unit for observation.
The patient was awaiting digital subtraction angiography for almost 2 days when his GCS suddenly dropped to 5/15, with pupils bilaterally equal, dilated, and nonreactive. He underwent emergency intubation and was shifted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Head CT without contrast and CT angiogram revealed redemonstration of subarachnoid hemorrhage from the proximal largest aneurysm with intraventricular extension predominantly along the corpus callosum, with effaced basal cisterns and an interval increase in both hydrocephalus and cerebral edema . The patient was shifted to interventional radiology suite for emergency coiling of the aneurysm and subsequent insertion of an external ventricular drain (EVD) for secondary hydrocephalus in the space of the next 5 h following decreased consciousness. The decision to prioritize coiling over EVD placement was influenced by the risk of repeat hemorrhage from suddenly decompressing the ventricles.
Angiography revealed a Spetzler-Martin Grade 2 AVM, being fed by two vessels, and draining into the superior sagittal sinus through the superficial cortical veins. The major feeder arose from left callosomarginal artery and a minor feeder from the left MCA. The nidus measured 18 × 14 mm in diameter. The angiogram also revealed multiple flow aneurysms on the feeder from left callosomarginal artery, with the largest aneurysm, 14 × 8 mm in size, at the callosomarginal bifurcation. Pericallosal artery, with a relatively sluggish blood flow, was seen arising from its neck, because of which this aneurysm was not embolized. The nidus and rest of the flow aneurysms were embolized using the onyx [ and ].
The immediate postprocedural period was uneventful and uncomplicated. The patient, nevertheless, did not regain consciousness and was shifted to the ICU on controlled mechanical ventilation for further management and observation. Postoperative angiogram did not reveal any significant spasm. However, the patient’s neurological status did not improve, and he died in the hospital following a complicated clinical course.