The patient was a 61-year-old Caucasian male with a history of coronary artery disease and hyperlipidemia, who initially presented with right shoulder and arm pain, as well as numbness and tingling. He was very active, working as a tennis instructor without any neurological deficits. On exam, motor/sensation was fully intact throughout both upper and lower extremities, with no upper motor neuron signs. He was classified as American Spinal Injury Association class E, Nurik Grade 0, with a full mJOA score. Despite this, the patient had failed conservative measures such as over-the-counter anti-inflammatory medications, but had not received prior spinal injection nor surgical intervention. Advanced imaging was obtained. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was notable for a cystic mass within the spinal canal on the right side posterior to the C6 vertebral body, causing spinal cord compression and right neural foraminal stenosis (, ). This was attributed to synovial facet cyst formation. Given failed conservative measures, patient preference, and clear evidence on imaging, surgical intervention was recommended. The surgical plan was for C6 laminectomy decompression, right-sided C6-7 foraminotomy, and surgical excision and biopsy of mass under general anesthesia with intraoperative neuromonitoring.
The C6-7 laminectomy and foraminotomy were performed and the cystic mass was visualized on the right side, compressing the dura. The mass was isolated and excised. Pathology revealed a synovial cyst. Motor and sensory evoked potentials remained at baseline with no changes throughout the entire procedure. Estimated blood loss was 100 cc. A subfascial drain was also placed which was removed on POD2. Output was 275 cc in the first 24 h, and then slowed to 40 cc over the second 24 h. Approximately 45 min after the procedure, he had full strength and sensation in the bilateral upper and lower extremities.
Two hours postoperatively; the patient complained that he was unable to move his arms or his legs after being sat up by nursing staff. He was found to have 0/5 strength throughout all motor groups in the bilateral lower extremities, dullness to sensation throughout the bilateral lower extremities, 5/5 deltoid strength bilaterally, 4/5 biceps strength bilaterally, and 3/5 triceps, wrist flexor/extensor, and interossei strength bilaterally. Patellar and Achilles reflexes were absent. The mean arterial pressure (MAP) before this episode was 91. Leading diagnosis at this time was ACS due to transiently decreased perfusion related to hypotension.
Ten minutes following onset of his weakness, he was found to have near full strength and sensation, with the exception of 4/5 triceps, wrist extensors, wrist flexors, and interossei. The MAP, at this time, was 101. After another 10 min, he again had recurrence of the neurological deficits. The MAP was measured at 93. This second episode resolved in approximately 10 additional min. BP readings were obtained per Recovery Unit protocol. In the Recovery Unit, these measures are obtained every 5–10 min. An urgent MRI was performed, which demonstrated expected post-surgical changes without evidence of cord signal change or compression and no compressive hematoma. In addition, there was a low likelihood of post-operative hematoma given the transient/intermittent symptoms described above ( , ).
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for close monitoring of both his BP (2 min cycles) and neurologic exam (whenever MAP <95, otherwise every 1–2 h per ICU protocol). He was given one dose of steroids postoperatively (dexamethasone 10 mg IV) in response to his symptoms as reperfusion injury was suspected. MAPs were maintained in the high 90s without the need for pressure support (norepinephrine or alternative therapies). High dose steroid treatment was not utilized. Over the next 24 h, his neurologic exam stabilized at full strength and sensation, with no recurrence of neurologic deficits. He had complete resolution of his pre-operative symptoms with normal neurological function and returned to teaching tennis over 1 year after surgery.