An 81-year-old Japanese man with a past history of stroke, hypertension, and dyslipidemia presented to our hospital because of respiratory failure. He had presented to the department of neurosurgery in our hospital 9 months earlier with a diagnosis of right cerebral infarction. He then developed left motor hemiparesis, left sensory deficit, and aphasia. He was operated on for PEG tube replacement (Button-type gastrostomy tube; Olympus Medical System Co., Ideal PEG Kit) by a gastroenterologist without complications 6 months before admission. Soon after the procedure he developed recurrent cerebral infarction and it became difficult to communicate with him. He had presented with aspiration pneumonia 3 weeks before the present admission. After being treated with antibiotic therapy for 2 weeks, he was discharged home 3 days prior to the present admission.
On admission day of the present case, he had developed diarrhea and begun vomiting in the morning. After vomiting, he had been well until the evening; however, he then went into respiratory failure. His family called emergency medical services (EMS), and he was transported to our hospital. On examination in our emergency room, his temperature was 38.6 °C, blood pressure 155/70 mmHg, his pulse was 125 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute, with oxygen saturation of 94 % on 10 liters of ambient air per minute given by mask. On physical examination, crackles and wheezing were heard on bilateral lower lung fields, and there was no tenderness and peritoneal signs in all quadrants of his abdomen. Results of a laboratory examination showed pH 7.445, partial pressure of oxygen 82.9 mmHg, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 37.5 mmHg, base excess 1.9 mmol/L, white cell count 16,830/μl, C-reactive protein 4.30 mg/dl, aspartate transaminase 29 IU/l, alanine transaminase 27 IU/l, alkaline phosphatase 271 IU/l, lactate dehydrogenase 224 IU/l, urea nitrogen 22.1 mg/dl, and creatinine 0.62 mg/dL. Computed tomography (CT) showed HPVG (diagnosed by appearance of branching lucencies within 2 cm of liver capsule ) and gas within the wall of his stomach . A CT obtained 3 weeks before admission with diagnosis of aspiration pneumonia showed no HPVG and no gas within the wall of his stomach in the visualized portions of his upper abdomen . He received a 2-week course of antibiotic therapy (ampicillin-sulbactam) for aspiration pneumonia, and feeding products were changed to another type. Follow-up CT on hospital day 14 showed HPVG and air within his stomach wall diminishing . His respiratory condition gradually improved. He was discharged on hospital day 17.