A 67-year-old Chinese diabetic and hypertensive female patient presented with sudden onset vertigo with nausea and vomiting 4 days ago. Then she presented with sudden onset of right hemiparesis 2 days ago and developed rapidly quadriplegia (upper and lower limbs with grade 0 power), dysarthria, bilateral facial weakness. Her eyes moved normally and no diplopia. She had no history of smoking or drinking. On physical examination, the temperature was 36.8 °C, the pulse 76 beats per minute, and the blood pressure 165/95 mmHg. Detailed neurological examinations revealed quadriplegia, dysarthria, bilateral facial weakness, bilateral positive Babinski’s sign. The pupils were equal and reactive. Corneal reflexes were present and there was no gaze palsy and nystagmus, scoring 24 on the National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS). On admission, laboratory findings indicated she had abnormal fasting blood sugar, HbA1c, total cholesterol (TC), triglyceride (TG), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-c), uric acid. Detailed results were shown in Table . Twenty four hours Holter electrocardiography showed sinus rhythm without ST-T segment change and occasional premature atrial contractions (22 times within 24 h). Echocardiography showed mild mitral valve regurgitation and the left ventricular ejection fraction was 68%. Color Doppler flow imaging examination showed a mild resistance index of the intracranial segment of the vertebral artery (VA) and BA.
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain diffusion-weighted imaging at 3.0 T revealed a giant heart-shaped hyperintensity area (“heart appearance-like sign”) on both sides in the ventral ponto-medullary junction [Fig. ]. Abnormal signal was observed in the same region by T1, T2, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC). On the basis of these findings, the patient was diagnosed to be having an acute bilateral ponto-medullary junction infarction. Next, we executed the detection of whole brain digital subtraction angiography (DSA) for the patient and DSA showed the basilar artery and vertebral artery remained intact [Fig. ]. Therefore, we speculated that the bilateral ponto-medullary junction infarction might be caused by the deep perforating branch of the basilar artery. The patient was treated with Aspirin (100 mg/d) and rehabilitation was initiated. Six months later, the patient still had quadriplegia (upper and lower limbs with grade 2 power), dysarthria, bilateral facial weakness and nasal feeding.