This is the case of a previously healthy 6-month-old male infant with an 11-day history of severe diarrhea and a 5-day history of vomiting before admission at our hospital. He had no familial history of urolithiasis. Oral administration of the rotavirus vaccine had already been completed. He was initially treated at a local hospital where his laboratory findings revealed dehydration: blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 23.9 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.35 mg/dL; sodium, 135 mEq/L; and uric acid (UA), 13.0 mg/dL. He was transferred to our hospital after two days. On admission, his blood pressure was 107/79 mmHg; pulse was 135 beats per minute; and temperature was 37.8 °C. His body weight was 7.9 kg, 9.2% less than his pre-illness weight of 8.7 kg. His laboratory findings improved: BUN, 13.1 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.30 mg/dL; sodium, 150 mEq//L; UA, 5.6 mg/dL; pH 7.44; HCO3−, 21.1 mmol/L; and base excess, -2.2 mmol/L. Dipstick urinalysis revealed pH 6.0, specific gravity 1.020, hematuria (occult 3+), and proteinuria (2+). Fraction excretion of sodium and UA were 0.05% and 5.7%, respectively. His stool was positive for adenovirus and negative for rotavirus and norovirus antigens. As a treatment for adenovirus gastroenteritis, we initiated fluid replacement therapy. On the second hospital day, he suddenly developed anuria. An ultrasound (US) of the kidney showed a bilateral dilated pelvis (Society for Fetal Urology [SFU] grade I), although an obstructive lesion could not be identified. We continued fluid replacement therapy, assuming that the anuria was due to prerenal AKI, but it did not improve. Moreover, after fluid replacement therapy on the third hospital day, his body weight increased back to his pre-illness weight of 9.0 kg. US showed bilateral dilated pelvis (SFU grade II) and stone-like masses in the left ureter with no stones in the right urinary tract. We then performed abdominal computed tomography (CT), which revealed bilateral hydronephrosis , left ureteral stones , and right bladder ureteral junction stones . Laboratory data showed that the creatinine level increased to 1.00 mg/dL. Based on these findings, we diagnosed postrenal AKI due to obstructive bilateral urinary stones associated with adenovirus gastroenteritis. Because the urinary stones were obstructive, no pharmacologic interventions were initially planned and we intended to proceed with a percutaneous nephrostomy or transurethral ureterolithotripsy. However, during pre-surgical preparation, spontaneous urination with stable urine volume was observed and surgical plans were deferred. A few stones were noted in the urine , which mainly consisted of ammonium acid urate (> 98%). On the fourth hospital day (before the release of stone analysis results), the urine pH was 5.0. We initiated potassium citrate therapy, targeting a pH of 6.5–7.0. The following day, US confirmed resolution of the urinary stones and bilateral hydronephrosis; the serum creatinine level improved to 0.25 mg/dL. He was discharged nine days after admission.