A 60-year-old woman was admitted to our oncology department on 2021-06-21 with recurrent palpitations and findings of anemia for more than 2 months, diagnosed as marginal zone lymphoma and treated with antitumor therapy. Laboratory examinations revealed anemia, renal function damage, hyperuricemia, and chronic viral hepatitis B, and bone marrow puncture results suggested a lymphoma. However, the patient’s platelet count and coagulation, liver, and heart functions were normal, and there was no bleeding. Antinuclear (ANAs), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic (ANCAs) and anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) antibodies were all negative. Complement levels were normal. As part of the examination of her condition, she was required to undergo an enhanced CT examination of the chest and whole abdomen. On the day of the examination, the patient entered the CT room at 10:43 a.m. and an iopamidol syringe was attached without incident. A chest CT was performed at 10:45 a.m. Scattered exudates could be seen (see Fig. -ABCD). After a static push of contrast agent, at 10:50 it was shown that the pulmonary exudate was rapidly increasing (see Fig. -EFGH). At 10:54, she felt very bloated and had to sit up. At 10:56, She was unconscious after spitting blood. The adjoining room’s emergency physician arrived in the CT room and assisted with resuscitation. Mechanical ventilation was given after endotracheal intubation, and hemorrhagic sputum could be drawn into the airway. An indwelling gastric tube connected to a negative pressure box can induce bloody fluid. At 12:10, the patient became conscious and could move his limbs autonomously. At 14:35, Fibrobronchoscopic alveolar lavage was performed. We saw bloody sputum and several reddish neoplasms in the segmental bronchus. Bronchoscopes at that time used eyepieces, so no photos could be taken. We did not test sputum for the haemosiderin of alveolar macrophages, so Golde score could not be calculated. Despite of the absence of true BAL, we consider an alveolar haemorrhage as probable. She was sent to the ICU for further treatment.
The patient denies a history of food and drug allergies. On physical examination, she had an anemic appearance, and small, 0.5–1 cm, hard, non-tender, and well-defined lymph nodes were palpable in the left axilla and bilateral groins. The remaining superficial lymph nodeswere not palpable. The respiratory sounds in both lungs were slightly coarse, and crackles were heard bilaterally.
The patient was administered levofloxacin for infection, norepinephrine for gastric lavage, esomeprazole for acid inhibition and gastric protection, methylprednisolone sodium succinate for allergy treatment, and.
blood transfusions for improving anemia..
On the second day after admission to ICU, gastroscopy showed congestion of the gastric body mucosa, and several mucosal bleeding spots were seen in the greater curvature and posterior wall, without active bleeding or ulceration, and the morphology of mucosal folds was normal, as shown in Fig. . Fiberoptic bronchoscopy showed no bleeding, but the patient had a secondary infection after pulmonary hemorrhage. After one week of treatment, the patient was weaned and extubated, and transferred to the general ward.