A 27-year-old woman presented with a large subcutaneous mass in the upper back of 8 months' duration.
Family history and past medical history were unremarkable. The patient reported that she had been involved in a motor vehicle accident 3 years previously, in which she sustained a brain concussion, fracture of the right lamina of the C-6 vertebra, and comminuted fractures of the left radius, ulna and femur.
Physical examination revealed a firm mass measuring 15 × 10 cm, adherent to its surroundings, with no apparent pathological vasculature or satellite lesions. Cytological examination was inconclusive. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a solid space-occupying lesion measuring 12 × 4.8 × 7.6 cm, located in the left paraspinal region beneath the trapezium muscle (asterisk), compressing the paraspinal muscles medially . The tumor has a heterogeneous appearance on T2 weighted images and enhanced with the injection of contrast material, demonstrating its vascularity. Findings on core needle biopsy were compatible with desmoid tumor. Colonoscopy revealed no abnormalities.
Owing to the large size of the tumor and its close proximity to the spine, the initial treatment consisted of tamoxifen 20 mg twice daily and indomethacin 250 mg q8h. The treatment was well tolerated. However, after 4 months, neither subjective nor objective changes in tumor consistency or size were noted. The tamoxifen dosage was therefore doubled. Computerized tomography (CT) scan, 4 months later demonstrated tumor growth. There was no evidence of infiltration of adjacent bony structures or pulmonary metastases. The patient was offered surgery.
The tumor was surgically excised. It measured 9 × 12 × 22 cm and weighed 1970 grams. It was relatively well circumscribed, with a fibrous consistency, and no areas of hemorrhage or necrosis. Microscopic study revealed relatively low (up to 2–3/10HPF) mitotic activity . The surgical margins were clear. At present, 24 months postoperatively, the patient is tumor-free.