A 62-year-old lady recently presented to the emergency room of National Liver Institute, Menoufia University, with 3-day history of high fever (41 °C), chills, but neither respiratory symptoms nor alteration of mental status were present. Clinical examination revealed scleral icterus and significant tenderness over the right hypochondrium.
Her history was significant for COVID-19 pneumonia and ICU admission for around 22 days in a nearby hospital 1 month earlier. The patient’s past history was not significant apart from an open cholecystectomy 20 years ago with uneventful postoperative period. The patient is neither diabetic nor hypertensive, and no history of past endoscopic procedures.
Laboratory investigations on presentation showed hyperbilirubinemia, leukocytosis, and pattern of cholestatic hepatitis, but normal COVID-19-related laboratory markers.
Also, immediate point of care ultrasound (POCUS) revealed a right hepatic lobe focal lesion measuring (10×10cm), along with an evident stent inside the common bile duct (CBD) . A consecutive computerized tomography scan of the abdomen confirmed the right lobe focal lesion as a complex abscess occupying large area .
Sonography guided, a 10-french pigtail catheter was inserted percutaneously into the abscess cavity meanwhile, with aspiration of 50 mL of purulent fluid that was sent for culture and sensitivity. The patient was transferred to the ward and parenteral broad-spectrum antibiotics were initiated. Few days later, the culture and sensitivity results gave priority to Escherichia coli, infection with modulation of prescribed antibiotic.
In the following days, the clinical status of the patient did not show any improvement with persistent fever, discharge from the pigtail, and non-change in sonographic measures of the abscess cavity. The antibiotic regimen was changed according to the results of culture and sensitivity from the pigtail discharge.
Further assessment in the following days has confirmed the condition as non-resolving abscess. This non-response to the classic measures of abscess treatment (culture-based antibiotics and percutaneous drainage) added to the sonographic findings and the cholestatic liver derangement had mandated stepping to endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERCP).
The CBD was cannulated after strenuous extraction of a long (20 cm) catheter that was largely displaced into the duodenal lumen. Cholangiogram revealed mildly dilated CBD with multiple large stones accompanied by mildly dilated central biliary radicals. Surprisingly, an old stent was hardly seen inside the dilated CBD, with mild dilatation of the intrahepatic biliary channels .
Papillotomy and papilloplasty were undertaken followed by stones’ extraction by a balloon extractor. The procedure was ended by inserting 2 plastic stents (10 cm× 10 f), and a flow of thick dark bile was inspected.
Finally, the patient fully recovered, and the pigtail was removed. Follow-up 2 weeks later revealed stable recovery.