A 37-year-old female patient, who is 22 weeks pregnant, came to the obstetrician with main complaints of fever, pain throughout the abdomen especially in the upper part, and shortness of breath. Following the procedural standard during the covid-19 pandemic, the patient was tested for SARS-Cov-2 IgM/IgG twice and both showed non-reactive results.
On the day of admission, routine blood examination showed hemoglobin level of 11.5 g/dL, leukocyte count of 19.400/μL, neutrophil percentage of 81.8%, and lymphocyte percentage of 12.0%. The patient was also subjected to ultrasonography (USG), which revealed multiple stone within the gallbladder and thickening of gallbladder wall suggesting of cholelithiasis, acute cholecystitis, gallbladder hydrops and Fetus located inside the uterus . The patient was then given antibiotic treatment using 1 g of meropenem thrice daily for 3 days.
On the second day, patient had magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and the result showed signs of cholelithiasis with multiple stones and biliary sludge filling the lumen and signs of acute cholecystitis with fetus in the uterus . Patient's blood was taken for culture and antibiotic sensitivity testing which revealed meropenem-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus.
On the third day, patient claimed that the fever and pain had not significantly improved even at the end of antibiotic treatment. Laboratory examination showed hemoglobin level of 8.6 g/dL, leukocyte count of 19.340/μL, neutrophil percentage of 89.7%, and lymphocyte percentage of 5.1%. Bilirubin examination showed total bilirubin level of 0.38. Pancreatic enzymes test showed amylase level of 339 U/L, and lipase level of 8.8 U/L. Liver function test showed SGOT level of 7.8 U/L, SGPT level of 7.2 U/L, alkaline phosphatase level of 5.7 U/L, and albumin level of 2.9 g/dL. Based on this set of test results, we suspected that there was also an occurring hemorrhagic necrotizing pancreatitis due to the drop in hemoglobin level and increase in pancreatic enzymes level.
On the fourth day, patient received blood transfusion and hemoglobin level increases to 13.9 g/dL and was allowed to undergo surgery. Patient underwent open cholecystectomy with subcostal incision (Kocher) performed by a senior gastrointestinal surgeon. Post-operative have found thickened wall of gallbladder with multiple gallbladder stones and gallbladder empyema .
The patient was released from the hospital after 5 days of post-operative care. At the end of care, the patient claimed that the abdominal pain had been significantly reduced and free of fever. Routine check-ups were scheduled until the patient's delivery date. There was no further complaint by the patient during the follow-up period. In the end, the patient gave birth to the baby at term without any complications related to the cholecystitis and pancreatitis that she had previously experienced.