A 67-year-old man underwent colonoscopy because of weight loss and nausea. Sigmoid colon cancer with all circumference-related stenosis was found by the examination , and the patient was transferred to our hospital for an additional close inspection and medical treatment. There was no medical history for him. None of his family had a clear history of cancer. Hematological examination showed no elevation of inflammation. The serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 5.5 μg/ml (normal range < 5.0 μg/ml) and the serum carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) was 7.8 U/ml (normal range < 37 U/ml). The small intestine ileus caused by the invasion of sigmoid colon cancer to the ileum developed after the transfer . The maximum tumor diameter was 6.5 cm, sized by computed tomography (CT) scan . The decompression of the small intestine was performed before the surgery using a nasal ileus tube. Laparoscopic high anterior resection and extended excision of small intestine segmental resection were performed . A small amount of ascites existed in the pouch of Douglas , and the operative rapid pathologic diagnosis examination showed class I. We firstly divided the small intestine at the point of oral and anal 10 cm distance from the invaded region. Secondly, we dissected the ileal mesentery using an energy device. Thirdly, we performed usual inner approach of high anterior resection for the sigmoid colon cancer. Protective laparoscopic operation was done, and the sigmoid colon cancer with invaded ileum was resected en bloc. Because there was no sign of lymph node metastasis in the ileal mesentery, ileal mesentery resection was performed to a minimum . The operation time was 294 min, and the blood loss volume was 32 ml. Histopathological analysis revealed a pathological diagnosis as pT4b (ileal submucosal invasion) N0 (0/11) M0 f Stage II, moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, ly1, v2, PN0 . The postoperative course was good, and he was discharged on the 13th postoperative day. Although adjuvant chemotherapy with capecitabine after the operation was planned for half a year, treatment was suspended in the first course due to the patient’s self-judgment. We enforced contrasting CT scan every 6 months. No recurrence was observed for a year after the operation, but metastasis recurrence in the para-aortic lymph node was found by a follow-up abdominal contrasting CT scan one and a half years after the operation . Metastasis in the para-aortic lymph node was not observed by preoperative CT scan . The tumor markers at that time were at normal levels (CEA was 3.4 μg/ml and CA19-9 was 2.6 U/ml). 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) revealed that FDG accumulated only in the para-aortic lymph node . Although there was the possibility of dissemination of sigmoidal cancer, we decided to perform surgical resection because the tumor marker level was normal and FDG was not accumulated in any other place. Because there were no findings about small intestine carcinoma in PET–CT and no clinical symptoms of small intestine carcinoma like progression of anemia and elevated tumor markers, we did not review the small intestine for carcinoma by the enteroscopy. Laparoscopic metastasis lymphadenectomy was performed due to the diagnosis of metachronous metastasis to the para-aortic lymph node alone. Intraoperative findings revealed that lymph node metastasis occurred in the mesentery of the ileum where we had performed the partial resection of invaded ileum in the first operation. The lymph node metastasis was located central side of the anastomotic intestine mesentery and near the marginal artery. Protective laparoscopic operation was done and we could preserve the marginal artery . The operation time was 160 min, and the blood loss volume was low. Histopathological analysis was consistent with a lymph node metastasized by colon cancer recurrence as moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma . The postoperative course was good, and he was discharged on the 8th postoperative day. Although we recommended adjuvant chemotherapy after the second surgery, the patient refused. No adjuvant treatment was given after the secondary operation, and he is still alive with no recurrence 1 year and 9 months after the first operation.