A 43-year-old man working at a printing company that had been exposed to organic solvents for 15 years was introduced to our hospital with thickening of the gallbladder wall observed on abdominal ultrasonography (US) during a routine medical checkup. He had no significant medical history, or history of smoking and alcohol consumption.
Initial dynamic computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed gallbladder wall thickening, suggesting chronic cholecystitis, with no lesions in the liver . The patient continued to undergo regular abdominal US and blood tests at the local physician’s office because of the high risk of developing cholangiocarcinoma. At 47 years of age, the patient had a γGTP level of approximately 40 U/L. His regular checkup at 48 years revealed a mild elevation of the serum γGTP level which was 82 U/L and remained elevated between 80 and 100 U/L. Results of the laboratory tests performed when the patient was referred to our hospital revealed an elevated serum γGTP activity. However, the serum concentrations of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), total bilirubin (T-Bil), and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) were within normal ranges . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed thickening of the gallbladder wall and chronic cholecystitis without dilatation of the bile duct or presence of tumor in the hepatic or extrahepatic bile ducts . Dilatation of B8 was observed on dynamic CT and MRCP performed at 51 years of age. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) revealed a small area of high-signal intensity corresponding to the center of the dilated bile duct in MRCP , whereas the dynamic CT was negative for any tumor lesions in the liver . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography-guided (ERCP) brush cytology of B8 revealed no malignant findings. An MRCP repeated when he was 53-year old revealed further dilation of B8 and enlargement of the high-signal intensity area on DWI at the root of B8 . Abdominal dynamic CT revealed a nodule with ring enhancement in the same area . Drip Infusion Cholecystocholangiography (DIC-CT) revealed stenosis of the roots of B8 and intermediate B2 . No tumor lesions were identified using any imaging modality in the area with B2 stenosis. Based on these imaging findings, we suspected the development of malignancy and diagnosis of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma at roots of B8, stage T1aN0M0 according to the UICC 8th edition. Blood tests showed normal liver function, with a Child–Pugh score of 5 A and liver damage level A. There was no evidence of HBV or HCV infection. The tumor markers were within normal range with CEA at 1.6 ng/mL and CA19-9 antigen at 36.1 U/mL .
In consideration of the stenosis in B2 and given the high likelihood of occupational cholangiocarcinoma in B8, based on the history of exposure to organic solvents, we assessed that there was a high risk of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma developing in the B2 region in the future. Consequently, we performed right anterior sectionectomy to preserve the remaining liver volume, rather than right hepatectomy, to ensure sufficient distance from the tumor. The operation time was 502 min, and the blood loss was 1175 ml without any transfusion. The patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day without any complications. After surgery, postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 monotherapy was administered for 6 months. The patient is currently on regular follow-up every 2–3 months with performance of blood tests including γGTP, CEA and CA19-9 and MDCT alternating with MRI and sometimes additional abdominal US. Moreover, 2 months postoperatively, the γ-GTP value decreased and remained within normal levels thereafter. Eight months postoperatively, the patient presented no signs of recurrence.