An 18-year-old male patient sustained a high-energy trauma following a motorcycle accident. He was transferred to the emergency department of our level one trauma center. Initial whole body computer tomography (CT) revealed multiple fractures (injury severity score = 27), including a 3rd degree open comminuted fracture of the left femur with fracture of the left patella, a 3rd degree open comminuted fracture of the right ankle (open fractures classified according to Gustilo-Anderson), a comminuted left calcaneal fracture, and multiple stable (A0, A1) vertebral fractures. A shows the extent of the femoral fracture.
The patient was always hemodynamically stable and urgently referred to the operating room for damage control surgery. According to international guideline regarding the treatment of open fractures, intravenous antibiotic prophylaxis was initiated preoperatively. Microbiology specimens of the left femur were negative. The open right ankle fracture was contaminated with dirt and biopsy detected pollution with Pseudomonas fluorescens. Therefore, the patient received antibiotic therapy. There were no neurovascular damages to the left femur. Debridement and irrigation of the open fractures were followed by external fixation.
Six days after admission, preliminary treatment of the left femoral fracture was initiated through a lateral subvastus approach. The external fixation was removed. All fragments in the comminuted area were avascular and therefore removed, leading to a circumferential bone defect of about 10 cm in length. The sagittal split of the condyles that extended into the femoral notch was reduced and held with three 4.5 mm screws leading to a stable joint block. Afterwards an 18-hole variable angle (VA) condylar plate (4.5/5.0 Condylar plate, Synthes, Houston, Texas, USA) was used for internal fixation, following the concept of bridging the defect. Due to the absent bony fracture references, intraoperative determination of length, axis and especially rotation was based on the clinical presentation. The defect was filled with a polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) cement spacer. B shows the 3D reconstruction of a CT scan of the femur after ORIF and defect filling with bone cement.
Alignment analysis based on postoperative CT scans was performed and a consecutive 3D-analysis was conducted by Medacta (MySolution, Medacta International SA, Castel San Pietro, Switzerland). The mirrored contralateral bone was used as a template. A rotational difference of 19° (internal rotation), a coronal axis deviation of 1° (varus) and a flexion malalignment of 3° were detected for the distal femur. Moreover, a shortening of 10 mm, a lateral deviation of 4 mm and an antero-posterior (a.p.) deviation of 8 mm were measured.
The combination of these deviations, but mainly the rotational malalignment led to the decision to revise the alignment during the planned second stage surgery with bone-grafting according to Masquelet. displays the deviations on a 3D-view.
The aim of the 3D-planning was to correct the orientation of the distal femoral fragment to the mirrored uninjured side. Subsequently, surgical guides were designed to implement these corrections accordingly. The planning was executed in collaboration between the surgeon and a biomedical engineer. The guides were 3D-printed by Medacta. Surgical planning is displayed in A and B.
Definitive surgical treatment was performed 8 weeks after preliminary internal fixation. Due to the circumferential defect, we decided to add a medial plate via medial subvastus approach to enhance stability . The preexisting lateral approach was used to change the plate. The first guide (A) was placed as planned and the reference pins were inserted. After plate removal, reorientation of the femur was performed using the second set of guides (B). The femoral length was adjusted to the 3D-planning (+10 mm). The reduction maneuver was challenging because the Masquelet-membrane could not be debrided, which led to increased tension when the orientation of the fragments were altered. Angle stable osteosynthesis was performed using a new 18-hole VA condylar plate (4.5/5.0 Condylar plate, Synthes, Houston Texas, USA). The Masquelet-membrane was thoroughly incised longitudinally from the medial side and the cement spacer was removed. Subsequently, the proximal and distal fracture endings were decorticated and multiple 1 mm drilling holes were created to promote blood supply. The defect was filled with autograft from the iliac crest, allograft (femoral head, Smith & Nephew Schweiz AG, Zug, Switzerland) and demineralized bone matrix (GRAFTON® DBM Putty, 5 cc, Medtronic Sofamor Danek Inc.; ratio allograft/autograft 3:1). Afterwards the Masquelet-membrane was closed with absorbable sutures. A 12-hole locking compression plate (4.5/5.0 mm LCP, DePuy Synthes, Houston Texas) was bent in order to achieve a good fit medially and then fixated to the bone with cortical screws. Locking screws were avoided on the medial side, because very stiff constructs can lead to higher non-union rates .
The postoperative care was limited due to multiple injuries on both legs. For the left femur, partial weight-bearing with 15 kg was allowed, but due to the concomitant injuries only wheelchair mobilization was possible. The patient underwent inpatient musculoskeletal rehabilitation for 3 months. Weight-bearing was slowly increased to full weight-bearing at 6 months postoperatively aided by an intensive ambulatory rehabilitation protocol.
At the final follow-up one year postoperatively, the patient was satisfied with his left hip and knee function and had no pain. The fracture was completely healed confirmed by a CT scan. No signs of infection were present. The patient had an IKDC-score of 67.8 % (International Knee Documentation Committee, score ranges 0–100, where 100 = no limitation with daily or sporting activities and the absence of symptoms). Femoral alignment parameters are displayed in . shows the radiographs and a CT scan of the left distal femur.
Alignment parameters were obtained from CT scans followed by 3D-reconstruction and registration with the mirrored contralateral proximal femur. The medically certified software Materialise Mimics and 3-matic (Materialise GmbH, Munich, Germany) were used for segmentation, registration and measurement. Determined reduction parameters were rotation, length and coronal/sagittal axis. Parameters are displayed in .