The patient was a 66-year-old man who had undergone robotic-assisted laparoscopic radical prostatectomy plus extended lymph node dissection for prostate cancer. The pathological results were status post endocrine therapy with residual viable acinar adenocarcinoma, ypT3bN1M0, ypStage IV. The patient was discharged from the hospital on the 14th day after surgery, but 2 days after discharge, he complained of fecal discharge from the urethra. Colonoscopy revealed a large perforation (size: approximately 2 cm) in the anterior wall of the lower rectum (a), and enterography and computed tomography (CT) revealed an abscess cavity (size: approximately 3 × 3 × 2.5 cm) between the rectum and urethra (b, c). The patient was admitted on the same day with a diagnosis of RUF and started on antimicrobial therapy. As the patient had a stable general condition, no abscess drainage was performed. The patient underwent cystostomy, laparoscopic ileostomy and transanal fistula closure on the 4th day after admission and was discharged on the 26th day after surgery. The patient continued conservative treatment for 5 months after discharge, but the RUF remained (a, b). A collaborative operation by urological, gastrointestinal, and plastic surgery was performed to close the fistula. A catheter (3 Fr) was inserted into the fistula using a cystoscope, which was used as a marker for fistula resection. A transverse incision was made through the perineum, and dissection of the recto-urethral space proceeded. Since it was difficult to reach the fistula through the perineum alone, we used a laparoscopic transabdominal approach to dissect the superior part of the fistula. Therefore, it was dissected using a laparoscope in combination with transabdominal manipulation. The fistula was reliably resected by combining the abdominal and perineal dissection (a). The pneumoperitoneum was maintained after connecting to the perineal wound, and the laparoscopic operation was not affected. The fistula was resected from the perineal wound using a catheter as a landmark, and both the rectal and urethral fistulas were closed with nodal sutures using 3-0 vicryl®. A left gracilis muscle flap was then harvested (b) and inserted subcutaneously into the perineal wound (c). It was then tractioned into the abdominal cavity by laparoscopic manipulation and fixed to the peritoneum of the bladder after confirming that the area in which the fistula was resected had been sufficiently filled (d). The patient was discharged on postoperative day 19. At two months after fistula closure, the cystostomy was removed. At four months after fistula closure, the closure of the fistula was confirmed by cystoscopy and colonoscopy, and ileostomy closure was performed. Six months have passed since the closure of the fistula, but the fistula has disappeared on MRI and there is no evidence of recurrent symptoms . The patient will be followed up carefully with attention to urethral stricture and stenosis.