A 63-year-old woman from the south of Italy was admitted to the thoracic surgical service for the evaluation of two coin lesions of the right lung. The lesions were found incidentally on a chest X-ray that the patient received for a clinical suspicion of pneumonia. Past medical and surgical history was unremarkable other than for cystocele repair at age 36. Further imaging showed two oval-shaped, non-calcified, well demarcated PET-negative lung lesions measuring approximately 13 × 8 mm in the apical segment of the right upper lobe and in the superior segment of the right lower lobe . Physical examination of the patient and pulmonary function tests were within normal limits (VC = 108%; FEV1 = 95%). The white blood cell count was 6520/ml without eosinophilia (Eosinophils = 1.2%). A CT-guided needle biopsy of the lesions was performed, showing CD68+ histiocytes, lymphocytes and myofibroblasts suggestive of a benign, granulation-like tissue. Given the inconclusive diagnosis, two wedge pulmonary resections were performed using a minimal invasive approach . The final pathologic review of the resected lesions suggested a morphological diagnosis of human pulmonary dirofilariasis . Postoperative serological testing for anti-Filaria antibodies using ELISA was consistent with the above diagnosis. The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged home on post-operative day 3. A pharmacological treatment was not considered since complete resection is considered to be curative .
A biomolecular testing procedure was performed to further validate the diagnosis, and to discriminate the specific Dirofilaria subspecies. Total DNA extraction was carried out from paraffin embedded tissue taken from the lung nodules, by using a QIAmp DNA mini kit. Reference genomic DNA was extracted from animal blood containing D.repens (15,000 mff/ml). A quantity of 20 ng DNA was used for the amplification with four specific forward primers and a common reverse primer as showed in Table . The capillary electrophoresis was performed on an ABI Prism 3130 DNA sequencer. The collected data was then analyzed, considering 97% identity as the stringent parameter for strain identification. Multiplex-PCR cox1 amplicons from the DNA extracted from the embedded tissue resulted in a band consistent with D. repens (479 bp). The BLAST analysis of the cox1 sequences revealed a 99 to 100% identity compared to the sequences available in GenBank™.