A 40-year-old Japanese man was referred to the Department of Oral-Maxillofacial Surgery, Dentistry and Orthodontics, at The University of Tokyo Hospital by a dental clinic after identification of a radiolucent finding on the right side of his mandible in December 2002. The patient reported no symptoms in his mouth including the mandibular area, and on clinical examination no swelling could be detected on the right side of the jaw, and the oral mucosa appeared normal . However, a panoramic radiograph revealed an extensive radiolucent and multilocular area with imprecise borders that extended from the right posterior mandibular body to around the root of tooth #46, and exhibited a “soap bubble” appearance . Computed axial tomography imaging showed an area of infiltration in the medullary bone with thin trabeculae in the right side of the mandible . The tumor measured approximately 30 × 15 × 40 mm. The patient’s medical history was otherwise unremarkable. An incisional biopsy showed loosely arranged spindle-shaped cells in a myxoid fibrous stroma. On the basis of these histological findings, a provisional diagnosis of odontogenic myxoma was made.
We performed extraction of tooth #46, and an enucleation and wide curettage of the normal surrounding tissue to preserve the inferior alveolar nerve, the jaw, and oral function under general anesthesia with nasopharyngeal intubation . The surgical specimen revealed benign-looking spindled and stellate cells in the mucinous stroma . Taken together, these findings confirmed the diagnosis of odontogenic myxoma. There have been no clinical or radiological signs of recurrence over 10 years follow-up .
To investigate the influence of a conservative or radical surgical approach to odontogenic myxoma, we undertook a search of the PubMed database in July 2013 using the search term “odontogenic myxoma” that identified 211 studies published between December 1990 and July 2013 . Articles for which full text was not available or with missing data were excluded. The second step involved filtering the remaining 181 studies by patient age and sex, tumor location (maxilla/mandible), treatment approach (conservative/radical), recurrence, and follow-up period. Conservative treatment was defined as enucleation, curettage, and marginal resection; radical treatment was defined as segmental or block resection, and hemimandibulectomy requiring reconstruction. After this second step, 45 articles were identified, of which 21 (reporting 44 cases of mandibular disease) were selected for analysis.
Details of the 44 cases are given in Table . The mean age of patients was 31.9 years, and 22 (50.0%) were male. Twenty of the 44 cases (45.5%) were managed by conservative surgical techniques, the remainder underwent radical treatment. Tumors recurred in three of those who were treated with conservative surgery (15.0%); one patient had undergone a marginal resection and the other two had undergone enucleation and curettage. There were no reported recurrences in any patient who underwent radical surgery. The mean follow-up period was 46.4 months.