A 48-year-old, para 5, postmenopausal black African woman who was human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-negative presented to our casualty department with a 5-year history of progressive abdominal swelling. Five years prior to presenting, which was 1 year before she reached menopause, she had noticed that her abdomen was gradually distending. Her symptoms were associated with constipation, feeling of incomplete rectal emptying, early satiety, vomiting, and urinary frequency and urgency. She did not have any chronic illnesses and had a negative personal and family history of ovarian, uterine, bowel, and breast cancers. She was not receiving any medication prior to this presentation. She had delivered five children by cesarean section, and they were all alive and well. She lived in a rural area and was a subsistence farmer. She did not smoke and did not drink alcohol.
She had ascitic taps three times in 1 week at a district hospital before referral to a higher-level hospital because of recurrent reaccumulation of ascites. A transabdominal ultrasound scan (USS) showed generalized ascites with a thick fluid with septa, as well as bilateral mild hydroureter and hydronephrosis. Again, the ascites was drained twice. One month later, she underwent computed tomography (CT), which showed a large predominantly cystic lesion that occupied almost the entire abdominal and pelvic cavities, which were distended, causing a marked mass effect on surrounding organs and bowel. The lesion had areas of internal septation predominantly on the right flank with no features of metastatic disease. Tumor markers measured during this admission are shown in Table .
The patient was referred to a tertiary hospital but only went 5 years later. Upon admission, she had marked temporal wasting, with bilateral pitting lower limb edema extending to her sacrum. She had a normal breast examination. Her blood pressure was elevated at 167/93 mmHg, with tachycardia of 150 beats/min. Her body temperature was 36.8 °C. She had equal air entry bilaterally, and her cardiorespiratory and neurological systems were normal. She had a lower midline scar with massive abdominal distention that was nontender and had a positive fluid thrill test result .
Results of investigations showed microcytic anemia with hemoglobin of 9.9 g/dl, white blood cell count of 7 × 103/μl, and platelet count of 250 × 103/μl. She had normal urea and electrolytes and hypoalbuminemia of 21 g/L, with results of the rest of her liver function tests being normal. Urinalysis did not show abnormalities.
Her case was discussed by a multidisciplinary team (MDT) that included gynecological oncologists, radiation oncologists, general surgeons, anesthetists, and nursing staff. The MDT considered the risks of death following hemodynamic instability and bleeding as well as the postoperative risks of deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, difficulty weaning off the ventilator, and death. The conclusion of the meeting was to take the patient for staging laparotomy despite these risks.
Preoperatively, the patient and her relatives were counseled on the possible complications. The patient received a transfusion with 2 Units (U) of packed cells (PCs). The team also contemplated drainage of the mass preoperatively but was unable to secure appropriate drains to drain the thick green fluid from the mass.
At laparotomy, through a right paramedian incision, a huge abdominopelvic mass was found filling the whole abdomen and pelvis. The liver, spleen, and hemidiaphragms looked normal. The mass was shelled out by blunt dissection . The mass burst during mobilization, however, with rapid drainage of dark-colored fluid and decompression 50 min into the surgery. Subsequently, the mass was stripped off the anterior abdominal wall and completely excised. A total abdominal hysterectomy was done. The anterior abdominal wall was noted to have very deficient layers. Estimated blood loss was 450 ml. Anesthetically, the patient was unstable, particularly after the rapid decompression. She received a massive transfusion of 7 U of PCs, 6 U of fresh frozen plasma, and 4 L of gelafundin with 7 L of Ringer’s lactate. The surgery lasted about 3 hr. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for cardiopulmonary support.
The patient was critically ill in the ICU. On the day of admission, she had a cardiac arrest and was successfully resuscitated. She required inotropic support and ventilation. By day 5, she had developed hepatosplenomegaly, uremia, and an increased international normalized ratio. She was leaking serous fluid from the suture line, with darkening of the previously stretched skin of the anterior abdominal wall. She remained anemic with thrombocytopenia. She received a further 6 U of PCs. She was kept on albumin and given high-protein energy feeds by the dietitian in view of her hypoalbuminemia and malnutrition. By day 6, she was noted to have disseminated intravascular coagulopathy. She was given vitamin K. A pneumothorax was noted, and the cardiothoracic surgeon inserted a chest drain. She was also noted to have aspiration pneumonia following a self-extubation on the same day. By day 10, she was noted to have multiple organ failure with oliguria, falling level of consciousness, aspiration pneumonia, a gangrenous abdominal wall , and coagulopathy.
She required inotropic support and ventilation. She died on day 10 after surgery. The pathology report showed a partial cystic lesion with benign epithelia of mucin-secreting columnar cells, no evidence of stromal invasion, no stratification, and no atypia and intraluminal mucin . The cyst walls were necrotic with fibrinopurulent exudate. Normal ectocervical and endocervical mucosa was observed. The endometrium was inactive, and there was evidence of an anterior fibroid. This confirmed the diagnosis of benign mucinous cystadenoma. Figure illustrates the sequence of events.