A 34-year-old Caucasian woman from Southern Italy came to our attention because of a late (20th week gestational age) pregnancy loss of a morphologically normal intrauterine growth restricted foetus. The placenta, weighing 80 g, showed severe maturation alterations, intervillous thrombosis, fibrin deposition, especially on the maternal side and multiple areas of infarction. Pathologists concluded with “severe vascularization abnormalities, similar to those observed in severe preeclampsia”. Therefore, the patient underwent a thrombophilia screening, that showed 100 μmol/L of plasma total homocysteine (tHcy) and she was referred to our Thrombosis and Hemostasis Unit. At that time, she was being administered folic acid (calcium folinate, 15 mg/day) and her folate levels were 11.4 nmol/L (range: 3.1–17.5); B12 serum levels were 722 pmol/L (range: 191–663).
An accurate clinical history was collected together with laboratory data. She had been delivered at full term and had remained in apparently good health until the age of 20, when she showed elevated inflammatory markers and an impaired renal function. The urinalysis carried out revealed proteinuria and microhaematuria. A neurological examination showed normal results. She also presented with a normocytic anaemia (Hb: 8.2 g/L). A blood smear and a bone marrow aspiration were carried out but resulted negative.
A renal biopsy revealed thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) with predominant lesions in the glomerulus and minimal lesions in the arterioles. However, these findings were not confirmed in another Centre two years later.
These additional data induced physicians to suspect a disease in the metabolic pathway of homocysteine-methionine. Methylmalonic acid was measured and found higher than normal (1.09; μmol/L, reference value: 0–0.7 μmol/L).
After DNA extraction according to local protocol , a Whole Exome Sequencing Analysis (WES) was performed. This showed the presence of a compound heterozygosis for p. Tyr130His and p.Tyr222Stop in the MMACHC gene (Methylmalonic Aciduria type C and Homocystinuria) (OMIM * 609831). Both of these mutations have been described by Lerner-Ellis .
Thus, in addition to calcium folinate, the patient was prescribed intramuscular hydroxocobalamin, 1 mg/week. This treatment only partially reduced tHcy. Consequently,1 mg every 3 days was used and this approach normalised tHcy plasma levels and restored anaemia and renal function. Once normal levels of tHcy were reached, the patient initiated a second pregnancy. After a positive pregnancy test, she was prescribed low-molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin) at prophylactic doses (4000 IU/day) in addition to hydroxocobalamin. During the pregnancy there were no signs of anaemia or abnormal renal function and at 39 weeks a 2420 g male newborn (Apgar 1′: 8, 10′: 9) was delivered. In the figure , clinical and laboratory features, from the IUFD to the live birth of the second pregnancy are summarised.