In November 2012, a white native Finnish woman, aged 62 years at the time, was operated for breast cancer in the left breast (carcinoma ductale, grade 2, size 10 mm). The breast cancer was estrogen and progesterone receptor-positive. Radiotherapy was started 2 months later. Three months after the operation, an aromatase inhibitor (letrozole) was started. At the time there was no national recommendation in Finland for the use for adjuvant bisphosphonate or denosumab treatment during AI therapy, or for measuring BMD in postmenopausal women. The national recommendation for the use of adjuvant denosumab during AI therapy with a 100% special reimbursement started in Finland on 1 March 2017.
In August 2013, the patient stumbled and crashed onto stony ground and got a compression fracture of TH XII. BMD measurements were performed in October 2013 at the lumbar spine (L1–L4), total hip, and femoral neck by DXA (dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry) using a Lunar densitometer (Prodigy, GE Medical Systems). The lowest T-scores were at lumbar spine (L1–L2, T-scores of –1.9) and in the right femoral neck (T-score −1.8).
Because of the aromatase inhibitor (AI) medication and the fracture (compression grade 50%), a subcutaneous denosumab treatment (5 mg every 6 months) was started in October 2013.
Letrozole medication was discontinued after 5.5 years, and the last denosumab injection was given in November 2020. The patient’s additional daily medication was losartan 100 mg, simvastatin 20 mg, levothyroxine 100 mcg, warfarin 6–8 mg depending on the international normalized ratio (INR) level, and daily use of vitamin D supplements 1600 IU in winter and 800 IU in summer months. Permanent warfarin medication was started in 2000 after third distal deep vein thrombosis of the lower limb.
Six months after the last denosumab injection, our then 71-year-old patient received a single intravenous zoledronic acid (AclastaR) infusion (5 mg/100 mL). Due to her permanent use of warfarin medication, she did not receive any nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (for example, indomethacin, acetaminophen, ibuprofen, or diclofenac) before the administration of the infusion. She did not take paracetamol either because its concomitant use with warfarin has been described to increase prothrombin times and bleeding . Her health status was good before this first zoledronic acid infusion.
About 10 hours after the infusion, the patient suddenly suffered an acute phase response (APR), abruptly beginning with severe trismus, muscle twitching, spasms, tingling and numbness in the face and fingers, and ague. This was rapidly followed by influenza-like symptoms such as headache, pain in the pharynx and in the left side of the neck, and continuing within 24 hours with musculoskeletal pain, polyarthralgia, synovitis, abdominal pain, and exertional dyspnea.
A fever appeared quickly and her temperature rose to 39.3 °C and remained over 39.0 °C for 2 days. It began to decline after 3 days, returned to normal after 8 days, and her headache ended after 9 days. Other symptoms continued for 1–3 days but polyarthralgia lasted for nearly 2 months. The diagnosis of APR was undisputed by the patient’s husband who is a general surgeon and a specialist in orthopedics and traumatology.
On the second day, the patient’s husband called an ambulance because of the strong symptoms. Before calling the pre-hospital team, he consulted a general physician who gave the infusion in a private clinic.
The pre-hospital emergency team examined the patient, and because of the normal electrocardiography, oxygen saturation, and blood pressure, the patient remained at home. During the severe APR period she received 2–3 g oral paracetamol daily. There were no other follow-up visits and her physician husband took care of her. The patient’s general fatigue continued for about 2 months.
About 6 months prior to the intravenous zoledronic acid infusion, the following laboratory tests were performed: blood count, sedimentation rate (SR), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), parathyroid hormone (PTH), ionized calcium, creatinine, serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D (S-25OHD), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), and free thyroxin (T4-V). All test results were normal . Furthermore, certain routine laboratory tests were performed 34 days before the infusion . The patient’s international normalized ratio test (INR) was checked every 4–6 weeks. The glomerular filtration rate was 72 mL/min/1.73 m2 (reference value over 59 mL/min/1.73 m2 for age ≥ 70 years) a day before the infusion. She had no nephropathy.
Further laboratory tests were performed at 7, 11, 54, and 91 days after the infusion of zoledronic acid . The serum marker of bone resorption test [tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b (TRAP 5b)] was performed at 7 and 12.5 months after the infusion. The results were 3.73 U/L and 3.65 U/L, respectively (range in postmenopausal women: 1.49–4.89 U/L). The patient’s Covid-19 PCR test 9 days after the infusion was negative. All laboratory tests were privately performed at the laboratory of Helsinki University Hospital, Finland.
The last BMD was measured a few days before the zoledronic acid infusion. The BMD of the total lumbar spine (L1–L4) was 14.4% higher than in 2013. The total BMD results in the right total hip was 5.6% higher and in the left total hip 5.4% higher than in 2013.
Written informed consent for publication was obtained from the patient.