On April 6, 2020, a 39 years-old pregnant woman at 36 weeks of gestation was referred to our Maternity Hospital for premature rupture of membranes (PROM). In the previous days, she had suffered from hyperpyrexia up to 38.6°C, easily managed by paracetamol. Prior to admission, the naso-oro-pharyngeal swab performed in the emergency room resulted positive for SARS-CoV-2 at rRT-PCR assay. She weighed 97 kg, her height was 166 cm, blood pressure was 128/74 mmHg, O2sat was 100%, and respiratory rate was 16 bpm. Medical history was positive for late onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxilase deficiency (NCAH) diagnosed at the age of 17 because of elevated basal 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17OHP) concentrations at the investigations performed for hyperandrogenism and alopecia. Since then, she was on steroid replacement therapy (cortisone acetate 12.5 mg plus dexamethasone 0.75 mg per day, both in the morning). She had two previous pregnancies, one six years earlier, delivered at term and one first trimester miscarriage. Glucocorticoid dosage had never been adjusted. Cesarean section was planned due to persisting hyperpyrexia and late preterm PROM. She was started on a 100 mg-bolus of hydrocortisone, followed by continuous infusion of 200 mg/24 h as indicated to avoid adrenal crisis in surgical intervention of chronic adrenal insufficient patients (–). She was delivered by cesarean section under spinal anesthesia, provided its positive influence on cardiopulmonary function .
At 36 weeks of gestational age, a female neonate was delivered. She was in good clinical condition, and her nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2 by rRT-PCR was negative.
On second postpartum day, the mother was in good condition and was switched from intravenous to oral supra-physiological steroid therapy (cortisone acetate 25 + 12.5 + 12.5 mg/day); at that time since her temperature was 37.5°C, she was started on full dose low molecular weight heparin. On the third day her clinical conditions progressively worsened, with fever >39°C associated with respiratory symptoms requiring O2 support. Thus, therapy with hydroxychloroquine and azithromycin was started. Accordingly, cortisone acetate was increased to overall 75 mg/day. A Chest Computed Tomography (CT) showed signs of acute pulmonary embolism, along with extensive ground-glass opacifications involving both the lung parenchyma and laboratory tests showed high D-Dimer (4,136 µg/L, nv <500 µg/L) and CRP (11.22 mg/dl, nv < 0.05 mg/dl). Her conditions rapidly worsened so she was moved to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU); orotracheal intubation along with mechanical ventilation were started, and she was promptly switched back to intravenous steroid therapy (Hydrocortisone, 50 mg every 6 h iv).
This aggressive respiratory and medical support allowed her to recover and, after the first week, to improve significantly her general condition. On April 30, pulmonary embolism was completely resolved at CT scans. Finally, on May 13th, she was discharged in good condition.
At the beginning of May, hydrocortisone was progressively reduced and switched to oral route (cortisone acetate 12.5 + 12.5 + 6.25 mg) to continue monitoring at our tertiary outpatient’s clinics.