A 47-year-old Caucasian woman with a past medical history of hypertension presented to a local hospital for acute onset of numbness of her left arm in May 2007. A left axillary arterial thrombus was identified on Doppler ultrasound. Subsequently, our patient underwent left axillary artery stent placement with complete symptom resolution. To identify the source of the thrombus an echocardiogram was performed, which revealed a large mobile mass adherent to the anterior apical region of her left ventricle. The left ventricle ejection fraction was normal at 60%. The intracardiac mass was thought to be a thrombus and anticoagulation was initiated to prevent further embolic events. Possible cancer-induced thrombosis was suspected and a computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest, abdomen and pelvis was obtained. This showed a 7 × 8 cm complex mass between the upper pole of her left kidney and her spleen as well as a 3 cm nodule in the right lower lobe of her lung. A total body positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed increased uptake in the abdominal mass as well as the lung nodule, which raised the question of metastatic disease. Initially, renal cell carcinoma was considered the most likely diagnosis and surgery was scheduled to take place following dissolution of the intracardiac thrombus. However, while still hospitalized for anticoagulation therapy, our patient had multiple hypertensive episodes with a blood pressure as high as 223/139 mmHg. This prompted a 24-hour urine collection for catecholamine and metanephrine tests. Her 24-hour urine metanephrine and normetanephrine levels were significantly elevated at 18160 μg (normal range: 19-140 μg), and 7742 μg (normal range: 52-310 μg) respectively. Her 24-hour urine epinephrine level was 756 μg (normal range: 2-24 μg) and norepinephrine was 1161 μg (normal range: 15-199 μg). Her 24-hour urine vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) was also elevated at 46.6 μg (normal range: < 6 μg). She was then referred to our endocrine clinic for further management.
A review of her previous history revealed multiple "spells" occurring over the last five years. During these episodes, our patient experienced palpitations, a heavy pounding heart beat and a sensation of "my heart jumping out of my chest". They were accompanied by cold sweats and right-sided headaches. Occasionally, a left-sided burning sensation of the chest along with nausea and vomiting would accompany the headaches. The "spells" were sometimes associated with bending over or lying on her right side. Interestingly, these episodes occurred more often between 10 am and 11 am. The frequency of the spells had increased to almost daily over the two weeks prior to presentation. Normally her "spells" lasted only for a few seconds to a few minutes then disappeared completely. Her blood pressure has been normal until 2005 and she only started to take hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril in 2006. During her "spell" at the outside hospital, it was noted that she was very hypertensive with a systolic blood pressure of more than 230 mmHg, but her blood pressure returned to baseline after the spell passed.
Her previous studies included a normal thyroid scan. Her non-specific symptoms were attributed to acid reflux. Her hypertension was treated with atenolol, lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide prior to admission to the outside hospital. She does not have any other chronic illness. Her medication at presentation to our clinic included atenolol, hydrochlorothiazide, Plavix (clopidogrel), lisinopril, Prilosec (omeprazole), potassium chloride, and warfarin. She was on an oral contraceptive which was discontinued after her hospital admission. Her social history is unremarkable. Both of her parents have hypertension; otherwise there is no family history of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, Von Hippel-Lindau disease, neurofibromatosis, pheochromocytoma, thyroid cancers or any other endocrine tumors. Her review of systems was remarkable for fatigue, nasal congestion, and cough with greenish sputum production over the few weeks prior to presentation. Her physical examination was significant only for a blood pressure of 120/77 mmHg, a heart rate of 96 beats per minute, and a 2/6 systolic murmur over the precordial area.
Our patient had significantly elevated levels of plasma metanephrine at 14.5 nmol/L (normal range: < 0.49 nmol/L), and normetanephrine at 24.3 nmol/L (normal range: < 0.89 nmol/L). Similar to reports in the literature , she also had an increased white blood cell count (WBC) of 13.3 k/mm3 (normal range: 3.8-9.8 k/mm3) and a platelet count of 629 k/mm3 (normal range: 140-440 k/mm3). Her other endocrine studies showed a moderately elevated plasma renin level of 21.5 ng/ml/hr (normal range: 0.65-5.0 ng/ml/hr), abnormal fasting blood glucose (163 mg/dl) and hemoglobin-A1C (HbA1C) (6.8%). Her aldosterone and thyroid-stimulating hormone levels were within normal limits. She had no detectable cardiolipin antibodies, antinuclear antibody, factor V Leiden, or prothrombin gene mutation and her rheumatoid factor (RF) was within normal limits. Her homocysteine level was mildly elevated at 14 umol/L (normal range: < 10.4 umol/L). The DNA analysis for methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) showed a heterozygous mutation for C677T and A1298C.
Based on the above data, our patient was diagnosed with pheochromocytoma and treatment with phenoxybenzamine at 10 mg once a day with gradual dose titration to 30 mg three times a day was initiated. The increased uptake of the right lower lobe of the lung on a PET scan raised the question of a metastatic lesion. Our patient experienced symptoms of cough, nasal congestion and green sputum production two to three weeks prior to presentation to the outside hospital. She likely had pneumonia at that time. Pneumonia may cause increased uptake on a PET scan as well. Nevertheless, a (123)I- metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) scan was indicated to further differentiate between metastasis and pneumonia. Her 123I-MIBG scan revealed intense uptake only in the left abdominal mass excluding the lung mass being metastatic .
Six weeks after initiating anticoagulation, the intracardiac mass was no longer present on repeat echocardiogram. The adrenal mass was removed by laparoscopy without complication. The surgical pathology report confirmed the diagnosis of a pheochromocytoma with the presence of vascular invasion by tumor . Six weeks post-operatively, repeat plasma metanephrine and normetanephrine levels were normal at < 0.2 nmol/L and 0.72 nmol/L and they remained normal at follow-up five months later (metanephrine < 0.2 nmol/L and normetanephrine 0.85 nmol/L). The other laboratory abnormalities such as HbA1C, fasting blood glucose, renin, platelet, and WBC all returned to normal. A few months after surgery, a follow-up chest X-ray showed no evidence of a lung mass. Our patient did not experience any more "spells."