A 20-year-old male, suffered from cough, rhinorrhea, wheezing and dyspnea after exposure to rainy environmental conditions. He was diagnosed with asthma in childhood. Positive family history of asthma included his mother and three elder sisters. Following treatment with inhaled corticosteroids, the symptoms abated over the next three days. Nine days after the onset of his asthma exacerbation, he developed an unsteady gait (day 1). The symptoms persisted, and on day 3 he developed blurred vision, dizziness, and nausea. On day 12, he became intermittently drowsy, however, he could be aroused by noxious stimulation. Six days later (day 18), he experienced an episode of tonic-clonic seizures. This episode brought him to the attention of the neurological team. On neurological examination he was fully conscious, had a wide-based gait, and was unable to stand on one foot. Limitations of lateral gaze in the left eye and vertical gaze in both eyes were observed. Motor and sensory functions were intact. Brain computed tomography (CT) and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination showed no abnormalities. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed a 4–6 cycle per second slow wave pattern diffusely, and a 22–26 cycle per second waveform predominantly over centroparietal area, bilaterally . Brainstem encephalitis was tentatively diagnosed, and the patient was given intravenous dexamethasone (10 mg per day) for treatment. Despite the treatment, the patient’s symptoms deteriorated, his level of consciousness varied from occasional drowsiness to lethargy, and on day 21, he developed quadriplegia. On the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale, his muscle strength was grade one for all limbs. Triceps brachii and biceps brachii reflexes were decreased bilaterally, and brachioradialis reflexes were absent bilaterally. Patellar and achilles reflexes were also absent bilaterally. Plantar reflexes were equivocal. CSF examination showed albuminocytologic dissociation with 64 mg/mL protein and 2/μL cells. Serologic and CSF screenings for IgM antibodies against cytomegalovirus (CMV), Herpes Simplex Virus I (HSV-I), Coxsackie virus (CV), Measles virus (MV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), as well as EBV viral capsid antigen (VCA) IgA were all negative. Serologic analysis of antibodies against ganglioside complexes (anti-GDIa, anti-GDIb, anti-GM1, anti-GM2, anti-GM3, anti-GQIb and anti-GTIb antibodies) were negative. Serum and CSF examination, revealed significantly elevated IgE levels in both the serum (14.4 mg/L, normal range: 0.1-0.9 mg/L) and CSF (0.046 mg/L, normal range: undetectable), whereas, IgA, IgM and IgG were within the normal range. Nerve conduction study (NCS) revealed peripheral nerve abnormalities characterized by axonal damage . Both motor conduction velocity and sensory conduction velocity were normal in the four limbs. Motor nerve conduction study showed variable decreased amplitude at the median, ulnar, tibial, and peroneal nerves on both sides. The right peroneal nerve showed slightly prolonged latency. Sensory nerve conduction study recorded decreased amplitude at the left tibial nerve, but the right sural nerve, right median nerve and left ulnar nerve were relatively spared. Left median F-wave could not be elicited, but H-wave was evoked normally. Overall, the NCS findings were consistent with a diagnosis of GBS with predominant axonal damage.