A 60-year-old, white, obese woman was referred by her primary care physician for renal dysfunction. The patient, who has a history of intermittent proteinuria, had normal renal biopsy findings 14 years ago, and would likely benefit from another biopsy. She also has a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, hypothyroidism, peptic ulcer, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, RA, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Her joint exam revealed some deformities related to RA but no active synovitis. Proteinuria was 2.5 g at presentation, serum creatinine was at a normal level, and C-reactive protein level was elevated. A biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of FSGS. Light microscopy examination of tissue samples revealed glomerular scarring. Intracapillary hyaline dense deposits were identified in sclerotic segments. No glomerular inflammatory cellular infiltrates or foci of capillary thrombosis or necrosis were present. Glomerular immunofluorescence was uniformly negative for immunoglobulins IgG, IgA, complement C3, C1q, and light chains. One glomerulus was examined by electron microscopy. The quality of glomerular tissue preservation was adequate, with no evident cellular or proliferative changes or entrapment of immune complexes at any capillary or mesangial foci. Foot processes of the visceral epithelial cells and capillary basement membranes were intact and free of defects.
The patient was treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor for FSGS and was maintained on her current dosage of prednisone for RA. She also complained of worsening vision in her right eye and of seeing “water bubbles.” An exam with an ophthalmologist showed that the patient had orbital inflammation and ON hyperemia and she was diagnosed with ON. The patient’s FSGS remained stable for approximately 8 months after presentation when examination showed worsening edema and highly probable FSGS relapse. Serum creatinine concentration was 1.54 mg/dL, and she had 4+ proteinuria (319 mg/dL) and a urine protein-to-creatinine ratio (UPCR) of 9.3 g/g. The patient also experienced painful RA “flares” during ongoing treatment with 5 mg of prednisone once daily. She began treatment with a 6-month regimen of Acthar Gel (40 U twice weekly) in April 2013 for FSGS. At her initial follow-up visit in September 2013, proteinuria and UPCR had decreased to about one-half (159 mg/dL and 4.3 g/g, respectively) and serum albumin was 3.4 g/dL. At a follow-up visit later in September, spot urine UPCR was 1.78 g/g and serum albumin was 3.7 g/dL. She also had 2+ bilateral pitting edema. In addition, ophthalmic follow-up showed a decrease in orbital inflammation and reduction in swelling and thickness of the optic nerve in both eyes.
Although approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for treatment of ON, there are limited data demonstrating the efficacy of Acthar Gel (a highly purified preparation of ACTH) for this condition. The patient reported that after starting treatment with Acthar Gel, she experienced fewer RA flares and pain had decreased by about 50%. She was also instructed to call in the case of worsening symptoms or adverse effects to medications. The patient has a history of hypertension and is receiving blood pressure medication. The patient did experience an elevation of her blood pressure and vitreous seeding was observed.