A 78-year-old man was referred to the corneal service at the Ophthalmology Department at Careggi Teaching Hospital, Florence, Italy, in November 2020 for non-medical-responding corneal oedema. His medical history was composed of atrial fibrillation treated with anticoagulant therapy (Endoxaban) and PD treated with Levodopa and Amantadine (100 mg bis in die). The amantadine treatment had begun 2 years before. The patient reported progressively blurred vision in both eyes that had begun 3 months before the hospital visit and had been treated with bilateral topical and subconjunctival steroids. He denied a history of trauma, injuries, or surgery to either eye. His family history for corneal disease was negative.
At his first consultation his Best Corrected Visual Acuity (BCVA) was 20/60 Snellen equivalent in his Right Eye (RE) and 20/100 Snellen equivalent in his Left Eye (LE), Intraocular Pressure (IOP) was 14 mmHg in the RE and 15 mmHg in the LE. Slit-lamp examination revealed a central corneal oedema and vesicular opacities with Descemet plicae, little or no sign of anterior surface disorders, no signs of inflammation in the anterior chamber and no vitreous or retinal pathological findings .
During the examination the following assessments were carried out in order to document corneal alterations: central ECD was 1106 cells/mm2 in RE and 1051 cells/mm2 in LE. The Corneal Endothelial Cells (CEC) located beyond these central areas were polymegathic (CEC enlargement) and pleomorphic (loss of CEC hexagonality), while the peripheral CECs showed only a slight degree of pleomorphism. The central pachymetry was 637 microns in RE and 683 in LE with a gradual thinning in the periphery.
The Anterior Segment Optical Coherence Tomography (AS-OCT, MS 39 CSO. Florence Italy) showed an increased central corneal thickness with sub-epithelial bullae in RE and a central corneal oedema with Descemet folds in LE .
Several confocal scans were taken in the central and peripheral part of both corneas using IVCM (Heidelberg Retina Tomograph III Rostock Cornea Module HRT III-RCM Heidelberg Engineering GmbH, Germany). IVCM identified a few hyperreflective particles arranged with an irregular pattern at the epithelial level; there were no abnormalities in the Bowman layer, with a decrease in sub-basal nervous plexus density; in the stromal layer expanded hyperreflective keratocyte cell bodies and disarrangement of stromal lamellae were observed only in the central area, a sign of stromal oedema; CECs showed irregular hyperreflective intracellular inclusions both in the central and in the peripheral corneal area .
An aqueous tap was performed to exclude the presence of a herpes virus in the LE; the PCR analysis was negative for herpes simplex viruses, varicella zoster virus and cytomegalovirus.
An adverse event related to a systemic drug reaction was suspected, amantadine has previously been reported as a cause of non-resolving corneal oedema. After a neurologist consultation the amantadine treatment was discontinued.
One month later the patient was re-examined, and slit-lamp microscopy showed the absence of corneal oedema and opacities, bilaterally . The patient’s BCVA returned to 20/25 Snellen equivalent in both eyes. AS-OCT showed no corneal opacity or oedema in the RE, Central Corneal Thickness (CCT) was 553 microns, a slight corneal thinning with a fine subepithelial opacity was reported in the LE, CCT was 568 microns, . Corneal microstructural analysis revealed the disappearance of epithelial and stromal abnormalities and the persistence of endothelial intracellular hyperreflective inclusions, as well as a worsening of the endothelial pleomorphism and polymegathism, as confirmed by the analysis of the endothelial cell count (691 cell/ mm2 and 700 cell/ mm2 in the RE and in the LE, respectively). Six months after amantadine discontinuation the patient’s corneal opacities had disappeared, AS-OCT findings were normal and IVCM analysis showed a persistence of endothelial pleomorphism and polymegathism, with irregular intracellular hyperreflective deposits.