A 48-year-old woman with a history of manic depression and no history of previous NSAID or probiotic use had been treated for bilateral cutaneous candidiasis of the thighs for 3 weeks. The patient visited her family physician because she had experienced severe bilateral pain in her thighs upon waking up in the morning and was unable to walk. Blood tests showed high levels of inflammation (C-reactive protein [CRP] 45.94 mg/dL), and she was referred to our hospital for a detailed examination. Mild erythema and swelling of the skin, extending from the pubic area to the groin, were observed, and she had persistent severe pain in that region. Her height was 158 cm, weight 101 kg, body mass index (BMI) 40.5 kg/m2, Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS): E3V5M6, temperature 37.3 °C, pulse 114 beats/min, blood pressure 91/58 mmHg, respiratory rate 21 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation 95% at room air. The patient was severely obese and had impaired consciousness and hypotension. Blood laboratory test values, including those for Laboratory Risk Indicator for Necrotising Fasciitis (LRINEC), were: white blood cell count 12,600/µL (76.5% neutrophils), haemoglobin 14.3 g/dL, platelet count 120,000/µL, Na+ 127 mEq/L, creatinine kinase 33 IU/L, lactate 3.0 mmol/L, glucose 741 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 50 mg/dL, creatinine 1.9 mg/dL, creatinine clearance 57.74 mL/min, CRP 45.71 mg/dL, HbA1c 15.6%, and urine ketone 2 + positive. Type 2 diabetes mellitus was diagnosed at the time of admission. Arterial blood gas analysis showed HCO3− of 9.8 mEq/L and an anion gap of 27.6 mEq/L, indicating anion gap-opening metabolic ketoacidosis. Computed tomography showed increased adipose tissue deposition, from the right abdomen to the anterior of the right thigh, with no gas-producing findings . Initially, cellulitis was suspected; however, since the patient complained of severe pain and was at high risk of NF with a LRINEC score of 9 (4, 2, 2, and 1 points for CRP, sodium, creatinine, and glucose, respectively), an exploratory surgical incision was made, and NF was diagnosed based on the identification of necrotic tissue in the fascia. Emergency debridement surgery was performed on the same day. Intraoperative findings revealed extensive necrotic tissue extending from the right side of the abdomen to the anterior thigh . The necrosis in the right groin extended to the right femoral vein. The follicle in the medial region of the right femur was the most inflamed and considered the site of bacterial entry, with necrosis more extensive than the skin findings. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). Adequate circulatory status was maintained with extracellular fluid administration, norepinephrine, and vasopressin. The patient required sedation and analgesia during daily wound care. Consequently, ventilatory management was initiated. Tight glycaemic control was maintained with administration of intravenous insulin because of diabetic ketoacidosis. Because the patient had an unstable circulatory status and was receiving high doses of catecholamines, meropenem and vancomycin were empirically administered until the causative bacteria were identified. Gram staining of the tissue culture and aspirated fluid/pus showed an elongated GPR. When specimens were examined for each colony grown on chocolate medium, they revealed two types of Lactobacillus spp.: Lactobacillus salivarius and L. iners. On day 6, report of bacterial susceptibility to antibiotics was obtained; however, no drug resistance was found. Penicillin and ampicillin sodium are first-line antibacterial agents for Lactobacillus infections. Therefore, following detection of sensitivity, the antibiotic was changed to sulbactam ampicillin. A second debridement was performed on day 11. Candida albicans was detected in the pus from the wound, and was treated with a 9-day micafungin therapy. Pseudomembranous enteritis developed on day 18 and consequently, fidaxomicin was administered for 10 days. The patient was weaned off the ventilator on day 19. Drainage with negative-pressure wound therapy was continued from day 21 to 36. Because MRSA was detected in blood cultures, vancomycin was administered from day 21 to 41. The patient’s condition improved and antibiotics were discontinued on day 25. On day 36, the wound was closed and skin grafted from the right inguinal region to the thigh. The patient was discharged from the ICU on day 41. The skin graft was successful and the patient was discharged without assistance on day 73 .