A 47-year-old male patient with a smoking history of 70 pack years presented with shortness of breath and minor hemoptysis. A computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a large tumor of the left hilum with infiltration into the upper- and lower main bronchus, infiltration into the left pulmonary artery and subcarinal extension. Upon subsequent bronchoscopy and transbronchial biopsy, a squamous cell carcinoma was diagnosed. PD-L1 immunohistochemistry (clone E1L3N®, Cell Signaling Technology, Cambridge, UK) revealed a positivity in 40% of the tumor cells and in 70% of the tumor-infiltrating immune cells. A staging by positron emission computed tomography (PET-CT) showed normal-sized mediastinal lymph nodes without increased FDG-uptake, but metabolically active left axillary lymph nodes. The axillary lymph nodes were thus resected and histological analysis showed focal lymphadenitis, but no malignancy. After a cranial magnetic resonance tomography had displayed no signs of brain metastases, a clinical T4 N0 M0 status was defined, corresponding to UICC stage IIIA. Therefore, an induction concurrent radiochemotherapy was initiated. Induction chemotherapy consisted of three cycles of carboplatin and paclitaxel. The concurrent neoadjuvant hyperfractionated radiotherapy was administered to a cumulative dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions of 2 Gy, given 5 days a week. The subsequent CT showed a partial morphological response. Considering the high PD-L1 expression, the patient subsequently received 4 cycles of pembrolizumab. The re-staging by PET-CT revealed a further reduction in tumor size with only minimal residual metabolic activity and no relevant new lesions.
The patient was then admitted for surgical resection as definitive local treatment 5 weeks after the last cycle of immunotherapy. Pre-operative spirometry showed sufficient functional reserve (forced expiratory volume in one second: 2.75L (75% of set), diffusing capacity 64% of set) and the perfusion of the diseased left lung (V/Q-scan) was reduced to 29%. Due to the central location of the tumor with contact to the left main pulmonary artery and bronchus, an intrapericardial left-sided pneumonectomy was performed, followed by mediastinal lymphadenectomy. Upon histological analysis, a pathological complete response (pCR) was found, correspondent to a ypT0 ypN0 (0/25) status . The patient was discharged after an uneventful recovery on the 11th postoperative day. Postoperatively, the patient reported a mildly to moderately impaired respiratory reserve upon physical exertion. In the last regular clinical and radiological follow-up 24 months after surgery, no signs of relapse were present.