A 22-year-old white British man with a background of epilepsy presented with a 2-week history of worsening nausea, vomiting, confusion, and aggressive behavior. On admission, he was encephalopathic and confused with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 14. In view of his deteriorating condition, he was admitted to the acute admissions unit for further investigation.
There was no history of significant illness in infancy or childhood. At the age of 18 while working as a lifeguard, he had a fall and hit his head, following this injury he had a grand mal seizure and was started on anticonvulsant medication. He had previously tried lamotrigine and levetiracetam but was unable to tolerate the non-neurological side effects. He did not report altered mental state on these medications. He had been started on sodium valproate 1 month prior to presentation.
Initial laboratory findings showed his alanine transaminase was elevated at 74 iU/L and his white cell count was 12 × 109 /L. C-reactive protein and all other blood tests were within normal ranges. His ammonia level was measured 2 days later and was 120 umol/L (normal range: 12–47 umol/L). Despite weaning down and stopping sodium valproate, his ammonia level continued to rise, reaching 230 umol/L. At this time, specific therapy for his hyperammonemia was started.
Plasma amino acids showed a raised glutamine of 1160 umol/L (515–75), consistent with a chronic hyperammonemia and a low citrulline level of 13 umol/L (20–55), consistent with OTC deficiency. Urine organic acids showed a large peak of orotic acid, confirming the diagnosis.
Initially, it was thought that his encephalopathy was secondary to sepsis. It took 48 hours for the ammonia to be checked. The hyperammonemia was initially considered to be simply due to valproate therapy and the drug was stopped. When the ammonia continued to rise, an underlying metabolic disorder was considered.
To reduce the plasma ammonia levels, he was treated with sodium benzoate, sodium phenylbutrate, and L-arginine intravenously. He was also put on a zero protein diet and given intravenous 10% dextrose to prevent catabolism. Once his ammonia levels declined to below 100 umol/L, dietary protein was gradually reintroduced and sodium benzoate, sodium phenylbutrate, and L-arginine were continued orally. He commenced clobazam for his epilepsy.
He made a full recovery, with no neurological abnormality detected on examination at outpatient follow-up 2 months later. He cut down on his consumption of meat but otherwise follows a normal diet. Ammonia was normal at 35umol/L (12–47) at 2 months.
Following this presentation, he was referred to a specialist metabolic unit for further testing. He was found to have a genetic mutation associated with late presentation of OTC deficiency and continues to take reducing doses of medications for hyperammonemia with the aim to eventually stop them all together and get him back onto a normal diet in the long term.
He would be at risk of decompensation in the future if exposed to metabolic stresses such as prolonged fasting or severe gastroenteritis. He has been given an emergency dietary regime, consisting of high carbohydrate and low protein intake to follow in such circumstances. He has also been advised to obtain a MedicAlert bracelet.
As this is an X-linked condition, other family members have been recommended to attend for genetic screening.