Our patient is a 67-year-old female with a medical history of diabetes and hypertension, recruited because of upper left quadrant abdominal pain. She was referred for pancreato-splenectomy because of a 3-cm-sized mass in distal pancreas. The operation time was 240 min, the estimated blood loss was 200 ml. With no postoperative complications as well as no diarrhea, the patient was discharged on the POD8 uneventfully. Pathological result: pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma with T2N1 staging and negative margin (R0).
The reported case of a 67-year-old female patient a medical history of diabetes and hypertension. She admitted to the hospital because of upper left quadrant abdominal pain. There were no significant findings on physical examination with the exception of mild malnutrition. Height was 150 cm and weight were 50 kg. Laboratory findings were as follows: total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, and albumin was within normal range, and amylase was 682 U/l (the normal range was 28–100 U/l). The serum level of carbohydrate antigen (CA)19-9 was 862 U/mL, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 3.72 ng/ml. Abdominal contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 30-mm solid mass in distal pancreas. There was no evidence of lymph node metastasis, peritoneal dissemination, or distant organ metastasis. The final diagnosis was an adenocarcinoma tumor of the Ampulla of Vater with TNM Staging was cT2N0Mx according to The American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) 8th Staging . MDT meeting consisted of surgeons, physicians, clinical and medical oncologists, radiologists, pathologists, and clinical nurse specialists (CNSs) were organized to make clinical decisions. The informed consent was signed, and RAMPS technique was performed.
We use five trocars: one 10 mm-trocar placed through the umbilicus for camera; two 12 mm-trocars placed at the midclavicular line higher 1 cm compared to umbilicus in the right and left side for instrument; two 5 mm-trocars placed at right and left subcostal, and the patient placed in a Trendelenburg position. Surgeon stands on the right side of patient in the SMA’s dissection phase, and changes to the middle position when dissecting the posterior surface of the artery with the rest of the surgical phases, the second and third assistants holding the middle and right cameras, the first assistant standing on the right side.
After exploring the peritoneum to exclude metastases, the left-sided assistant lifts the mesentery of transverse colon upward, and the right-sided assistant pulls the first jejunum to the right side. The retroperitoneum is opened at the left-posterior side of the meso-pancreato-duodenum along to the inframesocolic space, so that the anterior surface of the aorta (AO), inferior vena cave (IVC), left renal vein (LRV), left adrenal grand (LAG), and kidney are completely exposed, as well as the posterior side of pancreatic body to excluding posterior surgical invasion . The anterior or posterior RAMPS were performed depending on whether the tumor infiltrated to the LAG or not . Then, the gastrocolic and gastrosplenic ligaments are divided, and the inferior border of the pancreas had been dissected and separated from the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) below the pancreatic isthmus, removed the lymph nodes (LNs) groups 14v and 17. Then, go upward to the superior side of the pancreas to dissect of LNs groups 7,8,9,11p,12 en bloc. After transecting the pancreas, carefully dissect the distal pancreas with the SMA, including dissection of LNs group 14p, d or SMA LNs with preserving the nerve plexus around the SMA (pl-SMA) and celiac axis (pl-CE) . Suture and cut the pancreatic isthmus, find and suture Wirsung’s tube with Prolen 5/0 X-stitch, and suture U-stitch with Prolen 4/0, or just using a Surgical StaplerTM. Then continuedly expose left gastric artery (LGA), common hepatic artery (CHA) and splenic artery (SA) then ligate the SA just close its stump. Then the splenic vein (SV) is revealed at the splenic-mesenteric confluence, ligation of the splenic vein at the root. Left meso-pancreas, or ‘lame rétroportale gauche ’, a retro-pancreatic structure connected the left-side SMA with distal pancreas was dissected en bloc with specimen . The dorsal margin of the tumor using cross section of specimen in our patient showed without evidence of tumor invasion .