Forty year-old male patient diagnosed with AS with axial involvement admitted to our rheumatology diseases follow-up outpatient clinic with round, crusted, about 1-cm diameter lesions on feet, legs and elbows . Lesions had manifested a week ago. He did not mention about peripheral arthritis, aphthous ulcer, abdominal pain, recent infection, fever or weight loss. He had no nail finding. Morning stiffness was lasting for approximately 10 minutes. Disease activity index (BASDAI) was calculated as 2.5. In his medical history, there was nothing specific other than 15 packs/year smoking. He had no history for any drug use for any systemic disease. The patient was under treatment with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and Golimumab 50 mg/month. Laboratory results were within normal limits. In radiological evaluation, sacroiliitis and degenerative changes on lumber vertebral discs were found. Patient was consulted to Department of Dermatology. Biopsy was performed from skin lesions. In pathological examination, mild capillary proliferation and focal extravasated erythrocytes were observed beneath the epidermis exhibiting focal parakeratosis and mild acanthosis. These histopathological findings were supportive for both phthiriasis rosea and psoriasis, however, its definite differentiation from guttate psoriasis were performed with clinical findings. The patient hadn’t used any other suspicious drugs, didn’t have a family history of psoriasis or manifestations of infection before the lesions appeared. Also, his clinical and radiological findings were not compatible with psoriatic arthritis with axial involvement. Clinical status of the patient was ensured to be guttate psoriasis which developed due to anti-TNF use. Topical steroid treatment was started and anti-TNF treatment was stopped. During his follow-up, rashes of the patient were gradually lost within 2 weeks. However, after 2 months, the patient was re-admitted to our outpatient clinic with complaints of back-hip pain and morning stiffness. He had difficulties in fulfilling his daily routines due to exhaustion and pains. There was no sign of infection but it seemed to be active on laboratory tests. BASDAI calculated as 5. Anti-TNF treatment was changed and decided to be restarted and his treatment was organized as Etanercept 50 mg/week. After 10 days from the initial dose of treatment with Etanercept, complaint of rash similar to previous lesions on his ankles recurred. Topical steroid was applied but lesions persisted. Because of the fact that lesions began to extend, treatment with Etanercept was stopped after 4th dose. All lesions were regressed within a week. The patient re-admitted to our outpatient clinic after 1 month with active disease presentation. At this time, treatment with Adalimumab 40 mg/2 weeks and oral methotrexate 10 mg/week was planned. The patient’s informed consent was obtained. Clinical follow-up of the patient has been ongoing with lower disease activity and without rashes for last 5 months.