A 12-year-old male presented with the complaint of abnormal movement of the right hand for 12 days. According to the informant, he was in a usual state of health when he developed abnormal jerky movement of his right hand which was progressive, and continuous. The hand movement could not be suppressed voluntarily and it aggravated via stress and awake state and relieved during sleep. Over time, the condition progressed to include difficulty in walking and writing. On further inquiry, there was no history of waxing and waning and diurnal variation. There was no history of any joint pain and swelling, photosensitivity, fatigue, and rash. There was also no history of fever, headache, vomiting, and recurrent throat infections. There was no any indication of history of heat intolerance, significant weight loss, palpitation, and change in mood. Furthermore, there was no history of vomiting, convulsion, blurring of vision, yellowish discoloration of the sclera, and decreased urine output. Finally, there was no history of falls or trauma.
His past medical and surgical histories were insignificant.
There was no history of behavioural or neuropsychiatric disorders in the family. There was no history of consanguineous marriage in the family.
His developmental history and immunization records were as per age.
He was delivered via spontaneous, normal vaginal delivery at term and the perinatal period was uneventful. There was no history of yellowish discoloration of the body.
He had no history of drug intake or allergies.
On presentation, the patient was alert, afebrile, and well-oriented to time, place, and person. He was anxious and restless with involuntary movements and unable to stand without support. His vital signs were stable. On general examination, jerky, nonpatterned, involuntary, and random movements of his right upper limb were noticed with variable speed, timing, and direction (SDC Video 1, Supplemental Digital Content 2, ). A facial grimace was also noticed. On neurological examination, his higher mental functions, cranial nerves, and sensory examinations were within normal limits. However, during motor examinations, he had abnormal hand grip with difficulty maintaining a tetanic contraction with his hands, “Milkmaid’s sign” (SDC Video 2, Supplemental Digital Content 3, ). Deep tendon reflexes were normal and symmetrical on both sides, and his toes were down-going. Cerebellar signs could not be assessed due to the jerky movements. However, his gait was unstable and he ambulated with assistance to avoid falling. No other manifestation of RF was detected. Examination of the cardiovascular system revealed normal heart sounds and no audible murmurs. Ophthalmologic examination revealed no Kayser–Fleischer (KF) rings. On examination, there were no signs of meningeal irritation. The rest of the physical examination was otherwise unremarkable.
Laboratory evaluation revealed an anti-Streptolysin O (ASO) titre (quantitative) of 222 IU/ml (normal: <200.0 IU/ml) and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 24.0 mm/h (normal: 0–22 mm/h) . The basic metabolic panel, liver function tests, urine tests, and blood culture tests were all unremarkable. Anti-nuclear antibody report was found to be negative. MRI Brain revealed features suggestive of non-specific foci of demyelination .
The patient was admitted for further evaluation. Electrocardiogram was normal. Echocardiogram was done which showed thickened anterior mitral leaflet (thickness of 3.5 mm), slightly restricted motion of posterior mitral leaflet, and pseudo prolapse of the anterior mitral leaflet with mild eccentric mitral regurgitation along with trivial tricuspid regurgitation (gradient: 17 mmHg), trivial aortic regurgitation and trivial pulmonary regurgitation. The biventricular function (left ventricular ejection fraction= 65%) and chambers were all found to be normal and no clots, vegetation, or pericardial effusion could be appreciated. The final diagnosis of ARF with SC was made.
He was started on haloperidol, 0.5 mg per day in two divided doses. The dose was gradually up-titrated during his hospital stay to 1 mg per day in two divided doses. No adverse reactions were noted during this period. Secondary prophylaxis with 1.2 million units of IM benzathine penicillin was given. He was discharged on 14th day of admission with oral penicillin V 250 mg twice daily along with a maintenance dose of haloperidol. The patient followed up after a month. His chorea had improved to some degree. He was compliant with the prescribed penicillin.