A 6-year-old girl with no relevant past medical history presented to our clinic after development of a right ankle varus deformity. She had sustained a right Salter Harris type 3 distal tibia fracture 10 months prior while jumping on a trampoline and underwent closed reduction percutaneous pinning at an external facility 3 weeks after the initial injury . Postoperatively, she was immobilized in a controlled ankle motion (CAM) boot and underwent removal of hardware surgery 2 weeks later. She was referred to our clinic once it was observed that she was developing an ankle deformity. Upon initial presentation to us, the patient was reported to have been participating in gymnastics without any difficulty or concerns for pain. On exam, the patient demonstrated a mild varus deformity to the hindfoot with painless max passive and resisted ankle inversion and eversion. On radiographic imaging done at this visit, the lateral distal tibial angle measured 103° indicating 14° of varus deformity .
To better characterize the physeal bar, the patient followed up at a second visit 2 weeks later having obtained a computed tomography (CT) scan with 3D reconstruction. The physeal bar was measured at approximately 5 mm, involved less than 25% of the surface area of the physis, and localized to the anteromedial aspect of the right ankle . Through shared decision-making, informed consent was obtained for distal tibia physeal bar resection with bone wax interposition, and the choice for lateral hemiepiphysiodesis was deferred unless indicated by insufficient resumption of growth or angular correction.
An anteromedial approach to the ankle was utilized and the physeal bar was localized on fluoroscopy with a Kirschner wire (K-wire). The K-wire was overdrilled with a drill bit size of 5 mm to a depth of 6 mm as determined by her preoperative CT imaging. A curette was used to further clear the borders of the physeal bar until normal appearing cartilage was visualized at the margins. There appeared to be some residual bone within the depth of the wound, and O-arm navigation was used intraoperatively to revise and verify that no remaining bone was crossing the physis. The bony edges were then covered with bone wax. Postoperatively, the patient was immobilized in a CAM boot and restricted in her daily activities.
She was immobilized for 6 weeks before advancing to a normal shoe and resuming activities. At a 5-month follow-up, imaging revealed no obvious bar recurrence and a varus deformity of 8°, indicating a slight correction compared to preoperative films . At a 9-month follow-up visit, approximately 21 months from the initial fracture, the patient’s gross alignment appeared near symmetric with symmetric ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion to 20° and 30° respectively. The patient had returned to gymnastics and normal activities without pain or soreness. Radiographic imaging from this visit showed nearly completely corrected varus deformity . At a 14-month follow-up, imaging demonstrated continued remodeling of the distal tibia without evidence of bar formation .