A 75-year-old Chinese female without viral hepatitis, biliary stones, nonalcoholic fatty liver disease, or family history of disease was found to have liver-occupying lesions by color Doppler ultrasound during her routine physical examination in June 2020. Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of abdomen showed a lesion located in the caudate lobe, invaded portal vein and inferior vena cava around, measuring up to 6.7 cm (shown in a, b). Computed tomography scan of lung and pelvic cavity did not find any distal metastasis. Carcinoembryonic antigen was normal while cancer antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) was increased to 700.6 U/mL. The patient received a liver biopsy, which obtained three pieces of tumor tissues, in June 14, 2020, and the immunohistochemical analysis was shown as following: CK7 (+), CK19 (+), Muc-1 (+), Hep-1 (+), arginase (−), Gly-3 (−), GS (−), CK5/6 (+), and p40 (−), which suggested the diagnosis was ICC with stage of IIIB (cT4N0M0).
With no indication of radical surgery, this patient received gemcitabine (1,000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8) plus S-1 (80 mg daily on days 1–14 of a 21-day cycle) as first-line regimen. CA19-9 level fell rapidly to normal after the first cycle. Follow-up enhanced MRI of abdomen showed that the tumor size decreased about 71% without any new lesion emerging after five cycles treatment (shown in b). Because of serious thrombocytopenia, the patient refused the combination of gemcitabine and received S-1 oral-only regimen since the sixth cycle. Five months later, enhanced MRI of abdomen revealed tumor progression (shown in b).
With the patient’s consent, the primary tumor tissue sample was obtained by biopsy. And the gene sequencing of her tumor tissue confirmed that this patient was MSI-H PD-1 inhibitor was recommended as an alternative regimen after first-line treatment failure. Camrelizumab, a kind of PD-1 inhibitor, had proved efficacy and safety in solid tumor patients with MSI-H and mismatch repair deficiency in a phase 2 clinical trial , was then initiated with 200 mg intravenously every 3 weeks. After 2 months of treatment, enhanced MRI scan showed that the targeted lesion had a dramatic regression, 44% shrinkage from baseline (shown in b). Unfortunately, a massive, rapidly disease progression burst out 1.5 months later, not only in liver but also spreading to lymph nodes and subcutaneous soft tissues (shown in c). And patient died 2 months later.
To explore the potential mechanism of this patient’s rapid progression, we also obtained the progressive metastatic tumor tissue by surgery with the patient’s consent. Multiple immunohistochemical staining showed that the metastatic tumor tissue was CK19, CK7, and Muc-1 positive, which could be diagnosed as cholangiocarcinoma metastasis (shown in a). A 769-gene panel next-generation sequencing was used to analyze the gene feature of both primary and progressive tumor tissues (shown in online suppl. Table S1; see online suppl. material at ). The results showed that 36 genes mutated both in primary and progressive tumor tissues. The mutation abundance was calculated from alternating allelic observations divided by the read depth at each position . Interestingly, while the tumor mutation burden was similar before and after immunotherapy (26.05 and 24.36 Mut/Mb, respectively), the abundance of gene mutation was lower at the time of disease progression (shown in b). Among these mutated genes, there were some clinically significant pathogenic mutations, such as TP53, KRAS, ARID1A. No events were observed in JAK1, JAK2, JAK3, B2M, or PTEN, which are associated with acquired resistance to ICIs. However, these mutated genes were detected in MSI-H ICC patients who were sensitive to ICI treatment (shown in online suppl. Table S2, S3). Besides, TGFBR2 frameshift mutation was detected in both gene-sequencing results.
To estimate loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I at the somatic level, we used the LOHHLA algorithm with default settings. Both primary tumor and metastatic tissue specimens had LOH in HLA-I alleles. In particular, this patient was found to harbor subclonal loss of HLA-B44 supertype while keeping HLA-B62 supertype (shown in c).
To analyze the change of tumor microenvironment before and after immunotherapy, immunofluorescence staining, imaging, and quantification of simultaneous detection for multiplex molecules within the tumor immune microenvironment were performed by Tissue Cytometry Analysis System. The results showed that the proportion of PD-L1+ cells in tumor was highly enhanced in the ICI-resistant metastatic tumor tissue. And the results also revealed that the infiltration percentages of the immune cells in the baseline primary tumor tissue were very low, with only CD68+CD163‒ M1 macrophages having been detected. And a variety of immune cells infiltrated in the ICI-resistant metastatic tumor tissue had increased, including CD8+PD-1+ T cells, CD4+PD-1+ T cells, Foxp3+CD4+ Treg cells, CD68+CD163− M1 macrophages, and CD68+CD163+ M2 macrophages (shown in ). However, only the increase of Treg cells, M1 and M2 macrophages had statistical difference.