A 15-year-old male patient presented to the emergency department for acute pain of the left knee after trauma resulting from a direct hit while playing basketball. The patient denied having any history of chills, fever, or weight changes. His family history was insignificant for unspecified malignancy in both parents.
In the physical examination, there was direct tenderness on the left patella. The left anterior patella showed edema. However, there were no palpable masses or local heat. The range of motion (ROM) of the left knee was restricted, and the left lower limb could not bear weight. There were no abnormal neurological findings. There was no external shortening or rotation of the leg. The lateral stress test of the knee joint, McMurray’s test and posterior-anterior drawer test were negative.
Laboratory testing included a comprehensive metabolic panel, tumor markers and complete blood cell count results within the normal range, except for an alkaline phosphatase level of 153 U/L (reference range, 40–150). Radiography of the knee revealed a well-demarcated, eccentric, and osteolytic lesion with pathological fracture of the left patella by a uniformly radiolucent and expansile process that did not involve any adjacent osseous structures. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a thin sclerotic rim with fine matrix calcification within the lesion (1.5 × 2 × 3 cm) . MRI demonstrated pathological fracture and a solitary solid enhancing tumor that caused more than half of the destruction of the left patella, with expansion of the osseous margin. In addition, the case showed intensity on T2-weighted images and slight intensity on T1-weighted images. The soft tissue showed edema in the anterior of the patella. A whole-body bone scan with technetium-99 m-methylene-diphosphonate (99mTc-MDP) revealed moderate uptake in the left and right patella without strong accumulation in other parts of the body. However, the right knee was painless, its ROM was not restricted, and its patella was normal on X-ray. Chest radiography showed no abnormal changes. The lesion was stage 2 according to the Enneking system for staging benign and malignant musculoskeletal tumors of Patrick et al. .
Considering the appearance and location of this tumor, a primary diagnosis of benign tumor was made. Among CB, giant cell tumor, aneurysmal bone cyst, giant cell reparative granuloma, chondromyxoid fibroma, and brown tumor of hyperparathyroidism, the most likely diagnosis was CB.
Preoperative contraindications were excluded. The operation was performed in the People’s Hospital of Deyang City, Sichuan University, by bone tumor surgeons (Drs. Yuehong Liu and Lejin Yang). The patient was placed under intravenous general anesthesia with the use of a tourniquet ischemia. The left knee was covered with disinfecting solution and paving sterile drapes and positioned to expose the surgical field. A longitudinal midline 6-cm incision was formed overlying the left patella. The tissue layers including the skin, subcutaneous tissue, and superficial and deep fascia, was separated. A thin and broken periosteal shell was exposed, and the surrounding soft tissue was not invaded by the tumor. The broken periosteal shell was removed with the attached tumor tissue. The bone window (2.5 × 3 cm) was located the anterior and inferior of the patella. Thorough curettage of the visualized tumor tissues was performed. A high-speed burr was used to grind the tumor border and cancellous bone for 5 mm around the lesion edge. The tumor cavity was inactivated by 95% alcohol for 20 min. Next, we used an electrotome to burn the cavity and washed the cavity deliberately with sterilizing water. The patella was subsequently filled with autogenous iliac cancellous bone and structural cortical bone block to reconstruct cortical defects. To prevent further fracture, tension band wiring fixation of the patella was implemented and carefully closed and repaired with interrupted sutures of each layer of soft tissue. The total loss of blood was ~ 100 ml, and no blood transfusion was performed during the hospitalization. The specimen contained a mixture of soft, friable, yellow-white material, and hemorrhage . Intraoperative tissues were sent for pathological examination.
Histological examination showed round or polyhedral cells with oval nuclei in the areas of proliferation embedded in a chondroid matrix . However, focally, a clear cell change was observed . The nucleus was centrally placed, and a central, longitudinal nuclear groove (“coffee bean” nucleus) was observed . Some nucleoli were small. Histologically, CB was confirmed.
Antibiotics were administered for 24 h (cefazolin 1 g iv), and the rehabilitation program that was started the second day following surgery consisted of muscle strength, joint mobilization training, and partial weight-bearing, as tolerated. The wound healed to grade A. Follow-up occurred at 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months and then every 6 months after surgery. At the same time, the patient was followed up with plain tomography, and a CT scan was performed to observe the healing of the grafted bone and tumor recurrence. At 2 months after the operation, the patient could go to school and participate in some simple sports activities. The functional outcome was evaluated with the Pediatric Outcomes Data Collection Instrument (PODCI) questionnaire developed by the Pediatric Orthopaedic Society of North America (POSNA) . At the last follow-up at 21 months after surgery, there was no evidence of local recurrence or distance metastasis . The internal fixation showed no loosening or migration. The global PODCI score was 100 points. The patient’s sports and physical functioning domain score was 100 points.