A 24-year-old woman with Asian eyelid underwent bilateral upper lid blepharoplasty and levator tucking with skin approach for double lid formation 7 years ago. After the first surgery for cosmetic purpose, her eyelid level in the right eye was over-corrected, and thus she underwent several surgeries performed by another plastic surgeon to correct the lid level. First, she underwent removal of the levator tucking suture, but then the upper conjunctiva was prolapsed and ptosis occurred in the right eye. Prolapsed conjunctiva was resected. Subsequently, the patient underwent levator resection with skin approach for ptosis correction in the same eye. After this surgery, the patient immediately complained of vertical diplopia in the primary position that worsened in upgaze. Vertical diplopia persisted, and 2 months later, she was referred to our clinic for evaluation of strabismus.
The patient underwent complete ophthalmic examination including prism and alternate cover test. We found a 25-prism-diopter (PD) right hypotropia and a 4-PD intermittent exotropia in the primary gaze, increasing to a 30-PD right hypotropia in upgaze as a consequence of the restricted upward movement of the right eye (− 2 degrees) . CT scan was performed immediately, and revealed suspicious enlargement and enhancement of the right SR muscle, considered as possible damage from trauma . The infiltration around the SR muscle insertion was observed to be increased, and the insertion of the SR muscle was not clearly shown in the CT. The patient was prescribed 50 mg of oral prednisolone tapered over 7 weeks. Five months later, CT was repeated; however, there was no significant change. Since there was no improvement of her hypotropia and CT scan, we elected to explore the SR muscle. Preoperatively, mild (1+) restriction in the IR muscle on the forced duction test and weakness of the SR muscle on the forced generation test were observed.
Intraoperatively, there was neither remnant muscle fiber nor muscle capsule at the insertion site. Instead, some SR muscle fibers were attached at the posterolateral location of the original insertion of the SR muscle . The superior oblique (SO) muscle was intact. There were severe adhesions around the SR muscle. Normal muscle fibers of the SR muscle were identified when tendon tissue containing radial fibers obscured the view of the muscle hook underneath it. After exploration and scar tissue removal, for nonadjustable procedures, two single-armed absorbable 6–0 polyglactin 910 sutures were passed in full thickness, double loop, locking fashion at the both margins of the remnant SR muscle fibers and perimuscular connective tissue at the anomalous attachment site. The SR muscle was sharply disinserted from the sclera and was advanced maximally to the original insertion. The muscle was sutured to the sclera at the new insertion site. Aiming to achieve initial postoperative alignment of orthotropia to 4PD right hypotropia, we additionally performed 5.5 mm IR muscle recession with a 6–0 polyglactin 910 double arm suture. No other inflammation was observed. Topical antibiotics and steroids were used postoperatively for 2 weeks.
On postoperative 1 day, a 6-PD intermittent exotropia of the primary gaze was observed and vertical diplopia was diminished. At 2 months after surgery, orthotropia was maintained in the primary gaze and there was a 2-PD right hypotropia in upgaze. Upgaze restriction of the right eye was greatly improved. There was no postoperative improvement in ptosis. At 6 months after surgery, orthotropia was observed in upgaze as well as primary gaze. At 12 months after surgery (last visit), orthotropia in all gazes was maintained.