A 41-year-old male with no significant past medical history presented to the emergency department (ED) with pain, redness, and swelling of his right ankle’s medial aspect for five days. He first noticed his symptoms while mowing grass. He denied any trauma. At the time of symptom onset, he was under home arrest and was wearing an electronic monitoring device on his right ankle. He was concerned that this device might have been contributing to his symptoms and had it moved to his left lower extremity two days before his presentation to the ED. Despite this, his pain, redness, and swelling continued to worsen. Ibuprofen and heating pads improved his pain but did not reduce the swelling. He noted that his pain was aggravated by ambulation, but he maintained the ability to ambulate independently. He denied associated fever or rash. At the time of his presentation to the ED, his pain severity was 7–8 on a 1–10 scale.
On examination, the patient was well appearing. Initial vital signs were as follows: temperature 36.8°C (98.2°F); heart rate 99 beats per minute; respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute; blood pressure 128/82 millimeters mercury; and pulse oximetry 96% on room air. Erythema and swelling were noted overlying the right medial malleolus . The area was tender and fluctuant. There was no evidence of trauma to the skin. No crepitus or drainage was present. Distal sensation and pulses were intact, and his ankle had a full range of motion.
Plain radiographs demonstrated marked soft tissue swelling around the ankle joint, most prominent at the medial malleolus. A point-of-care ultrasound was performed, which revealed a 3 centimeter × 1 centimeter thick-walled cystic mass containing fluid of mixed echogenicity, consistent with bursitis .
Aspiration of the bursa was performed with an 18-gauge needle, and 3 milliliters of cloudy yellow fluid was removed and sent for culture. No additional studies were obtained. The patient noted decreased pain after the procedure. A presumptive diagnosis of septic medial malleolar bursitis was made, and the patient was discharged with a 10-day course of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. He did not receive antibiotics in the ED.
Gram stain of the aspirated fluid was negative, but culture grew Staphylococcus aureus. On telephone follow-up one week later, the patient noted significant symptomatic improvement. Unfortunately, he had not begun taking his antibiotics. He was encouraged to do so. The patient was lost to further follow-up.