In 2011, a 66-year-old Japanese woman underwent unenhanced computed tomography (CT) that showed an incidental cystic lesion in the tail of the pancreas measuring 9 mm . She did not have any symptoms. After that, she underwent a CT scan every year. Her medical histories were as follows: breast cancer, HCV carrier, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Laboratory tests, including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), were normal. In 2013, the cystic lesion had grown to 14 mm, and the peripheral rim was enhanced on contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) . Although the cystic lesion continued to increase gradually, its form did not change. In 2018, the cystic lesion had become 33 mm and contained fluid at the bottom, which was considered clot on unenhanced CT . However, endoscopic ultrasound did not reveal a mural nodule lesion. In 2019, the cystic lesion was 40 mm, and the outer rim was thinner on CECT . Endoscopic retrograde pancreatography (ERP) showed that the main pancreatic duct was stenotic without any connection to the cystic lesion . The main pancreatic duct further exhibited tapered stenosis at the pancreatic body and a slightly dilated main pancreatic duct on the distal side. Cytological examination demonstrated class IIIb adenocarcinoma . The patient also underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), demonstrating T1 low, T2 high, and fluid-fluid levels . We considered that an intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm or a mucinous cystic neoplasm was complicated by pancreatic cancer, and we performed laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery and left the hospital 12 days later.
Histopathology showed a cystic lesion measuring 21 × 11 mm in the tail of the pancreas . The content of the cystic lesion was serous fluid without blood. The wall of the cyst was filled with fibrous connective tissue, with some growth of tumor cells consisting of atypical cells with dense chromosomes on the inner surface. There was no necrosis or mucus in the lumen . The tumor cells displayed ribbon-like hyperplasia and gland-like structures. There were small blood vessels around the cells and no mitotic figures at 10 hpf . Cytological examination showed positive staining for INSM1 and synaptophysin, which are highly specific markers for neuroendocrine tumors . The Ki-67 index was less than 1%, making this a G1-type tumor. Immunohistochemical markers of insulin and glucagon were negative.