A 55-year-old Caucasian British woman was referred by her general practitioner with a dragging sensation in her lower pelvis and vagina of 18 months' duration. She described it as 'my womb is going to drop out'. She reported very vague symptoms during micturition and had recurrent cystitis. She did not complain of any bowel symptoms or urinary incontinence, and did not have significant sexual dysfunction.
Two years before her presentation, she experienced urinary urgency with urge incontinence and underwent video urodynamics. This showed signs of an overactive bladder and the anticholinergic, tolterodine extended release (ER) was prescribed, which has improved her symptoms dramatically.
Her obstetric history included three normal deliveries, the last one 27 years previously (birth weight 4-4.5 kg). On examination, there was no obvious cystocoele or stress incontinence seen in the supine position. The cervix looked healthy and on Sims' speculum examination, there was a very mild degree of prolapse of the anterior and posterior vaginal wall. There was an enterocele and the cervix had descended to within the introitus but outside the introitus with strain (stage III modified Baden and Walker).
Considering the primary uterine prolapse and the dragging sensation, she was counselled to undergo laparoscopic sacrohysteropexy. At laparoscopy, she was found to have a moderate sized (6×7 cm) pedunculated fibroid coming off the back of the uterus, which may account for some of her pelvic dragging sensations .
The fibroid was removed using an endoloop and two sutures . Then sacrohysteropexy was performed to further elevate the uterus: polypropylene Ethicon mesh (Espiner Medical) was fixed to the back of the uterus at the uterosacral ligament level using four (ProTac) staples and four Vicryl (polyglactin 2-0) sutures for secure fixation . The other end of the mesh was sutured above the sacral promontory by four ProTac staples then the mesh was covered with the peritoneum by Vicryl 2-0 sutures. Operative time was 60 minutes; histopathology confirmed benign leiomyoma.
The procedure went very well and the patient was discharged home after a couple of days. A follow-up examination after 6 months revealed a well-supported uterus and vaginal walls (stage I modified Baden and Walker) with good patient satisfaction. The patient did not have any new pelvic floor or urinary symptoms.