A 48-year-old healthy man with no history of trauma presented with pains and swelling of the posterior aspect of the left ankle and lower calf. It had lasted for 1½years before presentation. Both pains and swelling had been progressive, and it was difficult to walk on the left leg for the past3 months. He took analgesics with minimal relief. The local examination revealed a hard and tender mass at the lower calf region, about 2 inches above the left ankle. There was significant muscle wasting of the calf muscles, compared to the right leg. The ankle movements were restricted to terminal range only. Thompson’s test for ruptured TA was negative. A plain radiograph revealed a bony mass at the left Taregion . The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the presence of a bony mass within the substance of TA. All the clinical and biochemical laboratory tests, including serum calcium levels, were within normal limits. The heterotopic bone mass was removed, using a posterior longitudinal incision over the left Achilles tendon, centering over the bony mass. The TA was split carefully, and bony mass of 3 inches × 2 inches was removed . The split TA was repaired primarily using no. 2 Ethibond™ (Ethicon), and the wound was closed in layers. The histopathology of the excised bony mass revealed tendinous tissue showing the exuberant metaplastic bone formation of woven and lamellar types and is laid down as anastomosing thick trabeculae with focal osteoblastic rimming and separated by intertrabecular spaces containing chiefly mature adipose tissue. The trabeculae show evenly distributed osteocytes with lacunar spaces. These histopathological features were suggestive of HOTA. An above knee plaster slab was applied, with the ankle in plantar flexion. The plaster slab was removed after 4 weeks, and a Foam Pneumatic Walker™ (AIRCAST, USA) was given for 2 months more for walking. At 6 months of follow-up, the patient had no pain, swelling, and a full range of ankle movements. The TA was intact on clinical examination.