A 19-year-old male patient presented to our hospital with a chief complaint of recurrent nasal bleeding over two months. He also complained of progressive nasal blockage, continuous nasal discharge, and occasional headaches throughout the past few weeks, with a history of similar complaints two years previously. He had no other comorbidities, nor was he taking any regular medications. His surgical history was significant for radiotherapy of the tumor in 2019 and an attempted resection of a nasal mass in 2020. His family history and physical examination were unremarkable. His initial relevant laboratory workup was reported to be normal.
His CT scan showed a lobulated, enhancing soft-tissue mass in the region of the right pterygopalatine fissure and bilateral posterior ethmoid sinuses, anterior to the medial pterygoid plate with extension into both sphenoid sinuses posteriorly and the right maxillary sinus laterally. Arbitrarily, the mass measured approximately 29 mm × 29 mm in the craniocaudal and transverse dimensions. The enhancing soft-tissue mass anterior to the right pterygoid plates measured approximately 18 mm × 12 mm. The right maxillary sinus was not visualized, status-post intervention. The brain showed normal gray and white matter differentiation. No acute intracranial hemorrhage, established infarct, or mass effect was seen. There was no hydrocephalus or shift of the midline structures. Ventricles and basal cisterns appeared normal. His non-contrast CT scan images are shown in .
The case was thoroughly reviewed, and he was managed along the lines of a recurrent angiofibroma. If not treated, the patient would have suffered from persistent nose bleeds, and the tumor would invade into the cranium. Due to the complex site of the tumor, neurosurgery was also consulted. The family was extensively counseled, and after informed consent, he was planned for an endonasal endoscopic resection of the juvenile angiofibroma post angioembolization.
A team of Biomedical Engineers was involved in this case for the development of a patient-specific 3D-printed biomodel . Detailed information and CT DICOM images were provided to the team. Utilizing “computer-aided design” and slicing tools such as “3D slicer” and “Autodesk Meshmixer,” a 3D biomodel was developed. Consequently, a series of interactive discussion sessions were held between the clinical and biomedical engineering teams to develop the final revised version of the model. Two different types of materials, polylactic acid (PLA) and thermoplastic polyurethane 95A (TPU95A), were used for printing. The skull was printed using PLA material due to its rigidity and stiff nature. For the tumor, TPU95A material was used due to its flexible nature. Dual extrusion printing was used to print this model.
A 4 French vascular access sheath was placed in the right femoral artery, and through this access, bilateral external carotid arteries were cannulated, and angiograms were performed. The angiogram revealed a vascular blush in the posterior nasal region corresponding to the lesion seen on diagnostic imaging. This was predominantly supplied by bilateral internal maxillary artery branches (right>Left). The supplying branches were selectively cannulated and embolized using polyvinyl alcohol particles through a microcatheter. Post embolization run showed a significant reduction in the arterial supply of the lesion.
Two days after angioembolization, the patient underwent endoscopic endonasal excision of the angiofibroma under general anesthesia with a cover of hypotensive drugs to minimize bleeding. The 3D biomodel was used by the surgical team, preoperatively and intraoperatively, to visualize the tumor and plan the optimal approach. During the procedure, a big anteroseptal defect was visualized secondary to his previous surgery. The tumor was visible, extending into the right pterygoid and pterygopalatine fossa. The tumor was shaved off and removed using reticular dissection. Careful dissection was done while separating the tumor from the fibrous tissue. On reaching the distal edge, the tumor was found to adhere to the dura mater. It was carefully excised and revealed to be a blood-filled cyst.
The patient was closely monitored for the next two days postoperatively. He remained vitally and clinically stable. Postoperatively, his extraocular movements, pupillary reflex, and higher mental functions were thoroughly examined and found to be normal. On a follow-up visit to the clinic, he showed promising recovery with no signs of any cranial deficits. The summary of the patient’s management is described in .