The patient was a 60-year-old man. Abdominal ultrasonography indicated that he had an abdominal mass. He reported having perceived lower abdominal pain 7 months before the initial examination, but it spontaneously remitted. The patient had no fever nor any history of conditions such as hypertension. A blood test revealed that he did not have anemia, thrombocytopenia, or coagulation abnormalities. The patient demonstrated slightly elevated levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (4.7 ng/ml) and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (603 U/ml), tumor markers that are elevated in gastrointestinal cancers and malignant lymphoma. Contrast-enhanced CT showed a 33× 31 mm abdominal aortic aneurysm and a 106 × 81 mm mass peripheral to the abdominal aorta. The mass did not feature a contrast effect, and its margin was enhanced in the venous phase . Sigmoid wall thickening and inferior vena cava thrombosis were also observed . We suspected the patient had a neoplastic disease, such as a malignant lymphoma or sigmoid colon cancer. Detailed examinations were consequently performed, and direct oral anticoagulant therapy was initiated to treat the inferior vena cava thrombosis.
The FDG-PET revealed an abnormal accumulation of FDG in the margin of the mass and the sigmoid colon, but not in any other organs. Colonoscopy showed only mild inflammation in the sigmoid colon, and a sigmoid colon biopsy revealed no significant findings. Chronic inflamed fibrous connective tissue was harvested from the periaortic mass using CT-guided biopsy. There were no findings indicative of infection or neoplastic disease, thus precluding a pathological diagnosis.
At 1 month after the initial examination, intermittent claudication occurred, prompting the performance of follow-up contrast-enhanced CT scanning. On CT scanning, we found an arterial occlusion from the infrarenal abdominal aorta to the bilateral common iliac arteries, the right external iliac artery, and the right internal iliac artery . These findings indicated the potential progress of the tumor to the aorta. Via a midline incision, biopsies of the mass and the lymph nodes peripheral to the sigmoid colon were obtained. However, these biopsies showed only connective tissue with inflammation and fibrosis and did not yield any significant findings. Since the developments, we elected to resect the mass and perform bypass surgery for definitive diagnosis and treatment after 3 weeks from biopsy.
Surgery was performed using a transperitoneal approach via a midline incision. Adhesion was observed peripheral to the abdominal aorta, the bilateral iliac arteries, and the retroperitoneal mass. The abdominal aortic lumen was completely occluded by an old thrombus and plaque. Removal of the thrombus revealed a 35-mm intimal defect consistent with the direction of the retroperitoneal mass . Communication was observed between the intimal defect site and the retroperitoneal mass, which was filled with a partially organized old thrombus. During the intraoperative rapid pathological examination, the tissue inside the mass was diagnosed as a fibrin clot. The tumor tissue was not assessed. The area from the infrarenal abdominal aorta to the right common femoral artery and the left common iliac artery was bypassed using a Y-shaped woven Dacron graft. Pathologic examination showed that the mass tissue was a partially organized fibrin clot, thus agreeing with our intraoperative rapid diagnosis. On the basis of the intraoperative and pathologic findings, the patient was diagnosed with CCR-AAA with abdominal aortic occlusion. His intermittent claudication improved, and he was discharged on day 19 after surgery. Six months after the operation, the retroperitoneal mass disappeared on CT.