A 42-year-old female presenting with headaches was found to have a 5 mm laterally projecting right middle cerebral artery (MCA) bifurcation aneurysm and a 5 mm BX aneurysm . Given the patient’s young age, surgical treatment was offered as an alternative to endovascular treatment. After discussion of the risks and benefits, the patient opted for a minimally invasive supraorbital keyhole craniotomy for clipping of both aneurysms.
Preoperative computed tomography angiography (CTA) evaluation of the patient’s aneurysms revealed aneurysms amenable for surgical clipping through a supraorbital keyhole approach (SOKA). The MCA bifurcation aneurysm was noted to be at the level of the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone and evaluation of the anatomical accessibility of the BX aneurysm was determined using the orbital roof-dorsum estimation line as previously described. Briefly, the elevation of the orbital roof off the anterior skull base is determined in the coronal plane which is then translated on to the midsagittal plane; this point is then extended to the top of the posterior clinoid and continuing until it reaches the basilar artery (BA) determining the most superior exposure of the BA. Utilizing this line, it was estimated that the superior most exposure through the SOKA would be the neck of the aneurysm with further inferior exposure afforded by the superior extent of the craniotomy off the roof of the orbit .
The patient was positioned supine and the head was placed in three-point fixation. A right-sided approximately 5 cm eyebrow incision was made extending from the supraorbital notch to just lateral to the superior temporal line . A 2 cm × 1 cm craniotomy was made above the orbital rim. A curvilinear dural incision was made and the frontal lobe gently dissected off the anterior skull base without the use of fixed retractors. The opticocarotid cistern was opened to release cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and facilitate brain relaxation. The Sylvian fissure was then dissected to expose the MCA bifurcation aneurysm. A right-angled clip was applied and placement was confirmed with mICG-VA using a 0.5 mg/kg bolus of ICG . Attention was then turned to the BX aneurysm. Arachnoid dissection around the optic nerve was performed to allow unencumbered access into the opticocarotid and carotidoculomotor triangles. Through the carotidoculomotor triangle, Liliequist’s membrane was opened until the aneurysm dome was identified. The aneurysm dome and neck were visible; however, the more proximal BA and perforator origins were obscured by the posterior clinoid. A 0 degree, 4 mm outer diameter, ICG capable endoscope (Storz; Tuttlingen, Germany) was introduced through the opticocarotid window (OCW) allowing complete visualization of the more proximal BA and perforator origins. Another bolus of ICG was administered and the aneurysm was inspected with eICG-VA. A posterior clinoidectomy was considered but ultimately deemed unnecessary given the improved visualization. Adenosine was available, if necessary, for intraoperative rupture. After careful dissection of the perforators off the aneurysm neck, a straight blade aneurysm clip was placed under a microscopic view. Postclipping inspection of the aneurysm utilizing eICG-VA demonstrated good exclusion of the aneurysm with no neck remnant and intact parent and perforator vessels .
Postoperative CTA confirmed adequate placement of clips with no residual . Patient recovered well and was discharged on a postoperative day 2 with no short- or long-term complications or neurologic deficits at 3-month follow-up.