A previously well 55-year-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese woman from Kandy presented to Teaching Hospital Peradeniya with a history of high-grade fever of 7 days’ duration with severe headache. She had anorexia and generalized malaise. She was treated with a course of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid by a general practitioner for possible sinusitis, but she had no clinical response. On day 5 of her febrile illness, she noticed a rash that was erythematosus initially, starting over her bilateral lower limbs and hands and progressing rapidly to involve her back and trunk. The lesions progressed to become black and necrotic with a few hemorrhagic blebs. She had severe pain in her hands and feet, particularly worsening with cold exposure. She had been to southeastern Sri Lanka on a pilgrimage and recalled having multiple tick bites. On examination, she was in severe distress with a high fever of 105 °F. Her higher mental functions were intact. She had marked conjunctival injection. An extensive purpuric rash with areas of hemorrhage and necrosis was seen over both legs, hands, and the trunk . The results of the rest of the systemic examination were normal. The patient did not have an eschar. She did not have any other bleeding manifestations.
The patient’s complete blood count showed a total white blood cell (WBC) count of 6.6 × 109/L (60% neutrophils, 15% lymphocytes, and 25% monocytes), hemoglobin of 9.1 g/dl, and a platelet count of 36 × 109/L. A peripheral smear taken upon admission showed normochromic normocytic anemia with marked monocytosis and apparently low platelets that could have been due to multiple platelet clumps, and there was no evidence of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA), but subsequent peripheral smears drawn on the third and fifth days of admission showed evidence of MAHA with marked thrombocytopenia. The patient’s prothrombin time was 15.7 s (control 12 s), and her activated partial thromboplastin time was 36 s (control 25 s). Her d-dimer level was 1500 ng/ml (normal range < 500 ng/ml). Her fibrinogen levels were not available in the hospital. Her transaminases were within the normal ranges. Her serum protein concentration was 61 g/L with albumin of 30 g/L. The results of her renal function tests were normal. Her serum lactate dehydrogenase was 810 U/L (normal range 225–450 U/L). The results of her blood and urine cultures were sterile. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal cardiac valves and endocardium. The result of immunofluorescence antibody testing of rickettsial immunoglobulin G was strongly positive for Rickettsia conorii, with a rise in titer convalescent sera repeated after 2 weeks.
Our patient was treated initially with doxycycline. She continued to spike high fevers while on doxycycline, and her skin lesion was spreading extensively. On the third day of her hospital stay, intravenous chloramphenicol was started, and she was afebrile within 24 h. Intravenous chloramphenicol was continued for a total of 7 days. Antipyretics, antiallergy drugs, and topical emollients were also applied. She recovered completely, including regression of the rash at follow-up after 10 days. Her complete blood count showed a WBC of 8 × 109/L with a normal differential count, hemoglobin of 10.5 g/dl, and a platelet count of 156 × 109/L, and a peripheral smear showed complete resolution of features of disseminated intravascular coagulation.