An 89-year-old woman (height: 138 cm, weight: 43 kg) with a history of hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and osteoporosis, was referred to our hospital due to a susception of drug-induced rhabdomyolysis. Her medications from two different clinics included eldecalcitol at 0.75 μg, amlodipine at 5 mg, pravastatin at 5 mg, mecobalamin at 500 μg, yokukansan at 7.5 g (containing liquorice at 1.5 g), furosemide at 20 mg, shakuyakukanzoto (containing liquorice at 4 g), limaprost alfadex at 15 μg, lactomin amylolytic bacillus, famotidine at 20 mg, etodolac at 400 mg, and etizolam at 1 mg. She consulted her general physician a day before referral due to a feeling of general fatigue and worsening bilateral upper extremities muscle weakness. Laboratory tests with her general physician revealed severe hypokalaemia (1.8 mEq/L) and elevated CK level (4910 IU/L). Troponin I level was 0.0773 ng/mL, and CK-MB (myoglobin binding) level was 15 IU/L. The patient presented with a blood pressure of 171/80 mmHg and a regular heart rate of 105 b.p.m. during the initial assessment at our emergency department. Electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed frequent premature ventricular contractions and pulseless ventricular tachycardia, i.e. torsades de pointes; thus, immediate defibrillation was delivered. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated visually normal LV function (, ). Further laboratory analysis, including arterial blood gas, revealed severe hypokalaemia (1.7 mEq/L), and metabolic alkalosis (pH: 7.54, partial pressure of carbon dioxide: 51.8 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen: 62.2 mmHg, and bicarbonate: 43.9 mmol/L), while renal function (serum creatinine: 0.57 mg/dL and serum blood urea nitrogen: 7.0 mg/dL) remained normal. The patient’s CK level was also elevated at 4449 IU/L. Spot urinary potassium concentration was 9.9 mEq/L. Chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly and mild congestion. Based on the above findings, hypokalaemia with metabolic alkalosis secondary to hyperaldosteronism was suspected. She was hospitalized and managed with aggressive potassium replacement therapy, requiring 140–160 mEq of intravenous potassium chloride daily. Herbal medicines were discontinued. After the admission, blood pressure gradually improved from 140–160/85–100 mmHg to 120–135/85–95 mmHg. Eventually, potassium levels were up to 3.6 mEq/L on Day 4. Plasma renin activity (PRA) and aldosterone levels were both highly suppressed at the presentation [PRA: <0.2 ng/mL/h (0.2–3.9 ng/mL/h), plasma aldosterone: <4.0 pg/mL (4.0–82.1 pg/mL)], thus, pseudoaldosteronism secondary to excessive liquorice intake was indicated.
Creatine kinase level elevation progressed through Day 3 (peak CK level of 8492 IU/L, ), accompanied by acute kidney injury (serum creatinine: 1.41 mg/dL). Creatine kinase-myoglobin binding level was not elevated (Day 2; 8 IU/L, Day 4; 9 IU/L). Furosemide was intravenously administered on Day 4 since congestive kidney was suspected. Chest X-ray on Day 6 revealed cardiomegaly and butterfly shadow with bilateral pleural effusions consistent with pulmonary oedema, and transthoracic echocardiography revealed decreased LV dysfunction [LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 24% by modified Simpson method, , ] with no focal wall motion abnormality. The ECG revealed a complete right bundle branch block with a negative T wave in V1–4 leads. Laboratory findings demonstrated an elevated Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP) level (2251.1 pg/mL). She was managed with furosemide and dobutamine (1γ) because of decreased estimated stroke volume (18 mL) in TTE. The optimal medical therapy for heart failure with reduced ejection fraction was concomitantly initiated with spironolactone at 50 mg, enalapril at 1.25 mg, and empagliflozin at 10 mg. She developed a hypokalaemia recurrence (2.5 mEq/L) on Day 8, causing paroxysmal atrial fibrillation as aggressive potassium replacement therapy was attenuated. Concurrently, she suddenly developed aphasia, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a left middle cerebral artery M1 occlusion, consistent with acute embolic stroke. A tissue plasminogen activator was immediately administered, and emergent cerebral angiography demonstrated almost a complete left middle cerebral artery reperfusion. She completely recovered with no sequelae from acute stroke. The TTE revealed almost complete recovery of LV function (LVEF of 50% by modified Simpson method) on Day 14 and more LV function recovery (LVEF of 59% by modified Simpson method, , ) on Day 21. The decreased BNP level was demonstrated, commensurate with LVEF recovery. Concurrently, myocardial perfusion scintigraphy revealed no evidence of ischaemia. Cardiac MRI revealed banding late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the basal-mid segments . She was symptom-free and got discharged home on Day 25. The clinical course of blood CK, BNP, potassium levels, and LVEF are summarized in .