A 51-year-old female with no significant prior history presented as an outpatient with dyspnoea on exertion and palpitations secondary to atrial flutter. Physical exam revealed a systolic murmur with a grade of 2/6. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed moderate right atrial (RA) and right ventricular enlargement with normal systolic function. Right heart catheterization revealed a left-to-right shunt with step-up in oxygen saturation from the superior vena cava (SVC) (73%) to the pulmonary artery (80%). Qp:Qs was 1.4 and pulmonary vascular resistance was 1.4 WU. Selective coronary angiogram revealed a tortuous, ectactic RCA with an aneurysmal connection through three pseudochambers to the CS and subsequent drainage into the RA . The posterior descending artery (PDA) takeoff appeared normal . Venography revealed a severely dilated SVC. Computed tomography confirmed the presence of three pseudochambers constituting the fistula sac: a 5 cm chamber immediately distal to the RCA, followed by a 2nd and 3rd chamber connected by a narrow neck ( and ).
Given the significant left-to-right shunt causing right heart enlargement, which was the likely aetiology for her atrial flutter, a decision was made to treat the patient’s fistula. Multidisciplinary discussion with cardiac surgeons led to the decision of a transcatheter approach given the extensive reports of coronary thrombosis following surgery in this particular scenario. The patient was taken to the catheterization lab and coiling of the RCA-CS fistula neck was attempted by deploying a 12 mm × 60 cm packing coil and a 14 mm × 60 cm packing coil (Penumbra, Inc., CA, USA). However, due to the brisk flow through the fistula, both coils embolized into the fistula sac .
The patient later underwent a 2nd embolization attempt. To prevent its inadvertent embolization, the PDA was identified on computed tomography angiography (CTA) pre-procedure and again on fluoroscopy intra-procedurally. Importantly, the flow through the RCA seemed to have slowed with better contrast opacification during the 2nd catheterization, likely related to partial occlusion of the distal segments of the fistula. In order to overcome the tortuosity of the RCA, a telescoping delivery system was created using a 7-Fr 90 cm Flexor® guiding sheath (Cook Medical LLC, IN, USA) within which was advanced a Benchmark™ mother catheter (Penumbra, Inc., CA, USA) to the mid-RCA , and a daughter catheter to the distal RCA . A 150 cm LANTERN microcatheter (Penumbra, Inc., CA, USA) was then advanced into the fistula neck . A stable coil mass was again attempted with deployment of a 14 mm × 34 cm AZUR framing coil (Terumo, NJ, USA) into the fistula neck ; however, this also embolized into the fistula sac .
An alternative target location for the coils was subsequently identified in a sharp bend in the RCA distal to the PDA takeoff and coursing towards the fistula sac , into which a series of coils were rapidly deployed . The coil mass remained stable, and angiography demonstrated reduced flow through the fistula and preserved patency of the PDA. One year later, the patient was doing well with resolution of her symptoms, no clinical symptoms of coronary ischaemia and a reduced Qp:Qs of 1.1.