A female Egyptian girl aged 18 years, at the time of presentation, was referred from the dermatology clinic to the genetics unit after being diagnosed with diffuse angiokeratomas based on clinical and dermoscopy examination, to be confirmed by histopathology . Family history was positive for consanguinity, and her brother was known to have intellectual disability, short attention span, and cleft palate that was operated on. The pregnancy history was unremarkable, and the patient was born full term through a normal vaginal delivery, with no history of postnatal incubation or jaundice. Past history was positive for delayed developmental milestones starting from early age. At the age of 11 months, she was only able to sit supported, and she started to walk supported and speak few words by the age of 2 years. Global developmental delay has been noticed at the age of 3 years. When the parents sought medical advice, the patient was misdiagnosed as cerebral palsy. The manifestations became worse by time with progression of the motor delay over the years. The patient suffered recurrent attacks of pneumonia that required hospitalization. Tonsillectomy was performed at the age of 3 years due to tonsillar hypertrophy that was complicated by chronic upper airway obstruction and.
Her skin lesions began as faint erythematous telangiectatic rash at the age of 4 years that progressed gradually. Her parents gave a history of cold extremities with bluish discoloration in cold weather. There were numerous concerns by parents regarding the progressive regression of her mental and motor milestones, failure to thrive, multiple joint contractures, and widespread telangiectasia in her skin. By the age of 5 years, she lost the ability to sit or walk supported. She experienced her first attack of generalized tonic–clonic convulsions at the age of 6 years and started carbamazepine treatment. At the time of presentation, she was on double anti-epileptic drugs. By the age of 7 years, she could barely sit supported. Scoliosis was obvious at the age of 9 years. The patient had limb dystonic movements that led eventually to permanent bone deformities and joint contractures.
At the time of examination, the patient weighed 23 kg (Z-score = − 14), with a height of 122 cm (Z-score = − 6.31, below the third percentile curves for her age), and a head circumference of 53 cm (− 1 SD). She had coarse facial features .
Her vitals were within normal range. Cardiac examination revealed tachycardia with soft cardiac murmur and neck pulsations. She had abdominal distension with firm palpable liver. Abdominal ultrasonography showed splenomegaly 15 cm below the costal margin and hepatomegaly 5 cm below the costal margin. Neurological and skeletal examination exhibited spasticity, exaggerated reflexes, scoliosis, and widespread joint contracture, especially at the wrist and metacarpophalangeal joints. Brain MRI and X-ray imaging were done at the first presentation and showed thinning of gray matter, dysostosis multiplex of long bones, pelvis, and spines, and scoliosis (Images are not available for publication). Based on the clinical and radiologic features, fucosidosis was suspected. Accordingly, the activity of the enzyme alpha-L-fucosidase was measured by fluorometric assay, and it was shown to be deficient (< 0.05 (LOD) μmol/L/h, normal reference is ≥ 6.3 μmol/L/h). Sequencing of FUCA1 gene including NGS-based CNV analysis revealed homozygous FUCA1, c.1100del p.(Glu367Glyfs*42) variant which creates a shift in the reading frame starting at codon 367. The new reading frame ends in a stop codon 41 positions downstream. It was classified as pathogenic (class 1), according to the recommendations of CENTOGENE and ACMG. Consequently, the genetic diagnosis of autosomal recessive fucosidosis was confirmed.
Two months after the diagnosis was made, the patient’s father was diagnosed as COVID-19 with moderate symptoms of cough and fever (38.5 °C). He recovered without complications. Few days following his diagnosis, the patient developed a high-grade fever of 40 °C that failed to respond to antipyretics, a moderate productive cough, and difficulty in breathing. Her extremities were cyanosed. Her mother reported loss of the usual body spasticity, fatigue, and flaccidity of the patient’s lower limbs. Being a COVID-19 suspect, she was admitted to the nearest isolation hospital and was diagnosed as a COVID-19-induced pneumonia based on positive PCR test and the characteristic findings in her CT chest . On admission, she was confused and distressed (respiratory rate: 40 breaths/min, pulse rate: 110 beats/min, and oxygen saturation: 75%). Her peripheral blood lymphocytic count was very low (0.30 × 109/L). She started on oxygen therapy through non-rebreathing face mask, anticoagulants, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and tocilizumab 400 mg in two divided doses with 12 h interval. Despite therapy, her condition deteriorated with drop of oxygen saturation to 60–65%, which required a mechanical ventilator. She died three weeks following initial diagnosis with COVID-19 infection.