The patient was a girl, aged 1 year, who was admitted to our hospital due to obvious growth retardation. The girl was born to a nonconsanguineous couple, and the mother suffered from gestational diabetes during the third trimester. At 24+3 weeks of gestation, the color Doppler ultrasound examination of the fetus showed that one femur was shorter than that expected for healthy fetuses in the same gestational week, the ratio of femur length to plantar length was 0.81, and the proximal femur shaft-epiphysis angle was greater than 116°, which were highly suggestive of abnormal skeletal system development. Amniocentesis, high-throughput gene sequencing, prenatal screening, chromosome microarray analysis and Sanger sequencing for the FGFR3 gene c.1138G > A pathogenic variations were performed immediately, but no obvious abnormality was found. When the genetic examination results were obtained, the fetus was already 29 gestational weeks of age. Because the findings of the prenatal diagnosis-related genetic examinations of the fetus were all negative, the family refused further whole-gene examination.
The proband was delivered at 39+2 weeks by cesarean section, with Apgar scores of 9, 10, and 10 at 1, 5, and 10 min, respectively. The mother breastfed the proband for the first ten months, and supplementary food was started at 6 months. The proband showed a poor appetite from the time of birth. The birth weight of the child was 3300 g (P55.8, Z score 0.15), and the length was 48 cm (P40.5, Z score -0.24). When she reached 6 months old, her weight was 6.13 kg (P7.5, Z score -1.44), her height was 59.5 cm (P0.3, Z score-2.76), and her cranial circumference was 45.6 cm (P97.1, Z score 1.9). At 12 months of age, her weight was 7.62 kg (P9.0, Z score-1.34), her length was 65.5 cm (< P0, Z score -3.33), and her cranial circumference was 47.5 cm (P97.1, Z score 1.9) . The ratio of crown-rump length to height was greater than the upper limit of normal . Routine test results for d-3-hydroxybutyric acid increased to 2.66 mmol/L (reference value: 0–0.27 mmol/L), while routine blood, liver and kidney function parameters and electrolyte, blood glucose, blood lactate, blood ammonia, pyruvic acid, ceruloplasmin, insulin-like growth factor-1, insulin-like growth factor-1 binding protein 3, thyroid stimulating hormone, free thyroxine, free triiodothyronine, and parathyroid hormone levels were all normal. The findings on ordinary X-ray examination showed that the bone mineral density was decreased in the tubular bones and spinal column, both humeri were thick and short, and the metaphyses of both humeri had a large width and were irregular with a cup-shaped deformity . Her brain cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings were normal. The patient was able to raise her head at 5 months old, sit with help at 8 months of age, and climb at 12 months. The Gesell Developmental Schedules test results showed that her motor development was mildly delayed due to malnutrition.
Fetal DNA was extracted from cells in amniotic fluid, and panel Sanger sequencing results for the FGFR3 gene c.1138G > A pathogenic variations were negative. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples, and WES was performed when the proband was 1 year old. Sanger sequencing was used to verify the pathogenic variations in the proband, and the variant was classified following the 2015 guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG). The c.1620C > A pathogenic variations was detected in exon 12 of the proband, which is a pathogenicity variant leading to an amino acid change, p.Asn540Lys. No relevant variants were identified in the parents, whose genotypes were normal . Testing for the variant in the proband and her parents was performed by Sanger sequencing, and the variant met the criteria to be identified as a pathogenic variant, PS1 + PS2 + PS3-Supporting + PS4 + PM2-Supporting + PP3, according to the 2015 ACMG guidelines. Multiple color ultrasound examinations during the fetal period found short limbs and an abnormal diaphyseal-epiphyseal angle of the proximal femur, but the results of Sanger sequencing performed for the FGFR3 gene c.1138G > A pathogenic variations were negative. The proband presented with asymmetrical short stature combined with an enlarged head. We performed whole-exon gene sequencing of the proband’s DNA, which was positive for the FGFR3 gene c.1620C > A pathogenic variations, and the proband was finally diagnosed with HCH. The proband received rehabilitation training because of her delayed motor development.