A 16-year-old boy was admitted to our center from another hospital to start plasmapheresis treatment, with the presumptive diagnosis of acute transverse myelitis. The symptoms started 8 days prior to his admittance in our institution, with sudden onset of severe right arm and chest pain, interpreted as a precordialgia secondary to ventricular arrhythmia, followed by progressive severe quadriparesis and respiratory failure. He was admitted few hours after the onset of symptoms to the regional local hospital and was sent to the Neurology Department at our hospital. Previous magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings were interpreted as a cevicodorsal acute transverse myelitis. The boy was previously healthy and had no medical history.
On examination, the patient presented flaccid paraplegia, with areflexia of the lower limbs, monoplegia of the right arm, and monoparesis of the left arm 2/5 proximal, 1/5 distal. He exhibited a complete sensory level at D4 and sphincter paralysis. He displayed a port-wine angioma in the right cervicodorsal and chest region . The patient was already intubated on arrival. The spinal MRI (repeated in our institution for lack of quality of the first one) showed intraspinal tortuous blood vessels in the saggital plane from C5-D2, with no predominant variceal component and many flow voids images in the axial plane, occupying the whole thickness of the cord at the aforementioned levels . It is noteworthy that the intraspinal signal hyperintensity was well above and below the lesion, making it probably responsible for the upper cervical symptoms, as well as the misdiagnosis of acute transverse myelitis from general practitioners who may lack experience in visualizing such images, in the setting of a poorly performed cervical-only MRI (not displayed in this paper).
The patient had no improvement from the symptoms after a 4-day treatment with plasmapheresis, and was presented to our department, where the final diagnosis was made. We programmed surgery 9 days after arrival prior to obtaining a cervical DSA showing right-sided predominance of arterial feeding pedicles and several tortuous varicosal drain veins .
The patient was treated with a standard microsurgical procedure for spinal AVMs performed by the senior author (FRP) with no prior embolization. He was positioned supine, and C6-D1 bilateral laminectomy was performed. The dura was exposed and incised in the regular cefalocaudal fashion, showing underneath the varicosal draining shunted veins in the dorsal archnopial compartment . With the use of bipolar cautery and the aid of small-sized transitory aneurismal clips, all the arterial feeders, both right and less predominant left-sided, were ligated and coagulated. Then, dissection proceeded in the usual manner as for any AVM, leaving the ligation of the main venous drainages as the last step before piecemeal removal of the lesion. The lesion was removed completely and surgical bed hemostasis was performed with oxidized cellulose polymer, taking extreme caution not to use cautery in the remaining cord. The patient did well in the immediate postoperative period, showing motor amelioration in the right arm at 1/5. His neurological function continued to improve in the following weeks after the surgery, with the residual capability of moving both upper limbs: 4/5 proximal, 3/5 distal left arm; 3/5 proximal, 2/5 distal right arm. He also showed improved respiratory function, being capable to breathe for his own at first and swallowing soft food afterwards. He was discharged to his local regional hospital 7 weeks after the surgery to continue physiotherapy and medical treatment for intercurrent nosocomial urinary tract infection.
In the subsequent control MRI and angiography, there was absence of lesion and significant lowering of the signal intensity above and below the lesion in the remaining spinal cord .
At the 6-month follow-up after surgery, the patient continued rehabilitating in his home town in an outpatient basis, with both upper extremities improving functional capacity to the extent of being capable of self-feeding and performing daily activities. In the last follow-up 1 year after the surgery, the patient functions in a wheelchair, moves both arms with minor deficits, and can attend school.