A 5-year-old male with Aarskog-Scott syndrome, gastroesophageal reflux, and beta thalassemia minor initially presented with a 2-month history of morning emesis and decreased oral intake. He had subsequent difficulties with balance, truncal and extremity weakness, and a wide-based gait. His medical history, as part of his Aarskog-Scott syndrome, was significant for small stature and decreased weight, tracking under the first percentile for his age. His family history was significant for a father with history of childhood seizures and a younger brother who also has Aarskog-Scott syndrome.
Initial exam was significant for 4/5 strength in all extremities, truncal ataxia with a wide-based gait, and dysmetria. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 4.1 × 5.7 × 6.3-cm, heterogeneously enhancing tumor in the fourth ventricle, with obstructive hydrocephalus. An MRI of the spine and a lumbar puncture showed no signs of distant disease. The patient underwent gross total resection of the tumor. Pathology showed medulloblastoma, classic variant, World Health Organization grade IV, MYC/MYCN non-amplified, with loss of heterozygosity secondary to copy number gains of chromosome band 1q, 7, 9, and 14, as well as a copy number loss of chromosome band 16q, overlapping with the group 3 subtype .
Four days after the surgery, the patient was diagnosed with severe posterior fossa syndrome with poor global muscle tone, ataxia, mutism, and dysphagia. Subclinical seizures were confirmed by video electroencephalogram. A literature search revealed no contraindication or increased sensitivity to radiotherapy associated with Aarskog-Scott syndrome. His radiotherapy consisted of 23.4 GyRBE to the craniospinal axis with an additional 30.6 GyRBE to the tumor bed, for a total dose of 54 GyRBE with weekly vincristine at 1.5 mg/m2. Maximum and D50 (median) doses to the patient's brainstem were 54.4 GyRBE and 53.7 GyRBE, respectively, well within published guidelines for healthy brainstem tolerance [–]. Modest improvements were made in strength, mobility, and mutism with intensive rehabilitation.
He received his first 6-week cycle of maintenance chemotherapy with cisplatin, lomustine, and vincristine per ACNS0331 , cycle A prior to being discharged to home. Adjuvant chemotherapy continued with another A cycle, and then a 4-week B cycle comprising cyclophosphamide with Mesna and vincristine. Routine MRI, at 21 weeks after radiotherapy completion, revealed new, rim-enhancing lesions with central necrosis and surrounding edema in the left upper, middle, and lower pons, as well as in the right medulla and cervicomedullary junction, measuring up to 1 cm (–). All lesions were within the tumor-bed boost portion of the radiotherapy field and were judged to be consistent with radiation injury, although the patient had not manifested any neurologic deterioration. Further chemotherapy was held, and the patient was started on dexamethasone.
An MRI performed 6 weeks later showed lesion progression . The patient developed worsening hemiparesis in the following days. Dexamethasone was continued, and bevacizumab was initiated at 10 mg/kg every 2 weeks for 6 doses [, ]. Mild improvement in symptoms occurred, and radiographic stability was observed on the following MRI 2 months later. Radiographic improvement continued after completion of bevacizumab therapy, with enhancing lesions subsequently subsiding ( and ); however, his neurologic deficits persisted.
Daily hyperbaric oxygen therapy was initiated 6 weeks later [–]. During this treatment, mild clinical improvement was reported. To date, the patient continues to have slow clinical improvement.