An 18-year-old woman presented to our hospital with anorexia and vomiting. Abdominal/pelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a large gastric body mass, approximately 17 cm in diameter , and delayed enhancement of liver mass lesions in the S4 and S8 segments of the liver . Gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a large submucosal lesion in the lower body of the stomach with ulcers on the surface . Biopsy specimens revealed a c-kit-, vimentin-, and CD34-positive spindle-cell GIST. Upon further examination, positron emission tomography with 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) integrated with CT showed strong FDG uptake in the gastric tumor. The maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) was 37.95 . Furthermore, FDG uptake was observed in the liver masses located in the S4 (SUVmax: 12.3) and S8 (SUVmax: 5.0) segments of the liver . Moreover, gadoxetic acid-enhanced dynamic magnetic resonance imaging detected multiple liver metastases < 10 mm in diameter (S1, S4, S5, S7, S6, and S8 segments). Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with a giant advanced gastric GIST with multiple liver metastases.
The patient’s treatment strategy was discussed at the multidisciplinary team (MDT) conference by surgical gastroenterologists, oncologists, and radiologists. Initially, the GIST was considered unresectable due to its large size, distant metastases, and the difficulty of achieving R0 resection. Therefore, imatinib therapy was administered as first line treatment, with a daily dosage of 400 mg imatinib mesylate. However, primary tumor growth was confirmed after 8 months of imatinib therapy. Second line treatment with a daily dose of 47.5 mg sunitinib (for 4 weeks with 2 weeks off), third line treatment with TNO155 (SHP2 inhibitor) + ribociclib as a phase I clinical trial (NCT04000529), and fourth line therapy with regorafenib were administered. No response was observed in all the above cases. Three months after regorafenib treatment, CT revealed that the GIST had grown to 18 cm, had invaded the transverse colon, and had increased the size of multiple liver metastases.
The treatment strategy was carefully discussed again at the MDT conference, and a team of hepatobiliary-pancreatic surgeons was added to consider the necessity of resection of liver metastases and pancreatoduodenectomy for direct invasion of the pancreas and duodenum. Although best supportive care was also an option, the patient the patient’s age (20 years) and good general condition favored a more aggressive approach. Due to multidrug resistance, pharmacological therapy options were not expected to be effective. Surgical treatment to achieve R0 resection with curative intention or at least a prolonged prognosis with combination of debulking surgery and adjuvant drug therapy to prolong survival were the remaining options. After careful discussion, surgical resection by the hepatobiliary and pancreatic surgeons’ teams, including pancreatoduodenectomy or distal gastrectomy, transverse colectomy, and resection of liver metastases, was planned. The surgery was performed 23 months after the initial visit. On exploratory laparotomy, only three small nodules, in which peritoneal dissemination could not be ruled out, were detected in the pelvis . Although the tumor invaded the transverse colon, there was no pancreatic or duodenal invasion . Therefore, the tumor was resected. Initially, the peritoneal nodules were resected, and distal gastrectomy with Billroth I reconstruction and transverse colectomy were performed . Subsequently, partial liver resection (S1, S2, S3, S4, and S8 segments) and extended right posterior hepatic sectionectomy (including six metastatic tumors) were performed with the clamp crushing method using Pringle’s maneuver . The operative time was 6 h 3 min, and the estimated blood loss was 702 mL with no blood transfusion.
Macroscopic examination of the specimen revealed a whitish mass, 18 × 11 cm in size, involving the transverse colon, and 21 cm in diameter . Pathological examination confirmed that the tumor cells were generally viable. The immunohistochemical staining results were as follows: CD34 ( +), Ki-67 (+ 5%), and mitotic counts of < 5 per 50 high-power fields . Tumor presence was also confirmed in liver specimens and small nodules of the pelvis. The surgical margins were negative. The CD34 and c-kit positivity characterize GIST, whereas the Ki-67 index, although relatively low in our patient’s case, indicates proliferative activity. In addition, despite multiple lines of tyrosine and multi-kinase inhibitor therapies, the tumor cells remained viable, suggesting resistance to systemic drug treatment. Together these results indicate a drug-resistant disease. Genetic analysis revealed a succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) mutation, SDHA p.Y259fs*21. Therefore, this disease was likely associated with SDHA deficiency. No mutations were detected in KIT, platelet-derived growth factor receptor, or BRAF. Consequently, the final diagnosis was GIST with high-grade malignancy and moderate tumor progression risk according to Miettinen’s risk classification and high risk according to the Modified Fletcher Classification [, ], liver metastases, and peritoneal micro-metastases. According to Miettinen’s risk classification system, high-grade malignancies typically include tumors larger than 10 cm with a mitotic rate greater than 10 mitoses per 50 high-power fields, whereas our case showed a mitotic count of < 5 per 50 high-power fields, classifying it as moderate-risk according to this system.
The postoperative course was uneventful without complications, and the patient was discharged 14 days after surgery. Adjuvant imatinib therapy (400 mg/day) was administered and continued. After 27 months of follow-up, no clinical or radiological evidence of recurrence was observed.