The Ethics Committee of Liaocheng People’s Hospital approved this case report, and the patient provided written informed consent for the publication of this report and the accompanying images.
The patient, a boy who was born on October 19, 2000, and he was 14 years old at the time of presentation, was diagnosed with PHA on April 13, 2015 at our hospital owing to a 1-year history of left-sided facial atrophy. At this time the patient’s frontal face and CT scan were obtained, and he has been followed up clinically since then. The patient had a complete inpatient record and diagnostic certificate following the first diagnosis in 2015. The patient’s parents exhibited no relevant family history of similar disease and were not affected by PHA. The patient presented with normal blood pressure and blood sugar levels, normal cognitive function, fluent speech, a positive attitude, and was able to freely move his eyes in all directions. He had no history of trauma, infection, or poisoning prior to the development of this disease, which exhibited an insidious onset. As shown in Figure A, the patient presented with bilateral asymmetry, with his face being smaller on the left side relative to the right side, together with atrophy of the left zygoma, cheek, mandible, and lip. There is a ~5 cm × 6 cm depression on the top of the left skull with a maximal depth of 0.5 cm. No abnormalities in speech, chewing, or swallowing were evident, nor did the patient experience any facial paresthesia. Plain CT scans of the skull revealed that the patient’s cranial cavity was narrow in the bilateral frontal region and that the left cranial depression was markedly sunken . CT scans of the upper and lower jaw indicated that the left mandible was more concave relative to the contralateral mandible .
In order to assess whether this patient harbored any pathogenic genetic mutations, the neurology department of our hospital collected 5 mL samples of peripheral blood from the patient and his healthy parents in 2022 for whole-exome sequencing, which was performed as follows:
Samples of genomic DNA (200 ng) were prepared from 5 mL peripheral blood samples collected from the patient and his healthy parents using a QIAamp DNA blood MIDI Kit (Qiagen, Germany). A Nanodrop instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was used to ensure the quality of the prepared DNA (OD 260/280 = 1.8–2.0), while the gDNA concentration was measured with a Qubit dsDNA Assay. These 200 ng gDNA samples were then diluted to a final volume of 50 µL using 1X Low TE Buffer, and DNA shearing was performed with a Covaris S220 instrument with a target DNA fragment size of 150 to 200 bp. An Agilent 2100 instrument was then used for quality control analyses of the fragmented DNA.
An Agilent Sureselect DNA Targeting Sequence Capture Kit was utilized for library preparation based on provided directions. Briefly, end-repair was first conducted for the fragmented DNA, with an A being added to the 3’ end of each fragment, and with the gap being connected using appropriate adapters. AMPure XP beads were used for purification after each step. Polymerase chain reaction was performed with an amplification volume of 50 µL, and the product was purified with AMPure XP beads. Amplified DNA was hybridized and placed at 65°C for 16 to 24 hours. After hybridization, stranded penicillin magnetic beads were applied for probe capture and Polymerase chain reaction amplification in a 50 µL volume. AMPure XP beads were again used for purification, and an Agilent 2100 instrument was used for quality control. The resultant fragment size for the final library was about 250 to 350 bp. Paired-end sequencing (PE75) was then performed with a Nextseq CN500 instrument (Illumina).
Sequencing data were analyzed by initially using Trimmatomatic to remove the original sequencing adapters and low-quality sequences. Filtered sequences were aligned via a BWA approach to the Thousands Genome Reference Sequence (GRCh38), and Samtools was used to convert the output data to a BAM file. Picard was used for sequence deduplication, and the GATK software was used to analyze and filter single nucleotide variation and insertion-deletion mutations. Called variants were mapped to the dbSNP database and annotated with ANNOVAR, and MAF values were filtered using the Exac database.
The resultant sequencing data were then analyzed. First, non-synonymous mutations in exons were screened, with those exhibiting a MAF < 0.01 in East Asian populations being retained. Heterozygous mutations that were present in the patient but absent in his parents were then retained, as were homozygous mutations that were present in the patient but heterozygous or absent in his parents. Through this approach, 2 mutation sites were identified .
By annotating low-frequency mutation loci, we identified mutations in the ARHGAP4 and CFAP47 genes in this PHA patient. The rs201123211 mutation in ARHGAP4 resulted in a change in the 891st amino acid of this protein from glycine to aspartic acid. The rs142417700 mutation in CFAP47 resulted in a change in the 870th amino acid of this protein from arginine to glutamine.
The reliability of these sequencing results was confirmed via Sanger sequencing. The results indicated that the patient did harbor mutations in ARHGAP4 and CFAP47 .