A 51-year-old female travelled from Illinois to Colorado for a winter vacation with her family. She was a previous smoker (< 1 pack/day) and had been abstinent for more than 10 years. Past medical history consisted of a remote Caesarean section, medically controlled hypertension, no know allergies, and minimal social alcohol consumption. On March 6, 2020, she presented with an unstable ankle fracture to a local hospital and underwent surgery by open reduction with internal fixation the following day. Prior to her surgery, she had reported “mild cold symptoms”. Upon awakening from general anesthesia, during extubation she was noted to have an unusual consistency of her respiratory secretions described as “pink and frothy”. Empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics were initiated for the treatment of a presumed aspiration pneumonitis. The patient deteriorated over the subsequent days with fever, hypoxemia, and bilateral pulmonary infiltrates. She required intubation and mechanical ventilation. COVID-19 testing was performed by nasopharyngeal swab and was positive for SARS-CoV-2 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The patient was transferred to our center, an established ECMO program, for higher level of care 1 week after her initial admission.
The timeline of the patient’s course of events is summarized in Table .
Upon arrival to our facility, she was hemodynamically stable, sedated, intubated and mechanically ventilated on 60% FiO2 and 10 cm H2O positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP). Figure demonstrates the patient’s chest X-ray on admission. She was admitted to our designated COVID-cohorting unit in the ICU and placed with strict respiratory droplet isolation precautions in a negative airflow room. Her admission laboratory studies demonstrated a low white blood cell count of 3110/μL with lymphocytopenia (22.5% or 700/μL). A bedside transthoracic echocardiogram showed normal left and right ventricular function, no valvular abnormalities, and normal estimated pulmonary artery pressures. By hospital day 2, her oxygen requirements increased and intermittent prone positioning was initiated in conjunction with pharmacologic paralysis and inhaled nitric oxide treatment.
Within the next few days, the patient’s pulmonary compliance and hypoxemia worsened. Isolated end-organ pulmonary dysfunction persisted despite maximal ventilator support resulting in a PaO2/FiO2 ratio of 66 while still receiving inhaled nitric oxide iNO at 40 ppm. The arterial blood gas analysis (ABGA) showed a pH 7.36, pCO2 45 mmHg, and pO2 66 mmHg. The patient had a calculated “Respiratory ECMO Survival Prediction” (RESP) score of 1 with a risk class III and an estimated ECMO survival probability of 57% .
Percutaneous femoral-femoral veno-venous ECMO support was initiated on day 7 of hospitalization. In brief, following systemic heparinization (10,000 units; maintenance target PTT 40–60 s), cannulation was accomplished with a 21-French venous multi-stage drain and a 21-French single-stage inflow cannula connected to a CardioHelp™ extra-corporeal support system (Maquet Cardiovascular, Wayne, NJ). Initial ECMO settings were 3.8 l/min flow, 3.2 l of gas sweep, and ECMO FiO2 of 1.0. A lung protective ventilator strategy was initiated with an airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) mode (rate: 16, pressures: 28/10, FiO2: 0.8, inhaled nitric: 20 ppm, and plateau pressures were limited to 30 mmHg). Antiviral therapy with remdesivir (RDV / GS-5734; Gilead Sciences Inc., Foster City, CA) was initiated on hospital day 9 under a humanitarian use protocol for “compassionate use” indication , with a loading dose of 200 mg RDV intravenous on the first day, and once-daily maintenance doses of 100 mg RDV intravenous for a total treatment duration of 10 days.
A repeat echocardiogram showed no change in her left or right ventricular size or function. A bedside ultrasound demonstrated increasing bilateral pleural effusions which were managed by percutaneous drainage with bilateral 14-French chest tubes. The patient’s pulmonary compliance, oxygenation, and ventilation, gradually improved over the subsequent days, and the ECMO sweep was slowly weaned (ventilator settings at pressure control; mean airway: 25 mmHg; rate 25; FiO2 0.50; inhaled nitric oxide 20 ppm). Subsequently, the ECMO gas sweep was weaned off and the patient was successfully decannulated at the bedside on ECMO day 11 (hospital day 17). Her overall pulmonary function improved to the point in which she was extubated to heated high-flow oxygen. The patient’s oxygen requirements were weaned to 2 l nasal cannula on post-ECMO day 4 (hospital day 21). Room air blood gas analysis revealed pH 7.46; pCO2 33.6 mmHg; pO2 74.4 mmHg; HCO3–23 mEq/L, SO2 94%. A limited bedside spirometry yielded a negative inspiratory force (NIF) of − 50 mmHg.
Two repeat COVID-19 tests were negative for SARS-CoV-2 prior to discharge form the hospital. The patient was discharged to a rehabilitation facility on hospital day 28 requiring 2–3 l/minute of supplement oxygen which was weaned to room air within the week. At discharge, she was weak but able to stand and walk short distances and had an otherwise normal neurologic examination. Upon discharge she was greeted by a large group of health care providers as part of a farewell ceremony for our COVID-19 survivor .