A 43-year-old woman with history of metastatic melanoma presented to emergency room with severe fatigue. Patient stated that she started having generalized weakness and shortness of breath 2 weeks ago. She denied any fever, cough, chest pain or any bleeding episodes. Her history was significant for recently diagnosed metastatic melanoma to brain, liver and right iliac lymph node. B-raf and c-kit mutations were negative. After completing a course of whole brain radiation therapy, she was started on immunotherapy using ipilimumab and nivolumab. She received two cycles of treatment with the last treatment given 3 weeks prior to presentation. Her medical history was significant for hypothyroidism and 20 pack-year smoking. She had significant family history of melanoma in multiple relatives as well. Her medications include hydrocodone, acetaminophen, dexamethasone 4 mg three times a day, levetiracetam and levothyroxine; none of them was recently introduced. She denied using any over-the-counter medications or supplements. Physical examination was unremarkable except for obesity.
Initial laboratory investigations showed white cell count of 8200/mm3, hemoglobin of 5.6 gm/dL, platelet count of 122,000/mm3 and reticulocyte count of 6.5% (absolute reticulocyte count of 0.11 million/mm3). Further work up revealed lactate dehydrogenase of 1406 IU/L (reference normal value: 240 IU/L), total bilirubin of 1.5 mg/dL, haptoglobin of < 10 mg/dL, creatinine of 0.7 mg/dL and positive direct coombs test (Positive for both anti-Ig G and anti-complement 3d). Peripheral smear revealed several spherocytes and multiple polychromatic cells. No schistocytes were present on peripheral smear.
Patient was diagnosed with autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) secondary to immunotherapy with ipilimumab and nivolumab. She was given multiple blood transfusions and started on pulse dose steroids using 1000 mg of intravenous methylprednisolone daily for 3 days. She was then transitioned to oral prednisone 1 mg/kg daily and was tapered over a period of several weeks. Her hematological parameters improved gradually over a period of 2 months. Immunotherapy was held during this period. Once her hemoglobin normalized, she was re-challenged with ipilimumab and nivolumab. She developed hemolytic anemia again after administration of immunotherapy. She was re-treated with similar steroid regimen. Due to slow response to steroids and concern for steroid related side effects, rituximab was added at a weekly dose of 375 mg/m2 for 4 weeks. She responded well to this treatment and at the time of last follow up her hemoglobin normalized. Response to treatment is demonstrated in Fig. . Immunotherapy was put on hold again. During this period, imaging studies showed improvement in brain lesions and stable disease elsewhere.