A 72-year-old Japanese man was diagnosed with HCC and liver cirrhosis, caused by alcohol abuse, in 2011, and was referred to our hospital for therapeutic management. Since then, transcatheter arterial chemoembolization and radiofrequency ablation had been performed repeatedly, followed by the oral administration of sorafenib, 400 mg daily. After 1 year of sorafenib treatment, he was admitted to our hospital for dyspnea and low back pain. Computed tomographic (CT) scans revealed multiple HCC tumors in the liver , as well as sacral bone metastases and multiple metastatic nodules in the lungs but no ascites.
The laboratory examination showed a mild increase in aspartate aminotransferase (74 IU/L), blood urea nitrogen (31 IU/L), creatinine (1.0 mg/dL), and C-reactive protein (5.36 mg/dL); mild decrease of prothrombin time (76% of normal), and serum albumin (3.4 g/dL). The Levels of tumor markers—alpha-fetoprotein, Lens culinaris agglutinin–reactive alpha-fetoprotein isoform, and des-gamma-carboxy prothrombin—were significantly increased, to 67,183 ng/mL, 37.2%, and 75,000 milli-arbitrary units per milliliter or higher, respectively . No increase in white blood cell count, and other hepatobiliary enzymes were marked.
On the sixth day after hospital admission, the patient’s respiratory condition worsened, and his blood gas analysis showed oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 91%, pH of 7.456, carbon dioxide tension of 35.2 mmHg, oxygen tension of 62.9 mmHg, bicarbonate level of 24.3 mmol/L, and BE of 0.7 mmol/L, with supplementation of 2 L/min of oxygen . The chest radiograph showed a frosted glass-like shadow in the upper right lobe, middle lobe, and the lower left lobe . The blood and sputum cultures revealed no evidence of infectious pneumonia; however, respiratory distress and decreasing arterial blood oxygen saturation continued, and chest CT examination revealed worsening of the frosted glass-like shadow on day 8 . On the basis of these findings, and because antibiotics produced no response, we diagnosed his condition as acute respiratory distress syndrome, potentially a result of the lung metastasis and involvement of the pulmonary vessels by tumor thrombus.
Chest radiographs showed worsening on day 14 . To alleviate the respiratory failure caused by the infiltration of the inflammatory cells and the reaction in the lung, we started oral administration of prednisolone, 80 mg daily, on day 16 after admission . The frosted glass-like shadow on chest radiographs and CT studies showed temporary improvement and the symptom of dyspnea showed mild improvement; however, the patient’s respiratory condition and the data from the blood gas analysis did not improve with oxygen supplementation. The patient’s general condition worsened gradually and he died on the 37th day of hospitalization .
With the informed consent of the patient’s family, autopsy was performed to assess the cause of the respiratory failure and the frosted glass-like shadow. Macroscopically, the lung appeared to be hard and yellowish, and the presence of multiple tumors in the area was confirmed . Microscopically, these tumors were confirmed to be metastases of HCC , and multiple pulmonary artery tumor emboli with diffuse alveolar damages of detachment of alveolar epithelial cells, edematous changes of alveolar wall, accumulation of macrophages, and exudation of fibrinous tissue were seen and in part with recanalization in the tumor thrombus and the fibrocellular intimal proliferation . In addition, medial thickening of the arterioles were seen and the tumor emboli were accompanied by CD31-positive endothelial cell growth with fibrocellular intimal proliferation which are the characteristics of PTTM.