We report a 32-year-old man with a history of hospitalization at 14 days after birth due to unexplained cyanosis. Although the cause of cyanosis was unknown, his condition was non-fatal, and he was discharged at 9 months of age. He had no severe symptoms or fatal events after discharge without medication and attending hospital.
At age 32 years, he presented to our hospital with breathlessness during exercise and abnormal electrocardiogram findings found in a health check-up. Although he had no clinical signs of PH or right heart failure including a loud pulmonic component of the second heart sound or leg oedema, PH was suspected based on electrocardiographic evidence of right ventricular (RV) overload . Echocardiography ( and ) showed RV dilatation with a D-shaped left ventricle. Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging showed RV dilatation and systolic dysfunction (right ventricular ejection fraction = 16%, right ventricular end-diastolic volume = 143.0 mL, and right ventricular end-systolic volume = 120.4 mL) ( and ). His haemoglobin level and haematocrit were 20.1 g/dL and 65.4%, respectively. Chest computed tomography showed no interstitial lung disease or thoracic deformation, and pulmonary function tests revealed neither obstructive nor restrictive abnormalities. Lung perfusion scintigraphy results were normal. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed type 2 respiratory failure without a significant alveolar–arterial oxygen gradient, indicating alveolar hypoventilation. Right heart catheterization revealed pre-capillary PH [pulmonary artery wedge pressure, 9 mmHg; pulmonary artery pressure, 47/24 (35) mmHg; and pulmonary vascular resistance, 4.7 Wood units] .
A hyperventilation challenge and non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) were performed during RHC . Notably, the hyperventilation challenge drastically improved the oxyhaemoglobin saturation at the left atrium (pulmonary artery wedge samples), PH [pulmonary artery wedge pressure, 8 mmHg; pulmonary artery pressure, 28/12 (18) mmHg; and pulmonary vascular resistance, 2.6 Wood units], and electrocardiographic evidence of RV overload. Twenty minutes elapsed between the end of the hyperventilation challenge and NPPV. During recovery, the pulmonary artery pressure gradually increased to a level greater than that at rest. Furthermore, NPPV produced similar haemodynamic improvements. Polysomnography revealed central apnoea and severe hypoxaemia with tachycardia . Surprisingly, the mean oxyhaemoglobin saturation was 64.0%. Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome was ultimately diagnosed based on genetic test results (20/25 PARM in PHOX2B). This represents a relatively short polyalanine expansion length and causes mild hypoventilation without a requirement for ventilation support during wakefulness. Therefore, NPPV only during sleep was initiated, and the average use of NPPV was 4.8 h per day in 73.3% of the first 30 days. Hypoxaemia and tachycardia notably improved with NPPV . One month after NPPV initiation, the haemoglobin level and haematocrit decreased from 20.1 to 14.4 g/dL and from 65.4% to 45.6%, respectively. Right ventricular overload findings on the electrocardiogram were also slightly improved .