A 23-year-old, otherwise healthy female, initially presented with non-specific, atraumatic left thigh pain. Workup including plain radiographs and full femur magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 4 cm × cm 4 × 2 cm juxtacortical lesion arising from the posterior aspect of the proximal femur concerning for malignancy without evidence of skip lesions (A to E). Open biopsy was performed and confirmed the diagnosis of high-grade osteosarcoma (F). Staging studies were negative for metastatic disease, and 4 weeks following open biopsy, the patient began 12 weeks of AOST0331-MAP/EURAMOS-1 protocol chemotherapy as dictated by our institutional paediatric tumour board. While not traditional, this 4-week period between biopsy and treatment initiation was needed to stabilise our patient's social situation, and provide appropriate genetic and psychological counselling with the goal to maximally optimise the patient prior to initiation of our protocol.
Three weeks following preoperative chemotherapy completion, resection and reconstruction was performed. Surgery began with placement of four parallel 5-mm Schanz pins from lateral to medial, two distally in the posterior femur and two proximally at the level of the lesser trochanter, to set rotation and pre-resection length for controlled establishment of post-resection alignment. With length and rotation accounted for, a standard lateral approach to the femur was performed. Prior to resection, parallel etches were made with a microsagittal saw on the lateral femur at the osteotomy sites for further rotational assessment during reconstruction. The tumour resection was then completed yielding negative intraoperative margins. In total, 12.5 cm of bone was resected. Reconstruction was then performed using two PRECICE intramedullary lengthening nails (NuVasive, San Diego, CA). First, the previously constructed external fixation frame was reattached to the Schanz pins in parallel orientation and with femoral etchings realigned to restore rotation of the limb. Due to the size of the osseous and soft tissue defects, the limb was then acutely shortened to 7 cm, using the frame, for a remaining 5.5-cm defect. The antegrade nail, 8.5 mm × 165 mm, was lengthened 5 cm on the back table and inserted through a standard greater trochanteric entry point. The nail was statically locked proximally and distally within the proximal aspect of the future transport segment. A second PRECISE nail, 8.5 mm × 165 mm, in its maximally shortened position was placed in retrograde fashion and statically locked distally and proximally allowing for slight overlap with the antegrade nail to enhance construct stability (which accounts for the use of comparatively smaller diameter nails). This allowed the antegrade nail to function as a shortening nail while the retrograde nail served as a lengthening nail . Next, a transverse osteotomy was made using a 3.5-mm drill and stiletto osteotome in the distal meta-diaphysis creating a free distal intercalary segment for proximal transport. The external fixator was removed and all wounds were irrigated and closed in standard layered fashion. The patient was made non-weight bearing post-operatively with initiation of 1 mm/day of lengthening starting post-operative day 7. The surgical pathology revealed 60% necrosis and post-operative chemotherapy was resumed 3 weeks after resection and stopped 1 week prior to her second stage reconstruction.
Two months post-index surgery, both nails were removed, and the original retrograde nail, now maximally lengthened 5 cm, was repurposed and placed back into the patient in antegrade fashion (to now serve as a shortening nail), and a new 190 mm × 8.5 mm nail was placed in retrograde fashion (to function as the new lengthening nail) for planned 5 cm of an additional distraction . Three weeks post-operatively, chemotherapy was resumed and the patient completed her remaining 12 weeks of post-operative chemotherapy for a total of 6 cycles, 25 weeks, of pre- and post-operative chemotherapy. Lengthening was completed 2 months following her second surgery resulting in nearly 10 cm of distal intercalary segment transport and 2 cm of proximal callous within the resection site . Overall healing index (HI) was found to be 12.2 days/cm. No changes were made to the distraction protocol while on chemotherapy. She remained foot flat weight-bearing for an additional 6 months to allow the regenerate to consolidate and mature. The second planned return to surgery was 10 months after the initial operation to replace her dual-nail construct with a standard retrograde intramedullary nail (380 mm × 12 mm) to promote stability and restore anatomic mechanical axis. The most recent follow-up, 18 months after index surgery, demonstrated stable reconstruction without evidence of recurrence. The patient resumed her normal activities and on exam, had 0–100 knee flexion with 5/5 strength and no reported pain. Overall Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) functional score was found to be 93 with the patient reporting only a mild limp when running long distances. Imaging at that time demonstrated a stable appearing femur with abundant callus and maturing regenerate . Overall lengthening was radiographically and clinically determined to be within 1 cm of the contralateral femur.