A 74-year-old Caucasian man consulted us after having undergone penile ultrasonography for pain and increased thickness at the base of the penis after self-examination. The patient presented with a history of hepatitis C-related cirrhosis and intrahepatic CCA, diagnosed 3 years previously, when he underwent right posterior hepatic subsegmentectomy with lymph node dissection. No portal vein invasion had been reported, and all lymph nodes had been negative. The patient had not received adjuvant therapy after surgery. Follow-up examinations had been performed every 3 months for 2 years post-operatively and every 6 months thereafter. The patient had undergone clinical examination, laboratory tests including measurement of tumour markers, abdominal ultrasonography, and radiological investigations including chest and abdominal computed tomography. Twenty-nine months after the primary surgery, follow-up positron emission tomography-computed tomography had not revealed any elevation in the standardised uptake value at any site.
Penile ultrasound examination, performed with a high-frequency linear probe (12–5 MHz), showed a large solid formation located at the base of the penis with poorly defined edges involving the corpora cavernosa on both sides and the corpus spongiosum of the urethra, without invasion of the tunica albuginea. Elastography showed discrete intralesional vascularity with a high strain ratio of 22. The thickness of the septum between the corpora cavernosa and corpus spongiosum was increased due to calcification on the distal two-thirds of the length .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Figure ) showed a mass surrounding the left corpus spongiosum on both dorsal and ventral sides of the tunica albuginea, with involvement of Buck’s fascia. On post-contrast images, the mass showed a slight and tardive enhancement, suggesting a fibrous composition. The urethra was displaced with partial infiltration. MRI was performed without the injection of alprostadil because of the patient’s pain.
Discrete intralesional vascularity was also observed. Therefore, we decided to perform a biopsy of the corpora cavernosa on both sides via skin incision at the root of the penis. Histologic analysis revealed a carcinoma harbouring the same histological and immunophenotypical features as the primary hepatic lesion. Histopathologic analysis revealed a malignant epithelial neoplasm composed of cuboidal or columnar cells with pleomorphic nuclei and prominent nucleoli as well as weakly eosinophilic cytoplasm organised in duct-like structures . The neoplastic cells were positive for CK7, CK 8/18, CK19, CK 20, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and negative for Heppar-1 and CD56 [,].