This is the case of a 67-year-old female patient with an accidental diagnosis of a retroperitoneal tumor arising from the left renal vein. The computerized tomography (CT) scan showed a solid hypodense lesion of 22 × 30 mm in the aortocaval space, arising from the left renal vein . The preoperative histological report, obtained by endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy, documented the neoplastic cells with focal high-grade atypia, thus suggesting muscle differentiation. The patient's medical history included obesity (body mass index 31), a prior case of breast cancer, C-section, as well as total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with umbilical-pubic incision for endometrial cancer. She underwent a robotic resection of the left renal vein with preservation of the left kidney and a relative outflow trough the gonadal vessels . Following an initial viscerolysis and laparoscopic incision of the mesentery root, the robotic docking was performed . Then, the exposure of the aortocaval plane was performed by isolating the lesion, which was originating from the left renal vein, from the inferior vena cava and the infrarenal segment of the abdominal aorta. After locating the left renal artery, the plane between the anterior wall of the aorta and the left renal vein was developed. During the exposure of the lower margin of the left renal vein, a reno-lumbar vein was identified, isolated and sectioned using clips, as well as the left adrenal vein. Then, the section of the left renal vein, which was upstream of the left gonadal vein was performed using a 30 mm vascular linear stapler. The lesion was then detached from the aortic plane from the lateral to medial region. Subsequently, a partial section of the vena cava was tangentially carried out with a 30 mm vascular linear stapler and the specimen extracted .
On the third postoperative day, the patient underwent renal ultrasonography which documented the left renal artery and vein patent with traces that were within the limits. Renal function was normal. The patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day without any complications. The pathology report showed a left renal vein leiomyosarcoma (4 × 2.2 × 2 cm) grade 2 s. FNCLCC , with inferior vena cava (IVC) and left renal vein negative margins. There was no tumor recurrence noted during the 24-month follow-up period.