An 87-year-old man with a 3-wk history of right leg radiating pain was admitted to our hospital.
Initially, right leg pain appeared after weight bearing. The pain worsened when standing, and no significant relief could even be achieved by staying in bed. The pain was located in the posterior part of his right leg, from the right hip to calf, with no numbness or hypoesthesia. He was diagnosed with lumbar disc herniation with radiculopathy in a community health service centre 10 d before admission to our hospital. He was advised to take celecoxib 0.2 g q.d., acupuncture, massage, and other physiotherapy; however, the pain was still constant, and there was no real remission. Therefore, he came to our hospital for further treatment.
The patient was diagnosed with osteoarthritis of the knee for 15 year. He underwent resection of the nucleus pulposus of the intervertebral disc 10 years ago due to lumbar disc herniation, with no symptom recurrence after surgery. He had undergone plain CT 40 d prior because of abdominal pain and no positive findings. After taking some traditional Chinese medicine, he experienced pain relief.
The patient did not drink or smoke. The patient’s family history was negative.
Lumbar muscle tension, tenderness on L5, S1 spinous process, and severe tension on the outlet of sciatic nerve of the buttock were noted. The muscle strength and tension of both lower limbs were normal. The straight-leg raising test was positive (40°) on the right, and the augmentation test was positive (30°). Both knee tendon reflex (++), left achilles tendon reflex (++), and right achilles tendon reflex (+) were positive.
The blood test showed no abnormality.
Although the patient had undergone plain CT 40 d prior because of abdominal pain, the CT image showed no gas collection in the lumbar spinal canal . However, when the patient presented with pain this time, the CT image showed a marked L5/S1 vacuum disc phenomenon, and gas collection was located at the posterolateral position of the spinal canal adjoining the right-upper portion of the S1 posterior vertebral wall . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a lesion with extremely low signal intensity on both T1WI and T2WI in the L5/S1 disc space that was consistent with the very low signal intensity in the spinal canal.