A 49-year-old man referred to the emergency department following a high-energy trauma in a motor vehicle collision. On arrival, the ankle was severely painful with swelling and a little ecchymosis. The patient did not have concomitant injuries. Physical examination revealed intact arterial supply of the foot without neurological deficit or skin laceration. Initial plain radiographs revealed dislocation of talocalcaneal and calcaneocuboid joints with comminuted avulsion fragments on the tip of the lateral malleolus. It appeared that talonavicular joint was intact . A computed tomography (CT) scan was requested to delineate the injury pattern . Because of swelling and deformity, the successful simple reduction was immediately performed by traction of the toes and directly pushing the calcaneus medially to its anatomical position, in the emergency room under sedation. The lower limb was placed in a short leg backslab and the reduction was confirmed with a post-reduction CT scan. Comminuted displaced fracture of the sustentaculum tali, cuboid, lateral process of the talus, and avulsion fracture of superior peroneal retinaculum were apparent .
Two days after the injury, through sinus tarsi approach extended proximally to posterior of the lateral malleolus and distally to the calcaneocuboid joint, arthrotomies were done and multiple free osteocartilaginous fragments from lateral process of the talus were excised. A chondral lesion (6 × 8 mm) was seen in the posterior facet of the calcaneus for that chondroplasty and microfracture were performed. The avulsion fracture of the superior peroneal retinaculum was reduced and fixed to its anatomical position by a suture anchor, after reduction of the peroneal tendons in the retromalleolar groove. Also, small bony fragments from the cuboid were excised. Based on Fig. d, about 60% of proximal articular surface of cuboid was intact and after perfect reduction of the calcaneocuboid joint, there was no any risk of lateral column instability or shortening; therefore, calcaneocuboid joint was fixed by two Kirschner wires in order to stabilize it . Because talocalcaneal joint was stable by stress tests under guide of fluoroscopy, no Kirschner wire was inserted in it. Due to bullae formation in medial of the ankle, we decided to postpone reduction and fixation of the sustentaculum tali.
In the second stage, 10 days later, through the medial approach to the talocalcaneal joint, by retracting flexor hallucis longus tendon downward, the fractured sustentaculum tali was exposed. It was partially detached from surrounding soft tissues and displaced in order to see intraarticular and extraarticular free fragments. After subtalar joint arthrotomy, multiple free bony fragments were excised. Then sustentaculum tali was reduced and fixed using a lag screw. The stability of subtalar joint was checked by stress view under guide of fluoroscopy.
Postoperatively, a non-weight bearing short leg cast was applied for six weeks. Then K-wires were removed and physiotherapy was started. The patient had permission to start partial weight bearing 6 weeks following the second surgery. Finally, at the 10th postoperative week, he had full weight-bearing without any aid instrument.
At 34 months after the injury, the patient was recalled for a follow-up visit. He was able to return to his regular activities about 6 months after the injury. The function was evaluated using the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) ankle-hindfoot scale , the foot function index (FFI), and visual analogue score for pain (VAS). The total AOFAS ankle-hindfoot scale was 92 from 100 (no pain, moderate restriction in hindfoot motion and mild hindfoot valgus deformity). The FFI percentile was 7% and the VAS score of the pain was 1.9. The last radiographs revealed normal configuration of talocalcaneal, calcaneocuboid, and talonavicular joints with a little joint space narrowing in posterior part of the subtalar joint .
Informed written consent was obtained from the patient for publication.