A 38-year-old Mexican female patient attended the hospital with a pregnancy of 20 gestational weeks (according to her last menstrual period) for a routine prenatal visit. The patient was only complaining of abdominal fullness. During the physical examination, she was found to have a uterine fundus exceeding the expected measure for her gestational age. She was therefore referred to our hospital for further assessment.
The patient had no relevant past medical history. At 13 weeks of gestation, she was admitted to the hospital due to vaginal bleeding and treated for abruptio placentae, with discharge at recovery. Then at her routine prenatal visit for her 20th (T0) week of pregnancy, she was found to have a uterine fundus greater than her gestational age, for which she was referred to our hospital to discard polyhydramnios. A pelvic ultrasound was performed, finding a normal intrauterine pregnancy of 25 gestational weeks with cephalic diameter consistent with gestational age, normal cardiac activity, and an adequate amount of amniotic fluid. The ultrasound showed bilateral enlarged ovaries with heterogeneous echogenicity. Due to these findings, pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, which showed occupation by an intrauterine pregnancy , as well as a left tumoral lesion with dimensions of 22.1 × 13.6 × 16.3 cm, with regular lobulated contours which caused right confinement of the uterus, as well as eccentric displacement of the small intestine, peripheral vascular structures, and mild compression of the bladder, without infiltration. There was left ureteral compression with mild pyelo-ureteral dilation, as well as mild compression of the inferior vena cava. The lesion was heterogeneous, predominantly isointense to soft tissue in different sequences, with hypointense areas in T1, hyperintense in T2, and irregular borders. It presented extensive contact with the uterine corpus . The ovaries were not easily visible.
The patient was provided fetal lung maturation therapy with dexamethasone and scheduled for a cesarean section at 26 weeks of gestation (T1). During surgery, the uterus was opened using a median incision, and the neonate was obtained without complications. The abdominal cavity showed bilateral tumors compatible with the MRI findings. A hysterectomy with right oophorectomy was performed; the patient was discharged 2 weeks later without complications.
The ovarian tumors were sent to pathology, and the results showed poorly differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma (WHO III) with extensive SRCs.
Two days after discharge, she presented with nausea and vomiting of gastric content accompanied by abdominal pain. She was admitted to the hospital due to the described symptoms and ascites findings; an abdominal paracentesis was then performed. The ascites fluid analysis showed glucose of 20 mg/dL, proteins 1.28 g/dL, and lactate dehydrogenase 1551 U/L, with the presence of gram-positive cocci. Due to the physical and analytical findings, we initiated management with intravenous fluids and antibiotic therapy.
There was no relevant past medical history, risk factors, or family history of cancer. The patient lived at home with access to all essential services of water and electricity.
On admission (T0), she was cachectic, with abdominal distention due to ascites fluid, bulging flanks, and abdominal pain at profound palpation. A 1 cm dehiscence on the vaginal vault was found on the pelvic examination, with fecal material drainage. Her blood pressure remained constant at 100/70 mmHg.
The laboratory assessments showed decreased hemoglobin levels (8.0 g/dL), hematocrit (25.8 %), albumin (2.04 g/dL), proteins (4.60 g/dL), globulin (2.56 g/dL), sodium (132 mEq/L), and chloride (96 mEq/L). Additional laboratory tests showed mildly elevated platelet count (400.0 × 103 u/L), as well as leukocytes (10.0 × 103 u/L), neutrophils (87%), and potassium (5.30 mEq/L).
As a team decision after postsurgical tumor staging, CA-125 levels were not measured due to the limited utility of this marker in patients with poor prognosis. CA-125 levels are usually collected as a follow-up marker to monitor tumor activity after surgery. From this perspective, the patient had such advanced disease that the team deemed it unnecessary to measure CA-125 levels, as it could increase the patient’s burden .
Panendoscopy displayed an irregular shape of the gastric antrum, fundus, and body due to a neoplastic lesion located in the greater curvature. The histopathological diagnosis of the biopsied specimen was invasive SRC carcinoma. Colonoscopy showed hemorrhoids in the anal canal and sigmoid colon with extrinsic compression suggestive of adhesions.
Computed tomography (CT) examination of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis with oral contrast showed bilateral pleural effusions, morphological changes in the stomach associated with the diagnosis of gastric cancer, free air, and fluid levels in the peritoneal cavity, with contrast enhancement suggestive of perforation at the anterior wall of the rectum; inflammatory and ischemic changes in the left kidney were also observed.