A 31-year-old gravida three para 1011 (i.e. one term delivery, one abortion, and one living child) woman at 25 weeks and 4 days of gestation was referred to our hospital for evaluation and management of a pregnancy complicated by severe MS and PASD. As a child in Bangladesh, she had acute rheumatic fever complicated by rheumatic heart disease. Her obstetric history was notable for two previous pregnancies, including a termination by dilation and curettage procedure in Bangladesh (year unknown) and a caesarean delivery under general anaesthesia with her first child in 2017. She reported having undergone two previous percutaneous mitral balloon valvuloplasties (PMBV) for MS, the first at age 12 and the second in 2019 at age 28 for severe MS with a mean mitral valve gradient of 18 mmHg which was described as ‘unsuccessful.’ At that time, she was advised to pursue valve replacement surgery.
She did not follow-up with medical care and presented to an academic tertiary care institution four years later early in her third pregnancy. There, she had magnetic resonance imaging concerning for PASD with invasion into the bladder and parametria. In addition, a transthoracic echo (TTE) showed severe MS with peak and mean mitral valve gradients of 46 and 29 mm Hg, respectively, and a severely elevated estimated right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 90 mmHg.
Because of the obstetric and cardiac complexities of the case, the patient was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit of our hospital, a quaternary care centre in New York City. She reported no symptoms before becoming pregnant but over the last several weeks had experienced episodes of lightheadedness and palpitations. Medications before hospitalization included metoprolol succinate 25 mg daily and furosemide 20 mg daily. On physical exam, the patient had blood pressures ranging from 80–112 systolic/58–79 diastolic mmHg, a heart rate of 90–117 b.p.m. in sinus rhythm, a respiratory rate of 18–34 breaths per minute, and a peripheral oxygen saturation of 93–100% on ambient air. She had jugular venous distension to the jawline, a 2/4 rumbling diastolic murmur auscultated over the area of apical impulse, a 3/6 systolic murmur auscultated throughout the precordium, a prominent P2 without parasternal heave, bibasilar crackles, and warm extremities without peripheral edema. On bedside obstetric sonogram, an active fetus was noted, and PASD was confirmed.
Laboratory testing on admission was notable for a hemoglobin of 9.4 g/dL and an N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide of 613 pg/mL (normal range <450 for age <50 years). A TTE showed heavily calcified mitral and aortic valves with severe MS (peak and mean mitral valve gradients of 34 and 19 mmHg at a heart rate of 95 b.p.m., respectively, mitral valve area 0.9 cm2 by planimetry, Wilkins score 12), moderate aortic stenosis (AS) (peak velocity 3.6 m/s, mean gradient 31 mmHg), mild mitral and aortic regurgitation, and severe tricuspid regurgitation (, , ). The left ventricular end-diastolic diameter was 4.4 cm, end-systolic diameter was 2.9 cm, left ventricular mass indexed to body surface area was 85 g/m2, and the ejection fraction was 60–65%. The right ventricle was severely dilated with end-diastolic diameters of 5.1 and 3.7 cm at the base and mid-ventricle, respectively. The right ventricular peak systolic excursion velocity was 11 cm/s and the tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion was 1.8 cm. The left atrial volume indexed to body surface area was 56 mm/m2. The RVSP was estimated as 87 mmHg.
A pulmonary artery catheter placed to characterize the patient’s hemodynamics demonstrated severe pulmonary hypertension with a right atrial pressure of 19 mmHg, systolic and diastolic pulmonary artery pressures of 82 and 43 mmHg, respectively, a pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 37 mmHg, and a cardiac index of 2.9 L/m2. The transpulmonary gradient was 19 mmHg and the pulmonary vascular resistance was 4 Wood units, consistent with both pre- and post-capillary pulmonary hypertension. Intravenous furosemide 20 mg and metoprolol tartrate 6.25 mg every 6 hours was initiated. However, she quickly developed symptomatic hypotension in response to these therapies, so they were discontinued.
A multidisciplinary cardio-obstetrics team which included physicians from the divisions of advanced heart failure, cardio-thoracic surgery, maternal-fetal medicine, gynecologic oncology, cardiac and obstetric anaesthesiology, neonatal intensive care, and consult liaison psychiatry met with the patient and her partner to determine next steps. Because of the presence of PASD, the risk of significant blood loss during delivery and potential requirement for large volume transfusions was estimated as extremely high. Accounting for the patient’s potential for significant blood loss and her rheumatic heart disease with severe MS, secondary pulmonary hypertension, and right ventricular dysfunction, urgent caesarean delivery with probable hysterectomy followed days later by surgical replacement of the mitral and aortic valves was recommended to the patient. Because significant hemodynamic fluctuations were anticipated during surgery, a plan was made for the initiation of veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) for right ventricular support should signs of hemodynamic instability develop. She was counselled extensively on the risks of maternal morbidity and mortality, the risks of fetal complications with delivery at an extreme preterm gestational age, and the risks of cannula and bleeding complications. She expressed an understanding of these risks. In addition, while mechanical aortic and mitral prosthetic valves were strongly recommended to the patient, she repeatedly expressed that she did not want to manage long-term warfarin therapy and therefore had a strong preference for bioprosthetic valve replacements.
On day three of the hospitalization, she was brought to the operating room (OR). A combined spinal-epidural anaesthetic was placed after which she developed significant hypotension necessitating initiation of norepinephrine at 10 mcg/min and vasopressin at 4 units/h. A decision was made to proceed with cannulation to peripheral femoro-femoral VA-ECMO. Neuraxial anaesthesia was inadequate, so she was converted to general anaesthesia. A transesophageal echocardiogram was performed which showed severe MS with a mean gradient of 11 mmHg (on VA-ECMO), moderate to severe AS, left ventricular ejection fraction of 30%, and a moderately dilated right ventricle with reduced function (, ). She then underwent successful VA-ECMO supported caesarean delivery of a vigorous male infant at 25 weeks 6 days gestation followed by an uncomplicated abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingectomy with an estimated blood loss of 500 mL. She was extubated and brought to the cardio-thoracic intensive care unit for 48 hours.
On post-operative day 3, she underwent surgical bioprosthetic aortic and mitral valve replacement and tricuspid valve annuloplasty without complication. She was decannulated from VA-ECMO in the OR and extubated the next day. The infant, who was born at 25 weeks 6 days, was discharged from the hospital at postmenstrual age 38 weeks and 5 days. He had no supplemental oxygen requirement and was exclusively feeding by mouth with cranial ultrasounds reassuring against intraventricular hemorrhage. The patient’s TTE prior to discharge showed a bioprosthetic aortic valve which was well-seated without stenosis (peak velocity 2 m/s) or regurgitation, a bioprosthetic mitral valve that was functioning normally with a mean transvalvular gradient of 4 mmHg at a heart rate of 80 b.p.m., and a repaired tricuspid valve with moderate regurgitation. Left ventricular size and function were normal, the right ventricle was moderately increased in size with normal function, and the pulmonary artery systolic pressure was estimated to be 36 mmHg. She was initiated on daily low-dose aspirin and an oral anticoagulant for episodes of post-operative atrial fibrillation and surgical bioprosthetic valve implantation with plans to re-evaluate the need for anticoagulation after three months. The patient wished to breastfeed. Because of limited data on the safety of direct oral anticoagulants while breastfeeding, warfarin was preferred with a goal international normalized ratio of 2–3. She was also started on a heart failure regimen with metoprolol succinate 25 mg, spironolactone 25 mg, and furosemide 20 mg.