An 81-year-old woman was admitted to our institution due to prominent bilateral leg oedema and orthopnoea concomitant with 8 kg of weight gain in 3 months after four courses of trastuzumab therapy to treat HER-2 overexpressing breast cancer. She was prescribed with irbesartan 100 mg/day, amlodipine 10 mg/day, febuxostat 10 mg/day, and ibandronate 100 mg/month for hypertension, hyperuricaemia, and osteoporosis, respectively. In September 2021, she underwent mammectomy for Stage IIb breast cancer with high proliferative activity (Ki 67, 63%), negative hormone receptors, and HER-2 overexpression. After surgery, she received adjuvant therapy with trastuzumab (loading dose of 8 mg/kg followed by a maintenance dose of 6 mg/kg) at one dose every 3 weeks. She noted bilateral leg oedema and diarrhoea, 9 weeks after the initiation of anti-HER-2 targeted therapy, which progressively worsened after four courses of treatment. Although she was referred to a general cardiologist, the patient was not diagnosed with CTRCD due to the absence of LV systolic dysfunction [LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 70%] paired with a nonspecific elevation of brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level of 57.3 pg/mL. After 15 weeks of treatment with trastuzumab, dyspnoea, general fatigue, orthopnoea, and anorexia developed, and the patient was eventually diagnosed with heart failure.
On admission, her blood pressure was 176/68 mmHg, heart rate was 69 beats/min, and oxygen saturation was 93% (room air). Physical examination revealed hepatomegaly, jugular vein distension, and prominent bilateral leg oedema. On auscultation, a SIII gallop with no cardiac murmur was observed. On admission, the NT-proBNP concentration was 1525 pg/mL (normal value <125 pg/mL) and the Troponin I level was 32.6 pg/mL (normal value <26.2 pg/mL). Electrocardiography indicated a normal sinus rhythm with first-degree atrioventricular block and a nonspecific T-wave inversion on precordial leads. Chest radiography and computed tomography revealed bilateral pleural effusion with significant cardiomegaly , in comparison with the patient’s preoperative images which did not show any pleural effusion . Transthoracic echocardiography revealed that LV contraction was preserved without any ventricular remodelling , and the LVEF was calculated at 62% using the bi-plane Simpson’s method (see , ). Moreover, no significant reduction in GLS was observed compared with results obtained before anti-HER-2 targeted therapy (from −16.5 to −14.6%; relative reduction of 11.5%, ). In contrast, the left atrial volume index (LAVI) and tricuspid valve regurgitant jet velocity increased from 48.8 to 85.1 mL/m2 and 2.5 to 3.2 m/s, respectively. Doppler echocardiography showed that the transmitral flow pseudonormalized (E/A ratio; from 0.70 to 1.30), e′ velocity was reduced (e′ septal 5.1 cm/s and e′ lateral 6.0 cm/s), E/e′ ratio was elevated from 14.3 to 19.1, and pulmonary venous flow changed from a systolic component dominant to a diastolic component dominant pattern , all of which indicated elevated ventricular filling pressure as a result of the development of LV diastolic dysfunction. The patient was consequently diagnosed with decompensated heart failure, and combined treatment with diuretics (torasemide 8 mg/day, spironolactone 25 mg/day, and trichlormethiazide 2 mg/day for 14 days), arteriodilators (amlodipine 5 mg/day and olmesartan 20 mg/day), and venodilators (carperitide 0.125 μg/kg/min for 7 days) was introduced, resulting in the complete disappearance of pleural effusion and peripheral oedema concurrent with a reduction in body weight of 8 kg in over 3 weeks. After successfully achieving volume reduction, the patient underwent cardiac catheter examination to further assess her haemodynamic status . Notably, the mean pulmonary artery wedge pressure was elevated to 18 mmHg without any systolic dysfunction or LV dilation, indicating LV diastolic dysfunction.
After a thorough discussion with her breast surgeon, trastuzumab was discontinued. At discharge, the patient was treated with 3.75 mg of tolvaptan, 200 mg of sacubitril valsartan, 5 mg of amlodipine, 25 mg of spironolactone, and 30 mg of azosemide. At 12 weeks after the interruption of trastuzumab administration, her heart failure symptoms significantly improved to New York Heart Association functional Class I; thus, maintenance medication was reduced to 5 mg of amlodipine and 200 mg of sacubitril valsartan. As shown in , Doppler echocardiographic parameters of diastolic function, including E/A of 0.60, E/e′ of 14.3, and LAVI of 57.1 mL/m2, significantly improved.