We report the case of a 4-year-old male child, admitted to our clinic for generalized seizures, which persisted in spite of anticonvulsant therapy (Diazepam), with no previous acute symptoms. His personal history revealed ureterovesical junction obstruction, mild hydronephrosis, and an episode of generalized seizures approximately 2 months before the current admission for which chronic therapy with sodium valproate (Depakine) was recommended. We must mention that the brain MRI performed at that time was normal. The family history showed the presence of ageusia and anosmia in both parents.
At the time of admission, the patient was intubated and mechanically ventilated and the clinical exam revealed only pallor.
The laboratory tests performed on the day of admission revealed anemia (Hemoglobin—Hb 9.98 g/dL, Hematocrit—Htc 28.54%), a severely increased number of monocytes (9624/µL), and a mildly increased C-reactive protein (CRP 7 mg/L). Taking into account the family history, a real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of the oropharyngeal swab was performed and it tested positive for SARS-CoV-2. Moreover, both parents were confirmed with this infection. Both urine and blood cultures were negative. The serology for viral hepatitis B and C, as well as antinuclear and anti-double-strained DNA antibodies were negative. We performed a thoracic computed tomography (CT), which showed consolidation in the lower lobe of the left lung associated with an opacity in the right apex, suggesting possible atelectasis ( and ). The cranial CT revealed no pathological findings. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with a diagnosis of COVID-19 in a severe form.
We initiated antibiotic treatment (ceftriaxone 800 mg twice a day and amikacin 100 mg twice a day), antiviral therapy (lopinavir/ritonavir 2.5 mL twice a day), corticosteroids (Dexamethasone 4 mg twice a day), anticoagulants (enoxaparin 0.2 mL in a single daily dose), and antipyretics (Paracetamol), and we continued the chronic anticonvulsant therapy with sodium valproate. The second RT-PCR performed on the third day of admission was also positive for SARS-CoV-2 infection. Unfortunately, the patient’s condition deteriorated progressively, and, after approximately 72 h of hospitalization, he developed desaturation and bradycardia. We repeated the laboratory parameters before the bradycardia event and we found leucopenia (leukocytes 3500/µL), neutropenia (neutrophils 1111/µL), mildly increased creatin kinase (280 U/L), a high ferritin level (121 ng/mL, normal ranges 7–84 ng/mL), hypoalbuminemia (3.29 g/dL), a prolonged time of prothrombin (22.3 s) and an increased international normalized ration (INR 1.74).
Despite all efforts to resuscitate the patient, he died on the fourth day of admission.