A 57-year-old man was admitted to our acquired brain injury (ABI) rehabilitation unit 8 months after he suffered a large right cerebellar hemorrhage with significant mass effect requiring an emergent posterior fossa decompressive craniectomy. His past medical history included hypertension, vertigo, a remote concussion, and history of a fractured jaw. He developed significant dysphagia early following his stroke, including difficulty with secretion management. The dysphagia was likely multifactorial, related to the cerebellar bleed with initial mass effect and possible subsequent structural injury to the brain stem (central) and cranial nerves (peripheral) as well as an early altered level of consciousness (drowsiness, somnolence) following his stroke. A percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube was placed 11 days after his stroke, but refractory vomiting and aspiration pneumonia eventually necessitated gastrojejunostomy (GJ) tube placement. He continued to have ongoing issues with vomiting despite a trial of metoclopramide. Imaging performed 1 month after placement of the GJ tube revealed retrograde migration with the tip of the catheter visualized within the oropharynx, which was approximately 14 weeks after his stroke. The GJ tube was then replaced under fluoroscopic guidance. Within 2 weeks the tube had again migrated and was visualized within the esophagus on imaging. He underwent endoscopic placement of a gastrostomy tube with addition of a jejunal extension. Ten weeks after placement, the GJ tube had migrated with the tip now located in the duodenum. At this point, his chronic vomiting appeared to be improving with a trial of erythromycin so no further adjustments to the tube were made.
Upon admission to our ABI unit he had ongoing dysphagia, significant hypophonia, and intermittent episodes of regurgitation and vomiting, though often only small amounts of bile or fluids. The vomiting was not stereotyped, nor did he have long episodes where he was completely symptom free, as seen in cyclic vomiting syndrome . He had two further episodes of retrograde tube migration requiring replacement by interventional radiology. A video fluoroscopy study was performed 10 months after his stroke that revealed rhythmic pulsations of the palate, pharynx, and larynx involving the vocal cords, in keeping with palato-pharyngo-laryngeal myoclonus (see ). Subsequently, a brain MRI was completed showing apparent unilateral hypertrophy and increased FLAIR signal in the left inferior olive suggestive of hypertrophic olivary degeneration.
Several medication trials including clonazepam, divalproex sodium, and gabapentin, were undertaken to help control his palato-pharyngo-laryngeal myoclonus. Medications were administered independently with no combination therapies trialed. Clonazepam was poorly tolerated due to drowsiness and thus discontinued. Divalproex sodium titrated up to 1000 mg per day and gabapentin titrated up to 600 mg per day did not lead to significant changes in the frequency or intensity of his myoclonus on repeat video fluoroscopic studies. However, his GI symptoms improved significantly with these medication trials such that he no longer vomited and there were no further incidents of retrograde migration of the feeding tube. Imaging performed 3 months after the initiation of the medication trials and 2 months after the most recent GJ tube replacement demonstrated the tip of the tube appropriately located within the jejunum.