A 30-year-old Chinese man with 8-day intermittent chest pain was admitted to our hospital on 17 August 2015. His cardiovascular examination revealed an initial blood pressure of 115/72 mmHg, heart rate of 68 b.p.m., and his electrocardiogram showed Q-wave formation in the precordial and inferior leads and T-wave inversion in precordial leads with a raised initial high-sensitivity troponin level which was 304.7 ng/L (0–15 ng/L). On auscultation, his chest was clear and heart sounds were normal. He had experienced oral and GUs for the previous 12 years and complained about episodes of fever for the last 2 months. He had neither a history of smoking nor a family history of coronary heart disease. No medication was taken before admission. Coronary angiography (CAG) revealed two aneurysms in the left anterior descending artery (LAD) with a 90% stenosis following the distal aneurysm . Consequently, a drug-eluting stent (DES, 3.5 × 24 mm) was implanted successfully in the middle LAD . Additionally, aspirin, clopidogrel, atorvastatin, metoprolol, benazepril, trimetazidine, and pantoprazole were prescribed to the patient. A transthoracic echocardiogram showed apical hypokinesia, left ventricular ejection fraction of 50%, and an apical ventricular aneurysm (35 × 18 mm).
Four months after discharge, the patient was admitted because of recurrent chest pain, associated with nausea and vomiting. The electrocardiogram showed elevated ST-segment in precordial leads with a raised initial high-sensitivity troponin level which was 932.1 ng/L. The patient received double antiplatelet therapy and an emergency CAG revealed a total occlusion of the LAD . A guidewire was successfully advanced across the occlusive lesion and a large fresh red thrombus was removed by aspiration catheter. The intervention was ended due to good blood flow of distal LAD after an intracoronary tirofiban bolus. The C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 75.5 mg/L (0–8 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 84 mm/h (0–15 mm/h). Four days later, a GRAFTMASTER covered stent was implanted successfully in the middle LAD. In order to better characterize coronary anatomy, intravascular ultrasound, and computed tomography coronary angiography were performed, confirming the presence of two CAA at the level of the proximal and middle LAD (8 × 9 mm and 16 × 5 mm, respectively). Accordingly, a second covered stent was implanted in the proximal LAD on 11 April 2016 .
The patient was treated appropriately with warfarin for 9 months. Immunosuppressive drugs were prescribed to the patient after his second discharge with a combination of prednisone, cyclophosphamide, and thalidomide to maintain normal CRP and ESR levels. Due to the poor management of the OU and fertility needs, the above prescription was then changed into cyclosporine and methylprednisolone. Additional testing for antibody and pathergy test were negative. The CRP and ESR level were normal. During the follow-up in 2019, the patient remains asymptomatic.