On September 1, 2022, a 59-year-old male patient was admitted to the Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, because of unilateral nasal obstruction on the left side accompanied with epistaxis for more than 2 months. Besides, a renal occupying lesion was detected 1 week prior. He did not complain of any other discomfort and did not report any relevant family history.
On September 2, 2022, positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scans revealed the loss of left pharyngeal recess, as well as a palpable mass formed by incrassated soft tissue on posterior and left walls of the nasopharynx, 32 × 30 mm in size, of which the FDG metabolism increased significantly and the SUVmax value was 9.1 . Diffuse elevation of FDG metabolism was also found in the tongue, SUVmax = 21.4. In addition, PET-CT scans also revealed an abnormality in kidney and thyroids. An isodense nodule was observed in the right superior renal pole, approximately 25 mm in diameter, with an increase in FDG metabolism . Both lobes of the thyroid were normal in shape and size. However, there was a slightly hypodense shadow in the right leaf of the thyroid, approximately 13 mm in diameter, with an unusually high level of FDG metabolism, SUVmax = 26.5 . According to the above results, the possibility of synchronous malignant tumors in the right kidney, nasopharynx, and right lobe of thyroid was suggested. Other lesions detected include a nodule in the inferior lobe of the left lung which was 12 × 10 mm in size , and multiple patchy shadows with low density in the liver . Last but not least, multiple bone destructions were revealed in the left frontoparietal suture , multiple vertebral bodies and appendix , cricoid cartilage, bilateral scapulae, multiple bilateral ribs, pelvis bones and bilateral femurs, accompanied with increased FDG metabolism, suggesting a large possibility of systemic bone metastases.
On September 6, 2022, nasal endoscopy revealed a gigantic tumor-like neoplasm in the nasopharynx and hyperplastic lymphoid follicles in the posterior pharyngeal wall and root of the tongue . Mild hyperemia of the pharyngeal mucosa was also observed. On September 7, 2022, a nasopharynx enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed a distinct incrassation of the nasopharyngeal posterior wall; and an irregular-shaped mass shadow with slightly hyperintense on T1W1 and hypointense on T2W1 was be observed, 33 × 27 mm in size. After injecting the contrast agent, the scan showed significant enhancement in the mass, as well as loss of bilateral pharyngeal recesses and the narrowing of nasopharyngeal cavity. In addition, multiple vertebral bodies demonstrated variable signal intensity on MR scans, and showed significant enhancement following contrast administration. There were also patchy shadows in the left mastoid region with slightly hypointense on T1W1 and hyperintense on T2W1. On September 19, 2022, the pathological results of the nasopharyngeal biopsy revealed that around most necrotic tissues in the tumor-like neoplasm there were a small amount of heterocysts, accompanied with hemosiderin deposition. On September 26, 2022, the final results of biopsy immunohistochemistry showed the following: CAM5.2 ( −), VIM ( +), P53 ( −), Ki67 (10%), SOX10 ( +), SY ( −), CD56 ( −), CD20 ( −), CgA ( −), CD31 ( −), Desmin ( −), P40 ( −), HMB45 ( +), MelanA ( +). Gene detection showed amplification of CCND1 and mutation of BRAF oncogene. In combination with the pathological results, it was suggested that there was a nasopharyngeal malignant melanoma. On September 15, 2022, immunohistochemical results of intercostal puncture showed the following: VIM ( +), S-100 ( +), HMB45 ( +), MelanA ( +), PD-L1/22C3 (3%), Ki67 (40%), CAM5.2 ( −). Gene detection showed a mutation in MSS, SF3B1, Ep300, MYC, CCND1, and PAK1. And therefore, bone metastasis of malignant melanoma was suggested according to the above results.
On September 9, 2022, a color-Doppler guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the thyroid gland was performed. The result revealed a hypoechoic nodule with microcalcification (TI-RADS 4a) in the lower part of left lobe of the thyroid, 5 × 4.8 mm in size, and multiple nodules (TI-RADS 4b) in both upper and lower part of the right lobe of thyroid, respectively 12.5 × 10.3 mm and 6.7 × 4.6 mm in size. On September 12, 2022, the genetic test results of thyroid needle biopsy showed a mutation of BRAFV600E in both the left and right lobes of thyroid. The pathological results subsequently revealed papillary carcinoma (Bethesda category VI) in both lesions of the left and right lobe of thyroid.
On September 15, 2022, the patient underwent a renal needle biopsy, of which the pathological results revealed clear cell carcinoma and the immunohistochemistry results showed the following: PAX-8 ( +), CAIX ( +). Gene detection showed that the tumor mutation burden (TMB) was 16.58 Muts/Mb. The morphological and immunohistochemical results were consistent with a clear-cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC).
The patient was transferred to Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center on September 30, 2022. After excluding contraindications of chemotherapy, Cisplatin 40 mg ivggt d1-d3 + Toripalimab 240 mg ivggt d1 + Endostar 180 mg civ72h d1 + Temozolomide 200 mg op d1–d5 once/3 weeks were prescribed for treatment. At present, the patient remains stable and his overall condition is good. No adverse reaction such as marrow suppression has developed yet.