A 15-year-old male was referred to a gastroenterology consultation due to increased total bilirubin (71,8 μmol/L), alanine transaminase (65 IU/L) and aspartate transaminase (55 IU/L) levels. Ammonia levels were normal. The lab tests were required before isotretinoin initiation for acne disease. The patient was asymptomatic and had no relevant past history.
An abdominal ultrasound identified multiple hyperechoic nodules and a direct communication between the portal trunk and the IVC with hypoplastic portal branches. Subsequent CT and MRI confirmed the presence of a type II CEPS, measuring 16 mm in diameter and 4 mm in length, and the nodules were characterized as probable regenerative nodules .
The patient underwent a portocaval venography and shunt temporarily occluded with a balloon. Portal pressure values increased from 16 mmHg to 28 mmHg after occlusion (12 mmHg gradient). Given these values a progressive closure of the CEPS was planned.
In the initial procedure, through a transjugular access, a TIPS was created between the middle hepatic vein and right portal vein (GORE® VIATORR® TIPS Endoprosthesis 8-10 × 50 + 20 mm). Using the 10F TIPS sheath the CEPS was occluded with a 16 mm atrial septal defect occluder (Amplatzer™ septal occluder, Abbott®), matching the CEPS diameter previously measured on CT. The TIPS was created before the CEPS occlusion to avoid the risks of an unsuccessful TIPS creation . TIPS patency and CEPS closure were assessed with Doppler ultrasound.
A second procedure was performed forty days later with downstaging of the TIPS caliber using a flow reductor stent (14/4/14x40mm sinus-reduction stent, Optimed®), resulting in a minor increase in portal pressure from 6 to 8 mmHg . Temporary shunt balloon occlusion was repeated with portal pressure increasing to 14 mmHg. According to these portal pressure values a decision was made to definitively occlude the TIPS using a 14 mm Amplatzer™ Vascular Plug II . The patient was started on 40 mg/day of enoxaparin.
Likewise, TIPS and CEPS closure were accessed with Doppler ultrasound. At 2 weeks follow up a non-occlusive peripheral thrombus was identified in the left portal branch and enoxaparin dosage upscaled to 60 mg/day. The thrombus resolved 3 months later and enoxaparin was withdrawn. At a 1 year follow up the TIPS and CEPS remained occluded, liver nodules size decreased, the patient is asymptomatic and did not develop additional complications. Total bilirubin (68,4 μmol/L), alanine transaminase (68 IU/L) and aspartate transaminase (39 IU/L) did not decrease to normal levels.