A 60-year-old man was transferred to our department with sudden onset of abdominal pain. He had a past medical history of duodenal ulcer and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and had taken rivaroxaban. He had no allergy and no family medical history.
Physical examination showed initial findings of Glasgow coma scale, E4V5M6; blood pressure, 85/66 mmHg; respiratory rate, 25 /min; and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2), 100% at 6 L/min of oxygen by reservoir mask. He complained of sustained upper quadrant pain with abdominal guarding. Initial enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated extravasation from the posterior inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery and celiac trunk stenosis. Thereafter, we diagnosed him with PDAA rupture due to MALS.
First, an urgent transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was performed . The PIPDA was selectively catheterized through the SMA, and embolization was performed using coils and N-butyl-2cyanoacrylate. The angiography at this time demonstrated both retrograde blood flow from the PIPDA to the celiac artery and stagnant contrast agent in the celiac trunk, indicating total celiac artery occlusion. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) because of some severe complications such as acute kidney injury, acidosis, and coagulopathy due to hemorrhagic shock. Continuous hemodiafiltration, intubation, and blood transfusion had been required in the ICU.
The patient was followed-up with enhanced CT every week. Follow-up CT on day 21 after admission demonstrated newly formed multiple aneurysms in the transverse pancreatic artery, hepatic artery, great pancreatic artery, and right renal artery; notably, the hepatic artery enlargement was bead-like.
Because of the high rupture risk for the aneurysms in the both the transverse pancreatic and hepatic arteries, a second angiography was performed to evaluate the possibility of liver ischemia after an additional TAE of the pancreaticoduodenal arcade. Unexpectedly, the angiogram on both expiratory and inspiratory phases revealed substantially preserved blood flow in the celiac trunk and hepatic artery aneurysms . Based on these findings, we postulated that hemorrhagic shock-induced vasospasm caused bloodstream changes during the initial angiography or that a systemic vascular disorder, such as periarteritis nodosa (PAN) or segmental arterial mediolysis (SAM), may be involved in pathophysiologic mechanisms of these events. Although the PAN diagnosis was uncertain, we initiated pulse steroid therapy with methylprednisolone at 1000 mg/day for three days.
We decided to perform extrinsic MAL release before additional pancreaticoduodenal arcade TAE, which was considered safe without causing liver ischemia based on the findings of both the first and second angiography. The pancreaticoduodenal arcade aneurysm was at high risk for rupture irrespective of the size. The hepatic artery aneurysm was also at high risk. Additional rupture would result in vasospasm of celiac artery and decrease of the flow and result in liver ischemia. Therefore, we performed a laparoscopic MAL release on day 29. Simultaneous excision biopsy of the greater omentum showed no diagnostic pathologic findings, except for slight vasculitis.
On day 35, the second TAE was planned. Contrary to our prediction, digital subtraction angiography demonstrated spontaneous occlusion of the transverse pancreatic artery and marked resolution of the other aneurysms, including the hepatic artery aneurysms . Therefore, TAE was not performed. Although the blood examination did not fully satisfy the criteria for PAN, the patient received additional immunosuppressive therapy with oral prednisolone (60 mg/day) and intravenous cyclophosphamide (500 mg/day), which decreased the C-reactive protein (CRP) level to below 0.03 mg/dL. CRP level was maintained above 3.0 mg/dL until the therapy. For more than one year of follow-up, the patient remained recurrence-free and had no complaint about quality of life after discharge, even though hyperglycemia due to prednisolone required oral medication. The patient sent us a letter saying that he was satisfied with his current condition and had no complaint about our treatment.