An 83-year-old man was referred to our hospital with sudden chest pain and dyspnea. He had been diagnosed with chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis (CHP) 3 years previously and had been receiving treatment with oral corticosteroid (5 mg/day) and home oxygen therapy since then. A chest radiograph showed a right pneumothorax with mediastinal shift, diagnosed as a secondary pneumothorax associated with the advance state of CHP. A 20 F thoracic drainage tube was placed , but a chest radiograph showed incomplete expansion of the right lung, and marked air bubbling into the analog chest drainage system during expiration persisted, corresponding to Cerfolio classification, Grade 2 . The right upper lobe was fully expanded, and the presence of bronchopleural fistulas in the middle or lower lobes was indicated by chest CT performed after placing the drainage tube, but the precise locations were unclear. The air leak persisted for 5 days, and the pneumothorax was considered intractable. The chest drainage system was changed from analog to digital (Thopaz®, Medela, Baar, Switzerland) for the accurate measurement of the air leakage. Surgery to close the fistulas under general anesthesia was deemed unsafe due to poor pulmonary function and general condition. Therefore, we performed EO using silicone spigots (Novatech, La Ciotat, France) on day 10 of the hospital stay.
The EO procedure was performed using flexible bronchoscopes (thick scope BF-1TQ290 and thin scope BF-P290, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) under local anesthesia with a combination of fentanyl and midazolam for conscious sedation. The patient underwent fiberoptic intubation with an 8.5-mm uncuffed endotracheal tube (Portex® Siliconised PVC Oral/Nasal Uncuffed Tracheal Tube, Smiths Medical, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The AAL, initially measured at 100 mL/min in the sitting position, decreased to approximately 20 mL/min when the patient assumed a supine position. To locate the fistula, oxygen was insufflated at a low flow rate (2 L/min) for 15 to 30 s through the working channel of the thick bronchoscope after wedging the bronchoscope tip sequentially into each subsegmental bronchus in the right middle and lower lobe, and the AAL was measured with a DCDS . Increased AAL was observed when oxygen was insufflated into B5a and B5b (from 20 mL/min to approximately 200 mL/min in both bronchi), but not the other subsegmental bronchi. Therefore, we judged that there was a bronchopleural fistula on the peripheral side of B5a and B5b. These bronchi were occluded by inserting spigots (size M, 6-mm diameter for B5a, and size S, 5-mm diameter for B5b) using a thin bronchoscope . After bronchial occlusion, the AAL on the DCDS decreased significantly to ~ 0, so EO was terminated.
The following day, an autologous blood patch (ABP) was performed because a minor pneumothorax in the right lung was visible on chest radiograph and a slight air leak was observed when the patient was asked to cough. The air leak completely disappeared after ABP, and the thoracic drainage tube was removed. On day 17 of hospitalization, the patient was discharged.