A 5-year-old girl with no relevant medical history presented to our hospital with complaints of abdominal distention and pain, constipation, poor vitality, and jaundice. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple masses extensively occupying the abdomen, common bile duct interruption, and dilation of the right and left hepatic ducts at the hepatic portal .
On admission, her blood sample showed the following results: white blood cell count, 7.20 × 109/L; hemoglobin, 11.9 g/dL; platelet count, 296 × 109/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 286 U/L; alanine aminotransferase, 609 U/L; γ-glutamyl transferase, 301 U/L; total bilirubin, 5.3 mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 4.1 mg/dL; blood urea nitrogen, 11.3 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.51 mg/dL; total protein, 5.8 g/dL; and C-reactive protein, 1.3 mg/dL. The serum lactate dehydrogenase level was high (1237 U/L) on admission. No significant tumor markers were detected.
The patient was hospitalized, and rapid tumor growth and pleural effusion were observed within a few days. Her serum lactate dehydrogenase level increased to 8787 U/L on the fifth day of admission. We performed a bone marrow biopsy, chest puncture, open tumor biopsy, and central venous catheter insertion on the same day. We initiated empirical chemotherapy promptly with cyclophosphamide and rituximab, and her bilirubin level decreased. The tumor was diagnosed histopathologically as Burkitt’s lymphoma. However, on the 14th day of hospitalization, the direct bilirubin level increased again to 8.0 mg/dL, and a plastic stent was placed endoscopically into the biliary tract. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) at stent insertion showed biliary stricture .
Following biliary stent placement, the bilirubin level decreased. After that, we treated the patient with chemotherapy (two courses each of R-COPADM: rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, and methotrexate; R-CYM: rituximab, cytarabine, and methotrexate; R-CYVE: rituximab, cytarabine, and etoposide). We administered chemotherapy for 9 months, during which time we replaced the stent endoscopically every 2–3 months.
After completing chemotherapy, thickening and stricture of the bile duct at the cholecystic duct junction persisted. A 7 mm lymph node without 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation was identified on the dorsal side of the common bile duct. However, it did not meet the criteria for residual disease with a maximum diameter of at least 10 mm . Nevertheless, all target lesions were resolved, and we determined that the patient had achieved a clinical complete response. The patient developed biliary stent obstruction and cholangitis 2 months after chemotherapy. We performed an endoscopic biliary balloon dilation and a stent replacement. Although the jaundice improved temporarily, it did not lead to a fundamental improvement of the bile duct obstruction. ERCP during biliary stent replacement and MRI showed progression from biliary stricture to biliary obstruction at the junction of the cholecystic duct. We determined that she had developed a stent-dependent biliary obstruction. However, we could predict that a choledochojejunostomy would be possible based on the location of the biliary obstruction in those images. The size of the lymph nodes on the dorsal side of the common bile duct remained unchanged for 9 months after the end of chemotherapy, and a clinical complete response was maintained.
We performed a biliary reconstruction procedure 15 months after her initial hospitalization (6 months after the end of chemotherapy). A 10 cm incision was made in the right hypochondrium. The bile duct wall was thickened and sclerosed, and indurated lymph nodes were observed on the dorsal side of the common bile duct. The adhesions were strong, but we dissected the dorsal portion from the gallbladder to the junction of the cholecystic duct. The cholecystic duct was cut at the junction, and the stent was removed. We resected the common hepatic duct and ligated the common bile duct. The common bile duct showed wall thickening and stricture, as observed in the preoperative images. In addition, sclerotic lymph nodes were observed between the common bile duct and portal vein. Choledochojejunostomy and retrocolic Roux-en-Y reconstruction were performed after resection of the hepatic duct up to the porta hepatis and bilateral incision of the hepatic duct to secure the anastomotic diameter . The pace of growth of the Burkitt’s lymphoma remained rapid after 9 month post-chemotherapy. In addition, the portal vein was located near a lymph node on the dorsal portion of the common bile duct; thus, we chose to leave that node undisturbed to avoid the risk of injuring it. The intraoperative blood loss was 20 mL, and the operative time was 5 h and 20 min. Histopathologically, the resected bile duct wall showed fibrosis, thickening, and prolapse of the mucosa and muscularis propria. However, it revealed no malignant findings. The bile duct cavity had narrowed to approximately 2 mm . There were no postoperative complications, and the patient remained in remission for 6 month post-surgery. MRI showed resolution of biliary congestion, and the bilirubin level remained low .