A 38-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our department in November 2017 for evaluation of secondary amenorrhea. Absence of menstrual cycle followed oral contraception withdrawal in the context of spontaneous deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in 2015. Menarche was at the age of 13, and menstrual cycles were regular before the beginning of oral contraceptives. The patient had no previous history of infertility (two pregnancies and two deliveries) and reported weight gain of about 4 kilograms in the previous 2 years. She denied any symptoms of hyperandrogenism or virilization such as acne, hirsutism, or voice deepening. She also had a history of high blood pressure (HBP) for the previous 5 years, but no history of diabetes. At the time of initial evaluation, she was medicated with nebivolol/hydrochlorothiazide 5/25 mg once a day, rivaroxaban 20 mg once a day, and aceclofenac 100 mg twice a day. The patient complained of progressive and persistent right hip pain that started around 4 months after her second pregnancy and continued for 3 years, and was associated with limited mobility. Hip magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study revealed avascular necrosis of the right femoral head , and led to right hip arthroplasty 1 year before endocrinology evaluation. Although mobility was recovered after surgery, the patient continued to complain of proximal muscle weakness. She denied relevant family medical history. Physical exam showed a body mass index (BMI) of 25.96 kg/m2, facial plethora, truncal obesity, and supraclavicular fat pads. Muscular atrophy and easy bruising were apparent. No skin striae, hirsutism, or acne were seen.
Our workup revealed serum cortisol of 21.5 µg/dL after overnight dexamethasone suppression test (DST) (normal < 1.8 µg/dL), elevated 24-hour urinary free cortisol (UFC) (728.9 µg/day; normal 36.0–137.0 µg/day), and suppressed morning plasma ACTH (< 1.0 pg/mL; normal < 63.3 pg/mL), findings consistent with ACTH-independent CS. She had normal blood count in liver and kidney function tests, and glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) of 6.8%. Electrolytes were normal, with the exception of slightly decreased phosphorus (2.3 mg/dL; reference range 2.7–4.5 mg/dL). The remaining hormonal study showed mild changes compatible with pituitary function suppression from excess cortisol .
The patient underwent adrenal computed tomography (CT) scan, which showed a 25 mm lesion in the left adrenal gland, with density non-suggestive of adenoma . She was promptly scheduled for unilateral adrenalectomy and was started on steroid replacement therapy after surgery.
Three months after surgery she presented with resolution of HBP and recovered regular menstrual cycle; thyroid function (thyroid-stimulating hormone 2.94 µUI/mL [reference range 0.35–4.94 µUI/mL], thyroxine 0.75 ng/dL [reference range 0.70–1.48 ng/dL], triiodothyronine 3.31 pg/mL [1.71–3.71 pg/mL]) and UFC (37.4 µg/day [reference range 36.0–137.0 µg/day]) were normal. Histological evaluation of the excised adrenal gland revealed an adrenal cortex adenoma. Bone densitometry was compatible with osteoporosis in the lumbar column (Z-score −2.2, T-score −2.3) and severe osteopenia in the proximal femur (Z-score −2.4, T-score −2.5). She was started on alendronate 70 mg/day and cholecalciferol 600 IU daily to reduce fracture risk.
Ten months after adrenalectomy, she underwent an ACTH stimulation test. Serum cortisol was 0.2 µg/dL at baseline and 1.5 µg/dL after 60 minutes, revealing adrenal insufficiency, requiring postponement of hydrocortisone withdrawal (she is currently treated with hydrocortisone 7.5 mg in the morning + 5 mg at lunch + 2.5 mg at 4 pm). She lost 9 kg during this period, maintained normal blood pressure, fasting glucose levels < 80 mg/dL, and remission of CS. A timeline for this case report is provided in Fig. .