A 68-year-old Chinese woman with rectal adenocarcinoma suddenly experienced dyspnea and tachycardia.
In March 2015, the patient received a diagnosis rectal adenocarcinoma. She had been troubled by constipation for approximately 2 years, claiming intermittent hematochezia for 1 wk. The cancer was discovered during outpatient colonoscopy and was subsequently removed via abdominoperineal resection (Miles proctectomy). Postoperative pathologic examination showed a stage IIIB, moderately differentiated, KRAS-mutated (exon 2) adenocarcinoma with nodal involvement (2/12) . In April 2015, the patient began adjuvant concurrent chemoradiotherapy, receiving capecitabine and a total radiotherapy dose of 50GY. She continued adjuvant chemotherapy between June and October 2015, completing six cycles of oxaliplatin and capecitabine (CAPEOX).
By October 2018, frequent bouts of cough and chest tightness prompted her return to the hospital. Chest computed tomography (CT) of October 13 showed a mediastinal mass (6.7 cm × 5.0 cm) invading parietal pericardium and left hilum, left obstructive atelectasis, and a metastatic nodule of right lung . A bronchial biopsy was consistent with metastatic rectal cancer, proving positive for CDX2 protein and villin but negative for Napsin A and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) in immunostained preparations . The patient’s serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 11.44 ng/mL , and her condition was fair [Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 1]. Based on CT and histologic findings, the diagnosis was stage IV rectal cancer, with mediastinal and lung metastases. A first-line regimen of irinotecan plus 5-fluorouracil/Leucovorin (FOLFIRI) was therefore begun. At the end of the first cycle, the patient experienced grade 3 nausea and vomiting, which abated through parenteral nutrition. On November 7, 2018, a repeat CT scan showed progression of both mediastinal (8.2 cm × 4.4 cm) and right lung lesions, with some accumulation of pericardial fluid . This qualified as progressive disease (PD) by Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST), despite a drop in serum CEA level (9.08 ng/mL) .
During November 2018, the patient began a second-line FOLFOX regimen, barely completing two cycles before the abrupt onset of dyspnea and tachycardia on December 20, 2018.
The patient had hypertension.
The patient had no history of smoking, drinking, or familial cancers.
The patient’s temperature was 37.0 °C, heart rate was 130 bpm, respiratory rate was 24 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 95%. The clinical examination revealed jugular venous distention and muted heart sounds were evident.
Other parameters (myocardial enzymes, electrocardiogram) were normal.
Echocardiography disclosed a voluminous pericardial effusion, reduced left ventricular diastolic function, and an ejection fraction of 50% , signaling cardiac tamponade.
Ultrasound-guided pericardial puncture was performed at once, withdrawing 800 mL of bloody fluid. The patient’s discomfort readily dissipated, her ECOG performance status rebounding from 2 to 1. Fluid cytology confirmed tumor-derived cells, later found positive for CEA and CDX2 and negative for TTF-1 by immunostains, again compatible with metastatic rectal cancer .