A 59-year-old man was diagnosed in July 2014 with a rectal tumor and associated solitary lung metastasis, cT3N1bM1a. He was treated with Folfox-Bevacizumab during 2 months, followed by radiochemotherapy: 25 × 1,8 Gy in combination with oxaliplatin and 5FU. In December 2014, he underwent a total mesorectal excision (TME) together with a video-assisted thoracoscopic resection (VATS) of the lung lesion. The final pathological stage was ypT3N0M1 adenocarcinoma of the rectum and the patient underwent further treatment with Folfox-bevacizumab until the end of March.
In May 2015, at the time of planned restoration of bowel continuity, a relapse was noted in the liver and a resection of segment 4B was performed.
In November 2015, new liver lesions and a peripancreatic mass were found and for the first time a slight elevation of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) - 5 μg/L - was noted. Two months after initiation of Folfiri-Bevacizumab, progressive disease (PD) was found on CT scan (with growth of the peripancreatic mass and liver metastases and occurrence of an aortocaval lymph node). The CEA level had risen to 26 μg/L.
In the meantime, molecular analysis was performed and the tumor proved to be KRAS-NRAS wild type (WT), BRAF mutant with a specific mutation, c.1781A > G (p.(Asp594Gly)) in exon 15 (Next Generation Sequencing (Massively parallel targeted re-sequencing Somatic 1 Multiplicom MASTR assay). Immunohistochemical staining showed no loss of expression of mismatch repair proteins, suggesting microsatellite stability (Antibodies used: Clone ES05 (Novocastra) for MLH1, Clone 6219–1129 (Roche) for MSH2, Clone EP49 (DAKO) for MSH6 and Clone A16–4 (Roche) for PMS2).
Therapy with Folfox-Cetuximab was not successful: there was further progression after 2 months of treatment with occurrence of new liver metastases and a further growth of the peripancreatic lesion and aortocaval lymph nodule. CEA increased to 51 μg/L.
In March 2016, Regorafenib was started at a dose of 160 mg/day (21 days on, 7 days off) while at the same time treatment of the liver metastases with selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) with Yttrium-90 in combination with stereotactic beam radiation therapy (SBRT) for the para-aortic lymph nodes was planned. Because of a hand-foot skin reaction, treatment with topical corticosteroids and keratolytics was started and a dose modification was made to regorafenib 120 mg/d after 1 treatment cycle. In June 2016, when the treatment with Regorafenib was interrupted in order to proceed to radiotherapy, the CEA level had already dropped to 11 μg/L. SBRT of the para-aortic lymph nodes was administered at a dose of 3 × 8 Gy. CEA was 6 μg/L before selective treatment with Yttrium-90 in the right liver lobe. The patient suffered from bulbitis post radioembolization. In July 2016 a complete remission (CR) was seen in the liver – also in the left liver lobe, which had not been treated with Yttrium-90. CEA had dropped to 5 μg/L.
Regorafenib was stopped in September 2016 after 6 months of treatment.
Re-evaluation at the end of January 2017 showed new lymph nodes in the periampullary region and a rise in CEA level to 12 μg/L. Regorafenib was re-initiated at a dose of 120 mg/d, 3 weeks on, 1 week off. The hand-foot skin reaction was more severe, leading to a personalised treatment schedule - 10 days on/7 days off - in order to increase patient tolerability. Treatment with Regorafenib resulted in normalization of CEA (2 μg/L) and response on CT-scan and therapy was stopped in August 2017.
In February 2018, the patient consulted with complaints suggesting gastric outlet obstruction. Endoscopy revealed bulbitis. Chronic inflammation post radioembolization was suspected, but tumor cells were found in the biopsies. CEA had risen to 19 μg/L. A palliative Billroth II resection was performed and tumoral deposits were found both in the duodenum and the antrum.
Regorafenib was reintroduced in April 2018 at a dose of 120 mg/d using the same schedule as in 2017. Re-evaluation in July 2018 showed new adenopathies and a further increase in CEA to 43 μg/L. Shortly thereafter the patient developed jaundice because of biliary obstruction due to a lesion in the liver hilum. Biliary stenting was not possible, but the lesion responded very well to radiotherapy (5 × 4 Gy), resulting in an amelioration of the jaundice. The patient declined further interventions.
Overall, treatment with Regorafenib with therapeutic breaks resulted in clinical response, both biochemically and radiologically. Disease control was possible during more than 24 months in this patient with a rare BRAF mutation. A timeline highlighting the most important disease characteristics, the disease evolution and the therapeutic interventions can be found in Fig. .