A 56-year-old man had smoking history at 40 packs / year, no other history. A suspicious pulmonary nodule was detected in the left lower lobe. FEV1 and DLCO values were respectively 93 and 55%. A basal segmentectomy was planned for this increasingly central nodule according to multidisciplinary meeting.
VATS segmentectomy was started according to the World Health Organisation surgical safety checklist. Cardiac arrest (asystole) occurred immediately after placement of the first port (anterior axillary line, 7th intercostal space). After communication between the thoracic surgeon and anesthesiologist, it was decided to apply the Code Red procedure , to convert to thoracotomy to check for absence of cardiac bleeding (or pericardial wound) and to start cardiac resuscitation. A second thoracic surgeon and a second anaesthesiologist were immediately called in accordance with the crisis checklist. Internal cardiac massage was started after 4 min no-flow. Cardio pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) was performed according to the guidelines of the European Resuscitation Council guidelines . After few minutes, ventricular fibrillation (VF) occurred. The patient received adrenaline, amiodarone and internal electric shocks during CPR. After 25 min of CPR without cardiac recuperation (persistant VF), the surgical team (thoracic surgeon and anesthesiologist) conjointly decided to contact the cardiac surgeon for a veno-arterial extra corporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO). While the first thoracic surgeon continued the internal cardiac massage, we placed the patient in decubitus position and the second thoracic surgeon surgically prepared the right femoral vessels. The cardiac surgeon placed the peripheral VA ECMO cannula after 45 min low-flow. This allowed a return of spontaneous circulation. Operative times are available in Fig. .
In post-operative, coronarography showed coronary disease, without stenting. Then, redo for pericardial hemostasis was done by thoracotomy during the night. Therapeutic hypothermia (36 degrees Celsius) was done over a period of 24 h. The patient was weaned off the pump at Day 2 because of cardiac recovery, then extubated at Day 4 without central neurologic deficit. He was discharged from intensive care unit at Day 7. The left ventricular ejection fraction was 45%. The patient was discharged from hospital at Day 18. Another coronarography with interventricular artery stenting was done at 2 months.