A 35-year-old female patient with no significant medical history presented to our ophthalmic outpatient department with 1 week of bilateral blurred vision. She reported experiencing fever, headache, and cough 2 weeks before her visit, during which she tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). She had no history of ocular trauma or surgery before the occurrence of uveitis.
Ophthalmological examinations showed that her best corrected visual acuity was 20/125 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was 21 mmHg in the right eye and 22 mmHg in the left eye. Upon examination under a slit lamp, no keratic precipitates or flares were detected in the anterior segment, while vitreous opacities were grade 1+ inflammatory cells in both eyes. Funduscopic examination showed bullous serous retinal detachments (SRD) with subretinal fluid in the posterior retina of both eyes . Furthermore, optical coherence tomography (OCT), B-scan ultrasonography and fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) were also performed. OCT provided further insights into the SRDs, revealing the presence of cystoid spaces in the neurosensory layer of the retina, which was divided into several compartments by subretinal septa. OCT also demonstrated the presence of retinal pigment epithelium folds and bacillary layer detachment . FFA indicated multiple punctate fluorescein leakages and pooling of the dye in areas of SRDs, and optic disc hyperfluorescence . B-scan ultrasonography confirmed the presence of SRD and thickening of the posterior choroid in both eyes, while ruling out any evidence of posterior scleritis .
On admission, her body temperature was 36.6 degrees Celsius (°C), and her chest X-ray image showed no abnormal shadow. Furthermore, she was tested by PCR and was negative for SARS-CoV-2. She did not notice tinnitus or hair loss. A complete systemic workup was conducted. Brain magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated bilateral retinal detachment, while there was no evidence of optic nerve thickening or any intracranial or orbital space-occupying lesion . Complete blood tests were performed, reporting unremarkable outcomes. The patient's erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 20 mm/h, and the C-reactive protein level was 0.73 mg/L. Serological tests for toxoplasmosis, EBV, CMV, Rubella virus, Herpes simplex virus 1, and HIV were negative. In addition, extensive blood tests for underlying autoimmune etiologies were carried out, all within normal limits.
According to the clinical findings and laboratory data, she was diagnosed with incomplete VKH disease due to the presence of ocular signs and neurological findings. Early and aggressive systemic glucocorticosteroid therapy remains the primary treatment according to the standard treatment for VKH disease. The patient was treated with pulse intravenous methylprednisolone therapy (1000 mg/day) followed by a subsequent high-dose oral corticosteroid regimen upon confirmation of the VKH disease diagnosis. In the clinical course of treatment, we paid attention to the deterioration of visual acuity and SRD, and tapered the dose of prednisolone slowly. Two weeks after the first evaluation, the patient presented with an improvement in her visual acuity, measuring 20/60 in the right eye and 20/80 in the left eye. The control OCT findings revealed a significant resolution of subretinal fluid in both eyes .