The patient was a 4-year-old Chinese boy who couldn’t stand steadily by himself and had suspicious foot-drop gait. Physical examination revealed atrophy of lower extremities . His left foot showed a mild pescavus deformity and could not lift up by himself. There was no strength in his right hand. Testing of the deep-tendon reflexes showed reduced patellar tendon reflex and ankle reflex. There were no Babinski sign, Chaddock sign, Oppenheim sign and Gordon sign. Muscle strength was reduced with MRC scores of IV on lower extremities. The muscular tension was mildly reduced. NCVS showed damage of peripheral nerves.
The patient is the third child in his family. His two sisters who are four and two years older were completely healthy. No family history of similar problems was presented. The patient was one of the two twins when his mother was in pregnancy. Unfortunately his twin brother died in the uterus. Since his mother’s amniotic fluid broke early, he was born by caesarean with 5.73 pounds in weight. There was no asphyxia at birth. During his growing progress, he could walk at the age of 1 year and 7 to 8 months albeit not steadily with suspicious foot-drop gait. He was easy to fall when running with progressive aggravation. He had normal intelligence. NCVS showed normal motor nerve conduction velocity (MCV) of upper limbs but showed slower sensory nerve conduction velocity (SCV). In addition, neither compound motor action potential (CMAP) or sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) of lower limbs was elicited, indicating that the peripheral nerves of his lower limbs were damaged . When it comes to brain and spinal MRI, the brain MRI image indicates the possibility of periventricular leukomalacia (PVL) while the spinal MRI image shows no apparent abnormality . As for lumbar puncture, the cerebrospinal fluid examination results were normal. The leucocyte count was zero, the protein and sugar quantifications were in normal control range and the immunoglobulin quantifications were as well.
Since the clinical features of the patient was suspicious of CMT, we sequenced 133 candidate genes for hereditary motor sensory neuropathy (HMSN) and identified a novel heterozygous mutation c.730G > C (p.Val244Leu) in MFN2. This mutation was not present in either of his parents.