A 19-year-old female was presented with palmoplantar hyperkeratosis from the age of 4 years and complete loss of teeth by the age of 14 which was the characteristic criteria for PLS. She was the second child born to apparently healthy consanguineous parents (cousins). Her older brother also suffered from PLS but two younger siblings were normal. Previous medical history showed that her permanent and deciduous teeth were lost after erupting normally.
On physical examination, there was diffuse palmoplantar keratoderma . Intraoral examination revealed complete edentulous ridges with normal overlying mucosa. In the panoramic view, severe maxillary and mandibular bone resorption along with bilateral pneumatization of maxillary sinuses were seen. Her chin was small but the other systemic examinations, routine laboratory examinations, chest X-ray, and skull X-ray were normal. She was subsequently provided with artificial dentures and she was a candidate for mandibular bone graft from her skull and dental implants of lower jaw. Complete blood count and liver function tests were also normal.
The patient was informed of the indication, and risks and benefits of fiberoptic nasal intubation under sedation. Preoperatively, after careful intravenous catheter insertion, she was premedicated with intravenous midazolam 1 mg and glycopyrolate 0.2 mg. Topical nasal vasoconstriction was achieved with oxymetazolin nasal drop and xylocaine spray 10% in both nostrils. Nasal oxygenation through the nasopharyngeal airway with 100% oxygen was started 3 minutes before the nasal intubation. The patient received a loading dose of dexmedetomidine (Precedex) 1 µg/kg infused over 10 minutes, followed by maintenance dose of Precedex (0.4 µg/kg/h). Gently, she was intubated by fiberoptic. During the awake nasal intubation, the patient’s SpO2 remained between 97% and 100%. The heart rate varied from 82 to 96 beat/min. Fentanyl (1.5 µg/kg), propofol (2 mg/kg), and cisatracurium (0.15 mg/kg) were used for induction, and general anesthesia was maintained with Sevoflurane, 50% oxygen and 50% nitro oxide. Vital signs were stable during the surgery. Fentanyl (50 µg) and cisatracurium (2 mg) were repeated every 45 minutes.
At the end of the surgery, the patient was extubated when she was fully awake and shifted to post anesthesia care unit (PACU) and had a recovery without any complication. Informed consent was taken from the patient regarding the publication of information in the journal. The patient reviewed the case and gave written permission for the authors to publish the report.