A 64-year-old man with adenocarcinoma of the lung presented for flexible bronchoscopy and wedge resection of a 9×8 mm adenocarcinoma in the right upper lobe. The procedure was performed via a video-assisted thoracoscopic approach.
The patient had received the diagnosis of SIT as a child. Other pertinent past medical history included hypothyroidism, extensive smoking with a greater than 84 pack year history, moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and stable mid ascending aortic dilation measuring 45 mm. Serial radiographic evaluation of his aorta led to the incidental finding of a right upper lobe pulmonary nodule. The patient underwent computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy of the pulmonary lesion, which confirmed the diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. Additionally, the patient had a PET-CT scan, pulmonary function testing showing a FEV1 of 1.57 L and a DLCO of 49% predicted. Imaging, including chest and brain MRI, did not find any evidence of mediastinal or hilar adenopathy nor any evidence of metastatic disease. Review of the patient’s history, examination, imaging, and multidisciplinary evaluations led the surgical team to determine the best course for surgical excision to be thoracoscopic wedge resection of the patient’s lesion to allow the patient to maintain as much of his lung as possible while ensuring clear margins during resection. Intraoperative pathologic tissue examination revealed clear margins and complete resection of the lesion. The patient denied a history of chronic sinusitis, bronchiectasis, hearing loss, infertility, or other signs of primary ciliary dyskinesia or Kartagener syndrome. The latter is associated with SIT in up to 25% of cases.
The patient underwent CT-guided technetium Tc 99 nodule localization before operative intervention. On arrival in the operating room, the patient had standard American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) monitors applied. Because of the diagnosis of SIT, ECG leads were placed in a mirrored orientation on opposite sides of the patient’s chest to allow monitoring of typical electrical orientation of the heart. The LA (left arm), LL (left leg), and V (chest) leads were placed on the patient’s right chest, and the RA (right arm) and RL (right leg) leads were placed on his left chest. After an uneventful induction of general anesthesia, his airway was secured with direct laryngoscopy and placement of a single-lumen endotracheal tube (ETT).
Flexible fiberoptic video bronchoscopy anatomy was consistent with CT findings and the patient’s history of SIT. The patient’s anatomical left lung consisted of three lobes and the right lung of two lobes in a mirrored image of normal anatomy. The patient’s right lung (morphologic left) had a long mainstem bronchus divided into upper and lower segments and his left lung (morphologic right) had a proximal upper lobe bronchus and bronchus intermedius. Other than showing the mirrored orientation, the videobronchoscopic examination was unremarkable.
The patient’s airway and oropharynx were then suctioned and the single-lumen ETT removed. A left-sided double-lumen ETT (DLETT) was placed into his trachea under direct laryngoscopy and rotated 90° clockwise to advance the device into the patient’s right mainstem bronchus. Placement of a left-sided DLETT into the right mainstem bronchus for thoracic operation of this patient population has been described previously. Flexible fiberoptic videobronchoscopy confirmed proper positioning of the DLETT with the bronchial balloon positioned immediately distal to the tracheal carina . Bronchoscopy also confirmed patency of the patient’s right (functionally left) upper and lower lobes. The patient was then turned to a left lateral decubitus position, with all pressure points padded and an axillary roll placed. Repeat bronchoscopy confirmed the appropriate DLETT position. The right (functionally left) lung was then isolated, and ventilation to this lung was discontinued. Three 10 mm ports were used for the video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) with radionucleotide-guided wedge resection of the lesion. The patient underwent wedge resection of the right upper lobe with use of an Endo GIA stapler (Medtronic). Pathologic evaluation of the tissue confirmed an adenocarcinoma with clear margins. A chest tube was placed, and several intercostal nerve blocks with liposomal bupivacaine were administered through video thoracoscopic guidance. A postoperative chest radiograph confirmed bilateral postoperative lung reinflation.
The patient had an unremarkable intraoperative and postoperative course and was discharged without complications on postoperative day 1. Follow up with the patient at 22 months postoperative revealed no evidence of recurrence of his malignancy.