A 73-year-old female with a history of thoracic surgery had been diagnosed with malignant lymphoma. During treatment, an aneurysm of the abdominal aorta and right common iliac artery (CIA) was found on a computed tomography (CT) scan. Because CT performed in the previous month showed a normal aorta, the aneurysm was believed to be an inflammatory process. The patient was transferred to our hospital for treatment of the aneurysm. On admission, she presented with painful right leg edema that had begun 1 month earlier. Laboratory findings on admission were positive for hepatitis C virus antibody, pancytopenia, liver dysfunction, and heart failure. There was no laboratory data suggesting inflammation.
Contrast-enhanced CT showed an aneurysm at the level of the terminal aorta, IVC compression, and early venous filling into the iliac veins . CT angiography (CTA) revealed AAA and right CIA aneurysm . The IVC was compressed at the lower portion near the confluence of the bilateral common iliac veins (CIVs) by displacement of AAA. The bilateral internal iliac veins and bilateral ovarian veins were dilated, which was suggestive of ACF. The general condition of the patient was stable, and the aneurysm was suitable for stent grafting. Because of the narrow diameter of the abdominal aorta (14 mm) and external iliac artery, a bifurcated stent graft was not suitable for insertion. After informed consent was obtained from the patient, we decided to insert a straight stent graft between the abdominal aorta and left CIA after coil embolization of the right internal iliac arteries. Iliofemoral artery bypass from the left external iliac artery to the right femoral artery was followed after stent graft insertion.
The bilateral femoral arteries were exposed and looped under general anesthesia. A 4-Fr sheath (Radifocus Introducer II; Terumo, Tokyo Japan) was then inserted into the right cubital vein, and an intravenous route was established. Aortic angiography revealed a terminal aortic aneurysm extending to the right CIA. The adjusted IVC was obliterated because of external compression caused by the aneurysmal sac. Early venous filling of the internal iliac veins and ovarian veins was also visualized . These findings suggested that ACF was caused by the rupture of the right CIA aneurysm with IVC compression due to displacement of the aneurysmal sac and development of collateral circulation in the pelvic venous system.
From the right transfemoral artery, the right internal and external iliac arteries were embolized by using detachable micro coils to prevent endoleaks. A through-and-through technique was used from the right cubital vein through the right femoral vein. After making a small incision at the left iliac artery, forceps were used to clamp the distal portion. A 14-Fr sheath (Ultimum™ EV Hemostasis; St. Jude Medical, USA) was inserted into the abdominal aorta along a preloaded stiff guide wire (Amplatz Ultrastiff guidewire; Cook Medical, USA). A stent graft (Excluder Leg®, 16 mm–8 cm; W.L. Gore, AZ, USA) was inserted and deployed at the portion between the abdominal aorta just below the inferior mesenteric artery orifice and the distal portion of the left CIA. Then, a 27-mm Equalizer (Equalizer™ Occlusion Balloon Catheter, Boston Sientific,USA) was used to apply balloon touch-ups. In addition, percutaneous transluminal angioplasty balloon (XXL, 16 mm × 2 cm; Boston Scientific, USA) dilatation was applied at the proximal and distal portions of the stent graft. Aortic angiography showed no endoleaks after stent graft insertion .
Right femoral vein angiography confirmed the entry of contrast agent into the aortic aneurysm and narrowing of the IVC . Left femoral vein angiography showed obliteration of the left CIV . Bare metallic stents of 12 mm × 10 cm and 10 mm × 10 cm (Luminexx®; Bard PV, AZ, USA) were then inserted at the same site from the right and left femoral veins, respectively, using the kissing method. After insertion of the bare metallic stents, venography of the bilateral femoral veins showed good flow from the femoral vein to the IVC . Following longitudinal incision to the left external iliac artery, iliofemoral artery bypass using an 8-mm ePTFE graft with rings (W.L. Gore, AZ, USA) was completed.
After treatment, the aneurysm was completely excluded. Early venous filling also disappeared, and good venous returns were observed. Iliofemoral bypass showed normal flow into the bilateral femoral arteries . Clinically, the patient’s leg pain and edema disappeared. Cardiac symptoms and laboratory data, including liver dysfunction data, were reviewed. There was no evidence of recurrence at 3.5-month follow-up CT.