A 32-year-old male with a history of insomnia and benzodiazepine use disorder presented to the emergency department after being found at home unconscious with gurgling noises and cyanotic lips. He received naloxone 8 mg and a sternal rub, resulting in return of consciousness. In the emergency department the patient was tremulous and diaphoretic. His mental status was intact although he appeared sedated. Vital signs and pertinent laboratory values are described in . He received IV diazepam 5 mg and 4 L of lactated ringers resulting in quick normalization of the lactic acid and temperature. He was admitted to a medical-surgical unit.
Patient interview and collateral obtained from family revealed that he had been ingesting several substances he procured from the internet including etizolam and tianeptine. He reported taking liquid etizolam daily for the past 1.5 years. The concentration of the etizolam bottle was labeled as 10 mg/mL. On the day of the overdose he ingested 1.5 mL (15 mg etizolam), noting that usually he takes 2 to 3 mL (20-30 mg) daily. He also reported taking “low doses” (unknown dosage) of tianeptine daily for the past 2 years, but at times takes “megadoses” (50 mg) to achieve opioid effects. On the day of the overdose, he took 50 mg, but stated that it was his first time using a new bag which was marketed to be more potent. He also endorsed occasional social use of phenibut, a glutamic acid derivative with anxiolytic and addictive properties which is not approved for use in the United States but is easily obtainable online. He reportedly did not ingest phenibut on the day of overdose. The patient indicated that the overdose was unintentional although he had felt increasing depression in the weeks leading up to the incident. He was unaware of the addictive potential of these substances despite a history of prior withdrawal symptoms, and he had never experienced a seizure. He treated his symptoms in the past with diazepam and buprenorphine and requested treatment for his substance use disorders on this admission.
During the hospital admission, poison control services were contacted and they recommended IV fluid hydration and serial electrocardiograms for 24 hours to monitor the QTc interval. The patient maintained normal sinus rhythm throughout the hospital stay with no QTc prolongation noted. The day after admission, he began experiencing withdrawal signs and symptoms including dilated pupils, shivering, insomnia, diarrhea, myalgia, anxiety, and irritability. He additionally described tingling and numbness of bilateral lower extremities and auditory and visual hallucinations. These hallucinations included commands to hurt loved ones and seeing “demonic figures” and “weird shapes” in the dark. The internal medicine service initiated oral methadone 5 mg twice daily to treat opioid withdrawal and chlordiazepoxide 25 mg every 6 hours to treat his benzodiazepine withdrawal, the latter of which the patient stated was being tapered too aggressively.
Addiction medicine was consulted. Using a conservative dose equivalence of 1 mg etizolam to 5 mg diazepam as described by Altamura et al, we estimated that 20 to 30 mg of etizolam is equivalent to 100 to 150 mg of diazepam daily. We recommended oral diazepam 20 mg 4 times daily with additional diazepam 20 mg every 6 hours as needed for breakthrough symptoms. Gabapentin 300 mg 3 times daily was initiated. Recommended supportive medications included trazodone, clonidine, ibuprofen, loperamide, and ondansetron. Since the patient had already received methadone prior to the addiction medicine consult, we recommended a methadone taper followed by referral to outpatient services to initiate buprenorphine maintenance treatment so as not to complicate the hospital course with possible precipitated withdrawal. He received methadone 5 mg twice daily for 3 days, followed by 5 mg daily for 2 days.
The patient was discharged from the hospital on day 6 on a simplified regimen of diazepam 40 mg twice daily and gabapentin 300 mg 3 times daily. Outpatient follow-up was arranged with an addiction medicine specialist with a warm handoff plan to provide treatment for the benzodiazepine use disorder using a prolonged diazepam taper while concurrently treating the patient's tianeptine use using a medication for opioid use disorder (likely buprenorphine based on patient preference). Information regarding the patient's long-term disposition is limited as he was referred outside of our hospital network. At last known contact, the patient had successfully established care with the outpatient addiction medicine specialist to whom he had been referred.