A 22-year-old African female was booked for extracranial to intracranial arterial bypass surgery due to extensive cerebral vasculopathy diagnosed at the age of 16 years. She had recently presented with a dense right-sided weakness due to a hemorrhagic stroke in the left lentiform nucleus. However, urgent neurosurgical intervention was deferred for several weeks due to her significant medical background, which warranted preprocedural preparation.
Her background was complicated with severe sickle cell disease associated with several vaso-occlusive crises and frequent blood exchange to keep the hemoglobin (Hb)SS < 20%, and to treat iron overload, extensive acute on chronic upper limb deep vein thrombosis (DVT), poor intravenous access, needle phobia, and severe depression. The agreed perioperative plan was followed by the multidisciplinary team comprising anesthesia, hematology, and neurosurgery. She received a preoperative red blood cell transfusion in the referring hospital 4 days before the procedure. On admission to our neurosurgical center, her baseline Hb was 11.9 g/dl, her HbSS fraction was 10%, and her baseline neurological examination revealed a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 15/15, with a mild right hemiparesis. All her other baseline investigations, including electrocardiogram (ECG), echocardiogram (ECHO), and chest X-ray, were normal. She received intravenous fluids preoperatively to maintain adequate hydration, along with routine medications until the procedure. Her routine medications included deferasirox, folic acid, pregabalin, and vitamin D3. Her aspirin had been on hold since her hemorrhagic stroke.
We ensured the availability of antibody-free packed red blood cells (PRBCs) before induction of anesthesia. After applying the Association of Anaesthetists of Great Britain and Ireland (AAGBI) standard monitoring, an arterial line was inserted awake, following which anesthesia was induced with propofol, fentanyl, and rocuronium after preoxygenation. The trachea was intubated, and peripheral large-bore intravenous access was obtained. She had a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line in situ. We avoided central venous cannulation due to her history and increased risk of deep venous thrombosis. The patient underwent a left ECIC bypass from the superficial temporal artery to the middle cerebral artery, and anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane in oxygen and air. She received a target-controlled infusion of remifentanil. A phenylephrine infusion was used, targeting a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of 80 mmHg (10–20% above her baseline) during the procedure. Her ventilation, oxygenation, temperature, and blood pressure were maintained within normal limits throughout the procedure. She received heparin during the surgery, which did not require reversal with protamine at the end of the procedure. The procedure was performed successfully with minimal blood loss, and she did not require a transfusion. She was successfully extubated and transferred to the postanesthesia care unit. Her postoperative neurological examination was similar to her preoperative baseline. She was transferred to the intensive care unit for invasive blood pressure monitoring postoperatively and was discharged to the ward several days later. She received her routine medications soon after the procedure, and we ensured adequate postoperative analgesia and hydration.