A 73-year-old man presented with a sudden onset of left facial paralysis. Patient visited the emergency department 5 h after the onset. The patient was on medication for hypertension, which was diagnosed several years prior; and the patient was a heavy smoker. The patient had no apparent history of head or neck trauma. Neurological examination revealed profound left peripheral facial paralysis . Upon protrusion, the tongue deviated to the right, without fasciculation or atrophy. However, the tongue’s range of motion was normal at rest and did not protrude in any direction . It was suspected that there was a lesion in the upper motor neuron of the left hypoglossal nerve. An intraoral examination revealed no abnormalities in the uvula or palate. No complaints of swallowing difficulty or any motor or sensory impairments of the extremities. Although the patient’s blood pressure was high (169/89 mmHg), other vital signs were stable.
Acute left caudal pontine stroke was suspected, and a neuroimaging diagnostic workup was performed immediately. Initial brain computed tomography revealed no ischemia or hemorrhagic lesions. However, brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed a focal hyperintense lesion in the left pontine tegmentum on diffusion-weighted imaging . A low signal intensity on the apparent diffusion coefficient map demonstrated that the lesion was an acute ischemic infarction . Therefore, we determined that the lesion affected the upper motor neuron of the right hypoglossal nerve and the lower motor neuron of the left facial nerve.
Occlusions were observed in the fourth segment of the vertebral and basilar arteries, as identified by magnetic resonance angiography . Although the occlusions were initially attributed to large artery atherosclerosis, considering other etiologies, including cardioembolic causes, is important. Transthoracic echocardiography, 24-hour Holter monitoring, and transcranial Doppler ultrasonography-bubble test were performed, but no other embolic causes were identified. The lesion was relatively small in size compared to the area of occlusion and the patient experienced only mild symptoms; therefore, dual antiplatelet therapy rather than thrombectomy was recommended to prevent a secondary stroke. The patient received dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg/day and clopidogrel 75 mg/day) and high-intensity statin therapy (atorvastatin 40 mg/day). On the seventh day of hospitalization, the tongue deviation noticeably improved, and the patient was discharged without any worsening neurological symptoms.