In 2013, a 72-year-old Caucasian male patient with extensive history of sun exposure
presented with right eye pain and associated forehead dysesthesias. He was noted on
examination to have a palpable 3 mm dermal nodule within the right lateral eyebrow.
Biopsy revealed keratin-positive SCSCC with PNI. Staging computed tomography scans
revealed no evidence of metastasis. Mohs surgery performed in February 2014
confirmed a stage 1 lesion without extension to the epidermis and negative surgical
margins.
In August 2014, he developed double vision and right upper facial pain. He was found
to have a right cranial nerve (CN) VI palsy and partial CN III palsy. The etiology
of the right facial pain was not clear at the time. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
of brain and computed tomography imaging in September 2014 were negative; however,
his symptoms progressively worsened. Repeat MRI of brain in February of 2015
revealed a new 0.6 × 0.5 cm right Meckel’s cave lesion. Due to the location and the
size of his central nervous system (CNS) lesion, it was not deemed safe for biopsy
by the neurosurgical team. Given the anatomical distribution and symptoms reported
by the patient, it was assumed that the SCSCC previously resected from the right
eyebrow had tracked along the VI branch of CN V through the cavernous sinus to the
right Meckel’s cave resulting in additional cranial neuropathies of CN III and CN
VI. The workup for other malignancies was negative. The patient received external
beam radiation to the area of the original SCSCC and brain. The radiation resulted
in significant improvement in the right upper facial pain. In February 2016, he
developed left arm weakness and underwent another surveillance MRI of brain that
showed a new extensive T2/FLAIR hyperintensity centered in the right brainstem with
a 1.2 cm enhancing lesion in the right pons. He underwent gamma knife therapy that
was completed in March 2016 with no recurrence of disease through June 2016.
However, in September 2016, he developed recurrent left upper and new lower sided
weakness and gait instability. Physical and occupational therapy evaluations at the
time showed profound left-sided leg weakness and foot drop requiring bracing and a
cane for ambulation. A repeat MRI revealed changes assumed to be
radiation-associated necrosis, and he was treated with pulse dose steroids. In
January 2017, he was admitted for profound weakness, despite MRI showing stable
disease. In May 2017, he presented with vertigo and left eye abduction deficits and
worsening left-sided weakness. An MRI showed interval increase in the enhancement of
the V3 portion of the right trigeminal nerve extending into the foramen ovale and
destruction of the clivus on the right side with involvement of the right sixth CN
.
At this point, the patient was no longer a candidate for any further radiation
treatments given extensive prior treatment. He was considered for the SWOG S1609
DART trial (Dual Anti-CTLA-4 and Anti-PD-1 Blockade in Rare Tumors), but the risks
of acquiring a biopsy for study enrollment from the brainstem lesion were felt to be
too great. The tumor specimen originally resected from the right eyebrow in 2013 was
sent for further profiling and found to have retained expression of PMS-2, MLH-1,
MSH-6, and MSH-2 PDL1, therefore was unlikely to be microsatellite instability high.
However, the PDL1 score was found to be between 1% and 5%. In July 2017, the patient
was started on pembrolizumab 200 mg every 3 weeks after his steroid dosing was
steadily lowered to prednisone 10 mg. Given the convenience of every 21-day dosing,
pembrolizumab was chosen over nivolumab. Within 6 weeks of starting PD1-inhibitors,
the patient experienced dramatic neurological improvement in his arm weakness and
gait. He regained the ability to walk without any assistance and has continued to
experience progressive reduction in his residual deficits of right face numbness and
paresthesia. During treatment with pembrolizumab, he did experience a mild rash,
which was evaluated by dermatology and felt to be more consistent with his known
history of rosacea than an immunotherapy-related rash. Repeat MRI as of November
2018 has demonstrated continued response with near complete resolution in
enhancement along the pontomedullary junction in the region of CN VI, with stable
disease at the right clivus, and with no new areas of enhancement .