A 27-year-old young man sought consult at the outpatient clinic of our hospital complaining of sudden onset of dull abdominal pain over the right upper quadrant (RUQ) right of 3-days duration. He denied nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or any other gastrointestinal symptoms. Prior to his consult at our hospital, he initially sought consult at a local clinic on the second day of symptom onset and was prescribed with antispasmodics under the impression of acute gastroenteritis however there was persistence of the RUQ pain despite the intake of antispasmodics. Persistence as well as progression of the symptoms was noted which now began to radiate to back on the third day which prompted the patient to seek consult at our institution .
The patient had stable vital signs at our outpatient clinic. He denied any chronic illness or surgical history. He denied psychological disorder as well, and drank only in social occasions. The patient however volunteered the history of the accidental ingestion of a wooden chopstick nine months prior to which he sought consult a few days after that incident. The attending physician requested for an abdominal plain film which turned out to be unremarkable and offered the explanation to the patient that the chopstick may have been digested into fragments and will pass out unnoticed. After that consult, patient remained asymptomatic for nine months.
Upon examination, he presented with a mild abdominal tenderness over the RUQ with negative peritoneal sign. His chief complaint was the back pain with positive knocking pain was noted over the T12 to L2 level. Laboratory investigation revealed leukocytosis (white blood cell count: 12,100 cells/μl) and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) level (serum CRP: 164 mg/dl). Abdominal computed tomography (CT) was done, which revealed a chopstick-shaped foreign body about 11 cm in length penetrating the second portion of duodenum into retroperitoneal space. Focal fat stranding and tissue swelling were likewise noted but no free air or ascites .
Patient was admitted and started on a broad spectrum antibiotic Ertapenem and was scheduled for emergency exploratory laparotomy on the fourth day of symptom onset. Retroperitoneal space was approached by Cattell-Braasch maneuver which revealed a one piece of chopstick piercing the junction of second and third potion of duodenum at anti-mesenteric side. Minimal amount of abscess and tissue debris was noted along the tract of chopstick . Careful removal of the chopstick was done and closure of the 4 mm perforation with primary duodenorrhaphy after appropriate debridement. Two open drains were placed for monitoring of leakage before abdominal closure. Minimal blood loss (less than 20 ml) was recorded.
The patient recovered well after surgery. Sips of water were started on the 2nd post-operative day and soft diet on the 6th post-operative day. There were no note of febrile episode or recurrence of abdominal or back pain after surgery. Patient was discharged stable on the 8th post-operative day.