In November 2014, a 53-year-old woman with a history of depression was admitted to a regional hospital after resuscitation as a result of a suicide attempt by strangulation, where hypoxia led to the development of a malignant brain oedema. She was afebrile on admission and showed a normal chest radiograph along with microbially negative urine and tracheal secretion. On the sixth day of hospitalisation, she showed clinical signs of bacterial infection (CRP 93.4 mg/l, leukocyte count 17.3 × 109/l), with a chest X-ray showing suspected infiltrate in the basal part of the right lung. A standard microbiological examination was then carried out in conjunction with empiric antibiotic therapy (amoxicillin clavulanate 1.2 g á 8 h i.v.). Forty-eight hours later, Klebsiella pneumoniae and Escherichia coli, susceptible to all tested antibiotics except ampicilin - i.e. strains which did not meet generally accepted multidrug-resistance criteria, without ESBL production - were detected in the sputum along with microbially negative urine. Not having any pre-existing diseases, after 10 days in the ICU on mechanical ventilation, she was identified as a potential brain-dead organ donor and transported to the TC for further examination (echocardiography, coronarography), instrumental confirmation of brain death and possible organ procurement.
On admission to the TC, the patient was mechanically ventilated, achieving adequate ventilation and oxygenation status (tidal volume 500 ml, respiratory rate 12/min, FiO2 0.4, SpO2 99%); perfusion pressure was maintained with norepinephrine at a maximum dose of 0.05 mcg/kg/min. Laboratory results indicated an increase in inflammatory parameters except for procalcitonin (CRP 227 mg/l, leukocyte count 17.3 × 109/l, PCT 0.35 ng/ml), requiring blood cultures to be sent for microbiological examination before organ procurement, no other samples were taken. However, since she was afebrile and her chest radiograph was normal, there was no clinical evidence of infection. Because organ procurement was initiated just 4 h after admission and the results of the new microbiological examination were not available at that stage, no changes were applied to the primary antimicrobial therapy given to the donor. ICU care of the donor and multi-organ procurement were performed in the standard manner according to current guidelines, with the heart, liver, kidneys and pancreas all procured for islet isolation.
The organs were transplanted to 5 different recipients. All transplantation procedures were performed in the same TC and in a routine manner using standard techniques. Antibiotic prophylaxis (3 doses of cefuroxime 1.5 g i.v. á 8 h for kidney transplantation, piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g á 8 h i.v. for 3 days for liver transplantation, piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g i.v. single dose before Langerhans islet transplantation, ceftriaxone 1 g á 12 h for 2 days for heart transplantation) and immunosuppressive therapy were applied for all recipients according to routinely used organ-specific protocols and appropriately modified based on the level of immunological risk in each individual patient.
The first kidney recipient was a 60-year-old male on haemodialysis with end-stage kidney disease (ESKD) caused by diabetic nephropathy and a history of tricuspid valve replacement and atrial fibrillation. Since it was his second kidney transplantation, his immunological risk was considered high. The immunosuppression protocol consisted of thymoglobulin, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone, with induction by thymoglobulin and methylprednisolone. Cefuroxime 1.5 g á 8 h i.v. was used for antibiotic prophylaxis. On the first postoperative day, the patient suddenly developed haemodynamic instability with signs of both left heart failure and severe sepsis. Immunosuppression therapy was withdrawn and antibiotics were changed to meropenem 2 g á 8 h i.v. and amikacin 1.5 g á 24 h i.v.. Septic shock treatment – inotropes, vasopressors, fluid management and renal replacement therapy – was initiated immediately. On the second postoperative day, surgical intervention was performed due to visceral ischaemia. The patient died on the second day after kidney transplantation secondary to severe septic shock and multi-organ failure (MOF). On the third day after transplantation, microbiology (surgical samples cultures and blood cultures) confirmed the presence of ESBL producing Klebsiella pneumonia and ESBL producing Escherichia coli in the kidney graft.
The second kidney recipient was a 32-year-old male on peritoneal dialysis with ESKD due to glomerulonephritis and a history of recurrent peritonitis requiring antibiotic treatment. Because this was his third kidney transplantation and his immunological risk was extremely high, plasmapheresis was performed prior to surgery. Immunosuppression was induced by thymoglobulin (3 doses in total according to protocol) and intravenous immunoglobulin, and maintained by tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone. Cefuroxime 1.5 g á 8 h was initially used as prophylaxis, as in the first kidney recipient. On the first postoperative day, the patient showed signs of bleeding, and on the second postoperative day he suddenly developed both haemorrhagic and septic shock caused by a strangulated sigma loop via the peritoneal catheter. As with the first recipient, immunosuppression therapy was discontinued, meropenem 2 g á 8 h i.v. and metronidazole 500 mg á 8 h i.v. administered, and emergency surgery performed. Despite sepsis treatment, volume substitution including blood products, and renal replacement therapy, the patient died on the third day after transplantation secondary to MOF caused by hypovolemic and septic shock. Microbiological examination (surgical samples cultures, drain secretion cultures) showed the same results as those of the first kidney recipient.
The liver recipient was a 49-year-old male with hepatitis B virus-related cirrhosis with portal hypertension and a Model for End-Stage Liver Disease score of 19. He was admitted to hospital 10 days before transplantation because of a ruptured umbilical hernia resulting in peritonitis, which was treated by cefotaxime for 10 days. Immunosuppression consisted of methylprednisolone induction, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone. Antibiotic prophylaxis consisted of piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g á 8 h i.v. administered over 3 days. The patient exhibited no postoperative complications. On the second day after transplantation, ESBL-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae was found in the drain secretion. Antibiotics were therefore changed to meropenem 1 g á 8 h i.v. for 8 days. At the time of writing, the patient is still alive with good graft function.
Langerhans islets were transplanted to a 59-year-old female with type I diabetes mellitus complicated by daily episodes of hypoglycaemia and chronic kidney disease. Immunosuppression was induced by thymoglobulin and methylprednisolone and maintained by tacrolimus and rapamycin. The recipient was administered piperacillin-tazobactam 4.5 g i.v. single dose for prophylaxis. On the first day after transplantation, she developed severe haemorrhagic shock with extreme blood loss. This was followed by the development of sepsis due to pneumonia on the second day after transplantation, accompanied by acute kidney injury leading to MOF. The patient underwent several emergency surgeries. ICU treatment was based on immunosuppression withdrawal, antibiotic therapy (piperacilin-tazobactam 2.25 g á 6 h i.v. because of extracorporal renal replacement therapy and metronidazole 1 g á 8 h i.v., changed on the 4th day to meropenem 1 g á 6 h i.v. for 10 days and amikacin - dose adjusted according to serum level á 24 h i.v. for 10 days) and treatment of hypovolemic and septic shock, consisting of blood products, mechanical ventilation and haemodialysis. On the second day after transplantation, ESBL-producing Escherichia coli was detected in her sputum, and on the third day ESBL-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae was found in her blood cultures. After 81 days in-hospital, the patient was discharged despite the failure in function of the transplanted Langerhans islets. She subsequently underwent another, successful islet transplantation.
The heart allograft recipient was a 40-year-old male suffering from dilated cardiomyopathy and cardiorenal syndrome. Immunosuppression consisted of thymoglobulin and methylprednisolone as induction, with thymoglobulin, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and methylprednisolone for maintenance. Ceftriaxone 1 g á 12 h i.v. for 2 days was initially used for prophylaxis, but because of infectious complications to the other recipients, meropenem 1 g á 6 h was administered on the third post-transplant day, this treatment was maintained for 10 days. No complications or positive microbial findings were recorded for this patient. He is presently alive with good graft function .
In summary, 4 out of 5 recipients developed donor-derived infectious complications within 48 h post-transplant . While bacteria of good susceptibility were found during the primary microbiological examination of the donor on the sixth day in ICU, MDR strains (both ESBL Klebsiella pneumoniae and ESBL E. coli) were found in the transport medium in which the organs (kidney and Langerhans islets with duodenum) were stored during organ procurement, but not in the blood culture taken before procurement. In the samples of both kidney allograft recipients, the Langerhans islet recipient, and the liver recipient, the same MDR bacteria were detected on the third postoperative day. Pulsed field gel electrophoresis confirmed the identity of these bacterial strains. Using PCR the presence of extraintestinal virulence factors pap C, sfa/focCD (adhesins) and gimB (invasin) was detected in ESBL E. coli. The graft perfusion solution (Custodiol) was microbially negative. Secondary contamination during organ procurement/transplantation was ruled out .