A 49-year-old female, gravida 5, para 3, presented with dysuria and hematuria. Her past medical, surgical, gynecological, and family histories were all unremarkable. Her menstrual cycle was irregular. A bimanual pelvic examination identified a movable mass in the left adnexal region. Vaginal ultrasound confirmed the presence of a polycystic mass of 67 x 57 mm in diameter without a solid component, suggestive of ovarian tumor (Figure
). Ascites was absent, and there were no abnormal findings of the uterus and right adnexae. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a multilocular cystic mass with a fat component (Figure
). The serum tumor marker levels were within the normal ranges: CA125; 20.0U/mL (normal <35.0), CA19-9; 3.8 U/mL (normal <37.0), SCC; 1.1ng/mL (normal <1.5), except for carcinoembrionic antigen (CEA); 6.9ng/mL (normal <5.0). The diagnosis of left ovarian MCT was made based on these data, and laparoscopic surgery was planned.
An exploratory laparoscopy revealed an enlarged left ovary (80mm × 70mm). The surface of the tumor was smooth and well-circumscribed. There was no adherence to any other pelvic organs. A small amount of ascites was detected, and the cytology of ascites was negative for malignancy. A laparoscopic left salpingo-oophorectomy was performed, and the intraoperative diagnosis of frozen sections was suspicious of borderline malignancy. Therefore, we changed the procedure to a laparotomy and abdominal simple total hysterectomy, and a right salpingo-oophorectomy and partial omentectomy were carried out. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. The pathological findings revealed the tumor to be adenocarcinoma of the intestinal type arising from a MCT. The serum level of CEA was normalized 7 days after surgery. We explained to the patient that there was no evidence about the need for adjuvant therapy because the disease is extremely rare. She decided not to receive adjuvant therapy. The patient had no recurrence of the disease as of 5 years after the surgery.