The patient was a 46-year-old female who experienced a strain in the left shoulder, resulting in difficulty in raising, flexing and extending of the left upper limb for 2 weeks. Subsequently, the patient's left shoulder pain worsened during dancing, and then she was diagnosed as BPI at the local hospital. Cervical spine X-ray in the lateral view revealed osteophyte formation at the C4-C6 vertebra and stenosis of the C4/5 intervertebral space. The patient received the rehabilitation and massage, but the symptoms worsened, and spontaneous twitching in the left shoulder appeared. Further test revealed subacromial bursitis and a small cystic lesion in the proximal humerus of the left shoulder, as well as supraspinatus tendonitis on the ipsilateral side. As the condition gradually worsened, the patient was diagnosed with depression and anxiety symptoms, and accompanied by insomnia. As medications such as escitalopram, ibuprofen, and clonazepam were prescribed, the emotional disorder and insomnia of the patient were improved, while which didn't have significant effect on the pain and movement disorder . In June 2020, the patient was admitted and the multi-disciplinary treatment was arranged for her.
After the physical examination, we found that the bilateral neck muscles were tense, which were accompanied with pain and restricted neck movement. Besides, the patient also appeared positive for paravertebral tenderness in the cervical 3–7 spinous process, positive for tenderness in the upper corner of the left scapula, and positive for left brachial plexus traction test. However, the results of both intervertebral foraminal compression test and neck rotation test are negative. The muscle tension of the limbs, muscle strength of the right upper limb, and tendon reflexes in both upper limbs are normal. The examination on muscle strength test of the left upper limb is uncooperative. Besides, the bilateral Hoffmann sign are negative.
Musculoskeletal ultrasound of the brachial plexus showed an increased inner diameter at the left C5 to C7 nerve root outlet compared to the right side, with uneven internal echoes and enhanced nerve sheath echoes. The inner diameter at the C5 nerve root outlet was approximately 0.44 cm, at the C6 nerve root exit was approximately 0.46 cm, and at the C7 nerve root exit was ~0.43 cm .
In order to further confirm the diagnosis, the patient underwent other tests. All blood tests, including the routine blood test, blood biochemical, electrolyte and metabolic profiles, were normal. The result of CT on the brain suggested no evidence of intracranial hemorrhage or territory infarction. The MRI of left shoulder revealed that left-sided cystic degeneration of the upper end of the humerus and left supraspinatus tendon disease. The electromyography of left upper limb shows no abnormalities. Thus, the patient was clearly diagnosed with BPI.
This patient was treated with stainless steel acupuncture needles (size: 0.25 mm × 40 mm) inserted into a depth of approximately 1.5 cun. Acupuncture was performed at acupoints, namely Jiaji (EX-B2), Jianyu (LI15), Jianliao (SJ14), Binao (LI14), Hegu (LI4) and Waiguan (SJ5) . Connect one pair of positive and negative electrodes of the electrical stimulation device to Jianyu (LI15) and Jianliao (SJ14), and connect the other pair of positive and negative electrodes to Jiaji (EX-B2) upper and lower points bilaterally . Set the knob of the electrical stimulation device (HANS-200A) to zero, select mode of continuous wave with a frequency of 2 Hz . Then, turn on the power, adjust the intensity gradually until the patient can tolerate it, based on the occurrence of rhythmic muscle contractions locally. Each session lasts for 30 min. After treatment, turn off the power, remove the electrodes, and withdraw the needle. Treat once every 2 days, continuously for 3 months.
After 3 months of EA treatment, the ultrasound of brachial plexus showed that the inner diameter of the left C5 to C7 nerve root exits was relatively wider than the right side, with uneven internal echoes and enhanced nerve sheath echoes. The inner diameter at the C5 nerve root exit on the left side was approximately 0.38 cm, at the C6 nerve root outlet was approximately 0.39 cm, and at the C7 nerve root outlet was approximately 0.36 cm . Compared with pre-treatment, the inner diameter of the left C5 to C7 brachial plexus nerve root outlet was significantly reduced, the pain of the patient's left neck and shoulder was significantly relieved , and the movement disorder of limbs was improved (, ).
After 2 years of follow-up, it was found that the inner diameter of the left C5 to C7 nerve root outlet was relatively wider than the right side, with even internal echoes and normal nerve sheath echoes. The inner diameter at the C5 nerve root outlet on the left side was approximately 0.30 cm, at the C6 nerve root outlet was approximately 0.38 cm, and at the C7 nerve root outlet was approximately 0.33 cm . Compared with the musculoskeletal ultrasound on BPI patient 2 years ago, the inner diameter of the left C5 to C7 brachial plexus nerve root outlet narrowed, and the patient did not experience a recurrence of soreness and pain in the left neck and shoulder, and the movement of limbs and emotion disorder restored to normal (, ). The timeline of this case report is shown in .