An 11-year-old Japanese female patient with Williams syndrome was referred to our department for osteoporosis treatment. She has delayed development, characteristic face, and behavioral characteristics such as hypersensitivity to sounds in her infancy period. Collectively, she was diagnosed as Williams syndrome with a genetic deletion of 7q11. at 2 years old by a certified genetic expert at another institution. Her case was complicated by aortic stenosis that did not require surgery. She underwent correction surgery for scoliosis at 12 years old . Her BMD and laboratory data are presented in Tables and , respectively. Her reflexes in her extremities were mildly decreased, but her muscle strength was normal. She was able to walk steadily, and her gait was normal. The patient’s history revealed no previous fractures, and her family had no history of osteoporosis.
Osteoporotic treatment was initiated for the patient’s diminished lumbar and total hip BMD values at 12 years old. Subcutaneous injections of denosumab were given every 6 months since 2 months after surgery (12 years old), and the bone turnover markers and BMD values were examined before treatment and at 5, 9, 17, 23, and 29 months of treatment.
Serum tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b (TRACP-5b) greatly decreased after the first administration . Serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (BAP), type I procollagen N-terminal propeptide (PINP), whole parathyroid hormone (PTH), and 1-α, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D] decreased as well, while urinary type I collagen amino-terminal telopeptide (NTX) and 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 [25(OH)D] increased . During the observation period, no calcium abnormalities such as hypocalcemia were observed .
At 29 months of denosumab treatment, her BMD for lumbar and total hip increased by 51.6% and 37.6% at the end of our study, respectively . There were no fractures or falls during the treatment period. She was able to keep active without getting out of shape through all the follow-up visits.