A 49 year-old man since 2007 was diagnosed with CHC genotype 3a infection, probably received during blood transfusion on 1989 due to the bleeding from stomach ulcer. Patient was slightly overweight (body mass index-27), had not adequately controlled primary arterial hypertension and farsightedness, acquired in childhood. Liver biopsy, performed on 2007, revealed mild liver inflammation, moderate hepatosteatosis and second stage of fibrosis according to METAVIR classification. Since 29th of June 2007 he started CHC treatment with PEG-IFN alfa-2a (Pegasys, F.Hoffmann- LaRoche) (180 mkg once weekly) and ribavirin (1200 mg daily). After the 11th injection of PEG-IFN alfa-2a sudden bilateral visual loss of both eyes developed and changes in retina and optic nerve were observed. It was found out, that the first transitory visual loss patient noticed after the 10th injection of PEG-IFN alfa-2a. At that time hypertensive retinopathy was suspected, because the patient used his antihypertensive medications irregularly.
At the time of admitting to the hospital patient’s visual acuity was 0.1 (with correction) in the right eye and 0.01 (incorrigible) in the left eye. The intraocular pressure in both eyes was 14 mmHg. Extra ocular motility was full. The pupillary reactions were normal. Fundus examination of both eyes revealed: swollen optic nerve disc with varicose vessels and blurred margins, linear radial hemorrhages and cotton wool spots (right eye more than left) near the edge of the optic disc, narrow arteries and varicose veins . Fluorescein angiography confirmed the bilateral anterior ischemic optic neuropathy. Macular edema was clearly observed with optical coherence tomography (OCT). Retinal thickness at 3 and 9 o’clock position was respectively 329/322 µm.
Laboratory tests: serum transaminases, blood clotting parameters (partial thromboplastin time (PTT), international normalized ratio (INR)), basic blood test and urine test were normal: serum glucose 4.9 mmol/L, hematocrit 43%, hemoglobin 147 g/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 18mm/h, total bilirubin 8,5 mkmol/L, alkaline phosphatase 102 U/L, fibrinogen 4,87 g/L, D-dimmers 310 mkg/L.
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head were performed, but no pathological findings were found and multiple sclerosis was ruled out.
Antiviral treatment was permanently discontinued. Treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone at a dose of 1 g/day for 3 days followed by a 2 week course of oral prednisone at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day tapering over 3 days.
After the pulse therapy visual acuity increased from 0.1/0.01 to 0, 5/0, 2 and after one month (with optical correction) it was 0.8/0.7. 6 months later optic disc edema, hemorrhages and soft exudates were no longer visible. After 6 months OCT showed retinal thickness decreased to 245/224 μm at the same locations.
After 10 more months patients’ visual acuity was the same and no changes in retina were observed. OCT showed similar macular thickness, but the retinal nerve fiber layer was thinner on the temporal sides and the average thickness was 76.9/67.1 μm – below normal, which means sub atrophy of the optic nerve.
Patient was tested for HCV-RNA after the permanent discontinuation of antiviral CHC treatment, after 6 months follow-up and on May 2012 (5 years later) and, due to stabile negativity of HCV-RNA, sustained viral response was confirmed.
Ophthalmic examination after 5 years showed a visual acuity of 0.8 (with correction) for the right eye and 0.9 (with correction) for the left eye. Fundoscopy of both eyes was normal .