A 17 years old male presented with complaints of insidious onset of both leg weakness for about two and half months noticed when he had trouble holding onto his slippers with his feet. In a span of a month, his intensified weakness resulted in difficulty in walking without support. About a month after the onset of his weakness, he had an undocumented bout of fever which was associated with non-productive cough. This led to raised weakness followed by imbalanced walking, intermittent tremor-like movement in his legs and arms.
Since the onset of his symptoms, he had excessive sweating, severe lethargy, easy fatigue, and decreased touch and warm/cold sensation in lower limb. In the last two months, he had trouble coming up with the desired words and was easily distracted. He forgot the names of his family, friends and had difficulty in solving regular mathematics. He also complained of unsteady gait, slurred speech and vertigo. He also reported swinging movement of his trunk while standing and walking, even with support. However, he denied back pain; stool, urinary incontinence, urinary retention, constipation; dizziness, double vision, decreased vision, and decreased taste sensation, deviation of angle mouth, vomiting and headache. Prior to the onset of the symptoms, he did not have history of diarrhea, shortness of breath, sore throat, blurring of vision and photophobia. He had no significant family history, past history of tuberculosis, diabetes mellitus or other significant comorbidities. He denied history of trauma, illicit drug use, use of herbal remedies, unprotected sexual intercourse, or insect bite. His diet was non-vegetarian and consumed both red and white meat.
His vitals were stable and was well oriented to time, place an person with Glasgow coma scale scored 15 and mini mental state examination (MMSE) of 20/30 with problem in recall, attention and calculation. General physical examination was normal without associated pallor, glossitis, stomatitis and lymphadenopathy. Pupils were equal, round and reactive; and normal fundus without any feature of optic atrophy on fundoscopy. The cranial nerve examination was normal. In the motor examination, bulk, power and tone was normal in all limbs. Power in the ankle flexors and extensors was 2/5 bilaterally, 3/5 on knee flexors and extensors and 4+/5 on hip flexors and extensors, whereas power was normal in upper limb. Deep tendon reflex (DTR) in both ankle and knee was absent whereas it was decreased in both biceps tendon and supinators. He also had an intentional tremor and dysmetria with staggering gait but nystagmus and dysdiadochokinesia was absent. His finger nose test and heel shin test was normal. Bilateral Babinski sign was present along with decrease joint position, and absent vibration sense over both upper and lower limbs bilaterally. Temperature and fine touch sensation decreased in both lower limb but was intact in upper limb and upper boarder of loss of this sensation could not be delineated. The abdominal, cardiovascular and respiratory examination were normal. With these findings a differential diagnosis of Vitamin B12 deficiency, demyelinating disease like multiple sclerosis (MS), viral or autoimmine encephalomyelopathies was formed and investigations were sent.
On investigations, as seen in , complete blood count was normal. Normocytic normochromic red blood cells with mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 100 fl and hyper segmented neutrophils were seen in peripheral smear. He had an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) i.e. 28 mm/hr and normallipid profile and cerebro spinal fluid (CSF). With the normal levels of protein and inflammatory cells in the CSF, we were able to rule of encephalomyelopathies secondary to viral infections and autoimmune causes. His serum vitamin B12 level was 105 pg/ml (normal range: 178.0–883.0) and folic acid leveled 7.1ng/ml (normal range: >3.0) and vitamin E level was normal (7.41mg/dl). His stool examination was normal without any ova or trophozoites of parasites and stool occult blood test was negative.
The ultrasound examination of the abdomen and pelvis showed normal spleen with focal fatty sparing in the perihilar region in the liver. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain showed symmetrical T2 hyper intensity along the medial aspect of the bilateral cerebellar hemisphere presumed to be demyelination. The spine MRI showed normal report but along with mild sub-acute combined degeneration of spinal cord, the cerebral features was more pronounced.
A presumed diagnosis of ataxia secondary to cobalamin deficiency with involvement of the cerebellum, dorsal column and peripheral nerves was made following consultations with a neurologist. The peripheral nerve involvement were determined following the clinical features of the indexed case, while the nerve conduction study was not done for this case. Treatment was started with intramuscular (I.M.) methylcobalamine 1000 mcg on alternate days for 5 doses. With treatment vibration, position sense, touch and temperature sensations improved along with cognitive symptoms. He was discharged on 10th day with Inj. Methylcobalamine 1000 mcg I.M. weekly injection and he was advised to follow up at the outpatient clinic after 1 week with remaining investigation reports. At the time of discharge, he was able to stand and walk few steps without support and had improved ataxia. Although a clinically isolated syndrome of multiple sclerosis could be suspected even in the presence of a superimposed vitamin deficiency, but was less likely as symptoms in multiple sclerosis develop over hours to days gradually remit over weeks to months, although not completely unlike that seen in this patient. Furthermore, with treatment of Vitamin B12 deficiency the patient showed rapid and marked improvement as such this possibility was discarded and specific investigations for multiple sclerosis were not done.
Most of the aforementioned cognitive cerebellar and motor symptoms, gait, joint position, vibration sensation, DTR were steadily improved. He had normal plantar reflex, his intentional tremor subsided and was able to walk without support on subsequent follow up.
Anti-parietal cell antibody titer (1:40) was positive and diagnosed with ataxia secondary to vitamin B12 deficiency due to autoimmune gastritis without anemia. He was treated with intramuscular Vitamin B12 weekly till the symptoms subsidized completely, and later reduced to a monthly dose which will be continued every three months throughout his life. However, he refused to perform an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy investigation.
During the follow up after 3 months, his cognition had improved with 28/30 MMSE score and he had normal vitamin B12 level. In the subsequent follow up in 6 months, his MRI scan showed no altered signal intensity along the medial aspect of the bilateral cerebellar hemisphere. The reinvestigated laboratory parameters were within the normal range. This case study adopted CARE items following CARE checklist and guideline .