A 39-year-old Japanese female presented with high fever 1 week after her second childbirth by Cesarean section. She subsequently developed acute pericarditis with dyspnea, bilateral pleural effusion, pericardial effusion, ascites, systemic lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, and leukopenia. Acute pericarditis was improved spontaneously after admission to our cardiology department. However, her fever continued and leukopenia worsened. Complete blood counts showed pancytopenia with 800 leukocytes/μL (32 monocytes/μL), hemoglobin content of 9.9 g/dL, and 108,000 platelets/μL 50 days postpartum . Bone marrow aspirates and biopsy showed normal cellularity and non-caseating granuloma, without myelodysplastic features.
The patient was the second child born to unrelated parents. She was healthy until 31 years of age except for an ectopic pregnancy at 28 years and recurrent warts; during this time, she gradually developed lymphadenopathy on her neck. Moreover, her peripheral blood showed mild pancytopenia. She was histopathologically diagnosed, at 32 years, with sarcoidosis with involvement of the cervical lymph node and bone marrow , based on the presence of non-caseating granulomas with a background of normocellular bone marrow . Ziehl–Neelsen staining was negative for both the lymph node and bone marrow specimens (data not shown). Cytogenetic analysis of the bone marrow cells showed a normal 46 XX chromosomal pattern. The results of the bone marrow aspiration and peripheral blood counts obtained 6.3 years before the second childbirth of the patient are shown in Table . Although cytopenia was observed, there were neither symptoms nor signs of deterioration in the laboratory findings, and she was suspended from hospital visits. She presented again with regrowth of cervical lymphadenopathy during pregnancy at 36 years, her peripheral blood counts at the time are shown in Table as “3 years before her second childbirth” . After her first childbirth, the lymphadenopathy disappeared spontaneously. Moreover, her bone marrow sarcoidosis was believed to have caused leukopenia. She was followed up without treatment .
Monitoring the whole-body uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose using positron emission tomography-computed tomography revealed hepatosplenomegaly and increased diffuse uptake of fluorodeoxyglucose in the systemic lymph nodes, spleen, and bone marrow . We suspected sarcoidosis and malignant lymphoma owing to the high levels of angiotensin converting enzyme (84 U/L), lactate dehydrogenase (1436 IU/L), and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (10,100 U/mL), positron emission tomography-computed tomography scans, and previous pathological findings. Since she suffered from prolonged fever and severe general exhaustion, an axillary lymph node biopsy was performed to confirm the diagnosis, and steroid therapy (prednisone, 1 mg/kg) for sarcoidosis was initiated 86 days postpartum. Her clinical condition, fever, and general condition improved after 2 weeks of steroid therapy along with reduction in hepatosplenomegaly. Lymph node biopsy showed reactive histiocytic hyperplasia that did not enable a definitive diagnosis. Fever, splenomegaly, and leukopenia reappeared while tapering the steroid therapy. We performed bone marrow biopsy again to detect normal cellularity and non-caseating granulomas with positive Ziehl-Neelsen staining . Ziehl-Neelsen staining also detected a small population of mycobacteria in the pathological specimens from an axillary lymph node during retrospective analysis, and blood culture revealed the presence of M. avium. Disseminated NTM infection was diagnosed and combination therapy with clarithromycin, rifampicin, and ethambutol was administered 6 months postpartum. However, owing to liver dysfunction and acute kidney injury, the treatment regimen was modified to ethambutol, kanamycin, azithromycin, and levofloxacin. She developed fungemia (Candida glabrata) along with sudden impaired consciousness, and a magnetic resonance imaging of the head revealed multiple cerebral infarctions, suggesting septic emboli. Unfortunately, despite administering the patient with the specific therapeutics for these diseases, she manifested with progressing disseminated fungal and bacterial infection . Ultimately, the patient exhibited respiratory failure and died 9 months postpartum.
Anatomical pathology and fs revealed systemic invasion of the brain, heart, lung, liver, stomach, intestine, spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow by Aspergillus flavus, A. fumigatus, Candida glabrata, and M. avium. The cause for immunodeficiency was analyzed while the patient was being treated for disseminated NTM infection. Genetic testing showed the presence of a heterozygous missense mutation in GATA2 (c.1114G > A, p.A372T) confirming GATA2 deficiency. Furthermore, postmortem immunohistochemical analysis showed that DCs disappeared and the NK cell population decreased in the bone marrow after childbirth .