A 39-year-old male presented to the emergency room with a complaint of worsening headaches and visual decline. The patient emigrated from Mexico 13 months prior to presentation and reported no other significant medical history. He described diffuse headaches that had progressed over a 1-month period with new-onset bilateral visual impairment and nausea for the last week. His neurologic exam was nonfocal, however, the ophthalmologic evaluation revealed bilateral papilledema and diminished visual acuity. He was afebrile on presentation and without meningeal irritation signs. Initial laboratory findings indicated a normal white blood cell count of 7400/mm3 with 73% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 21% lymphocytes, and 1% eosinophils. A head computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated hydrocephalus with transependymal flow and a multilobulated hypodense mass in the basal cisterns. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed which demonstrated the presence of too numerous to count nonenhancing, T2-hyperintense cystic lesions in the lateral ventricles and subarachnoid spaces including the bilateral sylvian fissures and cerebellopontine angles, as well as the suprasellar, interpeduncular, and prepontine cisterns with the largest cyst measuring 21 mm in diameter and exerting mild mass effect upon the brainstem . Minor sylvian fissure enhancement was noted bilaterally, however, magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed no large vessel stenosis or occlusion. A screening MRI of the spine demonstrated a small subarachnoid cystic lesion at the level of the conus and multiple septations at the S1–S2 level. A lumbar puncture was performed, and an elevated opening pressure was documented. CSF analysis revealed a mild lymphocytic pleocytosis with 60 white blood cells/mm3 (96% lymphocytes, 4% eosinophils). The initial CSF protein level was 106 mg/dL with a glucose level of 54 mg/dL. CSF cysticercus antibody ELISA testing was positive, and a diagnosis of racemose NCC was made based on the immunoassay results, neuroimaging findings, and a history of recent emigration from Mexico.
After extensive discussion between the neurosurgical and infectious diseases teams, we elected to proceed with placement of a ventriculoperitoneal shunt to ameliorate his elevated intracranial pressure and communicating hydrocephalus. High-dose dexamethasone (4 mg QID) was initiated followed by administration of prolonged albendazole (10 mg/kg/day) treatment. The patient experienced immediate relief of his visual deficit following the CSF diversion treatment. He maintained a mild headache disorder that responded well to steroids, and he was able to be slowly weaned off of this medication over a 12 month period. MRI scan performed at that time revealed complete radiographic resolution of his subarachnoid, spinal, and intraventricular cystic lesions with very mild persistent meningeal enhancement . A serum cysticercus antigen ELISA test was nonreactive, and albendazole was discontinued.