A 28-year-old woman presented with complaints of pain and difficulty in weight bearing over her right lower limb for 2.5 months. visual analog scale score was 8/10. There was a mild swelling over her right leg during the period of 2.5 months. The patient had neither a history of any comorbidities (diabetes, hypertension) nor any significant surgical history. There was no significant history of trauma or tuberculosis contact. The patient did not have any complaints of fever, fatigue, malaise, or weight loss.
On clinical examination, there was localized tenderness present on the anterior aspect of the middle 1/3rd of the leg. There was no local rise in temperature. Both knee and ankle range of motion was within normal limits. The rest of clinical evaluation revealed no other significant findings.
On clinical examination, there was localized tenderness present on the anterior aspect of the middle 1/3rd of the leg. There was no local rise in temperature. Both knee and ankle range of motion was within normal limits. The rest of clinical evaluation revealed no other significant findings. Differential diagnosis includes benign bone tumor (simple bone cyst, fibrous dysplasia, and enchondroma), chronic osteomyelitis, and a brown tumor.
After a routine investigation and following biopsy and radiological findings, a definitive diagnosis of skeletal hydatidosis involving shaft of tibia right side was made, and the patient was subjected to surgery with excision of cyst along with extended curettage of bone creating a bone defect around the lesion and with anterolateral platting with coverage of bone defect by allogenic bone grafting. The patient was then kept on non-weight-bearing mobilization with an above knee slab for 6 weeks. For postoperative chemotherapy, tablet albendazole 400 mg once daily for 3 months was given to the patient from Post-operative day-1.
The patient was able to bear weight without pain after 6 weeks as shown in . The final histopathological slide of intraoperative specimen was positive for hydatid disease as shown in . The patient was followed up for a period of 6 months at 6 weeks interval. There were no any radiological signs of recurrence over the 6-month period. There was no any complaints of pain or difficulty in weight bearing. Postoperative visual analog scale at 6-month follow-up was 0/10. The knee and ankle ROM was within normal limits and there was no any localized tenderness. The scar mark of surgery has healed with primary intention. Radiologically, there was adequate sign of uptake of allograft. Serology for hydatid disease was also negative for the disease. Return to work and patient satisfaction were excellent.