A 52-year-old woman with a body mass index (BMI) of 40.7 kg/m2, without any underlying comorbidity or history of past surgeries, was referred for LSG. Two weeks prior to the operation, endoscopy was performed, which revealed the signs of minimal gastro esophageal reflux disease (GERD) in the esophagus and stomach, as well as Helicobacter pylori infection. The patient received appropriate treatments for these problems. She was a participant of the Tehran Obesity Treatment Study (TOTS) . LSG was performed in August 2019, followed by normal post-operation recovery and routine nutritional consult at discharge . In brief, the LSG procedure was performed by excision of 80 % of the stomach. Using several stapler firings, the gastric tube was formed over a 36-F bougie and reinforced with running sutures and an omental pouch. At one-month post-operation, she experienced nausea, vomiting, and early satiety. She also had attempts for self-induced vomiting. The percentage of excess weight loss (EWL%) was 24.0 %, and BMI reduced to 36.9 kg/m2. Antacid therapy (Pantoprazole) was initiated. At three-month post-operation (EWL% = 63.8 %, BMI = 30.7 kg/m2), due to the persistence of the patient’s complaints, endoscopy was performed, which showed mild antral gastritis and GERD (grade B). She was advised to continue antacid therapy and refer for follow-up visits. Due to the persistence of her symptoms, barium meal (upper GI series) was performed, which indicated incisura stricture . Therefore, she became a candidate for redo bariatric surgery. However, due to the Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) lockdown, she was unable to refer on time, and her follow-up nutritional assessments were not held as TOTS’s routine protocol . After one year of the operation, she returned with significant weight loss (EWL% = 95.5 %, BMI = 25.7 kg/m2) and the continuation of previous symptoms. So, she underwent endoscopy again, which showed medium-sized sliding hiatus hernia, large gastric phytobezoar in the body of the stomach, and suspicious rotation of antrum anatomy. Upon follow-up questioning, the patient reported routine consumption of raisins, seeds, and plums in her dietary habits. Following the consumption of oral Coca-Cola® drink for three days, another endoscopy was performed. The phytobezoar’s size was reduced, and after fragmentation, it was removed by snare . Afterwards, control endoscopy showed a normal stomach without any phytobezoar . However, her symptoms persisted, and following the previous diagnosis of incisura stricture, she underwent redo bariatric surgery (conversion of LSG to LRYGB) in November 2020 (EWL% = 98 %, BMI = 25.0 kg/m2). Incisura stricture and phytobezoar were observed during operation . After the surgery, the patient experienced severe bleeding from the drain site, which led to the transfusion of packed red cells. She was then stabilized, recovered, and discharged four days after the operation. She easily progressed toward consuming a regular diet. At one-month post-LRYGB, she had a good general condition and no symptoms.