A 37-year old nulliparous African female presented to the Emergency Department with recurrent right-sided chest pain, cough and progressive dyspnoea of 2 months duration, co-inciding with the onset of menstruation. She had previously been managed with Closed Thoracostomy Tube Drainage (CTTD). She was being managed by the Obstetrics & Gynaecology (O&G) unit for secondary infertility and severe dysmenorrhoea. She neither smokes nor takes alcohol and her family history was unremarkable. On examination she had decreased air entry in right hemithorax, stony dull percussion notes and absent breath sounds on the right lower and middle lung zones. Examination of other systems was unremarkable. Vital signs on presentation: respiratory rate (30 cycles/minute), temperature (36.7 °C), pulse rate (90 beats/minute), blood pressure (100/70 mmHg), Sp02 in room air (97%) and pain score of 8/10 as evaluated by the Visual Analog Scale of 1–10 [1 = no pain; 10 = agonizing pain]. Chest X-ray revealed massive right-sided pleural effusion with pneumothorax involving the middle and lower lung zones. Ultrasonography of the pleura revealed a 3.2 × 1.4 cm anechoic right-sided pleural collection anteriorly at the mid-clavicular line, just above the ipsilateral diaphragm. She had a diagnostic thoracocentesis which revealed aspirate of air and frankly hemorrhagic effluent, necessitating her admission by the Cardiothoracic Surgery Unit with a working diagnosis of right-sided TES with a suspicion of catamenial pneumothorax and catamenial hemothorax. On Admission, she had a right-sided CTTD , which drained an initial volume of 1.1 litres of hemorrhagic effluent, and a pleural biopsy. Pleural biopsy report revealed widespread inflammation in the pleura, a finding supported by her Full Blood Count (FBC) panel, which revealed Leukocytosis (13,400 cells/mm3) with Neutrophilia of 82%. She had a serum CA-125 level of 55.5 u/ml. Over the following weeks, she had 4 repeat CTTD procedures due to persistent drainage of frothy, hemorrhagic effluent and persistent alveolopleural fistulas (air leaks) as shown by her repeat X-ray films. She also had 2 chemical pleurodesis procedures which failed to close the air leak.
The patient was eventually scheduled for right-sided posterolateral thoracotomy with repair of alveolopleural fistula and mechanical pleurodesis. Alveolopleural fistulas were identified and closed using 2-0 Vicryl sutures . Mechanical pleurodesis was done by abrasion of the pleura using sterile gauze. Ribs were re-approximated using 2 Vicryl sutures, muscle with 1 Vicryl suture, subcutaneous tissue with 2-0 Vicryl suture and skin with 3-0 Monocryl suture. The immediate post-op status was stable with optimal pain control. She had a repeat Chest X-ray on the 6th day post-op which showed an improved status and she was subsequently discharged. She was co-managed by the O&G team with monthly Goserelin injections and tabs mefenamic acid and hematinics. The procedure was done under General Anesthesia by a Cardiothoracic Surgical Senior Resident with over 3 years of specialty training.