Our case involved a 32 year-old woman affected by CF diagnosed at 6 months old, with renal diseases and hypertension in her family medical history. She also suffered from reactive arthritis since 19 years old in steroid and hydroxychloroquine therapy and had been diagnosed with CF-related diabetes at the age of 21.
After a fever episode (treated with ciprofloxacin) in October 2015 the patient’s laboratory tests showed Haemoglobin 8.2 mg/dl, serum creatinine 2 mg/dl, creatinine clearance 62 ml/min, hypocomplementemia C3. Her urinalysis pointed out hematuria (10–20 RBC/field of view) with 60% of dysmorphic erythrocytes, without proteinuria. The first clinical suspicion was a post-infectious glomerulonephritis. After that, a close follow up was conducted until December 2015. The persistent laboratory results over 8 weeks required kidney biopsy to be performed to exclude other causes of nephritic syndrome.
Light microscopy pointed out 5 sclerotic glomeruli out of 23. Main pattern was diffuse endocapillary proliferation, segmental in only a few glomeruli, with neutrophil (and less frequently lympho-monocyte) infiltration. Mesangium was characterized by deposits as well as hypercellularity and increased mesangial matrix. Interstitium showed mild edema and inflammatory cells, as well as between Tubular Basement Membrane and the above cells. A few arteries presented a fibrous intimal thickening. Arteriolar hyalinosis manifested too .
Immunofluorescence assay proved strong C3 staining (3+) in granular deposits in mesangium and glomerular basement membrane (GBM). Staining was less evident in tubuli (2+). IgA staining was focal in mesangium and in only a few arteriolar walls (2+). The presence of IgG only into tubular cells was explained as the result of re-absorption .
The deposits were well characterized by electron microscopy. They were localized to a greater extent in mesangium, but the assay demonstrated their presence also in subendothelial and subepithelial spaces. Their confluent electrondense appearance, instead of the intensely osmiophilic ribbon-shaped deposits pathognomonic for DDD, allowed to conclude for a C3 glomerulonephritis .
Complement system dysregulation was tested and resulted in a strong terminal pathway activation proved by high levels of sC5b-9 complex, amounting to 1588 ng/ml (normal value < 400 ng/ml).
Both genetics and C3NeF were investigated to determine the etiology of this altered control of alternative pathway. Next generation sequencing (NGS) showed polymorphism in CFH (p.V62I in SCR1) and THBD (p.A473V) already known as pathogenic for C3GN, as well as a mutation in C3 (p.R102G) associated only with age-related macular degeneration (AMD) so far.4
Our patient is now treated with Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) added to her current Cystic Fybrosis and Reactive Arthritis therapies to preserve her kidney function.
After two years of disease her renal function is stable with serum creatinine 1.7 mg/dl, creatinine clearance 50 ml/min, 24 h proteinuria 270 mg, hypocomplementemia for C3 (14 mg/dl) and haemoglobin 9.4 mg/dl.