A 47-year-old woman presented to urgent care with acute worsening of bitemporal headache and dizziness over the course of 2 weeks. She was noted to have had subjective personality changes in the previous several months, but otherwise her neurological examination was non-focal. Referral to an outside emergency department revealed a large left mass arising from the sphenoid wing measuring 5.2 × 4.2 × 6.1 cm with significant vasogenic edema on the frontotemporal regions, 1 cm of midline shift, and enhancing nodular and cystic components on MR imaging (MRI), with displacement of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) M1 and M2 segments and invasion of the calvarium. Initial imaging is shown in . The imaging favored atypical meningioma however glioma and malignant skull-base tumor were on the differential diagnosis. Given the skull-base location and extent of tumor, the patient was referred to our institution for definitive resection. The patient consented to participate in this report, which was written according to surgical case report guidelines and did not require review by the health system Institutional Review Board.
The patient had a preoperative cerebral angiogram with particle embolization of feeding vessels from the left middle meningeal artery. She then underwent a left frontotemporal craniotomy with osteotomy of the greater wing of the sphenoid. A subtotal Simpson grade IV resection was performed, limited by tumor encapsulation of the third nerve and involvement of the striate vessels of the inferior frontal lobe. Postoperatively, the patient had a new left upper eyelid ptosis and facial numbness at the craniotomy site, but was otherwise without complications. She was discharged home on postoperative day (POD) 2 without incident.
Histopathological assessment revealed a spindle-cell neoplasm with whorling and collagen deposition. There was nuclear atypia and increased mitotic figures with some areas of necrosis, but no invasion of brain tissue. The KI-67 index was 10% and the lesion was epithelial membrane antigen positive and signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 negative. The final WHO integrated diagnosis was atypical meningioma, the WHO Grade 2.
The patient developed significant left-sided headaches in the area of her craniotomy for which she began taking butalbital/ acetaminophen. Six-week postoperative MRI revealed 2.3 × 2.7 cm of residual enhancing tumor along the left sphenoid wing as expected . It was recommended that the patient undergo radiation therapy. She was treated with intensity-modulated radiation therapy up to 57.6 Gy in 1.8 Gy fractions without new complications. Unfortunately, postradiation MRI [9 months total postoperative, Figure 1c] showed increased tumor size to 3 cm in maximal diameter and contrast enhancement along the sphenoid wing with possible bone infiltration. There was also new T2 signal abnormality in the white matter of the left frontal lobe. The patient was offered continued observation, repeat resection, or LITT for the lesion and ultimately elected for LITT 10 months from her initial surgery.
The patient was placed in the supine position. A supraorbital approach along the long axis of tumor was chosen for biopsy and laser ablation. The target location of the fiber tip was planned for the base of the frontal lobe in front of the MCA. Biopsy to rule out radiation necrosis or development of higher-grade features again demonstrated atypical meningioma, the WHO Grade 2. Following biopsy, the patient was transitioned into the intraoperative MRI and the lesion was ablated from deep to superficial with multiple rounds of lasing in 360° under real-time MR thermography monitoring. Special caution was taken to create a trajectory sparing the cranial nerves and other eloquent structures, as shown in neuronavigation software . No complications or new deficits were noted, and the patient was discharged on post-operative day 1 (POD 1) with prophylactic levetiracetam and a dexamethasone taper. At her 2-week postoperative visit, she reported an increase in her left-sided frontal headaches and was restarted on dexamethasone with transition to her butalbital/acetaminophen regimen. The patient ultimately pursued disability due to persistent blurry vision and short-term memory deficits following her prior surgery. Follow-up MRIs have been stable, and the patient has remained progression free at 24 months post-LITT .