A 38-year-old man presented to the emergency department with a 2-day history of central sharp chest pain radiating to the shoulder. This was associated with breathlessness, fever, and chills. The patient had undergone an elective laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy for weight loss 5 days prior. He did not have abdominal pain, vomiting, or symptoms of bowel obstruction.
His medical history was significant for obesity, diet controlled type II diabetes mellitus, dyslipidaemia, obstructive sleep apnoea, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, gout, and childhood asthma. He also reported a history of an upper abdominal stabbing in a knife fight 20 years prior. Further details of this injury were not available. There was no significant family history of cardiovascular disease.
On initial examination, he was tachycardic with a heart rate of 118 beats per minute. The blood pressure was 103/62 mmHg. The temperature was 37.9°C. Oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. There was no jugular venous distension. Heart sounds were dual but soft, and there were no murmurs or pericardial rub. Auscultation of the lung fields revealed reduced air entry and bilateral basal crepitations. The abdomen was soft and non-tender. There were no signs of abdominal distension or bowel obstruction. There was no evidence of infection associated with his recent surgical wounds. No old scars were noted on the abdominal wall. There was no peripheral oedema.
The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST segment elevation in the inferolateral leads and PR segment depression, suggestive of pericarditis . The chest X-ray (CXR) showed a widened cardiothoracic ratio with bibasal atelectasis and a small right-sided pleural effusion. Previous chest imaging was not available for comparison.
Laboratory testing showed a leucocytosis with a white cell count (WCC) of 25.8 × 109/L. Inflammatory markers were elevated with a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 409 mg/L. Renal function was normal. No troponin was requested. Serial blood cultures were negative.
A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed. This showed a large amount of echogenic material in the pericardial space. There was also evidence of interventricular dependence and constrictive physiology .
A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram was performed at presentation. It excluded a pulmonary embolism however revealed a 9 mm defect along the central tendon of the diaphragm. A large amount of herniated omental fat was visualized in the pericardial space. There was evidence of fat stranding suggestive of inflammation and necrosis.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was also performed later in the hospital stay . This showed increased signal intensity of the pericardium on post Gadolinium delayed enhancement imaging and fat suppressed T2-weighted imaging. This was thought to be consistent with active inflammation. There was mild septal shift during inspiration suggestive of ventricular interdependence and constrictive physiology (see , ).
The patient was empirically treated with broad spectrum antibiotics (piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g QID) though infectious pericarditis was considered a less likely diagnosis. There was no infectious prodrome on history.
Abdominal laparoscopy was performed the day after presentation in consultation with the general surgical team. It was considered a reasonable initial approach rather than proceeding directly to laparotomy. Laparoscopy confirmed the presence of herniated omentum in the pericardial space, through a diaphragmatic defect (see and see , ). The pericardial omentum was retrieved and the pericardial and diaphragmatic defects were closed. Biomesh was used for closure of the diaphragmatic defect. Histology of the retrieved pericardial omental fat showed fat necrosis, haemorrhage, and fibrosis.
Almost 2 weeks after presentation a video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery was performed to retrieve residual necrotic omentum, which had become densely adherent to the right atrium. An echocardiogram performed the next day showed evidence of mild constrictive physiology. This suggests that both mechanical factors and inflammation were contributing to the constrictive picture. The patient was discharged home 3 days post procedure with minimal residual chest pain. His inflammatory markers had improved. He was prescribed a three month course of colchicine and ibuprofen, to prevent progression to chronic constrictive pericarditis.
At the three month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic and echocardiography showed improvement in the constrictive physiology (no tethering, septal bounce, or mitral inflow variation). Inflammatory markers including WCC and CRP also improved.
The bariatric surgeon was consulted about the initial laparoscopic gastric sleeve procedure. They noted the diaphragmatic defect during the procedure. It was anatomically distant from the operative field and was clearly unrelated to that particular surgical intervention. The surgeon noted a tongue of omentum extending through the diaphragmatic hernia. It was not apparent that this defect extended through to the pericardium. Detachment of the tongue of omentum at the diaphragmatic border disrupted omental blood supply rendering it ischaemic and necrotic. It is hypothesized this precipitated an inflammatory response in the pericardium.