A 42-year-old male patient farmer by occupation from the Northernmost part of Andaman and Nicobar Island was admitted to the orthopedic ward with complaints of left knee swelling, pain, and high-grade fever of 1-week duration. The swelling started first followed by high-grade fever and pain. The swelling rapidly developed and progressed. The pain was mild, dull aching, insidious in onset without any radiation, aggravated by movements and relieved by rest and analgesics, and gradually worsened with time disabling him for day-to-day activities. The fever was high grade continuous in nature, with chills and rigors, without any diurnal variation or any upper respiratory tract infection, and relieved with antipyretic. There was no history of trauma, loss of appetite, night sweats, or contact with tuberculosis (TB).
Clinically, there was a local rise of temperature at the left knee and redness. There were no sinus tracts. The knee was swollen with the fullness of the suprapatellar pouch. The range of motions was painful and limited. The knee joint was held in slight flexion (comfort position) .
Laboratory findings showed his hemoglobin was 11.2 gm/dL, ESR was 62 mm/h, C-reactive protein level was 96 mg/L. His serology was negative for HIV. The patient had uncontrolled diabetes with a fasting sugar of 192 mg/dL, postprandial sugar of 288 mg/dl, and HbA1c of 10.5%. He was a known case of Type 2 DM and was not compliant with treatment. Plain radiograph of the left knee showed localized soft tissue swelling with obliteration of soft tissue plane without any severe joint space narrowing or bony destruction . Ultrasonogram of the left knee showed a subcutaneous localized collection with septate loculations and intraarticular effusion . Computed tomogram, magnetic resonance image scans were not sought as the clinical and radiological evidence pointed toward localized collection.
An aseptic technique was used with a local anesthesia infiltration. Aspiration of the knee joint revealed 20 mL of frank pus. The affected joint’s synovial fluid was sent for regular microscopy, culture, and sensitivity testing. Routine microscopy and cytology with gram staining revealed gram-negative bipolar rod-shaped bacilli and leukocyte count of 28,800/mL (with 95% polymorphs and 5% lymphocytes) (, ).
An emergency arthrotomy was done, the joint was washed thoroughly and samples were sent for culture and sensitivity. Blood samples were taken for blood cultures then intravenous linezolid and amikacin were started which provided gram-positive and gram-negative coverage while waiting for culture reports. But there were no signs of recovery, with frequent spikes of fever, chills, and rigors for 3 days. The culture report came out after 3 days. It showed growth of B. pseudomallei which was sensitive to intravenous Carbapenems and ceftazidime. Treatment was started according to the culture and sensitivity reports with intravenous ceftazidime (2 gm) 8 hourly, and the signs and symptoms of the patient started improving. At the end of the 10th day, his knee range of motion increased dramatically and the patient’s condition improved symptomatically. Intravenous antibiotic treatment was continued for 3 weeks at the hospital as his home was far away from the hospital with poor medical access. The patient was discharged on oral cotrimoxazole and doxycycline for 5 weeks.