A 37-year-old man was diagnosed with HIV infection and cerebral toxoplasmosis. The patient presented headache, psychomotor retardation and left hemiparesis, associated to advanced immunodeficiency (20 CD4+ T cells/μL), high plasma HIV load (301,000 copies/mL) and positive serology for toxoplasmosis. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed scattered lesions in the brain parenchyma with perilesional edema, sulcal effacement suggesting mass effect, and some ring contrast enhancement . After initiation of specific anti-toxoplasma treatment, without corticosteroid therapy, a clinical and radiologic improvement was observed (Additional file : Figure S3). HAART was started 1 month after HIV diagnosis (drug combination on Table ) and toxoplasmosis treatment was maintained for further 1.5 months and then changed to suppressive therapy (long-term, low-dose therapy to prevent further recurrent episodes); primary prophylaxis for other opportunistic infections was maintained .
In a routine medical appointment 3 months after HAART initiation, the patient presented decreased sensation of the right lower limb that started about 1 month before. The hyposensitivity started abruptly, with progressive worsening, extending at that moment to the entire right lower limb and half of the abdomen. The patient showed neither fever, nor symptoms of the respiratory, digestive or urinary systems. He stated being compliant to all prescribed therapies (i.e., HAART, therapy for toxoplasmosis and primary prophylaxis for Mycobacterium avium complex disease). Neurological examination, mental status and cranial nerves exam were normal. No papilledema or neck stiffness was present. Besides a slight sequelar left hemiparesis, an upper right unilateral sensory level at D-9 was present with loss of touch sensation and of the ability to feel pain below this level across the entire right lower limb and right hemi-abdomen. Proprioception, muscular force and reflexes were present in the correspondent area. The patient was immediately admitted to the hospital. A brain CT scan was performed and showed the previous lesions (a couple revealing worsening with a slight ring contrast enhancement and perilesional edema, others revealing improvement) and some new lesions (Additional file : Figure S4). A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the dorsal spinal cord revealed myelitis: multiples areas of high signal intensity on the T2-weighted images, located between D3 and D9, and probably a posterolateral lesion at D7-D8 . At this moment (i.e., 3 months after HAART initiation), the effect of therapy on the CD4+ T cells and viral load was already evident; CD4+ T cell count was 128 cells/μL and the plasma viral load of 121 copies/mL. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) evaluation showed: 5 cells/μL; 58 mg/dL protein; 51 mg/dL glucose; negative results for Gram and acid-fast stains, microbiological cultures, cryptococcal antigen, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test and polymerase chain reactions (PCR) to identify other common agents (JC virus, BK virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, human herpesviruses 6, varicella-zoster virus, and enterovirus). A CSF PCR for T. gondii was not performed due to technical limitations. The CSF PCR for Epstein-Barr virus was positive, but a normal CSF lymphocyte phenotype assay and a whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed neither hyper-metabolic cerebral nor medullar lesions, which ruled out CNS lymphoma. Serological HTLV-I/II antibody assay was negative.
The clinical and laboratory information suggested a potential case of CNS-IRIS. The differential diagnosis between IRIS and a progression of toxoplasmosis infection is difficult, but if the last hypothesis was true, most probably a marked worsening of all the previous lesions would be present in the brain CT scan. Furthermore, the patient stated that he had correctly took his anti-toxoplasma medication.
Because there are no consensual recommendations for the treatment of toxoplasmosis-associated CNS-IRIS, anti-toxoplasma therapy with full doses was restarted by precaution, HAART and prophylaxis for opportunistic infections were maintained and the patient was kept under close surveillance. Corticosteroids were not administered.
One month after hospitalization, the clinical status of the patient was stable and the results of a new brain and medullar MRI were similar to the previous one. A stereotactic brain/medulla biopsy was planned, however it was readily postpone due to its inherent technical risks as soon as the patient revealed signals of clinical improvement. A MRI was repeated 4 months later showing a significant improvement of the brain lesions and a complete resolution of the medullar lesions. The patient presented fully sensory recovery about 9 months after HAART onset, only maintaining the sequelar left hemiparesis. At that time-point, CD4+ T cell count was 244 cells/μL and the HIV viral load was <20 copies/mL. The patient maintained in addition to HAART suppressive treatment for toxoplasmosis for 12 months.
A detailed analysis of T cell subsets evolution was performed in the present CNS-IRIS case. Taking into consideration that this investigation encompasses a single case of a rare condition, the analysis was complemented with a group of HIV-infected patients that did not develop IRIS and were followed in the same hospital, all with <100 CD4+ T cells/μL at baseline and a rapid decline of the HIV plasma viral load after HAART initiation, similar to what was observed in the reported case.Naïve and memory T cells: No differences were observed on the absolute numbers of memory CD4+ or CD8+ T cells (CD45RA−CD45RO+) between the CNS-IRIS case and controls at any time-point. The case had a significant lower percentage of memory CD4+ T cells at baseline, but this difference was inverted one month later . In both CNS-IRIS case and controls, there was an increase in the percentage of memory CD4+ T cells from baseline to 1 month, but this increase was higher in the CNS-IRIS case (1.4 fold-change) compared to the controls (1.1 mean fold-change). A higher percentage of memory CD4+ T cells in the CNS-IRIS patient was still present at symptoms onset and IRIS diagnosis (i.e. 2 and 3 months after HAART initiation). T cell activation: At baseline, there were no differences on the absolute number of CD4+ or CD8+ T cells expressing CD69 or HLA-DR between the CNS-IRIS case and the controls. However, there was a higher percentage of both CD69+ cells and HLA-DR+ cells among CD4+ T cells, but not among CD8+ T cells, in the CNS-IRIS case. The absolute number of HLA-DR+ CD4+ T cells in the CNS-IRIS case increased from baseline (when it was similar to the controls) up to 3 months on HAART (when IRIS was diagnosed). In contrast, the percentage of HLA-DR+ cells among CD4+ T cells decreased from baseline until 2 months on HAART (at IRIS symptoms onset). After 6 months on HAART, the absolute number of CD4+ T cells expressing CD69 or HLA-DR was higher in the CNS-IRIS compared to the controls. This difference was not observed in CD8+ T cells . Regulatory T cells: There was no statistically significant difference on Treg percentage among CD4+ T cells or absolute number between controls and the clinical case at baseline . However, while the mean Treg percentage continuously decreased after HAART initiation in the controls, the CNS-IRIS patient presented first a decrease, reaching a minimum at 1 month of HAART, and then an increase of this percentage, until 3 months of HAART (when IRIS was diagnosed, the patient was hospitalized and the therapy changed). After 6 months on HAART, Treg percentage was similar between the CNS-IRIS case and the controls. Regarding Treg subsets, there was a higher absolute number and percentage of naïve Treg and recent thymic emigrants Treg in the CNS-IRIS patient, compared to the controls, at baseline and 3 months after HAART initiation. The CNS-IRIS case presented a higher Treg proliferation rate between 1 and 2 months on HAART, compared to the controls. This difference inverted at 3 months on HAART, and was not present 3 months after .