A 44-year-old woman introduced herself to the emergency department in November 2020, complaining of epigastric pain, progressive dyspnea, nausea, premature satiety, and anorexia. She also stated that she had been suffering from deterioration of her general condition accompanied by weakness, fatigue, lethargy, dyspnea (NYHA class ΙΙ), and a 12 kg unwanted weight loss within 2 years. No cough, sputum, orthopnea, and prior cardiac diseases were claimed. Previous medical history included multiple muscle problems and neck pain which had been treated with a diagnosis of Fibromyalgia. No radiation, chest surgery, or trauma history and no history of diagnosed cancer in her family were mentioned. The patient was a non-smoker and had no history of asbestos exposure. Medication history included Gabapentin 100 mg twice daily and oral contraceptive pills.
Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 112/80, heart rate of 100 beats/min, respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min, and a temperature of 36.5 °C.
O2 saturation was 94%. The heart sounds were normal with a regular rhythm, and no murmur was found. In lung auscultation, no remarkable finding was detected. The patient did not have elevated JVP as well as abdominal ascites and edema in the lower extremities. In laboratory findings, the CBC revealed anemia (Hb: 8.0 g/dl) and thrombocytosis (PLT: 609 000 U/L). The patient's blood chemistry showed elevated inflammatory markers level. (ESR: 101 mg/dl, CRP: 24 mg/dl, WBC: 17.2 billion/l) along with an increased lactate dehydrogenase level (LDH: 1757 U/L).
Chest X-ray on admission revealed a cardiothoracic index of > 50%, widened mediastinum, and pleural effusion in the left hemithorax . First Electrocardiography showed T inversion in leads Ι and avL, but the troponin level was normal. Thereafter, the patient was referred to our hospital, which is the only referral center for cardiovascular diseases.
A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed and demonstrated normal left ventricular (LV) size with mild systolic dysfunction (LVEF: 45–50%), moderate LV diastolic dysfunction with annulus reversus (E’septal > E’lat), normal inferior vena cava (IVC) with reduced respiratory collapse, normal right ventricle (RV) size with moderate systolic dysfunction (RVSM 8 cm/s) and left atrium enlargement. Moderate mitral regurgitation, no mitral stenosis with significant MIF respiratory change, and at least moderate tricuspid regurgitation (TRG: 36 mmHg) were also reported. Additionally, Visible thickened pericardium with an obvious thickness (in size 24 mm in anterior RVOT) and mixed pericardial effusion (size 19 mm in posterior LV) and visible mass-like lesion in size approximately 42 mm in inferolateral RV were declared in the echocardiogram report .
All of the above findings were consistent with constrictive pericarditis. Thereafter, the Patient was referred to a tertiary hospital in order to further investigations. Computed tomography was performed and demonstrated cardiomegaly, mild pleural effusion on the left side, and a nodular infiltrative mass in anterior and middle mediastinum accompanied by pulmonary vessels enhancements and pericardial involvement. Multiple lymph nodes in mediastinum and multiple hypoechoic lesions in the liver were also reported. In addition, several multi-focal and multi-lobar ground-glass opacities with peripheral dominancy in both lungs were seen, which considering the Covid-19 pandemic, was suggestive of Covid-19 viral pneumonia. Pleural fluid cytology evaluation was negatively malignant. The patient underwent the Covid-19 RT-PCR test via oropharyngeal and nasopharyngeal sampling, and the result was positive. Then, according to the consultant infectious disease specialist, based on her clinical symptoms and examinations (no fever, no cough, no sputum, no myalgia, or severe weakness, normal respiratory rate and normal O2 saturation ≥ 94%), patient was isolated and underwent conservative therapy and supportive care for the COVID-19 infection during hospitalization. The patient successfully recovered from COVID-19 infection.
Radiological consultation for biopsy of the lesions (mediastinal mass or liver mass) was requested, and due to the thickness of the pericardium, pericardial biopsy was recommended.
The patient was decided to undergo pericardiectomy surgery. Patient with severe adhesive pericarditis and multiple effusive pericardial effusion underwent midline sternotomy with oscillator saw, and all adhesions released from heart epicardium in a delicate manner from inferior side RV up to ascending aorta as well as pulmonary trunk and was sent for pathology examination due to its very bizarre appearance and consistency. According to the surgery report, during the procedure, abnormal appearance of the pericardium and macroscopic infiltrations to heart muscle were visible. Left ventricular mass resection and thymus gland biopsy were also performed. Additional files – show the surgery procedure, releasing adhesions from epicardium, and mass resection.
Specimens were sent to histopathology evaluation in 2 containers labeled as thymus gland and pericardial mass. Thymus gland specimen in macroscopic examination consisted of multiple fragments of fibro-fatty tissue, TM: 5 × 5 × 4 cm with foci of firm consistency. On sections, foci of firm gray, creamy areas were seen on the surface; the largest measure was 1.5 cm in greatest diameter. No mass was identified grossly.
The pericardial mass consisted of multiple fragments of fibro-fatty tissue with foci of firm consistency TM: 7 × 7 × 3 cm. On sections, foci of creamy rubbery to firm area were seen measuring about 4 × 4 × 2 cm. In the microscopic examination, the section from pericardial lesion showed proliferation of mesothelial cells with a tubulopapillary architecture and few solid areas infiltrated between muscle handles and was in intimate contact with adipocyte. The tumor cells were characterized by enlarged vesicular to hyperchromatic nuclei, occasional prominent nucleoli, and moderate amount of amphophilic cytoplasm. No necrosis was identified .
Overall, histopathological examination of the pericardial lesion demonstrated malignant epithelioid mesothelioma, and the tumor size was reported 4 cm in greatest diameter. No vascular invasion was noted. Also, the thymus gland showed malignant mesothelioma on the surface, and no clear-cut evidence of invasion to the thymus gland by tumor was detected .
Thereafter, due to the massive extension of the tumor to the mediastinum and heart as well as the detection of hypoechoic lesions in the liver in CT-scan suggesting distant metastasis, chemotherapy with pemetrexed 500 mg/m2 in combination with carboplatin were administrated to the patient. To date, she has been through four cycles of chemotherapy with no complications, and she has been asymptomatic and in remission so far.