A 70-year-old woman, without any prior confirmed medical history, was admitted to the Emergency Department with fever (39.6 °C), altered neurological status (Glasgow Coma Scale 10) without meningeal involvement, and non-blanching haemorrhagic rash. Laboratory examinations showed increased inflammatory markers (white blood cell count -WBC -15.46 x 103/μL, C-reactive protein - CRP - 122 mg/L), lactic acidosis (pH 7.26, lactate 6.2 mmol/L), elevated serum creatinine (SCr 1.5 mg/dL), hyponatremia (Na+ 133 mmol/L), hyperkalemia (K+ 5.7 mmol/L), thrombocytopenia and altered coagulative parameters. Total body CT scan showed inflammatory pulmonary lesions and disseminated lymphadenomegaly. Suspecting invasive meningococcal disease, empirical broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy with ceftriaxone and ampicillin was introduced.
The patient rapidly deteriorated and developed a severe septic shock with MOF. Then, she was admitted to the ICU, with a Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score of 15, where she was immediately intubated, and mechanical ventilation was started. Due to haemodynamic instability (mean arterial pressure 45 mmHg), following the Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guidelines , fluid resuscitation with crystalloids at the dose of 30 ml/ kg was started, combined with vasopressor and inotropic support, rapidly titrated to high doses (norepinephrine 1 μg/kg/min, dobutamine 10 μg/kg/min and epinephrine 1 μg/kg/min). Moreover, the patient became anuric and sCr raised to 2.2 mg/ dL, accompanied by a prominent elevation of inflammatory markers (WBC 29.5 x 103/μL, CRP 146 mg/ L, procalcitonin - PCT - 559 ng/ml), as shown in . Endotoxin shock was confirmed by endotoxin activity assay (EAA) of 0.71. Neisseria meningitidis was detected by Real-Time - Polymerase Chain Reaction on blood samples and blood cultures subsequently confirmed the presence of Neisseria meningitidis serogroup C. Consequently, after infectious disease consultation, it was decided to continue antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone.
In addition, after a multidisciplinary evaluation, because of the presence of endotoxin septic shock and severe AKI, CVVHDF treatment was started, using a modified AN69ST membrane (oXiris®, Baxter, Meyzieu, France), combined with CytoSorb® (CytoSorbents Corporation, Monmouth Junction, NJ, USA), an unselective porous particle adsorbing cartridge, for two consecutive cycles, using each cartridge for 24 hours. These two devices were incorporated in series on a CRRT platform (Prismaflex®, Baxter, USA) with post-dilution reinfusion. CVVHDF parameters were initially set to reach a prescribed dose of 40 ml/kg/h, with a convective dose of 25 ml/kg/h, without ultra-filtration. CRRT was started using systemic heparin anticoagulation. Haemodynamic parameters began to improve after the first 24 hours of treatment, allowing a progressive reduction of the inotropic support and the beginning of ultrafiltration (UF), at an initial rate of -50 ml/h. Patient’s haemodynamic further improved after the second cycle of continuous haemoadsorption treatment, with the possibility of discontinuing dobutamine therapy, halving the epinephrine dose, and concurrently increasing the UF rate to -150 ml/h. Moreover, this treatment resulted in a significant decrease in serum endotoxin levels (EAA 0.45) and inflammatory markers . After 48 hours, CytoSorb® treatment was stopped, while CVVHDF was continued only with oXiris® membrane.
During the following days, the haemodynamic conditions further improved, allowing progressive weaning from vasoactive therapy. The patient was successfully extubated on day 15. From day 20, renal function started to improve, and diuresis increased (from anuria to 0.5 ml/kg/h), then CRRT was gradually discontinued and definitively stopped on day 31 (for a total of 9 CRRT sessions).
After a rehabilitation period, on day 67 the patient was discharged from the hospital.
At that time, the patient provided written consent to data collection and publication