A 15-year-old male student was hospitalized for dark abscess, pustules, severe pain in both legs, and fever for 11 days . The patient developed pustules on both legs after scratching while working in the field, and this was accompanied by chills and fever, with a maximum temperature of 40 °C. Then, the pustules spread to the abdomen, back and upper arms. The lower legs were markedly swollen, and the pustules at the ankles were broken and ulcerated, forming purple and black scabs. This patient was unable to walk and sit in a wheelchair due to pain.
There were pustules with gray-white pus and red infiltrating plaques on the back, and the subcutaneous nodules could be touched in front of both tibias, with scab, rupture and necrotic tissues of the lower limb. The liver and spleen did not touch. The patient’s consciousness, cranial nerve motor system, sensory system reflex, meningeal stimulation sign, and autonomic nerve function were examined. No positive signs were found, and organic lesions of the nervous system and septic shock were excluded.
After admission, the following results were recorded: hemoglobin, 113 g/L; white blood cell (WBC) count, 20.83 × 109/L; lymphocyte (LYM) count, 0.52 × 109/L; NEU, 19.75 × 109/L; platelet (PLT), 112 × 109/L; albumin (Alb), 30.00 g/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 30 mm/hour; C-reactive protein (CRP), 247.81 mg/L. The enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest revealed a slightly low-density shadow on the bilateral frontal and parietal subcutaneous, considering the possibility of abscess, and on the posterior mediastinal occupation, considering tumorous lesions, while lymphoma was not excluded . Furthermore, the autoantibodies, vasculitis binomial, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) detection, purified protein derivative (PPD) test, T-SPOT, hypertrophy reaction, and fungal D-glucan were negative. The surgical biopsy of the back and abdomen revealed inflammation with abscess formation . However, no bacterial or fungal growth was observed in the pustular secretion and blood culture. The NGS results for the tissue revealed the following detection sequence , indicating that the patient was infected with C. violaceum. Hence, the investigators immediately switched to the experimental treatment of 0.4 g of amikacin VD, 12 per hour, and 1 g of meropenem IV, six per hour, supplemented with nutritional support. The patient provided the blood culture and drug sensitivity results at the time of hospitalization in 2016, which revealed that the lower limb pus culture was C. violaceum infection. The patient was contacted for more details on the 2016 hospitalization data, but the patient lost this information due to the long period of time. The antimicrobial tests revealed that this was sensitive to amikacin, gentamicin, meropenem, norfloxacin, cefepime, imipenem, minocycline, compound neonamine and levofloxacin, was intermediate-resistant to cefoperazone/sulbactam and aztreonam, and resistant to ceftazidime and piperacillin/tazobactam. The antibiotics chosen by the investigators was consistent with the drug sensitivity results. After 4 weeks of treatment, the patient’s temperature dropped to the normal range. The chest enhanced CT re-examination revealed that the bilateral inflammatory nodules were absorbed, when compared pre-treatment. The re-examination for blood routine, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) and other indicators basically returned to normal. Furthermore, the whole body positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) examination revealed that there were multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the left axilla, bilateral hilum and mediastinum (subcarinal lymph nodes). Moreover, the metabolism significantly increased, and some lesions in the left axilla were accompanied by calcification. It was suggested that lymphoma should be excluded by the biopsy of hypermetabolic lesions. Multiple nodular hypermetabolic lesions were observed in multiple parts of the patient’s bones, and changes in bone density were considered to be correlated to infection. Multiple joints in the body have increased the metabolism, considering the multiple arthritis. In addition, hypermetabolism was observed in other parts of the body, and inflammatory lesions were considered . The patient’s skin rash improved , and the patient went to an oncology hospital for further treatment.