A 39-year-old Bedouin male, diagnosed with a beta-thalassemia major at infancy, was referred by his hematologist to the Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery Department at Galilee Medical Center for evaluation of his facial deformity in the upper jaw and to treat his severe periodontal disease. Despite his severe condition, the patient never visited any dental clinic. His parents were both asymptomatic carriers of one altered beta-globin gene, which affected our patient and his younger brother, who did not require any oral and maxillofacial intervention. He began receiving blood transfusions in early infancy, and his blood requirement increased gradually, reaching 400 mL/kg/year of packed red blood cell.
Remarkable muscle wasting as a result of severe malnutrition was noted on physical examination. The patient required the assistance of crutches to walk. He weight was 40 kg, height 170 cm, and body mass index 13. He was pale and jaundiced.
The patient presented maxillary hyperplasia with severe periodontitis, which interfered with eating, thereby affecting his social life. Complete blood count showed pancytopenia as a sign of hypersplenism, and ferritin levels were as high as 17,133 ng/mL during acute periods. Iron chelation treatment compliance was very poor. All coagulation factor levels were low, suggesting liver cirrhosis.
Maxillary overgrowth and severe dental deformity resulted in progressive disfigurement and difficulty in chewing, swallowing, and speaking. Physical examination revealed classical prominent malar bones, a saddle nose, and excessive premaxillary growth in all dimensions. Severe lip incompetence and excessive maxillary gingival display were apparent (severe gummy smile). Intraoral examination showed the extent of the vertical excess of premaxilla, and severe periodontal disease in both jaws, very poor oral hygiene, absence of teeth 21 and 11, and overeruption of teeth 22 and 12. Radiographic examination utilizing dental and 3D computed tomography (CT) showed severe periodontal disease with a floating appearance, and the jaws showed a widening of the medullary space and thinning of the mandible cortices maxilla (bowing appearance), with negligible trabecular bone. Also, the maxillary sinus was fully obliterated .
The treatment plan considered the maxillary deformity and the quality of bone in both jaws. No endosseous implant-supported fixed prosthesis was considered because of the lack of stable cortical bone, expansion of bone marrow in both jaws, and near absence of trabecular bone. For this reason, we planned to fabricate a custom-made subperiosteal dental implant with extension to both malar bones and to the external oblique line at the mandible. The surgical plan involved extraction of all the teeth in both jaws, and resection of the vertical excess concerning the maxillary occlusal plane and the root of the zygoma. The osteotomy level considered the relation between the upper jaw and the upper lip for the future exposure of upper teeth. Virtual computerized planning of the surgery and implant angles/direction was performed with ABGuidedService software (AB Dental Devices Ltd.) . The subperiosteal implants were printed from titanium Ti64 Gr5 powder by a direct metal laser sintering (DMLS) 3D printer (EOSINT M 280, EOS, Germany) utilizing the CT-scan model. A surgical wafer was fabricated for the osteotomy level. A preoperative workup included several laboratory tests, confirming average albumin level with preserved renal and hepatocellular function. Laboratory evaluation is critical in patients with a tendency for malnutrition to avoid potential complications such as delayed wound healing. Presurgical management included transfusion of two units of packed red blood cells, two units of fresh frozen plasma, 1 g tranexamic acid, and 2 g first-generation cephalosporin.
The surgery was performed under general anesthesia, utilizing nasal intubation and local anesthesia (2% lidocaine with 1:100,000 epinephrine) infiltrate in both jaws' vestibule. Gingival alveolar buccal and palatal incisions were made, and a subperiosteal flap was raised in both jaws. An additional oblique vertical releasing incision was made on both sides of the maxilla to explore the zygomatic buttress. A subperiosteal oblique releasing incision was made in both retromolar dissections at the mandible. The dissection revealed a partial lack of cortex at the maxilla and thin parts, which showed only loose honeycombed medullary bone.
Full-mouth tooth extraction was performed, and a 12-mm vertical excess was resected to ensure proper relation between future upper teeth rehabilitation and lip. Resection was made using an oscillating saw guided by a prefabricated surgical wafer in the upper and lower jaw, followed by osteotomy and alveoplasty at the extraction sites to fit the custom-made implants. After fitting the custom-made implants in both jaws, it was fixed using titanium alloy (Ti-6Al-7Nb) 2.4-mm screws (MatrixMANDIBLE, DePuy Synthes) in the zygomatic buttress, retromolar area, and chin/genio. The flaps in both jaws were then released to be sutured without tension, with vicryl 30.
The patient lost approximately 650 mL blood, mostly attributed to persistent oozing from the hyperplastic marrow. The patient received 1 U packed red blood cells intraoperatively. His immediate postoperative hemoglobin reading was 9.8 g/dL, and 3-month serial complete blood counts showed he maintained hemoglobin levels. Overall, the patient tolerated the procedure well and encountered no postoperative complications. The patient received IV antibiotics and steroids during hospitalization and was released from the hospital after 6 days. Postoperative panoramic and lateral cephalometric X-rays showed good fitting of the implant in both jaws .
Oral mucosa healing above the implant was good and free of infection and dehiscence of the gingiva. A dental impression was taken for the upper and lower fixed prosthesis at the 1-month follow-up, inserted to restore the patient occlusion 6 weeks after surgery. A final dental X-ray examination was performed after both jaws with the fixed prosthesis had been rehabilitated.
In the 3-year follow-up visits conducted after the operation, the patient reported a significant improvement in facial profile and no longer exhibited a gummy smile. The substantial improvement in lip closure (competent lips) and stable jaw occlusion led to significant functional improvements. The patient reported a significant improvement in his chewing capability, allowing him to eat and swallow solid foods and significantly improve his pronunciation and speaking . No significant soft tissue dehiscence was observed in the follow-up period.