The patient was a 31 y/o Gravida 3 Para 2 who presented to our center at 19-week gestation. She had two prior uncomplicated full term vaginal deliveries and received Rh immunoglobulin during and after each of her previous pregnancies. She has no significant past medical or surgical history.
During this pregnancy, her first trimester studies revealed an anti-D titer of 2048. The fetal status was noted to be RHD positive on amniocentesis.
On her initial evaluation at 19-week gestation at our center, the middle cerebral artery (MCA) Doppler revealed a peak systolic velocity (PSV) of 2.37 MoM. There was mild ascites and cardiomegaly.
After counseling the patient underwent the first in a series of combined intravascular/intraperitoneal intrauterine transfusions (see ). The ascites and cardiomegaly resolved after the second transfusion.
The fourth transfusion was complicated by an episode of transient bradycardia with spontaneous recovery after removal of the procedure needle from the umbilical vein. On a preoperative ultrasound prior to her sixth procedure, thrombosis of one of the umbilical arteries was noted (see ). A review of earlier ultrasounds indicated two patent umbilical arteries although visualization of the cord was not specifically undertaken postoperatively after the fourth procedure or before and after the fifth procedure. Based on the reassuring status of the fetus, a decision was made to continue serial intrauterine transfusions. Antenatal testing was initiated with weekly biophysical profiles and daily kick counts.
In addition to fetal anemia, this pregnancy was complicated by diet controlled gestational diabetes and mild polyhydramnios with an AFI of 29. The estimated fetal weight at 35 weeks ultrasound was 3193gms (87th %ile). She underwent a cesarean section at 37 weeks, delivering a 3480-gram male fetus in vertex presentation with APGARS of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. After delivery the umbilical cord was examined and a 3-vessel cord with an intraluminal hematoma in one umbilical artery was confirmed. The hematocrit was 37% after birth. The total bilirubin was 9.9mg/dL and the direct bilirubin was 2.6 mg/dL. As per our neonatal protocols weekly hematocrit levels were monitored which remained above 30%; hence no transfusions were needed during this period.