A 60-year-old female is described who presented with atrial premature beats and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. A transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was performed which showed a small, localized thickening of the interatrial septum that was considered as a structural variant . She subsequently underwent circumferential pulmonary vein radiofrequency ablation (RFCA). Three months after RFCA, the patient was readmitted following the sudden onset of chest tightness, dyspnea, transient palpitation, and recurrent pericardial effusion. Chest x-ray examination revealed moderate cardiomegaly and T-wave abnormalities in precordial leads were found in electrocardiogram. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) examination revealed a large immobile, non-pedunculated mass (47 mm × 17 mm × 11 mm) occupying almost half of the right atrium (RA) and extending along the lateral wall of the RA to the interatrial septum. The mass did not extend into the superior vena cava (SVC) and did not cause stenosis of the tricuspid valve annulus. Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) confirmed the presence of the mass and showed that it extended from the orifice of SVC to the tricuspid valve annulus and from the right auricle (RAA) to the RA . The mass exhibited central cavitation suggesting that blood flow was poor in this region. No malignant or atypical cells were found in the bloody pericardial effusion.
Based upon these findings, our attention focused on the identity of the mass: cardiac tumor or hematoma? If it was a tumor, was it benign or malignant? If it was malignant, had it already metastasized? A F18-fluorodeoxy glucose-positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET-CT) scan was advised to further characterization of the mass and assessment of metabolic activity. The scan revealed an area of abnormal tracer activity in a hard tissue mass occupying the RA and encroaching on the adjacent left atrial roof . With contour and heterogeneous contrast enhancement, the infiltrative mass was observed to arise from the RA. Moreover, another area of increased radiotracer activity was found in the RAA but there were no hypermetabolic lesions in adjacent organs. These images suggested the possibility of an angiosarcoma without metastasis. Subsequently, the patient underwent surgical excision of the tumor. Pathological analysis identified the tumor was a primary cardiac angiosarcoma. Microscopic findings showed that the tumor was composed of frequent slit-like vascular channels and hyperchromatic, elongated cells with obvious nuclear atypia . The results of immunohistochemical investigation revealed that tumor cells stained positive for CD31 , CD34, VI antigen, and vimentin which confirmed the endothelial origin of the tumor. Unfortunately, the patient refused treatment with adjuvant radiotherapy, chemotherapy or immunotherapy. Within 3 months post surgery, the tumor recurred in the same location. The patient survived for a total of 7 months from the first episode of tamponade.