A 57-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation of the accidental finding of a space-occupying lesion in the upper right abdomen made in the course of a sonographic evaluation of the underlying cause of upper abdominal pain. Although the patient did not report unintentional weight loss, she complained of the presence of night sweats unaccompanied by fever over the past 12 months, as well as of the occurrence of exertional dyspnea. There were no significant pre- existing disorders, and neurofibromatosis had not been diagnosed. The CT-scan showed an axial space-occupying lesion of approximately 9.1 x 6.6 cm right-sided paramedian retroperitoneal, with displacement of the inferior vena cava and stretching of the right renal vein (A/B). [18 F]FDG-PET/CT confirmed the presence of the described right lateral paraaortic lesion, situated at the level of the renal hilus with a malignoma-typical increase of metabolic activity in the marginal areas . No hematogenic or lymphogenic metastases were identified. Pheochromocytoma was excluded by negative catecholamines and metanephrines in the 24h-urine collector. The punch cylinders obtained on CT-guided puncture were in some instances characterized by hyalinized and cell-poor spindle cell proliferation, while siderite pigmentation was observed others. Immunohistochemically, the spindle cells were strongly positive for S-100 and showed nuclear positivity for SOX-10 at negativity for MDM2, Desmin, CD1a, Melan-A, and HMB-45, as well as for smooth muscle actin (SMA). The MIB-1 proliferation index ranged at < 1%. Molecular-biologic analysis did not yield evidence of MDM2 amplification. The overall histopathologic assessment of the described factors leads to the diagnosis of a benign schwannoma with marked regressive changes.
The observed displacement of both, the inferior vena cava and the right renal vein, as well as the malignoma-typical increase of metabolic activity in the [18 F]FDG- PET/CT led to the assumption – in spite of negative histology - that the presence of malignancy could not be excluded. Consecutively, we performed an open resection of the tumor with plastic reconstruction of the right renal vein, while the inferior vena cava could be completely preserved, as it was unaffected (A). Macroscopy revealed a solid, greyish, spherical tumor with a soft capsule and a heterogeneous center (B). The final histopathologic examination confirmed the presence of a partially myxoid schwannoma of 8.5 cm on the largest diameter, showing significant regressive changes and a partially cystic component, as well as evidence of metaplastic ossification (A/B). The tumor together with the intact capsule was resected curatively (R0-resection). The postoperative course was uncomplicated and the patient was discharged from hospital on postoperative day 8. No adjuvant therapy was indicated and regular aftercare only was recommended by the interdisciplinary tumor board.