An otherwise healthy 33-year-old man lost consciousness during physical exercise and was administered 500 mg acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) and 5000 IU unfractionated heparin intravenously (IV) on site. Computed tomography revealed a SAH and ventricular haemorrhage. After an external ventricular drain had been inserted, digital subtraction angiography (DSA) showed an aneurysm on the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) with a 5 mm fundus and 4 mm neck diameter. His clinical condition was rated at Hunt and Hess IV, with a Fisher grade 3 haemorrhage. After interdisciplinary discussion, it was decided to treat this aneurysm by endovascular means. The poor clinical condition of the patient and the previous IV administration of ASA were considered arguments against microsurgical clipping of said aneurysm. The relation of the wide-necked ruptured aneurysm to the MCA bifurcation appeared well delineated on the 3D reconstruction of the rotational angiography . Occlusion of the aneurysm sac without compromise of the inferior trunk of the MCA might have been possible with a WEB (MicroVention) or even with dual-catheter coil occlusion. The eventually possible 2D DSA in the working projection, however, did not unambiguously show the transition from the inferior trunk of the MCA to the aneurysm neck. We had to decide between a projection which showed the full depth of the aneurysm sac (without control of the bifurcation; ), or a projection which visualised the MCA bifurcation (with foreshortening of the aneurysm sac; ). The decision to use a pCONUS was made, with the expectation of predefining the level of final occlusion by the position of the implanted pCONUS and relying on the mechanical coil retention, preventing an inadvertent occlusion of the inferior M2 segment.
pCONUS_HPC has a CE mark, which allows the implantation under SAPT if justified by the clinical circumstances. Another 500 mg ASA IV was given. After Multiplate (Roche Diagnostics) and VerifyNow (Accriva) tests had confirmed efficient ASA-induced SAPT with no P2Y12 inhibition, a Prowler Select Plus micro-catheter (Codman Neurovascular) was inserted via an 8 F guide catheter into the aneurysm. A pCONUS1_HPC with a 4 mm shaft diameter, 20 mm shaft length and 5 mm distal petal diameter was implanted into the aneurysm sac, covering the entire aneurysm entrance. An Excelsior SL10 micro-catheter (Stryker) was used to obtain access to the aneurysm fundus. Through this catheter, sufficient coil occlusion of the aneurysm sac using three coils (Target XL 360 5/15, Helical nano3/8 and 3/6; Stryker) was achieved. No thrombus formation was encountered. During the following days, daily doses of 2× 500 mg ASA IV were required to maintain SAPT, monitored by response testing. Follow-up DSA after 13 days for vasospasm treatment confirmed the occlusion of the aneurysm fundus and the patency of the MCA . Follow-up computed tomography four weeks after the endovascular treatment did not show sequelae of cerebral ischemia. At the three-month follow-up, the clinical condition was mRS 1 (occasional headaches, impaired short-term memory). A DSA follow-up has been scheduled but has so far been refused by the patient. This case summary illustrates the use of a surface-modified stent for assisted coiling in acute SAH aneurysm treatment. The avoidance of DAPT was considered a significant benefit.