A 67-year-old man was diagnosed with stage-IV gastric cancer with multiple liver and lymph node metastases, but no apparent brain metastases, in April 2013. The patient had no previous medical history of arrhythmia, ischemic heart disease, diabetes mellitus, or stroke, and he was not taking any daily medications. An echocardiogram before chemotherapy demonstrated no cardiac thrombus, no atrial/ventricular septal defects, no patent foramen ovale, no valvular vegetations, and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 67%. Immunohistochemical analysis showed a HER2-positive score of 3+ for a primary tumor. Thus, the patient was treated with trastuzumab, and cisplatin on day 1, with subsequent continuous infusion of 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) for 5 days. Although the patient did not experience any adverse events at the start of chemotherapy, 4 days afterward, he noticed a sudden onset of left hemiplegia and agitation. Laboratory testing showed grade-1 anemia (hemoglobin, 12.5 g/dL), increased number of platelets (452,000/μL), healthy levels of fibrinogen (235 mg/dL; reference range 150–340 mg/dL) and the prothrombin time–international normalized ratio (PT-INR) of 1.05 (reference range 0.90–1.10), and a slight increase in fibrin degradation product (FDP) levels to 10.3 μg/mL; reference range 0–4.0 μg/mL). An electrocardiogram showed a healthy sinus rhythm with no ST–T changes. Noncontrast brain computed tomography (CT) revealed a “dot sign” in the right middle cerebral artery (MCA) seen as a dot in the sylvian fissure , which is known as an early CT marker of acute cerebral infarction. Brain magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance angiography revealed an MCA occlusion , consistent with a diagnosis of chemotherapy-induced grade-4 stroke. After consultation with a neurologist, emergency endovascular therapy with an aspiration catheter and balloon was performed. Removal of the clot did restore the blood flow; however, distal emboli still remained . The patient concomitantly received argatroban and aspirin. No further chemotherapy was administered because of the deterioration in the performance status of the patient. He underwent extensive neurorehabilitation, which brought a slight improvement in his neurological status. One month after initiation of chemotherapy, his carcinoembryonic antigen level decreased from 15.4 ng/mL to 7.6 ng/mL (reference range 0.0–5.0); however, he developed jaundice because of the tumor burden due to liver metastasis. His condition worsened and he died 2.0 months after chemotherapy initiation.