A 65-year-old woman was referred to our endocrinology center for evaluation of diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, and bilateral adrenal masses, which were detected for the first time prior to a scheduled operation for sigmoid-colon cancer. She previously underwent total hysterectomy for uterine fibroids at the age of 44. She was on anti-hypertensive medication from approximately 40 years of age, and had experienced aortic dissection at the age of 56. She showed normal stature and a body mass index of 24.7 kg/m2. She did not show any Cushingoid signs. Fasting morning serum cortisol and urinary free cortisol levels (measured by immune radio metric assay method, SRL, Tokyo) were normal . However, midnight levels of serum cortisol were high, and both overnight dexamethasone suppression tests, using 1 mg and 8 mg dexamethasone, did not suppress serum cortisol or dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) -sulfate levels. Plasma ACTH levels were low and did not respond to 100 μg of intravenous corticotropin-releasing hormone. Furthermore, a dexamethasone suppression test using Liddle’s method showed a paradoxical increase in the levels of urinary cortisol . The ratio of plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC) to plasma renin activity (PRA) was significantly high, although PAC was within the normal range. Based on the results of endocrinological examinations, the patient was diagnosed with idiopathic hyperaldosteronism . Adrenal venous sampling indicated bilateral aldosterone hypersecretion . Bilateral adrenal tumors, 25 × 13 mm and 18 × 15 mm, in the right and left gland respectively, had the appearance of adrenocortical adenoma on computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging . Accumulations of 131I-adosterol in adrenal tumors were observed on both sides, though predominantly on the left . Various extra-adrenal masses were detected in several imaging modalities, and patchy brown skin pigmentations were observed systemically .
Thus, the patient was diagnosed with SCS due to bilateral functioning autonomous cortisol secreting adrenal tumors . Although serum cortisol and urinary free cortisol levels decreased after left unilateral laparoscopic adrenalectomy, the paradoxical response persisted . Pathological examination revealed adrenocortical adenoma. The tumor consisted of round to polygonal-shaped cells with microvascular or eosinophilic cytoplasm, proliferating in an alveolar fashion, accompanied by hemorrhage, inflammatory infiltrate and lipochrome deposit, leading to the diagnosis of adrenal adenoma. Immunohistochemical analysis showed positive expression for cytochrome P450 (CYP) 17A1, HSD3B type-1, HSD3B type-2, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase, and CYP11B1, but not for CYP11B2 . Genetic examination of the adrenal tumor revealed the somatic GNAS mutation p.R201H, which is known to be responsible for McCune-Albright syndrome, although sporadic GNAS mutations have also been reported . No PRKAR1A mutation was detected in either the adrenal adenoma or the peripheral blood. The patient was treated with eplerenone, which had successfully ameliorated persistent hypertension and hypokalemia at her one year follow up visit.