A 42-year-old man (height 170 cm, weight 75 kg) who experienced severe precordialgia, which persisted for 1 h, was admitted to a local second-level hospital for emergency treatment. Although he had a history of hypertension for 5 years, he did not take antihypertensive drugs according to the advice of doctors. He had no trauma, surgery, or family history. There was no apparent cause of the sudden precordialgia. His blood pressure was 115/76 mmHg, and his heart rate was 105 bpm at admission. ECG showed ST-segment elevation (II/III/aVF) , and myocardial enzyme levels were CK-MB 18.35 ng/ml and troponin 0.42 ng/ml. No scheduled cardiac ultrasound examination was performed, and the patient was treated for acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction, received 300 mg of aspirin and 180 mg of ticagrelor, and was immediately sent to the interventional catheter room. Coronary angiography showed severe stenosis of the starting part of the right coronary artery trunk . Subsequently, PCI and coronary stent implantation were performed, as well as stenosis section recovery patency . However, precordialgia was not alleviated after PCI, and no improvement was observed after the tirofiban injection. Moreover, hemodynamics became unstable, oxygenation function decreased, blood pressure dropped to 80/50 mmHg, peripheral blood oxygen saturation was 85%, and the heart rate was130 bpm, leading to mechanical ventilation 22 h after PCI and vasoactive drugs to maintain blood pressure. At this point, clinical physicians began to consider the possibility of AD, and an aortic CTA examination confirmed the diagnosis of type A AD (–). The rupture of the aortic intima was located in the descending thoracic aorta, aortic dissection was reverse-tearing to the ascending aorta, a false lumen was extending to the upper edge of the right coronary artery opening, the hematoma inside the false lumen was very thick, and the true lumen of the ascending aorta became smaller due to compression by the false lumen. Local hospital staff urgently transferred the patient to a higher-level hospital, and emergency surgery was performed, including CPB (right axillary artery perfusion), ascending aorta replacement, and SUN's procedure (total arch replacement and stented elephant trunk implantation). It was difficult to detach the CPB during surgery because of right ventricular failure caused by preoperative myocardial ischemia. Therefore, VA-ECMO (left femoral artery and vein) was simultaneously implanted. The CPB time was 337 min, cardiac arrest time was 132 min, circulatory arrest time was 21 min, and intraoperative minimum temperature was 28°C. Owing to preoperative antiplatelet therapy, coagulation function had been severely affected, posing significant difficulties for surgical hemostasis. Platelets, cryoprecipitate, and fibrinogen were also infused. Fortunately, there was no severe progressive bleeding, and thoracic drainage on POD1 after the surgery was 500 ml. To prevent coronary stent thrombosis after PCI, platelet inhibitors on POD2 were re-administered. The patient regained consciousness on POD4 in the intensive care unit. Cardiac troponin and myocardial enzyme levels continued to decrease after surgery, circulation gradually stabilized, and the dosage of vasoactive drugs gradually decreased. ECMO was discontinued on POD5 when the hemodynamics returned to stability. Tracheotomy was performed on POD10 because of moderate pulmonary infection, and the postoperative mechanical ventilation time was 276 h. The tracheostomy was closed on POD20. Postoperative aortic CTA revealed that the artificial vessels were unobstructed . The thoracic stent was well dilated without internal leakage . The opening of the right coronary artery was unobstructed, the coronary stent implantation was visible , and smooth morphology of the thoracic aorta was observed (, ). The heart rate and blood pressure of the patient were stable, and heart function was normal through rehabilitation training after 6 months. Moreover, a cardiac ultrasound examination indicated normal cardiac structure and valve function, with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 55%.