The patient was a 51-year-old man with a displaced middle-third left clavicle fracture (Robinson classification type 2B2) . The patient, who had diabetes mellitus and hypertension as comorbidities, experienced a direct trauma after falling down the stairs. Despite the patient’s history of consistent aspirin use, his prothrombin time and international normalized ratio was 1.0 during a laboratory test, indicating no prolongation.
The patient did not receive any treatment immediately after the injury. However, at 1 day after the injury, the patient was prescribed with a shoulder sling and underwent conservative treatment at an outpatient local clinic due to left upper extremity. At 3 days after the injury, the patient was admitted to our institution with chief complaints of worsened hand numbness and immobility. The patient had a severe bruise around the site of the clavicle fracture at the time of admission. Skin tenting caused by displaced fracture fragments was not observed . A manual muscle strength test was performed using the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale , showed grades 2, 0, 3, 0, and 0 on elbow flexion, elbow extension, wrist flexion, wrist extension, and thumb and other finger extension, respectively; shoulder abduction was not examined since the patient had a clavicle fracture. The pulse could be palpated over the brachial artery at the elbow level and over the radial and ulnar arteries at the wrist level. Furthermore, the distal phalanx of the left hand showed an intact capillary refill.
No cervical spine injury-related abnormalities were observed. In magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed 3 days after the injury, brachial plexus discontinuity was not observed in the T1-weighted coronal and axial view, although the brachial plexus was compressed by the displaced midshaft fracture fragments . MRI was performed with the patient in the supine position using a Philips Ingenia 3.0-T scanner (Philips Medical Systems, Best, Amsterdam, Netherlands) with a dedicated anterior and head/neck 16-channel coil. A detailed MRI protocol was added as Table .
Electromyography (EMG) performed 3 weeks after the injury revealed brachial plexopathy at the whole trunk level.
Conservative treatment, including a shoulder sling, was performed for 4 weeks at our institution. At 4 weeks after the injury, active-assisted motion exercised were started when the shoulder sling was weaned. At 11 days after the injury, both the wrist extension and extension power of the thumb and other fingers improved from MRC grade 0 to 1. No significant improvements in motor power were observed at 27 days after the injury, although the patient reported of more arm strength during the subjective assessment. The follow-up EMG was scheduled at 3 months after the injury to assess the extent of recovery from the brachial plexus injury. However, the patient refused EMG, and since an examination at an outpatient clinic was difficult owing to the patient’s personal reasons, a follow-up telephone interview by audio reporting was conducted instead. At approximately 6 months after the injury, we assessed the patient’s recovery status through a telephone interview. The patient could perform shoulder abduction up to 90° without experiencing pain, and the muscle strength was improved to grade 4. Elbow flexion and extension were improved to MRC grade 5 (the patient reported being able to lift up to 20 kg with the affected arm) and wrist flexion and extension as well as flexion and extension of the thumb and other fingers improved to MRC grade 4. The numbness in the affected upper extremities subsided. The patient had an overall 70% improvement compared with his condition at the time of the injury, showing a satisfactory recovery.