A 34-year-old male patient presented in our clinic on May 19, 2017, with a complaint of decreased visual acuity (20/100) in his left eye for several days. Laser photocoagulation had been performed at another hospital for the RCHs in his left eye half a year ago. He lost vision in his right eye after the surgical treatment of RCHs associated with VHL at the age of 30. The patient received multiple operations for cerebellar hemangioblastomas and adrenal pheochromocytoma when he was 25 years old. His father died from the complications of cerebellar hemangioblastomas associated with VHL. Genetic testing revealed that he, his son and daughter all carried a heterozygosity missense variant c.499C > T (p. Arg167Trp) in the Hg19 gene, a VHL gene located in Chr3:10,191,506 .
The fundus photo, B-scan ultrasonography (US), fluorescein fundus angiography (FFA) and SS-OCT (single line scan mode) visualized eleven RCHs in the left eye . Fundus photo showed the huge RCHs along with diffuse exudation around their nourishing vessels (No.1, 2, 7 RCHs in Fig. ). FFA distinguished the middle and tiny ones in retina (No.3–6, 8-11RCHs in Fig. ). B-scan ultrasonography provided the size, shape and location of the largest RCH (No.2 RCHs in Fig. ). SS-OCT measured the size of the largest RCH and visualized its full-thickness structure (No.2 RCHs in Fig. ).
After twice consecutive monthly intravitreal ranibizumab (0.5 mg) injections and followed by prompt laser photocoagulation (within a-week day after every injection), obviously absorption of subretinal fluid (SRF) and visual acuity improvement (20/25) were observed . One year later, the patient complained vision loss again with exudative macular detachment and enlarged RCHs in nasal inferior retina due to unregular reexamination after combined therapy (approximately 3PD in diameter) . Four monthly ranibizumab intravitreal injections were performed, the reduced transient SRF and improved vision were noted , but the RCHs still enlarged rapidly (approximately 4PD in diameter) .
To control the enlarged RCHs and macular exudation, transscleral cryotherapy and intravitreal ranibizumab injection were performed under local anaesthesia in the left eye. One month after surgery, the largest RCH appeared to be pale and atrophied, accompanied by reduced exudation . Nine months after surgery, OCT images revealed that macular region remained a good structure and retinal exudation was reduced . Two years after surgery (November 6th, 2020), two newly developed RCHs temporal to macular were visualized by fundus examination using slit lamp due to the unregular reexamination. The multimodal imaging was recommended to this patient to find out all lesions in the retina in avoiding of serious complications. Fifteen RCHs were identified through detailed ophthalmological examination and multimodal imaging evaluation even if he had no complaint with vision loss . The larger one with the size of 1.35*0.84*0.62 mm located in temporal to macular (No.5 RCH in Fig. ) seemed to be exist in the first multimodal imaging evaluation, but it was so tiny that had been ignored during laser treatments. In addition, his irregular visit interrupted our observation and misled its diagnosis, so that No. 5 RCH grow rapidly during the two-year failure access. Then, three times continuous laser photocoagulations were performed around the RCHs and their nourishing vessels. Three months after laser therapy, the third multimodal image evaluation was conducted to observe the therapeutic effect and monitor active lesions . The newly developed RCH (No.5 RCH in Fig. and Fig. ) responded well to laser treatments and best corrected visual acuity reaching 20/25. Following-up every three months were recommended for him to continuous monitor and treatment. The patient appreciated for the regained vision and maintained it for 3 years. Nevertheless, the financial burden of treatment may hinder his regular following-up.