We have obtained a written informed consent from the patient and his family for the publication of this case report.
A 64-year-old man (height 175 cm, weight 85 kg) with a giant retroperitoneal tumor was scheduled for tumor resection and left nephrectomy. The tumor component was diagnosed as liposarcoma based on the pathological result of the computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy before the surgery. He presented with dyspnea 20 days before the scheduled surgery and consulted his attending urologist. Upon admission to the general ward, he experienced respiratory failure and underwent oxygen therapy with a reservoir mask (PaO2/FIO2 ratio: 72). His lower legs were markedly edematous. Further CT imaging demonstrated the giant retroperitoneal tumor occupying his abdominal and pelvic region , severe compression of the inferior vena cava, bilateral pleural effusion, and atelectasis . Transthoracic echography showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction (> 50%) and diastolic function, no regional wall motion abnormality, mild aortic regurgitation, and moderate mitral regurgitation. The patient’s N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro BNP) value was 1232 pg/mL. We thus diagnosed the cause of his respiratory failure as not only diaphragmatic compression due to the giant retroperitoneal tumor but also heart failure and excessive volume. He refused preoperative intubation and ventilator management.
After being admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU), the patient received noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NPPV) and hemodynamic therapy with reference to cardiac output and cardiac index provided by LiDCOrapid V3™ (Masimo Japan, Tokyo) monitor. In addition, we inserted central venous pressure catheter to his right internal jugular vein. On the patient’s 2nd day in the ICU, the NPPV changed to NHFT based on the patient’s desire. Due to the lack of efficacy of a single intravenous furosemide infusion, his diuresis was managed with continuous intravenous infusions of dobutamine, mannitol, and furosemide . The patient’s body weight had decreased from 85 to 78 kg until the operative day; the value of NT-pro BNP decreased to 637 pg/mL immediately before surgery. His ROX index (i.e., the ratio of oxygen saturation as measured by pulse oximetry/FIO2 to the respiratory rate ) remained over 7.0 after the provision of a NHFT and the decrease in the accumulated body fluid.
On the 5th day after the patient’s admission to the ICU, the retroperitoneal tumor was resected. The tumor specimen was liposarcoma, weighing 17.4 kg. The amount of intraoperative bleeding was 3300 g. From before to after the tumor resection, the cardiac output changed from 6.9 to 10.3 L/min, and the stroke volume variation (SVV) changed from 19.7 to 3.7%. On the day of the tumor resection, the patient was ventilated with 8 cmH2O of positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) in order to avoid re-expansion pulmonary edema, and he was extubated and managed with NHFT the day after the surgery. On the 2nd postoperative day, the patient was discharged to the general ward in stable respiratory condition with an oxygen nasal cannula. About 1 month after the surgery, transthoracic echocardiography showed that the degree of aortic and mitral regurgitation had become trivial.