A 66-year-old Asian man presented to Asahi General Hospital with symptoms of pruritus and anorexia. The patient had no significant medical history. He did not smoke tobacco but habitually consumed alcohol. Laboratory examinations showed elevated levels of serum total bilirubin (7.2 mg/dL), aspartate aminotransferase (353 IU/L), and alanine aminotransferase (625 IU/L) because of obstructive jaundice. The serum levels of carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 were 2.1 ng/mL and 2,880 U/mL, respectively, while those of squamous cell carcinoma antigen were not examined. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed a tumor measuring 1.6 cm in diameter located at the AmV and distal bile duct (a). Dilatation of the intrahepatic and common bile ducts was also visualized (b). Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography revealed a tumor in the AmV (c). Histopathological examination of the biopsy specimen revealed an adenocarcinoma. Therefore, the patient underwent subtotal stomach-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) with radical lymphadenectomy. No intraoperative complication occurred. The operative time was 498 min, and the estimated blood loss was 314 mL. The tumor was white in color, measured 25 × 22 × 22 mm, and infiltrated through the duodenal mucosa to the muscularis propria, pancreas, and common bile duct (a, b). Macroscopic vascular invasions of the tumor were found. Histopathological examination of the resected specimen revealed a combination of moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma and squamous carcinoma with pavement-like arrangements (a–d). Infrequent invasion of lymphatic vessels was also observed. Two of the 29 dissected lymph nodes showed metastases and only had the adenocarcinoma component. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with advanced ASC of the AmV, pT3bpN1pM0 pStage IIIA, according to the eighth classification of the Union for International Cancer Control Staging. The patient developed no postoperative complication and was discharged on postoperative day 25. We administered S-1 (TS-1; Taiho Pharmaceutical, Tokyo, Japan), containing tegafur (a prodrug of fluorouracil), gimeracil, and oteracil potassium at a 1:0.4:1 M ratio as adjuvant chemotherapy for 6 months according to the Japan Pancreas Society clinical practice guidelines for pancreatic cancer published in 2019. The patient did not exhibit any recurrence during the outpatient postoperative follow-up of 28 months.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and its accompanying images. The copies of the written consent forms are available for review on request.