A 28-year-old woman visited our clinic with a complaint of headache, which was aggravated by standing and relieved on lying down. She had been involved in a road traffic accident (RTA) approximately 1 year previously (she was a restrained driver at the time of a rear-end collision). MRI of the cervical spine (T2-weighted sagittal image) obtained shortly after the injury was considered within the normal range . She was alert and oriented, however, she could not maintain an upright posture due to a headache. SIH was suspected, and a brain MRI with gadolinium established the diagnosis through the identification of a diffuse duromeningeal enhancement on the axial T1-weighted image and the pituitary gland on the sagittal T1-weighted image. MRI of the cervical spine (T2-weighted sagittal image) revealed a decrease in the CSF space of the cervical spine compared with the previous MRI [Figure and ]. A mild increase in the thickness of the retro-odontoid soft tissue was noted [Figure and ]. There was no mechanical instability in the flexion-extension cervical spine X-rays. The accumulation of extradural CSF in the paraspinal tissue at C1-2 was also shown in the heavily T2-weighted MRI .
To identify the CSF leakage point in the spinal dura, CT myelography was performed. There was no spontaneous CSF outflow following spinal needle insertion, indicating negative CSF pressure. A CT myelogram, obtained 1 hour following the intrathecal injection of contrast material, revealed a massive CSF leakage at C1-2 [Figure and ]. Although the spinal dura at C1-2 was suspected as the leakage point of CSF based on these radiographic examinations, T-SLIP MRI was performed to obtain further information on the CSF flow dynamics at that level. For T-SLIP MRI performed under an electrocardiogram-triggered procedure, 3T Vantage Titan (Toshiba Medical Systems Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was used with the following settings: Repetition time, 19 R-R intervals; black blood time, 1800–3700 ms; interval, 100 ms; inversion pulse width, 1.4 cm. Twenty-eight consecutive images were collected and were edited using a software (Graphic Converter 9; Lemke Software GmbH, Peine, Germany) to produce a cinematic view to run in 5.6 s. With the cinematically reconstructed T-SLIP MRI , the CSF outflow into the C1-2 epidural space on the left side was observed [Figure –]. Based on the CT myelography and T-SLIP MRI findings, the patient was diagnosed with SIH due to high-flow CSF leakage at C1-2. Following failed conservative management comprising bed rest and intravenous fluid administration for 2 weeks, two therapeutic options were suggested to the patient: Surgery or an epidural blood patch administered via a catheter inserted from the lower spine. After the patient selected the former option, she was taken to an operating theatre. Following a straight neck incision over the C1-3 laminae and partial C1 laminectomy, CSF collection was observed in the paraspinal tissue, and incessant CSF flow was observed from a pouch around the left C2 nerve root, which was considered to be an extradural spinal arachnoid cyst . The epidural space was packed with pieces of muscle and fibrin glue. The postoperative course was uneventful, and her headache disappeared 3 days after surgery. A repeat CT myelogram was obtained 14 days after surgery, which revealed no CSF leakage [Figure and ], and she was discharged 20 days after admission. She has not sustained recurrence of SIH for more than 6 months. Permission for publication was granted by the patient.