An 11-year-old girl exhibited persistent abdominal pain, diarrhea and bloody stool for two months. A bacterial infection was suspected and she was treated with antibiotics, but her symptoms persisted and she was referred to our hospital. Up to two years old, her medical history indicated she had undergone repeated ophthalmological examinations and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for suspected neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) because of multiple café-au-lait macules (CALM) present since birth. A family history showed her maternal grandmother had breast cancer in her 50 s, but no other history of CALM and/or colorectal cancer was recorded . At admission, a physical examination revealed CALM on the dorsal area and the lower limbs . She had lost 3 kg in two months. Laboratory tests revealed mild anemia, and other blood tests were within normal limits. An ultrasonography demonstrated a mass protruding into the lumen of the descending colon. Colonoscopy (CS) revealed multiple polyps in the sigmoid and descending colon. The colonoscope could not pass the descending colon because the epithelial tumor occupied most of the colon lumen. Histology of the polyps revealed tubular adenoma (Group 3). Subsequent contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed a mass lesion in the ascending colon. A brain MRI showed faint T2-hyperintensities in the left cerebellar hemisphere, right pons, and right globus pallidus, indicating an unidentified bright object (UBO), potentially indicative of NF1 . No neoplastic lesions were observed.
Based on these endoscopic findings, it was highly likely the tumor in the descending colon was colorectal cancer. Approximately three weeks after admission, she was transferred to a university hospital to treat the colon polyps. After transfer, a second CS was successful for cecal intubation. This revealed multiple polyps in the transverse colon and ascending colon, and biopsy sampling revealed adenocarcinoma (tub1/tub2). One week later, polyps were removed by endoscopic mucosal resection and submucosal dissection. Pathological examination of four of the 19 polyps revealed moderately well differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. Surgery was scheduled to remove the large tumor of the descending colon at a later date because it could not be removed endoscopically. Prior to surgery, the patient developed abdominal distension. MRI showed ascites and bilateral ovarian cysts with solid materials. Ascitic drainage was performed.
Approximately four weeks after transfer, the patient underwent laparoscopic surgery. Bilateral ovariectomy was performed in addition to left hemicolectomy as adenocarcinomas were identified in ovarian solid materials, even though ascitic fluid cytology was negative for malignant cells .
Pathology of the resected colon and bilateral ovaries revealed adenocarcinoma. Histologically, it was difficult to determine whether the ovarian tumors were concurrent or metastatic from the primary tumor. The tumor of the descending colon had invaded from the muscularis propria to pericolorectal tissues. Lymph node metastasis was observed in one location (pT3N1aM1a, pStage IV).
We also performed microsatellite instability (MSI) testing of genomic DNA from micro-dissected samples of the colorectal adenocarcinoma. This was conducted using the first panel of five microsatellite markers as recommended by the National Cancer Institute Consensus Conference . The colorectal adenocarcinoma was classified as MSI-high (4/5). Immunohistochemical (IHC) tumor analysis indicated absent MSH2 and MSH6 protein expression, although MLH1 and PMS2 expression was positive. Taken together, CMMRD or Lynch syndrome (LS) was suspected. To be diagnostically definitive, we performed a multi-gene panel assay which contained 14 genes involved in hereditary colorectal cancer syndromes; MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, EPCAM, MSH3, MLH3, APC, MUTYH, POLD1, POLE, TP53, MBD4, and NTHL1. The results revealed biallelic variants in MSH6; c.[2969 T > A (p.Leu990*)] and [3064G > T (p.Glu1022*)] . From this genetic information, the patient was diagnosed with CMMRD, indicating compound heterozygous variants in MSH6. This result suggested that loss of MSH2 protein expression in tumor tissue was probably due to secondary acquired somatic changes in MSH2. Parental and sibling genetic testing confirmed the patient was the biological daughter of her parents and an offspring of a non-consanguineous marriage. Her mother and sister had one variant of MSH6, c.3064G > T (p.Glu1022*), but the other variant, c.2969 T > A (p.Leu990*) was not identified in her parents, brother and sister. Her mother and sister who had the c.3064G > T variant never had LS-related tumors. These genetic analyses indicated the second variant, c.2969 T > A (p.Leu990*) had occurred de novo.