A 30-year-old Japanese man with no personal or familial psychiatric history was admitted to a psychiatric hospital for manic episode. His medical history included head trauma by traffic accident at the age of 6 years. He experienced severe impaired consciousness for 2 weeks after the head trauma. After discharge he showed a flat affect, which resolved after 3 months. Thereafter, he showed an inability to control his emotions for some time, but this eventually resolved, and he lived a stable life without major problems.
At the age of 12 years, the patient passed an entertainment office audition and subsequently performed on TV programs and on the stage. During high school, he studied in Australia and obtained tattoos on his whole back, which is uncommon behavior for a Japanese student. During college, he was the captain of a dance team. At 21 years, he had a child. Thus, his behaviors from the ages of 12 to 21 could be interpreted as showing a disinhibited tendency. After college graduation, he initially worked on a motor race rescue team for 4 years before switching to work in his family’s company. At 29 years, he experienced a problem with his relationship with his sister and became estranged from his family.
The patient began working as an apparel retailer and was taking lessons for Japanese classical dance and classical ballet. He frequently went dancing in nightclubs, reversing his day/night cycle. According to the patient’s wife, the patient stated, “I communicate with the universe” during this period. In June of 2016, at the age of 30, he was scouted in a night club by a record company, and he ended up paying the company several thousand dollars to produce his music video. In addition, his schedule grew busier because of training in both Noh theater (Noh is a form of traditional Japanese dance-drama) and ballet. In August, after seeing a Noh performance, he showed symptoms of megalomania by claiming “Because Noh is a world heritage, I would not be guilty even if I killed a man.” and “The world goes around me.” At his grandmother’s funeral at the end of September, he stated, “I worship nature and attend as God”. After the funeral, he suddenly went to a shrine and prayed to cleanse his unclean body. When he returned home, he quarreled with his mother, yelling and behaving incoherently.
On October 1, he dashed naked out of the house and repeatedly made emergency calls to police to ask, “Who am I?” He also brazenly took many books out of a bookstore without paying. Because of these incoherent behaviors, he was voluntarily admitted to a hospital. Although pharmacological treatment with aripiprazole was initially adopted, his symptoms continued to deteriorate. The patient purchased an expensive Japanese sword and telescope via a telephone service and displayed sexually disinhibited behavior in the hospital. The admission was changed from voluntary to involuntary. On November 8, the patient was referred to our hospital to have a more detailed examination. On admission to our facility, the patient was apathic rather than hyperactive. Electroencephalography and brain computerized tomography (CT) revealed no notable results. Magnetic resonance imaging was not available due to his tattooed back, but single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) revealed low blood flow in the OFC and high blood flow in the PCC . According to the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale–Third (WAIS-III), the patient’s total IQ was 85 (verbal IQ: 90, performance IQ: 82). In particular, his WAIS-III scores for letter–number sequencing, picture completion, digit symbol-coding, and symbol research were low. He scored an 81/85 (low average) on the Behavioral Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome (BADS), and his score on the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) was normal. His performance on the trail-making test was accurate, but he processed slowly. Together, these tests revealed that the patient had a slow processing speed and lowered attention .
After admission to our hospital, the patient was treated with carbamazepine in addition to aripiprazole. He gradually became coherent enough to claim that he did not have any fantastical feelings, and finally his megalomania and irritability disappeared. 9 months after discharge, in February 2017, he reported that his life had returned to how it was before the onset of mania. Reflective of this recovery, he showed a WAIS-III total IQ of 96 (verbal IQ: 97, performance IQ: 95). Other tests further confirmed his improvement, although he still showed a low processing speed and low attention . Hypo-activity in the OFC and hyper-activity in the PCC were no longer detected by SPECT .