Ophthalmologic consultation at the University of Florida in Gainesville was requested for a 3-day-old Hispanic baby girl. She was born at 36 weeks via induced vaginal delivery with features of severe CZS. The infant’s mother had traveled to Honduras early in pregnancy prior to knowing she was pregnant. Prenatal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed prominent ventricles, microcephaly, cerebral, cerebellar, and brainstem atrophy. Amniotic fluid via amniocentesis tested positive for Zika serologies. Following birth, the infant presented with slow respirations, bradycardia, and temperature instability. She stabilized and was able to breastfeed and demonstrated improvement of her vital signs. On physical examination, she was noted to have bilateral talipes equinovares and arthrogryposis.
On external examination, her head circumference was 24.0 cm, which is categorized as severe microcephaly. She was noted to blink to light and her globes were soft to palpation bilaterally. An anterior segment examination was unremarkable and her corneal diameter was noted to be 9.5 mm bilaterally. A dilated fundus examination was significant for a large, well-circumscribed area of colobomatous-like excavation with chorioretinal atrophy in the bilateral maculae. The lesions were noted to have a hyperpigmented border and scleral show . Additionally, optic disc pallor, vessel attenuation, and retinal pigmentary changes were noted in both eyes. Other communicable diseases including hepatitis B, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), syphilis, toxoplasmosis, rubella, and cytomegalovirus were ruled out. The infant’s newborn screen and cytogenetics panel returned within normal limits. A neonatal brain MRI at 4 days of life revealed severe microcephaly and lissencephaly, diffuse atrophy of the corpus callosum and cerebellum, dystrophic calcifications, and marked thinning of the basal ganglia and brainstem . Additionally, ventriculomegaly was noted in all ventricles.
The infant remained hemodynamically stable throughout her hospital course and was able to breastfeed without difficulty. She was discharged home with her parents at 1 week of life, with scheduled follow-up in the pediatric ophthalmology clinic. She was seen at 3 months of age in clinic and was noted to blink to light, but could not fix and follow. The fundus examination was stable in both eyes.