A 43-year-old man visited our hospital because of respiratory distress. He was a heavy smoker. Computed tomography revealed a large mass measuring 55 mm in the upper lobe of his right lung and front mediastinum, with multiple metastases observed in the surrounding lymph nodes. Lymph node biopsy was performed. The initial pathological diagnosis was NSCLC and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. While chemotherapy was administered, the tumor was refractory, and the patient died 6 months after admission. Subsequently, an autopsy was performed. Macroscopically, the tumor measured 10 cm in size and extended from the upper lobe of the right lung to the anterior mediastinum , with many lymph node metastases. The tumor was deeper than the submucosa and solid, opalescent, and necrotic. Histologically, the tumor showed a sheet-like growth pattern of monotonous epithelial-like cells. The tumor cells showed loose binding and distinct nucleoli, with some rhabdoid-like cells observed. Frequent mitotic figures and necrosis were also observed. Representative microscopic morphological features are shown in Fig. A and B. Immunohistochemical staining of paraffin-embedded tissues using a three-step ABC showed that the tumor cells were negative for desmin, S100P, TTF-1, p40, CK7, CK20, SMARCA4 , and SMARCA2 and positive for SOX2 , CD34, p53, and AE1/AE3 .
While a partial ARID1A deficiency in the nuclei was observed , SLC7A11 expression was not decreased . The tumor cell cytoplasm was positive for ARID1A expression . Subsequent companion diagnostics for molecular therapies such as EGFR, ALK, and ROS-1 did not reveal mutations or fusion genes.
As a differential diagnosis, we considered lymphoma, NUT carcinoma, germ cell tumor, neuroendocrine carcinoma, large cell carcinoma, melanoma, and a variety of sarcomas such as rhabdoid tumors and epithelioid sarcoma. Lymphoma, NUT carcinoma, germ cell tumor, neuroendocrine carcinoma, and melanoma are unlikely to be detected by immunohistochemistry. The most difficult to distinguish are sarcomas, such as epithelioid sarcoma and SMARCA4-deficient NSCLC. In particular, the present case was diffusely positive for AE1/AE3; thus, SMARCA4-dNSCLC could not be ruled out. However, Yoshida et al. reported that half of the reported SMARCA4-DTS cases were pan-keratin-positive . Moreover, Nambirajan et al. reported that SMARCA4-deficient NSCLC was CK7-positive and SOX2-negative, while SMARCA4-DTS was often CK7-negative and SOX2-positive ; however, the present case was CK7-negative and SOX2-positive. In addition, the age of onset is relatively young, and tumor development may occur in the mediastinum. Furthermore, no differentiation into adenocarcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma was confirmed in any tumor section. We diagnosed the present case as SMARCA4-DTS based primarily on the hematoxylin-eosin findings of loose binding and rhabdoid-like cells. According to the 5th edition of the WHO classification, these findings corresponded to thoracic SMARCA 4-deficient undifferentiated tumors. If frozen material is available, genetic analysis may reveal SMARCA4 deficiencies or mutations. Thus, this case may be a tumor, such as a borderline lesion between SMARCA4-DTS and SMARCA4-dNSCLC.
Autopsy revealed a ganglioneuroma in the adrenal gland and an enchondroma in the left clavicle ; in other words, two of the three signs of Carney’s triad. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed as having incomplete Carney’s triad. While PRKAR1A has been identified in recent years as one of the genes responsible for the Carney Complex, this complex exhibits a variety of phenotypes and there are many symptoms in which the relationship with gene mutations is unknown. Although Carney Complex was possible in this case, the patient had died, and no additional investigations, such as genetic screening, were performed. Therefore, a diagnosis of the Carney Complex could not be confirmed.