A 54-year-old Caucasian man underwent right pleural biopsy in December 2005 for recurrent pleural effusion and locally advanced malignant mesothelioma was diagnosed. Subsequently, he was treated with chemotherapy containing cisplatin and pemetrexed for seven cycles; CT scan showed a partial response. In December 2006, he underwent surgery involving total right pleuro-pneumonectomy plus partial resection of the pericardium and diaphragm. The histological features showed epithelioid malignant mesothelioma involving the parietal and the visceral pleurae, the lung, the pericardium and the diaphragm.
Subsequent radiotherapy to the right chest was administered using 50.4 Gy, 28 fractions.
The patient remained disease-free until June 2009 when an isoechogenic and hypodense nodule of 35 × 16 mm was discovered on US and CT scan in the right side of the anterior abdominal wall. An ultrasound-guided biopsy showed metastasis of mesothelioma. In August 2009, the nodule was surgically removed, and radiotherapy was then administered to this site using 45 Gy, 15 fractions.
In September 2011, a relapse in the mediastinum (lymph nodes) was found by CT scan and Positron Emission Tomography (PET), so six cycles of chemotherapy with cisplatin and pemetrexed were started which lasted until January 2012. Complete response at PET examination in February 2012 was demonstrated.
In November 2012, a right submandibular salivary gland tumefaction was recorded. US examination showed right submandibular gland hypertrophy , confirmed on CT scan and with neither US nor CT signs of metastasis; a diagnosis of inflammation of the gland was made. Anti-inflammatory therapy was administered; the patient also received antibiotic therapy but without improvement. An US-guided FNAB of the right submandibular salivary gland was then performed using a 22-gauge needle and showed atypical mesothelial cells, with nuclear enlargement and increased chromatin representation . Immunocytochemistry showed positivity for calretinin and nuclear, weak and focal positivity for WT-1 . Based on the previous history of malignant mesothelioma and the morphologic features of the cells, immunocytochemistry allowed confirmation of the diagnosis of right submandibular involvement from epithelioid mesothelioma. The subsequent PET scan was positive for the right submandibular salivary gland. The patient was treated with radiotherapy to this site.
A computerized literature search through MEDLINE, Cancerlit and Embase was performed, in order to make a comparison with our case, applying the words: ‘mesothelioma', ‘metastasis', ‘oral cavity', ‘mouth', ‘buccal', ‘tongue', ‘head and neck area’. Articles and abstracts were also identified by back-referencing from original and relevant papers. Selected for the present review were papers published in English before April 2013.