A 57-year-old white woman presented to the emergency department of the hospital in Novara, Italy, with sudden ocular pain and blurred vision in her left eye. The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in her right eye and 20/200 in her left eye. Her right eye was normal. Her left eye anterior segment showed an aqueous flare and the presence of cells and keratic precipitates without posterior synechiae. Intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg in her right eye and 20 mmHg in her left eye. A fundus examination showed an intense vitreitis and a focal necrotizing retinochoroiditis above the optic disc . As the pigmented chorioretinal scar adjacent to the active lesion was not visible, a clinical diagnosis of suspected primary ocular toxoplasmosis was made. The diagnosis had been confirmed by anamnestic data (our patient adopted a wildcat a few months before). Serology for T. gondii (IgM and IgG) was positive, but it was negative for other common uveal infections. Necrotic herpetic retinopathies, cytomegalovirus retinitis, syphilitic chorioretinitis, and tuberculous chorioretinitis were excluded by serological tests. In addition, a chest X-ray to detect hilar adenopathy of sarcoidosis was performed. The result was negative. After that, a systemic antibiotics combination therapy with pyrimethamine and sulfadiazine was performed and a steroid therapy with prednisone was started. Two months after healing, the inflammation completely disappeared. Analyzing the fundus, a non-pigmented atrophic chorioretinal scar without signs of vitreitis was clearly visible in the primary lesion site and a clinical examination showed that the BCVA was 20/25 in her left eye.
Despite the vitreitis , SS-OCT and OCTA (Triton Plus®, Topcon Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) were performed before and after the resolution of the disease. In particular, the SS-OCT showed nerve fiber swelling and choroidal thickening . The OCTA performed on the lesion showed an obliteration of the retinal capillary, choriocapillary, and deep choroidal vessels . Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed a hypofluorescence during the early phase, followed by a progressive hyperfluorescence that developed after the leakage phase; on the other hand, indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) showed a hypofluorescent lesion with characteristic hypofluorescent perilesional satellite lesions.
After healing, an SS-OCT performed on the lesion showed a hyper-reflective dome-shaped intraretinal mass involving the entire retinal thickness, associated with an increasing retinal thickness on the scar site . The retinal layers within the mass could no longer be recognized. The choroid had a normal thickness. An OCTA performed on the lesion showed a persistent retinal capillary plexus and a choriocapillaris failure with partial reperfusion of the deep choroidal vessels .