A 42-year-old male presented with a 3.5-year history of chronic right groin and testicular pain (refractory genitofemoral neuropathy characterized by constant and dull burning sensations) after a gunshot injury to the groin. The pain failed to resolve with several anti-inflammatory and pain medications: ibuprofen, gabapentin, ketorolac, and opioids (e.g., hydromorphone, oxycodone, morphine, and fentanyl). The patient initially benefitted from a genitofemoral nerve block, a right ilioinguinal nerve block, and a right spermatic cord block. As his pain then became refractory to these treatment modalities, and his MR studies of the thoracic and lumbar spine were negative for causative pathology, he underwent a trial of genitofemoral SCS. His visual analog scale (VAS) scores before the SCS trial ranged from 8 to 10/10.
For the SCS trial, two percutaneous 16-contact, midline cylindrical leads were temporarily implanted, and positional adjustments were made until the patient reported adequate capture of the typical painful areas. The optimal level of stimulation was at the mid-T9 level. The SCS trial lasted for 1 week, at which point he reported >50% reduction in both right groin and testicular pain, with his VAS score decreasing to 3/10. He also noted improvement in sleep, mobility, and functional activity. He underwent permanent SCS placement with a 4-column, 2 × 8-contact epidural paddle lead (at mid-T9 through a laminotomy at T10) . A paddle SCS lead was in the posterior midline with the tip of the lead at the bottom of T8. In addition, a neurostimulator pulse generator was placed in the patient’s right flank. The operation was uneventful. SCS parameters were set immediately following the procedure: pulse width of 400 microseconds (μs), frequency of 40 Hertz (Hz), and current of 5.5 milliamperes (mA). The patient’s postoperative pain medications remained unchanged with acetaminophen and duloxetine.
Six weeks after the permanent SCS was implanted, the patient continued to report >50% pain relief, VAS scores remained stable at 3/10, and he was able to return to work. At the 6 week follow-up visit, the patient reported over-stimulation symptoms; therefore, the stimulation parameters were adjusted to a pulse width of 340 μs, frequency of 40 Hz, and current of 6.1 mA. At the 9 months follow-up, the patient continued to report >50% pain relief with VAS scores in the 3–4/10 range.