A 44-year-old Asian man with a medical history of chronic sinusitis and IgG4-related ophthalmic disease who was prescribed 5 mg of oral corticosteroids (prednisolone) 2 years previously (initial dose was unknown) was transported to our hospital with dyspnea lasting for several hours. He smoked cigarettes 24 pack years but did not have a history of intravenous drug abuse, heavy drinking, or poor dental hygiene. He had not undergone dental procedures recently. On arrival, his Glasgow Coma Scale score was 11 (eye, 3; verbal, 2; motor, 6), body temperature 37.1 °C, his respiratory rate was 28/min, his blood pressure was 99/42 mmHg, and his heart rate was regular at 150 beats/min. His symptoms were not obvious because of his consciousness disturbance; his face had no skin erythema or swelling, and his neck induration could not be palpated. A purpuric eruption was covering both of legs. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a hypercontractile left ventricle without pericardial effusion, regurgitation of valves, and vegetations. Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed no obvious embolization at the bilateral pulmonary arteries, but revealed left lung ground glass opacity, and bilateral irregular lung opacities without cavitation. Fluid retention at the right maxillary sinus was also found. Laboratory test results were as follows: leukocyte count, 19,100 cells/μL; hemoglobin level, 15.7 g/dL; platelet count, 0.6 × 104 cells/μL; creatinine level, 4.1 mg/dL; total bilirubin level, 3.9 mg/dL; C -reactive protein level, 45.6 mg/dL; procalcitonin level, 44.7 ng/mL; β-D-glucan level, < 6.0 pg/mL; a negative pneumococcal urinary antigen test; a negative Legionella urinary antigen test; prothrombin time international normalized ratio, 1.15; fibrin degradation products, 103 μg/mL; Japanese Association for Acute Medicine (JAAM) disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) scores, 7 points; and Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score, 15 points. Blood gas analysis results were as follows (10 L/minute O2 administered): pH, 7.174; PaCO2, 32.7 mmHg; PaO2, 177 mmHg; HCO3, 11.6 mmol/L; lactate 13.8 mmol/L; anion gap, 16.7 mmol/L. Owing to suspected bacterial pneumonia-induced septic shock and/or purpura fulminans, endotracheal intubation was performed, and fluid resuscitation was started immediately. After we obtained blood, sputum, and urine cultures, initial empiric antimicrobial drugs (meropenem, clindamycin, and vancomycin) were administered. Norepinephrine was initiated, titrated up to 25 μg/min. In addition, vasopressin 0.03 U/min, dobutamine 8 μg/kg/min, and hydrocortisone 200 mg/day were also added for continuous infusion. Because mean blood pressure could not be maintained at 50 mmHg despite adequate drip infusion and high dose vasopressors, venoarterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA-ECMO) was initiated due to refractory septic shock. Continuous hemodiafiltration (CHDF) was also introduced due to severe lactic acidosis, and recombinant thrombomodulin was administered for sepsis induced DIC. After the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit, his vital signs stabilized gradually. Both VA-ECMO and CHDF were tapered on day 2 post admission. Norepinephrine, vasopressin, and dobutamine were tapered on day 3, 4, and 5, respectively. Repeat contrast enhanced CT confirmed bilateral lung nodules, left internal jugular vein and vertebral vein thrombosis; following this Lemierre’s syndrome was diagnosed on day 6 . Although the primary focus of the infection was thought to be the right sinus, purpura worsened on both legs. He then went into shock again on day 6 . Additional soft tissue infections were suspected; therefore, bilateral below the knee amputations were performed for source control. In addition to intravenous antibiotics, edoxaban (non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant) was initiated for left internal jugular and vertebral venous thrombosis. Following this, his vital signs improved without further systemic embolism. Cultures of the exudates from the skin lesions and histopathological samples did not identify any pathogens, and histopathological findings showed arterial thrombosis, and therefore, it was thought that second time shock developed due to purpura fulminans in the context of the septic shock and DIC. A tracheotomy was performed on day 13, and intravenous antibiotics and edoxaban were discontinued on day 59 with disappearance of the neck thrombosis, and bilateral lung nodules and fluid retention at the right maxillary sinus as identified on repeat CT. Lastly, he was transferred to another hospital for rehabilitation on day 121.
Gram-negative coccobacilli and gram-positive cocci were yielded from two sets of blood culture bottles (BacT/ALERT, bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France), which were taken prior to antibiotic administration. The gram-negative coccobacilli were identified as E. corrodens by ID Test HN-20 Rapid (Nissui Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) (profile: 5220000, %ID 99.9%) and susceptibility testing was determined by Etest (bioMérieux) in Mueller-Hinton agar plates (bioMérieux) . These gram-positive cocci were catalase-negative and showed weak-beta hemolysis on 5% sheep blood agar (Nihon Becton-Dickinson, Tokyo, Japan), initially suspected as pyogenic streptococci, after 48 h of incubation under anaerobic and 5% CO2 gas at 35 °C. This strain was not identified by the rapid ID 32 STREP system (profile 00002500000; low discrimination of Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae/Gemella hemolysans/Gemella morbillorum, bioMérieux) but was identified as G. morbillorum by BD BBL Crystal GP (profile: 0500000100, %ID 98.5%, Becton-Dickinson, Sparks, MD, USA). It was identified as G. bergeri with a score value of 2.068 (species level) by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS, Autoflex II with MALDI Biotyper software ver 3.1; Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany) and confirmed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing by the method described previously . Phylogenetic analysis results are shown in Fig. . Susceptibility testing was then performed with MicroFAST Type 7 J Panels and MicroScan Walkaway-96 (Beckman Coulter, Brea, CA, USA). According to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) document M45-A3 (Clinical and laboratory standards institute. Methods for antimicrobial dilution and disk susceptibility testing of infrequently isolated or fastidious bacteria, 3rd edition, CLSI guideline M45. Clinical and laboratory standards institute, Wayne, PA. 2015), results of minimum inhibitory concentrations of various antimicrobials and interpretation of susceptibility testing are shown in Table . Based on these susceptibility results and negative results of additional blood cultures on day 6, antimicrobials started empirically were changed to ampicillin-sulbactam on day 10.