A 20-year-old previously healthy man, a student by occupation and a non-smoker not on any medications, presented to his primary care physician with a history of swollen glands for a 'couple of months'. On further review it was found that for one month prior to presentation, our patient had noticed multiple enlarged cervical, occipital, and right inguinal lymph nodes. No constitutional symptoms were reported. Our patient was of Middle Eastern heritage, but was born and raised in the USA. He had not travelled recently, nor had he had any recent contact with sick people or any occupational exposure. On physical examination, our patient was afebrile with normal vital signs. Enlarged, non-tender, freely mobile bilateral cervical and occipital lymph nodes were palpable and measured up to 4cm. His right inguinal lymph nodes were similarly enlarged. The left palatine tonsil was slightly erythematous and enlarged. A monospot test was negative for Epstein-Barr virus infection. Given these findings, the primary care physician prescribed a course of antibiotics for a possible infectious etiology consisting of a three-day course of azithromycin followed by amoxicillin-clavulanate one week later due to persistent symptoms. Initial investigative tests showed normal blood counts and serum electrolytes. An HIV antibody enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test was also negative.
Our patient returned to the clinic for re-evaluation. With the exception of the enlarged lymph nodes, he remained otherwise clinically asymptomatic. On physical examination, the lymph nodes appeared unchanged, and there were no newly involved nodal chains. Upon more thorough investigation, our patient indicated that approximately once month ago he ate raw kibbe, a Middle Eastern dish that consists of spiced uncooked beef or lamb with grains. Additional laboratory studies were ordered and are listed in Table . Our patient was diagnosed with acute toxoplasmosis and counseled regarding dietary habits and risk factors. No specific treatment was administered, and close follow-up was planned to ensure resolution of the lymphadenopathy.