A 52-year-old man complaining of a high-grade fever was referred to kitano hospital in August 2005. He previously had glucose intolerance, has a 26 pack-year history of smoking, and consumed 350 ml of beer per day. A chest X-ray showed a mass-like opacity in the apex of his right lung . A physical examination on admission showed reduced body weight (45.5 kg), sinus tachycardia (108/min), high respiratory rate (20/min) and high body temperature (38.0°C). Blood examination disclosed a marked leukocytosis (neutrophilia) and elevated serum concentrations of C-reactive protein (CRP) and liver enzymes . A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a mass-like opacity in the apex of the right lung, with the inside of the mass being of low density .
His symptoms, blood examination and chest CT scan suggested a lung abscess. Despite the administration of antibiotics, however, the mass-like opacity rapidly grew . The transbronchial specimen and CT guided biopsy specimens were negative for bacteria, fungi and acid fast bacilli, but showed infiltration of lymphocytes. 18 F-fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed the localized uptake of FDG to the center of the mass-like lesion and right hilar lymph node, in addition to diffuse uptake by the bone marrow and an enlarged liver and spleen . Before surgery, we considered that the lesion-like lung abscess was cancer and pneumonitis associated with cancer. The tumor was diagnosed as a cT3N1M0, stage IIIA lung cancer. Therefore, a right upper lobectomy was performed . The tumor was pathologically diagnosed as a pleomorphic carcinoma of the right upper lung . Following excision, it was shown to be of mixed subtype (predominantly large cell carcinoma with >10% giant cells and a few adenocarcinoma cells), measuring 40 × 34 × 28 mm, and graded pT3, pl0, G3, Ly0, V0, PLC0, R0, and pm0. The tumor was positive for lymph node metastases, and graded pN0, #2 (0/3), #3 (0/5), #4 (0/1), #10 (0/1), #11 (0/1), #12 (0/1) [pT3N0M0, pStage IIB]. The tumor was surrounded by intense infiltration of neutrophils and lymphocytes. The patient’s high grade fever, neutrophilia, and elevated CRP level rapidly subsided after the operation , as did his elevated serum concentrations of G-CSF and IL-6 .
Since the rapid growth of the mass-like shadow likely resulted from the infiltration of neutrophils and lymphocytes, we assessed the mechanisms underlying the infiltration of these cells.