A 15-year-old white Latin American female patient underwent contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for outpatient investigation of persistent pelvic pain. In a recent emergency department (ED) visit for the same complaint, a normal urinalysis was obtained. Her past medical history was unremarkable, and she did not take any medications and denied alcohol, tobacco, or any drug abuse. Few minutes after receiving gadolinium during MRI, she presented to the ED with shortness of breath, chest pain, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. Upon admission, she had a brief period of loss of consciousness and her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure (BP), 84/40 mmHg; temperature, 36.4 °C; heart rate (HR), 122 beats per minute; respiratory rate (RR), 30 breaths per minute, and peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 78%. Her pulmonary auscultation revealed bilateral rales, but she did not have rash, or tongue or lip swelling. Despite significant hypoxemia, she was able to speak in whole sentences, and inhaled oxygen was delivered through a non-rebreather mask (NRBM) at 10 L per minute. She immediately received 500 mg of hydrocortisone and a 1 L bolus of intravenous crystalloids, but epinephrine was not administered upon the patient’s presentation. Also, antimicrobial therapy with ceftriaxone and azithromycin was initiated.
Laboratory tests demonstrated a hemoglobin level of 18.6 g/dL, a slightly elevated white blood cell count (15,360/mm3, normal 4000–11,000/mm3), an increased C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration (41.8 mg/L, normal: < 0.5 mg/L), a lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level of 176 U/L (normal 135–214 U/L), and a d-dimer concentration of 1.7 mg/mL (normal: < 0.5 mg/mL). B-type natriuretic peptide and troponin levels were low, and the echocardiogram was normal.
A chest computed tomography (CT) was performed around 1 hour after GBCA administration and showed bilateral pulmonary compromise secondary to multiple confluent consolidations located mainly in the posterior aspects of the lower lobes. There were also regions of ground-glass opacities that were more evident in the upper lobes along with diffuse thickening of interalveolar septa . A CT pulmonary angiography ruled out the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism. A severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) nasopharyngeal swab testing came back negative.
She was then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with improved vital signs: BP, 119/71 mmHg, HR, 122 beats per minute, and SpO2 of 93%. Due to high oxygen requirement, methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg was prescribed and she was commenced on bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) ventilation and high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC). The patient showed substantial improvement over the following 12 hours, which enabled her to be weaned off noninvasive ventilatory support. She was afebrile during the entire hospital stay. She was discharged from ICU on day 2 receiving inhaled oxygen via nasal cannula at 1 L per minute and discharged home on day 3, with SpO2 of 98% on room air. Owing to the patient’s rapid recovery after supportive treatment and the absence of clinical evidence of infection, the decision to cease antibiotic therapy was made. Corticosteroid treatment was tapered down slowly over 30 days after discharge. Six months after initial presentation, the patient remained well and the follow-up was uneventful.