A 37-year-old female patient presented to our Emergency Department with hematemesis. She had been diagnosed with cirrhosis for two years with an abdominal ultrasonography. Notably, the patient had a remarkable height of 186 cm but did not exhibit any signs of secondary sexual characteristics. After stabilizing her cirrhosis, she was transferred to the Endocrinology Department for further investigation.
The patient was born in a suburban hospital with abnormal medical conditions. There were no detailed birth records on adverse perinatal events. Her mother recalled that she was born at full-term with a birth weight of 3.2 kg (50 centile, 0SD) following a breech delivery (birth length was unknown). There was no definitive record of hypoglycemia in the neonatal period. Her parents were not consanguineous and her father and mother had heights of 176 cm and 150 cm, respectively. The mid-parental height was 156.5 cm (23 centile, -0.8SD). The patient experienced a growth rate of 3-5 cm per year until reaching a height of 186 cm in her twenties. Surprisingly, she had never received any exogenous growth hormone replacement therapy. Moreover, she had no breast development, menarche, pubic hair, or axillary hair. Although prescribed oral estrogen and progesterone for amenorrhea, she exhibited poor compliance with the treatment. The patient had a limited level of learning ability and had only completed elementary school. According to her mother’s recollection, the patient was frequently ill during childhood, but there was no definitive history of hypoglycemia or seizures.
At the age of 24, the patient was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus and initiated metformin and acarbose treatment without regular glucose monitoring. Family history revealed that her parents and several maternal family members had diabetes. Her mother experienced an uneventful pregnancy at the age of 26 and gave birth to the patient, although the blood glucose level during pregnancy was unknown. Her mother was diagnosed with diabetes at the age of 52, while her father was diagnosed at 55. Other maternal family members developed diabetes after the age of 50 and were managed with oral anti-diabetic medications. None of them reported a definite history of childhood hypoglycemia or seizures.
The proband had a height of 186 cm (-> 99 centile, +4.7SD) and weighed 70.3 kg (>97 centile, +2.2SD), with a body mass index (BMI) of 20.32 kg/m2 (50 centile, 0SD). Her leg length measured 100 cm, while her arm span was 183 cm. Blood pressure was measured at 126/72 mm Hg, and the heart rate was 76 beats/min. The patient had a Tanner breast I and pubic hair I rating in terms of sexual maturity. Although she had large hands and feet, there were no obvious signs of acromegaly. Furthermore, no abnormalities were detected in the heart and lungs. There were no marfanoid features namely joint hypermobility, arachnodactyly and scoliosis, etc.
Routine hematology evaluation revealed that the patient was anaemic, leucopaenic, and thrombocytopaenic. Liver function tests showed elevated levels of serum alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, and glutamyltransferase.
Endocrine evaluation indicated undetectable estrogen levels with low serum gonadotropin, which did not respond to gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogue (GnRHa) stimulation, suggesting gonadotrophin deficiency. Free thyroxine (FT4) levels were low with slightly elevated thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Serum prolactin levels were within the normal range. Cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels at 8 am were lower than normal. Blunted response of GH to insulin tolerance test (ITT) indicated GHD. Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) levels were also decreased (25 ng/mL). The patient had a female karyotype (46XX). Diabetes-related evaluation showed elevated glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) levels and negative pancreatic islet autoantibodies. The insulin releasing test indicated impaired glucose tolerance anddelayed insulin secretion without absolute insulin deficiency . Continuous glucose monitoring during hospitalization showed hyperglycemia most of the time, with occasional hypoglycemic events .
X-ray of the left hand and wrist revealed closed epiphysis . MRI showed small anterior pituitary, ectopic neurohypophysis and missing pituitary stalk . Abdominal CT scan revealed signs of portal hypertension, liver cirrhosis, and a small uterus. Echocardiography showed normal left ventricle function. Thyroid ultrasound showed inhomogeneous parenchyma. Carotid artery and lower extremity artery ultrasound results were normal. The results of the ophthalmic evaluation indicated normal vision and fundus, without any mid-line abnormalities.
Ultrasound elastography of liver showed that the controlled attenuation parameter was 265 decibels per meter (dB/m, normal value was < 240). Liver histopathology indicated nonalcoholic fatty cirrhosis.
Whole exome sequencing was conducted to identify the causal gene in the proband. A heterozygous mutation of p.Arg301Cys (p.R301C, c.901C>T) was found in the KCNJ11 gene (accession number NM_000525.4, exon 1). The mutation was validated using Sanger DNA sequencing , and the same mutation was identified in her mother. No mutations in genes involved in the development of the pituitary were found. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and her parents.
Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with combined pituitary hormone deficiency (CPHD) caused by posterior pituitary ectopia and absent pituitary stalk. She was prescribed hydrocortisone, thyroid hormone, and estrogen, and scheduled for follow-up in our outpatient clinic. Considering the presence of GHD, which may be a major contributing factor to cirrhosis, recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH) was prescribed. Additionally, she was given IDegAsp (70% insulin degludec and 30% insulin aspart, 20 IU once before dinner), metformin (500mg twice a day), and canagliflozin (100mg once a day) to manage her glucose levels.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and her parents included in the study. Publication of a specific case report does not need ethical review in our institution.