A previously healthy 66-year-old Hispanic man presented with a 1-month history of recurrent fevers, chills, and night sweats and a 3-week history of new onset jaundice. His pertinent medical history included localized prostate cancer status post-transurethral resection of prostate in remission, peptic ulcer disease, benign prostatic hypertrophy, hypertension, hypothyroidism, and prior left lower extremity deep vein thrombosis several years ago. On physical examination, he was fatigued, febrile, tachycardic, with diffuse jaundice and mild lower extremity bilateral pitting edema. Just 6 months prior at a primary care physician visit, he had grossly normal laboratory values including complete blood count and liver function tests. A complete blood count on initial workup at our institute was significant for white blood cell count of 2.7×103/μL, platelets of 98×109/L, and hemoglobin of 8.2 g/dL with a mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 78 fL. He had normal electrolytes, but abnormal liver function panel with a total protein of 5.2 g/dL, albumin of 1.3 g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 135 units/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 269 units/L, alkaline phosphatase of 1235 units/L, total bilirubin of 4.9 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 4.1 mg/dL, and indirect bilirubin 0.8 mg/dL. His international normalized ratio (INR) was elevated at 1.59. Blood cultures and urine analysis were unremarkable; a QuantiFERON Gold test was indeterminate. Further workup for acute liver failure with abdominal ultrasound, magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), and hepatobiliary scan revealed possible findings of chronic cholecystitis but no biliary obstruction. He was empirically treated with ceftriaxone for assumed cholecystitis, but the results of his liver function panel tests continued to worsen.
With his liver function panel and condition continuing to worsen, a more extensive autoimmune and infectious workup for liver failure was performed. A viral hepatitis panel revealed hepatitis A IgM, hepatitis B surface antigen and core IgM, and hepatitis C antibody to be negative. Further viral workup did show EBV IgG, cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG, and herpes simplex virus (HSV) I IgG positivity. His EBV viral load was 55,000 copies/mL. EBV IgM, CMV IgM, human herpes virus-8 (HHV-8), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), parvovirus B-19 IgG/IgM, and HSV I/II IgM were all negative. An autoimmune workup revealed negative antinuclear antibody (ANA), rheumatoid factor (RF), antiliver/kidney microsomal antibody, antimitochondrial antibody (AMA), and anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA). His ceruloplasmin and alpha-1 antitrypsin levels were normal, and he had a negative human hemochromatosis gene screening.
On day 7, a bone marrow biopsy was performed which revealed a normocellular bone marrow (50%) with increased histiocytes with areas of hemophagocytic activity . Focally, there were ill-defined granulomas present that contained few large atypical cells . Paraffin immunohistochemistry showed positivity for small and large cells with CD30 and EBV-encoded small RNA (EBER), as well as few large cells with MUM-1 . These findings were most compatible with atypical immunoblasts in the setting of an EBV infection, but this would be unusual in an immunocompetent adult. An additional consideration was the possibility of subtle involvement by Hodgkin lymphoma. The report suggested further investigation into a possible occult lymphoma.
On day 10, he was pre-emptively started on treatment for HLH per the HLH-94 treatment protocol with etoposide (initially at 75% dose reduction due to hepatic impairment, subsequent graduated increases in dose by 25%) and dexamethasone at 10 mg/m2 daily. This was continued for a 2-week course. Further laboratory testing revealed that he met five out of eight criteria for HLH diagnosis: fevers, pancytopenia, hemophagocytosis, ferritin of 23,292 ng/mL (>500 ng/mL), and soluble-CD25 of 15,330 pg/mL (>1033 pg/mL). He did not meet criteria for hypertriglyceridemia (161 mg/dL, less than 265) and hypofibrinogenemia (368 mg/dL, more than 150 mg/dL); natural killer (NK) cell activity was not tested. A subsequent liver biopsy on day 13 revealed findings of chronic hepatitis and focal histiocytic proliferation consistent with HLH.
With still no clear identifying etiology for secondary HLH, underlying malignancy was suspected and a positron emission tomography (PET) scan was performed. This revealed an enlarged right cervical lymph node measuring up to 1.7 cm as well as increased metabolic activity noted in his ascending colon. On day 18, a lymph node biopsy was performed which histologically revealed CD15, CD30, MUM-1, and EBER-positive cells with morphologic findings of classical Hodgkin lymphoma, lymphocyte-rich subtype . On day 25, after 2 weeks of HLH-directed therapy with etoposide and dexamethasone, he had minimal improvement in his pancytopenia and hepatic impairment. He was then started on R-ESHAP for concurrent treatment of HLH with underlying Hodgkin lymphoma. He completed one full cycle of R-ESHAP (rituximab 375 mg/m2 day 25, etoposide 40 mg/m2 days 26 to 29, methylprednisolone 500 mg days 26 to 28,cisplatin 25 mg/m2 days 26 to 29, and cytarabine dose reduced to 1000 mg/m2 day 30). Only cytarabine was 50% dose reduced based on hepatic function. Initially he showed improvement in serial hepatic function panels. His EBV viral load 4 days after rituximab therapy (day 29 from diagnosis) was below detectable limits. However, his treatment course in the setting of continued neutropenia was complicated by Enterococcus faecalis bacteremia and colonic microperforation. He was not deemed to be a surgical candidate and his condition did not improve on broad spectrum antibiotics. Subsequently, he was transitioned to comfort measures only and moved to an in-patient hospice and died.