A 70-year-old woman was treated for acute retinal necrosis in both eyes 15 years ago with pars plana vitrectomy and lensectomy without intraocular lens implantation at that time. She was referred by her family doctor for evaluation and treatment of progressive retinal detachment in the right eye. Her past medical history was significant only for hypertension, which was well controlled with oral Ca blockers.
Her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.02 OU. She had immediate pars plana vitrectomy with scleral buckling with silicone oil tamponade. However, she went blind in her right eye after 3 months. Two months later, she had blurred vision in her left eye. Her BCVA OS was 0.02, and her intraocular pressure was 12 mm Hg OS. Slit-lamp examination demonstrated cells, fare, and mutton-fat keratic precipitates in the anterior chamber, strong vitreous cavity opacification, and vitreous cells. Fundus examination was difficult because of opacification . We detected swelling of the choroid, and optical coherence tomography showedserious retinal detachment at the posterior pole. Fluorescein angiography showed leakage corresponding to serious retinal detachment areas . The results of the laboratory investigations of the serum including angiotensin-converting enzyme, antinuclear antibodies, rheumatoid factor, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were unremarkable except for the presence of elevated C-reactive protein. Serological analyses indicated that there was no active infection of syphilis, human T-cell lymphoma virus 1, herpes simplex virus, or varicella zoster virus. We diagnosed sympathetic ophthalmitis.
The patient then received steroid pulse therapy (1,000 mg/day of methylprednisolone for 3 days/week), followed by 30 mg/day of prednisolone therapy administered orally. However, her intraocular inflammation could not be stabilized, particularly the opacification in the vitreous cavity. Thus, we added 50 mg/day of CsA for 1 week; however, the trough level in her blood was too low, so we increased the dose to 100 mg/day of CsA with 10 mg/day of prednisolone. In addition, her systolic blood pressure was too low (approximately 85–100 mm Hg with no symptoms), so we ceased the administration of Ca blockers for her hypertension .
Two days later, she displayed a sudden onset of headache and hypertension (systolic blood pressure 180–200 mm Hg), loss of consciousness for several hours, and reduced limb movement. We speculated acute or subacute onset brain infarction; thus, we immediately performed a head MRI. The radiologist first diagnosed acute brain infarction. However, a neurologist in another hospital noted the possibility of PRES. The MRI showed a high signal intensity in both posterior lobes, consistent with PRES . An electroencephalogram showed diffuse slow and irregular ground activity (data not shown). An examination of the cerebrospinal fluid indicated that it was within normal limits. Her CsA trough level in the blood was 68 ng/ml on the day of the attack.
CsA use was immediately stopped. Her blood pressure was strictly managed in the ICU of the Neurology Department. Her symptoms gradually improved over the next several days; however, she developed cortical blindness, which lasted for several weeks. Finally, she returned to her baseline state before the attack, including her BCVA. The MRI findings with axial views showed that hyperintense spots remained on both posterior lobes 6 months after the day of the attack . Ocular inflammation could be stabilized by oral prednisolone .