A 70-year-old man was referred to our institution for treatment of a right kidney tumor. The tumor was incidentally detected on a computed tomography (CT) scan. The CT scan revealed a right kidney tumor with a maximum diameter of 12 cm accompanied by lymph adenopathy in the inter-aortocaval, para-aortic, external iliac, and mediastinal regions. No visceral metastasis was observed. The clinical diagnosis was metastatic RCC. Open nephrectomy and lymph node dissection were performed. The mediastinal lesions were not resected because of the difficulty in approaching them. Macroscopically, a brown-black tumor measuring 12 × 10 × 8 cm showed expansive growth . Microscopic examination revealed a solid, partly cystic structure of tumor cells with large eosinophilic cytoplasm containing abundant melanin . Immunohistochemistry was positive for AE1/3, PAX8, and melan A and negative for alpha-smooth muscle actin. Therefore, melanoma and epithelioid angiomyolipoma were ruled out. We suspected MiT family translocation RCC as melanin-producing RCC. Immunohistochemistry was positive for TFEB and negative for TFE3. FISH using a TFEB split probe (GSP Lab., Inc., Kobe, Japan) was carried out to attain a definitive diagnosis . TFEB rearrangement was confirmed. Additionally, TFEB gene signals were remarkably increased, indicating TFEB amplification. FISH using a MALAT1-TFEB fusion probe (GSP Lab., Inc.) did not demonstrate MALAT1-TFEB gene fusion . Based on the above results, although the TFEB fusion partner gene was not identified, the diagnosis was TFEB-translocated and -amplified RCC. In addition, FISH using a VEGFA probe and the Chromosome 6 Control Probe (Empire Genomics, Buffalo, NY, USA) was performed . The results indicated VEGFA amplification without chromosomal amplification.
Because the mediastinal lesions remained unresected, pazopanib was administered. We did not select a combination of tyrosine kinase inhibitor and immunotherapy because they were not standard at that time. Two weeks after administration, pazopanib was discontinued because of liver dysfunction, and axitinib was started. Immediate shrinkage of the lesions was observed . Two years after administration of axitinib, positron emission tomography–CT revealed no new lesions. Radiation therapy was performed on the mediastinal lesions, and axitinib was discontinued. Six months later, a metastatic lesion was found in the para-aortic region. We performed laparoscopic resection, and the microscopic findings revealed almost the same tissue as the primary tumor. Three months later, a CT scan revealed new presacral lesions. After re-administration of axitinib, shrinkage of the presacral lesions was observed. However, liver metastasis was noted on a CT scan 18 months after axitinib re-administration, and nivolumab was initiated. Nevertheless, the disease was controlled for 52 months by multimodal treatment.