This study presents a rare case of an 81-year-old male with an unremarkable medical history who was admitted to our department complaining of increasing dysphagia and dysphonia caused by a giant cervical mass which had grown steadily during the previous six months. Clinical examination showed a solid, painless, mobile mass extending to the right and central areas of the neck. Ultrasound examination revealed a heterogeneous hypoechoic mass with irregular edges. The CT scan confirmed a giant, heterogeneous, and hypodense mass (95×72×145mm) extending from the hyoid bone to the retrosternal area with compression, narrowing, and left displacement of larynx and trachea. There was also no evidence of locoregional or metastatic disease .
Laboratory findings revealed that the patient was euthyroid. Fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) was inconclusive, and a core needle biopsy was performed with a suspicion of a solitary fibrous tumor; therefore, we performed a surgical excision of the tumor. We approached the neck with right cervicotomy, and it was possible to identify and dissect the vascular pedicle of the tumor, which was attached to the right thyroid lobe. The mass was macroscopically removed while preserving the thyroid gland (, ).
Postop was uneventful, and the histopathological and immunohistochemical studies established the final diagnosis of fibrosarcoma (G2: moderately differentiated).
Histopathological examination with hematoxylin-eosin techniques revealed a proliferation of ovoid spindle atypical cells associated with abundant collagen fibers and blood vessels with irregular edges. Numerous mitotic figures were present and the mean necrosis percentage was inferior to 50% .
In immunohistochemical staining, the spindle cell areas were focally immunoreactive to CD34, BCL2, and CD99. However, they had no reactivity to CK, desmin, S-100, STAT6, CD31, TTF-1, AE1/AE3, EMA, and HMB-45. In the head and neck, oncological multidisciplinary team complementary treatment with radiotherapy was decided although the patient refused it. After one year follow-up, there were no clinical or radiological signs of recurrence.