A 59-year-old woman presented with no relevant past medical history initially presented in 2012 with a 3-year history of right tinnitus, hearing disturbance, and hemifacial paresis. Her right facial function was House–Brackmann (H-B) Grade III, and hearing function was American Academy of Otolaryngology–Head and Neck Surgery (AAOHNS) class B. MRI displayed an extra-axial mass lesion with a maximum diameter of 20 mm in the right CPA. The lesion showed a low-intensity signal on T1-weighted imaging, a high-intensity signal on T2-weighted imaging, and a high-intensity signal on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) [-]. Furthermore, the lesion showed no enhancement on contrast-enhanced T1-weighted imaging . Therefore, the MRI findings were compatible with a benign epidermoid cyst. The tumor was near-totally removed by the lateral suboccipital retrosigmoid approach. The tumor contents were pearly white debris and could easily be aspirated . The tumor capsule was a translucent thin membrane that could easily be removed from the surrounding tissue, but a small portion of the capsule was left because it was tightly adhered to the brainstem and facial nerve (near-total removal) [ and ]. Postoperative facial nerve function and hearing function were H-B grade V and AAO-HNS Class B, respectively. For postoperative follow-up, a neurological examination and non-contrast enhanced MRI were performed every year. Results indicating recurrence were observed on MRI 6 years after the initial surgery. On MRI at that time, the lesion showed a low-intensity signal on T1-weighted imaging, but unlike the MRI findings before recurrence, the lesion showed a heterogeneous low-intensity signal on T2-weighted imaging, and a low-intensity signal on DWI [-]. Since the lesion was very small at that time, we decided to perform a shorter follow-up including contrast-enhanced MRI. However, the lesion grew rapidly within 2 years until it began compressing the brainstem, and MRI showed contrast effects of the tumor capsule on contrast-enhanced T1-weighted imaging [-]. Moreover, edema around the brainstem owing to tumor compression was also observed. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis at that time showed that both the protein level and cell number were within the normal range. Based on the MRI findings, malignant transformation of the CPA epidermoid cyst was considered. In addition, as the tumor grew, the patient’s hearing function deteriorated to AAO-HNS Class D, and she also developed gait disturbance. Therefore, reoperation was performed 8 years after the initial operation for the purpose of a definitive diagnosis on histopathology and the relief of brainstem compression. The tumor extended from above the tentorium to the jugular foramen. Therefore, the tumor was removed using the combined transpetrosal approach. Unlike the tumor that had been removed initially, this tumor contained yellowish and flaky debris and could not be easily aspirated . The tumor capsule was also a thick and cloudy membrane that tightly adhered to the surrounding cranial nerves and brainstem and was subtotally removed . Postoperative histopathological analysis demonstrated malignant transformation of the epidermoid cyst, and hence stereotactic radiotherapy (local 50 Gy in 25 fractions) was performed as postoperative adjuvant therapy. At the time of writing, 7 months have passed since the second surgery, but no regrowth has been observed.
At the time of the first surgery, histological analysis revealed that the cyst lining was composed of stratified squamous epithelium with a granular layer and abundant lamellated keratin flakes. The histological diagnosis was an epidermoid cyst. The cyst lining demonstrated multilayered squamous metaplasia owing to the proliferation of basal cells with mild nuclear atypia . The atypical squamous cells showed loss of cellular polarity without mitotic figures. IHC analysis revealed that these atypical squamous epithelial cells had partial loss of staining for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), 70–80% of the cells were positive for p53, and a few cells were positive for p16 [-].
At the time of the second surgery, histological analysis revealed that the cyst lining had typical epidermoid features, and in many parts the cyst lining showed multilayered squamous metaplasia with atypical features, such as the loss of cellular polarity and few mitotic figures [ and ]. IHC analysis revealed that almost all of the atypical squamous epithelial cells were positive for p53, and 30–40% of the cells were positive for p16 [ and ].