An 8-year-old boy was admitted to the hematology department in Namazi Hospital (Shiraz, Iran) due to clinical findings such as fever, jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, and pancytopenia. Laboratory studies showed notable abnormal findings related to liver function tests and coagulation profile. He had an increased level of AST, ALT, LDH, total and direct bilirubin, prolonged prothrombin time (PT), and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), serum ferritin (nearly 1000 ng/ml), and low level of fibrinogen, total protein, and albumin. A high titer of Ebstein-Barr virus (EBV) viral capsid antigen IgM antibody proved an acute EBV infection. Serological markers for hepatitis A, B, and C were negative, and antibody titers for autoimmune hepatitis were within normal range. Moreover, Wilson disease was ruled out by measuring serum ceruloplasmin and 24-h urine copper. Liver biopsy and bone marrow aspiration followed by biopsy was inconclusive with non-specific findings. Laboratory tests such as defective killing activity of either CD8 or NK cells, were not available in our center or elsewhere in Iran.
The proband was product of consanguineous marriage (first-degree cousins) and there were no any documented HLH disease phenotype, immune disorders, hepatic diseases and blood malignancies in the immediate and extended family. The patient was suspected as a case of HLH according to HLH-2004 protocol given the fact that he fulfilled the necessary criteria mentioned above. He was treated with dexamethasone, cyclopsporin and etoposide, but soon after starting treatment he showed dramatic responses with resolution of fever and correction of hepatitis, pancytopenia and bleeding tendency. Gradually, the patient developed clinical signs of the central nervous system (CNS) involvements such as convulsion, ataxia, spasticity and slurred speech. But cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) analysis for cell count, protein and cytology were normal. Brain MRI with and without contrast injection revealed spots of white matter hypersignal intensities on T2 and FLAIR images which were in favor of CNS involvement in HLH . Thus, we added intrathecal methotrexate and hydrocortisone to his treatment regimen, and searched for an HLA-matched donor for BM transplantation.
To determine whether the patient is a case of familial HLH, an unbiased next generation DNA sequencing which covered the entire coding exons was performed for detection of mutation in genes involved in FHL. We performed whole exome sequencing utilizing next generation sequencing on an Illumina platform on DNA sample from the patient. Detail of sample alignment is listed in Table . The text files of sequences were aligned using BWA aligner tool and variants were identified using GATK and annotated with the use of annovar software. In total, more than 120 K annotated variants were identified with hetero/homo ratio of 1.7, which then were filtered based on their frequency, location, functional consequences, inheritance pattern and more importantly clinical phenotype. Results revealed a novel homozygous missense mutation in PRF1 gene (NM_001083116: exon3, c.1120 T > G, p.W374G, position 72,358,357 on chromosome 10). Homozygous mutations in PRF1 gene, which is encoded for perforin 1, have been previously reported to cause type-2 of familial HLH, (OMIM number 603553) , having an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Using Sanger sequencing, the new identified mutation was confirmed in the proband (as homozygote mutation) and his parents (as heterozygote mutation) . This mutation has not previously been reported and this is the first report of mutation of PRF1 gene in Iranian patients affected by HLH. Following evidences confirm that this mutation can lead to FHL2: 1-Whole exome sequencing only identified this mutation to be the main cause of FHL2 in the patient. 2- As can be seen in Fig. , Sanger sequencing confirmed the mutation in the proband and based on identified heterozygote mutation in his parents, the inheritance pattern must be an autosomal recessive. 3- Bioinformatics software such as polyphen, SIFT, LRT, Mutation Taster, FATHMM, Radial SVM and Mutation Assessor software are predicted that this variant will be damaging 4- As shown in Fig. , the comparative amino acids alignment of perforin 1 protein across all Kingdoms using multiple sequence alignment analysis using T-Coffee Multiple Sequence Alignment Program revealed that this amino acid is highly conserved during evolution. 5. In addition, a substitution from tryptophan amino acid with an aromatic side chain (at position 374) to glycine amino acid with a nonpolar and small hydrogen side chain can create major problem in the protein. Thus, this mutation in PRF1 gene is extremely pathogenic in our patient with FHL2.