A 55-year-old Hispanic man, with a history of generalised seizure disorder, presented
with complaints of extensive scarring involving the entire trunk, neck and face (35%
body surface area) following a burn injury three years before presentation. He was
interested in pursuing treatment for disfiguring symptomatic scarring on his face
and neck, which was causing him significant psychological distress. The burns were a
result of water heater explosion that ensued after the patient experienced a grand
mal seizure while fixing the stated appliance. The patient’s initial injuries were
treated at an outside hospital burn unit where he received aggressive wound care and
extensive skin grafting procedures. He complained of persistent and, often,
incapacitating pruritus, pain, tightness and progressive immobility of his skin.
Emotionally, the patient displayed an altered sense of self, lack of self-esteem and
had a documented history of depression due to the injuries he had sustained.
On physical examination, extensive pink to brown firm, hypertrophic rope-like plaques
and associated contractures were noted on the upper and lower cutaneous lip, chin,
lower mandible, neck, trunk and bilateral upper extremities, including the hands.
All scars were tender on palpation . Amputation of the distal digits on the left hand was also
appreciated.
One firm tender nodule containing numerous terminal hairs on the left submental chin
was biopsied. Histopathologic examination of the tissue revealed cicatricial
fibrosis and a dilated follicular cyst with associated keratin. Granuloma formation
was noted to be consistent with a ruptured follicle. No foreign body was seen on
polarisation.
To ameliorate symptoms and improve the appearance and functional status of his
extensive hypertrophic and keloidal burn scars on his face and neck, an aggressive,
non-surgical course of treatment consisting of nine monthly interventions was
developed. In effort to maximise patient comfort, medical modalities (intralesional
injections) were alternated with procedural laser therapies (epilatory, vascular and
fractional laser treatments).
At eight-week intervals, five concurrent sessions of high-dose intralesional
triamcinolone acetonide (40 mg/mL, total 6 cc) injections and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU;
50 mg/mL, total 2 cc) injections were administered via a modified subcisional
technique. All injections were delivered using a 25-gauge needle (1.5-in. length)
into the deep dermis as to avoid inducing superficial atrophy. After an initial
linear ‘tunnel’ was established within the scar by advancement of the needle,
medication was injected in retrograde fashion. From single points of entry, the
needle was reintroduced several times in a fanning pattern to maximize the total
treated area using the fewest number of access sites.
Additionally, he underwent four combination laser sessions with the pulsed dye laser
(PDL) (595 nm [VBeam Perfecta, Syneron-Candela Inc, Irvine, CA, USA], spot size 5
mm, energy 10J, pulse duration 5 ms, cooling setting 2) and Alexandrite laser (755
nm [GentleLase, Syneron-Candela Inc, Irvine, CA, USA], spot size 8 mm, energy 35 J,
cooling setting 30/20/0) to the upper cutaneous lip, chin, jawline and neck. One
fractional laser (1550 nm [Fraxel Dual, Solta Medical Inc, Hayward, CA, USA], energy
50 mJ, treatment level 5, passes 8) treatment was performed after topical (topical
lidocaine and prilocaine 2.5% cream) and local anaesthetic (1% lidocaine with
1:100,000 epinephrine, total 3 cc) administration at month 3. While he reported
improvement in the appearance of his scar after fractional resurfacing, he
complained of temporary isolated altered mental status, which he attributed to the
administration of the anaesthetics. In accordance with his preference to eschew
further usage of topical or local anaesthetics, only PDL and Alexandrite lasers were
continued.
Following two sets of injections and one laser session, the hypertrophic scars became
more supple and scattered, allowing entrapped, horizontally growing terminal hairs
(~1 cm in length) to be visualised within the scars located on the neck. In order to
decrease the suspected inflammation stimulated by this hair trapping, the
Alexandrite laser was added to the patient’s therapy regimen. At the completion of
treatment, the patient reported significant improvement in pain, itch, physical
mobility and self-esteem. Clinically, he displayed a remarkable decrease in scar
thickness and improvement in the parameters of erythema, dyschromia, texture and
range of motion . Results were
maintained at 15 months after presentation.