A 50-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for vacuum-assisted removal of bilateral breast fibroadenomas due to progressive growth of the masses. The patient had no history of trauma, hypertension, coagulation disorders, or any other systemic disease. She previously underwent an ultrasound-guided biopsy of bilateral breast masses, and the histological diagnosis was fibroadenomas. Ultrasound-guided VAR was performed with an 8-gauge needle under local anesthesia until the masses were no longer sonographically visible. The patient was discharged on the same day without any immediate complications.
The patient was followed up after 3 months and reported to be a good condition without any discomfort. On physical examination, the lateral part of the right breast presented mild arterial pulsation without any palpable active mass or breast bruising. The two-dimensional ultrasound showed that there was a well-defined anechoic nodule in the right breast at 9 o’clock, 3 cm from the nipple . Color Doppler ultrasonography demonstrated that it was a localized dilated intramammary artery with an intact wall, measuring 6 mm × 4 mm, and no evidence of fistula and surrounding thrombosis was found on repeated scans . Spectral Doppler displayed a high-speed turbulent arterial flow component inside . Power Doppler showed that blood flow was filling it in . The patient denied a history of trauma to the right breast or anticoagulation therapy during the follow-up visit, and no cystic structure was found in previous breast ultrasound examinations. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with an iatrogenic aneurysm of the breast.
Finally, a multidisciplinary consultation was conducted regarding the patient, and a variety of management schemes were proposed for the treatment of the true aneurysm, including conservative treatment with regular imaging surveillance, surgical resection, or interventional procedures. After explaining to the patient the pros and cons of various treatment protocols, she preferred conservative treatment with regular breast ultrasound examination. The patient was also aware of the complications of the aneurysm and was told to present at a nearby hospital if there was breast pain or bruising. A recent ultrasound scan revealed no increase in aneurysm size, and she has remained asymptomatic for 18 months.