A 35 years old gentleman previously healthy, presented to the ENT clinic in Kuwait with 7 months history of a nasal lesion on the left soft triangle. The lesion started as a small soft oval shaped mass and increased in size gradually around 3 mm per month. It was not associated with pain, fever, bleeding, or difficulty breathing. There was no history of trauma or any surgeries to the nose. His family history was clear from similar lesions.
On examination, he was vitally stable and afebrile. A pedunculated left soft triangle nodule was noted on the nose, measuring around 2 × 1.5 cm. Its oval in shape and the color is similar to the patient's skin. On palpation, it was mobile with a peduncle attached to the soft triangle. It was non-tender and had normal temperature. There were no palpable lymph nodes or similar lesions on his body. Full ENT exam was done that was unremarkable. .
A biopsy was taken which showed a well-circumscribed biphasic tumor with admixed epithelial and myoepithelial/mesenchymal components. Epithelial component composed of branching glands lined by two layer of epithelial cells or small duct. Mesenchymal component shows a myxoid stroma, and clusters of spindle to epithelioid myoepithelial cells. Diagnosed as chondroid syringoma (mixed tumor of the skin).
Patient was scheduled for a surgical excision and core fillet flap, that was done under local anesthesia. The incision was made in a flap from the anterior skin portion overlying the tumor. Next the tumor was excised from anterior and posterior aspects of the tumor base near the nostril. The flap was folded on the tip of the nostril and secured by interrupted square matrices as seen in the pictures. Follow up was done showing great wound healing and no complications. (, ).
The excisional biopsy showed a well-circumscribed mass filling whole dermis is formed of alveolar branched tubular ducts lined with cuboidal cells and filled with sweats and mixed with abundant myxoid stroma of fibroblasts. The overlying epidermis is atrophied, confirming the diagnosis. (, , ).