A 36-year-old man presented to the hospital with subacute onset heart failure, palpitations, and atypical chest pain. He had schizophrenia (with an admission 10 years prior for paranoia and suicidal behaviour) and several cardiovascular risk factors, including hypertension, smoking habits, dyslipidaemia, and obesity (body mass index 48 kg/m2). His medication included bisoprolol 2.5 mg o.d., ramipril 5 mg o.d., simvastatin 20 mg o.d., metformin 1000 mg b.i.d., lamotrigine 25 mg o.d., risperidone 4.5 mg o.d., and lorazepam 2.5 mg o.d.
Upon initial examination, he was tachycardic at 150 b.p.m., had a blood pressure of 110/55 mmHg, and a peripheral oxygen saturation of 90%. Heart sounds were rapid with no murmurs, jugular venous pressure was raised at 45°, there were bilateral pulmonary rales and pedal oedema. Electrocardiogram revealed rapid atrial flutter (150 b.p.m.) and non-specific ST changes . A transoesophageal echocardiogram was done in the emergency room and excluded left atrial appendage thrombus, allowing for safe cardioversion (1 synchronized 150 Joules shock) that successfully reverted the patient back to sinus rhythm. The transthoracic echocardiogram performed at the echo laboratory disclosed an extrinsic compression on the left atrium and left ventricular (LV) moderate systolic dysfunction with global hypokinesia (, Video S1).
Given the patient’s risk factors and clinical presentation, a coronary angiography was performed to evaluate for coronary disease. There was no epicardial coronary disease, but the angiography showed a large vascularized mass located posteriorly to the heart. The mass was supplied mainly by an anomalous feeder branch arising from the left circumflex coronary (; , Video S2).
Contrast computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a large mediastinal mass (61 × 53 × 33 mm) with heterogeneous arterial-phase enhancement and compression of the left atrium . The poorly defined borders of the mass suggested local invasion of the pulmonary arteries and the pericardium. These CT findings raised the suspicion of a PG. There were no other masses or suspicious ganglia in the thoracic, abdominal or pelvic compartments.
Hormonal analysis showed significant elevation of 24-h urinary and plasmatic normetanephrine values, revealing that this was a functional(catecholamine-secreting) PG. A subsequent whole-body 123-MIBG scintigraphy confirmed an isolated enhanced uptake in the mediastinum.
The final diagnosis was consistent with the presence of a large non-metastatic functional mediastinal PG, with a left circumflex coronary anomalous feeder branch. Catecholamine secretion and direct mass effect were the most likely causes for atrial flutter and subsequent tachycardiomyopathy.
Anticoagulation with rivaroxaban (20 mg o.d.) was started. Alpha and beta blockade was achieved by adding the alpha-blocker phenoxybenzamine (10 mg initially slowly titrated until 30 mg/day) to the selective beta-blocker bisoprolol (2.5 mg o.d.). The case was subsequently discussed at a multidisciplinary meeting with the cardiology and neuroendocrine thoracic tumours teams.
Surgical risk was deemed high due to (i) patient comorbidities (metabolic syndrome, LV dysfunction, and schizophrenia), (ii) tumour vascularization and proximity to major thoracic structures, and (iii) risk of catecholamine surges. The team’s approach to try to optimize the patient prior to surgery, namely by trying to decrease tumour size and the risk of perioperative complications, consisted of three steps. The first was alpha and beta blockade, the second was to perform embolization of the anomalous coronary branch, and the third was peptide-receptor radionuclide therapy with 177-Lu-DOTATE. The patient’s 68-Galium-DOTANOC positron emission tomography scan showed high expression of somastostatin receptors , making him a good candidate for radionuclide therapy.
Cardiac catheterization was performed via radial artery. For the embolization procedure, the interventional cardiologists used the EBU 3.5–4 (Medtronic®) guiding catheter, the BMW guidewire (Abbot®), and the microcatheter finecross (Terumo®). Two hydrocoils (AZUR®) were deployed in the anomalous branch of the circumflex artery achieving significant reduction in distal flow (, Video S3). Subsequently, the patient underwent radionuclide therapy with 177-Lu-DOTATE and completed two cycles during the following year (1 cycle every 3–5 months).
A CT coronarography performed 1 month after the procedure and confirmed the successful embolization of the anomalous branch. A second follow-up CT was performed after the second cycle of radionuclide therapy (11 months after embolization) . It confirmed a reduction both in tumour vascularization and size (from 61 × 53 × 33 mm to 59 × 50 × 29 mm). The patient was followed monthly via outpatient consultations. His symptoms slowly improved and there was no evidence of arrhythmia recurrence. Echocardiography was done every 6 months and showed an improvement in LV function (39–50% in LV ejection fraction by Simpson’s biplane). Hormonal analysis revealed a decrease in catecholamine levels [plasmatic normetanephrine (upper limit of normal < 983): initial value: 4530 pmol/L, at 12 months: 4420 pmol/L; urinary normetanephrines (normal-range: 480–2424): initial value 10454 nmol/day, at 12 months: 8894 nmol/day]. Genetic testing for SDHAF2, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, MAX, TMEM127, and VHL genes was negative.
The adjunctive strategies to reduce surgical risk showed positive results. Unfortunately, the patient expired due to unrelated causes (suicide) before the procedure (18 months after initial presentation).