A 59-year-old male, with a history of hypertension and type 2 diabetes, came to a national hospital complaining of epigastric pain, early satiety, nausea, and vomiting. On esophagogastroduodenoscopy, a pyloric ulcer was found which caused gastric outlet obstruction. A biopsy was done, revealing a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell features. The patient was diagnosed as gastric carcinoma with pyloric stenosis and then underwent exploratory surgery. During operation, the tumor was found at the antrum and pylorus region invading the duodenum, the head of the pancreas and the mesentery of transverse colon and small intestine, along with multiple enlarged and hard regional lymph nodes. A gastrointestinal anastomosis and a peritoneal lesion biopsy were performed. The pathology result of peritoneal lesion was signet ring cell carcinoma (SRCC), confirming the postoperative diagnosis of advanced gastric cancer (pT4bN2M0).
Afterwards, the patient was transferred to our institution for chemotherapy. After three cycles of EOX regimen (epirubicin, oxaliplatin, and capecitabine) , the disease was found to have progression. An abdominal CT scan at this time showed a broadly invasive gastric tumor, multiple enlarged lymph nodes, and secondary mesenteric lesions. Laboratory data indicated an increase in the level of tumor markers compared to pretreatment values, including CEA 12.47 ng/mL (from 3.91 ng/mL) and CA19-9 9.82 U/mL (from 5.99 U/mL).
We accordingly changed the chemotherapy regimen to FOLFIRI (5-fluorouracil, calcium folinate, and irinotecan) . After two months (4 cycles), the tumor markers reduced below a normal range and CT scan also showed less-invasive lesions. Another CT scan done after six months (12 cycles) only showed a wall thickening of the gastric antrum (41 mm in length) with no surrounding fatty infiltration, no enlarged lymph nodes, and a well confined cyst posterior to the head of the pancreas . Endoscopic examination revealed no gross lesion of gastric mucosa. FOLFIRI chemotherapy has down-staged the patient from T4bN2M0 to ycT3N0M0. During chemotherapy treatment, the only significant toxicity was anemia which did not require blood transfusion and no grade 3-4 toxicities were recorded.
Then, we decided to perform a subtotal gastrectomy and a D2 lymphadenectomy on this patient. During surgery, the surgeons recorded a thickening of the antrum, without any enlarged lymph nodes or peritoneal metastases. The postoperative pathology result was gastric chronic inflammation, fibrosis, and intestinal metaplasia, with negative lymph nodes (7/7 nodes of stations 1, 3, 7, and 9 and 2/2 nodes of small intestinal mesentery) as well as negatively greater omentum lesions, giving a postop stage of ypT0N0M0. The patient was closely followed up afterwards. No adverse events were recorded during the follow-up, and a CT scan was performed 34 months after the second operation showed no recurrence.