A 75-year-old white Caucasian female patient presented to our clinic in August 2022, complaining of left knee pain and weight-bearing intolerance, even when using an extension knee brace and crutches. The knee was swollen with lateral patella dislocation and a passive range of motion of 0–120°. She underwent a medial unicompartmental knee arthroplasty (UKA) surgery in 2009 with good outcomes; then, in April 2021, she was diagnosed with left peroneal malleolus fracture, incomplete quadriceps tendon rupture with patellar dislocation, and instability of the UKA after a trauma. The fracture was treated with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) and the UKA was revised with a uncemented modular rotating hinge prosthesis (Endo-Model-M, LINK—Hamburg, Germany) in July 2021. Nevertheless, in December 2021, there was a recurrence of left patellar dislocation treated conservatively with a brace and weight-bearing restriction for one month. Then, in January 2022, after another fall, the patient experienced a Felix type III periprosthetic tibial fracture, treated with open reduction and internal fixation. Since this event, 8 months before being referred to us, the patient has been unable to walk. Radiographs performed at that time showed a tibial malunion with tibial stem mobilization due to stress-shielding .
To rule out infection, an arthrocentesis was performed, it showed clear yellow fluid without any traces of blood. The cell count values were 180 cells/microL, with 17% polymorphonuclear cells. Cultures were negative for both aerobes and anaerobes. The blood levels of C-reactive protein (PCR) were 2 mg/dL. At the time of the surgery the patient was affected by tibial malunion, aseptic loosening of the tibial component, extensor mechanism disruption with consequent patellar irreducible dislocation. The patient didn’t present any rotational defect,the patellar dislocation was entirely attributed to the rupture of the extensor mechanism with impaired healing and retraction of tissues that kept the patella laterally dislocated. The pre-surgery plan was to remove the tibial plate, screws, and all prosthetic components, replacing them with an uncemented modular knee fusion nail (Endo-Model Knee Fusion Nail SK, LINK—Hamburg, Germany). A lateral distal approach, centered on the previous scar, allowed for the removal of the distal tibial screws. An anterior medial approach to the knee, extended to the proximal part of the tibial diaphysis, was performed for a complete removal of the tibial plate and screws. Subsequently, an arthrotomy was performed. Five samples for culture examination were taken. The patella was irreducibly dislocated, necessitating a lateral release and the removal of its prosthetic component. The tibial prosthetic component was extracted through an anteromedial tibial window and, following appropriate preparation, a 240 mm non-cemented stem was inserted into the tibial canal. Despite numerous attempts, the femoral stem could not be mobilized due to its deep osteointegration, so only the femoral shield was removed. After confirming stability and positioning, arthrodesis was achieved by connecting the retained femoral stem with the modular interconnection of the knee fusion nail system. The proximal tibia was further stabilized with Tycron no.5 cerclages. After nail positioning, the 10 cm gap between distal femur and proximal tibia was filled with antibiotic cement spacer (Palacos-R, Heraeus Medical -Wehrheim, Germany) .
The limb was immobilized in a brace for the first 21 days post-surgery, after which the patient began exercises for hip and ankle mobilization, isometric muscle strengthening, and magnetotherapy. Non-weight-bearing ambulation was prescribed for 30 days. All intraoperative culture tests yielded negative results.
After three months, the patient was able to walk with just one crutch, and after six months, she was allowed to resume normal activities. At one-year follow-up, the patient can walk using a cane, enabling full weight-bearing on the operated limb. She reports an improved sense of well-being and a return to normal daily activities. The patient uses a 1.5 cm insole to enhance walking comfort and reduce pelvic tilting. follow-up X-rays confirmed the stability of fixation devices and cement, without signs of subsidence of the implant .