A 61-year-old man with a medical history of chronic neck and back pain secondary to a motor vehicle accident presented to the clinic with a 1-month history of worsening neck pain. The x-ray of the cervical spine showed evidence of degenerative disk disease, and he was prescribed hydrocodone. One week later, the patient returned with progressive worsening of pain associated with upper extremity weakness, decreased grip strength, numbness, and paraesthesias of bilateral upper extremities. Range of motion was impaired secondary to pain. Activities of daily living were reported to be severely limited as the patient was unable to dress or bathe himself without assistance. Social history was significant for a several year history of construction work and negative for tobacco or alcohol use. On examination, temperature was 36°C, blood pressure was 140/88 mm Hg, and pulse was 75 beats per minute. Point tenderness was noted on palpation of the cervical spine, and strength and range of motion testing were limited by severe pain.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine ordered by the primary care physician showed extensive vasogenic edema of the brain and spinal cord as well as a single nodular lesion at the C4-C5 level . The patient was subsequently admitted to the hospital and had an MRI of the brain, cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spinal cord. Imaging revealed innumerable ring-enhancing lesions throughout both cerebral hemispheres, basal ganglia, and cerebellum concerning for metastases. There was also evidence of a 6 mm × 14 mm × 9 mm-enhancing nodule in the right lateral ventral spinal cord at the level of C4-C5. No other spinal cord lesions were noted. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was ordered, revealing a dense consolidation of the left lower lobe . Other CT findings concerning for metastases included mediastinal and periportal lymphadenopathy, a low-density lesion in the posterior spleen, and a nonspecific small sclerotic lesion of the left iliac bone. Although there was initially concern for an infectious process, blood cultures and infectious workup were negative. Transbronchial biopsy of the lesion confirmed the presence of a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the lung with evidence of lymphovascular invasion. In the setting of wide metastases noted on CT, the disease was found to be consistent with stage IV adenocarcinoma of the left lung.
Promptly after diagnosis, the patient was started on palliative whole brain radiation therapy and spinal radiation therapy. The tumor was found to be anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene positive, and the patient was subsequently started on crizotinib, an oral tyrosine kinase inhibitor targeting ALK. Due to central nervous system (CNS) involvement, dexamethasone was initiated with plan for a long prednisone taper.
This patient’s disease course was complicated by steroid-induced psychosis and acute hypoxic respiratory failure which was believed to be multifactorial. He was found to have a left-sided pleural effusion for which a thoracentesis was performed. One liter of serosanguinous fluid was drained with cytology confirming a malignant effusion. Unfortunately, the patient experienced a prompt reaccumulation of loculated fluid, and his respiratory status continued to decline. He was ultimately discharged on home hospice.