A 45-year-old man with symptoms of cough and fever was admitted to the respiratory medicine department of a local hospital. The patient reported a 1-month history of headaches before admission but was otherwise healthy. Temperature was not measured before admission. On admission, his temperature was 39.0 °C, with oxygen saturation kept at 95% while breathing ambient air. His respiratory rate was 24 breaths/min, and his level of consciousness remained undisturbed. Chest auscultation revealed coarse crackles in both lower lungs. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed right lower lobe consolidation, multiple calcifications in the bilateral perihilar, and small mediastinal lymph nodes . Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid indicated Legionella pneumophila (8702 unique reads) as the pathogenic microorganism while the presence of a few mycobacteria (9 unique reads) was also observed. He was subsequently diagnosed with Legionella pneumonia and was treated with piperacillin-tazobactam sodium and levofloxacin. After two weeks, the patient’s temperature gradually returned to normal, and his headache slightly improved.
One week after discharge, the patient developed a decreased state of consciousness, and his temperature was 37.8 °C. On physical examination, the patient had a decreased level of consciousness and neck resistance, with bilateral Kernig’s sign positivity. The bilateral eye movements were slightly limited. Bilateral muscle strength testing of the upper and lower limbs indicated patient muscle strength at grade 4. Chest CT showed that the inflammation of the right lung was mostly cleared when compared with the previous CT scan . CSF pressure significantly increased to 330 mmH2O. CSF analysis revealed a slightly increased number of white blood cells (65*10^6/L), increased protein (1381 mg/L), and a reduction in glucose (2.16 mmol/L) and chloride (110.8 mmol/L) levels. CSF ADA levels (23 U/L) were also increased. mNGS of the CSF revealed Mycobacterium tuberculosis as the pathogenic microorganism (52 unique reads). Tests for GFAP-IgG in the CSF (1:100) and serum (1:32, analyzed by a fixed cell-based assay, examined by confocal fluorescence microscopy; Fig. ) were positive. Serological examination results were negative for onconeural antibodies, including ANNA-1, NMDAR, AMPH, Yo, CV2, PNMA2, Ri (ANNA-2), recoverin, GAD65, and Tr (DNER) antibodies. Tests for serum and CSF AQP4 and MOG antibody were also negative. Brain MRI revealed punctate infarcts in the right cerebellar hemispheres and temporal lobe and multiple lesions in the right insula, left thalamus and around the cistern. Some of the nodules were enhanced after injection of gadolinium . Spinal cord MRI (including the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine) was normal. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with GFAP astrocytopathy and tuberculous meningoencephalitis. He was then administered isoniazid 0.6 g/day, rifampicin 0.6 g/day, pyrazinamide 1.5 g/day, ethambutol 0.75 g/day, and levofloxacin 0.5 g/day for anti-tuberculosis treatment. Simultaneously, he was treated with 250 mg/day of intravenous methylprednisolone for 5 days, followed by 120 mg/day of intravenous methylprednisolone for another three days, which was eventually changed to oral prednisone tablets (60 mg) as maintenance therapy. The patient’s consciousness gradually improved, and the headaches improved significantly. After one month, the patient’s CSF pressure dropped to 170 mmHg. Re-examination of the CSF showed reduced number of white blood cells (24*10^6/L) and protein (530 mg/L). CSF glucose and chloride levels returned to normal. GFAP antibody levels in the serum and CSF were negative at the 12-month follow-up visit. There was no relapse after the treatment.