A 35-year-old woman was admitted to Reunion Island University Hospital for an infectious syndrome with febrile dyspnea. Her medical history was mainly a Sharp’s syndrome treated with long-term hydroxychloroquine and corticosteroids. She had not travelled abroad in the past 2 years. On admission, the patient presented with Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (fever 39.7 °C, pulse 120 beats/min, blood pressure 112/66 mmHg, respiratory rate 32 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation in room air 100%). Pulmonary clinical signs were pleuritic pain, dyspnea, dry cough, and crackles. The patient had no extrapulmonary symptoms. Laboratory investigations showed biological inflammatory reaction, with a white blood cell count of 8.6 G/L (neutrophils: 7.65 G/L), lymphopenia (0.54 G/L), anemia (10.2 g/dL), and elevated C-reactive protein (76 mg/dL). On Day 1, an injected chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed showing left basal pleuropneumonia with pleural effusion, subpleural nodular lesions, and lymphadenopathies. Three doses of spiramycin (3 M IU) were administered and antimicrobial therapy with ceftriaxone (3 g per day) was initiated. The patient was transferred to the Internal Medicine department. On Day 3, her respiratory status and biological inflammatory reaction worsened, with hyperleukocytosis of 15.2 G/L (neutrophils: 14.2 G/L) and elevated C-reactive protein (> 350 mg/dL); however, she presented no signs of septic shock. Urinary antigen tests for L. pneumophilia and Streptococcus pneumoniae were negative. Antimicrobial therapy with spiramycin (3 M IU every 8 h) was reintroduced. The patient was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU). Treatment was changed to triple antimicrobial therapy with piperacillin-tazobactam (16 g per day), spiramycin (3 M IU every 8 h), and amikacin (30 mg per kg). Complementary microbiological investigations performed in ICU on blood, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, and sputum were all negative. Respiratory multiplex PCR assay on nasopharyngeal swab (FTD Respiratory pathogens-21, Fast Track Diagnostics, Luxembourg; not targeting atypical microorganisms) was negative. A control injected chest CT-scan (Day 5) revealed multiple nodular parenchymal lesions in both lobes, as well as increasing multiloculated pleural effusion. On Day 6, the patient’s clinical condition finally improved. She was transferred to the Pneumology department for etiological investigations.
On Day 9, a specific PCR assay (FTD Atypical CAP, Fast Track Diagnostics, Luxembourg and Genesig Advanced Kits, Primerdesign Ltd, UK) on bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was positive for Legionella spp. (cycle threshold-Ct-34.35) and negative for L. pneumophila. The BAL culture was positive with typical colonies of Legionella spp. which were identified as L. sainthelensi or L. santicrucis using MALDI-TOF Biotyper (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). A second control CT-scan performed on Day 10 showed the persistence of multiloculated pleural effusion and the appearance of bronchopleural fistula in the left lower lobe . Pleural fluid collected on Day 5 was retrospectively reanalyzed and tested positive for Legionella spp. (Ct 28.40). Biochemical analyses of pleural fluid showed parapneumonic pleural effusion with excudate (total protein: 49 g/L; LDH: 1156 IU/L; pH: 7.3 and glucose 2.1 mmol/L).
The French National Reference Center for Legionella confirmed the identification of L. sainthelensi by MIP sequencing . Raw reads from whole-genome sequencing using Nextera XT technology (Illumina, ) were deposited into the European Nucleotide Archive (study Accession No. PRJEB40106).
Minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) determined using the broth microdilution method were similar to those reported for wild-type L. pneumophila strains (0.032 mg/L for moxifloxacin, 0.016 mg/L for levofloxacin, 0.063 mg/L for erythromycin and azithromycin, and 0.001 mg/L for rifampicin) .
Three weeks after admission, the patient’s general health improved and she was sent home.