A 59-year-old previously healthy man presented with fever and pain and swelling in his right lower leg. About two months before this admission, he had developed pain in his right lower leg. The pain had progressively worsened despite analgesics, and his right lower leg had begun to swell. About two weeks before this admission, he had been admitted to an outside hospital where he was found to have osteomyelitis of the right fibula combined with abscesses of adjacent muscles (soleus, tibialis posterior, and fibularis longus). He underwent incision and drainage of his right leg. A first generation cephalosporin was started empirically. However, repeated cultures from tissues had grown no microorganisms, and the leg had been draining pus persistently up until transfer to our hospital. The patient was transferred to our hospital for further diagnostic evaluation and treatment.
His past medical history was negative for diabetes mellitus, arterial hypertension, alcoholism, steroid use, and any other systemic infections. He has been smoking one packet of cigarettes a day for 15 years. He denied a history of local trauma or recreational drug abuse. He recalled recurrent periodontitis lasting for ten years. Approximately three months before presentation, he had four teeth extracted and dentures implanted. He did not receive prophylactic antibiotics before the tooth extraction.
On physical examination, temperature was 37.1 °C, blood pressure was 124/69 mmHg, pulse was 100 beats per minute, and respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute. In general, he appeared ill, although his mental status was alert and oriented. The wound on the lateral side of his right lower leg had an incision 16 cm in size. The fibula was exposed with signs of inflammation of the adjacent muscles with draining pus and a foul odor. Laboratory evaluation revealed a leukocyte count of 12,980/μL (80% neutrophils), a hemoglobin of 9.7 g/dL, a platelet count of 385,000/μL, a C-reactive protein level of 329 mg/L, and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 86 mm/h. A chest radiograph demonstrated no active lung lesions. Computed tomography (CT) of the lower extremities at the outside hospital revealed osteomyelitis of the right fibula and a muscular abscess along the fibular shaft. Magnetic resonance imaging of the lower extremities , which was performed at our hospital, revealed a slightly decreased amount of surrounding abscess. MRI also showed persistent osteomyelitis of the right fibula with no change in the periostitis of the right proximal tibia compared to CT imaging from the outside hospital.
Incision and drainage were performed at the bedside and tissues were sent for Gram staining and culture. Intravenous ampicillin-sulbactam was started at 3 g every six hours. On hospital day 3, fibular excision was performed due to the severe osteomyelitis. Findings on microscopic examination of the bone biopsy specimen were consistent with acute osteomyelitis and showed necrotic tissue with microabscess. Initial tissue culture at our hospital revealed F. nucleatum and Actinomyces meyeri as the causative organisms. Tissue cultures performed at the outside hospital also reportedly grew Fusobacterium spp. in two out of five specimens. The patient had repeat incision and debridement surgery on hospital day 7 and day 17. Intravenous ampicillin-sulbactam was administered for three weeks and then switched to oral amoxicillin-clavulanate at 625 mg every 8 h for eight weeks. Antibiotics were discontinued after 11 weeks of successful treatment. His recovery has been uneventful without recurrence of infection after seven months of follow-up.