A 61 year-old, Caucasian man, with controlled type II diabetes, came to our attention in April 2011 because of loss of balance that progressed over weeks. There was no family history of neurological or autoimmune disorders. In the preceding month, he started noticing body imbalance, reduced ability to focus on daily activities, to elaborate thoughts, and incoordination. Neurological examination revealed signs associated with acute cerebellar degeneration, such as dysdiadochokinesia, mild dysarthria, dizziness, vertigo and clear ataxia. Baseline International Cooperative Ataxia Rating Scale (ICARS score) was 18. Insulin, gastrin, glucagon, C-peptide, thyroid stimulating hormone, thyroxine, folic acid, vitamin B-12 serum levels and urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA) levels were normal. Results of the lumbar puncture and lower extremity electromyography were within physiological limits. No brain masses or abnormalities were evident at both magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scans. No neural auto-antibodies (anti-Purkinje cells, anti-granule cells, anti-nucleolin, anti-GABAergic synapses, DOT-BLOT IgG - Ravo) were detected, neither in serum nor in cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF). CSF analysis revealed an albumin level of 28,34 mg/dL and an IgG level of 4,50 mg/dL. The cytology of CSF was negative for tumor cells. In May 2011, an abdominal CT scan revealed a large pancreatic mass with multiple liver metastases . Subsequently, a percutaneous liver biopsy revealed pathological features of well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (WDNET) of the pancreas, with a 5 % proliferation index (Ki67). Serum Chromogranin-A was elevated (524 U/l, upper normal limit 18) and the 111In-octreotide scintigram resulted positive. An early treatment with monthly intramuscular octreotide LAR (long-acting releasing) at the dose of 30 mg and daily oral prednisone at the dose of 25 mg were started. A complete disease restaging was performed in September 2011. As expected, the size of the primary lesion and of liver metastases did not change significantly, whereas a good biochemical response was detected, with Chromogranin-A serum level decreasing to 58 U/ml. Clinically, the patient experienced an improvement in neurological symptoms. However, three months later, neurological symptoms rapidly worsened, requiring hospitalization. Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed a typical diffuse encephalopathy pattern, whereas the brain MRI scan was negative. Despite an increase in the dexamethazone daily dose up to 16 mg, during the hospitalization the cerebellar syndrome further deteriorated, preventing patient’s self-care. In October 2011, the ICARS score was 41 and Rankin scale 4 . In November 2011, seven months after the onset of the symptoms, patient died from neurological impairment.