A 53-year-old postmenopausal woman who complained about progressive abdominal distention and aggravating satiety was referred to the department of gynaecology in our center.
The patient started to feel intensifying abdominal distention and satiety for the last 2 mo. She also found a significant increase in abdominal circumference and thinning of the limbs. The patient denied other discomforts, including fever, abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. The patient had been postmenopausal for 5 years and did not report abnormal vaginal bleeding.
The patient had a 10-year history of hypertension and took Loxone once per day, with stable control of blood pressure. The patient denied any history of diabetes, coronary heart disease, or malignancy. She also reported no drug allergy or other physical impairment. Additionally, the patient did not receive regular physical examinations, and the last medical examination had occurred more than 10 years prior.
No noteworthy personal or family history was reported by the patient.
The patient’s height was 161 cm, and her weight was 60 kg (body mass index: 23.3, within the normal range). The physical examination revealed a palpable giant abdominal mass reaching the xiphisternum with a rubbery consistency. Other clinical symptoms, including tenderness, rebound tenderness, and mobile turbid sounds, were found.
After hospitalization, the patient received a series of laboratory examinations for testing liver and kidney function, faecal occult blood, blood coagulation factors, electrolyte panel, and tumor biomarkers. The laboratory findings fell within the normal range.
The patient had received a computed tomography (CT) plain scan at another hospital, and was re-evaluated by ultrasonography at our hospital. A massive hyperechoic mass, approximately 30 cm × 17 cm in size, was visualized via ultrasound. The mass was clearly defined and had internal echogenicity, filled with stripe-like structures. Minimal blood signals were detected by colour Doppler ultrasound . A CT plain scan demonstrated a giant homogeneous mass mainly consisting of fatty tissue and thin septa. It measured 16.6 cm × 28.6 cm in volume and pushed the peritoneal contents, such as the bowel loops and uterus, to the right part of the abdomen .