In 2013, a 58-year-old man was admitted to the emergency department of Recep Tayyip Erdoğan University, Rize, Turkey, with complaints of severe headache, agitation, and progressive loss of consciousness. His blood pressure was 250/100 mmHg, and his Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score was 12 - 13 in the emergency department. A diagnosis of aneurysm was obtained with computed tomography (CT) scans and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head. The aneurysm was measured at 56.5 mm with the General Electric Healthcare PACS program (GE; Centricity Universal Viewer Zero Footprint, version 5.0 sp7.1) . The aneurysm was seen to have settled in the middle fossa at the base, filled the inferior p ortion of the temporal lobe, and ruptured toward the posterior portion within the temporal lobe. At first, it had been observed on the CT at the orbital level, and the higher axial sections showed lobulation extending up to the third ventricular level. The aneurysmal wall was not calcified, while the thrombosis within the lumen was locally calcified. A midline shift had formed due to the impact of the hemorrhage. In the cerebral angiographic images obtained by MRI, it was observed that the right MCA and all of its branches did not fill up with blood . It was decided, after the aneurysm’s rupture, that the anterior circulation fed by the right ICA was totally occluded due to vasospasm.
The patient’s medical history showed that he had been diagnosed with a giant cerebral aneurysm 8 years earlier and that two separate endovascular interventions had been performed, both of which failed. During this process, the patient never had an ischemic cerebral attack. The patient begin living with the giant aneurysm. The patient and his family believed that aneurysmal rupture would not occur because there was a large thrombosis filling the aneurysmal lumen during the previous endovascular procedures. The patient had hypertension, but he did not take any regular anti-hypertensive medication. Although the aneurysm was not expected to rupture, it eventually did.
The patient’s clinical condition began to deteriorate after 6 hours in intensive care. He rapidly lost consciousness and began to experience irregular respiration. He was intubated and attached to a ventilator. Upon the occurrence of anisocoria, he was rushed to surgery, both to provide intracranial decompression and to close the aneurysm. All relevant information about the patient is summarized in .
Based on CT and MRI in the emergency department, the giant-sized aneurysm with a diameter of 56.5 mm, which had developed from the MCA and filled the inside of the right temporal fossa, was determined to have ruptured. Since the patient’s clinical condition was rapidly deteriorating, urgent surgery was decided upon. The actual size of the aneurysm was larger than expected during the surgery. In order to be able to obtain proximal control of the aneurysm more safely and to uncover the aneurysmal neck, the ICA was first closed temporarily. A 6-minute-thrombectomy was performed on the giant aneurysm, and the parent artery was revealed along with the MCA branches. Since the parent artery was the one that directly filled the aneurysm, it was closed with a clip.
Despite vasospasms, the right ICA was prepared because hemorrhage control might be challenging due to the magnitude of the aneurysm. Vascular tape was wrapped around it in a way that would make it possible to close at any time. Following the pterional skin incision, an extensive temporoparietal craniotomy was performed. The dura was opened so that the pedicle base would stay on the temporal base. There was no pulsation in the right cerebral hemisphere. The aneurysm was directly seen in the proximal entry of the sylvian sulcus and on the inferior temporal gyrus . The diameter of the visible surface of the aneurysm was measured at 40 mm. Since it completely filled the proximal part of the Sylvian sulcus, dissection was not performed on the Sylvian sulcus. The aneurysmal walls were not movable, thus the carotid artery could not be reached. The aneurysm was hard and no dissection was likely to be performed around it. At this stage, when it was obvious that the inside of the aneurysm was filled with thrombus, it was decided that the posterior part of the aneurysm would be reached through thrombectomy.
When the outer wall of the aneurysm was opened, the old thrombus wall was encountered . During the thrombectomy, it was noted that the thrombus had became fibrotic and old, while the new thrombus was very small. The aneurysm was filled with thrombus to the parent artery lumen, and it took the shape of the lamina seen within the aneurysm. The thrombus layers were totally rigid, gray, and even calcified due to the fact that the layers close to the external wall, in particular, were rather old. As the center was more closely approached, newly-formed thrombus layers were encountered . When the center of the aneurysm was reached, it gradually began to bleed. At this point, the right ICA was compressed and the blood flow was stopped. After the contents were discharged, the aneurysmal wall became flexible. The posterior part was examined while being moved, and the aneurysm, along with a separate large lobule, seemed to proceed into the temporal lobe and toward the superior region. The aneurysm was minimized with macro-scissors. After the primary lobule was thoroughly removed, the interior portion of the secondary lobule was discharged with tumour forceps . The M2 branch of the MCA originating from the wall, overlooking the temporal lobe of the giant aneurysm and proceeding toward the distal part of the Sylvian sulcus, could be seen when the walls of the secondary lobule were moved. The M2 originated from the second lobule of the aneurysm. There was no pulsation in the M2 and its diameter was tiny due to vasospasm . Perforating branches with rather tiny diameters were separated from the side of the giant aneurysm, which overlooked the temporal lobe and proceeded along it. The proximal part of the aneurysm that was connected to the artery was reached, and the final large thrombus was removed from it. The ICA was then re-opened, and the hemorrhage that followed had a higher flow rate than the previous one. It was then understood that the bleeding vessel was M1 itself and the parent artery. After the parent artery was closed with clips, the bleeding ceased. The thrombectomy was completed in 6 minutes.
The aneurysm had reached a giant size. It was formed of the MCA bifurcation and had remained within the M2 and its branches. No atheroma plaque to prevent the clip insertion was seen. At the end of the process, there was no pulsation in the right cerebral hemisphere as had been seen at the start of the surgery. The necessary precautions were taken to increase the patient’s blood pressure. In case edema developed in the brain, duraplasty was performed via a galeal graft, and the cranium was not closed. Following the operation, the patient was taken to the intensive care unit. His blood pressure did not increase despite the discontinuation of opiates. Dopamine was started. No radiological follow-up was performed since the patient’s hemodynamics were failing. His anisocoria recovered in the postoperative early period, during which he began to localize the pain with the help of his right arm. Shortly after that, at the end of the postoperative 12th hour, his response to pain suddenly deteriorated. Eventually, the patient lost spontaneous respiration. He had rapid cardiac arrhythmia, followed by cardiac arrest. Deep bradycardia and hypotension were assumed to be due to ischemia affecting the brain stem.