Patient was a 28-year-old female non-smoker with a past surgical history of breast implants. She presented to the emergency room with a 3-week history of recurrent episodes of hemoptysis and cough; at first, the symptoms were mild, so the patient did not seek any medical attention; nonetheless, they became more intense over time and were accompanied by severe shortness of breath, due to this, she was admitted to a private clinic. Complementary exams, at the time of admission, revealed leukocytosis, neutrophilia, and a ground-glass opacification in the right upper lobe on chest X-rays. SARS-Cov-2 was suspected, yet the initial COVID-19 RT-PCR (real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction) test from the nasopharyngeal swab was negative. Regretfully, the medical team did not consider other diagnoses at that time, and she was misdiagnosed as community-acquired pneumonia. Oxygen and antibiotics were initiated, yet, despite treatment, and after a week, the patient lacked significant improvement. Suddenly, on the seventh day of hospitalization, she experienced dyspnea on exertion and endured massive hemoptysis that required a transfusion of three packed red blood cells as her hemoglobin lowered below 6mg/dl. After the patient was stable, a contrast-enhanced chest CT identified the same ground-glass pattern, now on both lungs, multiple peripheral pulmonary nodules, pericardial effusion. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was requested immediately, revealing a large vegetation in the posterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve; consequently, infectious endocarditis was suspected.
Blood cultures were requested and identified a methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) three days after this event. Nonetheless, her clinical condition continued to deteriorate. Due to the ground glass pattern observed in both lungs, another COVID-19 test was requested on the twelfth day of hospitalization; this time, the test was positive.
COVID-19 therapy, including azithromycin and corticosteroids, was about to be administered. Nonetheless, as her clinical course was unfavorable, she was transferred to our hospital.
On arrival, a conscious but dyspneic and tachypneic patient was encountered, her blood oxygen saturation was 74%; hence, high-flow oxygen therapy was started. Her blood pressure was normal and cardiac auscultation was unremarkable without any murmurs. On chest examination, decreased expansibility was detected along with diffuse crepitations and crackles.
Due to the discrepancy of the results in the COVID-19 tests, a new RT-PCR test was performed, which was negative. Also, as we only had the radiology reports but no images were available, new imaging studies were done and a new contrast-enhanced chest CT showed diffuse alveolar hemorrhage, the previously detected pulmonary nodules, and a right atrial mass . A new transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was done at our center, showing a large (7 × 6 × 4 cm) lobulated heterogeneous intracardiac mass within the right atrium; it had a broad base that reached the tricuspid valve. The mobile mass entered into the tricuspid orifice in diastole and back into the right atrium during systole. A widened inferior vena cava, mild tricuspid regurgitation, moderate pericardial effusion, and bilateral pleural effusions were also detected . With these findings, the medical team reached a definitive diagnosis. Although the pandemic has undeniably affected all our institutions and personnel, we should not lose awareness of the other pathologies that can harm our patients. Cardiac mass, multiple pulmonary nodules, hemoptysis are not the principal characteristics of SARS-Cov-2. Although ground-glass opacities can cloud our judgment in pandemic times, it should not define our practice as physicians. After a multidisciplinary meeting, the COVID-19 diagnosis was dismissed, and we focused on the cardiac mass.
Cardiothoracic assessment was required, and wide resection surgery was decided. During surgery, and after a median sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass, the tumor was visualized. It had compromised the right atrial wall. It measured 6 × 6 × 4 cm and involved the atrioventricular sulcus; resection of the tumor was not possible as infiltration was extensive. Therefore, multiple biopsies were taken . Also, numerous pulmonary nodules were seen in the upper-middle and lower pulmonary lobes. Surgery was completed, and the patient was successfully weaned off cardiopulmonary bypass. Frozen section revealed an angiosarcoma (AS).
She remained stable during her first day in the ICU with ventilatory support; however, 28 hours after surgery, the patient underwent abrupt hypotension requiring a high dose of inotropes and vasopressors. As she remained unstable despite these measures, a new TEE revealed that the lobulated cardiac mass was absent, and only a small part of it was evident. (Supplementary Video 2). We also detected right ventricle dilation and dysfunction. Tumor embolism was presumed. Pulmonary angiogram and emergent embolectomy were considered; nonetheless, due to her condition and grim prognosis no other therapies could have improved her recovery. Regretfully the patient suffered an irreversible cardiogenic shock and died.
Pathology confirmed a high-grade primary heart angiosarcoma (AS), with multiple spindle and ovoid cells; immunohistochemistry was positive for CD34, vimentin, FLI-1, and CD31 .