A 55-year old female Nigerian trader, known hypertensive and type 2 diabetic (diagnosed two years prior to presentation) presented to the emergency room with worsening polyuria and polydipsia, associated with progressive unintentional weight loss, heat intolerance, fatigue and an anterior neck swelling over the past two months. There were no features suggestive of cerebrovascular, cardiac or renal decompensation. Relevant examination findings included a blood pressure of 154/96 mmHg, resting pulse rate of 100 beats per minute, and an anterior neck swelling which was diffuse, firm, not tender, moved with deglutition and not with tongue protrusion. She had a fine distal tremor of outstretched hands. There were no signs of ophthalmopathy, acropachy or dermopathy. Other cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal and central nervous system (CNS) findings were essentially normal. A random blood glucose of 427mg/dL with glycosuria of 3+ warranted her admission for intravenous (IV) insulin therapy.
Other routine investigations were essentially normal. However, her glycemic profile remained poorly controlled despite up-titration of insulin and antidiabetic medications (vildagliptin and metformin). An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia. Thyroid function test (TFT) showed a markedly elevated free T4 25.9pmol/L (7.2-16.4pmol/L), free T3 was 3.3 pmol/L (3.8-6.0pmol/L) and TSH was 0.330ꙡIU/ml (0.380-5.330). Thyroid ultrasound showed a diffuse thyroid enlargement with multiple colloidal cysts, which necessitated a fine needle aspiration for cytology (FNAC). About 12 hours following the FNAC, the patient started to complain of chills and rigor, as well as profuse sweating, inability to sleep and palpitations. 48 hours later, she became confused, and subsequently drifted into unconsciousness with a Glasgow coma score of 8/15. A diagnosis of thyroid storm was made using the Burch-Wartofsky (score of 85) and Akamizu criteria. She was managed according to 2016 Japan Thyroid Association guidelines for thyroid storm, with the use of carbimazole 20mg 8-hourly, propranolol 40mg 12-hourly, with particular attention paid to supportive care while proceeding with her antidiabetic and antihypertensive drug regimen. Her consciousness subsequently improved. Cytology report showed clusters of benign follicular epithelial cells with round bland nuclei, fine chromatin pattern and moderate cytoplasm on a background containing abundant colloid materials admixed with few leukocytes. The patient made significant clinical improvement in glucose control and thyroid function, and was followed-up on outpatient basis. Post-admission TFT showed reducing free T4 levels, though still elevated (17.3pmol/L) and normal free T3 and TSH (4.8pmol/L; 1.009mIU/L respectively).