A 69-year-old male patient presented to an outside clinic with weight loss and abdominal pain. Radiological investigations detected a mesenteric mass of 10 cm, which was supposed to be originating from the right colon. Diagnostic laparoscopy revealed a retroperitoneal mass with peritoneal implants. Biopsies’ results were carcinoma and its peritoneal metastasis. Then, the patient was referred to our center. A colonoscopy was performed, revealing a 3 cm diameter mass at the base of the cecum. Mucinous adenocarcinoma with a goblet cell pattern and widespread extracellular mucin secretion was detected . Abdomen magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 14x5.5x5 cm conglomerate mass and implants extending to the root of the superior mesenteric vein and attaching to the duodenum with minimal ascites in the pelvis . Thorax computed tomography (CT) pointed at 15x10 mm lymphadenopathy in the mediastinum with no other abnormal finding. Molecular analysis of the primary tumor revealed BRAF V600E mutant, KRAS, NRAS wild, and HER-2 (-) disease. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan revealed conglomerated lesion in the mesentery (SUVMax 23.5), wall thickening in the ascending colon (SUVMax: 26.1), and hypermetabolic areas in the abdomen thought to be due to the spread of the disease in the peritoneum . The systemic treatment of the patient was started with 5-fluorouracil, folinic acid, irinotecan, oxaliplatin (FOLFIRINOX), and bevacizumab while waiting for the MSI results.
A control CT after 4 cycles of treatment with FOLFIRINOX + bevacizumab regimen showed partial regression, and the treatment was completed to 8 cycles. A PET/CT scan following 8 cycles of FOLFIRINOX + bevacizumab showed a 90% metabolic response (SUVMax: 3). Meanwhile, immunohistochemical evaluation of the MSI panel from the primary tumor showed nuclear dot-like staining patterns for MLH1 and PMS2 . Molecular analysis with PCR was performed due to suspicious staining patterns for MLH-1 and PMS-2. It revealed MSI-H phenotype . MLH-1 methylation analysis was also performed; hypermethylation in the promoter region of the MLH-1 gene was detected . The systemic treatment was converted to folinic acid, fluorouracil, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) combined with pembrolizumab after the status of MSI-H was confirmed. The rationale behind this strategy was the assumption that the primary tumor, metastatic lymph nodes, and peritoneal implants had responded dramatically to triplet chemotherapy + bevacizumab.
The patient was treated with additional 4 cycles of FOLFOX concurrently with pembrolizumab with no adverse effects. The MRI prior to surgery showed that the cecal mass regressed and was limited to the mesocolon. The patient underwent a right hemicolectomy, a pelvic and lower abdominal peritonectomy, a total omentectomy, and a diverting loop ileostomy. Hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy with mitomycin-C was administered for 90 minutes. No major surgical complications occurred, and the stoma was reversed a month after the surgery. The pathology results revealed ypT0N0 (60 lymph nodes). There were no tumor cells in the peritoneal fluid cytology. Pembrolizumab as maintenance treatment was continued after curative resection. The patient was tumor free in his postoperative 6th-month follow-up. The treatment was planned to be continued for 24 months if no toxicity or adverse effects were seen. The timeline of the patient is summarized in .