A 62-year-old female came to us with right knee pain secondary to advanced tricompartmental osteoarthritis, for which a cruciate-substituting TKA was performed under spinal anesthesia. The patient was overweight (body mass index 29.3 kg/m2), hypertensive, with normal blood sugar levels and a glycosylated hemoglobin level of 5.8. The patient did not have any history of chronic dermatological or inflammatory conditions like rheumatoid arthritis and was never on diseasemodifying anti-rheumatoid drugs or steroids. The patient had undergone a tubal ligation procedure, cataract surgery, and renal stone surgery in the last 10 years, all of which had a complete and uneventful recovery. The TKA surgery was performed under strict aseptic precautions, with the surgical site covered with an iodine-impregnated incision drape (Ioban 2™, 3M Health Care, India) in an operation theater (OT) equipped with laminar airflow, and the surgical team used body exhaust helmet suits during surgery. The wound was closed in layers after proper hemostasis without a drain and covered with a sterile dressing. The total duration of surgery was approximately 45 mins, and the patient was administered 2 doses of intravenous (IV) antibiotics perioperatively and oral antibiotics for the next 48 h.
The patient was discharged after 3 uneventful days and a clean incision during the wound check . The patient reported persistent soakage 6 days after TKA surgery, and wound inspection at the outpatient clinic showed oozing and redness around the incision, indicating a superficial wound infection. A superficial debridement was performed in the OT, and stay sutures were applied. The daily wound check for the next 3 days after debridement showed a healthy skin margin with no wound oozing. Culture samples taken during debridement revealed a methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus epidermidis (MRSE) infection, and IV Linezolid and Levofloxacin were administered based on the sensitivity report. Resuturing was performed on the 4th day after the debridement (or 10 days post-TKA) in OT, and a check dressing the next day revealed a 2 cm skin edge maceration of the middle 1/3rd of the stitch line with a blister of around 6 cms on the anterior aspect of the middle 1/3rd of the leg . A repeat wound check after 2 days of resuturing (or 12 days post-TKA) showed non-progression of skin edge maceration but an increase in the leg blister area, which had ruptured and was oozing. The total white blood cell count was 31,890, and the C-reactive protein level was 307.
In view of increased maceration of the stitch line exposing the subcutaneous tissue and persistent oozing from the leg blister, a deep infection was suspected . A debridement, implant removal, and antibiotic cement spacer were performed 16 days post-TKA surgery. The leg blister area (at the middle 1/3rd of the anterior or pretibial surface of the leg) was also thoroughly debrided, and a vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) dressing was applied to both wounds . Histopathological analysis of intraoperative skin and subcutaneous samples from the incision and blister area confirmed the diagnosis of PG . A wound swab taken a day before the surgery revealed a Serratia Marcescens infection, for which IV Meropenem and Teicoplanin were administered. Injectable methylprednisolone was also administered as per the rheumatologist’s advice for the next 10 days. The VAC dressing was changed every 5 days, and the wound showed healthy skin and subcutaneous tissue on day 14 after revision surgery. The patient was put on oral antibiotics (Minocycline 100 mg OD and Cefpodoxime 200 mg BID) and Prednisolone 5 mg after 10 days of revision surgery. The patient was discharged with the advice to change VAC dressings every 5 days in our hospital.
The patient was lost to follow-up after discharge, and a routine call to the patient number after 2 months of discharge revealed that the patient had undergone a gastrocnemius flap procedure for soft-tissue coverage of her wound, and she then expired from complications, most likely septicemia, following the procedure.