A 45-year-old Hindu Mongolian female, with a history of type 2 diabetes for 9 years and under medication for the last 4 months, visited the National Public Health Laboratory (NPHL), Teku, to test for plasma fasting and postprandial blood glucose levels and HbA1c.
We tested HbA1c by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) Biorad VARIANT II, which showed HbA1c to be only 1.1% . The control test run for the day was within range. Fasting and postprandial blood sugars were found to be 173 mg/dL and 280 mg/dL, respectively. The patient sample was rechecked with HPLC TOSO 7234X, which showed HbA1c of 2.1%. In view of this, the patient was contacted and advised to have a complete blood count (CBC) and hemoglobin electrophoresis. We took a detailed history of the patient and requested the records of investigations done in the past.
According to the patient, she was apparently well around 9 years ago (the patient herself was not sure about the exact date) when she started developing increased urination, increased thirst, weakness, and occasional dizziness for a couple of months. She then visited a local health care facility near her hometown, where she was examined and sent for some blood and urine investigations (she has misplaced the lab reports, or probably lost them, according to her). According to her, she was told that she has high blood sugar levels and was advised to make some lifestyle modifications, such as dietary changes and increasing physical activities. She was also prescribed medication (she has no records of the medications prescribed then) and was asked to follow up in the next 3 months. Thereafter, she was doing fine with no complaints for a couple of years, and she never followed up with any healthcare facility until around 3–4 years ago (May 2020), when she presented herself to a healthcare facility in Kathmandu city with complaints of fatigue, severe headaches, pain and discomfort in the abdomen, and occasional dizziness and a feeling of lightheadedness for a couple of months. She also complained of weakness and decreased tolerance for physical activity. Physical examination was unremarkable, and laboratory investigations revealed high blood glucose and serum triglyceride levels (fasting blood glucose: 175 mg/dL; postprandial blood glucose: 193 mg/dL; serum triglyceride: 290 mg/dL). Other investigations were within normal limits .
With these reports, she was referred to a tertiary-level hospital in Kathmandu. On 1 January 2021, she visited Shree Birendra Hospital (a tertiary-level hospital in Kathmandu), where she was further evaluated. At this time, she also admitted having a history of a slight decrease in vision for the last few months and was evaluated for any eye findings. Apart from a slightly presbyopic finding, everything else was normal. Intraocular pressure was within normal limits. There were no findings suggestive of diabetic retinopathy. The fundus examination was normal. Further lab workup findings revealed the following: TLC: 11,660 cells/mcL; Differential Count (DC): Neutrophils = 76, Lymphocytes = 17, Monocytes = 5, Eosinophils = 1, Basophils = 1; MCV: 64.4 fL; MCH: 21.9 pg; RDW-SD: 36.1 fL; RDW-CV: 17.3 fL; postprandial (PP) blood glucose (two hours after taking a meal): 294 mg/dL; and HbA1c: 2.1%. Ultrasonography (USG) of the abdomen and pelvis showed a bulky uterus. All other investigations were within normal limits .
She was prescribed metformin 500 mg OD and advised to make lifestyle modifications once again. She was then referred to the National Public Health Laboratory (NPHL), the central reference laboratory in Nepal, for repeat investigations to confirm the abnormal HbA1c reports and for all other relevant investigations. On arrival at NPHL (21 January 2021), she was thoroughly interviewed for a detailed medical history. She was a nonvegetarian, and she did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol. She had never received a blood transfusion before. Apart from the metformin prescribed earlier, she was not on any other medications. There was no family history of low hemoglobin levels or blood transfusions. There was no other significant medical history in any of her family members, as far as the patient could remember. She gave a history of iron supplementation a long time ago (around 9 years ago when she first presented to a healthcare facility) for around 3 months but not thereafter. She denies any history of any means of blood loss. She has been married for around 25 years and has two kids (elder son: 23 years old, younger daughter: 21 years old). Physical examination was unremarkable and provided the following data: height: 5 feet; weight: 68 kg; body mass index (BMI): 29.3. Laboratory investigations are as follows:
CBC findings revealed hemoglobin of 13.6 g/dL, RBC of 6.2 × 106 cells/mcL, total leucocyte counts of 13,700 cells/mcL (N = 77, L = 18, M = 4, E = 1, B = 0), platelet count of 2.8 × 105 cells/mcL, and packed cell volume (PCV) of 42.1%. Red cell indices included mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean hemoglobin concentration (MCH), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), and RDW-CV%, which were found to be 67 fL, 21.7 pg, 32.3 g/dL, and 17.9%, respectively. All other investigations were within normal limits .
The ultrasonography (USG) report of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a bulky uterus and was otherwise unremarkable.
Hb electrophoresis was performed in the SEBIA MINICAP FLEX PIERCING electrophoretogram, which showed 93.2% HbE, 2.4% HbA2, 2.9% HbF, and 1.5% HbA . A peripheral blood smear revealed microcytic hypochromic red cells with some target cells. White blood cell (WBC) and platelet morphology seem to have no abnormalities.
On the basis od these findings, a diagnosis of homozygous HbE was made, and family screening was advised.