A 48-year-old, married, female presented to her urologist/doctor chiefly complaining from muscle pain, joint pain and fatigue. Her past medical history was significant for recurrent renal stones. After assessing the serum calcium levels, she was referred to a general surgeon as a case of high calcium levels (serum calcium = 14.5 mg/dl).
On examination the case was setting on bed, comfortable, normal breathing, no pallor, no jaundice, no any abnormal movement, well oriented and normal vital signs, that is clinically stable. On the examination of the head and neck, there was a palpable firm mass with regular smooth surface just at the lower pole of the left lobe of thyroid gland, reaching below the left clavicle. Otherwise she had a normal clinical examination with no any other findings. Later she was sent for investigations again, serum calcium showed levels greater than 16.5 mg/dl, PTH level was (1550 pg/ml reference range 15–65 pg/ml)
An ultrasound and MRI was done and showed a mass 46 ×25 × 33 mm (heterogeneous enhancing complex cystic solid mass seen just to the left of the midline with partially retrosternal extension suggestive of parathyroid tumour with cystic degeneration and another non enhancing cystic lesion was detected in the left lobe of thyroid gland) .
Under local anaesthesia and ultrasound guide fine needle aspiration cytology done and the results returned parathyroid lesion but need complete excision to differentiate adenoma from carcinoma.
After good hydration and good preoperative preparation, decision for surgery done, under general anaesthesia and secured air way (endotracheal tube), neck extension and pillow under shoulder, skin disinfection was performed. The skin was opened with transverse collar incision two finger above supra sternal notch. The mass was removed completely after identification of left recurrent laryngeal nerve plus left thyroid lobectomy . The procedure was followed by a good haemostasis with negative suction drain put for the first 24 h. The patient recovered smoothly from anaesthesia with no any reported complications within the first 48 h. After removal of mass, during surgery, blood sample sent for serum calcium level which returned to be 14 mg/dl, after 24 h, a second reading shown a decrease to 13 mg/dl and PTH level become undetected.
At day 5 she started to develops features of hypocalcemia in the form of muscle twitching, tingling of the fingers and circumoral numbness, but serum calcium level was 9 mg/dl (although this is normal for ordinary people). We put her on calcium oral tablets and one-alpha cholecalciferol tablet. The patient was followed, 1 month postoperation, she was doing very well, comfortable, and serum calcium level was 8.6 mg/dl.
Biopsy returned with results demonstrating parathyroid adenoma (30 g in weight), 60 ×55 × 10 mm (no capsular invasion and no vascular invasion), although such a big size and this high level of calcium and age near 50 usually we predicts adenocarcinoma of parathyroid rather than adenoma. Additionally, the thyroid biopsy revealed benign multi nodular goitre.