A 22-year-old male patient presented to our medical center with sharp substernal non-radiating chest pain for two days. He initially experienced generalized body aches and a subjective fever shortly after receiving his first dose of the mRNA-1273 (Moderna) vaccine three days prior. He then developed chest pain, at times pleuritic, which continued to worsen, prompting his presentation to the emergency department.
The patient had a mild COVID-19 infection six months prior to presentation. He took no medications or over-the-counter supplements. He denied any significant family history of chronic conditions including cardiovascular disease. He denied any tobacco, alcohol, or recreational drug use.
On initial presentation, his blood pressure was 97/57 mm Hg, heart rate 100 beats/min, respiratory rate 16 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation was 99 % on room air. He was afebrile with a temperature of 98.6° farenheight (38.6° celcius). On physical examination, he was tachycardic with a regular rhythm. No murmurs, rubs, or gallops were appreciated on auscultation. No jugular venous distension, tenderness to palpation of the chest wall, or lower extremity edema were noted.
Because of his pleuritic chest pain shortly after vaccination, our leading diagnosis was acute pericarditis. However, we also kept life-threatening causes such as acute coronary syndrome in our differential diagnosis.
His ECG revealed normal sinus rhythm with diffuse ST elevation . PR segment depression was discernible in leads V3–V6. High sensitivity troponin was 13,702 ng/L (normal range: 3–20 ng/L). B-type natriuretic peptide level was 48.0 pg/mL (normal range: < 100 pg/mL). His white blood cell count was 8700/cm3 with a neutrophilic predominance of 83%. A complete metabolic panel was unremarkable. The chest radiograph was unremarkable with no signs of focal consolidation, pneumothorax, or pleural effusion. A viral respiratory panel, HIV screen, and urine drug screen were all negative. Sars-CoV-2 nasopharyngeal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing was negative.
An echocardiogram revealed low-normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 50–55% with mid to apical anterior and anterolateral segments appearing hypokinetic (Additional file : Video 1).
Left heart catheterization revealed angiographically normal coronary arteries. Left ventricular end-diastolic pressure was 18 mmHg. CMR showed a normal LVEF (58 %) with findings of dyssnchrony of the septal wall (Additional file : Video 2). It also showed subepicardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) involving the lateral wall and inferior segments at the midventricular and apical LV. Mild adjacent pericardial LGE was also noted . These findings were consistent with perimyocarditis.
In the setting of pleuritic chest pain and anatomic pericardial involvement, the patient was treated with aspirin 650 mg three times per day and colchicine 0.6 mg twice per day. The patient was started on low dose metoprolol for myocardial protection after wall motion abnormalities were verified on CMR. His heart rate improved to a range of 70–80 beats per minute, troponin downtrended , and there was complete resolution of his symptoms during the hospital stay.
Given the development of perimyocarditis after the first dose of the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine, we discussed the risks and benefits of receiving the 2nd dose of the vaccine. After careful consideration the patient elected to forego the 2nd dose of the vaccine. He was discharged with plans to complete a two week course of aspirin, three months of colchicine, and metoprolol. He was instructed to avoid alcohol intake and significant physical exertion for three to six months and to obtain cardiac clearance prior to returning to strenuous physical activity.
He was seen one month following discharge with continued resolution of his symptoms. A repeat cardiac MRI was performed which showed improved subepicardial and adjacent pericardial delayed enhancement in the mid and distal left ventricle . It also showed resolution of the previously noted dyssnchrony suggestive of improving perimyocarditis.