In February 2022, a 5-year-old male patient was admitted to the Department of Pediatric Surgery of Tongji Hospital, Hubei Province, China. The chief complaint was that he could hear and snap when the left elbow joint was flexed, and a hard mass could be palpated medially. The child suffered a bruised left elbow while playing in the playground 1 year ago, and then developed upper extremity pain with limited mobility, normal extension, and range of motion (ROM) of 60°. The CT plain scan and three-dimensional reconstruction examination showed that there were no obvious signs of dislocation fracture and dislocation of the left elbow joint. The doctor who received the initial consultation did not pay attention to the signs of the elbow, and did nothing to deal with it, but only recommended to start functional exercise after two weeks of rest.
During this period, the patient's elbow pain did not increase over time. But the parents strictly followed the doctor's warning. Finally, after 20 days of functional exercise on the left elbow, there is a snapping sound at the joint when flexing. After 1 month of elbow activity, the family suddenly found that there was a 2*1 cm mass above the olecranon of the left elbow, which was hard and could not be pushed. Then the parents asked the doctor who received the first visit, but the doctor still did not pay attention to it, thinking that the bulging mass was formed after muscle contracture and would gradually disappear. After 1 year, the parents found that the patient's elbow was unstable, prolapsed with a small medial pressure, and the patient resisted pressing on the inside of the left elbow. Then came to our hospital for treatment.
This X rays and computed tomography imaging with three-dimensional reconstruction(3D-CT) showed that the left medial epicondyle was irregular in shape, the edge of the humerus was photo-sclerotic, and the humerus-ulnar correspondence was not good, so the left medial condyle was considered nonunion. There was no previous family history, and biochemical findings were unremarkable; on physical examination, there was joint snapping during flexion of the left elbow. The range of motion of the joints was normal, and the flexion and extension were not restricted, but the joints were unstable, and the blood supply and activities of the fingers were fine. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination in our hospital showed that the left medial condyle of the humerus was discontinuous, the broken end was dislocated, and the elbow joint cavity was effusion. We recommend surgical treatment .
During the operation, an incision was made with the medial condyle of the humerus as the center, the flap was opened to both sides, and the subcutaneous tissue was separated. Behind the medial muscle septum. The ulnar nerve was isolated and protected with a rubber drainage tube to avoid intraoperative injury. Muscles were then separated, and the brachialis and biceps and triceps were separated along the medial epicondyle of the humerus to expose the medial distal humerus, the posteromedial aspect of the elbow joint, and the ulnar portion of the olecranon notch. Clear and clear pale yellow synovial fluid was seen flowing out, and the free bone fragment was located on the ulna and had been fully rotated. An obvious defect was seen at the medial condyle of the left humerus, and the wound had obvious fibrotic tissue. A 2.0*1.5 cm free bone fragment (mostly cartilage components) can be seen above the olecranon of the ulna. There is a common flexor tendon attachment on one side of the bone fragment. In fractures of the distal humerus, a bone pluck is used to clear the surface of fibrotic tissue to create a fresh wound.
Due to the long time, the common flexor attached to the fragment retracted, and the free bone fragment could not be pulled back to the defect during the operation, so the muscle attached to the free bone fragment was cut off. The bone fragments were placed in the original defect, but the surface and shape of the fragments and the defect had occurred after positioning with two smooth Kirschner wires as guide wires. Two metal cannulated screws were fixed, and then the collateral ligament was reconstructed. Since the original ulnar nerve groove was missing, the nerve was moved forward, and the incision was sutured. The arm was cast in place for 4 weeks . X rays were reviewed postoperatively, and bone fragment reduction was seen . The patient presented with mild ulnar nerve palsy on the one day after operation, which subsequently recovered normal. At the 10-week follow-up, the patient had normal range of motion and full range of motion in the left elbow. At present, patients do functional exercise to avoid muscle atrophy.