In 2016, a 44-year-old male presented with sudden intermittent headache and dizziness and progressive loss of vision lasting for 3 months. He was diagnosed with obstructive hydrocephalus due to idiopathic aqueduct stenosis and underwent a right VP shunt procedure on September 10, 2016. His symptoms were completely relieved after the operation.
On February 15, 2021, he developed stiff facial expressions. After two weeks, he gradually developed bradykinesia and body stiffness. At that time, the patient’s family complained that he was depressed because of recent family conflict. A psychiatrist diagnosed him with catatonic syndrome. The patient subsequently started paroxetine and mirtazapine treatment. One month later, his symptoms began gradually intensifying, and he developed significant limitation of vertical ocular movements, parkinsonian symptoms of cogwheel rigidity and shaking, limb bradykinesia, and difficulty turning over in bed. In addition, his voice became slow and soft. Most of the time, he was silent and presented memory loss. Given the possibilities of parkinsonism, autoimmune encephalitis, and depressive stupor, the patient received duloxetine, clonazepam, donepezil, amantadine, ganciclovir, and methylprednisolone.
After two months of treatment, the patient became bedridden and was eventually admitted to our hospital. He gradually developed drowsiness, had to be fed through a nasogastric tube and needed tracheal intubation on April 19, 2021. Neurological examination showed high myodynamia, bilateral pyramidal signs, and hyperreactive deep-tendon reflexes. Madopar (125 milligrams (mg) ter in die) was administered to improve parkinsonism. Duloxetine (20 mg quaque die), clonazepam (2 mg bis in die) and olanzapine (5 mg quaque nocte) were given to treat depressive stupor, all without effect. Considering that the psychiatric symptoms were not prominent and there was no evidence of shunt malfunction, we suspended the use of antipsychotics and prescribed Madopar alone. The dose of Madopar was increased to 1250 mg per day, and over the next five days, the patient became flexible and able to speak. Upon discharge, he was still suffering from parkinsonism and presented with Parinaud syndrome, a supranuclear paralysis of vertical gaze resulting from damage to the mesencephalon , but he could eat and walk with help. After being treated with Madopar (1250 mg/d) for one month, the patient was able to care for himself and was fully mobile. As a result, he stopped Madopar, and his parkinsonism did not relapse within one month after discontinuation of therapy.
The results of CSF examination were normal . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) scans displayed fluctuations in the lateral ventricle .
The patient had no related previous physical or mental illness, no toxic exposure and no medical history. Furthermore, no other family members had a similar history.