The patient was a 39-year old female, self-presenting for treatment for severe PMDD. Upon her own request, the patient had been referred from a secondary health care center specializing in OB-GYN (i.e. obstetrics and gynecology), to the Department of Gynecology at Oslo University Hospital (OUS). The aim of the consultation at OUS was to get a second opinion regarding having bilateral oophorectomy to treat her PMDD symptoms. The patient and her husband, voluntarily child-free, both took part in the medical consultation.
When presenting for treatment, the patient reported having struggled with PMDD for nearly a decade with the most debilitating symptoms being affective lability, irritability, anger and interpersonal conflicts, as well as depressed mood and anxiety. The symptoms had increased exponentially over the course of the previous 12–18 months, and were now severely impairing daily functioning. The patient had tried a number of conservative treatments such as oral contraceptives, individual therapy and couple’s counselling, none of which had had a positive impact with regards to PMDD symptoms. Five years prior to presenting for treatment at OUS, the patient had been prescribed intermittent luteal-onset dosing of Citalopram®, an anti-depressant drug in the SSRI class. Albeit “taking the edge off”, the patient reported that the antidepressants provided far from satisfactory effects, and that she had reached a point where the symptoms were so debilitating that she was no longer functioning emotionally, socially, nor professionally. As well as listing the DSM-5 PMDD criteria, Table also gives a post hoc account of the patient’s symptomatology. Criteria met are marked with an asterisk (*), illustrating the fulfilment of all listed criteria, accompanied by the presence of all listed symptoms, an immense symptom burden by any standard.
In addition to the psychological symptoms for which the patient had sought treatment, she also reported having struggled with eating and weight problems since the onset of PMDD (no prior history of an eating disorder was reported). Over the years, these had worsened in parallel with the intensification of affective and behavioral problems. The patient described these problems as an overall, marked increase in appetite and specific food cravings which started intensifying at the time of ovulation, and then increased exponentially until the onset of the menstrual period. She described this pre-menstrual appetite as an “insatiable hunger” characterized by cravings for palatable foods high in carbohydrates (e.g. chocolate, bread, cakes/cookies and pastry) and fats (e.g. nuts and cheese). The patient further described the urge to eat as “impossible to resist”, and explained that once she had given in to the cravings, she was unable to control her food intake (i.e. stop eating). Episodes of uncontrollable food intake almost exclusively took place when the patient was home alone, where large amounts of highly palatable foods were consumed. Initially, food was consumed to satiate hunger and cravings. However, even after having consumed enough to cease hunger, the patient kept on eating, often until feeling uncomfortably full. Due to the fact that as little as one slice of bread, a hand full of nuts or one piece of chocolate could trigger over eating, the patient tried avoiding having “trigger foods” at home. However, this solution only partially helped the patient to resist over eating. Episodes of over eating had occurred almost once weekly over the past 5–6 years, and were associated with a strong sense of shame and disgust, and a feeling of having to compensate by intermittently restricting food intake. The patient, albeit with a normal weight of 65 kg (BMI = 23.9) when presenting for treatment, reported having gained 12 k since the onset of PMDD. Prior to the onset of PMDD, the patient’s weight had been stable at 53 kg (BMI = 19.5) for many years, and as such, she attributed her weight increase to the erratic eating behaviors. Overall, food, eating and weight were constantly on the patient’s mind as she tried to manage a perpetual cycle of restricting and over eating.
Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (BSO) in the treatment of PMDD is considered a last-resort measure , and includes the removal of both ovaries and both fallopian tubes to induce surgical menopause. In the current case, all conservative first- and second line treatments had failed, leading to the consideration of BSO. With the aim of predicting the patient’s response to surgery (and as a prerequisite before referring the patient for BSO), a 3-month trial of a GnRH agonist injection (Procren®, 3.75 mg monthly), combined with estrogen replacement (Progynova®, 2 mg daily) was instigated. Two weeks after the first injection, the patient started noticing a number of adverse effects such as dizziness, arthropathy in hands and feet and amnesia. The discomfort associated with the side effects was severe enough to warrant discontinuation of the GnRH agonist trial. Hence, only one of the three depot injections was given. On a positive note, the patient reported complete (albeit short-term) resolution of all the above mentioned PMDD symptoms, indicating a positive, predictive response to BSO. Two months after the discontinuation of the GnRH agonist trial, laparoscopic BSO was approved. To prevent the risk of reintroducing PMDD symptoms after the surgery (which may be a result of progesterone which is prescribed to prevent endometrial hyperplasia or malignancy) , the patient also had a (supracervical) hysterectomy.
Albeit being a part of the collective PMDD symptoms, the patient was not treated primarily for problems related to eating. As such, assessment of eating disorder symptoms and attitudes was not performed pre-surgery. However, just short of 4 weeks post-surgery, the patient was retrospectively assessed (i.e. asked to report symptoms present over the past 3 months prior to surgery) using the semi-structured, diagnostic interview the Eating Disorder Assessment for DSM-5 (EDA-5) , and the diagnostic self-report questionnaire Eating Disorder Diagnostic Scale (EDDS) . Both assessments yielded a subclinical binge eating disorder (BED), where the patient fulfilled all BED criteria, but reported less than one weekly objective binge eating episode the previous 3 months (the DSM-5 frequency criteria requires that binge eating occurs, on average, at least once a week the previous 3 months). Based on the pattern of food intake related cognitions and behaviors identified through the EDA-5 and the EDDS, the patient’s eating behaviors are hereafter referred to as binge eating rather than over eating.
Symptom burden was assessed four, eight and 12 weeks, as well as at 6 months-post-surgery. Already at the four-week post-op evaluation, the patient reported complete resolution of all previously reported PMDD symptoms. This was also the case eight and 12-weeks after surgery, as well as at the 6-month follow-up. The patient had stopped taking the SSRIs the day after the surgery, and had not felt the need to reintroduce them. Further, the estrogen replacement was well tolerated, with no reports of adverse effects. Paraphrasing the patient, she describing the time after the surgery as “a period of inner peace” that she had not experienced for years. As for the problems related to food, eating and weight, the patient reported a significant decrease in appetite, a complete absence of the aforementioned cravings, and zero binge eating episodes. She now described feeling full after eating “healthy sized” portions, and had successfully reintroduced some of the trigger foods that she had previously avoided (e.g. chocolates, bread, nuts and cheese). She also described a sense of relief as she was no longer constantly thinking of food, and reported eating when hungry, without experiencing loss of control. Follow-up EDA-5 and EDDS assessments were performed 12-weeks and 6 months post-operatively. None of these interviews yielded a full threshold, or a subclinical eating disorder diagnosis. An EDDS symptom composite score, indicating the patient’s overall level of eating pathology, was calculated pre-surgery, and at three and six months follow-up. The retrospective, pre-surgery assessment yielded a composite score of 25, whereas the follow-up composite scores had markedly decreased to seven at 3-month follow-up, and to five at 6-month follow-up. An overall symptom cut-off score of 16.5 has shown to accurately distinguish between patients with eating disorders and healthy controls following DSM-IV criteria .