A non-medicated 51-year-old man with a 30-year history of depression presented to a local hospital complaining of fatigue and loss of appetite. The initial vital signs were: Glasgow Coma Scale 15 (E4V5M6); blood pressure, 139/81 mmHg; heart rate, 114 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 31 breaths/min; body temperature, 37.2°C; and SpO2, 98%. Physical examination revealed that his abdomen was hard and tender on the left flank, showing signs of peritoneal irritation. The blood test revealed leukocytosis, iron deficiency anemia, thrombocytosis, hypoalbuminemia, hyponatremia, and high C-reactive protein, but did not show liver or kidney dysfunction . Plain chest and abdominal X-rays showed numerous round-shaped radiopaque foreign bodies suggestive of coins . The patient was diagnosed with coin pica complicated with gastrointestinal tract perforation and he was transferred to the hospital for surgical treatment. On the same day, an emergency laparotomy was performed. Following celiotomy, a hole approximately 5 mm in size was observed on the anterior wall and greater curvature side of the stomach, from which coins were identified. The stomach was remarkably distended with a large number of coins. No coins spilled out from the stomach to the abdominal cavity. The hole seemed to be eroded by the pressure of heavy solid materials. In order to remove the coins, an incision of approximately 5 cm was made on the greater curvature of the stomach separately from the hole that was first observed. After coins in the stomach were removed by hand, the incision was closed primarily. The hole and surrounding tissue seemed structurally weak, presumably due to erosive changes, and, therefore, was closed by a single stitch with the same suture material and an omental patch was applied to the site for reinforcement.
Subsequently, a small number of residual coins in the esophagus were removed by endoscopy . The total number of coins removed was 1,894 and their weight was 8,076 g. All of the ingested coins were Japanese yen consisting of 140 1-yen coins, 99 5-yen coins, 1,642 10-yen coins, 8 50-yen coins, and 5 100-yen coins . The postoperative course was uncomplicated. The patient underwent a psychiatric evaluation and was diagnosed with schizophrenia. He was transferred to a psychiatric facility for treatment on post-operative day 16. The laboratory results of serum concentration of copper and zinc were 56 μg/dL (reference value, 80–135) and 21 μg/dL (reference value, 80–130), respectively.