A 28-year-old Caucasian woman underwent a uterine evacuation for a molar pregnancy at her local hospital and was registered for follow up with the United Kingdom (UK) Gestational Trophoblast Tumour service. The histopathology review confirmed the diagnosis of a complete molar pregnancy and as such she was enrolled in the hCG surveillance programme. After an initial early fall in her serum hCG level, her hCG level rose in two consecutive samples, because of this she was reviewed in clinic 14 weeks post-evacuation prior to consideration of chemotherapy treatment.
She had an unremarkable medical history, with two normal pregnancies, no major surgery or illnesses and no regular medications. The routine investigations demonstrated an hCG value of 2070IU/L, a normal chest X-ray and no visible uterine mass on the pelvic Doppler ultrasound but some increased vascularity. These results confirmed the indications for treatment and produced an International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics prognostic score of 1. Following the UK’s standard treatment protocols, chemotherapy treatment was commenced with the low-risk regimen of methotrexate and folinic acid .The patient was well 6 weeks after the commencement of chemotherapy but reported two modest episodes of haemoptysis and was readmitted for emergency investigation. Initial blood tests confirmed a normal clotting screen and platelet count, whereas a computed tomography (CT) scan of her thorax demonstrated a 17mm lobulated nodule in the apical segment of her left lower lobe. Surrounding this lesion, there was patchy ground glass opacification consistent with pulmonary haemorrhage . The CT findings were typical of a pAVM, probably due to a small pulmonary metastasis, complicated by recent haemorrhage.An urgent referral was made to the interventional radiology team and emergency pulmonary arteriography confirmed the presence of a pAVM with two separate feeding vessels. The pAVM was successfully embolised with magnetic resonance-compatible coils as shown in Figure and led to resolution of the haemoptysis. A follow-up thoracic CT 4 years after embolisation confirmed that the pAVM had been cured as shown in Figure .
Just prior to the embolisation procedure, her chemotherapy treatment had been changed to the etoposide, methotrexate and dactinomycin alternating with cyclophosphamide and vincristine regime as a result of a slow rate of hCG fall with methotrexate. Subsequent to this change, her hCG levels normalised 3 weeks later and after an additional 6 weeks of treatment chemotherapy was completed as shown in Figure . She remains well 4 years later, is cured of her tumour, has gone on to have another healthy baby and has had no further episodes of haemoptysis.