We report a 60-year-old Japanese woman with right breast cancer who received a COVID-19 vaccine during radiotherapy. She came to our department to receive postoperative radiotherapy. Her past medical history was shoulder pain, stomach ulcer, osteoporosis, and benign paroxysmal positional vertigo. She had an allergy to mackerel. She was diagnosed with noninvasive ductal carcinoma in the right breast. Partial mastectomy was performed 4 weeks before coming to our department. She had ductal carcinoma in situ, pathological TisN0M0, surgical margin close, estrogen-receptor-positive, progesterone-receptor-positive, human epidermal growth factor receptor type 2-negative and Ki-67 = 21.0%. She was scheduled to undergo irradiation at 2 Gy 25 times for the whole right breast followed by 2 Gy irradiation 5 times for the tumor bed . Whole breast irradiation was performed with 6 MV X-ray. The body maximum dose was 106.7% . A COVID-19 vaccine (Tozinameran, Pfizer Inc, Germany) was administered in her left upper arm on day 3 and day 19 of the radiotherapy. She felt a slight pain in her left upper arm and a headache after the first vaccination. Computed tomography for radiation treatment planning was performed on day 12 because the body setup position was changed to reduce shoulder pain that had persisted from before the start of radiotherapy. She had a headache from day 14 and radiation dermatitis grade 1 (common terminology criteria for adverse events v5.0) from day 15. She received the second vaccine at day 19 of radiotherapy and suffered from physical weariness from the day after the second vaccination. Her systolic blood pressure was 190 and she suffered from grade 3 vertigo. She was hospitalized and diagnosed with Meniere’s disease at a local hospital. Radiotherapy was suspended for a total of 4 days. She came to our department using a wheelchair from day 22 and tumor bed irradiation was rescheduled for 4 times at 2.5 Gy in order to reduce the number of hospital visits. Tumor bed irradiation was performed using a 6 MeV electron beam without a bolus . Her vertigo continued during radiotherapy, but she managed to complete the radiotherapy. Her right breast skin became slightly red but she did not use any medication. Her treatment schedule and side effects are summarized in Table .
She came to our department for a follow-up examination 4 weeks after the last day of radiotherapy. She was still suffering from vertigo. However, she could walk and had returned to work for a short time a few days before visiting our department. Radiation dermatitis was improving. The skin on her right breast was still slightly brown, but she had no pain or itching.