A 45-year-old, ill-appearing male with no past medical or surgical history presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of atraumatic low back pain that radiated down both of his legs. The pain started two weeks earlier and was associated with fevers and chills. Additional symptoms included difficulty with ambulation, generalized weakness, malaise, and 30 pound weight loss over several months. He denied any history of bowel or bladder incontinence, sensory deficits, or weakness. The patient denied IVDA or recent travel. On physical exam, he appeared pale and cachectic. He was febrile at 39.8º Celsius and his heart rate was 139 beats per minute. His other vital signs were normal. He had bilateral lower-back tenderness, but no bony midline pain. The skin over his back was normal appearing, with no redness, rash, or evidence of trauma. His neurological examination was within normal limits.
Initial laboratory investigations revealed an elevated white blood cell count of 30,800 cells per cubic millimeter (3.5–11.00×10^9/L), with 22% bands. In addition, he had a platelet count of 714×109 per liter (/L) (150–400×10^9/L), C-reactive protein of 461.36 milligrams per liter (mg/L) (RR 0–8 mg/L), and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 130 millimeters per hour (mm/h) (0–30mm/hr). Blood cultures sent from the ED were negative for growth at five days. Urine analysis revealed pyuria, and was positive for nitrites and leukocyte esterase, but with a negative culture. The emergency physician performed a point-of-care ultrasound (POCUS) with a curvilinear probe (2–5 megahertz) to evaluate for hydronephrosis, given the fever and back pain. While no hydronephrosis was seen, an abnormal collection of mixed echogenicity was visualized posterior to the kidney within the iliopsoas muscle ( and ). The patient had a computed tomography (CT) that confirmed bilateral iliopsoas abscesses and, in addition, identified a pulmonary abscess. IV antibiotics were initiated in the ED, and the patient was admitted to the hospital.