A 53-year old male forester and farmer was admitted with protracted fever up to 39 °C, abdominal pain, diarrhoea without vomiting, productive cough and loss of weight (8 kg, see below).
The complaints had started three weeks earlier, with epigastric pain followed by fever and chills, therefore he sought medical attention early in the course of his disease in one of the two existing em departments (one of which is the department of cardiology) of our non-academic tertiary hospital in lower Austria. He was diagnosed with viral gastroenteritis and sent home with supportive measures; follow up with his general practitioner (GP) was suggested.
About two weeks later the complaints had persisted; moreover, he suffered from productive cough and mentioned loss of 8 kg of body weight. Following the advice of his GP, a chest x-ray has been carried out, which was unremarkable. The patient presented again at our hospital, this time at the emergency department of our gastroenterology unit (there is no general emergency department at our hospital at the moment). A detailed history was taken and he was admitted for further investigation and treatment two days later.
The patient had an unremarkable medical history apart from a mild Helicobacter-associated gastritis which had been treated a few months before and some previous respiratory infections. He was a non-smoker, with low to moderate alcohol consumption. He denied journeys to foreign countries in the recent past; he had never left Europe but had visited Greece and Croatia, in 2017 and 2016, respectively. When he was asked about his profession, a detailed history of exposure to zoonotic pathogens was carried out. He denied contact with wild animals or slaughter in the last months but reported woodwork in the forest for the last 6 weeks. He was not aware of any tick bites or injuries.
At admission, he appeared to be neither septic nor jaundiced; there was no lymphadenopathy or rash. Heart and lungs were clear to auscultation; abdominal examination showed no abnormality apart from hyperactive bowel sounds. Heart rate and blood pressure were within normal limits.
Laboratory results showed elevated leucocyte count (13/nL), platelet count (560/nL) and C-reactive protein (12 mg/dL). Other remarkable results were as follows: gamma-glutamyl transferase (gamma GT) 108 U/L, bilirubin 1.5 mg/dL, the remaining liver function tests and kidney function tests were within normal limits, as was the procalcitonin. A summary of laboratory test results and cutoff values is presented in the table (see Table ). A chest x-ray showed a discrete pulmonary infiltrate at the right upper lobe, but no hilar enlargement.
Blood cultures were drawn and serum was sent to a reference laboratory for antibody testing for anaplasmosis, rickettsiosis, babesiosis, Q fever, brucellosis, and tularaemia. Moreover, infection with Rickettsia spp. and Coxiella burnetti was excluded by PCR. Tuberculosis was ruled out by a negative interferon gamma release assay (Quantiferon – QFT PLUS, Qiagen GmbH, Germany). Empiric antibiotic therapy was initiated with intravenous ceftriaxone 2 g bd and oral doxycycline 200 mg qd. The patient recovered quickly, fever, cough and abdominal complaints resolved. During the course, he recognized mild pharyngitis. A control chest x-ray didn’t show any infiltrates.
Serologic tests for tularemia were performed with an agglutination assay (CCPro, Oberdorla, Germany) and ELISA (Virion/Serion, Würzburg, Germany). The antibody titre was 1:80 in the agglutination assay which was classified as negative and the ELISA was positive for IgG (52,6 U/mL, positive cutoff > 15 U/mL) and IgM (145,3 U/mL, positive cutoff > 15 U/mL). The other serologic tests and blood cultures (after 7 days of cultivation, however) were negative, therefore an infection with Francisella tularensis was suspected. The therapy was switched to oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg bd to complete a 3-week course and the patient was discharged. In order to confirm the infection, serum was sent to the same laboratory 4 weeks later by his GP for a repeated serologic testing. The agglutination assay was positive at the titre of 1:640. The ELISA results changed to 91 U/mL for IgG and 322 U/mL for IgM.