A 60-year-old man was referred to our hospital for kidney transplantation. His wife, a 59-year-old woman, volunteered to donate her kidney to him when he started hemodialysis at age 59. The proposed transplant was ABO incompatible, from a donor with blood-type A to a recipient with blood-type O, and the recipient’s anti-A blood-type IgG antibody titer was measured at 4096-fold dilution.
Preoperative testing included HLA-DNA typing, which revealed a mismatch in 6 antigens. Initial flow cytometric crossmatch testing (FCXM) was negative. Moreover, the flow cytometric panel reactive antibody (Flow PRA) screening test was negative for human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class I and class II. Single antigen testing was also negative.
Three months prior to surgery, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 750 mg/day was initiated and the anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody Rituximab (200 mg) was administered according to our pre-transplantation regimen . Following 3 months of desensitization therapy, the patient underwent two sessions of double filtration plasmapheresis (DFPP).
Anti-blood type antibody titers (IgG/IgM) were then assayed using the column agglutination technology (gel microcolumn) method (Bio-Rad®, Japan). Our target antibody titer level was < 128-fold dilution; however, the anti-A blood-type IgG antibody titer decreased to only 512-fold dilution . In addition, serum IgG before the induction of DFPP was 1428 mg/dl. The high titer state following plasmapheresis was considered “refractory rebound”, and the planned transplant was postponed in order to resume desensitization therapy (MMF 750 mg/day). Four months following the initial start of desensitization therapy (MMF), the anti-A blood-type antibody level rebounded to 1024-fold dilution.
Shortly after the re-initiation of desensitization therapy (150 days from the initial start of therapy), the patient developed herpes zoster infection. He was treated with anti-viral medication and the MMF dose was reduced from 750 mg/day to 500 mg/day. After 1 month, the MMF dose was increased back to 750 mg/day.
Transplantation was rescheduled to occur 210 days from the initiation of MMF. The pre-transplantation regimen was as follows. Rituximab was administered at 200 mg and 100 mg at 21 days and 1 day before transplant, respectively. Twelve days prior to surgery, the dose of MMF was increased to 1000 mg/day (At 11 days prior to surgery, serum MMF Area Under the Curve (AUC)0–12 was 35.6 ng/ml.). The initial dose of extended-release tacrolimus (TacER) (0.15 mg/kg/day) was administered 13 days prior to transplantation and the dose was adjusted based on serum concentration. Because the initial DFPP sessions did not decrease the anti-A blood-type antibody titers, 4 sessions of selective plasma exchange (PE) were used to remove the anti-blood type antibody. With these interventions, the anti-A blood-type IgG antibody decreased to 128-fold dilution and the serum IgG level decreased to 357 mg/dl on the day of transplant .
The renal graft was transplanted into the right iliac fossa without incident. Subsequently, the graft became pink and urine was produced immediately. The post-transplant induction immunosuppression protocol consisted of TacER, MMF 2000 mg/day, basiliximab 20 mg administered on postoperative day (POD) 0 and 4, and systemic steroids starting on POD 0. A graft biopsy performed 1 h after reperfusion demonstrated no evidence of hyperacute rejection . The serum creatinine (s-Cr) level began to decrease immediately. On POD 6, the s-Cr level was 1.5 mg/dl, and anti-A blood-type IgG and IgM antibodies were measured at 16-fold and 4-fold dilutions, respectively. The antibody titer levels remained at these levels throughout the post-operative course. However, serum IgG increased to 957 mg/dl. On POD 12, cytomegalovirus (CMV) antigenemia was diagnosed. The antiviral medication baragancyclovir was initiated and the dose of MMF was decreased to 1000 mg/day. No further post-operative complications were observed.
The sCr fluctuated between 1.29 and 1.42 mg/dl during the 1.5 months after ABO-iLKT. A protocol biopsy was performed on POD 50. The histopathological examination revealed i) acute T cell-mediated rejection IB, and ii) no evidence of acute antibody-mediated rejection . Steroid pulse therapy (500 mg for 3 consecutive days) was administered.
At the time of 18 months after ABO-iLKT, the sCr level was between 1.30 and 1.49 mg/dl (estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR)-calculation of 38.0–40.8 ml/min/1.73m2). Urinalysis showed urine albumin of 30–80 mg/L, urine red blood cells of 0–1 /high power field, urine white blood cells 0–1 /high power field and no granular casts. His blood pressure was maintained as 132/80–138/88 mmHg on Amlodipine 5 mg once daily. Anti-A blood-type IgG and IgM antibody titers were stable at 16-fold and 8-fold dilutions, respectively. Serum IgG was preserved within the normal range. The patient was maintained on triple immunosuppression therapy consisting of TacER, MMF 1000 mg/day, and steroid 5 mg/day.