A 32-year-old male hypertensive patient was hospitalized in our department on January 29, 2021, with a 6-month history of elevated serum creatinine (SCr), accompanied by hypertension (peak 180/100 mmHg), and a 5-month history of maintenance hemodialysis. Computed tomography (CT) examination revealed bilateral nephrocalcinosis . With preoperative SCr 1296.00 μmol/L and blood urea nitrogen (BUN) 20.90 mmol/L, the patient was scheduled to receive a kidney allograft from a deceased kidney donor followed by hypertension treatment and standard triple immunosuppression with mycophenolate mofetil, tacrolimus and methylprednisolone (Methylpred). Routine blood biochemical analysis and therapeutic drug monitoring were regularly undertaken as follow-up assessments. Unfortunately, the renal graft gradually developed DGF with SCr 674.00 μmol/L and BUN 46.34 mmol/L. Due to the suspicion of acute rejection, high doses of methylprednisolone were administered for 3 days. Ultrasonography-guided needle biopsy of the renal graft was performed on postoperative day 21.
Borderline acute rejection and deposition of CaOx crystals in the allograft were detected on renal graft biopsy . The patient and his parents received molecular genetic testing and mutations in the AGXT gene were identified (1. exon 1/CDS1:c.120-121insC;p.Gly41Argfs*127 and 2. exon 4/CDS4:c.473C > T;p.Ser158Leu) . Based on the findings of severely elevated plasma oxalate concentration (pre-hemodialysis, 323 μmol/L; post-hemodialysis 68.62 μmol/L) and CaOx crystals involving the renal graft , the patient was diagnosed with PH1. Conservative treatments were administered, including pyridoxine (vitamin B6), and continuous renal replacement therapy followed by temporarily intensive hemodialysis to reduce plasma oxalate concentration. However, his renal function and CaOx crystal deposition in the renal graft gradually worsened . Compared with preoperative CT images, images at 4 and 7 weeks after surgery showed that the coronary calcification of the heart has worsen (Supplementary Figure ). Based on his condition, we recommended that the patient receive a liver transplantation first, and then receive kidney transplantation based on the recovery status of the patient’s renal function. On May 11th, the patient underwent living-donor liver transplantation performed utilizing the right lobe and bilateral nephrectomy, considering that high concentrations of plasma oxalate can continue to affect the function of the renal graft (Supplementary Figure ). Eight weeks after liver transplantation, the patient’s renal function did not improve, and his SCr was 671.00 μmol/L. However, his plasma oxalate concentration decreased to 195.4 μmol/L (pre-hemodialysis). The patient received the maintenance hemodialysis with looking forward to a chance of second kidney transplantation in the future.
The MEDLINE/PubMed, Embase, Web of Science, and CNKI databases were searched in April 2021 for all articles from 2000 to 2021, with English or Chinese language limits applied. A total of 19 cases of PH diagnosed after kidney transplantation, including 18 cases from the databases and our case, were collected and reviewed . Patients were mainly reported in developing countries with a median age of 34 years. Among these 19 cases, 11 cases (57.9%) are PH 1, and 4 cases (21.1%) are PH 2. It is worth noting that approximately 78.9% of the patients (15/19) had a history of bilateral nephrolithiasis. All studies reported that deposition of oxalate crystals could be detected by biopsy of the renal graft as early as 5 days after transplantation. In all patients who underwent biopsy within 1 month after transplantation, only two cases (2/8) had borderline acute rejection, and no cases of acute T-cell mediated rejection (TCMR) were reported. However, five acute TCMR cases (5/11) and one borderline acute rejection case (1/11) were detected from biopsies taken more than 1 month post-transplantation. A total eight cases (42.1%) were misdiagnosed as having acute rejection before needle biopsy. In all of these cases, postoperative complications included fever, viral infections, diarrhea, oral candidiasis, necrotizing skin lesions, abdominal pain, breathlessness, and urinary tract infection. After receiving conservative treatment, only three patients (3/19) reported no further deterioration of renal function; however, most of the patients (14/19) had progressive deterioration or eventually received hemodialysis.