A 36-year-old gravida 2 para 1001 at 29 weeks 6 days, dated by a 14-week ultrasound inconsistent with her last menstrual period, re-presented to the high-risk obstetrics clinic where she was previously followed for type 1 diabetes for evaluation of a new finding of abnormally elevated alkaline phosphatase. She had been seen in the Emergency Department (ED) two days prior where she reported the development of bilateral ankle rash, pain, leg swelling, and subjective fever 1 day after receiving the Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine. She denied chills, chest pain, dyspnea, myalgias, abdominal pain, and exposure to irritating substances or new clothing in the area of her rash. There were no symptoms, focal signs of infection, or recent travel to suggest exposure to the Zika virus. Her medical history was significant for bipolar disorder, prior cholecystectomy, hypothyroidism stable on levothyroxine 50 mcg daily, and type 1 diabetes mellitus complicated by suboptimal glucose control in the current pregnancy and two prior hospital admissions for diabetic ketoacidosis, most recently 4 years ago.
On presentation to the ED, she was afebrile, and vital signs were stable. Physical exam revealed 1+ bilateral pitting edema and a nonblanching confluent erythematous rash on the medial and posterior of the lower extremities. Abdominal exam was unremarkable aside from gravid uterus, and the rash was not warm to the touch.
Bilateral lower extremity Doppler ultrasound was negative for deep venous thrombosis. Basic labs were ordered as part of her work-up, and a comprehensive metabolic panel was notable for alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 1,327 U/L and albumin of 2.5 g/dL. AST, ALT, total protein, and total and direct bilirubin were within normal limits. There was no leukocytosis, anemia, or thrombocytopenia. Her last ALP measured at 16 weeks 4 days was 258, demonstrating significant interval change.
Given her benign abdominal exam and labs not suggestive of an active infection, she was discharged with close outpatient follow-up. She was seen two days later in the obstetrics high-risk clinic, where she was noted to be clinically stable. She was then referred to the hepatology practice for further evaluation and was seen at 31 weeks 6 days. On further history, she reported no use of acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, alcohol, intravenous drug, herbal supplements, and antibiotics and denied recent travel. Family history was positive for Hepatitis C infection in her brother, most likely acquired secondary to intravenous drug use. She was immune to Hepatitis B. She noted pruritus and continued to endorse bilateral pedal edema with improvement in the rash.
Further work-up at that time was significant for ALP now elevated to 1,937 U/L, albumin of 2.3 g/dL, total bile acids elevated at 22 μmol/L, and ceruloplasmin of 63.4 mg/dL. Mitochondrial (M2) antibody, Hepatitis A IgM, and Hepatitis E IgM were negative. GGT was normal. Complete blood count with differential, ALT, AST, total and direct bilirubin, and serum alpha-1-antitrypsin were within normal limits. Hepatitis C RNA was not detected. Liver ultrasound showed normal size at 16.0 cm, normal contour, mildly increased echogenicity, extrahepatic common bile duct 0.2 cm, and a surgically absent gallbladder, compatible with nonspecific hepatic parenchymal disease.
She was diagnosed with intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy with plan for induction of labor at 37 weeks and was started on ursodiol 300 mg TID. She was evaluated again at 34 weeks 6 days by the high-risk obstetrics and liver medicine teams, reporting continued pruritus refractory to topical treatments and ursodiol. Follow-up labs revealed bile acids of 35 μmol/L, albumin of 2.2 g/dL, and ALP of 2,069 IU/L. Alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes were liver fraction of 59%, bone fraction of 40%, and intestinal fraction of 1%. Placental fraction was not able to be quantified by the specific laboratory processing the specimen.
She presented to Labor and Delivery triage at 35 weeks 2 days with mild range blood pressures, elevated urine protein/creatinine ratio of 824 mgTP/gCr, and otherwise normal labs, which was consistent with the diagnosis of preeclampsia without severe features. She re-presented at 35 weeks 4 days in latent labor. She delivered a liveborn female weighing 3,020 grams via normal spontaneous vaginal delivery, and Apgar scores were 8 and 8. Placental pathology demonstrated a 625-gram placenta with mild intervillous fibrin deposition. On pathology, the fetal membranes had mild focal acute chronic inflammation. No special stains were performed.
Her ALP peaked at 2,601 U/L (approximately 22 times the upper limit of normal) (ALP trend demonstrated in ), the final measurement before delivery at 35 weeks 5 days. By postpartum day 2, ALP was 2,019 U/L, and she was discharged in stable condition. She was seen again on postpartum day five for preeclampsia postpartum monitoring, and ALP had decreased to 1,483 U/L. At her six-week postpartum visit, ALP was 300 U/L, and by 15 weeks postpartum, it was 156 U/L.