A 49-year-old Egyptian man presented to our emergency department with a 48-hour history of cough. The cough was productive of a small amount of sputum and caused abdominal discomfort. He denied a previous similar episode. He was fatigued but recalled no chest pain, emesis, fever, chills, night sweats, melena, constipation, or diarrhea. His past medical history was only significant for obesity but he denied having diabetes mellitus, hypertension, or ischemic heart disease. His past history was significant for laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass electively done for weight loss. He denied tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drug use. His family history was noncontributory.
In the emergency department, he was afebrile with a temperature of 36.9 °C, and a blood pressure of 152/74 mmHg, pulse of 98 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 18 beats/minute, and oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. His physical examination showed that he was in mild distress, cooperative, alert, and oriented to person, place, and time. His respiratory examination revealed that his lungs were clear to auscultation bilaterally, with no wheezes, no rhonchi, and no rales. His cardiovascular examination showed regular rate and rhythm, no murmurs, rubs, or gallops. His abdomen was soft, nontender, nondistended, no hepatosplenomegaly, normal bowel sounds, stool guaiac negative, no guarding, no rigidity, and no rebound tenderness. Inspection showed scars consistent with a previous abdominal laparoscopic surgery.
Basic laboratory investigations were ordered. Levels of cardiac enzymes were normal with troponin-I levels being undetectable. A basic metabolic panel showed that the electrolyte levels were within normal limits. Complete blood count with differential was unremarkable. Kidney function tests were within normal limits except for a low urea (1.52 mmol/L).
A chest X-ray was ordered to rule out possible differential diagnoses for the presenting symptoms. An anteroposterior chest X-ray showed a collection or air under the right diaphragmatic copula . Further imaging by a CT scan of his abdomen with contrast was obtained and showed that the supposed air underneath the raised right copula of the diaphragm was a loop of colon with no evidence of free air or free fluid with evidence of slight eventration and thinning of the right copula of the diaphragm . Chilaiditi sign was diagnosed radiologically and due to the symptomatic nature of the presentation, a diagnosis of Chilaiditi syndrome was made.
He was managed with intravenously administered fluids, cough suppressants, and pain control. The pain resolved with supportive treatment and he was in a stable condition before being discharged home. After informing our patient of the results of the imaging studies, he chose to be discharged home after the pain subsided. Follow up after 1 year showed that he had been asymptomatic with no acute complaints and no further workup or interventions were warranted.