The patient was a 77-year-old woman with a history of hypertension and dyslipidaemia. She was taking amlodipine and rosuvastatin. She presented to her local doctor with symptoms of presyncope. Holter electrocardiography (ECG) showed paroxysmal AF and sinus arrest after the termination of tachycardia. Consequently, the patient underwent catheter ablation for paroxysmal AF. The study participant provided informed consent. Pre-operative contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed to evaluate for thrombus in the left atrium (LA) and to assess the morphology of the LA. It revealed a common trunk from which the bilateral inferior PVs and a left superior PV originated .
We created a voltage map of the LA during pacing from the right atrium using a three-dimensional (3D) mapping system (CARTO-3 system version 6; Biosense Webster Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) and a 20-electrode mapping catheter (PENTARAY; Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, California) using a trans-septal approach. A voltage range of less than 0.5 mV was defined as a low voltage area. The three PVs stemming from a common trunk showed a low-voltage area bounded by the common trunk entrance , which was not captured by electrical stimulation. As AF was noted to occur due to firing from the right superior PV (RSPV) , we created an isolation line to connect the RSPV and the common trunk with point-by-point RF applications at 40 W using the contact force–sensing irrigated ablation catheter (ThermoCool SmartTouch SF, Biosense Webster). The session was terminated after confirming that the potentials of the four PVs had disappeared. The patient was followed up with 12-lead ECG and Holter ECG.
Twelve months later, paroxysmal AF recurred, and a second catheter ablation session was performed. Although no LA-PV re-conduction was detected, the voltage map showed residual irregular potentials at the boundary between the common trunk and the LA . Consequently, we isolated the posterior wall of the LA, including the boundary between the LA and common trunk. Posterior wall isolation was conducted using a pentaray catheter after high-dose isoproterenol provocation and confirmed through voltage mapping and pacing with an exit block. Post-operatively, the patient maintained sinus rhythm with no antiarrhythmic drugs during the 12-month follow-up period.