The primary check up of a 16-year-old, twin-born female Caucasian patient with no relevant medical history started due to both weight loss and a mass which was found in the right kidney. Nephrectomy was carried out in January 2007. Macroscopically a 14 cm large, solid and cystic tumor mass was seen with focal necroses and haemorrhages (pT2 pN0). Histology showed a juvenile Xp 11.2 translocation type renal cell carcinoma . The tumor cells were arranged in papillary or trabecular-alveolar structures. They had large, clear to light pink cytoplasm and small nucleoli. Just a few mitoses were seen and no vascular invasion was detected. The immuno-histochemical (IHC) analysis proved focal EMA, CK (AE1-3) and CD10 reactions. The TFE-3 staining showed intense nuclear reaction.
The patient was only observed till August 2007, when an intraperitoneal relapse was confirmed. Following metastasectomy chemo-immunotherapy was initiated with the combination of recombinant interferon alfa 2a and vinblastine. In February 2008 sunitinib therapy was introduced due to local, peritoneal and pulmonary progression. Continuous regression was observed until March 2009, when mediastinal-hilar relapse was revealed. The dose of sunitinib was increased from a daily 50 mg to a daily 62.5 mg dosage achieving further tumor response without any serious adverse events. In August 2009 cerebral progression was confirmed. Then the sunitinib treatment was terminated. After surgical removal of the biggest occipital metastasis, whole brain radiotherapy (RT) was initiated. Having delivered only limited RT dose (4 Gy in 2 fractions), a second neurosurgery had to be carried out due to tumor progression and mass effect. A second-line sorafenib treatment was started in October 2009 and four months later the residual cerebral mass was removed with a third neurosurgical intervention. Up to January 2011 all control examinations showed good tumor regression under continuous sorafenib medication with tolerable (Grade 1–2) side effects. During the year of 2011 due to mediastinal and suprarenal progression sorafenib medication was terminated and without having any effective fourth line systemic treatment first mediastinal irradiation was carried out. This was followed by surgical removal of the suprarenal manifestation. Thus, after achieving excellent tumor control without any systemic therapy, our oncology team recommended the watch and wait approach, and further observation was carried out from the spring of 2012.
In August 2012, when the patient was 22 years old, a 13-week-old pregnancy was verified by gynecological examination. During her anticancer treatment she was informed about the importance of using contraception and she reportedly used only physical contraceptive methods. The patient insisted on her pregnancy, although she was fully informed of the risk of her decision. At the end of August the first chest X-ray examination recorded two new pulmonary manifestations, with diameters of 29 × 19 mm and 18 × 11 mm. Twelve days later chest MRI was carried out, showing rapid progression of the lung metastases with largest diameters of 41, 16 and 11 mm, and with bilateral hilar and right supraclavicular lymph node manifestations. Due to the significant progression and the appearance of clinical symptoms our patient changed her decision and accepted the surgical abortion of her pregnancy. During this period the respiratory distress deteriorated. Following the abortion, the patient’s complaints ceased and the size of the neck mass decreased. Chest X-ray examination showed regression compared to the previous X-ray findings .
The patient received ergotamine and bromocriptine medication immediately after the abortion. Eight days after the abortion chest CT examination was carried out to verify the tumor regression. Results revealed rapid regression of the pulmonary manifestations : the diameter of the largest metastasis decreased to 23 mm and the volume decreased from 30.02 cm3 to 3.51 cm3 based on the measurements of two independent observers. Without any anticancer treatment, within one week the tumor shrinkage rate was at least 85–90 %, compared to the pre-abortion volume. Meanwhile the diameter of the palpable supraclavicular mass decreased as well, from about 3 cm to 2 cm.
In the beginning of November 2012 the check-up CT showed a stable disease without any therapeutic intervention. One month later the chest X-ray revealed progression in one of pulmonary manifestations, therefore interferon re-induction was initiated based on the hypothetical post-abortion immunological effect and the patient’s preference. In January 2013 restaging CT examinations demonstrated multi-organ progression therefore the interferon medication was terminated. The patient received RT, followed by the fourth neurosurgical intervention in order to remove a frontal cerebral metastasis, which caused mass effect. Completing whole brain RT (36 Gy in 18 fractions) sunitinib re-challenge treatment strategy was introduced in a continuous daily dosing of 25 mg. The next brain MRI showed regression of the residual cerebral lesions however, the whole-body CT revealed unambiguous and rapid abdominal (liver and adrenal gland) and multiple bone progression. The general condition of the patient deteriorated, so we delivered palliative irradiation to the painful vertebral bones (20 Gy in 5 fractions) and medroxy-progesterone medication was initiated. Due to the rapid progression and multi-organ failure, 6 years after the first diagnosis, at the end of June 2013 we lost our patient.
To prove the potential role of hormonal effects during pregnancy IHC examinations were performed on the original biopsy and surgery samples of the primary tumor and the metastases. The presence and density of Estrogen, Progesterone and Luteinizing Hormone Receptors (ER, PGR and LHR, respectively) were analyzed. ER (SP1, rabbit monoclonal, 1:50, Histopathology Ltd.) and PGR (SP2, rabbit monoclonal, 1:100, Histopathology Ltd.) primary antibodies were used (both with Bond Epitope Retrieval solution) and Bond Polymer Refine Detection (Leica, Germany) was applied as a developer system on Bond TM. LHR antibody (H-50: sc-25828, rabbit polyclonal IgG, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, Texas) was used as primary antibody at 2ug/ml final concentration with citrate buffered heat retrieval, pH6. Deparaffinized sections were pretreated with EnVisionTM FLEX Target Retrieval Solution, 3 in 1, Low pH (20′) - K8005. The reaction was developed on Dako Autostainer (Dako, Denmark) with EnVisionTM FLEX, High pH, HRP, Rb/Mo - K800021 according to the vendors’ guideline.
IHC staining revealed no ER or PGR activity. However, a high density of LHR-s was unambiguously detected , indirectly proving the potential mitogenic effect of human chorionic gonadotropin hormone (hCG).