An 82-year-old woman presented with intermittent claudication in her left foot and an ankle-brachial index of 0.5. An enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a completely occluded 20 cm lesion in her superficial femoral artery (SFA) . Despite medical therapy, her symptoms persisted, and she opted for endovascular treatment. A 5 Fr guiding sheath was inserted by puncturing the dorsalis pedis artery , and 5000 units of heparin were administered. Attempts to cross the lesion with a 0.014-inch wire using a needle in the catheter failed due to severe fibrous sclerosis. A new access site was chosen, and a 6F guiding sheath was crossed by puncturing the contralateral common femoral artery (CFA). With an increased wire tip load of 15 to 45 g, the wire was finally able to pass through the chronic total occlusion (CTO) after thrombus aspiration and a 3.0 mm × 40 mm balloon dilatation. The wire had almost passed into the intraplaque, and the healthy area in the popliteal artery was only the P3 area. Due to the lesion’s length, a 6.0 mm × 150 mm interwoven stent (IWS) and a 7.0 mm × 80 mm paclitaxel-eluting stent (PES) were overlapped from the popliteal artery to the SFA ( and ). The patient was discharged the next day without complications. However, after 6 months, she reported left leg pain for 2 days, and an enhanced CT scan showed a complete absence of blood flow in the ostial SFA , resulting in a diagnosis of acute limb ischaemia (ALI) (Class IIa). Endovascular therapy (EVT) was performed starting from the contralateral right CFA with a 6 Fr guiding sheath. Surprisingly, angiography revealed a gap between the two consecutive stents (, , ). Following aspiration, intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) imaging showed significant thrombus in the ostial SFA and neointimal hyperplasia in the gap . To address this, we treated the gap with a 4.0 mm × 15 mm cutting balloon. Subsequently, blood flow was restored to normal . She was started on aspirin 100 mg/day following a diagnosis of LEAD, and cilostazol 100 mg/day was added at the first EVT session. Aspirin was discontinued, and a direct oral anticoagulant (apixaban 10 mg/day) was started due to thrombotic lesions.
The next morning, her leg became cold with no palpable pulses in the common femoral to dorsalis artery. Her right leg was normal, and 12-channel electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm. A duplex ultrasound revealed that there was no blood flow in her SFA ostium, requiring further treatment. A metal-tipped microcatheter successfully passed a 0.014-inch wire through the total occlusion of the SFA ostium , and IVUS showed a significant thrombus. After thrombus aspiration, a 7.0 mm × 4.0 mm PES was implanted to push against the thrombus in the gap between the IWS and the PES ( and ). The final angiogram showed complete revascularization , and the patient was discharged 10 days later without recurrence symptoms and thrombotic occlusion.
Six months later, she kept coming to the hospital as an outpatient as if nothing had happened.