In May 2020, an 80-year-old man presented with symptoms including anal swelling and pain.
Patient’s symptoms started a month ago with recurrent episodes of anal swelling and pain, as well as blood in the stool and diarrhea.
The patient went to hospital for colonoscopy due to repeated blood in stool in January 2010. A mass in sigmoid was found and pathology showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Subsequently, he underwent an open radical resection of the sigmoid colon in January 2010. Postoperative pathological examination showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, pT3N1M0, with invasion to the serosal layer; the margin was free and 1 of 29 Lymph nodes was positive. In December 2010, he complained of anal swelling and pain and subsequently underwent anal fistula resection. Postoperative pathology revealed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma and the margin was free. In December 2010, the patient began 6 cycles of chemotherapy with the FOLFIRI regimen and one course of local anal radiotherapy (45 Gy in 25 fractions). In September 2019, he was admitted to the Department of Hematology for four rounds of Azacytidine chemotherapy for myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).
The patient did not have any history of anal disease. His family history was unremarkable.
Our physical examination found an approximate 3 cm × 3 cm perianal ring-shaped mass with obvious tenderness.
Blood count shows lymphocyte count 1.03 × 109/L, red blood cell count 3.52 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 114 g/L and albumin 33.2 g/L. Blood tests for cancer-associated markers revealed the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) of 5.95 ng/mL and carbohydrate antigen 199 (CA199) of 20.59 U/mL. Fecal occult blood test was positive.
Colonoscopy did not detect any mass or abnormality. Computed tomography found low-density shadows on the posterior edge of the anal canal. Magnetic resonance imaging further confirmed that the 22.8 mm × 24.2 mm lesion went through the external sphincter. The internal fistula was located at 6 o’clock on the posterior edge of the anal canal; the external fistula was at the left side of the buttocks; and the subcutaneous soft tissue signal of the buttocks was increased . Biopsy test of the anal mass was performed by resecting the most obvious swollen part at the lithotomy position. Postoperative pathology of this soft and poorly structured tissue showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with large amounts of necrotic tissue that was positive for cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and negative for cytokeratin 7 (CK7) .