We report a case of a 18-year-old caucasian nulliparous female who referred to our attention in 2018 because of recurrent episodes of abdominal pain in known history of wandering spleen, casually diagnosed two years before after a gynecological routine visit.
She used to complain with frequent episodes of lower abdominal pain that caused multiple visits to the Emergency Department. The patient had never experienced any abdominal trauma and never undergone abdominal surgery.
She was investigated with a new CT-scan of abdomen and pelvis that showed a multi-infarcted pelvic splenomegaly (max diameter 13,5 cm), compressing the womb and the bladder, and a typical “whirl sign” of the splenic vascular pedicle (, ). No radiological signs of portal hypertension were found, but was reported huge ectasia of the splenic veins and collateral tributaries . Angio-CT reconstruction was performed to study in details the vascularization of the spleen .
She underwent hematological evaluation revealing normocromic normocytic anemia and piastrinopenia compatible with the multi-infarcted spleen. Also an Helicobater Pylori gastritis was found and treated by eradication therapy.
A physical examination of the abdomen revealed a tender pelvic mass, changing position with the variation of the patient decubitus.
The patient was candidated to a laparoscopic elective splenectomy due to her symptoms, the spleen dimension, the risk of splenic infarctions and potential obstacle to a future pregnancy. She received a prophylaxis therapy with triple vaccine against Haemophilus Influenzae, Pneumococcus and Meningococcus three weeks before surgery.
An explorative laparoscopy confirmed the presence of a bulky multi-infarcted spleen completely obstructing the pelvis. The vascular pedicle was composed of a big artery originating as usual from the celiac trunk and some enormous veins draining into the superior mesenteric branch. Because of the unusual position and weight of the spleen and its vessels, also the tail of the pancreas was innaturally tractioned medially and inferiorly towards the lower abdomen. Furthermore the pancreas appeared to be in abnormal position, resulting anterior to the mesocolon and intraperitoneally located.
The Sustentaculum lienis (freno-colic, colic and freno-splenic ligaments) was under-developed; the splenic pedicle was twirled around its long axis several times and the tail of pancreas was partially involved in the torsion without any chance of derotation. To avoid the risk of complications, like vein thrombosis or bleeding from the ectasic tributaries of the splenic vein, we decided to dissect the splenic pedicle in proximity of the tail of pancreas preserving the pancreatic vessels.
A laparoscopic dissection and ligature of the splenic artery was performed, obtaining a volume reduction of the spleen. We than continued with the ligation of some ectasic splenic veins and finally, we extracted the specimen from a 5cm periumbilical incision and completed the separation of the splenic pedicle from the pancreatic tail (, ).
After splenectomy, the tail of pancreas was left in its innatural position, above the left colic flexure. A peripancreatic drainage was placed. (Supplemental Digital Content: Video)
Supplementary video related to this article can be found at .
The following is the supplementary data related to this article:
In order to reduce the risk of postoperative pancreatitis, we started intraoperative octreotide, extended during the all hospitalization.
The post-operative recovery of the patient was uneventful and she was discharged after 6 days.
Laboratory investigations showed a postoperative stability of hemoglobin level and a progressive increased platelet count.
Given the risk of thrombotic events, prophylaxis with subcutaneous low molecular weight heparin (LMWH) was started 24 hours before undergoing surgery and continued for 1 month.
Histopathological examination revealed a spleen measuring 15 cm (maximum diameter), weighing 576 g, with multiple twist of the pedicle, which was revealed to be 45 cm long. The microscopic examination showed multiple hemorrhagic infarctions.