The patient was a 65-year-old woman with no relevant family history. She was born without any perinatal anomalies, although short stature was identified at around 3 years of age, but she never received effective treatments. Withdrawal bleeding occurred from around the age of 16 years after hormone-replacement therapy was started to address the absence of secondary sexual characteristics and primary amenorrhea. However, treatment was self-interrupted 1 year later, and she remained amenorrheic thereafter. The patient noticed hair loss in her late 30s. She visited a medical practitioner due to gout at 45 years of age and was subsequently treated for hyperuricemia, dyslipidemia, and hypertension at the clinic. In addition, the patient was diagnosed with hypothyroidism at 50 years of age, and thyroid hormone-replacement therapy was started (levothyroxine sodium hydrate, 50 μg/day). In 2013, at 58 years of age, the patient was referred to our department for endocrinological examination of short stature. The results of this examination showed impaired secretion of TSH on the thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test, impaired secretion of LH/FSH on the luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) stimulation test, impaired secretion of GH on both arginine and GH-releasing peptide-2 (GHRP-2) stimulation tests , and an empty sella turcica with atrophy of the anterior pituitary gland on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) , but secretion of ACTH was retained on the corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) stimulation test . For this reason, GH-replacement therapy (0.075 mg/day of somatropin; genetic recombinant) was started. In addition, chronic kidney disease of unknown cause was identified (estimated glomerular filtration rate [eGFR], 31.9 mL/min/1.73 m2) . At 63 years of age, hypoxia and hypercapnia were identified (partial pressure of carbon dioxide [pCO2], 59.6 mmHg; partial pressure of oxygen [pO2], 48.7 mmHg), and respiratory function testing confirmed a markedly restricted ventilation disorder, and both vital capacity (VC) and forced vital capacity (FVC) were significantly reduced (VC, 0.54 L; percentage predicted VC (%VC), 26.9%; FVC, 0.50 L), but percentage predicted forced expiratory volume in 1 s (%FEV1.0) was within normal limits (80.0%). Because the patient did not wish to receive home oxygen therapy (HOT) or respiratory rehabilitation, she was followed-up. However, HOT (0.5 L/min by nasal cannula) was started about 6 months later as her exertional dyspnea gradually worsened, and renal function also slowly decreased (eGFR, 25.0 mL/min/1.73 m2). Since there was no bronchiectasis or emphysema, pulmonary embolism and shunt disease were ruled out by the lung perfusion scan (technetium-99 m-labeled macro-aggregated albumin scintigraphy), and since there was weakness of proximal muscle without abnormal neurological findings, the patient was diagnosed with endocrine myopathy by both a respiratory physician and a neurologist. Furthermore, a nephrologist noted that there was no glomerulonephritis or hereditary kidney disease, and that there was unexplained renal atrophy. Around this time, frequent episodes of hypoglycemia occurred, and a low basal level of serum cortisol (6.38 μg/dL), a relatively low basal level of plasma ACTH (34.2 pg/dL), and a low 24-h urinary cortisol level (5.5 μg/day) were confirmed . Delayed overreaction of plasma ACTH and failure of serum cortisol on the CRH stimulation test were confirmed , and a failure of plasma ACTH on the insulin tolerance test was confirmed . Furthermore, the cortisol response on the rapid ACTH stimulation test was slightly delayed and attenuated , and the prolonged ACTH stimulation test showed a sufficient increase in urinary free-cortisol levels . The patient was therefore diagnosed with hypothalamic secondary hypoadrenocorticism, and replacement therapy was started (prednisolone at 2.5 mg/day). At 65 years of age, the patient developed CO2 narcosis (pCO2, 80.1 mmHg, pO2, 76.0 mmHg) during bronchopneumonia treatment, and ventilatory function was: VC, 0.48 L; %VC, 27.1%; and FVC, 0.49 L. Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (NPPV) (2.0 L/min by mask) was started and continued at home.
The patient was 129.4 cm tall and weighed 21.8 kg (body mass index, 13.2 kg/m2). Blood pressure was 110/57 mmHg, and heart rate was regular at 93 beats/min. She showed no mental retardation, and no pigmentation on the skin and oral mucosa. Her hair was thin, and no underarm or pubic hair was present. The Turner classification for the breasts was stage 1. Mild scoliosis was evident. Cardiopulmonary examination showed normal results, and no abnormal abdominal findings were identified.