In February 2012, a 22 y.o. male patient came to our institution one year after a proximal pole scaphoid fracture of the non-dominant left hand, treated elsewhere with an internal screw fixation, referring functional impairment and persistent pain (VAS 8\10). The clinical examination showed a reduced range of motion (ROM, measured with a goniometer) of the wrist: 25° flexion (30% of contralateral), 20° extension (23% of contralateral), 5° radial deviation (50% of contralateral), 10° ulnar deviation (25% of contralateral) and 50° prono-supination (32% of contralateral). The grip strength tested using a hand-held dynamometer (Baseline1→, White Plains, NY, 10602, USA) was reduced to 21 Kg\N (contralateral 28 kg\N), while the key pinch strength test measured 8 Kg\N (contralateral 12 Kg\N). The DASH (Disability of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand) score and PRWE (Patient Rated Wrist Evaluation) score assessed a reduced functionality of the wrist (70 and 88 points, respectively) (, ) . The X-Ray showed a scaphoid non-union together with a mild arthritis at the radial styloid (SNAC I). At the MRI, the proximal pole appeared avascular and necrotic (stage IV according to Herbert Classification) .
Using regional anesthesia and under fluoroscopic imaging control during the surgery, the patient underwent the positioning of the small size APSI spacer, without fixation, through an open dorsal approach and radial styloidectomy, according to previously described technique; beside the ablation of the internal fixation screw . A double layered capsuloplasty was performed using 4-0 PDS sutures, re-tensioning carefully the capsular ligaments. A splint cast was kept for 3 weeks, afterwards the patient begun a specific physiotherapy rehabilitation protocol for 3 months. At his 6 month follow-up, no complications had occurred, the patient was very satisfied with the treatment and he had resumed his daily routine. No residual pain was described (VAS 0\10) and there was great improvement of all functional measured outcomes (refer to Table1 for all details) . 5 years later, following a high energy motorbike accident, the patient returned to our department referring a dorsal perilunate dislocation (stage II according to Taleisnik classification) on the same hand, unexpectedly without dislocation of the implant . In the O.R., the implant was temporary removed through the same dorsal access, the perilunate dislocation was reduced and fixed with 3 Kirshner wires (2 between triquetrum and lunate, and 1 between capitate and triquetrum), and finally the same implant reinserted. The wrist was then immobilized for 45 days before starting physiotherapy for 6 months. At the 30 months follow-up, the patient was pain free (VAS 0\10) with almost completely recovered function of the hand and wrist. The ROM values were as follow: 64° flexion, 73° extension, 15° radial deviation, 20° ulnar deviation and 60° prono-supination. Grip strength was improved to 19 Kg\N and the key pinch strength test to 9 Kg\N, while functional outcomes were greatly enhanced according to the DASH and PRWE scores (8.3 and 9 points, respectively) . The antero-posterior and lateral X-ray projection performed at that time did not detect any sign of implant dislocation or osteoarthritis progression, while the carpal height was maintained . The patient was able to return to his daily activities and sports.