The patient is a woman in her thirties who developed jerky arm movements at 3 years of age which progressed over time, worsened with action, and improved with alcohol. Additionally, she developed a jerky tremor of the neck as well as difficulty writing. At 8 years of age, she experienced generalized tonic-clonic seizures that resolved after initiation of levetiracetam. Subsequent brain MRI and electroencephalograms (EEGs) were unremarkable. However, she later developed paroxysmal non-epileptic spells (PNES) confirmed in an epilepsy monitoring unit admission. Her family history was remarkable for similar jerky upper body movements in her brother and a female cousin, but in no family members in prior generations . Her neurological examination revealed left laterocollis, left torticollis with dystonic head tremor, mild right dystonic finger flexion, a dystonic grip on the pen when writing, and proximal upper extremity myoclonus that worsened with actions like writing, but was not stimulus sensitive. The remainder of her neurological exam was unremarkable.
Despite lack of autosomal dominant inheritance pattern in her pedigree, clinical suspicion was high for myoclonus-dystonia, so she underwent single gene testing which was positive for a pathogenic variant (Invitae, NM_003919.2: c.835_839del (p.Thr279Alafs*17)) in the epsilon-sarcoglycan (SGCE) gene. Levetiracetam prescribed for epilepsy was ineffective for her myoclonus, so she was started on zonisamide and underwent botulinum toxin injections for cervical dystonia. Over the last 3 years at subsequent follow-up visits, she has reported mild symptomatic improvement with treatment interventions.
Following diagnosis, she inquired about the risk of her asymptomatic preschool-aged and teenage daughters. She was counseled that patients under the age of 18 generally should not undergo predictive genetic testing when it will not change medical management, but that typically myoclonus-dystonia presents in childhood with most patients developing symptoms before the age of 20 . There was a 1 in 2 chance that she passed the pathogenic variant to each daughter, but due to imprinting (silencing) of her maternal allele 95% of the time, there is only a 5% (1 in 20) chance that the pathogenic allele will be expressed if it was inherited. Thus, each daughter’s individual risk of expressing the phenotype is 1 in 2 multiplied by 1 in 20, or 1 in 40 (2.5% chance). If the patient has a son, he will have the same risk of inheriting and expressing the phenotype as her daughters. Since her daughters will also imprint their SGCE allele when they have children, provided they inherited the pathogenic variant, the risk of passing on and expressing the phenotype for each of the patient’s grandchildren is also 1 in 40 (2.5%). However, if the patient has a grandson with the pathogenic variant, his risk of passing on the variant to each of his children, her great-grandchildren, would be 1 in 2 (50%), and those who inherit the variant would be expected to be symptomatic because there is no paternal imprinting, and the paternal copy of the gene would be expressed. depicts and summarizes the counseling provided above as a concise genetics pearl for reference in the clinic. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this manuscript.