A 44-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to our institution because of adnexal complex masses, ascites and a carbohydrate antigen (CA)-125 value of 876U/mL (normal range 0 to 35U/mL).
Apart from a previous caesarean section, her gynecologic history was uneventful. She underwent laparoscopic evaluation before attempting cytoreductive surgery; she was considered not eligible for primary debulking surgery because of mesenterial involvement and diffuse peritoneal carcinosis with extension to her upper abdomen. Biopsies documented a moderately differentiated papillary ovarian carcinoma at histological findings; according to FIGO (International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics) staging it corresponded to IIIC final stage. After three courses of neoadjuvant chemotherapy based on a standard tri-weekly carboplatin and paclitaxel schedule, she achieved a partial clinical response and underwent interval debulking surgery with residual tumor smaller than 0.5cm. Consequently, she completed the chemotherapy administration receiving three more cycles of adjuvant treatment (carboplatin and paclitaxel).
Further follow-ups were negative for the next 8 months, when a rise of CA-125 to 201U/mL was documented. Laboratory data from liver functions tests were unremarkable; no predisposing factors for hepatic cirrhosis, steatohepatitis or dysmetabolic diseases were identified.She was submitted to an abdominopelvic CT scan which showed a hyperdense lesion in her right subdiaphragmatic region and a plaque thickening of her diaphragmatic dome, without evidence of peritoneal carcinosis. Taking into account her clinical condition and the isolated area of recurrence considered, she was judged eligible for SCR. In order to achieve a more accurate presurgical assessment a whole-body PET/CT was performed, showing high metabolic uptake with standardized uptake value (SUV) up to 4.2 in the suspected area, without evidence of other sites of disease.She underwent surgery. The laparoscopic examination resulted negative, but was not completely reliable due to severe adhesive syndrome. A laparotomy biopsy of the area situated in her right subdiaphragmatic region, over her hepatic dome was performed. A frozen section revealed an inflammatory granuloma probably derived from a propylene stitch applied at the time of the interval debulking surgery . Furthermore an unexpected diffuse peritoneal carcinosis, extended to her entire abdominal cavity but without involvement of her upper abdomen, was identified and multiple biopsies were carried out.
Definitive histological findings confirmed that the subdiaphragmatic lesion was an inflammatory granuloma, characterized by epithelioid histiocytes and giant cells, with lymphocyte infiltration, around a nonabsorbable propylene suture derived from previous surgery, while other biopsies were found to be sites of relapse.
After surgery she was submitted to second-line chemotherapy based on carboplatin and Caelyx® (doxorubicin hydrochloride) and she is now under third-line chemotherapeutic treatment still with persistent evidence of disease.