A 5-year-old Chinese boy presented with a 4-week history of recurrent bloating, abdominal pain, anorexia and vomiting. There was no past or family history of any IgG4 and/or auto-immune related diseases. On admission, physical examination showed a moderately distressed patient with a temperature of 36.2 °C, a respiratory rate of 23 breaths/min, a blood pressure of 92/63 mmHg and a pulse rate of 102 beats/min. Abdominal examination revealed a severely distended abdomen with massive ascites. There was positive shifting dullness and diminished bowel sounds, but no abdominal wall rigidity. A complete blood count revealed a white blood cell count of 10.2 × 109/L with 64% neutrophils, a hemoglobin level of 108 g/L and hematocrit of 35%. Biochemical investigations showed significantly increased serum levels of IgE (280 IU/ml; normal reference 0 IU/ml to 30 IU/ml) and C-reactive protein (11 mg/L; normal reference < 0.5 mg/L). Liver transaminases, albumin, total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, glucose, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, electrolytes and renal function tests were all within the normal ranges. Both stool culture and parasite tests were negative. An abdominal CT scan revealed bowel wall thickening on the right side and massive ascites. A positron emission tomography was performed to exclude any malignancies and showed a large soft tissue density around the pancreas, with inflammatory lesions and mild metabolic activity. There was widespread bowel edema. A diagnostic paracentesis revealed slightly yellow-colored fluid containing white blood cells (1000 × 109/L). Rivalta test of the ascites was positive for exudate and there was no tubercle bacillus or malignancy. An abdominal film showed intestinal obstruction . An initial barium study suggested an incomplete jejunal obstruction with delayed transit and only a small amount of barium reaching the distal jejunum .
An exploratory laparotomy was performed. There were widespread dilatation, edema and thickening of the small bowel, with massive clear slightly-yellowish ascites of about 1300 ml. Small intestine mesentery and ascending colon were also thickened, with multiple yellowish nodules. There were extensive intraperitoneal adhesions. No evidence of obstructive pathology was identified. The disease was centered more on the mesentery. With concern for malignancy, nearly 60 cm of bowel including the terminal ileum, ileocecal valve, part of ascending colon and their mesentery, and part of omentum, were resected. An end ileostomy was created.
Histopathological examination showed significant thickened serosa and eosinophilic infiltration (5-30/high power field) in the lamina propria. Mesentery and nodules had inflammatory cell infiltration, fat necrosis, fibroblast proliferation and fibrosis. There was omental fibrous connective tissue hyperplasia with infiltration of lymphocytes and adipose tissue .
Post-surgically, the patient was treated with parenteral nutrition, intravenous fluids, gastrointestinal decompression, and pro-motility agents such as mosapride and erythromycin. However, severe bloating persisted and more than 1000 ml of green-yellowish fluids was drained from the decompression tube and 200 ml from the ileostomy daily. With suspicion of eosinophilic enteritis based on pathology report, he was treated with intravenous dexamethasone at 0.2 mg/kg/d, which was gradually decreased to 0.1 mg/kg/day over a 2-week period and stopped after 4 weeks. His abdominal pain decreased and ascites resolved, with a gradual improvement in enteral nutrition intake. While the decompression tube drainage was decreased, the ileostomy drainage increased to more than 1000 ml daily. The second and third barium studies showed some degree of gastrointestinal motility improvement . Subsequently at 4 months after the initial exploratory laparotomy, a 2nd surgery was performed in order to close the ileostomy and revealed that the bowel was still severely edematous, with very tight adhesions between the bowel and the abdominal wall. Ileostomy closure couldn’t be performed. Tissues near the ileostomy, including bowel and mesentery, were resected and sent for pathological examination, which showed chronic inflammatory cell infiltration, fat necrosis and fibrosis . Based on pathological features and clinical presentations, a diagnosis of sclerosing mesenteritis was finally established. Prednisolone at 2 mg/kg was started and he experienced rapid clinical improvement in 4 weeks and was discharged from the hospital. After 8 weeks of treatment, prednisolone was slowly weaned and stopped after 24 weeks. At 8-month after hospital discharge, he was asymptomatic with adequate weight gain. A final surgery (15 months after the initial exploratory laparotomy) was performed to close the ileoostomy and there was no edema but he was noted to have diffusely enterocolonic adhesions. The boy remained asymptomatic at a 6-month post-operation clinic visit.