A 63-year-old Asian woman presented with intermittent fever of approximately 38.0 °C, which had lasted for 2 weeks and did respond to antipyretics. She had no night sweating or weight loss. She had been suffering from RA for 37 years and had been taking MTX for more than 15 years. The latest medication doses were 14 mg/week of MTX, 5 mg/day of prednisolone, and 1 mg/day of tacrolimus. She did not receive any other immunosuppressive medication. Other medical history included diabetes, atypical mycobacteriosis, and hepatitis B and there was no family history of lymphoproliferative disorders or malignancies. The patient did not smoke or drink alcohol.
At the time of admission, she had fever of 38.0 °C. Physical examination showed a 3-cm palpable mass in the left breast. There were no visible skin changes and no palpable lymph nodes. Laboratory studies revealed slightly elevated levels of C-reactive protein and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R). EBV-viral capsid antigen antibody immunoglobulin G and EBV nuclear antibody (EBNA) were also increased. We performed contrast-enhanced computer tomography of her chest and abdomen for general evaluation. Results revealed a mass in the left breast, a subcutaneous nodule in the abdomen, a mass in the left lung, and a nodule in the left retroperitoneum . We suspected that these tumors were associated with administration of MTX; thus, MTX was discontinued immediately, and the patient was hospitalized for medical examination.
One week after MTX withdrawal, imaging evaluation was performed. Craniocaudal and mediolateral oblique mammography showed a high-density mass with undefined margins in the internal lower left breast quadrant . Ultrasonography (US) showed a 4.5-cm heterogeneous hyperechoic mass in the internal region of the left breast, which had a low echo area spread like a cord, and blood flow was partially observed along the low echo area . Contrast-enhanced bilateral breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-defined mass in the same area. The contrast effect appeared only on margins and part of the interior, and the non-imaged mass showed a high signal in fat suppressed T2 weighted image .
Subsequently, an ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy was performed on the left breast mass. Biopsies from the breast mass were primarily composed of necrotic tissue and revealed the proliferation of atypical lymphocytes with enlarged nuclei around the blood vessel. On immunohistochemical staining, lymphoid cells were positive for CD20, CD79a, and BCL-2, but negative for CD3, CD7, and CD10. EBV-encoded RNA1 (EBER1), latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1), and EBV-nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2) were positive, and the tumor was thus categorized as latency type III EBV infection .
The tumors began to shrink after MTX was discontinued. Based on these clinical course and pathological findings, the definitive diagnosis was consistent with MTX-LPD merging into an EBV-positive, diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). One month following withdrawal of MTX, the breast mass had become smaller, about 2-cm in diameter on US. Six months later, the mass had markedly shrunk like a scar , and the patient remained in good health for 1 year after the withdrawal of MTX with no evidence of relapse of LPD. To treat the patient’s RA, iguratimod, salazosulfapyridine, and bucillamine were prescribed instead of MTX, and they provided adequate RA control. The patient is currently on a follow-up plan involving core laboratory studies, including sIL-2R every 3 months, and breast US every 6 months to 1 year.