A 19-year-old Chinese female was admitted to our institution with persistent high fever and icterus. Six months ago, she was diagnosed with HS due to icterus. HS had been diagnosed in her mother, and her symptoms, such as anemia after splenectomy, were significantly improved. One week ago, due to dizziness and fatigue, she was admitted to a local hospital for low hemoglobin (47 g/L). Red blood cell transfusion improved her anemia, with hemoglobin level rising to 62 g/L. However, symptoms of dizziness and fatigue did not alleviate. Two days ago, the patient developed fever and icterus and was admitted to our Hematology Department. On admission, physical examination findings were as follows: anemia, jaundice, marked splenomegaly, obvious tenderness in the left upper abdomen(LUA), and absence of lymphadenopathy.Laboratory tests revealed a WBC count of 3.9 × 109/L (lymphocytes 50.5%), an RBC count of 2.17 × 1012/L, a Hb concentration of 52 g/L, an HCT of 16.0%, an Rtc count of 5.8%, an atypical lymphocytes count of 7%, and a PLT count of 164 × 109/L. Peripheral blood film showed that spherical red blood cells accounted for about 6% . Blood biochemical analysis was as follows: TBIL 5.3 mg/dL; IBIL 4.1 mg/dL; ALT 66 U/L; AST 65 U/L; LDH 958 U/L; CPK 55.9 U/L; ferritin 1344 ng/mL; CRP 145.9 mg/L; PCT 0.46 μg/L. Coagulation tests: D-dimer 717 ug/L; PT 12 s. The results of the Coombs tests were negative. Ham and sugar-water tests were faintly positive. The result of G6PD was normal. The osmotic fragility test showed that the osmotic fragility of erythrocytes increased overall. Autoimmune workup was negative. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria screened by flow cytometry was negative. Serologic test results revealed a positive EBV infection (EBV viral capsid antigen (EBV-VCA) IgM-positive, EBV-VCA IgG-positive, EBV nuclear antigen (EBNA) Ig G-positive, and EBV early antigen (EA) IgM-positive). Due to obvious tenderness in the LUA, a CT scan of the abdomen was performed, and it was found that the spleen was enlarged with multiple wedge-shaped low-density foci, suggesting the presence of splenic infarction . Because of the poor effect of symptomatic and supportive treatment, emergency LS was performed. Intraoperatively, her spleen was obviously enlarged and presented with multiple large-area splenic infarcts . Pustular lesions were also observed on the surface of the spleen. Pathology review demonstrated splenic infarction with red pulp expansion, white pulp atrophy, splenic sinus filled with red blood cells . Unfortunately, the pathological evaluation of EBV in the resected spleen was not performed. Her operative and postoperative courses were uneventful. The patient recovered quickly after the operation and was discharged accordingly. BRT was made every 2 weeks after surgery. After two months of follow-up visits, the patient showed no relapse.