A 73-year-old Japanese woman with a history of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and atrial fibrillation (AF) with a CHA2DS2-VASC score of 3 developed bilateral hearing loss with vertigo and vomiting and was brought to a local hospital. Her home medications included 5 mg daily of atorvastatin. The diagnosis was sudden deafness and she was transferred to our emergency department. At that time her consciousness was clear. She had no significant family, social, environmental, or employment history. She did not smoke or take alcohol. Her blood pressure was 147/72 mmHg, her pulse rate was 78 beats/minute with AF, and her temperature 36.8 °C. One year earlier she interrupted anticoagulant therapy because she experienced recurrent epistaxis.
She reported only bilateral hearing loss without vertigo and vomiting. Dysarthria, weakness, ataxia, diplopia, dysphagia, and Horner syndrome were absent. As computed tomography (CT) returned no specific findings she returned home and was scheduled for audiometry on the next day.
The next morning her consciousness decreased progressively and she returned to our hospital. At the time of admission she was severely drowsy. Her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score was 7 (E2V1M4) and the National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 33. We found the normal pupil reflexes, symmetrical facial responses and withdrawal of both arms and legs to painful stimuli. Her general physical examination was unremarkable. Her blood pressure was 170/90 mmHg, her pulse rate was 80/minute with AF, and her temperature 36.4 °C. Her laboratory test results showed a white blood cell count of 8.8 × 109/l, hemoglobin of 14.7 g/dl, platelet count of 268 × 109/l, blood urea nitrogen 11.3 mg/dl, and creatinine of 0.58 mg/dl, as well as a normal liver function test result. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) revealed acute multifocal lesions involving the bilateral cerebellar hemispheres and pons and the posterior circulation. The DWI posterior circulation Acute Stroke Prognosis Early CT Score (DWI-pc-ASPECTS) was 7 . The susceptibility vessel sign was noted in the BA on T2*-weighted images . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and 3D CT angiography (CTA) showed occlusion of the V3–4 segments of the bilateral vertebral arteries (VA) and the BA . As conservative treatment was thought to be ineffective we started edaravone infusion (30 mg intravenously, twice a day) and performed endovascular treatment.
Transfemoral cerebral angiography showed occlusion of the V4 segment of the left VA just proximal to its union with the BA . Left common carotid angiography demonstrated retrograde blood flow into the BA and the bilateral superior cerebellar artery (SCA) via the left posterior communicating artery (PcomA); the proximal side was obstructed to the union area. Two-pass 5MAX ACE (Penumbra Inc., Alameda, USA) using a direct aspiration first-pass technique was successful. While the BA trunk was completely reperfused, the right AICA and SCA remained occluded .
Her past history of untreated AF and current angiographic findings strongly suggested a cardioembolic thrombus-induced basilar artery occlusion; we did not perform echocardiography. Postoperatively she was comatose; brain CT showed a large brainstem infarct and upward herniation and she died on the second day after admission. Whole body and brain autopsy was not performed.