A 45-year-old nulligravida woman with a history of laparoscopic ovarian endometrioma excision and abdominal myomectomy (27 fibroids, largest diameter 10 cm), presented to a fertility clinic. Transvaginal sonography (TVS) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed multiple fibroid recurrences, the largest being 8 cm in diameter . Preoperatively, infertility treatment by assisted reproductive technology was administered, and three blastocysts were cryopreserved. The patient subsequently underwent a second abdominal myomectomy, in which 26 fibroids were removed. Postoperatively, she complained of prolonged menstruation (15 days) and persistent brown discharge. Six months postoperatively, TVS revealed a 13.0 × 7.5 mm-sized diverticulum in the isthmus . MRI revealed a residual myometrial thickness (RMT) of 13.6 mm , and fat-saturated T1-weighted images showed high-signal areas, indicating the presence of a blood reservoir in the same area . She was referred to our hospital because her symptoms persisted during the embryo transfer cycle. Hysteroscopy revealed blood accumulation in the uterine diverticulum and the presence of a hypervascularized area and dendritic vessels consistent with the lesion . We performed hysteroscopic surgery to cut the lower edge of the defect and coagulate the hypervascularized areas to prevent pooling of blood in the diverticulum . Hysteroscopic surgery was performed 7 days after the patient’s last menstruation. Surgical procedures were performed using a 9-mm resectoscope with 0° optical system (TCRis; Olympus Tokyo, Japan) under general anesthesia. The cervical canal was dilated to 10.5 mm using Hegar dilators, and the uterine cavity was distended at 100 mmHg pressure using physiologic saline. Histopathology of the excised specimens revealed endometrial glands within the scar tissue . Two months postoperatively, the menorrhagia improved and the persistent brown discharge disappeared. In addition, postoperative MRI revealed an RMT of 18.1 mm , and fat-saturated T1-weighted images showed disappearance of the high-signal areas . Hysteroscopy also showed no hypervascularized area. . Preoperative endometrial biopsy and immunohistochemical staining using CD138 antibody showed the presence of 10 plasma cells per 20 high-power fields (HPF) of endometrial tissue , leading to the diagnosis of chronic endometritis (CE). After surgery, the CD138-positive plasma cells disappeared . The patient underwent single blastocyst transfer 3 months after surgery, and this did not result in pregnancy. She is currently awaiting her next embryo transfer.