A 9-year-old girl was referred to our hospital for further examination regarding dilatation of the common bile duct, which was found by abdominal ultrasonography performed for the evaluation of elevated liver enzyme levels. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed dilated bile ducts from the left and right intrahepatic bile ducts to the common bile duct, and the patient was diagnosed with Todani type IV-A CBD . The gallbladder was not detectable by abdominal ultrasonography, computerized tomography or MRCP; therefore, we suspected gallbladder agenesis preoperatively. The patient underwent laparoscopic excision of the extrahepatic bile duct to treat the CBD. Initial laparoscopic exploration did not reveal a gallbladder or cystic duct on the liver undersurface. Therefore, we considered gallbladder agenesis based on both preoperative imaging and intraoperative findings. Intraoperative cholangiography was performed by direct puncture of the common bile duct, and it did not show the gallbladder and bile duct . However, during dissection of the hepatic hilum, we detected a cystic structure on the ventral side of the common hepatic duct, slightly to the right, and the presence of a small additional duct that originated from the cystic structure . The size of the cystic structure was estimated to be 3 cm and the distance between the cystic duct and bifurcation was estimated to be 1.5 cm. A small amount of bile was drained upon incising the small duct. Thus, we diagnosed the cystic structure as an ectopic gallbladder with hypoplasia. After the ectopic gallbladder was removed, an excision of the extrahepatic bile duct followed by laparoscopic Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy was completed without any complications. Postoperative histopathological evaluations of the resected specimen revealed Rokitansky–Aschoff sinuses in the resected cystic lesion . Findings from the pathological investigations confirmed the diagnosis of an ectopic gallbladder. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and she was discharged on the ninth postoperative day. She recovered without any hepatobiliary complication 10 months after the operation.