A 38-year-old man was referred to our institution with chief complaints of bilateral sensory disturbance of the hands, intermittent headache, and nausea that persisted for 2 months. He had no apparent past medical history nor familial medical history.
On admission, neurological examination revealed sensory disturbance of the bilateral upper extremities. T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium enhancement revealed a well-demarcated, solid mass at the ventral foramen magnum that was compressing the patient's medulla oblongata [Figure –]. The tumor size was 12 × 13 × 22 mm and extended from the height of the C2 cervical vertebra to that of the medulla oblongata. A T2-weighted MRI showed no apparent edema inside the medulla . Computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed no obvious feeding arteries; however, the tumor was strongly enhanced. At first, cerebral angiography was considered as it is possible to embolize the feeders if detected. However, we thought surgical resection of feeders with appropriately wide surgical corridor can control the hemorrhage. It can result in almost the same outcome compared to TAE procedure, which carries some risks. Moreover, the patient was reluctant to undergo angiography. Consequently, we did not perform preoperative angiography. A preoperative diagnosis of meningioma was made, and the patient was recommended surgical removal of the tumor. Because the CTA image suggested high vascularity of the tumor, we determined that a far-lateral approach to secure wide surgical corridor was needed for safely managing the hemorrhage, as described above. The patient underwent surgical resection of the tumor under motor evoked potential (MEP) and sensory evoked potential (SEP) monitoring, utilizing a transcondylar approach in conjunction with a lateral suboccipital craniotomy. With this approach, the dorsomedial part of the left occipital condyle and the laminae of C1 and part of C2 were drilled. After cutting the dura, the reddish tumor was found ventral to the C1/C2 root and the dentate ligament, without retraction of the cervical spine. The dentate ligament was cut, and the tumor was detached from the surrounding neurovascular structures. After detailed inspection, the tumor was found to be attached to the dorsal dura at the odontoid process. The tumor bled easily and did not stop bleeding until multiple feeding arteries from the direction of the dura were coagulated and cut. After cutting the feeding arteries, the tumor became pale, and was easily removed with no further hemorrhage. The tumor was gross totally removed (Simpson's grade 2) .
Histologically, the tumor cells had high, dense nuclear, and branching vessels inside the tumors producing a staghorn appearance [Figure and ]. Immunohistochemical labeling was positive for cluster of differentiation (CD) 34, CD 31, and vimentin; it was negative for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and S-100. The Ki-67 proliferation labelling index was less than 3% [Figure and ]. The above findings were compatible with HPC.
After surgery, no additional neurological sequelae appeared, and his initial symptoms of bilateral sensory disturbance of the hands completely disappeared. He was discharged on the 9th day after surgery. Follow-up MRIs were conducted periodically, and no tumor recurrence was detected at the 10-month follow-up. Radiation therapy has not been offered to the patient till now. We saved the choice of treatment in case of tumor recurrence. Postoperative MRI showed no residual or occurrence of the tumor .