A 68-year old woman with a visually significant cataract in the right eye was referred for cataract surgery. The patient had an ocular history significant for myopia, Fuchs’ corneal dystrophy, Sjögren syndrome with aqueous tear deficiency, prior hydroxychloroquine use without maculopathy, and uncharacterized clinical rod-cone dystrophy. She had no prior history of ocular surgery. Family and social history were noncontributory. Best corrected visual acuity was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye with manifest refraction of −3.50 sphere and −4.25 +1.25 × 090, respectively. Intraocular pressure by applanation tonometry was 15 and 14 mm Hg in the right and left eye, respectively. Slit-lamp exam of both eyes showed 2+ guttae, 3+ nuclear sclerosis, and 1+ central posterior subcapsular cataract with vacuoles. Fundus exam was remarkable for mild temporal optic nerve pallor, peripapillary atrophy, blunted foveal light reflex, prominent choroidal vasculature, and scattered fine pigmentary changes with few bony spicules and inferior paving stones bilaterally. She was clinically described to have an autosomal recessive variant of rod-cone dystrophy.
The patient underwent uncomplicated phacoemulsification with insertion of a single-piece acrylic intraocular lens (IOL) in the right eye. On postoperative day 1, vision was 20/40 and intraocular pressure 20 mm Hg with a centered IOL and clear posterior capsule. At postoperative week 1, vision for the operative eye was 20/40 with pinhole acuity 20/25 and early 1+ posterior capsular opacification. At postoperative month 1, the patient subjectively reported cloudy vision with a best corrected visual acuity of 20/40 with a manifest refraction of +0.75 +0.75 × 173. Exam showed a posterior chamber IOL with severe anterior capsular phimosis limiting view of the fundus . The patient returned 2 weeks later for Nd:YAG anterior capsulotomy with visual acuity declining to 20/250. Nd:YAG anterior capsulotomy was performed creating a partial opening inferonasally due to the variable response of the thick capsule. The patient returned after 2 weeks and was found to have visual acuity of 20/200 with persistent capsular phimosis. Repeat Nd:YAG anterior capsulotomy was attempted with limited response due to the thickness of the opacification. At this point, the patient was consented for limited anterior vitrectomy. During bimanual anterior vitrectomy, the capsular phimosis was found to be extremely adherent to the anterior surface of the lens implant, and multiple unsuccessful efforts were made to remove the phimosis with the vitrector and sharp instruments. Surgery was halted due to IOL instability. The patient was referred to the retina service for surgical consultation and subsequently underwent uncomplicated pars plana vitrectomy, removal of the IOL with its capsular bag, and scleral-sutured sulcus-positioned IOL.