A 44-year-old female with past medical history significant for sarcoidosis, not currently receiving treatment, and hypertension presented to the clinic with a chief complaint of vague headaches and horizontal diplopia that worsened with left gaze of one days' duration. Neuro-ophthalmologic exam revealed an isolated, incomplete, left cranial nerve six palsy. Visual acuity was 20/20 bilaterally, Humphrey visual field testing with 24-2 testing strategy was full bilaterally, and dilated fundus examination revealed the absence of papilledema and a normal retinal periphery. There was no clinical evidence of either myasthenia gravis or thyroid ophthalmopathy.
An MRI of the orbits and brain revealed a 1.5 × 1.9 × 1.4 cm mass within the sella, displacing the pituitary gland and infundibulum towards the right and impinging on the left cavernous sinus. The mass extended into the suprasellar cistern, but did not compress the optic chiasm. There were intra-lesional areas of increased signal intensity on T1 and T2 weighted sequences that likely represented minimal hemorrhage, insufficient to qualify as apoplexy. There was no evidence of intracranial sarcoidosis.
The patient was immediately admitted to the neurosurgical service for preoperative studies and scheduled for urgent transsphenoidal hypophysectomy. Preoperative and systemic work up was initiated, inclusive of complete blood count, metabolic profile, coagulation studies, sedimentation rate, thyroid function tests, acetylcholine receptor antibodies both binding and blocking, & angiotensin converting enzyme. All tests were within normal limits aside from an elevated ACE, which was unchanged from previous examination. Review of history and physical exam revealed no clinical evidence of hypercortisolemia, hyperprolactinemia, or menstrual dysfunction. Evaluation of the pituitary hormone status of tumor, inclusive of ACTH, cortisol, prolactin, IGF-1, LH, and FSH, was scheduled but could not be completed due to rapid clinical deterioration.
The patient remained stable over the next 36 hours, at which point she developed a left-sided, severe, retro-orbital headache. Over the next four hours the patient developed acute left sided ptosis and proptosis with complete ophthalmoplegia and decreased visual acuity, findings consistent with complete cavernous sinus involvement. An emergent head CT was then obtained which demonstrated an enlarging mass in the sella without evidence of intra- or extra-lesional hemorrhage. Final dimensions of the tumor on this non-contrast head CT were 1.5 × 1.3 × 2.4 cm, overall a significant increase in size from the measured dimensions of 1.5 × 1.9 × 1.4 cm found on initial MRI especially given that MRI has been shown to provide better evaluation of pituitary macroadenomas [,].
The patient underwent emergent transsphenoidal hypophysectomy for this rapidly progressive tumor. Intraoperatively, the tumor was found to have clinical extension into the cavernous sinus. Pathologic examination of the mass demonstrated a 1.5 × 1.0 × 0.3 cm pituitary adenoma positive for ACTH immunostain. No frank hemorrhage or necrosis was noted. Post-operatively the patient was placed on intravenous Decadron, which was tapered over 10 days. She immediately regained visual acuity and the VIth nerve palsy resolved over the subsequent two months. Post-operative scans, however, continued to demonstrate tumor presence and growth and the patient underwent a second resection one month following the initial surgery, followed by stereotactic Gamma knife radiation seven months later. Now, 5 months post her last procedure, she remains free of symptoms with complete ocular motility, 20/20 visual acuity, and full visual fields. There have been no changes in her reported symptoms of sarcoidosis.