We report on a 73-year-old male with recently diagnosed myelodysplastic syndrome RAEB I showing complex karyotype. A routine-checkup revealed a tricytopenia in the blood count as well as a mild splenomegaly, further examinations including bone marrow biopsy confirmed the diagnosis. Facing the high-risk constellation of this disease (IPSS-R risk score: poor; ) and the excellent clinical condition of the patient with no relevant comorbidities, allogeneic stem cell transplantation was considered the sole option for a cure. With no HLA-identical siblings available, unrelated donor search was initiated resulting in the identification of a suitable HLA-matched donor.
Eleven months later allogeneic matched unrelated donor stem cell transplantation after conditioning chemotherapy with fludarabine, treosulfane as well as antithymocyte globuline and prophylactic immunosuppressive medication containing of cyclosporine and mycophenolatmofetile was performed successfully. No relevant complications occurred during the first weeks of follow-up besides moderate acute graft versus host disease of the skin which was immediately responsive to steroid treatment. Bone marrow examinations one month after transplantation showed complete cytogenetic remission of the disease as well as complete donor chimerism. With no further signs of graft versus host disease and a good clinical condition of the patient the immunosuppressive treatment could be constantly tapered during the following months. Continuous prophylactic antiinfectious medication with acyclovir, co-trimoxazole and posaconazole was administered.
Six months after transplantation without remaining medication the patient was presented to our internal emergency department with a critical septic condition showing fever (body temperature above 40°C) and dyspnea, and was immediately transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Intubation and mechanical ventilation had to be initiated due to respiratory failure. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral infiltrations referring to atypical pneumonia and regional osteopaenia with mild focal bone lysis at the level of the lumbar spine. Lumbar spondylodiscitis was ruled out by magnetic resonance tomography imaging (MRI).
No relevant bacterial, viral or fungal cause could be identified by bronchoalveolar lavage and multiple blood culture collections during the stay on the ICU. Cardiac echocardiography was performed and culture-negative endocarditis could be ruled out. The patient constantly improved under combinatory empiric antibiotic, antiviral and antifungal (azole) medication, extubation could be performed 7 days after intubation. While the respiratory situation completely stabilized, the clinical condition of the patient constantly deteriorated in the following days. For the first time the patient reported right hip pain.In consequence ultrasound, CT and MRI of the right hip and thigh were performed in order to identify and localize a potential inflammatory focus. The imaging revealed multiple old bone infarcts in both femurs as well as a new infarct with massive secondary osteomyelitis in the right femoral head, neck and trochanteric region, breaking through the medial cortex into the surrounding soft tissue . With emergency surgical intervention extensive bone and soft tissue destruction with ubiquitous blackened tissue became evident . Proximal femoral resection with a broad antibiotic (vancomycin, gentamycin, clindamycin) and antimycotic (amphotericin B) loaded spaceholder and extensive tissue debridement were performed. Microbiological and histopathological analysis and basic local alignment search tool (BLAST) identified RM . Bacteria could not be identified even after prolonged microbiological culturing for 10 days. Immediate high dosed liposomal amphotericin B (6 mg/kg bodyweight/day), supplemented with high dosed posaconazole (4 × 200 mg/day) was administered. After a short-term improvement of the patient’s condition with promising regression of inflammatory markers and a fever-free period, the wound at the level of the proximal thigh showed increased wound secretion and shading of the surrounding skin. Despite another 3 surgical interventions with debridement, lavage and vacuum assisted closure-therapy (VAC) the intraoperative and cutaneous state deteriorated with RM invading the tissue in a diffuse manner and ultimately perforating the skin. With this dramatic disease progression a whole-body-MRI was conducted 6 weeks after re-admission. Multiple other bone infarctions (left femur, both humeri, both tibiae) with suspected superinfection of RM became evident. Considering the drastic disease progression under maximal multimodal care further therapeutic interventions were stopped in consent with the patient and his family and palliative home care support was initiated. The patient passed away a few days later.