A 38-year-old woman presented to our emergency department with intermitting fever for the past 4 weeks, accompanied by unproductive cough, headache and dizziness, which she self-medicated with acetaminophen and metamizole. On the day of admission, she also reported nausea and abdominal pain. Seven months ago, she had had an uncomplicated delivery of a healthy child, preceded by an uneventful pregnancy. She had a medical history of radiochemotherapy for Hodgkin's disease in 2004 and had been diagnosed with ulcerative colitis in 1998, currently being medicated with mesalazine. A previous allergic reaction to penicillin had been described. Preclinical serology and laboratory results revealed DNA sequences for cytomegalovirus, a slight increase of the inflammatory marker serum C-reactive protein (41.6 mg/l) and a normal procalcitonin serum value.
The patient showed rapid deterioration of her condition and was transferred to the intensive care unit. She had a body temperature of 38.6° Celsius, a heart rate of 140 beats/min, a blood pressure of 80/40 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 30/min and suffered of tarnished consciousness. The electrocardiogram revealed sinus tachycardia and nonspecific ST-T changes. Chest radiography showed prominent pulmonary edema and bilateral pleural effusion . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed highly impaired left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of < 30%, slight pericardial effusion and no intraventricular thrombus. Laboratory results revealed increased markers of cardiac injury and congestion (high-sensitive Troponin I 3323 ng/l, N-terminal pro brain natriuretic peptide 21053 ng/l) and inflammatory response (C-reactive protein 229 mg/l, white blood cell count of 29.3/ nl with 82% neutrophils), impaired renal function (blood urea nitrogen 56 mg/dl and creatinine 1.2 mg/dl), mild elevation of transaminases (aspartate aminotransferase 289 U/l and alanine aminotransferase 71 U/l). Empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics and specific antiviral therapy with meropenem, clarithromycin, gentamicin and valganciclovir was established. Chest computed tomography (CT)-scan confirmed prominent pulmonary edema, accumulation of pleural effusion and infiltrates indicating possible pneumonia. There was no evidence of any other infectious focus in the abdominal CT-scan, neurological exanimation including lumbar puncture and gynecological examination. Follow-up TTE showed further decline of left ventricular ejection fraction, combined with rising vasopressor demand, rapidly increasing laboratory signs of cardial decompensation (maximal N-terminal pro brain natriuretic peptide > 70,000 ng/l, lactate dehydrogenase 13,000 U/l) and positive evidence for disseminated intravascular coagulation (thrombocytopenia of 95/nl, prolongation of partial thromboplastin time of 56 s, decreased antithrombin III). An Impella CP® device was inserted on day 1 shortly after her initial presentation , followed by a LV endomyocardial biopsy. Urgent coronary angiography in a patient with cardiogenic shock showed no underlying coronary heart disease . After initiation of the Impella CP®, the patient displayed further respiratory decline, requiring mechanical ventilation. In light of rising serum lactate levels (maximum 16.0 mmol/l), rapidly increasing catecholamine demand and additional imposing right ventricular failure, MCS was escalated via VA-ECMO at the same day. Additionally, the patient was started on inodilatative therapy with levosimendan. Anuria and acute renal failure required renal replacement therapy. Extracorporeal cytokine hemoadsorption via CytoSorb® was installed for 48 h . Histology of the LV endomyocardial biopsies revealed severe acute EM showing myocardial infiltration with eosinophilic granulocytes, macrophages and CD3 + T cells . Further laboratory work up revealed no peripheral eosinophilia and increased levels of cytomegalovirus-DNA (437 IE/ml). Perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA) and cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA) were negative. Immunosuppressive therapy with prednisolone was initiated on day 7 (1 mg/kg/day) and continued for 14 days, followed by a dose tapering regimen of 10 mg every 4 weeks. On day 5 both feet showed signs of acute gangrenous necrosis from the tips of all toes to the metatarsales . Duplex sonography revealed normal flow patterns in all lower extremity arteries and ruled out arterial flow obstruction by femoral ECMO cannulas and Impella® introducer sheath. The level of inotropic support required to maintain stable hemodynamics during “ECMELLA” use constantly decreased. VA-ECMO could be removed after 4 days. LV function recovered quickly to an ejection fraction of 55% by day 6, while the patient was still on mechanical circulation Impella® device support and without inotropes. The Impella® device was gradually weaned and could be removed after 9 days. The patient was extubated on day 13, had to be re-intubated due to palate bleeding the same day and could be successfully extubated the following day. Oral heart failure medication (e.g. angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor and β-blocking agent) was established after ongoing hemodynamic stability. Follow-up chest radiography showed a normalized cardiac silhouette and only residual mild pulmonary edema . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after 28 days demonstrated a borderline reduced systolic LV- and intact right ventricular function without signs of inflammatory myocardial changes or endomyocardial fibrosis . During the whole course of hospitalization our patient was in sinus rhythm and did not present any arrhythmic events. The patient was discharged from intensive care unit after 6 weeks in good clinical condition without neurological deficit and renal recovery and was transferred to a rehabilitation center thereafter. In consequent ambulatory follow-up visits, normal parameters were obtained for cardiac function. Six month later, transmetatarsale amputation of the right digiti III-V and resection of the distal phalanxes of the right digitus II and left digiti III-V became necessary.