We describe the case of a 51-year-old woman that was found at home presenting general convulsions, lying under a pendulum clock.
After a bolus of diazepam 20 mg, partial vigilance of the patient was restored, and she was carried to the emergency room. Vital signs and physical examination were normal.
Her medical history included hypertension in therapy with ramipril 5 mg daily, diabetes mellitus treated with fast and long-acting insulin, personality disorder in therapy with flufenazide in depot formulation and alcohol abuse.
Laboratory exams are displayed in , tests for alcohol and drugs were negative.
A whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan was negative for fractures or intracranial haemorrhage, but documented the presence of pyometra due to an extraneous body inside the uterine cavity.
Focal epileptic activity located in the left fronto-parietal portion of the brain was observed at electroencephalographic monitoring, but both infusion of levetiracetam and valproate were ineffective in controlling the incoming attacks that were finally extinguished after the continuous administration of propofol and phenytoin (500 mg in 24 h). Intubation and admission to the intensive care unit (ICU) were then needed.
For the management of the pyometra, endoscopic removal of the extraneous body (plastic plug, ) and antibiotic treatment with clindamycin and gentamicin were performed.
Thus, the hospitalization of the patient in the ICU prolonged for over 5 days. Thereafter, progressive worsening of the laboratory and haemodynamic parameters with hypotension was observed, suggesting septic shock, despite an escalation of the antibiotic therapy with anidulafungin and ceftriaxone. Norepinephrine (1 µg/kg/min) and epinephrine (1 µg/kg/min) infusion were then started.
12 h later, the patient suddenly presented a sustained ventricular tachycardia, that was resolved with amiodarone (300 mg bolus only) but immediately relapsed, the second time pulseless. DC-shock allowed a complete recovery of sinus rhythm without electrocardiographic abnormalities.
After about 5 h, the electrocardiogram (ECG) suddenly modified displaying a diffuse ST-segment elevation, with a triangular pattern known as the ‘shark-fin’ sign, without mirroring ST-segment depression .
The echocardiogram showed a severe reduction of left ventricular function (EF around 30%) with akinesia of the apex and periapical segments, suggestive for apical ballooning . Right ventricle and valve function were normal. Diastolic function evaluation was not performed in the acute phase, being conditioned by tachycardia. Considering the cardiovascular risk factors, the alterations of the baseline ECG at admission (, with mild antero-lateral ST depression and partially inverted T-waves) and the hemodynamic instability, coronary angiography was then performed. Coronary tree was normal but for a mild stenosis of the mid-left anterior descending artery (Videos 1–3), suggesting TTC. Only a mild troponin elevation was observed, which remained stable with no ischaemic curve (1st determination: 0.07 ng/mL, at 6 h 0.07 ng/mL, at 12 h 0.05 ng/mL).
Multiple aetiologies were hypothesized for the TTC, including epileptic status, sepsis, the use of amines, and phenytoin myocardial toxicity.
Thus, phenytoin was substituted again with levetiracetam, without epileptic relapse, and vasopressors were progressively stopped. Single antiplatelet therapy with aspirin was administrated, which was not deemed contraindicated from a neurological or gynaecological point of view, and, after the hemodynamic stabilization, beta-blockers were started and ramipril was re-introduced. Patient was extubated and discharged from ICU within 6 days.
A progressive resolution of the ST-segment elevation and recovery of the left-ventricular function were observed in the subsequent days (–C).
Her echocardiogram at discharge, after 25 days from the acute event, showed the complete recovery of the left ventricular function (EF 60%) with normal kinesis and no valvular dysfunction.
Therapy with aspirin, ramipril, and beta-blockers was maintained at discharge.
At 6 months follow-up, she remains asymptomatic with no further cardiovascular event.