A healthy-looking, 10 year-old female patient presented to the outpatient department with a complaint of large, unusual-looking front tooth in the upper front region of the mouth as shown in . On detailed anamnesis, no significant abnormalities were documented. Past family history revealed no finding of a similar dental abnormality or consanguinity of the patients' parents. Intraoral examination revealed a mixed dentition phase with normal shedding and eruption cycle of each tooth as informed by the accompanied parent. The associated tooth erupted at about 7 years 3 months' time without any complications. The oral hygiene of the patient was pretty fair with class I molar relationship and slight crowding of the lower anteriors. The fully erupted anomalous permanent maxillary central incisor tooth on the left side presented with a large crown and two unequally sized and shaped cusp-like projections on the labial aspect, each measuring about 5 mm × 3.5 mm × 4 mm in its greatest dimension, resembling an eagle's talon. Being well developed, the cusps extended from the cemento-enamel junction to the middle third of the crown, unequal in shape and size and well separated from each other. As per Mayes' classification, we classified them as stage 2 (towards the mesial aspect) and stage 3 (towards the distal aspect). The accessory cusps appeared as V-shaped tubercles with a smooth surface when viewed incisally. On the lingual aspect, no such accessory cusp was seen. The tooth responded normally to pulp testing. The cusps did not interfere with occlusion. However, the patient has slight discomfort while smiling due to friction of these cusps with the labial soft tissue mucosa of lips.
Intraoral periapical radiographic findings revealed two accessory cusps with normal enamel, dentin, pulp chambers, and root canals, which were separated by the deep developmental groove. The cusps exhibited a double V-shaped radio-opaque structures pointing towards the incisal edge, as shown in . Based upon clinical and radiographic findings, a diagnosis of double facial talon's cusp associated with the permanent left maxillary central incisor was made. The only differential diagnosis considered was dens invaginatus that was ruled out by radiographic presentation of both cusps having separate pulp chambers and canals and the classic appearance of a cusp-like projection on clinical picture, which was more representative of talon's cusp. One of the highlighting features of this documented case was the difference in the extent of both talon's cusp on the facial surface of 21 teeth. As per Mayes' classification system, the talon towards the midline belonged to stage 2 and the talon away from the midline belonged to stage 3. Based on the clinical and radiographic findings, the treatment was directed towards eliminating the double talons. The alginate impression model was made on the first visit, as shown in . Unfortunately, the patient failed to return after the first visit.