The patient is a 68-year-old woman who noted excessive thirst and dryness, along with progressive fatigue for 3–6 months. Endocrine laboratory evaluation revealed that her morning cortisol was low (3 ug/dl) with decreased ACTH. This prompted further evaluation with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary gland, at an outside facility. The scan was interpreted with a final diagnosis of pituitary mass and presumably macroadenoma. She was referred to our University Hospital for further management. The patient’s MRI scan was subsequently discussed at our multidisciplinary tumor board. MRI study revealed a large sellar-parasellar enhancing mass- like lesion with the involvement of bilateral cavernous sinuses and encasement of the cavernous carotid arteries, along with thickening of the infundibulum [ and ]. Our team of neuroradiologists noted, whereas the lesion did look like a pituitary adenoma on the T1-weighted postcontrast sequences, it did not follow the expected T2 signal of pituitary macroadenoma [ and ]. The lesion showed very low/dark signal on T2-weighted images, whereas pituitary macroadenomas show heterogeneously high/bright signal on T2 sequences with superimposed areas of cystic changes and necrosis often seen. The imaging findings, along with the diabetes insipidus like symptoms, prompted the discussion toward the lesion being inflammatory (likely lymphocytic hypophysitis [LH]) in etiology rather than neoplastic. In the absence of any evidence of disease in her chest or abdomen, a transnasal biopsy was planned to establish a definitive diagnosis.
The sella was exposed through an endoscopic transsphenoidal approach, and the dura was then opened using an arachnoid knife in a cruciate fashion. A firm rubbery mass was noted and multiple specimens were taken for frozen and permanent pathology. Frozen section demonstrated fibrous connective tissue with inflammatory cells. The final pathology revealed fragments of dense, fibrous connective tissue containing T lymphocytes, and histiocytes . Immunoperoxidase stains demonstrate the expression of CD3 by lymphocytes and CD68 by histiocytes . The final clinical-radiological and pathological diagnosis of lymphocytic hyposists were made, and the patient was treated accordingly.