A 67-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital due to “repeated chest pain for 1 month” in April 2018. The pain was behind the sternum, paroxysmal, and often occurred when waking up. The pain was tolerable, and could be relieved after eating meals. He also had sour regurgitation at that time, without dysphagia, nausea, vomiting, fever, chills or any other discomfort. No obvious weight loss was observed.
The patient had a history of H. pylori infection and was treated with levofloxacin, clarithromycin, colloidal bismuth pectin and omeprazole. He also had a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease for 5 years. He started smoking and drinking 40 years ago, consuming 450 mL beer and smoking 10 cigarettes per day, but he gave up these habits 20 years ago. No allergy of food or drugs.
Vital signs: T: 37.1 °C. P: 90/min. R: 18/min. BP: 122/81 mmHg.
Three months ago (January 2018), gastroesophageal endoscopy showed a submucosal mass with a smooth surface 25 cm from the incisors in the esophagus . At this time, the patient came to the hospital because of chest pain, so another gastroesophageal endoscopy (April 2018) was performed. Endoscopy showed a protuberance with a rough surface 25 cm from the incisors in the esophagus . EUS revealed that the layered structure of the esophageal wall disappeared over the protuberance, instead showing a hypoechoic structure spreading to the adventitia. A circular hypoechoic nodule could be seen at the back of the esophagus, and the boundary between the nodule and the esophageal mass was not clear. The measured thickness at the thickest part was 1.40 cm. The partial section size was 2.52 * 1.82 cm . A contrast-enhanced CT scan showed a mass with homogenous density adjacent to the esophageal wall . In addition, TSPOT test (April 2018) showed the positive result.
In view of our patient’s first endoscopic result, the first impression was submucosal tumors (SMTs). The patient was coming for treating sour regurgitation, so he refused to adopt a further diagnostic procedure. He was given rabeprazole for acid suppression, and rebamipide for gastric protection. However, 3 months later, the endoscopic result changed, calling attention to the possibility of tuberculosis. At the same time, a mass adjacent to the esophageal wall with homogenous density was seen on CT, which was considered to be enlarged lymph nodes.
The typical EUS manifestation of ET is the destruction of the five-layer esophageal wall structure; as a result, all layers are involved or only the mucosal layer is intact. Heterogeneous or homogeneous hypoechoic masses with mediastinal lymphadenopathy can be convincing proof of ET. Although a malignant lesion in the esophagus infiltrating the mediastinal lymph nodes can also be shown as a full-thickness segment with a hypoechoic structure and enlarged lymph nodes, there are still two differences on EUS between malignancy and ET: (1) malignant lymph nodes do not fuse with the esophageal wall, leading to disruption of the adventitia, and (2) hyperechoic strands and foci are not found in esophageal carcinoma or metastatic lymph nodes . Therefore, we inferred that the lesion was more likely to be a tuberculous mass on the basis of the fusion of the lymph nodes and esophageal wall. The hypothesis was that the enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum resulted from mediastinal lymphadenitis infiltrating the esophagus from the serosa to all layers of the esophageal wall, initially suppressing the esophagus so that it appeared as a submucosal bulge, which later progressed to an ulceration.
EUS-guided fine-needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) was further performed, and the pathological result indicated chronic active mucositis with multinuclear giant cell reaction in the middle of the esophagus . More importantly, several acid-fast bacilli were found in the biopsy specimens by acid-fast staining .