A 36-year-old woman, married and a mother of two kids, who suffered from morbid obesity, was a candidate for bariatric surgery. The presentation has been gathered according to the SCARE 2020 Guideline . In her past medical history, she had a duodenal ulcer and hypothyroidism, and the hypothyroidism was treated with levothyroxine. She was mentioned an initial weight of 113 kg, BMI 41 kg/m2. The patient was a candidate for SASJ Bypass surgery due to her tendency to squint, high volume of food consumption, and affinity for sweets . Three weeks after the surgery, the patient felt dyspepsia, nausea, and vomiting. The patient initially received oral treatment and partial recovery was achieved, but a few days later, the patient's symptoms (nausea and vomiting) got worse and became oral intolerance. The patient was also advised to consult her symptoms with psychologist but she refused it. Therefore, she became a candidate for hospitalization and further evaluation.
In the first hospitalization, upon admission in the general surgery department, the patient was evaluated clinically and paraclinically. Complementary laboratory tests were requested; Na (136 mg/dl), K (4.3 mmol/l), Urea (24 mg/dl), Cr (1.3 mg/dl), white blood cell count (4900 per microliter), Hb (12.8 mg/dl), PLT (210000), serum albumin and total protein, copper, calcium, phosphorus, 25 OH D3, serum iron, ferritin, liver function and thyroid function tests were all in normal range. In the report description of endoscopy bile reflux was found. Anastomosis and other findings were normal. Barium swallow imaging was done for the patient (, ), and slow entry of swallowed substances from the esophagus into the stomach, reducing peristalsis, and delaying the exit of substances from the stomach were seen. Other findings were normal.
In the abdominopelvic CT scan, contrast leak and other pathological findings were not reported. (Except a hyperdense liver lesion with the diagnostic possibility of sparing focal fat or perfusion change.) (, ).
The patient underwent conservative treatment with appropriate serum therapy and injectable Ondansetron and Pantoprazole. Also, psychiatric consultation was requested. The patient was discharged from the hospital five days after being admitted because of a relative improvement in the patient's overall health, the acceptance of the laboratory and paraclinical results, and the lack of pathology necessitating further treatment. They also noted that the patient's general condition had improved somewhat and that there had been no nausea and vomiting. The patient's weight was 89 kg when discharged. At this stage, the patient didn't take psychological drugs and left the treatment team, and after the active follow-up of the patient was found by the treatment team, it was found that the patient was suffering from depression and had family problems.
Three months later the patient again suffered from nausea and vomiting, anasarca edema, and severe weakness and lethargy so that it became difficult for her to perform simple routine activities and even walk. Therefore, the patient was re-admitted and re-evaluated. During the second hospitalization complementary laboratory tests were requested; Aspartate aminotransferase(AST) (76 U/L), Alanine transaminase(ALT) (193 U/L), Bilirubin (T, D) (3.5/2 mg/dl), albumin (2.8 g/dl), total protein (4.3 g/dl), Zinc (91 μg/dl), Ferritin (194 ng/ml), VitB12 (1837 pg/ml), Folic acid 9.5 (nmol/L), VitD3 (109 ng/ml), and anemia (Hb 11.8 mg/dl) were detected. Liver Sonography was done. Fatty liver was seen; ascites was not found. Esophagus and Stomach manometry was done and revealed hypotensive lower esophageal sphincter pressure (8 mmHg) with hiatal hernia and ineffective esophageal motility indicating pseudoachalasia.
A CV line was inserted, and the patient was treated with total parenteral nutrition (TPN). Due to edema and a decrease in albumin, she was treated with injectable albumin and then oral protein supplements. The patient was given reassurance and also underwent psychiatric counseling again and this time the patient underwent psychotherapeutic treatment. She was advised to take fluoxetine 20 mg once a day and clonazepam 2 mg every night and to continue therapy sessions. Also, she was recommended to start aerobic exercise (walking) with moderate intensity 5 days a week.
After 16 days of hospitalization, and after correction of albumin and storage of vitamins, the patient had a good PO tolerance, without any edema, no weakness, or lethargy, with a good general condition and a weight of 85 kg. She was discharged with a high protein diet, pantoprazole tab, ondansetron tab, FEFOL tab, domperidone tab, fluoxetine and clonazepam. In the 6th month postsurgical follow-up visit, the patient was tolerating PO, she had no nausea and vomiting. No edema was found in physical assessment. The lab data was normal. She has lost weight of up to 77 kg and she was continuing her psychotherapy sessions and aerobic exercise.