A 59-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital on June 2021 because of cough producing white, foamy sputum, accompanied by dyspnea and fever for 20 days. The local hospital considered interstitial pneumonia, and the symptoms did not resolve even after an antiinfective treatment with cefoperazone sodium sulbactam and meropenem for 2 weeks, so she was transferred to our hospital. Lung auscultation showed rales in both lungs. The patient's body temperature rose to 38.5°C. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed severe diffuse ground-glass opacities , calcification of heart valves , and gastric mucosa . The patient's procalcitonin (PCT) and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were within the normal range. Based on the patient's symptoms, serological indicators, and imaging presentation, a viral or atypical pathogenic infection was considered. Therefore, she received empirical antiinfective treatment with ganciclovir, moxifloxacin, sulfamethoxazole, and caspofungin. Other treatments included oxygen therapy combined with the prone position and steroids. Her body temperature fluctuated between 37°C- and 37.5°C after 7 days of treatment. However, she still complained of dyspnea and skin pain, followed by the appearance of herpes and petechiae . The CT scan of her lungs did not improve and showed a high-density shadow resembling calcification. To make a definitive diagnosis, we improved relevant inspections. Lung tissue biopsy showed the presence of crystalline materials with calcification and granulomatous foreign bodies in the interstitium and alveolar cavity . Skin biopsy showed purpura fulminans.
Considering that organ calcification may be related to tumors, organ transplantation, renal failure, hyperparathyroidism, abnormal calcium and phosphorus metabolism, and so on, we conducted an etiological search. She did not have a history of organ transplantation, gastric tumor, hypervitaminosis A, or the use of sucralfate. Her creatinine was 75.5 umol/L and her urine output was normal, so renal failure was ruled out. The patient's blood calcium ion level was 2.3 mmoml/L, and blood phosphorus ion level was 1.2 mmol/L, which were within the normal range, so parathyroid disease was not considered. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not show osteoporosis. Her parents were not consanguineously married, and her siblings had no similar symptoms. However, she said that she had a history of transient elevated calcium levels, the details of which were not clear, which might be a clue.
Based on her symptoms and test results, she showed strong indications for PAM, gastric mucosal calcinosis (GMC), and purpura fulminans. Since the disease was associated with a genetic mutation for which there was no effective treatment, we recommended her to undergo genetic testing. However, the genetic test results showed that the patient and her son had a heterozygous mutation in the FBN1 gene, and sequence 4,163 of the cDNA in the coding region of exon 34 on chromosome 15 was changed from C base to T, thus changing the amino acid GCG (arginine R) to GTG (histidine H) , while her daughter's results were normal. Her 29-year-old son did not show clinical symptoms such as cough or dyspnea, and a CT scan of the lungs did not reveal any abnormalities. The patient did not receive specific medicine interventions (i.e., etidronate, sodium thiosulfate) and then chose to be discharged. During follow-up, the patient showed no improvement in lung imaging and developed hypocalcemia. A partial debridement of the patient's necrotic skin was performed, followed by a skin grafting procedure .