A 25 year-old young man was injured in a motor vehicle accident (inability to control the vehicle due to violation of the speed limit). When his car reached the U-turn, it slid off the road and flipped over. Possible mechanism of injury was dorsiflexion pronation of the left side and dorsiflexion supination of the right side. The patient was brought in conscious and hemodynamically stable at the time of admission; he presented with severe bilateral ankle swelling, numerous bilateral ecchymoses and blisters without any open wounds. On physical exam, toe circulation was mildly delayed but the extremities were warm and no evidence of ischemia could be found. In the systemic review, no serious head, spinal or abdominal trauma requiring emergent measures could be noted. Ankle and plantar radiographs were obtained which demonstrated left ankle Hawkin type 4 open talar neck fracture with subtalar and talonavicular dislocation and a 3 cm open wound . On the right side, Hawkin type 4 open and comminuted fracture of the right talar body and lateral process with subtalar and talonavicular dislocation, and 3 cm open wound was noted (, ). In spinal radiography there were T10 and T11 vertebral body fractures.
In the right lower extremity, multiple fragmented talar body fracture and posterior medial tubercle were opened via an anteromedial approach. Chevron osteotomy of the medial malleolus was performed. After intraarticular irrigation and minimal soft tissue manipulation, reduction was performed by three partial thread cannulated and cancellous screws (4 mm). Consequent intraarticular irrigation was performed and the location of malleolar osteotomy was fixed by 2 malleolar pins . In the left extremity, the talus neck fracture with medial wall comminution and lateral malleolar tip avulsion was opened by simultaneous anteromedial and lateral approach for a better view, after which intraarticular irrigation and debridement took place. Neck reduction was performed using 2 cannulated cancellous screws (4 mm), and lateral Malleolus fracture was fixed using two pins(number 1.1) . Antibiotic prophylaxis was continued up to 48 hours after the operation. The patient was discharged with short splints on both lower extremities without any wound complications. The patient’s condition after 2 years follow up was 20 degrees plantar flexion, zero dorsiflexion with moderate pain and AVN and collapse in talar body on the right side. The Foot and Ankle Disability Index (FADI) score was 58/7 and 40 degrees plantar flexion 20 dorsiflexion no pains no AVN on the left side. The Foot and Ankle Disability Index (FADI) score was 82/7 . The patient`s quality of life was good based on the SF-36 score.