A 73-year-old male patient with a 32-year history of hypergastrinemia and multiple gastric NET with a comorbidity of type 2 diabetes mellitus was referred to the study center and found gastric tumors which led to a biopsy-based diagnosis of gastric NET. A blood examination revealed high neuron-specific enolase (NSE) (19.9 ng/ml; normal range: < 16.3 ng/ml) and serum gastrin (> 3000 pg/ml; normal: < 200 pg/ml). Endoscopic examination found atrophic mucosa with erosion and multiple, elevated lesions in the upper to the lower stomach. Based on an analysis of biopsy findings, the lesions were diagnosed as gastric NET. As none of the tumors were large, and no deep-tissue invasion or regional lymphadenopathy was present, the patient elected to receive endoscopic follow-up.
In year 24 of follow-up, he underwent an endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD) after an endoscopic examination demonstrated enlargement in one lesion in the greater curvature of the antrum . Histopathological analysis of the dissection specimen led to the diagnosis of pT1(sm) NET with WHO Grade 1 ly0, v0, MIB-1 index 3–4%, and a maximum lesion size of 5 mm. No further treatment was considered necessary at this stage. Endoscopy and computed tomography (CT) were conducted annually to monitor the tumor progression and detect the appearance of any new lesions.
At year 32 of follow-up, CT demonstrated regional lymphadenopathy with a 10-mm diameter in the greater omentum along the gastroepiploic artery , which was considered to be a lymph node metastasis of the gastric NET. Therefore, the patient underwent a robotically assisted total gastrectomy, D2 lymphadenectomy, and Roux-en-Y reconstruction. The operative time was 399 min, and the blood loss was 50 ml. Histopathological examination of a surgical specimen revealed extensive endocrine micronests in the upper to middle gastric body (red lines in Fig. ) and multiple, Grade 1 gastric NET (green circles in Fig. ) with ly0, v1a, MIB-1 index 1–2%, and a maximum tumor size of 4.5 mm invading the submucosal layer . At station #4d (n 1/34), a single lymph node metastasis, whose histological features resembled those of the gastric NET, was detected pathologically. In addition, an early stage signet ring cell carcinoma with ly0, v0 invading the mucosal layer was incidentally found in the middle stomach (yellow lines in Fig. ). It was not identified during endoscopy but was detected only in the postoperative pathological examination. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged on postoperative day 9. Serum gastrin normalized after surgery. The patient has been doing well to date without any recurrences at postoperative year 3.