A 13-year-old boy had an epileptic attack that was self-terminated. One hour after he went to sleep, he had another seizure and could not walk; therefore, he was immediately admitted to the hospital. The parents confirmed that the patient did not fall from the bed. He had a history of epilepsy and mild developmental retardation and was prescribed with sodium valproate at 8 months of age. It was discontinued 2 months before the episode because his condition was well controlled.
In the emergency department, the patient’s vital signs and general examination results were normal; however, the patient complained of bilateral thigh pain. His serum creatine kinase (CK) level was elevated to 5032 U/L (reference range: 51–270 U/L). Although whole-body computed tomography (CT) was performed, the attending emergency physician and pediatrician did not identify bilateral femoral neck fractures from the scan. He was admitted to the emergency department because myositis and rhabdomyolysis were suspected. Sodium valproate was resumed, and prednisolone infusion (once per day) was administered. Though the CK level decreased daily, the patient had persistent bilateral thigh pain. Hence, he was referred to the orthopedic department 3 days after admission.
Bilateral femoral neck fractures were revealed by frontal hip radiography. The fractures were classified as Delbet-Colonna type II . CT showed severe retroversion at both fracture sites . Surgical reduction and fixation were planned because the displacement of both fractures was apparent.
Closed reduction was achieved on both sides with traction and external rotation. Fixation with two cannulated screws on each side and capsular decompression was performed .
The patient was placed on bed rest for 3 weeks postoperatively, after which active movement of the hip joints was initiated, and he was allowed to sit. Training on all fours began at week 6. Ultrasound fracture therapy was also administered. Femoral head necrosis was not observed on a 9-week postoperative magnetic resonance imaging scan . Complete bone union was confirmed at the 10-week postoperative CT , and weight-bearing began. We allowed the patient to walk with full weight-bearing 12-week postsurgery. The screws were removed 6 months after the initial surgery. At the 1-year postoperative follow-up, the patient had no symptoms in the bilateral hip joints, with an almost normal range of motion. Plain radiographs did not show avascular necrosis (AVN) or early osteoarthritis .