A 41-year-old male patient was transferred from the local hospital to our hospital due to “sudden chest and back pain for 5 hours”. The patient had a history of hypertension for 10 years, and the highest reported blood pressure was 170/100 mmHg. He was treated with nifedipine and carvedilol for a long period of time, and his blood pressure was not well controlled. He also had a history of cerebral infarction for 6 years that resulted in paralysis of the left limbs. The patient had renal dysfunction for more than 7 months and had undergone regular dialysis treatment. An aortic computed tomography angiography (CTA) examination upon admission showed calcified plaques scattered throughout the aorta and DeBakey type II dissection of the ascending aorta involving the right innominate artery, accompanied by cardiac tamponade . Cardiac ultrasound showed pericardial tamponade, ascending aorta dilation, a floating intima 2 cm above the junction of the sinus tube, and no aortic valve regurgitation. The patient underwent emergency aortic root repair, ascending aorta replacement, and hemiarch replacement as well as the placement of a right innominate artery graft.
The right femoral artery was separated via a right inguinal incision. An anterior medial incision was created, and the right innominate artery was separated. The space between the arch and trachea was separated between the right innominate artery and the left common carotid artery with the left index finger as the middle arch blocking position, as was performed previously . Open pericardial exploration showed the following: haematic pericardial effusion of approximately 300 ml and haematoma of the entire ascending aorta involving the right innominate artery. In fact, the haematoma was confined to the innominate artery . After heparinization, an 18 Fr arterial cannula was inserted into the femoral artery, another 18 Fr cannula was inserted into the third branch of the #26 artificial four branch vessels (VASCUTEK Ltd., Inchinnan, Scotland), and another 12 Fr arterial cannula was used for standby . The four branch vessels were prefilled with CO2, and the gas in the duct (including the four branch vessels) was removed via the return of blood from the femoral artery cannula.
First, the “single branch-first” technique for the right innominate artery was used. The artery was transected 1 cm from the root of the right innominate artery, and a 12 Fr arterial cannula was inserted into the distal true lumen (return of blood from the femoral artery cannula was used to restore blood perfusion). Continuous suturing with 5–0 Prolene suture was performed to anastomose the fourth branch of the artificial vessel and the distal end of the right innominate artery . After anastomosis, the third branch of the artificial vessel was used for innominate artery perfusion. A two-stage venous cannula was inserted into the right atrium, cardiopulmonary bypass began, and the temperature decreased. A left cardiac drainage tube was placed in the upper right pulmonary vein for decompression. When the core temperature was 34 °C (nasopharyngeal temperature was approximately 32 °C), the “mid-arch clamping” technique was initiated. The aortic arch was blocked between the right innominate artery and the left common carotid artery. The longitudinal incision of the ascending aorta was made superior and inferior to the right innominate artery stump to a location 2 cm above the noncoronary sinus. Ascending aortic dissection involving the right innominate artery was discovered, and the dissection was confined to the innominate artery. The crevasse was located approximately 2 cm above the junction of the sinus tube in the noncoronary sinus, with a length of approximately 2 cm, and was surrounded by a calcified ulcer . The dissection involved the junction of the sinus tube in the left coronary sinus, the noncoronary sinus and the commissure of the right noncoronary sinus. A three-leaf aortic valve, without prolapse, and a valve ring without dilation were found. A thrombus of approximately 10 g was removed from the sandwich. The aortic root was poured into the myocardial protective fluid. Then, the dissected intima was excised proximal to 1 cm above the junction of the sinus tube and distal to the near-end of the arch.
Then, anastomosis of the proximal end of the arch was performed. The distal end of the artificial vessel was blocked close to the third and fourth branches and was trimmed to retain a suture margin of 2 cm. The arch cavity was lined with a free artificial vessel ring that was approximately 1 cm long. A 2–0 ETHIBOND EXCELTM (v-5) suture was used to anastomose the distal end of the artificial four branch vessels with the proximal end of the arch with the use of the intermittent stitch method . Afterwards, the artificial vessel and the mid-arch clamping forceps were opened, and the anastomosis was checked for bleeding. Intermittent reinforcement with 3 stitches was performed to stop the bleeding.
Next, anastomosis of the aortic root was performed. The commissure of the right noncoronary sinus was suspended by a 4–0 Prolene suture with a gasket. Another 3 sutures were placed to clip the dissection of the noncoronary sinus. Next, we applied the “embedded anastomosis” technique. A segment of free artificial blood vessel approximately 5 cm in length was taken, and the lumen was reversed and inserted into the left ventricle through the aortic valve ring. The proximal end of the artificial vessel was located 1 cm above the junction of the sinus tube, close to the intima of the aortic cavity. Continuous stitching was performed with 4–0 Prolene HS suture . After tying a knot, the artificial vessel was turned out and trimmed to an appropriate length. The proximal end of the four branch vessels was blocked close to the third and fourth branches, and the residual end was trimmed to the suture margin of 1 cm. A 4–0 Prolene HS suture was used for continuous suturing . After deairing, the blocking forceps of the four branch vessel was opened, and the heart began to beat again. Each cannula was removed after protamine and heparin neutralization, and each incision was closed.
The patient experienced a smooth operation. The total cardiopulmonary bypass time was 180 min, and the aortic clamping time was 122 min. The drainage volume 8 h after the operation was 200 ml. There were no postoperative complications. The patient was discharged 11 days after the operation. During more than 3 months of follow-up, there were no cases of aortic regurgitation or anastomotic fistula.