A 77-year-old Asian man presented with sudden onset pruritus. There was no history of drug allergy or scabies. His past medical history was significant for hypertension, benign prostatic hypertrophy, and early glaucoma. His past surgical history included vasectomy, laser iridotomies, and pterygectomies. His medications included losartan, doxazosin and silodosin, amlodipine, carvedilol, and a multivitamin. He was a retired pediatrician who was actively involved in gardening, carpentry, roller-blading, swimming, and walking his dogs. He has had healthy dogs his entire life and currently has dogs.
Our patient first presented to his primary care physician, who offered a psychosomatic explanation for his symptoms. A complete blood count (CBC) with a differential demonstrated elevated eosinophils of 36%. (His white blood cell (WBC) count was 3.7, hemoglobin level was 10.3, platelets were 288, neutrophils 1006, and eosinophils 1314.)
He was referred to an allergist, who started oral prednisone. There was some relief in his symptoms. The dermatologist prescribed interferon. This resulted in extreme fatigue and purple fingernails. There was no improvement in the pruritus, so interferon was discontinued.
He was then referred to a dermatologist who prescribed hydroxyzine and fluocinolone cream. This provided minimal relief. He saw a second dermatologist who performed a skin biopsy, which was negative. Hydroxyurea was prescribed. There was no improvement in the patient’s symptoms or eosinophil count.
Our patient was referred to an oncologist. A bone marrow biopsy (BMB) revealed a slight hypercellularity of 30–40% and increased eosinophilic concentration of 16%. There was no evidence of leukemia, lymphoma, or myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Cytogenetic testing revealed the following: 46XY, del 9 (q13q22) of unclear significance (as this is seen with AML, but there was no evidence of AML on BMB). His Kappa/Lambda ratio was slightly elevated at 4.15. V-kit Hardy-Zuckerman 4 feline sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KIT) mutation by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), T cell clonality by PCR, and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) panel results were negative. Immunoglobulin (Ig) testing revealed IgA of 140, IgG of 1317, IgM of 65, and IgE of 358.
Our patient also saw an infectious disease specialist. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), antinuclear antibodies (ANA), serum tryptase, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), vitamin B12, urine protein electrophoresis, and parasitic workup (trichinella, toxocara, strongyloides) results were negative. An echocardiogram demonstrated an ejection fraction of 62%.
Our patient continued to have chronic pruritus, resulting in sleepless nights. In desperation, he attempted to discontinue his prostate medications in the hope that his condition was a simple allergy to medication, but this resulted in urinary retention with fever, sepsis, and anasarca, necessitating urgent antibiotic treatment.
Although our patient was negative for the FIP1L1-PDGFRA mutation, a trial of imatinib (tyrosine kinase inhibitor) was given. There was no improvement in his symptoms or condition.
Our patient’s symptoms worsened with continued pruritus and resultant insomnia, so oral prednisone was increased from 20 mg to 80 mg. He noticed no improvement in his symptoms and became clinically depressed.
Additional testing was obtained, revealing the presence of a Janus kinase (JAK) 2 mutation (JAK2 V617F)
He was prescribed ruxolitinib 20 mg orally twice a day. By day 3 of ruxolitinib, he could sleep a full night without pruritus. His prednisone was tapered, and by 1 month, he had tapered off of his prednisone. He developed mild neutropenia, so the dosage of ruxolinitib was decreased. He noted that when he missed even one dose of his ruxolitinib, the pruritus would recur.
His most recent laboratory tests (4 years after his initial presentation and diagnosis of HES) revealed normal eosinophil levels of 2%. He had mild anemia and thrombocytosis, which were stable.
Several months after starting ruxolitinib, he noted hypertrichosis in both eyes, with increased length and thickness . He did not report additional hair growth on his head, facies, or other parts of his body. He had no history of alopecia throughout his life. He did note that his eyelashes were thinner before starting ruxolitinib .
Unfortunately, due to his tenuous condition, it was decided not to discontinue the oral ruxolitinib in order to measure his pre-medication eyelash lengths.
Our patient developed a painless, mobile, circular lesion in the left upper extremity (0.5 × 0.4 × 0.4 cm) . A biopsy revealed a schwannoma, containing spindle cells with Verocay bodies with some nuclear pleomorphism. It was resected without complications or recurrence. It is more commonly seen in psoriatic patients.