A 41-year-old man underwent laparoscopic partial gastrectomy for gastric GIST in 2012. He has no familial history of GIST-rerated heredity disorder. The pathological examination showed the negative resection margins, and there was no heterogeneity. The number of nuclear fissions was 50–70 with 50 high power fields. Therefore, the pathological findings suggested that the tumor had high-risk characteristics of recurrence according to the modified Fletcher classification . Thus, he received adjuvant therapy with imatinib for 3 years and follow-up computed tomography (CT) every 6 months. No recurrence and new one occurred afterwards. In 2018, 3 years after the completion of adjuvant therapy, tumor lesions were detected at the gastric cardia with a diameter of 30 mm via follow-up CT . Laboratory data, including tumor markers, were almost within the normal range. Gastroscopic examination showed a submucosal tumor at the gastric cardia with a diameter of 20 mm . The tumor was located away from the resection margin of the previous surgery, which suggested that the tumor was not a local recurrence but a newly generated tumor. Immunohistochemistry of the biopsy from the tumor showed a positive KIT protein, and the tumor was diagnosed as a gastric GIST. Positron emission tomography (PET) CT showed abnormal high uptake at gastric cardia .
He finally underwent laparoscopic partial gastrectomy again. The pathological examination showed KIT (+), CD34 (+), desmin (−), and S-100 (−) in the tumor. The number of nuclear fissions was 50–70 with 50 high-power fields. Therefore, the tumor was diagnosed as a high-risk gastric GIST .
We conducted a mutation analysis on both gastric GISTs. They had the same exon 11 mutations in the c-kit gene but different missense mutations. The first GIST had the W557_V559 > ST codon mutation of exon 11, whereas the second GIST had the W557_K558 > ST codon mutation of exon 11. This molecular heterogeneity suggested that they were derived from different origins. Therefore, we diagnosed multiple heterochronic GISTs in the stomach. Consequently, adjuvant therapy with imatinib was restarted for the second time.