A 35-year-old Nepalese man came to our institute with a primary complaint of headache for 3 weeks and weakness on the left side of the body for 2 weeks. The severity of the headache increased gradually and became worse a few days before the presentation. Headache was not relieved by over the counter medication. It was associated with low-grade intermittent fever, nausea, and vomiting, and was exacerbated by changes in posture. There was no photophobia, neck stiffness and convulsions. Left-sided weakness was progressive, which affected his hands and legs equally, making him bedridden. There was no history of ear / nasal discharge, cough, sinus pain, surgery or trauma. At the time of presentation, the temperature was 37.7 °C, the heart rate was 88 beats per minute, the breathing rate was 15 times per minute, the arterial haemoglobin oxygen saturation was 95%, and the blood pressure was 123/72 mmHg. During the examination, he was alert, oriented to time, place and person. There was no pallor, icterus, lymphadenopathy, cyanosis and clubbing. His muscle bulk was normal, and he had a left-sided weakness with power 2/5 on both upper and lower limbs, showing hypertonia and hyperreflexia. The left limb showed a positive Babinski sign. Sensation and co-ordination were intact, and neck rigidity was absent. Thorough cranial nerves and eye examination were healthy, and there was no noticeable change in fundoscopy. The cardiac analysis revealed systolic murmur with normal S1 and S2, and lung examination was normal. The patient had poor dental hygiene.
Biochemistry and haematology panel showed normal renal and liver function, absence of leukocytosis with normal differential cell count, a normal haemoglobin level of 12.2 mg/dL, and a normal platelet count of 133,000 cells/μL. Urinalysis, chest X-ray and electrocardiogram revealed no abnormality. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed mitral regurgitation and no evidence of valvular vegetation. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was performed, which showed a bi-lobed rim enhancing lesion with a conglomeration of two adjoining round lesions in the right parietal parasagittal region . Perilesional oedema resulting in mass effect over the right lateral ventricle and mid-right uncal herniation with midline shift was noted. FLAIR hyperintensity with mild leptomeningeal enhancement along the right-sided cortical sulci due to associated leptomeningitis was also reported.
Because of the treacherous mass effect of the abscess, the patient underwent craniotomy and lesion was excised, and he was empirically treated with intravenous meropenem and vancomycin. Gram stain of the extracted sample revealed gram variable filamentous rods . After the gram stain results, modified acid-fast bacilli stain (modified Kinyoun staining) was performed, which was negative. There was no growth on aerobic culture, but creamy white, moist, confluent colonies were observed on chocolate agar in the anaerobic medium , which on gram stain showed gram-positive filamentous rods . VITEK MS, which uses MALDI-TOF technology, identified the isolated colonies as Actinomyces meyeri. The identification of A. meyeri by MALDI-TOF (VITEK® MS) had a high confidence level with 99.9% confidence value (MALDI score of more than 2), suggesting accurate identification. Based on the susceptibilities, antibiotics were de-escalated to ampicillin–sulbactam combination as ampicillin was not available. Headache and weakness gradually improved, and he was able to walk without assistance at 6 weeks, at which time he was discharged on oral antibiotics for 12 months.