We report a case study of 52-year-old gentleman with no known prior comorbids, who presented to neurosurgery clinic with complaints of frequent instability in gait and numbness in bilateral lower limbs, for around 3–4 weeks. Recently, his symptoms have worsened to an extent that he is only able to walk with support, or else he falls within 5–6 steps.
At presentation, his neurological examination revealed powers of 5/5 in both upper limbs, 5/5 in the lower limbs proximally and 4 + distally. Signs of myelopathy including brisk lower limb reflexes and bilateral upgoing plantars were noted. Sphincters were continent and no sensory impairment was appreciated.
His MRI dorsolumbar spine with contrast was performed which reported an IM abnormal signal intensity area with homogenous enhancement, measuring 1.4*1.5*2.1 cm, corresponding to the level of T11, causing compression of spinal cord anteriorly and to the left side. This is associated with high signal cord edema in the lower thoracic spinal cord. No evidence of dural tail and extension in exiting foramina was noted. The lesion appears isointense on T1 and iso to hypointense on T2, with post contrast-enhancement; findings representing IM neoplasm with one differential of ependymoma .
With the impression of an IM cord tumor, patient was planned for surgical excision. After informed consent and preoperative counseling, D10 partial, D11 complete, and D12 partial laminectomy were performed.
Intraoperatively, an IM lesion was noted with no definite arachnoid planes, myelotomy was performed by the tumor itself. Hence, near total resection of tumor was done. Neuromonitoring could not be used because of unavailability.
Postoperatively, the patient had no new sensory or motor deficits in the lower limb. His active physiotherapy and limb strengthening exercises were done.
Histopathology of biopsied lesion reported areas of compact, elongated cells, with occasional nuclear palisading (Antoni A pattern) and less cellular, loosely textured cells with indistinct processes and variable lipidization (Antoni B pattern). Nuclear palisading and fibrillary processes were seen in cellular areas. Immunohistochemical stain S100 was positive in neoplastic lesion and GFAP negative in tumor cells. These findings were consistent with the diagnosis of schwannoma [ and ].