A 58-year-old Caucasian man was found dead by his wife, hanging from the ceiling in the basement of the cellar in which he used to live. The wife found the man 3 hours after death.
From the anamnestic data collected, the man had been suffering from severe depression for many years. He had retreated into seclusion for several years and moved to the cellar for no apparent reason many years before. The man was taking an antidepressant drug belonging to the class of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs): Prozac (three tablets per day, 60 mg). His everyday routine used to consist of taking care of the kitchen garden in the morning and keeping himself busy with carpentry work in the afternoon.
There are previous records of suicide attempts, 2 years earlier, by consuming alcohol together with the antidepressant drugs he had been regularly taking for his therapy.
The first inspection of the death scene led to the belief that it was a suicide, but since a large amount of blood and some lacerations were noted on the sweater, a forensic pathologist was required. Preliminary examination of the body, once the sweater had been lifted, revealed a wide incised wound, with irregular edges and of irregular shape, in the umbilical area, showing the muscular and adipose tissues below.
In consideration of these injuries, a careful inspection of the scene was carried out, but no further blood traces were found, except for a small pool of blood in the area below the body. On inspection of the surrounding area, the police found a chainsaw with blood spatter on both the blade and the handle in the garden beside the courtyard. Some textile fragments of the same color as the sweater were also discovered near the chainsaw in the garden.
The chainsaw used in the present case is shown in Figs. , . It has a weight of 4.4 kg and a blade 41 cm in length. According to the instruction manual, the maximum number of revolutions is 2400 per minute without load. The saw runs only when the throttle of the hand switch is gripped, so when the grip is released, the blade of the saw stops. Only the victim’s fingerprints were found on the chainsaw. Examination of the wound (direction, orientation, depth) showed that it could only have been inflicted by the victim.
Post-mortem examination was performed the day after the time of death. External examination showed a ligature mark around the neck, and a deep incised wound measuring 16 cm in width and up to 4.5 cm in length was encountered on the mesogastrium. The wound edges were generally torn, partly with grazed appearance . The wound was surrounded by a wide reddish abrasion measuring 23 cm in width and 12 cm in length The skin mark on the neck was brownish yellow, and the anterior surface was parchment-like; furthermore, a narrow zone of reddened hyperemia at either margin of the mark was seen. Subconjunctival petechiae were observed. No other injuries, including hesitation injury, were noted externally.
The autopsy showed hemorrhagic infiltration of the right omohyoid and sternocleidomastoid muscles, and the thyroid cartilage and the hyoid bone were intact. All the internal organs were intact and congested except for the intestinal loops below the chainsaw lesion, which were lacerated , and 100 ml of blood was found in the abdominal cavity.
Histological examination confirmed the macroscopic findings and revealed hemorrhagic infiltration in the skin lesions and in the intestinal mucosa. Immunohistochemistry was also carried out, confirming the vitality of both injuries: the abdominal incised wound and the ligature mark. Body fluids were sampled for toxicological analysis: blood alcohol and drugs/illegal substances were negative.
The cause of death was deemed to be asphyxia due to hanging. The traumatic shock and exsanguination from the abdominal injury were not related to the fatal event.