A 59 year-old woman, smoker 22 pac/year, presented to hospital with 4 months of worsening dyspnea, nonproductive cough at first, but lately she was able to cough up a thick, white sputum. She has lost 5 k since the beginning of the disease. She denied having hemoptisis and systemic infection symptoms, such as fever, chills and sweats. The patient’ had been regularly taking therapy for high blood pressure for 10 years. Pulmonary examination showed notably descended and immovable hemidiaphragms with decreased breath sounds accompanied by some low-pitched whistles. Lung function testing registered medium level restrictive disturbances of ventilatory insufficiency. DLCO was 27 %. Gas analysis of arterial blood registered hypoxic respiratory failure (PaO2 7.14 PaCO2 4.61 pH 3.37 SaO2 83 %). Chest X-ray demonstrated bilateral reticular opacities with honeycombing with predominant sub pleural distribution. CT confirmed findings of reticular interstitial opacities with extended and deformed small airways filled with plenty of thick mucus, visible bronchiectasis and thickening of interlobular septa . Bronchoscope findings were unremarkable with a lot of mucus gushing from the segmental bronchi. Histopathological finding of transbronchial biopsy as well as cytological examinations of bronchoaspirate was not conclusive. Progressive course of the disease without response to antibiotics and corticosteroid therapy indicated underlying malignant disease.
Consequently the patient underwent video-assisted thoracoscopy with lung biopsy under general anesthesia. Tissue histology revealed mucinous adenocarcinoma of the lung with pleural infiltration (stage PL1); pattern was largely lepidic with smaller foci of acinar growth , partially thickened septa and several cuts presented expanded air pathway that creates the image of centriacinar emphysema. Immunohistochemical finding was TTF1 negative, napsin negative, CDX2 negative, CK7 positive, and CK20 negative. In addition, approximately 20 % of lung adenocarcinomas are TTF1 negative, which further complicates the diagnosis [–]. Despite the fact that immunohistochemical staining wasn’t specific for mucinous adenocarcinoma, histological diagnosis was determined by morphological features of the tumor.
There were no detected mutations in EGFR gene. KRAS wild type genotype was detected on codons 12 and 13. Biopsy tissue didn’t show signs of pulmonary fibrosis. Seven days later, the patient died presenting terminal respiratory failure.