A 64 year old female of Chinese origin underwent uncomplicated mechanical mitral valve replacement in 2002. She was reviewed six weeks following discharge. The sternal wound was healing slowly, but there were no signs of infection.
Past surgical history included sterilisation in 1962, haemorrhoidectomy in 1983 and hysterectomy for fibroids in 1985. None of these operations had resulted in scar hypertrophy. No other significant medical history was present.
She made an uncomplicated recovery from her mitral valve surgery and she was discharged back to her general practitioner (GP). In the next 9 months, she noticed increasing pain and thickness of the sternotomy and previous chest drain scars. She was initially treated by her GP with local anti-inflammatory agents with no noticeable improvement. She searched for other treatment options on the internet and chose to use Cica-Care™ (Smith & Nephew™), a silicone gel sheet for six months with little relief. At that stage her GP referred her to a plastic surgeon and a pain therapist who treated her with local steroid and lidocaine injections for approximately 4 years with no improvement. Eventually she was seen by her cardiologist who referred her back to our cardiothoracic unit.
Her clinical examination confirmed a 12 cm long keloid scar at the site of the sternotomy and two other keloid scars inferiorly at the site of previous chest drains and pacing wires. These were extremely tender on light palpation, particularly over the site of the sternal wires. None of the wires were palpable. Following discussion on treatment options she agreed to have surgical excision of the scar and primary closure.
In November 2008, the patient underwent excision of the keloid scar with removal of the sternal wires and reconstruction of the wound with three layers of suture (1 Dexon™ Covidien UK™) under general anaesthetic. Mobilisation of the subcutaneous tissues was required for approximation of the skin edges. Skin was closed with Prolene™ (Ethicon™). Sutures were removed after ten days and a pressure dressing was applied. We were not sure if this patient was allergic to the Monocryl™ and we therefore chose to use a removable material such as Prolene™. The histology of the keloid scar did not show evidence of malignancy.
The hypertrophied scar at the pacing wire site was deliberately left untouched in order to compare any future scar formation. She was discharged home three days later. The patient was reviewed in the outpatients clinic six weeks later. The wound was healing well with minimal tenderness over the scar sites . Nine months after excision there was evidence of recurrence of her scar, however this was of a lesser degree . The patient felt that pain related to her scar had markedly improved and was satisfied with the overall result.