A 73-year-old man with unresectable stage IIIB MCC was referred to the National Institutes of Health for treatment with the monoclonal anti-programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) antibody avelumab. On physical examination, there were multiple pink to deep red smooth tumors with prominent vasculature on the central scalp and left cervical lymphadenopathy was palpable. Biopsy of a scalp tumor revealed neuroendocrine carcinoma with positive staining for cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and synaptophysin, confirming the diagnosis of MCC. Positron emission tomography/computerized tomography (PET/CT) scanning showed metabolically active cutaneous and subcutaneous nodules on the vertex of the scalp, and multiple metabolically active enlarged cervical and supraclavicular lymph nodes.
The patient was started on avelumab at a dose of 10 mg/kg infused every two weeks. He was pre-medicated with acetaminophen, diphenhydramine and ranitidine. Two weeks after his first infusion his scalp lesions were inflamed and enlarged, consistent with pseudo-progression . The scalp tumors and lesions on CT scans subsequently regressed .
Between his second and third infusions, the patient developed a pruritic erythematous eruption on the chest, upper back, upper arms and right lower extremity. Examination revealed numerous thin, pink-brown scaly plaques ranging in size from 1.0 cm to 1.5 cm and involving sites of pre-existing seborrheic keratoses (SK) and solar lentigines . A shave biopsy of an affected lesion on the right posterior shoulder was performed and histology demonstrated papillomatous epidermal hyperplasia with hyperkeratosis and focal parakeratosis. The epidermis contained scattered exocytosed lymphocytes associated with mild spongiosis, intermittent hypergranulosis, and copious dyskeratotic keratinocytes. The dermal-epidermal junction was obscured by a lichenoid infiltrate primarily composed of T-lymphocytes. These clinical and histological finding are consistent with lichen planus-like keratosis . Treatment with topical triamcinolone 0.1% ointment twice daily provided symptomatic relief. Inflammation of affected lesions diminished over the following two weeks , however, the patient experienced intermittent inflammation in scattered keratoses and lentigines during continued therapy with avelumab. Treatment with cryotherapy was effective at ablating individual symptomatic lesions and resolving the local inflammation.