A 60-year-old male underwent total colonoscopy following a positive fecal occult blood test at a referring hospital. A flat elevated lesion with central depression, 10 mm in diameter, was detected in the lower rectum. The depressed area had a remarkable reddish surface with fold convergence . Magnifying chromoendoscopy with indigo carmine demonstrated the surface character and the margins of the depressed area more clearly . The depth of the lesion was predicted as submucosal (sm) invasion based on the conventional endoscopic findings because of the fold convergence and the reddish depressed area. However, staining with crystal violet revealed type IIIL and VI mildly irregular pit pattern according to Kudo’s classification [,] or non-invasive pattern in our clinical classification . Biopsy specimens revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma.
The patient was subsequently referred to our hospital for further management. Computed tomography for tumor staging showed no lymph node swelling or distant metastasis. Blood examination revealed increased serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels (8.2 ng/ml) and normal carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) levels (< 1 U/ml) and a total colonoscopy was then performed in our hospital. A month after the previous colonoscopy, the examination showed different lesion morphology. Although the patient had received neither anticancer treatment nor any other medications, the lesion was smaller and more indistinct. However, the fold convergence persisted, suggesting a scar . Chromoendoscopy with indigo carmine dye (0.4%) revealed a clear demarcation between the fold convergence and normal tissue; however, we were unable to detect the lesion clearly . Narrow-band imaging (NBI) with magnification revealed a faintly visible honeycomb pattern around the normal gland. This finding was classified as type I according to Sano’s classification and Kudo type IIIL or elongated type I pit pattern was observed with magnifying chromoendoscopy and crystal violet staining (0.05%) . A biopsy taken from the center of the lesion revealed only normal rectal mucosa.
Colonoscopy was repeated one week after the first examination at our hospital, and with this exam, there was reddish mucosa with erosion caused by the biopsy . The endoscopic findings of the lesion revealed a remarkable reduction in size with the development of indistinct features during the short period of one month . Because it was difficult to diagnose the lesion by endoscopic findings and the biopsy specimen was normal, we performed diagnostic endoscopic submucosal resection with a ligation device (ESMR-L) .
Histopathological findings of the resected specimen showed a 1 mm well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with low-grade atypia and no lymphovascular invasion (the macroscopic type was 0-IIb). The depth of invasion was mucosal, and the vertical and lateral cut margins were negative. There was marked fibrosis, congestion, and inflammation around the intramucosal tumor . Surveillance colonoscopy was performed and only scar tissue was observed at the site of resection. A biopsy taken from the scar revealed normal rectal mucosa. The patient is currently in remission with no recurrence detected after 18 months of follow up.