A 25-year-old woman visited our hospital with recurrent abdominal pain.
There was intermittent epigastric pain that started 1 day before her visit to our hospital.
The patient had no specific history of past illness such as trauma or medication. Due to abdominal pain 1 year prior, she underwent computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis at another hospital and was transferred to our hospital. A contrast-enhanced CT scan revealed a poorly enhanced heterogenous mass adjacent to the anterior wall of the gastric lower body . A perigastric abscess or hematoma or a gastric SMT was suspected at that time because the patient had mild fever, abdominal pain, and a poorly enhanced heterogenous mass, and was hospitalized. The patient underwent sonography for percutaneous drainage insertion after admission and a focal hypoechoic solid-like lesion with an internal echogenic component on the anterior wall of the gastric antrum was found, but there was no evidence of an internal cystic lesion, suggesting that the hematoma was suspicious rather than an abscess because a small amount of blood component had drained . She was treated with antibiotics, tranexamic acid, a proton pump inhibitor, and conservative therapy. Because her symptoms improved, the patient was discharged without any further examination (such as endoscopic ultrasound) and underwent regular follow-up in the outpatient clinic.
The patient had no personal or family history.
The patient exhibited tenderness over the entire abdominal, with epigastric pain dominant, and a fever of 38.4°C.
Blood analysis showed a mild leukocytosis (white blood cell count, 11770/µL), with dominant neutrophils (78.7%) and a normal hemoglobin level and platelet count. The serum C-reactive protein level was elevated, at 31.2 mg/L (normal range, 0-5 mg/L). The other laboratory findings were unremarkable.
Abdominal CT showed a well-circumscribed, highly attenuated, and slightly homogenous round mass in the peri-gastric region . A SMT, peri-gastric hematoma, and gastric endometriosis were identified by differential diagnosis on CT scan. Thus, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, and a 6.7 cm × 2.7 cm subcutaneous lesion on the endoscopic anterior wall of the great curvature of the gastric antrum was identified . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) was performed next, and the findings were a heterogeneous hypoechoic mass of approximately 6.35 cm × 3.00 cm that appeared similar to a gastric SMT of fourthlayer origin . EUS-guided fine needle biopsy (EUS-FNAB) was performed due to suspicion of a gastric SMT based on the EUS findings, but because the tumor was not diagnosed histologically, surgical resection was planned.
The mass was mostly well circumscribed with a white-tan cut surface, showed focally infiltrative growth in fat tissue. The grossly confirmed mass was 6.5 cm × 4.0 cm × 1.0 cm, and a calcified fibrous tumor that originated from the gastrohepatic ligament and adhered to the lesser curvature of the gastric antrum was identified .
The tumor consisted of a sparse population of fibrous cells, hyalinized collagen, and a haphazard collagenous matrix; a scattered dystrophic calcification was observed. Inflammatory cells, consisting of lymphocytes and plasma cells, were the dominant infiltrating cells, and bland spindle cells were embedded . No germinal center was observed. A fibrinoid degenerative lesion due to a previous histologic examination by EUS-FNAB was present. Immunohistochemical staining results indicated that the tumor was CD34 negative, SMA negative, CD117 negative, Bcatenin negative, and Factor XIIIa positive for spindle cells .