A 13-year-old Caucasian boy admitted to the Hematology Department at our institution was diagnosed with anemia. Eight years prior to the admission he had been diagnosed with epilepsy. He was treated with 10 mg lamotrigine per day, which was withdrawn after one year because the seizures had ceased. Six years after the anticonvulsant therapy was discontinued a review electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed many synchronic epileptiform changes, that is, sharp waves and spikes. In spite of the fact that there were no reported seizures during the above-mentioned period, 20mg/kg/day valproic acid therapy was introduced.
After 12 months of therapy, during a routine visit, the neurologist noticed the patient presented with pallor. He did not report any other ailments and was leading an active life. His laboratory parameters were as follows: hemoglobin (Hb), 9.2g/dl; red blood cells (RBCs), 2.71 × 1012/L; mean corpuscular volume (MCV), 100 fl; mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), 33.9pg; mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), 34g/dl; platelets, 321 × 109/L; and white blood cells (WBCs), 4300 × 106/L. The only other medication taken by the patient was loratadine for his pollen allergy. Both the patient and his mother denied any exposure to environmental toxins, taking other medications or drugs, drinking alcohol, or smoking cigarettes. They confirmed full adherence to the therapy. The patient also denied having had any respiratory tract infections in the period preceding examination.
Although pale at the time of admission, the boy was in relatively good condition and there were no other abnormalities in the physical examination. Laboratory tests confirmed macrocytic anemia. Serum iron and erythropoietin concentration were elevated, but other biochemical measurements were within the normal range . Serological tests excluded cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis B and C, parvovirus B19, and toxoplasmosis infections. Antinuclear antibodies were negative, serum valproate concentration was within the reference range, and urine cultures were negative. A bone marrow biopsy revealed normocellular bone marrow with a regular myeloid:erythroid ratio and megakaryocytes and without malignant cells or megaloblastic changes. Mild dyserythropoiesis was observed: The amount of proerythroblasts was regular (5%), but the number of orthochromatic erythroblasts was diminished (3.3%) . Because we suspected that valproic acid could have induced the patient’s anemia, we gradually suspended it under close neurological control. On the EEG examination, only a few slow waves were found in the frontal region.
During the observation period, morphology tests improved systematically , and after 5 months they were as follows: Hb, 12.9g/dl; RBCs, 4.47 × 1012/L; MCV, 85.9fl; MCH, 28.9pg; MCHC, 33.6g/dl; reticulocytes, 0.4%; platelets, 226 × 109/L; WBCs, 4800 × 106/L; and neutrocytes, 1750 × 106/L.
The patient is still without anticonvulsant therapy and does not have any neurological symptoms.