A 64-year-old woman with a history of hypertension and hypercholesterolemia under treatment, presented to our emergency department with acute onset of substernal chest pain radiating to the neck and jaw. The pain had emerged 2 hours earlier when she had experienced near-drowning and fear of imminent death.
Physical examination on admission revealed a heart rate of 100 bpm, her blood pressure was 150-90 mmHg and her oxygen saturation was 97%. A grade 1–2/6 systolic murmur and a fourth heart sound were heard.
ECG demonstrated ST-segment elevation in leads V2–V6. Echocardiographic evaluation depicted decreased LV ejection fraction (40%), with new regional wall motion abnormalities, i.e. hypokinesis of the basal and mid segments of the LV . It was noted that these changes had not been noted on a previous routine echocardiogram. However, subsequent coronary angiography (CAA) revealed neither major atherosclerotic lesions nor coronary spasm, while throughout her hospitalization there was only a slight increase of troponin I (cTnI) levels. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and showed no evidence of myocarditis. The patient had no increased inflammatory markers. No endocrine diseases or other serious concomitant disorders were present.
During her hospitalization the patient remained asymptomatic. Ventricular systolic function recovered completely and the wall motion abnormalities resolved by the 3rd day following admission. Her ECG evolution showed T-wave inversion. The patient was discharged after six days, under medical treatment with a b-blocker and an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor. The prior occurrence of a stressful event, the normal CAA findings accompanied by cTnI levels that were disproportionate to the extent of hypokinesia and, finally, the fast LV recovery, lead us to believe that our patient had experienced a variant form of acute reversible stress cardiomyopathy.
During the next two months the patient experienced two more episodes of prolonged chest pain, both after emotional stress, bearing the same characteristics as before. However, the echocardiogram on both these occasions depicted no akinetic segments. There were neither abnormal ECG findings nor cTnI elevation.
To-date, she remains asymptomatic, with normal LV systolic function and VO2max.