A 69-year-old healthy male was referred to our department for revision left TKA. He had complained of chronic knee pain and stiffness following conversion of a knee arthrodesis to a TKA. He had initially undergone an open knee arthrodesis 50 years earlier for septic arthritis with a post-operative long rigid knee extension brace for 3 years. Conversion of the knee arthrodesis to a TKA was performed in 1997 at another hospital with a non-cemented cruciate sparing implant. The patella was not resurfaced. In the early post-operative period full knee extension and 75° of active flexion was achieved. The outcome deteriorated after a few years with the patient developing worsening stiffness and increasing pain and for these reasons a TKA revision had already been recommended. At his presentation the left leg was 1 cm shorter than the right. The circumference of the left thigh 5 cm above the patella was 3.5 cm smaller than the right. The left knee was stable with a valgus alignment. All movements of the left knee caused pain. Full extension of the left knee but less than 20° active flexion was seen with a mobile patella. There was no clinical evidence of knee sepsis or effusion. Radiographic evaluation showed the mechanical axis of the left lower limb was 188°. Patella baja and clear signs of loosening of both the femoral and tibial components were evident . After obtaining informed consent in March 2008 the patient underwent to a revision TKA using a cemented semi-constrained prosthesis (Legion, Smith & Nephew, Memphis, Tennessee, USA). At operation a mid-line para-patellar approach was made partially detaching the anterior tibial tuberosity (6 cm long bone block) on the medial side. The osteotomy was subsequently reattached with 2 staples and reasorbable sutures. Intraoperatively polyethylene wear was seen in the lateral femoro-tibial compartment. No signs of active sepsis were seen either on inspection or on microbiological examination of intraoperative specimens. The femoral and tibial components were easily removed without further bone loss leaving in-situ a broken tibial screw. Femoral and tibial stems with offsets were used. An oxinium femoral shield with 25 mm distal wedges was used to reduce the patella baja by lowering the joint line. All components were fixed using antibiotic impregnated cement. The patella was not resurfaced or reduced to avoid weakening the patella bone. Correct patella tracking and range of motion was observed intra-operatively .
A hinged knee brace was worn post-operatively with flexion limited to 30° for 20 days. Full weight bearing was encouraged as soon as tolerated. After brace removal progressive passive flexion was commenced with 95° of painless flexion achieved at 2 months after surgery. At 2 months post-operatively the patient was able to walk without pain. Despite incomplete healing, the tibia tuberosity staples were removed at 5 months after the revision surgery because of progressive staple loosening under the skin without any influence on the range of motion (0-95°). Nine months after revision knee surgery, following rising from bed and flexing the knee, the patient experienced acute left patella pain. Radiological assessment at that time showed a moderately displaced transverse mid-patellar fracture . The patient was treated with open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture using a tension band and k-wire technique. At the same surgery repeat tibial tubercle fixation was performed again using trans-osseous reabsorbable sutures . The previous post-operative rehabilitation protocol was used including a hinged knee brace with flexion limited to 30° for 20 days, and full weight bearing as soon as tolerated. Hardware removal was undertaken 9 months after fracture fixation for knee pain on maximal flexion even though the patella fracture had not completely healed. Radiographs at this time suggested fibrous union of the patella fracture. At the 36-month follow-up despite no further radiological sign of fracture union, no sign of fracture displacement was seen and it appeared clinically stable. At this time the tibial tuberosity was clearly consolidated. . No further displacement of the patella fracture was clinically or radiographically evident during flexion. The patient’s knee was painless with flexion of 0-95°. He was able to maintain a full painless knee extension against gravity and walk without aids. He was completely satisfied with the result. Left thigh atrophy 5 cm above the patella had improved from 3.5 to 2 cm.