A 50-year-old male with a distant history of unprovoked PE with negative work-up including factor V leiden, antithrombin III, protein C and S, and anti-phospholipid antibodies, presented to our hospital with resuscitated out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, fever, hypoxic respiratory failure and shock. Fourteen days prior to admission he developed fever and self-isolated. Upon paramedic arrival the patient developed asystole treated with cardiopulmonary resuscitation resulting in return of spontaneous circulation. Upon arrival to our hospital he again suffered asystolic arrest and was promptly resuscitated and intubated. Echocardiographic evaluation showed McConnell Sign, highly specific for acute pulmonary embolism. Confirmatory chest CT angiogram (CTA) revealed a saddle PE, dense bilateral interlobar arterial clot burden with diffuse segmental/subsegmental extension . Bilateral ground-glass and alveolar airspace opacities described in patients with COVID-19 infection were also noted . Venous doppler studies of the lower extremities were negative for thrombus formation. Laboratory evaluation revealed elevated leukocytes (11.7/mm2), C-reactive protein (1.76 mg/L), troponin I (0.06 ng/mL) and extremely elevated D-dimer (31 373 μg/mL). After intubation he stabilized and was treated with weight based low-molecular-weight-heparin.
In the ensuing 5 hours he developed refractory hypoxia and shock treated with systemic intravenous thrombolysis (Alteplase 100 mg infused over 2 hours). On hospital day 2, he had 3-pressor refractory shock (systolic blood pressure 70 mm Hg), acidosis, multisystem organ failure, fevers, and hypoxemia (oxygen saturation 45%) and we proceeded with mechanical circulatory support. He was placed on extra-corporal life support (ECLS) urgently. A 25 French percutaneous right atrial cannula (Biomedicus) was inserted through the right femoral vein for inflow into the pump circuitry. The outflow was into an 8 mm Gelweave (Terumo) graft tunneled and anastomosed to the right subclavian artery. The circuitry consisted of a Centrimag magnetic levitation pump head (Abbott), 3/8” Smart coated tubing (LivaNova), Quadrox oxygenator and a Blanketrol (both Maquet) heat exchanger. Post-operatively, the patient’s COVID-19 RT-PCR test was found to be positive.
He had an inadequate response to systemic thrombolysis the day prior and after 5 L of fluid for hemodynamic support he remained dependent on vasoactive medications. He was deemed a poor candidate for surgical pulmonary thrombectomy given co-existent multifocal pulmonary infiltrates and active COVID-19 infection. We chose to proceed with bail out catheter directed thrombolysis using rotational embolectomy. Pulmonary arteries were catheterized and exchanged for bilateral multi-side hole infusion catheters and each was bolused with 2 mg alteplase. During transport the left pulmonary catheter was displaced but the right sided catheter remained stable with proximal infusion ports in the main pulmonary artery confirmed with X-ray. We increased unilateral tPA dose to 2 mg/hr for 4 hours and 1 mg/hr for 12 hours with no bleeding complications. By hospital day 5 his VA-ECLS supported was weaned to 1.2 L/min with echocardiographic guidance and his right ventricle remained normal in size/function and hemodynamically stable. On hospital day 6 he was liberated from ECLS during a bedside decannulation and extubated on day 11. Repeat CTA demonstrated interval improvement in clot burden and multifocal opacities. On hospital day 21, right heart catheterization demonstrated normal cardiac output and pulmonary arterial pressures and a Denali (Bard) retrievable inferior vena cava (IVC) filter was placed for added protection during his period of recovery and vulnerability. He was discharged to home on hospital day 22 on therapeutic anticoagulation with warfarin.