A 7-year-old, 32 kg, neutered female Briard dog presented with inspiratory dyspnoea and an audible inspiratory wheeze particularly during exercise and after eating. The symptoms had been gradually worsening for a period of 3 months. There had been no cough or nasal discharge.
Mild inspiratory dyspnoea and increased inspiratory sounds during tracheal and laryngeal auscultation were noted at rest. Symptoms progressed to moderate to severe inspiratory dyspnoea under stress and an audible inspiratory wheeze became evident. Serum biochemistry revealed raised alkaline phosphatase activity (144 μ/L; reference interval < 95); other values were within normal range.
Left lateral cervical projection radiograph and radiographs of the thorax (right and left lateral and dorsoventral projections) were obtained. The dorsoventral projection included the caudal cervical trachea. In the left lateral cervical radiograph, a soft tissue opaque crescent shaped mass with long side dorsally was identified in the tracheal lumen at the level of the 5th and 6th cervical vertebrae . The mass measured 14 mm × 32 mm, and the tracheal diameter was reduced at the site. The mass was not visible in the dorsoventral projection. The cervical and thoracic parts of oesophagus were markedly dilated and air-filled, most likely due to dyspnea. Otherwise the thoracic radiographs were unremarkable.
Tracheoscopy and bronchoscopy were performed under light anaesthesia with butorphanol (Torpudor, Richter Pharma AG) and propofol (PropoVet Multidose, Fresenius Kabi AB) with a 4.9-mm flexible endoscope (Olympus GIF-N180). An approximately 3 cm long intraluminal mass originating from the dorsal membrane of the trachea was detected approximately 11–12 cm from the larynx . The base of the mass seemed to extend slightly to the left side of the dorsal membrane. FNA of the mass was performed using an endoscopic needle (Olympus NM-401L-0423, size 23G, diameter 0.6 mm and length 4 mm). Cytology of the samples revealed a scarce population of benign monomorphic mesenchymal cells. No signs of inflammation or malignancy were noted.
The surgery was performed 9 days later. The dog was pre-medicated with morphine (Morphin; Takeda Austria GmbH) and acepromazine (Plegicil; Pharmaxim) and anaesthesia was induced with propofol (PropoVet Multidose, Fresenius Kabi AB), ketamine (Ketaminol; Intervet) and midazolam (Midazolam Accord; Accord Healthcare Limited). Anaesthesia was maintained with a constant-rate infusion of fentanyl (Fentanyl-Hameln; Hameln Pharma Plus Gmbh). Intubation was performed under endoscopic guidance and an endotracheal tube was placed such that its cuff was distal to the mass. Cefazoline (Kefzol; Eurocept) was given intravenously 30 min before incision and every 90 min thereafter.
The dog was placed in dorsal recumbency and neck in extended position. Before the incision, the surgical area was infiltrated with lidocaine (Lidocain 20 mg/mL; Orion Oyj Orion Pharma). The cervical trachea was approached via ventral midline approach. The centre of the incision was approximately 10 cm from the larynx. The dissection was continued along the left side of the trachea as the endoscopic examination suggested that the mass extended more to the left side of the dorsal membrane. Oesophagus, nerves and vessels were avoided during the dissection. A stay suture was placed around the tracheal cartilage to facilitate rotation of the trachea to the right. The tracheal mass was localised using palpation and a longitudinal incision was made to the dorsal membrane next to the tumour margin. On the right side, the mass was attached to the dorsal membrane and on the left side to the site where the dorsal membrane joins cartilage. The tumour was resected from the dorsal membrane with narrow margins of healthy looking tissue. The right-sided dorsal membrane was sutured to the cartilage edges and annular ligaments on the left side using simple interrupted 3-0 polydioxanone (PDS, Ethicon) appositional sutures placed 2–3 mm from the wound edge. The last sutures were preplaced before tightening. Closure of the wound was performed in a routine fashion. On macroscopic evaluation the mass resembled fat tissue. The mass was formalin fixed and processed for histology at which it was identified as a lipoma .
The dog was hospitalised for 24 h after surgery for postoperative observation. Respiratory signs were relieved immediately after surgical removal of the tumour and postoperative recovery was uneventful.
At the control visit 6 weeks after the operation, the dog was free of symptoms and there were no abnormal findings on physical examination. In the control endoscopic examination, the surgical area had healed well with minimal scar tissue formation and no tracheal stenosis . The owner was contacted by telephone 9 months after the surgery and reported the dog to be asymptomatic.