A 47-year-old woman with a history of carotid artery dissection and metastatic melanoma presented with acute decompensated heart failure. One year prior to presentation, she had received one cycle of combination CPI therapy with ipilimumab and nivolumab. Due to rapidly progressive disease, these medications were discontinued and she was started on dabrafenib and trametinib, BRAF inhibitors. She had initial improvement on this new regimen, and then nivolumab was restarted four months prior to her heart failure presentation. One month prior to presentation, she developed asymptomatic supraventricular tachycardia and subsequent dyspnoea before hospitalization. On admission, she was afebrile, hypotensive and tachycardic, tachypnoeic, with pulmonary oedema, jugular venous distension, ascites, and lower extremity oedema. Initial ECG demonstrated a regular, narrow-complex rhythm, concerning for atrial tachycardia and without ischaemic changes. Serum troponins were negative, CK was negative, and serum proBNP was 3797 pg/mL (normal reference <300 pg/mL). A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed global biventricular failure with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 26%, severely dilated left ventricle, and a trivial pericardial effusion. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed and demonstrated a non-ischaemic pattern of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), most consistent with a myocarditis. Given the recent use of nivolumab and the cardiac imaging findings, the diagnosis of immunotherapy-mediated cardiac toxicity was highly considered, and immunosuppressive therapy with steroids (methylprednisolone 500 mg intravenous BID for 5 days) and infliximab (10 mg/kg/day for 2 days) was initiated. Her clinical course was complicated by cardiogenic shock refractory to inotropic support. Due to her poor prognosis, left and right heart catheterization with endomyocardial biopsy and advanced mechanical circulatory support were not pursued. She was palliated and died in the hospital. An autopsy was performed and tissue samples were obtained from areas of myocardium with and without LGE on the CMR.
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging was performed on a Siemens 1.5 T scanner. Cine images were acquired with steady state free precession sequences and revealed four-chamber dilation with severe biventricular dysfunction [LVEF 16%; and right ventricular (RV) ejection fraction 12%] (, Videos S1 and S2). Late gadolinium enhancement-cardiovascular magnetic resonance was performed using 2D single-shot and segmented inversion-recovery sequences, demonstrating mid-wall and epicardial enhancement of the basal to mid-inferior and inferolateral segments, with a focal area of increased signal intensity at the inferior RV insertion site , involving 15% of the total LV myocardium upon quantitative analysis. Due to the patient’s difficulty with breath holds, diagnostic T2 imaging could not be obtained. On microscopy, haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains showed evidence of moderate lymphocytic myocarditis in the regions with LGE , with a mild infiltrate throughout other regions of the heart. The infiltrate was composed almost exclusively of T-cells, with an admixture of CD4+ (helper) and CD8+ (cytotoxic) T-cells. Trichrome stain showed moderate fibrosis in the areas of LGE . Programmed cell death protein ligand-1 (PD-L1) stain showed focal membrane positivity in the areas of LGE . No significant coronary artery disease was seen on autopsy.