A 19-year-old Caucasian male was transferred to Washington University Barnes-Jewish Hospital for evaluation of acute renal failure (ARF) and previously diagnosed TMA on renal biopsy. He presented with anasarca, mild proteinuria, and diffuse lymphadenopathy. He was initially admitted to a community hospital with diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, generalized swelling, and low grade fever for 3 weeks. There was no history of recent travel, medication use or change in his home environment. While in the community hospital, he was noted to have new onset of thrombocytopenia and anemia without evidence of hemolysis or schistocytes. Stool Shiga toxin was negative, and stool cultures were negative for E. coli O157:H7, Salmonella, Shigella, and Campylobacter. Ascites was negative for peritonitis and malignancy, and an inguinal lymph node core biopsy was reported as nonspecific reactive hyperplasia.
Renal biopsy was performed and showed diffuse endothelial swelling, mesangiolysis and thrombi within capillary loops . Occasional double contours were present . There were no crescents, fibrinoid necrosis, or significant fibrosis. Immunofluorescence (IF) was negative for immune complex deposits. TMA was diagnosed. ADAMTS 13 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13) activity was decreased (20%; normal levels, ≥67%). 10 sessions of plasmapheresis performed in the community hospital did not improve his anemia, thrombocytopenia and kidney dysfunction.
On admission, tachycardia (109/min), hypertension (148/86 mmHg), and normal body temperature were observed. Conjunctivas were pale but not icteric. Respiratory sounds were decreased bilaterally. The abdomen was distended with free fluid. Lower extremities showed 1+ pedal edema, and lymph nodes were palpable in the axillary and inguinal regions.
Laboratory evaluation revealed microcytic anemia (hemoglobin 8.1 g/dL) and thrombocytopenia (platelets, 75,000/mm3) with lactate dehydrogenase and haptoglobin being within normal range. The repeated peripheral smear did not show schistocytes. Renal function had deteriorated (blood urea nitrogen [BUN], 27 mg/dL; serum creatinine [Cr], 2.18 mg/dL). The patient had normal liver function but with decreased total protein (6.2 g/dL) and albumin (3.0 g/dL). Complement levels were normal. Acute phase reactants including erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 59 mm/h; normal levels, <12 mm/h), C-reactive protein (CRP, 99.4 mg/L; normal levels, <9.9 mg/L) and ferritin (348 ng/ml; normal levels, <322 ng/ml) were elevated. An increased IgG of 1560 mg/dl (normal range: 700–1450 mg/dl) with normal levels of IgA and IgM was found. There was no monoclonal peak on immunoelectrophoresis in either serum or urine. Autoantibodies including antinuclear antibody (titer, 1:640) and anti-SS-A and anti-SS-B were positive. Additionally, serum lupus anticoagulant was positive, but β2 glycoprotein and anti-cardiolipin antibody were negative. Test results for hepatitis virus A, B and C, human immunodeficiency virus, Epstein-Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus were negative. Urinalysis showed microhematuria without any casts and non-nephrotic range proteinuria (683 mg/24 h).
Renal ultrasound showed normal size and echogenicity of both kidneys. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis showed retroperitoneal, mesenteric, pelvic, axillary and mediastinal lymphadenopathy as well as hepatosplenomegaly, moderate ascites and small bilateral pleural effusions.
An excisional lymph node biopsy performed in our hospital showed follicular hyperplasia and diffuse interfollicular plasma cell infiltrate . Some of the lymphoid follicles showed hyalinization of germinal centers and concentric layering of peripheral lymphocytes (onion-skinning) in the mantle area . Immunohistochemistry revealed interfollicular plasmacytosis demonstrated by CD138 staining . HHV-8 immunostaining was negative. The patient’s diagnosis was consistent with MCD, plasma cell variant. High circulating level of VEGF (343 pg/ml; normal levels, <86 pg/ml) was detected in this patient, a characteristic feature of CD. Notably, double IF staining for VEGF and the podocyte nucleus marker WT-1 showed that podocyte VEGF expression was reduced in this patient compared to healthy control .
The patient was started on chemotherapy with Rituximab, Etoposide, Cyclophosphamide, Vincristine and Prednisone for 6 cycles. Within a week of initiation of chemotherapy, his renal function normalized. His clinical symptoms such as fever, ascites and lymphadenopathy started improving. Anemia and thrombocytopenia resolved, and markers of inflammation such as ESR and CRP normalized within the first few weeks. The patient has been free of symptoms for 2 years without taking any medication.