A 47-year-old Greek woman was admitted to our hospital with a history of high-grade fever and mild right periumbilical abdominal pain for the past 30 days. Fever spikes were daily up to 41°C, accompanied with chills and malaise. She reported no traveling during the last year, pets or contacts with other animals, diarrhea or vomiting. She also denied any cough or dyspnea, photophobia, headaches or musculoskeletal pains.
On physical examination she was fully alert. Her vitals were a blood pressure of 110/80mmHg, oxygen saturation of 98%, temperature of 39.5°C, and heart rate of 120 beats per minute. Her abdomen was soft, with no signs of peritoneal inflammation. Both her temporal arteries were prominent, with strong pulses and no nodularity.
On admission her chest X-ray and electrocardiogram were normal. The laboratory results were as follows: white blood cells count 9000/mm3, hemoglobin 10.2g/dL, platelets 280,000/μL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 75mm/hour, C-reactive protein (CRP) 82.2mg/dL. Serum levels of electrolytes, albumins, total bilirubin, and renal and liver function tests were normal. All cultures were sterile. The results of tuberculin skin tests, virology and bacterial markers as well as immunoassays were negative. Serum protein electrophoresis was compatible with an acute inflammatory reaction. Her fever was unresponsive to broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics.
In the context of fever of unknown origin, an abdomen computed tomography (CT) was ordered. A temporal artery biopsy was also performed because during hospitalization she complained of a headache.
Examination of eosin and hematoxylin slides from the biopsy specimens of the temporal artery, showed thrombus formation in the lumen, focal intimal thickening and long breaks in the internal elastic lamina, as well as a transmural inflammation consisting of predominantly lymphocytes, few plasma cells and occasional polymorphonuclear leucocytes. In addition no giant cells were detected in examining biopsies at multiple levels. This was consistent with GCA according to the American College of Rheumatology criteria . Despite the fact that the above criteria for establishing the diagnosis of GCA were met, immunohistochemical staining for the macrophage marker CD68 revealed CD68+ macrophages present within the artery wall, which further confirmed the diagnosis of GCA .
The abdomen CT revealed the presence of a retroperitoneal soft-tissue mass located anteriorly to the upper infrarenal aorta at the site of the scintigraphic uptake. The lesion had well-demarcated irregular margins and nearly engulfed the anterior surface of the aorta. After intravenous contrast administration of intravenous contrast agent, no enhancement of the mass was evident . An abdomen magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was also performed: MRI signal characteristics of the lesion were similar to those of a fibrotic process. More specifically, the lesion had diffusely low signal on T1-weighted images and low to intermediate signal on T2-weighted images. After intravenous administration of gadolinium, lack of soft-tissue enhancement was also confirmed . The CT and MRI characteristics of the mass were consistent with RPF, and its morphology suggestive of benignity .