A 42-year-old woman who had been experiencing discomfort and edema in her left ankle for 8 years and had gotten worse during the previous 2 years visited our outpatient department. Swelling in the region of her left ankle was initially painless; with insidious and gradually progressive pain, swelling, and stiffness. She gave the history of excision biopsy performed over the same joint done 7 years earlier. Her histopathological reports of the same were unavailable. Her symptoms recurred 2 years ago and had been gradually progressive since then. For the past 2 months, the swelling was associated with severe pain while walking and weight bearing as to limit her mobility.
She had no history of loss of weight or appetite. No history of fever or trauma to the ankle joint. There was no history of swelling or similar symptoms of any other joint in her body.
Her general examination revealed nothing of note. Local examination of her left ankle revealed a bony hard swelling anterior and posterior to the lateral malleolus .
She had no distal neurovascular deficits.
On a simple roentgenogram of her ankle, the joint space was intact and there were massive, calcified masses of intraarticular loose bodies anterior and posterior to her ankle ( and ).
There were no articular erosions or osteopenia.
An anterolateral approach was used to access the tibiotalar joint. White cartilaginous masses were found in the joint distending the ankle joint anteriorly and posteriorly .
The fibular cortex was found to be intact. The masses were excised piecemeal.
Her immediate post-operative period was uneventful. She was afebrile in the ward and had no local wound-related complications and she was ambulated without difficulty. She had good relief of symptoms thereafter.
Histopathology reports revealed synovial tissue with attenuation of the lining. The subintima showed nodules of benign hyaline cartilage with clustering of chondrocytes displaying nuclear enlargement, hyperchromasia, and many with bi-nucleation. Few cartilaginous nodules displayed ossification with no evidence of malignant transformation.