A 71-year-old woman underwent distal pancreatectomy without lymph node dissection for SPN of the pancreas in 2013. The histopathological diagnosis showed solid diffuse growth of circular eosinophilic tumor cells with cystic and hemophilic changes on pseudopapillary structure. In addition, it was partially necrotic and bleeding. Immunohistostaining studies revealed that the tumor cells were positive for vimentin, synaptophysin, cluster of differentiation (CD) 56, β-catenin, CD10, and progesterone receptor. In 2017 (4 years from the first surgery), computed tomography (CT) identified four nodules in the anterior and posterior segments of the right lobe of the liver measuring approximately 15 mm × 14 mm, 12 mm × 11 mm, 8 mm × 8 mm, and 5 mm × 4 mm ; all had low-density areas. Abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the four nodules and revealed hypointensity in the hepatobiliary phase . Routine laboratory data, including tumor markers, were within normal ranges. Because these tumors were suspected metastases from SPN according to the imaging findings, the patient underwent partial hepatectomy. Pathological examination of the tumors revealed solid growth of circular eosinophilic tumor cells with cystic and hemophilic changes . In addition, the tumor embolization into the portal vein was observed. Immunohistochemical studies revealed that the tumor cells were positive for vimentin, synaptophysin, CD56, β-catenin, CD10, and progesterone receptor. This was the same result as the first surgery. The Ki-67 labeling index was 3%. These findings closely resembled the initial surgical pancreatic SPN, and we diagnosed SPN metastases. In 2018 (18 months from the first liver resection), we detected recurrent liver metastases. CT identified three low-density areas in the right liver lobe measuring approximately 10 mm × 9 mm, 9 mm × 8 mm, and 6 mm × 6 mm . MRI confirmed the tumors . Because the imaging findings were the same as the previous findings, we considered the new tumors to be liver metastasis from SPN, and the patient underwent partial re-hepatectomy. The pathological and immunohistochemical examination results were the same as those obtained previously . The patient has remained disease-free 18 months after the re-hepatectomy.