A 64-year-old man who had no symptoms was diagnosed with thoracic superficial esophageal cancer that was detected by screening upper endoscopy. He had a history of hypertension. He had also been found to have a vascular abnormality (DAA) as an adult and was observed in an asymptomatic state.
Physical examinations showed no unusual findings, and the laboratory examination data, including tumor markers, such as squamous cell carcinoma-related antigen and carcinoembryonic antigen, were all within normal ranges. Chest X-ray demonstrated a widening in the upper mediastinal silhouette, reflecting the superior right aortic arch. An endoscopic examination revealed superficial esophageal cancer located in the left side of the wall in the upper thoracic esophagus and the invasion of the submucosa . A histological examination of biopsy specimens confirmed the presence of squamous cell carcinoma. Enhanced computed tomography showed a swollen lymph node in the right upper mediastinum, which was diagnosed as metastatic . No distant metastasis was detected. Computed tomography also confirmed the DAA. The right aortic arch was dominant, and the descending aorta was located at the right side of the post-mediastinum, as is common in cases of DAA . The patient was therefore diagnosed with upper thoracic esophageal cancer of cT1bN1M0 Stage IIB (UICC-TNM 7th) and a DAA.
He underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy prior to sub-total esophagectomy with three-field lymphadenectomy. The neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimen was 2 courses of 5-FU (800 mg/m2) and cisplatin (80 mg/m2) every 3 weeks.
We planned to perform radical subtotal esophagectomy with three-field lymph node dissection after neoadjuvant chemotherapy. We first planned to perform cervical procedure in a supine position before the thoracic procedure in order to identify the bilateral inferior laryngeal nerves and avoid causing them injury or inducing palsy. We also planned to perform upper mediastinal lymph node dissection during this preceding procedure because the DAA was expected to interfere with upper mediastinal dissection attempted via either side of a transthoracic approach. We then planned to perform lymph node dissection via a left-thoracoscopic approach below the left aortic arch, as we worried that the right-sided descending aorta might interfere with a right-thoracic approach . The laparoscopic procedure was planned to be performed via an abdominal procedure in a supine position. Reconstruction would use the gastric tube pulled up via the retrosternal route with cervical esophago-gastric anastomosis.
In the preceding cervical procedure performed in a supine position, we identified the bilateral inferior laryngeal nerves, which were thought to be recurrent at each side of the aortic arch . After upper mediastinal dissection was performed, the left thoracoscopic procedure in a prone position was performed for middle and lower mediastinal lymph node dissection below the left aortic arch. We first confirmed that the right-sided aortic arch and descending aorta would interfere with the usual right thoracic approach . Upper mediastinum dissection was also deemed impossible via a bilateral thoracic approach because of the bilateral aortic arches and subclavian arteries, as expected preoperatively . Postmediastinal reconstruction also seemed impossible. The port position for the left thoracoscopic procedure was set symmetrically to our normal right thoracoscopic procedure for middle to lower mediastinal dissection, as shown in Fig. . No major anatomical findings other than those noted preoperatively were observed during the left thoracoscopic procedure. We were unable to identify where the thoracic duct ascended because of the preservation of the thoracic duct. We were also unable to confirm the details concerning both recurrent laryngeal nerves around each aortic arch.
The abdominal procedure in a supine position was performed laparoscopically with the simultaneous cervical procedure for bilateral supraclavicular lymph node dissection. Reconstruction was performed with cervical esophago-gastric tube anastomosis. The gastric tube was pulled up through a retrosternal route as planned. Three-field lymph node dissection and complete resection (R0) were achieved. The operative time was 8 h 9 min, and the total bleeding was 70 ml. No vocal cord palsy was observed on flexible laryngoscopy after the operation.
The patient’s postoperative course included minor leakage that was cured conservatively after 2 weeks, and he was discharged at postoperative day 29. The pathological diagnosis was ypT1bN0M0 Stage IA (UICC-TNM 7th edition). The patient was followed for 2 years with no signs of cancer recurrence.