An 83 year old lady initially underwent via a midline vertical incision, an extended right hemicolectomy in 2003. She had presented with weight loss with no previous medical or surgical history. Functionally she was independent and self-caring. Pre-operative radiology (including a staging CT scan) showed a mid-transverse colonic lesion. Colonoscopy revealed no other intra-colonic lesions and tumour markers were normal.
At operation, there was no invasion into other structures or the anterior abdominal wall. Histology demonstrated a T4 N2 Mx adenocarcinoma in the transverse colon. The serosa had been breached but the tumour had been completely excised. The apical node was clear but 4 out of 11 nodes were involved. The case was discussed pre- and post-operatively in the Gastro-intestinal (GI) multi-disciplinary meeting (MDM) and staged as T4 N2 M0 (Dukes C1). Adjuvant chemotherapy was offered to the patient, who subsequently underwent a weekly course of bolus 5FU & Folinic acid. This was well tolerated with only grade I nausea and mild hair loss and was completed at six months post-operation.
The patient was seen regularly in clinic on a three monthly basis. At one year, the surveillance CT scan (chest, abdomen and pelvis) was unremarkable as was colonoscopy. At 18 months, the patient complained of lower back pain in April 2005. In view of her history a chest X-ray, tumour markers and ultrasound scan of the liver were ordered. These were all negative. A radioisotope bone scan was performed. The scan showed only lumbro-sacral arthritis and her pain resolved with simple analgesia.
At three and a half years post-surgery, she reported some mild abdominal discomfort and distension. She attributed this to her incisional hernias, at the site of the midline scar. These had progressively worsened in size as had her symptoms. On examination, she was found to have two incisional hernias which lay 20 mm above and 20 mm below her umbilicus and were 30 mm and 40 mm respectively in diameter. A contrast enhanced staging CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis was performed. A midline ventral hernia was noted on transverse slices of the CT image but no focal lesion was reported. The anastomotic site appeared normal with no recurrent growth or lymphadenopathy otherwise seen. Tumour markers were not elevated (CEA = 3, CA 19-9 = 3, CA125 = 5). An incisional hernia repair was subsequently arranged and a specialised mesh was ordered. The provisional plan was to place the mesh behind the anterior abdominal wall (anterior to the peritoneum). As there were two large defects which were closely related, a 20 cm × 15 cm Bard Composix-Mesh® (C. R. Bard, Inc., 730 Central Aves Murray Hill, New Jersey, 07974, USA) was ordered
At operation in 2007, a further midline incision was performed. Following division of skin and subcutaneous tissue the anterior abdominal wall was visualised. The two incisional hernia sacs were each identified and freed from their attachments to the anterior abdominal wall allowing pre-peritoneal access. At this point it became apparent, that the tissue in between the two incisional hernias was not dense scar tissue. On palpation a hard mass measuring 20 mm × 20 mm in diameter was found situated within the anterior abdominal wall. This was not attached to peritoneum. Thus it appeared as if it may be an isolated recurrence . The mass was excised with a wide margin and sent for histology. A formal laparotomy was performed and no intra-abdominal recurrence or peritoneal seedlings were noted.
As defect following the wide excision was closed using the Bard Composix-Mesh®. This was attached with 3/0 Prolene to parietal peritoneum using continuous sutures as a modified sub-lay technique. The rectus sheath was approximated but not apposed with 1/0 nylon to allow a tension free repair. A vacuum drain was placed superficial to the anterior rectus sheath. Closure was with interrupted subcutaneous 3/0 Vicryl sutures and clips to skin. The post-operative course was uncomplicated.
The mass which measured 40 mm × 40 mm × 30 mm. Histologically, it consisted of fibro-connective tissue infiltrated by a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. The tumour cells were seen to involve one of the lateral surgical margins. There was no superior or inferior extension of the tumour. Subsequent immuno-histochemistry was positive for CK20 and CDX2 and negative for CK7 . This was characteristic of tumour cells arising from a colorectal origin and in keeping with the original pathology.
The case was discussed again in the GI MDM. On review of the scans, a 3.6 × 1.6 cm nodule was seen in the midline on the anterior abdominal wall just inferior to the hernia . The absence of intra-abdominal recurrence was reconfirmed, postoperatively with a repeat PET scan. The patient was subsequently seen in outpatients' clinic and the possible management strategies were outlined in the presence of the colorectal specialist nurse and the patient's surgical consultant.
The presentation and case above was novel to the department. As such an extensive literature search was performed using EMBASE and MEDLINE to find similar cases and related articles. The prognosis obtained from the literature following surgery to attempt clearance was not significantly better then adjuvant therapy. In view of this and the potential complications, she requested to be referred to an oncologist for consideration of palliative chemo-radiotherapy.