A 58-year-old Asian man received gluteal impalement injuries from three reinforced aluminum bars measuring 2.0cm in diameter after falling from a roof. On presentation, he was fully conscious with normal vital signs. A physical examination revealed left leg paralysis and no active bleeding from the insertion sites of the aluminum bars (Figure ). The location of the bars (A, B and C) was confirmed by MDCTA (Figures and
). Bar A (left) pierced his left gluteal region and extended into his left anterior superior iliac spine. Bar B (center) pierced his right gluteal region, passed through his rectum, continued into his spinal canal from the sacral bone, and extended into his spinal canal at the L4 level. Bar C (right) pierced his perineal region, passed through his rectum, continued into his spinal canal from the sacral bone, exited his spinal canal from the left side of L3, and extended into the posterosuperior side of his left kidney, sparing his small bowel, ureter and major vessels.
With our patient under general anesthesia and in the lithotomy position, bars A and B were gently pulled and successfully removed. Next, a celiotomy was performed to remove bar C. Following the removal of bar C, bleeding from the anterior side of his sacral bone was controlled by gauze packing. The perineal wound was debrided and presacral drainage was performed. The total volume of intraoperative bleeding was 4000mL, and 12 units of red cell concentrate and six units of fresh frozen plasma were transfused. Imipenem/cilastatin and clindamycin were preoperatively administered. After the surgery, our patient was admitted to our intensive care unit under endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. Dopamine therapy was initiated, followed by PMX-DHP for the septic shock. He initially received 8μg/kg/min of dopamine, and was weaned off the catecholamine during the first two hours of PMX-DHP therapy. This resulted in stabilization of our patient’s hemodynamic condition after two hours. Daily peritoneal lavage was performed for several days, along with a colostomy. He was extubated on day 15 of admission and transferred to a general ward on day 16.
Although motor and sensory disturbances were observed below the L3 level, there were no complications, including meningitis or abscess formation. He developed a neurogenic bladder, which was managed by intermittent catheterization. On day 191 of admission, our patient was discharged with motor and sensory disturbances below the L3 level. At time of discharge, he required a wheelchair and depended on assistance from others for daily activities.