A 53-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital on June 10, 2019, 20 days after being diagnosed with uterine endometrioid carcinoma. The patient went into menopause at the age of 49 years with no abnormal postmenopausal vaginal bleeding. She previously underwent breast-conserving surgery for infiltrating ductal carcinoma of the left breast with left axillary lymph node metastasis at our hospital on May 23, 2010. The pathological examination revealed infiltrating ductal carcinoma (grade 1) of the left breast with axillary lymph node metastasis. Postoperatively, she received chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and endocrine therapy, consisting of a non-steroidal antiestrogen, toremifene citrate, for 41 months.
The cervix was glossy, with no noted erosion or tenderness. A pedunculated mass, measuring 2.0 × 2.0 cm, was palpated in the smooth non-tender cervix.
The initial vaginal ultrasound examination, performed in our hospital, showed an anteverted uterus, measuring 117 × 123 × 68 mm, with a dark liquid area in the uterine cavity, which measured 110 × 104 × 54 mm. Several hyperechoic clusters were also appreciated, and the largest lesion measured 67 × 41 mm. Color Doppler flow imaging showed slightly rich blood flow signals in the uterine cavity. Curettage was performed, and the pathological examination revealed G1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed a significantly enlarged uterus. Multiple liquid signal shadows were observed in the uterine cavity. It exhibited a slightly high signal on T1-weighted imaging (WI) and a high signal on T2WI, and the junction zone was intact. Multiple nodular abnormal signal foci were observed in the uterine cavity with a slightly low signal on T1WI and a slightly high signal on T2WI. The larger signal size measured 3.7 × 1.7 cm. Diffusely arranged lesions were observed at the uterine base, and no contrast enhancement was detected. The remaining lesions had a limited diffusion, and significant enhancement was observed after contrast injection. Small, round, long T1 and T2 signal foci without apparent enhancement were observed in the cervix .
Radical surgery for endometrial carcinoma was performed on June 12, 2019. The postoperative pathological examination revealed G1 endometrioid adenocarcinoma, located in the inner mucosal layer. Metastatic lesions were not detected among the 15 harvested lymph nodes. Additionally, intrauterine leiomyomata were observed, and the cervical histology was consistent with SCVM. On immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells of the SCVM expressed estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, vimentin, desmin, and CD34. However, they did not express S-100 and actin. The tumor cells had a Ki-67 index of 1% .
Postoperatively, the patient continued receiving hormonal therapy and chemotherapy for breast cancer while under monitoring for 23 months. Neither recurrence nor distant metastasis of the endometrial cancer or SCVM was detected.