A 46-year-old man had noted a painless elevated lesion on his right eye for 8 months. He had been diagnosed with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) incidentally on examination for the comorbidity of Candida esophagitis 6 months ago, and had struggled with AIDS-related non-Hodgkin lymphoma. His CD4+ T-cell count was 11 cells/μL and strongly positive for anti-HIV antibody (591.36 S/CO) with a high copy of HIV RNA (8070.0 × 100 copy/mL) in the peripheral blood. There was no past medical or family history. Best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 with normal intraocular pressure in both eyes OU. A whitish nodule with an irregular surface, measuring 2 × 2 mm, was present inferiorly in the corneal limbus of his right eye . Slit-lamp examination showed no inflammatory signs such as hyperemia on the ocular surface. The intermediate optic media and fundus were unremarkable. AS-OCT (CASIA2; Tomey Corporation, ver.4A.1) showed a highly reflective elevated lesion with the horizontal section, which was considered to involve the corneal stroma . The tumor was completely excised together with incision of the superficial corneal stroma.
Pathologic examination showed a dome-shaped half split tumor, measuring 2 × 2 × 1 mm. Pathologic specimens were observed, and the pathological pictures were taken with the built-in camera under a Biorevo microscope (type: BZ-9000; Keyence, Tokyo, Japan). The pathological pictures were initially captured as JPEG image with 96 pixels, where the brightness was appropriately modified, without using any software. Each photograph was then incorporated into Photoshop CCR (Adobe KK, Tokyo, Japan), and the marge image was created. Microscopic findings revealed complete resection of the acanthotic corneal epithelium adjacent to the corneal stroma . There were various swollen epithelial cells containing eosinophilic inclusions (molluscum bodies) within the granular and horny layers . In contrast, there were no inflammatory reactions including lymphocytic infiltration in the tissue. He was histologically diagnosed with MC arising from the corneal limbus. Two months later, the wound had healed with a smooth ocular surface.