A 50 year old male presented with a progressive mechanical type of dysphagia for a month, which was associated with a significant loss of weight.
There was an occasional history of regurgitation present. He denies loss of appetite, retrosternal chest pain or discomfort. He also denies any history of heartburn, caustic ingestion, fever, cough, haemoptysis, change in voice, difficulty in breathing, hematemesis, melena or any drug intake.
Past history was significant for squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue, which was treated with surgery and chemoradiation 1 year prior. He lost follow up for the above. He quit smoking and alcohol after being diagnosed with tongue carcinoma.
Upon examination, his vitals were stable and there was no significant lym-phadenopathy. Oral examination was significant for a scar on the left lateral border of the tongue. His respiratory and gastrointestinal system examination was unremarkable.
He was further investigated. The basic metabolic panel was normal.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was performed, which revealed a large, hemispherical lesion with a normal-appearing overlying mucosa about 4 cm × 5 cm in size and extending from 30-34 cm from the incisors, as shown in Figure . That impression was that is was possibly a submucosal lesion of the distal oesophagus. Endoscopic biopsy was not done, and further evaluation of the lesion was planned using EUS.
EUS was done using the linear echoendoscope model MAJ1597 (EUS scope, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). EUS showed a large hyperechoic lesion arising from the third layer at 30 cm, as shown in Figure , with a provisional diagnosis of lipoma.
However, in view of the patient’s past history of malignancy, a fine needle biopsy was done using a 19-gauge Boston scientific acquired EUS fine needle biopsy device, and sent for histopathologic examination.
Histopathology revealed fragments of malignant neoplasm composed of cells arranged in sheets, as in Figure . The neoplastic cells were round to polygonal, with moderate amounts of eosinophilic cytoplasm with moderate nuclear atypia. Keratin pearl formation was abundant. Histopathology was reported as well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry confirmed the same.
Computed tomography (CT) on the thorax was then performed. CT of the thorax with IV and oral contrast showed heterogeneously enhancing soft tissue thickening noted in the retro cardiac oesophagus, with a thickness measuring 38 mm and a length of 68 mm, with proximal oesophageal dilatation noted. The OG junction was normal. The lesion has contact with the descending thoracic aorta at about 90°. The loss of flat plane was noted between the lesion and left atrium. Cavitatory metastatic nodules measuring 26 mm × 18 mm × 33 mm were noted in the posterior basal segment of the left lower lobe. Bilateral hilar nodes were noted, as shown in Figure . The CT of the thorax was finally reported as a Retro cardiac oesophageal growth with lung metastasis.