We reported the case of a male patient, 16 years old, with a history of frontal headaches accompanied by photophobia, nausea, and vomiting since the age of 4. He had his first episode of migraine associated with ocular pain and ptosis in the right eyelid, lasting 24 hours, in Jun 2010 at the age of 6. Six months later (Jan 2011), he had a heavier and persistent episode of migraine associated with right ocular pain (partial responsiveness to administration of paracetamol), right ptosis, and diplopia, so he was admitted to the Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neuroscience and Sense Organs, University of Bari “Aldo Moro,” Italy. Family history of migraine in both parents, multiple sclerosis in the father's family, and gastric neoplastic disease in the mother's family was referred. General physical examination was normal; neurologic examination showed paresis of the third and sixth cranial nerves. Laboratory investigation, including virological and organ-specific serum antibodies, and instrumental examination including awake/sleep electroencephalograph produced normal results. Brain and cervical-spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) enhanced after contrast administration and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) produced normal findings. Diagnosis of “ophthalmoplegic migraine” was made according to ICHD 2, as discussed in a previous publication . During the following years, about one time a month, the subject suffered from a moderate to severe intensity headache in the frontal and supraorbital region on the right side with a transient remission with paracetamol. Since his first hospitalization, he had 2 more episodes, in Jul 2013 and Jun 2016, of OM, with ocular pain ptosis in the right eyelid and diplopia. In both episodes brain MRI confirmed normal images. The diagnosis was revised as RPON according to the new diagnostic criteria of ICHD-3 beta (2013) . At the age of 15 years (Sep 2018), the patient was again admitted to our Child Neuropsychiatry Unit manifesting moderate and persistent migraine, nausea, vomiting, phonophobia, and photophobia associated with right ocular pain, diplopia, and ptosis. Neurologic examination showed right eyelid ptosis, and ophthalmologic evaluation showed paresis of the III cranial nerve. Brain MRI with MRA revealed a 5-6 mm nodular enhancement mass, located within the fork of the right basilar artery near to perimesencephalic and interpeduncular cisterns, suggesting an oculomotor nerve schwannoma without any vascular malformation . The subject was treated with corticosteroid therapy because of the partial and transient responsiveness with paracetamol during acute episodes of right eye pain. He showed gradual and progressive improvement of headache symptoms in about one week.