A 48-year-old African American woman presented to our academic tertiary referral centre for evaluation of progressive, intermittent, and non-exertional chest pain for the past 3 weeks. She had a past medical history significant for PRS, hypertension, obesity, and chronic kidney disease Stage III. She denied history of smoking or coronary artery disease. Physical examination demonstrated poorly controlled hypertension (179/120 mmHg), but other vitals were normal, and her exam did not reveal any significant abnormalities.
Initial workup was significant for troponin of 0.7 ng/mL (reference range 0.00–0.04 ng/mL) and an electrocardiogram that showed sinus rhythm with voltage criteria consistent with left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) without acute ST changes . A chest X-ray showed no acute cardiopulmonary findings.
Differential diagnosis at this time was broad and included acute coronary syndrome (ACS), hypertensive urgency, and non-cardiac causes of chest pain. She was admitted for further evaluation with serial troponin and electrocardiogram. Her blood pressure quickly improved with resumption of her home anti-hypertensives.
Serial troponin continued to rise to a peak of 6.16 ng/mL over the following 8 h. Electrocardiogram remained stable. A bedside echocardiogram was performed which showed moderate LVH, an estimated ejection fraction of 50–55%, and possible thinning and akinesis of the basal inferior myocardial segment—no pericardial effusion was noted. In the setting of recurrent, albeit atypical, chest pain with rising troponin and echocardiographic evidence of ischaemia, she was treated for ACS with loading doses of aspirin and clopidogrel (325 mg and 600 mg, respectively) and intravenous heparin infusion. She was monitored closely and underwent left heart catheterization (LHC).
Left heart catheterization demonstrated a large and aneurysmal left main artery, along with aneurysmal segments distal to the 1st diagonal branch as well as in the proximal left circumflex artery, and a diffusely ectatic right coronary artery. There was a discrete 90% lesion at the proximal posterior descending artery with chronic total occlusion distal to the lesion. Angiographically, there was no evidence of thrombus, dissection, intramural haematoma, nor other acute pathology. There were no signs of acute plaque rupture, nor obstructive disease amenable to percutaneous intervention .
Following catheterization, the patient underwent extensive workup to rule out other vascular anomalies and rheumatologic disease. She denied any history of Kawasaki’s disease or similar illness. Magnetic resonance (MR) angiogram of the head, chest, abdomen, and pelvis did not reveal other aneurysmal disease. Antinuclear, anti-centromere, anti-double stranded DNA, rheumatoid factor, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were mildly elevated (1.01 mg/dL and 32 mm/Hr, respectively). Lipid profile showed LDL of 114 mg/dL. The patient was started on a high-intensity statin and discharged on dual antiplatelet therapy with cardiology follow-up.
At 3-month follow-up, the patient reported occasional and mild palpitations and chest pain. At 12-month follow-up, she had complete resolution of her cardiac symptoms.