A healthy 32-year-old Asian woman presented to the emergency department with pain, photophobia and blurred vision in the right eye. There were no associated illnesses, history of retinotoxic exposures (medications, light), or family history of eye disorders. Written informed consent was obtained; the procedures adhered to the Declaration of Helsinki, and the study was approved by the institutional review board of the Wuhan University Renmin Hospital.
Her uncorrected visual acuity was 20/200 in the right eye, 20/25 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 31 mmHg in the right eye and 16 mmHg in the left. Neuro-ophthalmic examination was RAPD positive in the right eye. Mid-dilated fixed pupil in the right eye (Φ ≈ 4 mm). Tyndall phenomena were observed, vitreous were normal without cells; fundus examination results were also normal. The anterior segment image present with iris pigment detachment at 9 o’clock in the right eye . Results of anterior segment optical coherence tomography (ASOCT) showed slightly shallow anterior chamber in right eyes . The unharmed left eye also show slightly shallow anterior chamber (Additional file : Figure S1). On subsequent questioning, the patient disclosed that she received an intense-focused ultrasound (IFUS) in a cosmetic surgery center to lift and tighten the upper eyelid. Ultrasonic probe was applied at the eyebrow area. She immediately complained of painful blurry vision, the treatment was stopped and she was transferred to hospital.
After anti-glaucoma treatment for 1 day, IOP of the right eye dropped to normal range (21 mmHg). Uncorrected visual acuity in the right eye was improved to 20/160. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of right eye was 20/20 with refraction of − 1.50 DS/− 1.0 DC × 165. At 3 days follow-up, spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) was performed using an SD-OCT/scanning laser ophthalmoscope system (Heidelberg Engineering). Automated light-adapted static perimetry (HFA II-I; Carl Zeiss Meditec) using a 30–2 protocol confirmed a pericentral scotoma corresponding to the abnormality in the right eye , which could be causal by acute increase of IOP induced optic nerve edema; the left eye finding was unremarkable. Standard full-field flash electroretinography (ERG), and visual evoked potential (VEP) was normal, ruling out retina and brain disease. Optical Quality Analysis System (OQAS) exam showed that the objective scatter index (OSI) was 1.0 in the right eye and 0.7 in the left, modulation transfer function (MTF) cut-off was 23.831 in the right eye and 28.694 in the left; indicating comparable worse vision quality in the right eye (Additional file : Table S1), at 1 month’s follow-up.
At presentation to us on the 3 months of her symptoms, the patient still complained with headache, blur vision with photophobia in the right eye. Her iris damage was remained, with IOP measurement in normal range. Acquired myopia became her major complain. A comprehensive eye exam was further performed by an optometrist. Negative and positive relative accommodation (NRA/PRA), and accommodation amplitude was measured. Clearing additional plus lens power was difficult for this patient, indicating accommodation spasm in the right eye.
Accommodative spasm is a rare condition occurring in children, adolescents, and young adults. It can be caused by trauma , emotional problems, and other causes. In our case, further exam confirmed her accommodative spasm which was partially reversed by cycloplegia drops and bifocals.The patient was put on 1% tropicamide eye drops once a day and flipper lenses training was applied to treat her accommodation spasm. After 1 month, the patient achieved better uncorrected vision acuity at distance in the right eye (20/40) (Additional file : Table S2).
Safety and efficacy of IFUS in the aging eyelids have been studied and reported in the previous study . Tightening of infraorbital laxity and skin can be achieved using the IFUS, is performed by heating the dermis and underlying tissue, where protein around the focal point will reach over 65 °C and denatured within milliseconds . After the initial heat effects, the skin initiates a wound healing response, resulting in the formation of new collagen, which provides longer-term tightening of the skin . In this case, the acoustic energy rays might have threaded through the eyelid, caused dysfunction of the ciliary muscle, which affected the zonular tension, causing acute increase of IOP and acquired myopia. The excessive curvature of refractive lens surface leaded to curvature myopia and accommodation spam . Heat-caused injuries may be associated with a transient IOP increase due to acute trabecular meshwork changes.