A 73-year-old man presented to the emergency room with intermittent chest pain and shortness of breath (New York Heart Association class II).
The patient had developed chest pain and dyspnea on exertion in the past 1 mo, which had worsened for 3 d.
The patient also had a history of hypertension as well as smoking (30 pack years).
His initial blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg with a heart rate of 80 beats per minute. Room air oxygen saturation was 97%. He had a regular heartbeat without a murmur. His lung sounds were also clear. There was no abdominal tenderness or pitting edema.
Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with T wave abnormality in leads V1 to V3 without definite ST segment elevation or depression.
Initial cardiac enzyme levels, including creatine kinase-myocardial band and troponin I were within the normal range. The serum creatinine level was normal (0.96 mg/dL).
Coronary computed tomography (CT) angiography as an initial screening test revealed significant proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery stenosis. Percutaneous coronary intervention was decided. Diagnostic angiography was performed via the right radial artery, which showed 90% stenosis of the mid LAD. We re-inserted the extra backup 3.5 guiding catheter for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). However, we were unable to advance the catheter past the ostium of the right subclavian artery (SCA) to the ascending aorta with similar force applied to that required for the diagnostic catheter. Additionally, since the J-tip 0.035” guidewire tended to go down the descending aorta, we changed the guidewire to an angled 0.035’’ wire, which after several manipulations and additional forced pushes, appeared as though it successfully approached the ascending aorta, although an unusually large loop was formed by the guidewire . The patient also suddenly complained of chest and back pain. As we suspected aortic dissection, we further performed an aortogram using a 5Fr pigtail catheter via the right femoral artery (FA) only to confirm a dissection flap of the right SCA .
We promptly stopped the procedure and performed emergent CT aortography. The CT revealed an ARSA associated with type B AD originating from the proximal portion of the ARSA extending to the descending aorta down the infra-renal portion . The celiac trunk, superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and right renal artery (RA) originated from the true lumen. However, the dissection flap advanced through the left RA where the flow was preserved.