A 63-year-old lady was referred to the outpatient respiratory clinic with a 1-year history of increasing breathlessness, on a background of recent adalimumab therapy for Stage III hidradenitis suppurativa (HS). She had been on adalimumab for 4 years in total before it was ceased, for satisfactory remission of her HS. At the time of presentation, she had been off adalimumab for 4 months.
On assessment, she had New York Heart Association III dyspnoea. She had not suffered from any orthopnoea or recent chest pain. Clinical examination from a respiratory, cardiac, and rheumatological perspective was unremarkable, and her vital signs were within normal limits.
The patient had a background history significant for Hurley Stage III HS for which she had been on adalimumab for 4 years. She was an ex-smoker of 18 years with approximately 20 pack years of history. She had no other past respiratory or cardiac history.
The patient had a chest x-ray and subsequent high resolution computed tomography (CT) thorax performed. These investigations demonstrated significant pericardial calcification, primarily over the left ventricle (LV), with the posterior and lateral walls particularly affected. The calcification continued to become circumferential at the apex .
A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed Grade I diastolic dysfunction but was otherwise unremarkable. Aetiological workup of these findings included a QuantiFERON, as well as a rheumatological panel incorporating an autoantibody and myositis screen, all of which were negative. She had no clinical features of connective tissue disease and no prior history of cardiac surgery, pericardial disease, or radiation therapy.
She then underwent invasive right and left heart catheterization studies, which demonstrated equalization of right-sided and left-sided end-diastolic pressures, consistent with a diagnosis of CP .
Following multi-disciplinary discussion, conservative management was recommended with close monitoring, given that her symptoms had begun to improve since initial presentation. The considerable morbidity and mortality associated with surgical intervention was, in discussion with the patient, weighed up against her relatively mild symptom burden, and it was agreed to manage her case expectantly.
The patient was being closely followed on a 3-month basis to monitor for any symptom progression, which would likely represent an indication to proceed with pericardiectomy. Unfortunately, 9 months after her diagnosis, she once again developed increasing breathlessness.
A repeat CT thorax revealed worsening bibasilar peri-bronchial opacities and probable inter-lobular septal thickening, likely related to chronic cardiac congestion with atelectasis. There was also radiological evidence of liver cirrhosis, possibly secondary to congestive hepatopathy. In addition, this CT also demonstrated extensive pericardial calcification with dilation of the hepatic veins, suggestive of chronically elevated right heart pressures. Furthermore, a moderate right pleural effusion and a new small left pleural effusion had developed .
The above radiological findings correlated with clinical examination, confirmed evidence of right heart failure. Of note, all her biochemical markers remained normal, including an N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) of 182 pg/mL.
She was re-discussed at our Heart Team meeting, and early pericardiectomy was advised while her biventricular function remained normal. She was prescribed a low-dose loop diuretic under close supervision and subsequently underwent surgical pericardiectomy. She recovered well in the post-operative period. Of note, despite significant improvement in her symptoms, her NT-proBNP rose post-operatively to 904 pg/mL.