A 49-year-old Taiwanese woman presented with infrequent generalized seizures since childhood. She had her first generalized tonic–clonic seizure attack when she was 11 years old. The duration was 1 to 3 minutes with short postictal state. The frequency was about one to two attacks every decade under carbamazepine 200mg twice daily and valproic acid 500mg twice daily. She stopped both antiepileptic drugs against medical advice 4 years ago and started taking a Chinese herb. However, she presented with another episode of generalized tonic–clonic seizure and was transferred to our neurology out-patient department.
She had been born smoothly without abnormal birth history. Her family history of epilepsy or hereditary diseases is unremarkable. She has mild intellectual disability and completed basic national education only (junior high school). She had spontaneous pubarche, thelarche, and menarche at 13 years old. Her menstrual cycles were about 28 days and generally regular and she began menopause at 45 years old. She did not get married and had no sexual experience. She has a medical history of hyperlipidemia, thyroid adenomatous goiter, and gastric polyp. A physical examination showed her height 1.46m (1st percentile compared to same age population in Taiwan; height of her mother was 1.53m), weight 64kg, swelling of hands and feet, small fingernails , retrognathic face, webbed neck, and secondary sexual characteristics Tanner V. Her neurological examination was essentially normal. Laboratory data revealed normal thyroid functions. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed asymmetrical bilateral ventricular size (right side smaller), and bilateral periventricular and subcortical white matter hyperintensity . A pelvic ultrasound showed anteverted uterus of 4.8 × 5.2 × 4.2cm, right adnexal cyst of 3.1 × 4.3 × 4.2cm, and invisible left ovary. An electroencephalograph (EEG) showed 10 to 20uV beta rhythm with reactive 20 to 30uV posterior 10 to 11Hz alpha background activities without recording of epileptiform discharges. A G-band chromosomal analysis on peripheral blood lymphocytes reported 45,X[2]/47,XXX[1]/46,XX[27] , consistent with mosaicism TS. Cardiac echo showed mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitations without abnormal aortic valve. An X-ray of her hand showed normal alignment without shortening of the fourth metacarpal bone.