The patient was a 31-year-old G2P1 woman with a history of pregnancy and cesarean section of her first child due to early abruption of the placenta. The patient had no relevant medical history.
The pregnancy occurred spontaneously and progressed well. At 38 weeks and 2 days of pregnancy, an emergency cesarean section was performed because her membrane had ruptured. There were no problems until cesarean section was initiated and the baby was delivered. When uterine suturing was initiated, an intramuscular hematoma first formed on the anterior wall of the uterine body. A hematoma then developed next to the base of the uterus from the right uterine horn to the ovarian adnexa, and bleeding began. Repeated ligation failed to stop the bleeding, and the patient went into shock.
An intravenous route was added while blood was taken for testing, and fluid loading and continuous noradrenaline administration were initiated. Hematoma formation was evident from the right basilar ligament to the ovarian adnexa, and the adnexa had nearly ruptured. Blood tests submitted intraoperatively revealed decreased levels of hemoglobin (Hb), 5.3 g/dl; platelets, 113,000/μl; and fibrinogen, 184 mg/dl. Emergency transfusion of 6 units of Type O red blood cells (RBC) and 4 units of AB fresh frozen plasma (FFP) was initiated. The hematoma was incised, and the right adnexa was removed. Marked bleeding stopped, but complete hemostasis was not achieved. Complete hemostasis could not be achieved without improving coagulation function through blood transfusion, and the operation was terminated.
The total blood loss was 1869 ml, including the amniotic fluid. Blood tests after the transfusion showed Hb, 5.5 g/dl; platelets, 85,000/μl; and fibrinogen, 92.8 mg/dl, which did not improve, and an additional 8 units of RBC and 10 units of FFP were administered. After the additional administration, blood tests showed improvement in the levels of Hb, 9.0 g/dl; platelets, 67,000/μl; and fibrinogen, 232 mg/dl. Subsequently, the patient's condition showed good improvement; she was discharged on the 8th postoperative day.
Immediately after delivery, the patient experienced a massive hemorrhage of unknown cause; as no other explanation for the causative disease was available, a diagnosis of clinical AFE was made. Laboratory tests submitted to the Amniotic Fluid Embolism Group of Hamamatsu Medical School, which conducts clinical research on AFE, revealed the following: zinc coproporphyrin-1 (Zn-CP1), < 1/6 p mol/l; sialyl Tn antigen (STN), 23.0 U/ml < 45.0 U/ml; decreased C3 levels, 76.0 mg/dl < 80 mg/dl; C4, 14.0 mg/dl > 11.0 mg/dl; and C1 esterase inhibitors, 61.0 % > 42.0 %. Thus, uterine-type AFE is considered to be the cause of massive hemorrhage and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). The resected right adnexa showed no abnormal pathological findings. She was discharged and sent home eight days after surgery.