A 40-year-old female without previous medical history was brought to the emergency room at Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taiwan, after suffering from severe headache and vomiting. Brain computed tomography (CT) revealed a diffuse subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) with a hematoma measuring one mm, diffuse brain swelling and hydrocephalus (green arrows Fig. A). The CT angiography also showed a small aneurysm with lobulated contour, 4.6 mm in dimension noted in anterior communicating artery (yellow circles Fig. B and C). Aneurysm transcatheter arterial embolization was performed following the discovery. The patient was then reported to the Department of Ophthalmology for postoperative examination.
In ophthalmic clinic, the patient claimed to have poor vision prior to the brain aneurysm, with a best corrected visual acuity of 20/60 ever since she was in elementary school. She also reported a central scotoma in her visual field. None of the patient’s parents nor related family members showed similar symptoms. Upon further ophthalmological examinations, the dilated fundus exam showed no abnormal pigmentation on the retina and macula. However, temporal optic nerve pallor was revealed . The spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed a normal retina structure, with thinning of the retina nerve fiber layer around the optic nerve head, depicting optic atrophy . The full field electroretinogram (ERG) test results were within normal range, however the pattern electroretinogram (PERG) and pattern visual evoked potential (PVEP) results were not. The PERG results have missing negativities at approximately 95 ms (N95) for both eyes. For the PVEP, the positives at 100 ms (P100) were reduced in amplitudes and delayed . The results from the electrophysiological test supported the findings in the retinal images , which indicated optic nerve atrophy.
for genetic testing was obtained from the patient and both parents, and the study was conducted according to the declaration of Helsinki and approved by the Institutional Review Board of Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (No. 201601569B0C602). The patient’s DNA was extracted from peripheral blood. Exome capture was performed using xGen Exome Research Panel v2 (Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, Iowa, USA) and sequencing was performed using NovaSeq 6000 (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). In total, 9,162,817,743 bases of sequence were generated and uniquely aligned to the Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 37 (GRCh37) and Revised Cambridge Reference Sequence (rCRS) of the mitochondrial genome, generating 141.19 mean depth-of-coverage within the 34,366,188 bases of the captured region, which is approximately 99.3% of the RefSeq protein coding region. Approximately 98.80% of the targeted bases were covered to a depth of ≥ 20x. In total, 67,480 single nucleotide variants (SNV) and 11,123 small insertions and deletions (indel) were identified. Due to limitations in the coverage and depth of mtDNA using exome sequencing, additional Sanger sequencing was conducted to confirm the absence of three hotspots (m.11778G > A, m.14484T > C, or m.3460G > A) associated with Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy in our patient. The Exome Sequencing results did not identify any disease-causing variants related to optic atrophy. Through further pipeline analysis, a deletion spanning the OPA1 gene was suspected. Approximately 50% fewer reads were observed in the OPA1 gene in the proband’s sample compared to two other unrelated reference samples . Meanwhile, the reads in the neighboring genes showed similar patterns between the proband and the two unrelated reference samples . Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) was performed with the CytoScan HD array (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions on the GeneChip™ Scanner 3000 7G platform (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, US), which contains more than 2.67 million markers for copy number analysis, including 750,000 SNPs and 1.9 million nonpolymorphic probes. CMA data were visualized and analyzed with Chromosome Analysis Suite (ChAS) software package (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). The results showed a 960 kb deletion on chromosome 3q29 (arr[GRCh37] 3q29(193,238,393_194,198,653)x1, Fig. C). This large heterozygous deletion encompasses 7 RefSeq coding-genes, namely ATP13A4, OPA1, HES1, CPN2, LRRC15, GP5, and ATP13A3 genes. The Autosomal Dominant Optic Atrophy diagnosis has been confirmed by the OPA1 heterozygous deletion identification. We have examined the asymptomatic parents who showed no signs of ocular abnormalities (as indicated in Supplement Fig. ). Parental analysis by CMA concluded that the deletion was de novo.