A 74-year-old male with a history of symptomatic drug-refractory paroxysmal AF treated with a catheter ablation with pulmonary vein isolation 14 years prior and a second catheter ablation two years prior, presented to the emergency department (ED) with three months of progressive shortness of breath and palpitations. Upon presentation, he was afebrile, his heart rate was 137 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 106/76 millimeters of mercury, and oxygen saturation was 90% on room air. Cardiovascular examination revealed tachycardia with normal heart sounds and no murmurs, rubs or gallops. Jugular venous pressure was elevated. Pulmonary exam was negative for rales, and there was no lower extremity edema.
The ECG revealed narrow complex tachycardia with more P waves than QRS complexes. The differential diagnosis included typical and atypical atrial flutter and focal atrial tachycardias (AT) with 2:1 conduction block. Notably, P waves are positive in V1 and across all precordial leads (absent precordial transition), favoring atypical flutter from the left atrium over typical cavotricuspid isthmus (CTI)-dependent right atrial flutter. Positive flutter waves in the inferior leads indicate high to low atrial activation, most often caused by counterclockwise perimitral flutter and left atrial (LA) roof-dependent AT. Focal AT, due to enhanced automaticity from an ectopic focus, cannot be ruled out based on the ECG findings; however, reentrant arrhythmias are more common post-AF ablation.
A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a severely reduced ejection fraction of 20% without valvular disease or wall motion abnormalities. The patient was started on amiodarone and underwent direct current cardioversion. An electrophysiology study revealed perimitral isthmus flutter. indicates how the pattern of right atrial activation correlates with the ECG flutter wave morphology on the patient’s initial ECG. Repeat catheter ablation successfully terminated the arrhythmia. One month later, a follow-up TTE showed a recovered ejection fraction of 50%, indicating a likely tachycardia-mediated cardiomyopathy.