A 66-year-old male patient was sent to our center for intermittent abdominal pain for 8 wk and an increasing abdominal mass for 5 wk.
Eight weeks ago, after the treatment of SAP, the patient presented with intermittent abdominal pain, fat diarrhea, diabetes, malnutrition and other chronic pancreatitis symptoms. Five weeks ago, the peri-umbilical and lower abdomen skin began to appear purple, and a lower abdominal mass gradually appeared. Computed tomography (CT) scan results 1 wk before admission suggested that the fluid in the right renal space was less than before. The range of encapsulated liquid density shadows in the right retrorenal space was significantly larger than previously, and it extended to the right iliac fossa. The range of subcutaneous and intramuscular fluid density shadows in the right abdominal wall was significantly larger than measured before, measuring approximately 20.1 cm × 7.3 cm, and it went down to the right groin without obvious pelvic effusion.
Ten weeks prior, the patient was sent to our center for treatment due to SAP. After drinking a lot of alcohol, the patient had sudden, continuous and severe abdominal colic. Vital signs were as follows: heart rate 136 times/min, respiratory rate 26 times/min, blood pressure 92/52 mmHg, temperature 38.0 ºC, body mass index 18.1. Laboratory examination was as follows: serum amylase 804 IU/L, serum lipase 259.9 U/L, serum calcium 1.44 mmol/L, lactate 3.2 mmol/L, serum glucose 23.29 mmol/L, serum sodium 119.7 mmol/L, triglyceride 0.79 mmol/L, lactate dehydrogenase 579 IU/L, prealbumin 38 mg/L, white cell count 18.77 × 109/L, neutrophil count 16.03 × 109/L and plasma D-dimer 5.45 µg/mL. The modified Marshall score was 3, the APACHE II score was 23, the Ranson score was 6 and the modified computed tomography severity index was 10. A CT scan showed bilateral pleural effusion and atelectasis of the right lower lung lobe. The outline of the uncinate process of the head of the pancreas was unclear, and a large amount of exudate could be seen around the pancreas. Pancreatic parenchyma atrophy, multiple spotted calcifications, and pancreatic duct widening were also noted. On the right side of the kidney, there was an encapsulated effusion in the anterior and posterior spaces, and a density shadow of fluid could be seen in the subcutaneous and intramuscular areas of the abdominal wall. On the right side of the kidney, the volume of fluid was approximately 6.9 cm × 1.6 cm . The patient did not receive puncture drainage or surgical treatment. After 2 wk of conservative treatment, the patient was discharged from the hospital with no organ failure and was tolerating an oral diet. CT scan showed that the ranges of liquid density shadow of the right anterior renal space, and the right posterior renal space were slightly larger than that of the front, extending to the right iliac fossa. The density of the abdominal wall was increased in the subcutaneous and intermuscular areas, and the size of the right side was approximately 8.3 cm × 3.1 cm. The right peritoneum and perirenal fascia were thickened, and the liquid density shadow in the right renal fat capsule was decreased slightly. After intravenous contrast agent administration, the right anterior renal space, right posterior renal space, right iliac fossa and abdominal wall were subcutaneously wrapped with a liquid density shadow wall .
The patient had a history of chronic pancreatitis and had multiple acute pancreatitis episodes. The first diagnosis of acute pancreatitis in the patient was 14 years prior to presentation. Comorbidities of the patient included 12 years of diabetes, 30 years of smoking and 30 years of alcohol abuse.
At the time of admission, the size of the lower abdominal mass was approximately 22.5 cm × 14.2 cm, accompanied by obvious skin cyanosis and swelling, a significant increase in skin temperature and an obvious palpable tenderness. Heart rate 121 times/min, breathing 28/min, blood pressure 94/35 mmHg and body temperature 38.6 °C.
Laboratory values were as follows: 13.86 × 109/L white blood cell count, 10.23 × 109/L neutrophil count, 76 g/L hemoglobin, 405 × 109/L platelet count, 5.4 mmol/L lactate, 7.543 pH, 61 IU/L serum amylase, 34.9 U/L serum lipase, 25.10 g/L albumin, 19 mg/L prealbumin, 12.05 mmol/L glucose, 587 µmol/L uric acid, 124 mmol/L sodium, 3.990 ng/mL procalcitonin and 154.00 mg/L C-reactive protein.
Ten weeks before this hospitalization, the patient was sent to our center for treatment due to SAP. A CT scan showed bilateral pleural effusion and atelectasis of the right lower lung lobe. The outline of the uncinate process of the head of the pancreas was unclear, and a large amount of exudate could be seen around the pancreas. Pancreatic parenchyma atrophy, multiple spotted calcifications and pancreatic duct widening were also noted. On the right side of the kidney, there was an encapsulated effusion in the anterior and posterior spaces, and a density shadow of fluid could be seen in the subcutaneous and intramuscular areas of the abdominal wall. On the right side of the kidney, the volume of fluid was approximately 6.9 cm × 1.6 cm . Eight weeks before this hospitalization, CT scan showed that the ranges of liquid density shadow of the right anterior renal space, and the right posterior renal space were slightly larger than that of the front, extending to the right iliac fossa. The density of the abdominal wall was increased in the subcutaneous and intermuscular areas, and the size of the right side was approximately 8.3 cm × 3.1 cm. The right peritoneum and perirenal fascia were thickened, and the liquid density shadow in the right renal fat capsule was decreased slightly. After intravenous contrast agent administration, the right anterior renal space, right posterior renal space, right iliac fossa and abdominal wall were subcutaneously wrapped with a liquid density shadow wall . A week before this hospitalization, CT scan showed that the fluid in the right renal space was less than before. The range of encapsulated liquid density shadows in the right retrorenal space was significantly larger than previously, and it extended to the right iliac fossa. The range of subcutaneous and intramuscular fluid density shadows in the right abdominal wall was significantly larger than measured before, measuring approximately 20.1 cm × 7.3 cm, and it went down to the right groin without obvious pelvic effusion .