A 6-month-old Caucasian male presented with 2 weeks of fussiness, fever, and decreased activity and one episode of hematochezia and hematemesis in the setting of 1 month of a progressively worsening rash that started in his diaper area and spread to the extremities, neck, and trunk . There was no change in his rash with emollients or topical steroid use.
He was born full term without complications, passed meconium in the first 24 h of life, and had a normal newborn screen. His initial IRT was 59.3 ng/ml (normal <60 ng/ml), so no further testing was performed according to the state protocol. Parents were both identified as CF carriers during the pregnancy. His weight dropped from the 85th percentile at 2 months of age to the 33rd percentile at 4 months of age which coincided with a transition from exclusive direct breastfeeding to mostly bottle feeding of expressed breast milk. Weight gain from that point forward was consistent around the 35th percentile. His length, however, dropped from the 73rd percentile at 2 months of age to less than 3rd percentile at presentation at 6 months of age . He was taking adequate volumes of breastmilk on demand about every 3–4 h with occasional reflux episodes. He was taking minimal solid foods at the time of admission. Vitamin D supplementation was inconsistent. His stooling pattern was reported as 3–4 times per day, soft consistency without malodor, discoloration, or oil droplets except for one episode of bright red blood per rectum immediately prior to admission. His mother reported she had concerns about constipation due to crying and fussiness with stooling. He had no respiratory symptoms such as cough or history of pneumonia.
Physical examination on admission was remarkable for generalized edema (facial, periorbital, peripheral) with a diffuse, reddish-brown in color, serpiginous, rash with scaly plaques at his extremities and perineal area . The rash was most prominent in the flexural surfaces with darker purple appearance in the intertriginous areas. There was an approximately three centimeter left inguinal mass with overlying purpura. His breathing was comfortable without any adventitious breath sounds, and his abdomen was soft, nontender, and without appreciable organomegaly, though this was difficult to assess due to his anasarca. His hair was thin and reddish in color.
Labs were notable for coagulopathy, hypoalbuminemia, hyponatremia, elevated liver enzymes, elevated ferritin, elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), elevated c-reactive protein, decreased 25-hydroxy vitamin D level, decreased retinol/vitamin A level, decreased vitamin E alpha tocopherol level, and decreased zinc level . Stool was positive for occult blood. Due to multiple fat-soluble vitamin deficiencies, fecal pancreatic elastase was assessed and was low. His potassium was initially normal, but quickly dropped to 2.1 mmol/L on the second day of his hospitalization. He also tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 on admission. Of note, his father had tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 approximately 1 week prior to admission.
He was admitted and diagnosed with kwashiorkor with prompt and cautious initiation of treatment for severe malnutrition, electrolyte derangements, and coagulopathy. Consultants involved included gastroenterology, hepatology, genetics/metabolism, allergy/immunology, cardiology, hematology, nutrition physicians, pulmonology, infectious disease, and dermatology. He received intravenous vitamin K and was initially started on continuous nasogastric feeds with breastmilk fortified with a high-protein extensively hydrolyzed formula. He received intravenous antibiotics for inguinal lymphadenopathy and cellulitis with intravenous antibiotics. Based on his very low fecal elastase measurements without diarrhea and his persistent edema and electrolyte derangements, he was started on empiric pancreatic enzymes on hospital day 10 pending a unifying diagnosis. Given the severity of his presentation and the broad differential diagnosis, rapid whole exome sequencing was pursued which identified two mutations in CFTR: F508del and 1717-1G->A, leading to a diagnosis of CF. No other genetic mutations were identified. A sweat chloride test was not obtained during his hospitalization due to the severity of his rash and electrolyte derangements but was performed about 1 month after hospitalization. One month after discharge, his sweat chloride levels were elevated at 86 and 90 mmol/L (normal <60 mmol/L) on his right and left arms respectively, confirming a diagnosis of CF.
Ultimately, his presenting diagnoses of kwashiorkor and coagulopathy were considered secondary to chronic CF-associated pancreatic insufficiency and malabsorption. Kwashiorkor explained his edema, hypoalbuminemia, elevated liver enzymes, hypoglycemia, malabsorption, thin and reddish hair, and rash. He demonstrated improvement with continuous nasogastric feeds of fortified breastmilk, supplemental fat-soluble vitamins, pancreatic enzymes, and electrolyte replacements. He was discharged home on 24 kcal/oz fortified oral and nasogastric feeds, DEKA vitamins, supplemental vitamin D3 (cholecalciferol) and zinc, and pancreatic enzymes. Additionally, he was started on twice daily respiratory treatments with albuterol and chest physiotherapy. After diuresis, his weight dropped to the 4th percentile, which correlated with normalization of his albumin , indicating that the appearance of his reassuring growth prior to presentation was weight gain secondary to edema and not true growth. After interventions, his weight appropriately increased and his stunted length began to normalize, signaling improved absorption and adequate nutrition. Growth measurements 5 months after hospitalization demonstrate significant recovery with weight at the 45th percentile, length at the 11th percentile, and weight-for-length at the 75th percentile.