A 26-year-old Hispanic man with a history of type 1 diabetes that had been diagnosed between 12 and 14 years of age was brought to the emergency department (ED) after two episodes of new-onset seizures at home. A family member reported that the patient had stopped taking insulin for 1 day before presentation. He complained of epigastric pain and nonbloody, nonbilious vomiting at home. In the ED, the patient had another two episodes of tonic-clonic seizures.
His physical examination revealed that he was agitated, febrile (body temperature 38.5 °C), hypertensive (blood pressure 149/87 mmHg), and tachycardiac (heart rate 105 beats/minute). The remainder of his physical examination was unremarkable. His laboratory data were remarkable for hyperglycemia and high anion gap metabolic acidosis with an elevated β-hydroxybutyrate level compatible with DKA. No central nervous system pathology was revealed by a computed tomographic scan of his brain without intravenous contrast or by a lumbar puncture. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for management of DKA. His ketoacidosis resolved within 24 hours on intravenous fluids and an insulin drip. However, he continued to remain very drowsy in spite of correction of the DKA. Repeat laboratory data showed anemia (hemoglobin 9.1 g/dl, baseline value 11.8 g/dl 2 months prior), thrombocytopenia (150 × 109/L, baseline value 416 × 109/L 2 months prior), acute kidney injury with a blood urea nitrogen/creatinine ratio of 33/3.4 mg/dl (baseline value 40/1.4 mg/dl 2 months prior), and evidence of hemolysis (lactate dehydrogenase 1700 IU/L, indirect bilirubin 1.7 mg/dl) with schistocytes present on his peripheral blood smear. His presentation strongly suggested the possibility of thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura/HUS, and emergent, empiric plasmapheresis was initiated while awaiting the result for the ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with a thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13) activity level. His additional serologic workup results, including complement components C3 and C4, antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, cryoglobulins, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody, and hepatitis B and C panels, were normal or negative.
The patient responded with a dramatic improvement in mental status and hemolytic parameters after 5 days of plasmapheresis . Unfortunately, his kidney function did not improve. On day 6, his ADAMTS13 activity was reported as normal (81 %, reference range 68–163 % activity). His anti-complement factor H (anti-CFH) antibody result was negative. His renal biopsy showed moderate to severe nodular diabetic glomerulosclerosis with superimposed thrombotic microangiopathy in a single glomerulus, suggestive of superimposed aHUS . Complement sequencing of the coding regions of CFH, complement factor I (CFI), CFB, C3, membrane cofactor protein (MCP, CD46), diacylglycerol kinase ε, and thrombomodulin was completed. A heterozygous, nonsynonymous variant was identified in exon 12 of CFB with changes of a lysine at amino acid position 533 to an arginine (CFB p.K533R). The patient was started on treatment with eculizumab, a humanized monoclonal antibody targeting complement component C5, after he received meningococcal vaccine. He had no further episode of DKA or aHUS during 5 months of follow-up after initiation of eculizumab therapy. However, his renal function gradually deteriorated and hemodialysis was started . He is currently being evaluated for kidney transplant.