An 85-year-old man with a history of total aortic arch replacement performed using a 26-mm, four-branched Triplex graft (Vascutek Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) for an aortic arch aneurysm 5 years previously, was admitted to the emergency department with chest pain.
Laboratory data exhibited anemia (Hb 9.4 mg/dL), elevated inflammatory markers (WBC 8500 /μL, CRP 5.5 mg/dL), near normal renal function, elevated bilirubin level (total bilirubin 5.6 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 2.9 mg/dL), and negative blood culture results. TTE confirmed an ejection fraction of 60% and mild aortic valve regurgitation without any tamponade sign.
Emergent contrast-enhanced CT revealed an intra-mediastinal hematoma around the vascular graft of the ascending aorta and extravasation on the dorsal side of the center of the vascular graft .
Emergent angiography, which was performed under general anesthesia in a hybrid operating room, revealed pooling of contrast medium on the dorsal side of the vascular graft. However, the source of the leak was unclear. Aortic angioscopic examination of the graft was performed using a non-obstructive angioscopy system (FT-203F angioscope and VISIBLE fiber; Fiber Tech Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). This revealed a red vascular graft defect (Additional file : Video S1, Fig. A) that matched the simultaneous angiographic extravasation at the contralateral level of the prosthetic left common carotid artery (CCA) branch . A distance of 2 cm between the first branch of the graft vessel and rupture site was confirmed using a marker catheter.
We confirmed non-anastomotic graft rupture and immediately started two-debranching thoracic endovascular aortic repair. The left CCA and left subclavian artery (SCA) were revascularized via right SCA-left CCA-left SCA bypass using an 8-mm T-shaped ring-enforced polytetrafluoroethylene graft. A cTAG stent-graft (34 mm × 150 mm; W.L. Gore and Associates, Flagstaff, AZ) was deployed just distal to the first graft branch of the brachiocephalic artery via a femoral approach.
Finally, embolization at the left SCA was performed using the Vascular Plug (12 mm), and the proximal left CCA of the bypass anastomosis was closed with a Hem-o-lok XL (Research Triangle Park, NC, USA). A final angiography revealed the disappearance of the extravasation from the graft rupture site, patent flow to the grafted vessels, and no endoleak . The postoperative course was uneventful. He was transferred for rehabilitation in postoperative day 13. Follow-up CT at 6 months postoperatively showed no extravasation .