This case is of a 60-year-old Caucasian female with no significant past medical history who initially presented to her primary care physician for pharyngitis symptoms. During the visit an incidental murmur was discovered, leading to an echocardiogram that revealed thrombus formation in the right atria and inferior vena cava. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis depicted an 18.7 × 14.1 cm left renal mass with extension into the inferior vena cava (IVC) and renal and splenic vein with encompassment of the small bowel and pancreas . The patient continued to deny any symptoms apart from sore throat and weight loss. She was started on anticoagulation. Two weeks after initial presentation, a radical open nephrectomy was attempted, but the mass was unresectable as a result of extensive tumor fixation onto surrounding organs. A biopsy demonstrated a highly cellular neoplasm that was diffusely positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin, and GATA-3 transcription factor on immunohistochemistry. Histology revealed a highly cellular neoplasm with moderate nuclear pleomorphism and hyperchromasia. Additionally, two to three mitotic figures were noted per ten high-power fields, noting the potential for malignant behavior of the tumor. Pathology findings and multidisciplinary discussion led to suspicion of pheochromocytoma over renal cell carcinoma. A metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scan was conducted and confirmed the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. Subsequent positron emission tomography (PET) and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) ruled out metastatic disease. Because of the patient’s lack of typical endocrinological PHEO symptoms (such as hypertension, diaphoresis, and dyspnea) and normal urine metanephrine levels, the tumor was considered to be nonfunctional. Genetic testing was also performed, with no variant mutations found in the rearranged during transfection (RET), VHL succinate dehydrogenase complex subunit C (SDHC), succinate dehydrogenase complex iron sulfur subunit B (SDHB), or succinate dehydrogenase complex subunit D (SDHD) genes. She was clinically staged as stage III (cT3, cNX, cM0).
As a result of the thrombus, initial hospitalization course was complicated by congestive heart failure, and atrial fibrillation stabilized with rate control management. Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia also developed, requiring change of anticoagulation to a novel anticoagulant (NOAC). The patient was discharged 3 weeks following aborted nephrectomy. Initiation of systemic therapy was discussed but was determined to not be the best option for the patient at the time. Aortography and angiography were performed, demonstrating extensive tumor vascularity with feeding vasculature from the celiac, superior mesenteric, inferior mesenteric, and lumbar arteries. Thus, treatment with interventional radiology (IR) embolization was performed with the intent of diminishing tumor vascularity and reducing thrombus formation. IR embolization was performed twice, 2 months apart. It was discontinued when CT scans revealed no significant change of the tumor mass or thrombus. The patient was also evaluated by the radiation oncology department, who determined that she was ineligible for radiation therapy. This was due to concerns over the size of the mass and the appreciable toxic effects that could arise from radiating such a large area.
Post embolization, the patient began experiencing intermittent left-sided chest/abdominal pain, mild fatigue, and a decrease in appetite. Six months after initial presentation, the patient was referred for a second opinion for further management of her tumor. At that time, a Ga-68 dotatate PET scan revealed tracer uptake in the sacrum, demonstrating osseous metastasis .
Because of the progression and metastasis in the sacrum, it was recommended that the patient be considered for the clinical trial of lutetium Lu 177 dotatate (Lutathera) or be started on combination chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and dacarbazine (CVD). The patient was deemed ineligible by the clinical trial institution and was thus started on systemic therapy with octreotide long-acting release (LAR) and oral temozolomide per institute recommendation. Clinical restaging done following gallium scan was stage IV (cT4, cNX, cM1c). Chemotherapy treatment was begun 9 months after initial presentation. Around this time, the patient began experiencing increased pain of the lower back/abdomen and intense fatigue that affected her daily activities. Palliative radiation therapy of the sacrum was initiated to manage metastasis and alleviate pain. Two months after beginning systemic therapy, the patient was admitted to the emergency room for acute altered mental status, diarrhea, anorexia, and ascites caused by suspected acute liver failure. As temozolomide was considered a differential along with passive congestion of the liver, the medication was discontinued to prevent further liver toxicity.
Following stabilization, the patient was considered for the dual anti-cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (anti-CTLA-4) and anti-programmed death-ligand 1 (anti-PD-L1) in rare tumors (DART) clinical trial, which was studying the use of nivolumab and ipilimumab on rare tumors. Unfortunately, the PHEO/PGL arm was closed and thus patient was unable to take part. After discussions amongst multidisciplinary teams, the next best course of action was determined to be the use of off-label immunotherapy. Subsequently, 11 months after initial presentation, she was started on ipilimumab and nivolumab for salvage therapy in addition to octreotide LAR. Ipilimumab was administered at a dose of 1 mg/kg and nivolumab at a dose of 3 mg/kg. After four cycles of nivolumab and ipilimumab, the patient was tolerating the treatment well, with only the formation of a small pruritic rash. In addition, the patient began noticing decreased back pain and an increase in energy. A repeat PET revealed decreased size in tumor mass, reduced from 18.1 to 15.8 cm. A CT scan that followed corroborated the findings of decreased tumor size. On CT, the superior hypovascular portion of the mass was found to measure 7.4 × 5.7 cm compared with the initial 10 × 6.6 cm. The inferior hypervascular component also demonstrated a decrease in size to 6 × 6 cm from 7.8 × 7.6 cm. Subsequent CT scans conducted during immunotherapy treatment continued to illustrate decreased tumor mass size .
A repeat bone scan performed 1 year after initiating immunotherapy also showed no evidence of intraosseous metastasis of the sacral region. It was considered that the radiation therapy to the sacrum potentially contributed to the lack of metastasis on imaging studies. The patient remained stable on immunotherapy for approximately 15 months, with no serious adverse events occurring in that time. Following, she did experience some increase in abdominal pain, which a CT scan revealed to be due to development of a subocclusive thrombus. This was treated with change to another novel oral anticoagulant. The CT scan done at that time did not demonstrate any change in the pheochromocytoma.
As of today, the patient has been on immunotherapy maintenance treatment for over 20 months, and scans continue to demonstrate decreased size of the tumor mass. A repeat gallium-68 PET restaging study demonstrated somatostatin receptor (SSR) positivity of her tumor, which was useful for considering long-term management with octreotide . She was also reevaluated and started on radiation therapy because of the considerable decrease in tumor size. She will continue to be on IO and octreotide during radiation therapy.
Overall, since initiation of immunotherapy treatment, the patient has exhibited a significant increase in quality of life, as she has resumed many of her normal activities and her abdominal/sacral pain has improved considerably. Also, she is now being afforded the opportunity for radiation therapy of the tumor mass. This is significant and promising as this was an option she was considered ineligible for prior to commencing IO treatment.