A 70-year-old man of Kumbo origin from the Northwest region of Cameroon was admitted to a rural mission hospital in Cameroon with a history of crampy right lower-quadrant abdominal pain, nonbloody, nonmucoid diarrhea alternating with constipation for the last 5 days. Anorexia and low-grade fever were observed, but no weight loss. Abdominal examination revealed the features of acute intestinal obstruction with an ill-defined mass in the right iliac fossa (RIF) and visible peristalsis. A chest radiograph was essentially normal. An abdominopelvic ultrasound scan showed dilated bowel loops and an RIF mass. An abdominal plain radiograph showed multiple air-fluid levels and dilated bowel loops. An abdominal computed tomographic (CT) scan and barium enema study confirmed a complex ascending colonic and cecal tumor. The patient had a markedly raised white blood cell count of 40,300 cells/ml. The C-reactive protein was significantly elevated, and results of the tuberculin test and Genexpert test for tuberculosis were both negative. The patient’s blood pressure was 129/78 mmHg, and his pulse rate was 60 beats/min. He also had pyrexia (− 37.9 °C). In view of acute intestinal obstruction, exploratory laparotomy was performed after routine investigations. The intraoperative finding was a huge complex inflammatory mass involving the cecum, terminal ileum, and sigmoid colon. The patient subsequently had a sigmoidectomy with end-to-end sigmoidorectal anastomosis and a cecal resection, and the proximal ascending colon was exteriorized because end mucoid fistula and terminal ileostomy were performed. Figure is a postoperative photograph showing the ileostomy and disposable stoma bag. Figure is the immediate postoperative photograph of the resected complex mass involving the cecum, terminal ileum, and sigmoid colon. Histopathological examination of the resected specimen showed macroscopic appearance of a complex large mass involving the cecum, sigmoid colon, and terminal ileum, with congested swollen mucosa interspersed with diffused, irregular ulcerations with a cobblestone appearance (noncaseating granulomas in all layers of bowel wall from serosa to mucosa). Also, multiple fissures were present, as well as perforation and fistula seen between adjourning bowel loops, but no significant IBD was observed in nonulcerated mucosa. Microscopically, prominent and enlarged lymphatic follicles, proliferation of muscularis mucosa, and formation of fissures extending from mucosa to serosa along with gross edema. Marked infiltrates of inflammatory cells involved all the bowel layers; the details are depicted in Fig. . Therefore, histopathological diagnosis of CD was made. The postoperative period was uneventful. Thereafter, the patient received five courses of adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of azathioprine (AZA), methotrexate (MTX), mesalamine, and methylprednisolone. He had complete disease remission and subsequently underwent closure of the ileostomy with satisfactory postoperative status. The most recent follow-up abdominal CT scan and colonoscopy revealed disease-free status. The patient is also currently receiving a maintenance dose of rectal mesalamine and oral omeprazole treatment. He has been followed every 2 months in the surgical outpatient clinic over the last 16 months with a satisfactory clinical outcome.