A 58-year-old white man received a cadaveric renal allograft in 2001 for end-stage renal disease secondary to immunoglobulin M nephropathy. The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) compatibility of donor to recipient showed a mismatch of two antigens with peak panel reactivity antibody of 9%. The patient had been receiving tacrolimus 1.5 mg twice daily and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) 500 mg twice daily over the past 13 years without any evidence of chronic rejection. The transplanted kidney had been functioning well with baseline serum creatinine <100 μmol/L. The patient’s other significant comorbidities included hypertension, multiple resected squamous cell skin cancers, hepatitis C, and treated latent tuberculosis.
The patient noticed a rapidly enlarging, fungating skin lesion over the right scapula and complained of unintentional weight loss of 3 months’ duration. An excisional biopsy was performed, which showed an ulcerated nodular melanoma of 21-mm thickness, Clark level V. The patient’s immunohistochemistry was positive for homatropine methylbromide 45 (HMB-45), S100, and melan-A , and a molecular study showed wild-type BRAF status. Computed tomography-based staging revealed multiple liver metastases, an L4 lytic lesion, and left hilar and porta hepatis lymphadenopathy. A liver biopsy was performed, which also confirmed metastatic melanoma. Tacrolimus and MMF were stopped. The patient was started on azathioprine 100 mg daily and everolimus 0.5 mg twice daily prior to commencement of pembrolizumab 2 mg/kg every 3 weeks. The reason for modification of immunosuppressive drugs was to maximize the treatment effect of the anti-PD-1 inhibitor. Prior to treatment, the patient and his family were informed about the potential risks of graft failure and progression of melanoma.
After two cycles of pembrolizumab, the patient’s condition continued to decline rapidly, with reduced performance status and an increase in the size of subcutaneous nodules over his right scapular area . His renal function worsened rapidly with a creatinine level >200 μmol/L . He declined the options of hemodialysis and renal biopsy owing to his poor prognosis. His liver enzyme and electrolyte levels were within normal ranges, and his chronic normocytic anemia was unchanged with a hemoglobin level of 106 g/L. He had mild neutrophilia (9.6 × 109/L). His C-reactive protein level was 77 mg/L. He was transferred to a hospice so he could receive best supportive care, and he died there 3 days later.