A 51-year-old male with a 30-pack-year smoking history who worked as a hospice care assistant with an unremarkable medical history, presented in November 2022 at an outpatient clinic due to a 2-week history of hemoptysis. The patient denied at the time having any cough, dyspnoea, weight loss, chills, fever, night sweats, diaphoresis, headache, palpitation, flushing, changes in bowel movement, fatigue or other complaints.
Initial evaluation included a chest X-ray, revealing a right lung mass. Subsequent imaging in December 2022, via whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan with IV contrast, displayed a large, well-defined soft tissue lesion in the right middle lung zone, partially encasing the interlobar pulmonary artery and the right intermediate bronchus, measuring ~9.5×8.5 cm . Additionally, a well-defined and heterogeneously enhanced soft tissue mass lesion in the right kidney was observed, displaying internal calcification suggestive of renal cell carcinoma . His complete blood count and biochemical investigations were normal. One month later, a CT-guided lung biopsy was performed, resulting in a diagnosis of metastatic adrenocortical carcinoma. This diagnosis was confirmed by positive inhibin results and the absence of TTF1, PAX8, CD10, RCC, and HMB45 markers. Notably, all biochemical parameters, including plasma cortisol, testosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone (DHES), estradiol, Renin–aldosterone ratio, serum, and 24-h urinary metanephrine were within normal limits.
The mass’s characteristics observed on CT imaging, combined with the patient’s negative hormonal profile, created a diagnostic discrepancy. In an effort to address this diagnostic challenge, a case revision was initially attempted, but it yielded insufficient results. A new core-guided right lung biopsy was conducted in February 2023. This second biopsy revealed features consistent with a low-grade neuroendocrine tumour, devoid of necrosis or mitosis. Immunohistochemistry staining showed positivity for synaptophysin, chromogranin, CD56, and focal NSE, while testing negative for RCC, PAX8, vimentin, MelanA, HMB45, TTF1, and Napsin-A. Ki67 exhibited positivity in less than 2% of neoplastic cells. .
In light of these findings, the case was reviewed in a multidisciplinary tumour board meeting, leading to the conclusion that there were two primary tumours. Subsequently, two surgeries were scheduled to remove these primary tumours.
In March 2023, the patient underwent a right radical nephrectomy, and the excised kidney measured 14×7×5 cm. The kidney tumour appeared as a solid, well-circumscribed, spherical mass measuring 5.5×5×4.5 cm , occupying the lower pool and extending into the renal pelvis and renal capsule. Histologically, the tumour was characterized by nests, sheets, and trabeculae composed of pale cells with distinct cell borders. Fibrous scarring and significant calcification areas were present, with no evidence of lymphovascular invasion. Importantly, the tumour was confined to the kidney and did not involve the renal capsule, perinephric fat, or Gerota’s fascia. Surgical resection margins were free of tumour involvement. Immunohistochemical staining revealed positivity for CK7 and C-Kit, while CD10 and vimentin were negative consistent with Chromophobe renal cell carcinoma (ChRCC).
In May 2023, a right lung pneumonectomy was performed, revealing a grade 1 typical carcinoid tumour with neuroendocrine features. This tumour, measuring 9 cm (pT4), was located in the right middle lobe, extending into the right upper lobe and compressing the lobar bronchi. It exhibited neuroendocrine characteristics with low mitotic activity and a Ki67 index of 1–2%. Immunohistochemistry confirmed positivity for synaptophysin, chromogranin, CD56, and CK, while being negative for TTF1, Napsin-A, S100, and CDX2. Lymphovascular invasions were noted, but perineural invasions were absent. Importantly, five hilar and peribronchial lymph nodes were tumour-free, as were vascular, bronchial, and pleural margins. The hilar parenchymal resection margin was also clear, resulting in a pathological TNM staging of pT4, pN0, and Mx.
The patient’s recovery after surgery went smoothly, and regular follow-up was maintained. Three months later, a whole-body 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)/CT scan was performed and showed no evidence of disease.