A 53-year-old male photographer was referred to our diabetic foot clinic from another hospital. The patient presented with type 2 Diabetes mellitus (DM), diagnosed one month ago. He was non-complient to diabetes treatment (he was on insulin and GLP-1 analogue), and had a very poor glycaemic control (HbA1c=12,5%). He had diabetic neuropathy (abnormal 10g monofilament, biothesiometer and Neuropad® test), but no peripheral arteriopathy (Doppler ultrasonography). Two months earlier, without knowing that he had diabetes, the patient presented left foot ulcer after an accident with hot water, followed by soft tissue infection (acute bacterial skin and skin structure infection, ABSSSI), and 1st toe and 1st metatarsal osteomyelitis (OM), with plain x-ray findings . He was admitted to hospital, and DM diagnosis was made upon that time. A multi-drug resistant Enterococcus faecium was isolated in repeated cultures. Inflammation markers (WBC, ESR, c-reactive protein) were minimally affected. In-hospital targeted treatment with tigecycline (50mgx2, loading dose 100mg) and daptomycin (500mgx1) was administered iv for 10 days. The patient also received 1,5 gr dalbavancin upon discharge. After a 2-weeks’ interval, he continued treatment at home with linezolid (600mgx2, 2 weeks), followed by tedizolid (200mgx1, one week), per os. At the same time, a complete medical record with patient’s history, informed consent and relative literature was sent to Greek National Health Care Organization (EOPYY), requesting administering off-label another 1,5 gr dalbavancin. In the meanwhile, he was re-admitted to hospital for iv tigecycline (same dose, 7 days), and continued treatment afterwards with per os linezolid (same dose) at home for another two weeks. He finally received a second dose of 1,5 g dalbavancin. In total, patient received 14 weeks’ targeted antibiotic therapy, mostly off-hospital. By the end of treatment, foot was in excellent condition and there was a significant improvement in patient’s plain X-rays .
During treatment, patient was wearing aircast, after a three-phase scintigraphy revealed Charcot arthropathy. Patient’s last visit took place three weeks after the end of his antibiotic treatment. He was advised to continue aircast off-loading. Since then, he was lost-to-follow-up. Recently, after 1 ½ year, we finally got in touch with the patient, who informed us that his foot was in good shape, and denied a follow-up visit for personal reasons.