A 31-year-old woman presented with sudden-onset right upper- and lower-limb weakness and dysarthria for 1 hour. She denied any history of hypertension, diabetes, heart disease, migraine or other cerebrovascular risk factors, a family history of stroke, previous trauma, smoking or toxin exposure. However, she said she had taken combined oral contraceptive (30 μg ethinylestradiol and 3 mg drospirenone) once a day for 30 days. On admission, her vital signs were normal. The findings of her general physical examination were normal. Her neurological examination revealed that she was alert with left gaze deviation, dysarthria, and right-sided hemiplegia. The patient’s National Institutes of Health stroke score (NIHSS) was 11. Her routine blood test, glucose levels, and electrocardiography results were normal. A head computed tomography showed a hyper-dense left middle cerebral artery (MCA) sign , prompting a diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke. She was given intravenous thrombolysis with alteplase (a recombinant tissue plasminogen activator), an acute cerebral angiography confirmed occlusion of the left MCA M1 segment , and then she received mechanical thrombectomy that achieved grade-3 reperfusion on the Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction scale . After revascularization, all of her symptoms except for the facial paralysis improved. Subsequent diffusion-weighted brain MRI demonstrated lesions in the left basal ganglia consistent with cerebral infarction . After about 24 hours, she developed sudden painless vision loss in her left eye. Fundus fluorescein angiography revealed obstructed branches of left retinal artery . She rejected ophthalmologist-recommended dexamethasone treatment.
Her urine test, lipid panel, hemoglobin A1c measurement, liver, kidney and thyroid function, coagulation function, protein S, protein C, anti-cardiolipin antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, thrombophilia screening, C-reactive protein, HIV and syphilis serology, tumor markers, carotid duplex ultrasonography, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and 24-hour electrocardiogram were negative and unremarkable. Contrast-enhanced transcranial Doppler (TCD) analysis revealed a sprinkling of microbubbles both at rest and after the Valsalva maneuver suggestive of a substantial right-to-left shunt (RLS). The patient refused transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). Repeated TTE demonstrated a PFO with interatrial RLS even without the Valsalva maneuver . Her pelvic, upper-limb, and lower-limb duplex venous ultrasound findings were unremarkable. She was prescribed a prophylactic oral blood thinner (oral clopidogrel, 75 mg/once daily). Her RoPE (Risk of Paradoxical Embolism) score was 9, indicating that there was a high probability that the detected PFO was causally related to her strokes. Based on the substantial RLS and high RoPE score, a trans-catheter closure of the defect was performed with an Amplatzer septal occluder (15 mm) 2 weeks later .
Over the subsequent 3 months of follow-up, there were no signs of stroke or transient ischemia attacks, but visual loss in the patient’s left eye persisted. Her best corrected visual acuity was 1.0 in her right eye and 0.5 in her left eye. Repeat contrast-enhanced echocardiography revealed a residual RLS evidenced by > 10 bubbles in the left atrium in the third cardiac cycle following contrast appearance in the right atrium after Valsalva release.