In June 2019, a 9-year-old girl was referred to the Pediatric Department, Faculty of Dentistry, Babol University of Medical Sciences, Babol, Iran, for a dental visit. It was her first dental visit and the patient complained of tooth pain due to severe caries and pulpal involvement.
She was the only child of a consanguineous marriage. Her medical history consisted of type 3 PFIC (diagnosed by liver needle biopsy through her infancy). Her parents were both systemically healthy. Her liver function tests, such as alanine transaminase (ALT), aspartate transaminase (AST), and gamma-glutamyltransferase (GGT), were elevated during the first years of her life. She was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid, zinc sulfate, and vitamin E for her hepatic problems from an early age.
She was born with a dolichocephalic skull pattern; therefore, she underwent craniosynostosis surgery because of fused sutures at 4 months of age. She also had a generalized tonic colonic seizure at 20 months of age and took phenobarbital and diazepam subsequently for two years. However, genetic workups (when she was 3 years old) did not reveal any known syndrome as a justification for her craniofacial problems and liver disease, and her parents refused further genetic tests at the time of referral. She had a normal intelligence quotient, and to this date, she is under regular checks-up by her physician and is not on any medication.
After obtaining informed consent from patient’s father, she was referred to her physician for medical consultation in case of any contraindications for dental treatment, which turned out to be none. Appropriate laboratory investigations (such as complete blood count (CBC), the prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT), and liver function tests) were reviewed before dental treatments, all of which were within normal limits. We considered Lidocaine 2% with epinephrine 1:100,000 as local anesthetic agent which belongs to amides family that are most metabolized in the liver. Maximum safe drug dosage was cautiously calculated and minimum necessary amount was administered for each session in order to prevent reaching toxic levels.
Intraoral examination revealed an anterior open bite and a buccal crossbite on her right side. Dental and radiographic examination revealed 10 missing teeth in her permanent dentition, indicating oligodontia. A panoramic image showed missing of teeth #12, #22, #23, #35, #34, #32, #31, #41, #42, #45. Patient’s lower anterior teeth were primary and her father mentioned exfoliation of tooth #82 in the past year following tooth #43 eruption. Patient had both teeth #33 and #43 though tooth #33 was still un-erupted despite the eruption of tooth #43. There was a 4-mm midline diastema between teeth #11 and #21, with malformed crowns with dens invaginatus and pulp stones. Also, her #16, #26, #36, #46, #55 and #65 teeth had malformed crowns, and radiographs (most obvious on one year follow up radiograph) revealed their taurodontism. Her permanent dentition exhibited delayed development. Teeth #52, #62, #71, #72 and #81 were over-retained. All of the mentioned anomalies might be syndromal. Unfortunately, almost all her erupted teeth were carious .
Considering these findings, after evaluating patient’s cooperation in the first appointment during receiving dental prophylaxis (which was estimated frankl 4), as short-term plan, a comprehensive dental treatment was prepared for the patient which contained preventive interventions, restorative treatments and pulp therapy of her primary molars. The patients’s long-term treatment plan contained dental implants plus prosthetic and orthodontic procedures.
First, she underwent dental prophylaxis (with pumice and a rubber cup). Due to acute pain, tooth #85 had undergone pulp therapy (pulpectomy with zinc oxide‒eugenol) in the first session before overall photographic documentation (although primary radiographs were obtained before this session).
Of the right upper quadrant, tooth #16 was restored with amalgam, tooth #55 underwent a pulpotomy procedure and both teeth #55 and #54 were restored with composite resin. Due to deep caries in palatal invagination of tooth #11, it underwent an indirect pulp capping procedure and was restored with composite resin. Of the left upper quadrant, due to deep caries in palatal invagination of tooth #21 it underwent an indirect pulp capping procedure and was restored with composite resin like it’s contralateral tooth. Teeth #64 and #65 underwent a pulpotomy procedure and then were restored with stainless steel crowns (SSC) (3 M ESPE, Preformed Stainless Steel Primary Molar Crowns) and tooth #26 underwent a PRR (preventive resin restoration) procedure. Of the left lower quadrant, tooth #36 underwent a PRR procedure, teeth #75 and #74 underwent pulpectomy with zinc oxide‒eugenol and then were restored with SSC. Of the right lower quadrant, tooth #84 underwent a pulpotomy procedure and then was restored with SSC, tooth #85 was restored with SSC after root canal filling and tooth #46 underwent a PRR procedure.
Teeth #53, #52, #62, #63, #73 and #83 were not restored, considering extensive root resorption (almost more than two-thirds of the roots were resorbed) and having poor prognosis, instead they received a single application of 38% SDF (Fagamin, Tedequim Argentina) in the first session .
Fluoride therapy along with modification of patient’s diet and improving her oral hygiene were applied as preventive regimen considering patient’s high risk for caries. At first visit, patient’s teeth had extensive plaque, so her hygiene was evaluated by a dental probe while in the subsequent visits it was assessed and reinforced by disclosing agent. We also recommended her to use disclosing agent at home for improvement of her hygiene.
There are concerns regarding the longevity of treatment for teeth #55 (because of not being covered with SSC) and teeth #75 and #74 (because of not being filled properly), and these teeth require close follow ups to detect any potential failures and intervene in the proper time. On the other hand considering patient’s high risk for caries, an ideal follow up regimen was 3 month intervals, but unfortunately, due to lack of patient’s parents cooperation, after finishing dental treatments, 6 months follow ups (for check ups, reinforcement of oral hygiene and diet modification and subsequent fluoride therapy) were considered for the patient.
Twelve months later, patient was recalled to the clinic for data collection and more checkups. At this point, post-treatment intraoral photographs were taken and a panoramic radiograph was obtained. The treatment outcomes and tolerance were assessed by not observing any recurrent caries clinically or radiographically, and extensive dental plaque (checked by disclosing agents) in follow ups. Fortunately intraoral examination at this time did not manifest any secondary/recurrent caries or infected lesions and also a good oral hygiene was still maintained. Patient declared that she is delighted, considerig elimination of her tooth pain and her promoted overall oral health condition .