A 78-year-old woman was admitted in 2019 to the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery in Changi General Hospital, a tertiary hospital in Singapore, for a 4-mo duration of worsening lower back pain with claudication and right lower limb radiculopathy, with onset 5 years after a spinal surgery.
The patient’s past medical history was significant for well-controlled hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus, gout, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and obesity [body mass index (BMI) of 31.2].
She also had a significant past surgical history of L3 to S1 posterior decompressive laminectomy, stabilisation with pedicle screws, and posterolateral fusion with local bone grafting performed at the same hospital 5 years ago. The surgery was performed for a diagnosis of lumbar spondylosis with central canal stenosis, for which she presented with chronic lower back pain radiating down her bilateral lower limbs. Titanium polyaxial screws (DePuy Synthes) were used in that surgery. The patient’s symptoms were relieved after the surgery and she recovered. Postoperative lumbar spine radiographs showed the proper positioning of the spinal implants .
The patient was followed up in the orthopaedic surgery specialist outpatient clinic regularly after her spine surgery. Five years after the surgery, she started to develop progressively worsening lower back pain which radiated to her right lateral thigh and calves. Four months later, her symptoms had slowly deteriorated to the point where she required a motorized wheelchair as she was unable to ambulate long distances due to pain.
The patient had no relevant personal and family history.
The most significant finding on examination was reduced power in the right L2 and L3 myotomes [grade 4 out of 5 on the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale for muscle strength]. The rest of the myotomes from L2 to S1 were normal, with a grade 5 out of 5 power on the MRC scale. She also had a large body habitus. Her gait was slow but steady over a short distance. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable: There was no spinal tenderness or significant muscle wasting of her back or lower limbs. The range of movement of her cervical and thoracolumbar spine was normal. Sensation was intact over all dermatomes. Bilateral knee and ankle reflexes were normal. The straight leg raise test was negative as well.
Laboratory blood tests showed normal values, including a white blood cell count of 8.2 × 109/L and C-reactive protein level of 4.1 mg/L. Other biochemical parameters were within the normal range. Serum metal concentrations were not performed for the patient due to cost issues.
Lumbar spine radiographs and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed prior to the revision surgery. Lumbar spine anteroposterior and lateral radiographs revealed stable periprosthetic radiolucency surrounding the right upper two screws (L3 and L4 pedicle screws) that suggested loosening of the instrumentation . There was no evidence of fracture of the pedicle screws and rod instrumentation. Narrowing of the L4-L5 and L5-S1 intervertebral disc spaces was noted but vertebral body heights were largely maintained. Spondylotic changes and facet arthropathy were seen. There was no instability noted in the flexion and extension views.
Lumbar spine MRI revealed severe spinal canal stenosis at the L2-L3 level with compression of the cauda equina nerve roots, severe bilateral lateral recess, and neural foraminal stenosis . There was moderate spinal canal stenosis with crowding of the cauda equina nerve roots at L1-L2. Mild peri-screw bony edema was observed around the left L4 screw , otherwise there was no significant evidence of peri-screw edema and screw loosening around the rest of the L3 to S1 screws.