In August 2019, a six-year-old male patient manifested right eye (RE) excessive tearing, conjunctival injection and pain. Family history was unremarkable. The child was born after uncomplicated twin pregnancy, in 37th gestational week, but ultrasound assessment was consistent with 34th maturity week. Birth weight was 2100 g and Apgar score 9/10. Photographs before the event depicted isocoria without anterior segment asymmetry.
On examination, RE demonstrated visual acuity of light perception and intraocular pressure (IOP) of 36 mmHg. Left eye showed no abnormalities. The diagnoses of neovascular glaucoma, CRVO and CRAO were established as affirmed with fluorescein angiography (FA). Extensive systemic work-up was performed. Neurological and cardiologic examinations were unremarkable. Laboratory tests for tuberculosis, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, Toxoplasma gondii, rubella, herpes simplex virus type 1 and 2, and HIV were negative, as well as factor V Leiden (FVL) mutation, MTHFR gene, anticardiolipin antibodies, and lupus anticoagulant. PHA was not reported in any of the findings. The child’s condition was perceived as idiopathic CRAO and CRVO, which led to the development of neovascular glaucoma. The patient was treated with antiglaucoma drugs topically (dorzolamide + timolol 20 mg/L + 5 mg/L drops b.i.d., latanoprost 50 μg/mL drops q.d., and acetazolamide 250 mg q.d.), panretinal photocoagulation, ranibizumab intravitreally and cyclophotocoagulation.
In December 2019, the child was referred to our Centre for second opinion. Clinical examination showed no light perception. The slit-lamp indirect lateral illumination revealed fully dilated, non-reactive RE pupil . Retroillumination verified blood cells in the HA lumen and anterior vitreous . RE IOP was 38 mmHg. Brückner’s transillumination revealed dim red reflex and tubular remnant of HA freely rotating in the anterior vitreous (Additional file 1). Closed angle and clear lens were depicted using ultrasound biomicroscopy . Extensive subhyaloid and intravitreal haemorrhages obscured visualization of fundus periphery and posterior pole . Thus, RE optical coherence tomography (OCT) angiography could not be performed. Ultrasound B-scan affirmed low reflective membranous tubular structure of the persistent hyaloid artery extending freely into the vitreous demonstrating substantial after-movements . It originated within the optic nerve head measuring 4.92 × 1.08 mm .
Vascular occlusion incident was discerned as a consequence of the existence of patent HA in the highly mobile Cloquet’s canal. No therapeutic intervention was currently indicated, but only close follow-up because the patient did not complain of any eye pain.