A 52-year-old woman presented at our institution with herpes zoster. She had a medical history of myelodysplastic syndromes, cerebral infarction, and dysthymia treated with fluvoxamine. The aggregated rash with erythema and blisters accompanied by shooting pain and allodynia of the left pinna and cheek was typical of herpes zoster affecting the cervical dermatomes C2 and C3. The patient was treated with acyclovir (4000 mg/day) and acetaminophen (2000 mg/day). The rash improved and the pain completely disappeared within 1 month of this treatment. At 1 month after the first onset of the rash, itch appeared in the same dermatomal distribution involving the left pinna and cheek. The itch became severe, and the patient scratched her left pinna and cheek all day. The severity of the itch according to a 10-point numerical rating scale (NRS) was 8 during the day, with occasional exacerbations to 10 at night. The patient complained of sleeplessness, with severe itch that was evoked by the light touch of bedclothes. The patient was referred to our department 1 month after the first onset of the itch. On examination, blisters of the left pinna and cheek had already disappeared, leaving pigmentation only, and ulcers due to scratching were observed . There was a decrease in skin perception with touching, warmth, and cold as well as painful stimuli in her left pinna and cheek. Alloknesis (characterized by itch caused by innocuous mechanical stimulation) was identified in the same site. There was neither spontaneous pain nor allodynia after the rash had disappeared. Furthermore, the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale was 5 points for anxiety and 4 points for depression. Oral use of levocetirizine and diphenhydramine ointment did not relieve the itch. Pregabalin (25 mg) was taken once a day regularly after obtaining informed consent for the off-label use of pregabalin. Ten days later, the severity of the itch according to NRS had improved to 3. The patient was able to sleep without exacerbation of the itch at night. Her ulcers from scratching improved within 1 month of treatment with pregabalin. Given that 50 mg/day of pregabalin induced daytime sleepiness, the patient was maintained at 25 mg/day. One month after initiating pregabalin, the severity of the itch according to NRS had improved to 1, only slight pigmentation due to the herpes zoster remained, and no ulcers were observed. The patient was maintained at 25 mg/day of pregabalin and eventually returned to her usual life with slight concern for the itch.