A 73-year-old woman underwent AVR for aortic stenosis. Preoperative coronary angiography (CAG) results showed a SCA originating from the left coronary sinus (Lipton’s classification LII-B) without any stenotic lesion . The operation was conducted under moderate hypothermia. After cross-clamping the ascending aorta, cardiac arrest was induced by infusing a cold blood cardioplegic solution through the coronary sinus. The cardioplegic solution was infused in the same manner every 30 min during the surgery. The aortic valve was tricuspid and degenerative; a single coronary ostium was observed in the left coronary sinus. The aortic annulus was tighter than expected when it was sized, thus it was difficult to implant the 21-mm Hancock II valve (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN). Therefore, during implantation of the prosthetic valve, unplanned Manouguian procedure was performed to enlarge the annulus. Subsequently, AVR was finished without further difficulties. We ensured that the coronary ostium was not blocked by a valve strut prior to closing the aortotomy. Thirty minutes after weaning cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), gross distension and reduced contractility of the right atrium and right ventricle were noticed, so CPB was resumed. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiography results showed the same finding and a newly developed tricuspid regurgitation; the left ventricular contractility was normal, and the prosthetic aortic valve functioned well. Presuming that the right ventricular dysfunction was due to issues with myocardial protection in the right coronary artery (RCA), we tried to wean CPB more slowly. After 2 more hours of unsuccessful CPB weaning, we implemented an extracorporeal membrane oxygenator (ECMO) via femoral cannulae to allow more time for myocardial recovery, and then CPB weaning was performed to complete the operation. The aortic cross-clamp time and total CPB time were 144 and 324 min, respectively.
Postoperatively, the serum creatine kinase-MB level increased to 82.2 ng/dL on postoperative day (POD) 1, but it decreased rapidly to normal levels by POD 3. Additionally, there were no signs of potential myocardial ischemia observed on electrocardiography examination. However, ECMO weaning was unsuccessful, and follow-up echocardiography findings showed newly developed ventricular dysfunction on the left side in addition to persistent right ventricular dysfunction. On POD 4, CAG was performed to make a differential diagnosis, and the findings showed total occlusion of the origin of the RCA branching off from the common coronary trunk, resulting in backflow through the collateral vessels; blood flow of the left coronary artery was normal . Percutaneous coronary intervention was attempted to recanalize the RCA, but the guide wire could not be passed due to the unusual angulation of the course of the RCA. Hence, we performed emergency bypass grafting from the ascending aorta to the proximal RCA by using a saphenous vein graft .
Postoperative follow-up echocardiography results indicated functional improvement in both ventricles, and the patient was weaned from the ECMO on POD 10. She was discharged on POD 70, and she is undergoing outpatient follow-up without complications for 12 months.