A 56-year-old man has been treated hypertension and diabetes mellitus for several years at a local physician. He had received annual medical check-up, and was detected to have low plasma potassium level with an elevated level of plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC)/ plasma renin activity (PRA) ratio of 940. Bilateral adrenal swelling was demonstrated by an abdominal computed tomography (CT). So, he was referred to our hospital for further examinations and treatment. He had no family history of endocrine diseases. He was 168 cm tall and weighed 72 kg (body mass index: 25.4 kg/m2). He did not show any physical signs suggesting of Cushing’s syndrome, such as central obesity, skin atrophy, buffalo hump, red striae of skin or moon face. His blood pressure was managed to 134/77 mmHg with anti-hypertensive drugs, including doxazosin (4 mg) and nicardipine (40 mg). Laboratory examination showed a low plasma potassium level, a normal LDL-cholesterol level, and a normal fasting glucose level. Serum levels of cortisol and renin activity were within the normal range. Plasma ACTH level was slightly low, whereas serum level of aldosterone was high. In urinary extraction, cortisol was slightly high, and aldosterone was high.
His serum cortisol levels had no diurnal rhythm, and plasma ACTH level was suppressed throughout the day. Tests for endocrine functions showed unsuppressed cortisol levels by dexamethasone suppression test (DST), hypo-responses of ACTH and cortisol to corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) stimulation, and hyper-responses of cortisol and aldosterone to ACTH stimulation . These data were consistent with subclinical Cushing’s syndrome. On the other hand, stimulation with captopril and furosemide plus upright posture showed suppressed level of PRA .
These data were consistent with PA. Abdominal CT revealed bilateral nodular masses , and 131I–Adsterol scintigraphy showed increased uptake of radioactivity at bilateral adrenal glands .
We performed a selective adrenal venous sampling (AVS) to confirm the lateralization of the lesion of excess aldosterone secretion. After ACTH stimulation, the PAC in the left adrenal vein was 97,600 pg/ml (range of diagnosis for laterality; greater than 14,000 pg/ml) the lateralized ratio of the left side to right side was 10.1 (>2.6), and the contralateral ratio was 0.4 (<1.0) . These results indicated that left adrenal gland was responsible for aldosterone hypersecretion . A laparoscopic left adrenalectomy was conducted in accordance to the diagnosis of AIMAH associated with aldosterone producing adenoma of the left adrenal gland. He was doing well after surgery, and left the hospital for six days. His blood pressure was 113/71 mmHg with reduced dose of doxazosin (2 mg) and nicardipine (40 mg). Five months after the surgery, serum cortisol, aldosterone, and plasma ACTH concentration were found to be within the normal range, 10.7 mg/dl, 101 pg/ml, and 11.2 pg/ml, respectively. No enlargement of the contralateral right adrenal gland was demonstrated.
Macroscopically, the left adrenal gland was 3.8 × 6.7 cm in size, 30 g in weight, and comprised various sizes of yellow nodules . Histological findings revealed multiple capsulated macro-nodules that were composed of large clear cells stained with 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD3β2; 1:3000 dilution; M. Doi et al. J Clin Endocrinol Metab, 2014, 99(2), Kyoto, Japan) and small compact cells stained with 17β-hydroxylase (CYP17; 1:500 dilution; BEX, Tokyo, Japan), consisted with a diagnosis of AIMAH . Among non-nodular adrenal cortex, zona glomerulosa cell clusters, positive immunostaining for aldosterone synthase (CYP11β2; 1:500 dilution; C. Gomez-Sanchez et al. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014, 383(0), University of Missisippi Medical Center, Birmingham, AL, USA), were identified by the immunostaining .