A 45-year-old woman, was admitted to Nimes University Hospital (France) for a cough and sputum lasting for three weeks with an unfavourable outcome despite prescription of antibiotics (cefixime then pristinamycin). She had a medical history of smoking and systemic lupus diagnosed in 1991 with moderately reduced glomerular filtration rate (57 ml/min/1.73m2), stroke and right nephrectomy in 2011. Her usual treatment included hydroxychloroquine, clopidogrel and atorvastatine.
At admission, she presented dyspnoea, crackles of the right lung field and normal temperature. The white blood cell count was 19 × 103 cells/μL and C reactive protein was high at 144 mg/L. Chest X-ray showed a large pulmonary cavity of the right lower lobe and computed tomography (CT-scan) showed four large cavities and nodules of the right lower lobe . Blood cultures remained negative. A fibroscopy with broncho-alveolar lavage (BAL) showed local inflammation with sputum. Piperacillin/tazobactam plus amikacin was administered as empirical treatment. The BAL culture was positive with more than 104 CFU/mL of Gram negative bacilli.
MALDI-TOF (Matrix Assisted Laser Desorption Ionisation/Time Of Flight) analysis (Vitek MS, bioMérieux) identified A. calcoaceticus-baumannii complex (99%). Antimicrobial susceptibility was tested by disc diffusion in accordance with EUCAST (European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing) recommendations (version 5.0, 2015; ). The isolate was susceptible to ticarcillin, piperacillin, third and fourth generation cephalosporins, imipenem, ciprofloxacin and amikacin. Cultures for mycobacteria, Nocardia spp., Aspergillus spp. and Cryptococcus spp. were negative. Bronchial biopsy was normal.
Cavitary community-acquired pneumonia due to A. calcoaceticus-baumannii complex was considered. The antimicrobial treatment was changed to cefepime after seven days of piperacillin/tazobactam and two days amikacin. After twelve days of antimicrobial treatment (including five days cefepime) the CT-scan showed persistent excavated lung lesions. Size of the largest cavity was slightly reduced and the walls were thinner. The clinical outcome was favourable after twenty-one days of antimicrobial treatment (including fourteen days cefepime). The Positon Emission Tomography - Computed Tomography performed at the end of the antimicrobial therapy did not find hypermetabolic fixation. Six months later, CT-scan showed residual excavated lung lesions of the right lower lobe. The bronchoscopy with biopsies was normal and the BAL cultures were negative.
As species included in A. calcoaceticus-baumannii complex are closely related, rpoB sequencing and multilocus sequence typing (MLST) were performed to characterize the taxonomic status of the strain and the clone involved in this case. The isolate was identified as A. pittii belonging to ST249.
To evaluate the virulence of the A. pittii strain, we conducted a Caenorhabditis elegans nematode killing assay, a virulence model well described to study Acinetobacter spp. virulence . The median time required to kill 50% of the Fer-15 C. elegans population (LT50) was compared between A. pittii isolate and an A. baumannii strain belonging to international clone II/ST2 isolated in our laboratory (NAB ST2). In vivo kinetics of killing of C. elegans infected by A. pittii and NAB ST2 were compared with the survival curve for worms fed on non-pathogenic E. coli (OP50) using a log-rank (Mantel-cox) test.
There was no significant difference between kinetics of killing of C. elegans infected by A. pittii ST249 and NAB ST2 compared with those fed on non-pathogenic E. coli OP50, showing a very low virulence potential for the two strains equivalent to the standard feeding strain E. coli OP50 for nematodes . The LT50 were 7 ± 0.3 days, 7 ± 0.2 days and 8 ± 0.2 days respectively for A. pittii ST249, NAB ST2 and E. coli OP50, (p > 0,05).
Given that biofilm formation is reported to favour bacterial colonization and persistence, biofilm-forming ability was investigated and kinetics of A. pittii ST249 and NAB ST2 were compared. The kinetics of the early phase of biofilm formation for A. pittii and NAB ST2 were studied using the BioFilm Ring Test® (BioFilm Control, Saint Beauzire, France) . A high BioFilm Index (BFI) value (>8) corresponds to high mobility of free beads under magnetic attraction (no biofilm), while a low value (≤2) corresponds to complete immobilisation of beads (strong biofilm) . BFI values between 2 and 8 indicate that biofilm formation is in progress. Three experiments with two repeats were performed per strain and per incubation time. Mean BFI were compared between each strain after 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 h, using two-way Anova test followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test. Statistics and graphs were prepared using the software package GraphPad Prism 6.0®.
There were no significant differences between the two strains at the very beginning of kinetics (BFI = 9.27 ± 0.27 for A. pittii and 8.63 ± 0.37 for NAB ST2 at 1 h of incubation, p > 0,05) . However, at the next time points, A. pittii ST249 showed a significantly slower biofilm formation than NAB ST2: BFI = 8.83 ± 0.59 vs 3.93 ± 0.27 respectively at 2 h (p < 0.0001), BFI = 6.3 ± 0.17 vs 1.87 ± 0.12 at 3 h (p < 0.0001) and BFI = 3.67 ± 0.41 vs 1.7 ± 0.06 after 4 h incubation (p < 0.01). A. pittii biofilm was constituted after 5 h of incubation (BFI = 1.77 ± 0.09).