A 60-year-old man visited another hospital because of left scrotal enlargement. The testis was swollen and stiff on palpation, and ultrasound demonstrated a mosaic echoic mass. Blood examination showed an elevated human chorionic gonadotropin concentration of 6418 mIU/mL (reference range, <0.5 mIU/mL), elevated alpha-fetoprotein concentration of 3534.7 ng/mL (reference range, 7–10 ng/mL), and normal lactate dehydrogenase concentration of 189 U/L (reference range, 106–211 U/L). Contrast-enhanced CT showed normally sized lymph nodes and a double IVC. Left high orchiectomy was performed, and the pathological diagnosis was non-seminoma pT2 (60% embryonal carcinoma, 20% yolk sac tumor, and 20% immature teratoma) with vascular invasion. The patient’s tumor markers did not normalize postoperatively, at which point he was referred to our hospital. Blood examination in our hospital showed a human chorionic gonadotropin concentration of 46.4 mIU/mL, alpha-fetoprotein concentration of 59.9 ng/mL, and lactate dehydrogenase concentration of 141 U/L.
CT performed 1.5 months after the initial CT examination revealed swollen lymph nodes in the para-aortic region (under the left renal hilum, at the bifurcation of the inferior mesenteric artery). The clinical diagnosis was left testicular cancer T2N1M0S2, Stage IIA according to the Japanese Urological Association; the prognosis was considered to be good according to the International Germ Cell Consensus Classification. After four courses of chemotherapy with etoposide and cisplatin, the tumor marker levels decreased to the reference range and the swollen lymph nodes decreased to a maximum diameter of 1.0 cm. Therefore, we planned to perform RPLND. Because of the double IVC, we used the preoperative CT images to create 3D images using SYNAPSE VINCENT® software (Fujifilm Medical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) . The 3D images clearly showed that the left iliac vein formed the left IVC, which ascended along the left side of the abdominal aorta and flowed into the left renal vein. No findings of an interiliac vein were identified. Residual lymph node masses were located under the left renal hilar region and at the bifurcation of the inferior mesenteric artery, and these lymph node masses were in contact with the left IVC. Because anomalous lymphatic drainage associated with the double IVC was highly suspected, we decided to extend the template of the dissection range to include the right side of the right IVC . Intraoperative examination revealed that the residual lymph node masses were in contact with the aorta and left IVC, as the 3D images indicated, and that severe adhesion with the surrounding tissues was absent . The operation time was 5 h 40 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 1112 mL. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged from our hospital on postoperative day 14. The surgical specimen included a teratoma component, and no recurrence was observed during 17 months of follow-up.