A 74-year-old right-handed Japanese man was admitted to another hospital, due to the acute onset of cognitive impairment and psychosis, accompanied by headache and pyrexia. He was treated promptly with intravenous acyclovir. Due to the deterioration of his cognitive function and mental status, he was transferred to our hospital 7 days after the onset of his symptoms. He had normal development and growth before coming of age. His past medical history included hypertension, dyslipidemia, angina pectoris, and chronic renal failure. He had an unremarkable family history, including a lack of neuromuscular diseases, encephalitis, and mitochondrial disease.
At admission, his height was 161.8 cm and weight was 52.6 kg. On physical examination, his body temperature was 38.0 degrees Celsius. A chest auscultation revealed normal respiratory sound and normal heart rate with no murmur. Neurological examination showed mild disturbance of consciousness: GCS 14 (E4 V4 M6), attention disorder, disorientation, psychosis that included abnormal behavior and talkativeness, and left unilateral spatial neglect. On the first day of hospitalization, he presented with no muscle weakness. Ophthalmological examination revealed no abnormal findings in bilateral fundus and oculomotor control. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed high-intensity lesions in the right parieto-temporal area on fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images and diffusion weighted images (DWI) . On the lesions, the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) image demonstrated hypo-intensity in the cortical area and high-intensity in the subcortical area . A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sample included 26 white cells/mm3, 70 mg/dL of total protein, and 62 mg/dL of glucose (100 mg/dL of serum glucose). Electroencephalography revealed periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges (PLEDs), which manifested as high-amplitude, periodic, sharp, transient waves occurring every 1.0–1.5 s over the right temporo-occipital region . We initially diagnosed the patient with acute encephalitis with an infectious (e.g. herpes simplex virus encephalitis; HSVE) or autoimmune origin and continued treatment with acyclovir, while adding intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy. On hospital day 4, we discontinued acyclovir due to the receipt of negative real-time PCR results for herpes simplex virus DNA in the CSF. Moreover, autoimmune encephalitis associated with antibodies against neuronal surface antigens (e.g. anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor antibodies) was adequately excluded due to the negative results of autoantibody screening of the CSF with an in-house tissue-based assay using rat brain sections. Moreover, onconeural antibodies including Hu, Yo, Ri, CV2, Ma, amphiphysin, PCA-2, Tr, SOX1, titin, and recoverin all tested negative using line blot assay (EUROIMMUN).
The patient also developed mild muscular weakness in the left upper and lower extremities after the admission, as evaluated using the Medical Research Council (MRC) Scale, with a score of 3/5. His mental status deteriorated with increasing confusion and aggressive behavior and, therefore, we started a low-dose of continuous intravenous midazolam to sedate the patient. The cortical and subcortical lesions seen on DWI and FLAIR were seen to have progressed to the occipital area on the follow-up MRI. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) also revealed an elevated and inverted lactate peak with a normal N-acetyl-aspartate level and 123I-IMP single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) revealed increased uptake in the lesions that were involved on MRI . Repeated CSF analyses clarified the elevated level of lactate. These ancillary test results facilitated the possible diagnosis of MELAS, even though the episode was the first neurological event in the patient’s life. With the diagnosis of suspected MELAS, the oral coenzyme Q10 (90 mg/day), L-arginine hydrochloride (7.5 g/day), and vitamin B1 (225 mg/day) were administrated as additional therapies. On day 12, a muscle biopsy of the left biceps brachii was performed for the histopathological diagnosis and analyses of the mitochondrial genetic mutation. Modified Gomori-Trichrome staining of the specimens revealed some ragged-red fibers and analyses of the mitochondrial gene revealed an mtDNA 14453G → A point mutation ; this was accompanied by the mtDNA189A → G and 16129G → A point mutations, which were located in the D-loop region of the mtDNA.
With continued treatment, the patient’s disturbed consciousness and mental state gradually improved, but the mild left hemiparesis (MRC scale 4/5 for upper limbs and 4/5 for lower limbs) and cognitive impairment remained (modified Rankin Scale 2). On day 110, he was transferred to the rehabilitation hospital and his Barthel Index score was shown to have improved substantially (from a score of 10 to 80) after intensive rehabilitation. A summary of the clinical course of this patient is shown in Additional Fig. .