A 38-year-old female from Guangdong province in China was admitted to Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University in June 2016. At the age of 30, she developed progressive poor gait balance so that she frequently fell down when walking. At that time, she went to a local hospital for treatment, but diagnosis was not established. She was transferred to the Second Hospital Affiliated to Guangzhou Medical Hospital for hospitalization on December in 2010, where she was clinically diagnosed as cerebellar atrophy, Type 2 Diabetes and hyperlipemia. However, the treatments prescribed did not prevent disease worsening. In 2015, she presented a slowly progressing retardation. Within the year 2016, she began to suffer from bad-response, psychiatric manifestations, bilateral hearing loss and intermittent convulsion in her upper limb during sleeping, especially the right upper limb. With such complex symptoms, she was referred to our hospital. Her parents were not consanguinity, and no neurological disorders were found in her family members except herself.
Physical examination showed that she had mild mental retardation, apathy and spoke few words. Cranial nerves were normal except for symmetric bilateral sensory hearing loss. She did not cooperate with the neurological examination and sensibility could not be tested. Her muscle strength of bilateral upper limbs was normal but was decreased in lower limbs. Muscle tone was normal, but her right upper limb had abnormal involuntary movement. The patient had no pyramidal signs. Cerebellar function examination showed mild abnormalities on finger- to- nose, heel- to-knee and rapidly alternating pronation and supination of hands. Romberg test was negative.
Electrocardiogram investigation demonstrated sinus bradycardia (44/min on average). Nerve conduction studies revealed significant deceleration of motor conduction velocity in the right peroneal nerve (25.9 m/s), right median nerve (38.4 m/s), left ulnar nerve (45.5 m/s), right ulnar nerve (35.6 m/s) and the prolongation of F wave latency. The sensory nerve action potential could not be evoked in the bilateral peroneal nerve, sural nerve, and left median ulnar nerves. Electroencephalogram demonstrated mild to moderate abnormality and showed basic rhythms as 7.2–10 Hz and 20–40 μV slow alpha activities with low amplitude and irregular wave. Few 14–25 Hz and 20–30 μV beta waves sporadically emerged and more 4–7 Hz and 20–40 μV theta waves presented sporadically or in short-term in each lead. Visual evoked potential showed the extending of bilateral latency of P100 (Left = 101.1 mS, right = 107.0 mS) and decreased amplitude (Left = 3.24 μV, right = 1.30 μV). Brainstem auditory evoked potential showed bilateral disappearance of III-I, V-I and V-III IPL. Brain MRI revealed diffuse cerebral and cerebellar atrophy .
Exome sequencing (as published) performed in AmCare Genomics Lab revealed a novel heterozygous missense variant, c 1618 T > A (p. Y540N), in exon 20 of the DNMT1 .