Seventeen-year-old woman, nulligravida, presented with a complaint of abdominal pain and was admitted due to infectious colitis. Ultrasonography incidentally revealed a multiseptated cystic mass in the pelvis. Family history and past medical history were unremarkable, and her menstrual cycle was regular. Blood cell counts and blood biochemistry were normal. Serum levels of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19–9) were all within normal limits, while cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) was elevated at 76.3 U/mL (normal range 0–35.0). Levels of serum hormones including estradiol (76.3 ng/ml; normal range, 22–144 ng/ml), luteinizing hormone (LH; 4.7mIU) /ml and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH; 2.9 mIU/ml) were normal.
Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 141 × 96 × 127-mm well-demarcated multilocular cystic mass with irregularly thickened septa and solid components originating in the left adnexa. On T2WI, the signal intensities of the cystic components had the same SI as water, and those of the irregularly thickened septa and solid components had intermediate SI, higher than the SI of uterine myometrium . On T1WI, the septa and solid components had slight higher SI than uterine myometrium and showed early strong enhancement on contrast-enhanced T1WI and slight hyperintensity on DWI . PET-CT showed mild FDG uptake in solid components of the tumor (SUV: 2.11) .
The preoperative imaging diagnosis was SST or granulosa cell tumor, and it was not likely to be associated with a malignant ovarian tumor because of its low FDG uptake.
The patient underwent left oophorectomy and omentectomy. The cystic mass originated in the left ovary and measured 15 cm in diameter. Grossly, some thickened septa were observed in the mass but there were no obvious solid components. The cysts contained clear, straw-colored fluid.
Histological examination revealed that the mass consisted of hypercellular areas with prominent vascular networks separated by hypocellular areas that corresponded to collagenous and edematous areas, or a so-called “pseudolobular appearance”. Coarse collagenous fibers surrounding individual cells formed collagen bundles between cells, leading to heterogeneous cell density even in cellular areas . The hypercellular areas were composed of a dual cell population of collagen-producing bland spindled cells and rounded epithelioid cells. Prominent vascular networks with a hemangiopericytomatous pattern were observed . Immunohistochemically, tumor cells were positive for α–inhibin. Thus, the final histological diagnosis was SST of the ovary.
We searched the PubMed database for previous cases published in English from 1966 to September 2017 with the terms of “sclerosing stromal tumor”, “ovary” and “imaging”.
The results showed only one report describing PET findings for SST and three reports describing imaging findings on DWI for SST, including the above-mentioned report describing PET findings. Imaging findings on PET and DWI are summarized in Table .
According to one report describing PET findings of SST, the tumor showed intense FDG uptake (SUV max: 7.0). Although SST tended to show high SI on DWI, the exact degree of high SI varied between cases.