Our patient is a 32-year old white female patient who underwent surgery for multinodular goiter in 2006. During surgery, a papillary thyroid carcinoma had been detected (final histology: pT2, pN0, R0). Therefore, extensive neck dissection with total thyroidectomy was necessary leading to removal of all four parathyroid glands. Severe chronic postsurgical hypoparathyroidism developed rapidly. Despite optimal medical treatment with high doses of oral calcium (3 g/day), cholecalciferol (7000 IU/day) and calcitriol (2.0–3.75 μg/day) her calcium level remained low (6.25 mg/dl; normal 8.6–10.6 mg/dl) causing intolerable clinical hypocalcemic symptoms including tetany and paresthesias. Moreover, the patient frequently required hospitalization for i.v. calcium administration. Five years after thyroid surgery additional hormonal replacement therapy with parathyroid hormone PTH (1–84) was started (subcutaneous injection: 100 μg/day). However, the patient’s symptoms improved transiently for only three months. Altogether the quality of life was considered very low. Thus, allotransplantation of parathyroid glands for (definitive) treatment of persistent symptomatic and refractory hypocalcemia seemed an attractive therapeutic option. Despite of the potential risks associated with lifelong immunosuppressive therapy it was the distinct will of the patient to undergo the allotransplantation procedure. The patient’s 31-year old healthy brother expressed interest to be evaluated as a potential donor. He was ABO compatible to the recipient with no history of any relevant diseases and considered a suitable donor. Importantly, preoperative calcium and PTH-levels were within the normal range . By using contrast-enhanced ultrasonography (CEUS) , three parathyroid glands (one left superior, one left inferior, one right inferior) could exactly be localized preoperatively . Importantly, the Hospital Living-Donation Committee as well as the Hospital Ethics Committee approved the planned operative procedure. After removing the two left parathyroid glands from the donor through an unilateral horizontal anterior neck incision (length 2.5 cm; Fig. ) and histological confirmation by frozen section the parathyroid tissue was fragmented into approximately 20 small particles and implanted in the recipient’s left forearm brachioradialis muscle. Based on the the immunosuppressive therapy regimen for kidney transplantation, immunosuppression was initiated during surgery before implantation of parathyroid tissue by prednisolone i.v. (500 mg) and a perioperative single dose of basiliximab (20 mg). Additionally, oral application of tacrolimus was started six hours after surgery. Tacrolimus trough levels were maintained in the 10–12 ng/ml range. On day five after surgery, the patient received a second dose of basiliximab i.v. (20 mg). Prednisolone was reduced in a stepwise fashion to a maintenance dose of 2.5 mg per day after six months. Hormonal replacement therapy with PTH (1–84) was stopped after transplantation. Neither the donor nor the recipient experienced any surgical complications. The donor was discharged from our hospital on the second postoperative day and routine checks of calcium and PTH-levels showed normal values after surgery . In the postoperative course of the recipient increasing PTH levels were detectable and thereafter remained within the normal range with a serum total PTH of 21 pg/ml (normal range: 15–65 pg/ml) nearly three years after transplantation . Postoperative Casanova-Tests (venous blood samples for PTH measurement after inflation of an armlet on the graft-bearing arm) clearly verified the graft-bearing forearm as the source of increasing endogenous PTH levels after transplantation. Moreover, CEUS ten days posttransplant revealed vascularization of the allograft . The calcium levels of the recipient also returned into the normal range after parathyroid allotransplantation . Consequently the former replacement therapy (calcium and vitamin D) could be discontinued stepwise completely and was stopped on day 16 after the transplantation. Six months posttransplant another Casanova-Test verified the functioning graft (PTH-level before and after compression of the graft-bearing forearm: 41 pg/ml and 5.9 pg/ml respectively). The patient remained free of hypocalcemic symptoms to the present day after a follow-up of 35 months so far.