A 63-year-old woman presented with a mass in the left bulbar conjunctiva that had persisted for six months, accompanied by swelling and pain that had persisted for 3 d.
The mass had not significantly increased in size since its discovery. It was not taken seriously at the time and was not treated. However, swelling and pain appeared 3 d ago.
The patient had undergone aortic valve replacement surgery 8 years ago.
The personal history had no abnormalities. There was no immunodeficiency, particularly human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. The patient had no family history of lymphoid hematopoietic system tumors and hereditary diseases.
Eye examination revealed an 8 mm slightly elevated, sessile, pink-colored sub-epithelial mass described as a “salmon patch” in the conjunctival sac of the left eye , which could move with eyeball rotation, accompanied by congestion and edema of the surrounding conjunctiva.
No abnormalities were found in routine blood, biochemical tests and lactose dehydrogenase levels.
For in-depth diagnosis and treatment of this patient, positron emission tomography/computed tomography examination was performed after conjunctival mass resection, and revealed no other positive signs in the body.
Macroscopically, the surface of the specimen was smooth and the cross section was solid, grayish-white, and focally darkish red, and it measured 1.3 cm × 0.9 cm × 0.6 cm.
Microscopically, the tumor was well-demarcated in low-power fields and showed diffuse infiltration of monomorphic lymphoid cells in the stroma of the conjunctival subepithelium and focal involvement of the accessory lacrimal gland . Most of the superficial epithelium was exfoliated and absent. The neoplasm comprised uniformly moderate to large immunoblastic and plasmablastic cells. In tumor cells with an immunoblastic appearance, the cytoplasm was abundant and pale eosinophilic, basophilic, or amphophilic. The nuclei were large and round with vesicular chromatin; a clear nuclear membrane; and a single prominent, centrally located eosinophilic nucleolus . Plasmablastic cells were slightly smaller with basophilic or amphophilic cytoplasm and had a large, round, centrally or eccentrically placed nucleus with clumped chromatin and a conspicuous nucleolus or several small peripherally located nucleoli . Pleomorphic neoplastic giant cells with multinucleation or binucleation were observed focally . In addition, mitotic activity was brisk and easily observable, with up to 16 cells per high-power field. Furthermore, focal necrosis, abundant apoptotic debris, and hemorrhage were observed .
A polymerase chain reaction-based clonality study was performed for immunoglobulins (Ig) and TCR according to BIOMED-2 protocols. The results showed monoclonal IGH/IGK/IGL and TCRD rearrangements; however, monoclonal TCRB and TCRG rearrangements were not detected. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies did not reveal any BCL2, BCL6, and MYC rearrangements. Furthermore, in situ hybridization did not detect an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection in the lesions.
Given that the first IHC only showed CD79a patchily weak positive, an extensive IHC panel was performed using a streptavidin-peroxidase assay in batches to further confirm the nature of the neoplasm with appropriate reactive controls.
Immunophenotypically, the neoplastic cells were diffusely positive for ALK (cytoplasmic with perinuclear intensification) , CD10 , CD138 , Kappa, MUM1, BOB.1 , OCT-2 , CD4 , CD45, EMA , and Vimentin. Furthermore, they were focally weak positive for CD79a , CD38, IgA , CK (AE1/AE3), and CD99 (plasmalemma staining) and negative for CD20 , PAX5, Lambda, IgG, IgM, BCL6, CD30, CD21, CyclinD1, c-MYC, BCL2, CD3, CD5, CD43, CD8, TIA-1, CD56, CD117, MPO, TDT, S-100, HMB45, Desmin, INI-1, and BRG1. The proliferation index (Ki67) was approximately 70%. ALK showed a cytoplasmic distribution and a perinuclear pattern, reflecting Golgi localization.