A 62-year-old male patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and hypertension had his condition moderately controlled with metformin extended-release (ER) 500 mg daily, saxagliptin/metformin ER 5 mg/1000 mg daily, and pioglitazone 45 mg daily. In early 2014, his hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) level was 6.3% (45 mmol/L). It increased to 6.8% (51 mmol/L) in late October 2014. He was employed as a truck driver, which made optimizing diet and exercise regimens difficult. Therefore, empagliflozin 10 mg daily was added to his medication regimen.
On February 13, 2015, he presented to the clinic with 8 hours of painless gross hematuria, urinary frequency, and urgency. He complained of mild lower abdominal pain and denied dysuria, fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, and groin pain. On examination, he had mild suprapubic abdominal tenderness but appeared otherwise in good health. The patient was sent for urinalysis, complete blood count, renal panel, and an urgent genitourinary (GU) ultrasound (US). The US revealed EC, which demonstrated echogenic gas within the bladder wall as shown in .
On admission, he was conversant and resting comfortably. The patient denied any history of previous UTI, gross hematuria, urinary retention, or nephrolithiasis. He denied feeling ill the day before or the day of the presentation. There was no history of GU surgery or instrumentation. His cardiovascular and pulmonary examinations were unremarkable, with no extremity edema. The abdominal examination was unremarkable without costovertebral angle tenderness or gross abnormalities seen on his GU examination. Admission vital signs and laboratory data are displayed in .
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast noted intramural gas in the bladder. There was no urinary outlet obstruction or fistula formation noted on US or CT. Soon after, the patient complained of worsening bladder fullness. His postvoid residual (PVR) demonstrated volumes of >200 mL suspicious for inadequate emptying of the bladder. A Foley catheter was placed, and the patient was started on tamsulosin 0.4 mg daily. His diabetes was managed with insulin, and all oral agents were discontinued. He was started on intravenous ceftriaxone 1 g daily. His urine culture grew >100 000 colonies/mL of Klebsiella pneumonia, susceptible to fluoroquinolones and ceftriaxone. His blood cultures were negative, and ceftriaxone was discontinued, followed by initiation of oral ciprofloxacin 750 mg twice daily.
During his 2-day hospital course, the patient remained stable and did not develop a systemic illness. His admission was uneventful, apart from persistent elevated PVR volumes with an attempt to remove the Foley catheter on discharge. Except for empagliflozin, the patient restarted his previous hypoglycemic medications. He continued tamsulosin in addition to a Foley catheter. The Foley catheter was removed 6 days later after a successful voiding trial. He continued to have elevated but stable PVR volumes (>200 mL) on follow-up despite treatment with tamsulosin. His urinalysis was normalized, and near-total resolution of EC was noted on CT 20 days after discharge. After returning to work, he was lost to follow-up and did not undergo cystoscopy recommended by the urologist after discharge. He returned to the urology clinic 8 months later with complaints of malodorous urine. He was found to have an HbA1c level of 7.2% (55 mmol/L) and a body mass index of 32 kg/m2. He was started on ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily for 10 days with resolution of his symptoms but never returned to the urologist for follow-up evaluation of causes of his urinary retention.
In 2017, at follow-up in the endocrinology clinic, the patient reported that he retired and adopted a no-white food diet, gardening, and walking 2 to 3 mi, 4 times per week. In early 2020, he discontinued saxagliptin/metformin ER because of improving blood sugar levels, but he reported continued use of tamsulosin without reoccurrence of his urinary symptoms. In August 2020, his HbA1c level was 6.5% (48 mmol/L), and his body mass index was 26 kg/m2.