A 56-year-old Pacific Islander woman was admitted to our hospital after she presented with hemoptysis, which she quantified as about a handful. She was a lifelong nonsmoker with no history of obstructive or restrictive lung disease and no reported allergies. Her past medical history was significant for chronic myeloid leukemia on imatinib therapy and a previous case of mild hemoptysis 6 years prior to current presentation. At that time, the patient was diagnosed with ILPS; however, her symptoms resolved, and she did not pursue any treatment.
On arrival, the patient was hemodynamically stable (blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, heart rate 54 beats/minute) with mild anemia (hemoglobin 12.0 g/dl). Her physical examination was notable for coarse breath sounds throughout the lower left lung field without dullness to percussion to suggest hemothorax. Her cardiac, abdominal, and neurological examinations were without focal findings. Her airway was patent, and her oral mucosa was moist. Her laboratory work was notable only for the mild anemia noted above; her chemistry panel and coagulation profiles were within normal limits. Her body mass index was 20.8 kg/m2. A chest x-ray showed left lower lobe nodular opacities. Computed tomography of the chest with contrast demonstrated left lower lobe ILPS. The aberrant vessel was traced to its origin at the descending thoracic aorta, where it measured approximately 1 cm . Bronchoscopy was not pursued, because this could induce coughing and/or dislodge a clot. Furthermore, with radiographic evidence of the sequestration, another source of bleeding was not clinically suspected.
With PS, the usual treatment is resection of the sequestration. In those patients with the extralobar subtype, this is completed by removal of only the sequestration. The intralobar type is managed by segmental resection or lobectomy . The patient was evaluated by a cardiothoracic surgeon, who noted that surgical resection would likely require a thoracotomy and lobectomy instead of a less invasive video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS), given the size and location of the arterial blood supply to the sequestration. When we explained the risks and benefits to the patient, she declined surgery, given her ongoing treatment for chronic myeloid leukemia and her personal desire to avoid surgery.
After review of the case with a multidisciplinary team, the interventional radiology service offered embolization of the lesion as an alternative to surgery. Multiple 6–13-mm coils, including Nester Embolization Coils (Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA), AZUR® CX Peripheral Coil System (Terumo Interventional Systems, Somerset, NJ, USA), and hydrocoils, were used to embolize the sequestration. There was no considerable flow distal to the coils postembolization . The patient’s postprocedural course was notable for pleurisy that responded to oral analgesia. No signs or symptoms of infection occurred, and the patient did not require antibiotics. At her 9-month and 1-year follow-up visits, she reported no pulmonary symptoms, cough, or hemoptysis.