A 48-year old Indian male (BMI 23 kg/m2) was presented with a painful ulcer on his right leg. It started as a small swelling six months ago and subsequently developed into a painful ulcer in October 2017. His medications included warfarin 5 mg daily for atrial fibrillation (AF) and amlodipine 5 mg OD for hypertension for the last 26 months. He has a remarkable past history of right middle cerebral artery territory Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA) before 26 months. AF was identified during Holter loop monitoring as a part of TIA aetiological investigations. His AF was paroxysmal and no cause of AF was identified in spite of extensive diagnostic work up. His CHA2DS-VASc score for AF was indicative of prophylactic oral anticoagulant drug and was started on warfarin therapy.
At the time of presentation, his oral temperature was 100.6 F, pulse rate 100 per minute regular in rhythm and right arm blood pressure was 130/80 mm Hg. His cardiorespiratory and neurological examination was unremarkable. Examination of the right lower extremity revealed a tender 5x8 cm necrotic ulcer with serosanguinous discharge, surrounded by purpuric plaques. His hemogram was showing leucocytosis with neutrophilia, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were elevated. His renal function tests, liver function tests, metabolic profile, coagulation profile, bone metabolism work up including calcium phosphate product and thyroid functions were within normal limit . Further work up including anti-nuclear antibody, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody, antiphospholipid antibody, IgM anti-CCP, protein C, protein S and anti-thrombin 3 was in the normal range. X-RAY of the right leg revealed reticular vascular and superficial soft tissue calcifications. Electrocardiogram was showing normal sinus rhy-thm and a 2-D echocardiogram was unremarkable.
Dermatologist opine provisional diagnosis of panniculitis with secondary infection and skin biopsy after control of local skin infection was suggested. Skin punch biopsy was performed from the margin of the skin ulcer. Histopathology study of the biopsy revealed intravascular calcification involving small subcutaneous vascular channels with micro thrombi of capillaries, changes of panniculitis, necrosis of adipocytes and some of the adipocytes were filled with basophilic granules, suggestive of calciphylaxis. Aetiology of the lesion like end-stage renal disease, hyperparathyroidism, connective tissue diseases or any associated risk factors were unrevealed in spite of extensive diagnostic work up. We speculated warfarin or amlodipine as a cause of calciphylaxis in this case and Naranjo Algorithm (NA) scores for Adverse Drug Reaction (ADR) were calculated for both the drugs. NA for warfarin was 7, while for amlodipine was 1. Hence, warfarin adverse drug reaction was probable (NA- 5 to 8) cause. The drug was discontinued and it was replaced by rivaroxaban. He was discharged with appropriate wound care, analgesics and rivaroxaban. His ulcer healed within four months and there had been no recurrence noted during the one-year follow-up.