A 61-year-old male was admitted to the emergency department (ED) due to numbness and weakness of the lower limbs, which was his second hospital admission.
The patient reported a history of colchicine consumption for gout. He initially only took colchicine temporally for joint pain control or preventive purposes before drinking alcohol. He then started taking high doses of colchicine over the recent five years as his gout progressed. He reported discontinuously taking 30 mg monthly on average over the past five years. He also complained of diarrhea after taking colchicine. He was diagnosed with multiple gastric ulcers by gastroscopy and pathology, for which he received a subtotal gastrectomy approximately 6 mo ago.
The patient had hypertension for over 10 years.
He had a history of alcohol abuse.
Physical examination showed that the patient was afebrile, with no abnormal findings on heart and lung and abdominal examinations. However, multiple joint tenderness was present, consistent with gout. The patient’s muscle strength scores were 4 and 3 bilaterally in the upper and lower limbs, respectively.
After admission, we ordered a complete blood count (CBC), liver and kidney function tests, C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), tumor markers and other blood tests. Additionally, we performed an electromyogram, a positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan, and brain nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The CBC revealed the following: Leukocytes 2.72 × 109/L, neutrophils 1.75 × 109/L, hemoglobin 76 g/L, reticulocyte ratio 1.43%, indicating microcytic hypochromic anemia and leukopenia; carbohydrate antigen 724 (CA724) > 500 U/mL, which was highly increased; the ESR was 107 mm/h, which was also increased, for which we considered gout and infection as the most probable etiologic factors. Serum uric acid level was 449 µmol/L, which was also elevated. The patient’s serum ferritin, vitamin B12 and folic acid levels were all within the normal ranges. The patient’s potassium level was 3.2 mmol/L, calcium level was 2.1 mmol/L, and phosphate level was 0.71 mmol/L, suggesting hypokalemia, hypocalcemia and hypophosphatemia. After consulting a neurologist, we considered Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) as a preliminary diagnosis. In order to reach a precise diagnosis, we performed a lumbar puncture, bone marrow puncture and biopsy. The biopsy results demonstrated myelodysplasia. No abnormalities were detected in the cerebrospinal fluid, which excluded GBS.
The PET-CT scan did not reveal any structural lesions such as malignant tumors, but showed an infection of the right inferior molar teeth. Brain MRI was also normal. The electromyogram delineated neurogenic damage of the upper and lower limbs.