A 27-year-old gentleman sustained an open Grade 3C Gustilo-Anderson fracture with the right floating knee that was initially treated with debridement and external fixator and advised amputation above knee in outside hospital and presented to us within 12 h of initial injury. On head to toe examination, no other musculoskeletal and organ injuries were present. On initial presentation, he was hypotensive (blood pressure – 90/70 mm of Hg) and was started on appropriate measures by emergency room team. All cases had no known medical comorbidities, non-smoker, non-alcoholic, and no drug addiction. On local examination of the right lower limb:
1. Right lower limb knee spanning external fixator present 2. Lacerated wound of size 20 cm ×10 cm extending from distal third of thigh to middle third of leg anteriorly. Wound contamination present 3. Both femoral condyle fractured fragments and proximal tibial fractured fragments exposed 4. Patella and lateral tibial condyle absent 5. Tendons and muscles were exposed 6. Dorsalis pedis artery pulsation – feeble 7. Posterior tibial artery pulsation – absent 8. Sensations over right lower limb were intact 9. Active dorsiflexion and plantar flexion present.
Examination of neurovascular functions-
Vascular–
Anterior tibial artery pulsation feeble.
Posterior tibial artery pulsation was not felt.
Local orthopedics severity were assessed using-
1. Gustilo-Anderson’s classification 2. Modified Fraser’s classification .
Vascular surgeon opinion was sought and advised to do right lower limb computed tomography (CT) angiogram. CT study report shows posterior tibial vessel under spasm and anterior tibial sluggish blood flow. Vascular surgeon advised conservative treatment. According to modified Fraser classification, it was classified under type II C. The MESS was used to assist in the decision of injuries that also had a vascular component and the total score was found to be 7 (≥7 should be consider for amputation). In view of partial vascular injury (anterior tibial artery pulsation feeble and posterior tibial artery pulsation were not felt), GHOISS was also used which was found to be in borderline range of 16 score . Scoring systems provided limited diagnostic benefit. Thus, we had an extensive discussion with the patient and his relatives, to point out that any attempt at limb salvage might result to major complications and probably a delayed amputation. In addition, even with salvage severe disability was expected. After discussing and taking consent from patient and his relative, he was taken up for combined procedure under orthopedic and plastic surgery team after obtaining anesthetic fitness. He underwent right leg and knee wound debridement and reconstruction with Ilizarov fixator and soft-tissue repair. Intraoperatively, patella and lateral tibial condyle was found to be absent (, ). Patella tendon was sutured to quadriceps tendon. Postoperatively, he was shifted to intensive care unit in view of raised serum myoglobin and CPK levels for which cardiology opinion were sought. After 1 week, the patient underwent right leg Ilizarov realignment and wound debridement with medial gastrocnemius flap + split skin grafting + vacuum-assisted closure . Intraoperative period was uneventful. Intraoperatively, Gram, fungal, and acid-fast bacilli stain and culture were sent and found to be negative for organism growth. Postoperatively, regular wound inspection and dressing done which was found to be satisfactory clean (, ). Blood culture and urine culture show no growth. He was afebrile (initially, he was hypotension which was controlled during the course of treatment) and was hemodynamically stable. Gustilo and Anderson’s classification was used to highlight the contamination and the soft-tissue injuries as a risk factor in the fracture evolution. It was classified as Grade 3c (as vascular injury was present). He was started on rehabilitative care. Range of motion of knee was found to be 0–40 degree of flexion with some instability . Strict non-weight-bearing walking with walker support was encouraged. Quadriceps and hamstring muscle strengthening exercise was started. The treatment was deemed successful and the patient was discharged. Regular X-ray radiography was taken to assess fracture union (, , -). Fracture union for distal femur was seen at 8 months and for tibia it was 12 months. He was followed up for the period of 2 years and he is doing symptomatically better.
All patients were followed up for the period of 2 years. Average range of motion for all patients was 0–40 degree with some instability and some extension lag.