A 42-year-old Caucasian female came to the hospital with complaints of shortness of breath and nonradiating retrosternal chest pain that persisted for 1 week, associated with 2 days of high spiking fever. The patient had migratory polyarthritis and polymorphic maculopapular rash on the back and lower extremities for 4 months. She had been treated briefly with glucocorticosteroids and pain medication, with minimal response. The patient has no known drug allergies, a negative past medical history, and no history of heavy alcohol use, herbal treatments, insect bites, or animal contact.
Physical examination revealed a high fever (38.6°C), pulse rate (106/min), respiration rate (38/min), and blood pressure (117/52 mm Hg). There were no signs of jaundice, lymphadenopathy, or goiter. Auscultation of the lungs revealed decreased chest expansion, but no rales. Auscultation of the heart was normal. Muscle tenderness was detected in the arms and legs. Skin exam showed a purplish polymorphic eruption over the lower legs bilaterally, including the feet. Similar lesions that did not blanch under pressure and were nonpruritic were noted on lower back and upper thigh.
Computed tomography scan of the chest ruled out pulmonary embolism and revealed a pericardial effusion. Echocardiography confirmed moderate effusion and was negative for endocarditis. Blood sample analysis revealed high levels of CRP (42.9 mg/dL, normal: 0–0.3), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (113 mm/h normal: 2–20), white blood cell count (21,000 cells per µL, >95% neutrophils and 28 bands), hemoglobin (9.3 g/dL, normal: 10.1–14.5 g/dL), and platelet count (212 ×109 L−1, normal: 180–427 ×109 L−1). Urinalysis showed hematuria with white blood cells and bacteria. Urine and multiple blood cultures were negative. Ferritin was significantly high at 29,349 ng/mL (normal: 10–291 ng/mL). Renal function and liver enzymes were both within normal limits.
Serology tests were positive for rheumatoid factor 146 IU (normal: 0–19 IU) and cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody 20 (normal: 0–19 IU). The patient also had a total complement of >10,000, with normal C3 and C4 levels. Antistreptolysin O was elevated, 179 IU/mL (normal: 0–120 IU/mL). Tests were negative for antinuclear antibodies, anti-DNA antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, and anti-Jo-1 antibodies. There was no marker of recent infection, including hepatitis B antigen, hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus antibodies, histoplasma antigen, Epstein–Barr virus.
On admission, the patient was thought to be septic, with the source of infection either the urinary tract or endocarditis. Bacterial endocarditis was ruled out after echocardiogram and blood cultures. The patient was started empirically on antibiotics for presumed sepsis and disseminated intravascular coagulation. A few days later, the patient’s symptoms persisted. An infectious disease consultant did not think that the patient had an active infection. The patient’s rash was thought to be due to an autoimmune process. Leukocytosis and polymorphic exanthemous rash persisted. A dermatologist biopsied the rash. According to a dermatopathologist, the findings were consistent with urticarial vasculitis. A quotidian fever persisted for 3 days and then resolved when naproxen therapy was started. The patient’s arthralgias also responded well to naproxen. Shortness of breath and chest pain resulting from pericarditis resolved after the pericardial effusion was drained and the patient was started on dapsone.
A combination of naproxen, dapsone, and prednisolone therapy resulted in significant improvement of the patient’s arthralgias and rash. The inflammatory markers decreased gradually. On day 18 of hospitalization, the patient was discharged home after resolution of her acute symptoms and improvement of her rash and joint pain. Discharge diagnoses included rheumatoid arthritis and rheumatic fever. Adult onset Still’s disease was considered in the differential diagnosis, but was considered less likely as the patient failed to fulfil the Yamaguchi criteria (the patient’s documented fever was present for less than a week, the rash was not typical for adult onset Still’s disease, there was no sore throat, and rheumatoid factor was positive).
Soon after discharge from our facility, the patient was admitted to another hospital where she was diagnosed as having adult onset Still’s disease based on a different interpretation of her rash. She is currently doing well on on adalimumab, methotrexate, and prednisone for rheumatoid arthritis and secondary prophylaxis with monthly benzathine penicillin for rheumatic fever with carditis, after taking into consideration that she developed pericarditis that can be defined as a form of carditis (pericarditis is a form of carditis). The University of Oklahoma College of Medicine ethics committee does not require ethical approval for case reports. Written informed patient consent was obtained.