An 89-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to our hospital because of general fatigue, nausea, muscle weakness of the lower limbs, and ophthalmoplegia that had appeared 2 months earlier and gradually worsened. She noticed diplopia at 1 year before this hospitalization. None of her family members had a history of renal or autoimmune disease. There was no past history of allergic diseases such as bronchial asthma. The patient had never smoked. She had been diagnosed with hypertension and treated with an angiotensin-receptor antagonist (losartan, 50 mg daily).
The physical examination identified a slight fever, anemic conjunctiva, eyelid ptosis, and muscle weakness of the lower limbs; her blood pressure was 135/67 mmHg. The laboratory examination revealed elevated serum levels of creatinine (1.91 mg/dL, 170 μmol/L) and C-reactive protein (8.12 mg/dL). A hemogram showed anemia (hemoglobin concentration, 9.2 g/dL), but her white blood cell count was in the normal range (5400 /μL). On urinalysis, occult blood and protein and cellular (granular and red blood cell) casts were detected. Her urinary protein excretion was 2.13 g/g creatinine. The serological examination revealed an elevated level of serum IgG (3494 mg/dL), but serum complement levels were within normal limits: the serum C3 level was 95.1 mg/dL, the serum C4 level was 21.7 mg/dL, and the serum CH50 level was 44.7 U/mL. Positivity for MPO-ANCA (176 U/mL) and PR3-ANCA (125 U/mL) was observed, but rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody, cryoglobulin, and monoclonal immunoglobulin were not detected.
We also assayed for various types of ANCA in the patient’s serum. A sample was collected in a separator tube before the patient’s initial treatment and was separated at 1000 g for 15 min. The diluted serum sample was measured by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) using a Wieslab® ANCA panel kit (EuroDiagnostica, Malmo, Sweden), in duplicate. The ELISA plate was read on a microplate reader (Sunrise Remote®: Tecan Japan, Kanagawa, Japan) set at 405 nm wavelength. The patient showed positivity for azurocidin-ANCA (optical density [OD] ratio: 4.05, normal: < 3.0), but not bactericidal/permeability increasing protein (BPI)-ANCA (OD ratio: 1.61, normal: < 3.0), cathepsin G-ANCA (OD ratio: 1.20, normal: < 3.0), elastase-ANCA (OD ratio: 0.99, normal: < 3.0), lactoferrin-ANCA (OD ratio: 2.77, normal: < 3.0) or lysozyme-ANCA (OD ratio: 1.47, normal: < 3.0) [see Additional file ].
The patient’s symptoms and inflammatory findings did not improve with antibiotic treatment (ceftriaxone, 2 g daily for 6 days), and her serum creatinine level deteriorated to 2.42 mg/dL . On abdominal ultrasound examination, her kidney size was relative small (right, 78 mm × 40 mm; left, 87 mm × 46 mm). We diagnosed rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
Light microscopic findings of a renal biopsy sample showed cellular crescents in 50% of 14 obtained glomeruli, and a fibrocellular crescent was revealed in one of those glomeruli. Mononuclear inflammatory cell infiltration to the interstitium was widely observed. Vasculitis was not observed, but intimal thickening of the interlobular arterial walls was seen . On immunofluorescence findings, immunoglobulins and complement components were not detected. We therefore diagnosed microscopic polyangiitis with cellular-type renal involvement.
Chest X-rays showed a wide mediastinum, and chest computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 40-mm-sized lobulated tumor in the anterior mediastinum . On additional serological examination, anti-acetylcholine-receptor antibody was present (0.9 nmol/L), but anti-muscle specific kinase (MuSK) antibody was not detected. We thus additionally diagnosed myasthenia gravis with thymoma.
After the renal biopsy, the patient was treated with 500 mg/day of methylprednisolone for three consecutive days, followed by 30 mg/day (0.8 mg/kg) of oral prednisolone. Rituximab 500 mg (375 mg/m2) was intravenously administered, but it was discontinued after only one administration because of an adverse effect (atrial fibrillation). Three months after the remission induction therapy, the patient’s MPO-ANCA was decreased to 25.3 U/mL, PR3-ANCA was decreased to 15.2 U/mL, and elevated serum IgG level was normalized to 1297 mg/dL. Her symptoms had improved; at 2 months after the initiation of treatment, anti-acetylcholine-receptor antibody became negative and the size of her thymoma had decreased to approx. 20 mm . However, hemodialysis was initiated at 1 month after this treatment because the patient’s renal function was deteriorated. Her renal function did not unfortunately recovered, and she was moved to another hospital 3 months after the therapy because she needed rehabilitation for her muscle weakness due to disuse syndrome.