A 41-year-old woman presented to our department in January 2021 with urinary frequency and right suprapubic pain. Two weeks before her first visit, she was diagnosed with cystitis and outpatient antibiotic therapy was performed with levofloxacin(500 mg/day) for several days by her family doctor. She had undergone TVT insertion for severe SUI 19 years prior under proper counseling and consent, but her compliance was so poor that she quit coming soon after the initial TVT insertion. Her body mass index was 28.3. Her medical history was significant for schizophrenia and type 2 diabetes mellitus. There was no history of other surgery or pelvic radiation. Her medication included glimepiride, sitagliptin phosphate hydrate, pioglitazone hydrochloride, metformin hydrochloride, urapidil, biperiden hydrochloride, paroxetine hydrochloride hydrate, risperidone, etizolam, brotizolam, and carbamazepine. Physical examination revealed induration and tenderness of the right suprapubic area but no fever. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic area in the same region; her postvoid residual urine volume was 240 mL , indicating the presence of asymptomatic dysuria. Urinalysis revealed pyuria (urinary white blood cell count: 30–49/HPF). Her urine culture was negative. Cystoscopy, transvaginal ultrasonography, and vaginal examination revealed no evidence of a urethrovaginal fistula or tape erosion into the bladder or vagina.
We initiated outpatient antibiotic therapy with levofloxacin (500 mg/day), but the patient returned the following day with a fever and worsening pain. The right suprapubic area was red, hot, and indurated. Laboratory examination showed increased levels of C-reactive protein (14.15 mg/dL) and high white blood cell count (14.2 × 109/L); hemoglobin A1c and blood glucose levels were normal. Contrast-enhanced CT showed low-density areas with ring enhancement, suggestive of abscess, in the right inguinal region, abdominal wall, lateral bladder cavity, and perivaginal area; these areas corresponded to the route of the TVT implant . She was admitted to the hospital for incision and drainage, and her antibiotic was changed to meropenem (2.0 mg/day, 6 days). Urine and blood cultures from admission were negative. When the abscess culture revealed Streptococcus anginosus, we de-escalated antibiotic therapy to ampicillin/sulbactam (6.0 g/day, 12 days).
Although her fever and tenderness improved, the redness and swelling did not completely resolve . On the 10th day after admission, we performed surgical abscess drainage and removed the TVT implant. We reached the suburethral portion of the tape through a vaginal approach, cut the tape in the middle, and detached it from the urethra with blunt dissection technique. We also made a midline vertical incision to expand the retropubic space. We successfully located both ends of the tape; the abscess spread all around the tape, and both sides of the tape were too close to the bladder wall even though the CT showed the abscess more severely on the right side. We excised granulation tissue, drained the abscesses noted on CT, and removed the implant from the vagina . Intraoperative cystoscopy showed a defect in the muscular layer of the left bladder sidewall and muscular layer repair was performed. At last, we placed pelvic and subcutaneous drainage tubes . However, there was no evidence of tape erosion or urethral fistula.
The drainage tubes were removed on the fifth and sixth postoperative days, and the patient was discharged from the hospital 1 week after surgery, after switching to amoxicillin hydrate (750 mg/day, 6 days). The postvoid residual volume on the day of discharge was normal. The patient's postoperative course has been uneventful, without recurrence of infection. The surgical incisions are well-healed , and her incontinence has not returned.