A 52-year-old male patient was referred to our institution with a diagnosis of a methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus native aortic valve endocarditis. He had a history of a recent posterior ischemic stroke with hemorrhagic transformation 2 weeks earlier with visual impairment, no motor deficit, and an initial Glasgow scale at 15/15. Upon admission he was in a fair general condition, tachycardic, febrile, without leukocytosis. A grade III diastolic murmur was detected.
Initial transthoracic echocardiogram showed a bicuspid aortic valve and the presence of a pedunculated vegetation which caused a severe aortic stenosis with moderate regurgitation. The left ventricle was mildly dilated with a preserved systolic function .
The patient was started on IV Daptomycin guided by blood cultures.
Due to valvular compromise, a surgical aortic valve replacement was considered, however the procedure was initially deferred given the evidence of recent CNS bleeding on admission MRI .
Six days after admission, he presented with new onset fever despite receiving adequate targeted antibiotic treatment, new blood cultures and imaging studies were obtained. Brain angiogram showed no alterations. An abdominal CT revealed a large splenic abscess . After multidisciplinary consultation, valve surgery was further deferred aiming to achieve abdominal foci control. Given the radiological characteristics of the abscess, a high surgical risk was considered so a staged hybrid approach was decided. An initial percutaneous drainage of purulent fluid was performed aiming to reduce the size of the abscess and therefore reducing the chances of rupture and abdominal cavity contamination during a subsequent surgical intervention. The procedure was followed by a successful laparoscopic splenectomy three days later, finding an enlarged spleen with necrotic tissue and scarce purulent material. Cultures of the splenic abscess fluid were negative. After guaranteeing an adequate postoperative course, he was taken to a mechanical aortic valve replacement. Intraoperatively, a bicuspid aortic valve (fusion type with Noncoronary-right phenotype) was found with calcifications of the free edges and vegetations on the aortic side of the leaflets. An abscess of the aortic annulus which was extending from the left-right commissure towards the non-coronary-right commissure was found along with a small associated pseudo aneurysm at this level . After native valve removal and annulus debridement and decalcification, the abscess was drained. The annulus was sterilized with iodine-based solution and the small remaining cavity was sealed with the pledgeted sutures anchoring the prosthetic valve . He required a delayed sternal closure due to operative bleeding secondary to coagulopathy. During immediate postoperative care he required a pericardiocentesis due to cardiac tamponade and he received an implantation of a cardiac resynchronization therapy with a pacemaker (CRT-P) due postoperative grade III AV block. The rest of the postoperative course was uneventful. He was discharged with long term intravenous antibiotics. The patient has continued with strict follow-up, where he has shown no signs of relapse or complications after two-month follow-up. He received standard immunizations for post splenectomy patients which included pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccination along with seasonal influenza.