An 80-year-old man was found to have early gastric cancer during his yearly check-up by gastrointestinal endoscopy. He was 158 cm in height and weighed 62 kg. Gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a depressed lesion that was diagnosed as early gastric cancer by pathological examination of biopsy specimens. He underwent LADG with regional lymph node dissection (D1 including the nodes surrounding the origin of left gastric artery). A 12-mm trocar for the laparoscope was placed in the umbilicus. Pneumoperitoneum was then established with carbon dioxide and the intraperitoneal pressure was maintained at 10 mm Hg. Two more 12-mm trocars were inserted in the midclavicular line below the costal margin and 2 cm above the umbilicus on each of both flanks and were used for active surgical instruments. All trocars used were the non-bladed type. The specimen was removed through a small medial incision which was 55 mm in length placed after resection of the stomach, and then Roux-en-Y reconstruction (RY) was carried out . A tubular shaped drainage tube 10 mm in diameter was inserted and placed through the upper trocar site made on the right flank. Wound defect at the umbilical port site was sutured completely including the peritoneum with 0 absorbable suture and fascial incisions at all other trocar insertion sites were closed with 2-0 absorbable sutures. Surgical duration was 263 min, and the volume of blood loss was less than 50 mL with no blood transfusion.
Postoperatively, the patient complained of an acidic feeling in his stomach; however, there were no remarkable abnormalities on biochemical examination of serum. Radiological findings did not suggest bowel obstruction until 3 days postoperatively, although mild symptoms such as general malaise and vague abdominal pain were reported on day three. However, on day 4, the patient started to complain of upper abdominal pain and developed a high grade fever (38°C). Complete obstruction of the small bowel and leakage of contrast media were demonstrated by Gastrografin swallow and subsequent abdominal computed tomography (CT). CT also showed a mass lesion at the trocar insertion site on the upper left flank, suggesting herniation through the port site . Marked dilatation of the duodenum including the horizontal part and second portion was observed. A diagnosis of staple failure of the stump of the duodenum and port-site herniation of the small bowel was made, and exploratory laparotomy was carried out. A small medial incision that had been made at the initial surgery was extended downward to the umbilicus to open the peritoneal cavity. As we expected, the small bowel was incarcerated into the peritoneal defect in the abdominal wall created by the trocar placed in the left upper flank leading to complete obstruction of the bowel . Part of the jejunum 30 cm distal from the ligament of Treitz herniated around the fascial stitch, which still existed at the time of the re-exploration. The peritoneal cavity was contaminated with intestinal juice. Close examination after reduction of the incarcerated bowel did not demonstrate necrosis of the intestine, and thus, we decided not to resect this lesion. Leakage of intestinal juice through a pinhole fistula at the duodenal stump was also observed. Tube duodenostomy was performed with an omental patch used for closure of the fistula. The peritoneal defect was also closed. The postoperative course was fairly good without high output of the intestinal juice leakage or sepsis. The patient remained in the intensive care unit for 5 days after re-operation, and was then transferred to the general ward.