An 85-year-old man presented with masses in his neck and right groin. CT confirmed bulky lymphadenopathy in the neck (4.1 × 3.5 cm) and right inguinal area (5.6 × 3.7 cm) and demonstrated extensive smaller lymphadenopathy as well as five liver masses measuring from 3.5 to 4.6 cm. The patient was otherwise asymptomatic with no B-symptoms. Biopsy of the inguinal mass with an 18 gauge cutting needle produced cores of tissue the largest of which measured 17 × 2 mm and contained elements of CLL/SLL, FL and DLBCL. Shortly after the biopsy, the patient presented to the Emergency Department with an acute upper gastrointestinal bleed and Hb of 59 g/L. Endoscopic gastric biopsy showed DLBCL. After 6 cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone (R-CHOP) chemotherapy he had a dramatic response albeit with some residual lymphadenopathy. He therefore received another round of R-CHOP. Fifteen days later, he presented to the Emergency Department with dyspnea, fever and radiographic evidence of bilateral lung consolidation. His condition deteriorated rapidly despite aggressive antimicrobial and supportive therapy and he expired approximately 5 months after the original diagnosis.
The biopsy sample from the inguinal mass consisted of neoplastic lymphoid infiltrates with features of three distinct lymphoma types present in approximately equal proportions . The FL component was at one end of the fragment and consisted of closely spaced lymphoid follicle centers containing a heterogeneous mixture of cells amongst which large centroblasts were sufficiently numerous to justify designation as grade 3A. These follicles were separated by diffuse sheets of small, round lymphocytes with an appearance characteristic of CLL/SLL. An adjacent area in this tissue fragment consisted of pure CLL/SLL without the FL component. At the opposite end of the core, adjacent to the deposit of pure CLL/SLL and separated from it by a thin band of fibrosis, were sheets of large centroblasts associated with numerous mitotic figures, karyorrhectic debris and scattered tingible body macrophages presenting an appearance typical of centroblastic DLBCL. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) performed on serial sections demonstrated the expected immunophenotype for each lymphoma type . Specifically, all three lymphomas expressed CD20, CD79a and BCL2. The FL and DLBLC cells expressed BCL6 and CD10 but not CD5 or CD23. The CLL/SLL component expressed CD5 and CD23 but not BCL6 or CD10. And, the DLBCL, but not the other components, expressed Ki-67 and MYC in almost all neoplastic cells. These morphological and immunophenotypic findings unequivocally demonstrate the presence of all three lymphoma types in a single tissue fragment.
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) demonstrated the presence of an IGH-BCL2 fusion in both the DLBCL and FL components, but not the CLL/SLL component, whereas MYC was disrupted in the DLBCL, but not the FL, component . Considering these cytogenetics findings in the context of the revised 2017 WHO classification system, the DLBCL component should be designated “high-grade B-cell lymphoma with MYC and BCL2 rearrangements”.