A 74-year-old man with a history of type II diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and chronic coronary syndrome (previous PCI 10 years before) presented with unstable angina of 2 weeks duration. Resting electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ST-segment depression in inferior and lateral limb leads. On 2D echocardiography, the left ventricular ejection fraction was normal with inferolateral wall hypokinesia with no significant valvular disease. As the patient had frequent episodes of rest angina, he was taken up for upfront coronary angiography; which revealed a patent stent in left anterior descending coronary artery, severely diseased and calcified dominant RCA, and a severe lesion in the mid-portion of non-dominant left circumflex artery (LCX) (, Video 1). Being the dominant and large vessel, it was decided to treat RCA first followed by the LCX. As RCA was heavily calcified and very tortuous, we used a 7 French (F) Amplatz Left 1 (AL 1) guiding catheter through right femoral artery. It ensured good support during PCI and also enabled the use of bigger size rotablation burr, if required. Rotational atherectomy to RCA was performed using 1.25 mm burr followed by a 1.5 mm burr ( and ). After rotablation, the lesions in mid and proximal RCA were pre-dilated with a 2.5 mm non-compliant (NC) balloon at 16 atmospheres (atm) ( and ). Immediately after pre-dilation of proximal lesion, the patient developed a severe Ellis grade III perforation in the proximal RCA (, Video 2). The pre-dilatation balloon was re-inflated at 6 atm at the site of perforation to stop bleeding; meanwhile a 6F Judkin Right 4 (JR4) guiding catheter was inserted from the contralateral femoral artery access . Simultaneously two 16F patent peripheral venous cannulas were ensured in both upper limbs and significant pericardial effusion was ruled out using 2D echocardiography.
The first guiding catheter was withdrawn slightly and JR4 guide catheter was engaged in the RCA. A Fielder™ coronary wire was introduced into the vessel through JR4 guide catheter, after momentarily deflating the first balloon (Video 3). Another 3.0 mm semi-compliant (SC) balloon was advanced into the RCA from 2nd guide catheter and was inflated at site of perforation after removing the 1st balloon . Since a prolonged balloon inflation of 7 min failed to seal the perforation , we decided to use a covered stent. A 7F guide catheter compatible Graft Master® 3.5 × 19 mm covered stent was introduced through AL1 guide catheter. The 3.0 mm SC balloon, which was used to seal the perforation was deflated and pushed distally into RCA, where it was re-inflated to jail the two coronary guidewires and act as an anchor to provide strong support for covered stent delivery (, ). Before deploying the covered stent, anchor balloon along with the second guidewire were removed from RCA . The perforation site was successfully sealed after implantation of the covered stent . There was significant disease in RCA, both proximal and distal to the covered stent, which was further stented with 3.5 × 30 and 3 × 30 mm drug-eluting stents and post-dilated with a 4.0 mm NC balloon with a good angiographic result (, ). There was loss of small acute marginal branches after stenting, which was not associated with any chest pain or ECG changes.
Heparin was reversed with protamine at the end of procedure. The Troponin I level post-procedure was 0.09 ng/mL (normal <0.04 ng/mL) and there were no new ischaemic changes on the ECG. Post-procedural serial cardiac ultrasound did not reveal any pericardial effusion. The patient was discharged after 3 days of the procedure on dual antiplatelets (Aspirin and Clopidogrel). At a follow-up of 2 years, he is doing well and is in New York Heart Association Class I.