We present the case of a 64-year-old female patient from Soledad de Doblado, Veracruz, who was referred to our hospital in a coma on mechanical ventilation without sedation with broad-spectrum antimicrobial treatment. Seven days before her arrival, in another hospital, a transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI) procedure was performed due to a history of aortic stenosis, severe aortic insufficiency, and KDIGO III renal chronic disease. During the postoperative period, she presented cardiac arrest, requiring advanced resuscitation maneuvers with airway management, and three cycles of cardiopulmonary resuscitation were given before returning to spontaneous circulation. She was then admitted to the ICU under sedation, invasive mechanical ventilation, antibiotics and thromboprophylaxis. Upon admission to our hospital, a skull CT scan was performed with no evidence of injury. An electroencephalogram was also performed, which was reported as compatible with ischemic encephalopathy, considered probable brain death.
At physical examination, the patient was dependent on vasoactive amines, with a temporary pacemaker, on mechanical ventilation, and without sedation. The pupils were myotic and unresponsive to luminous or external stimuli, and a 3-point Glasgow Coma Scale at pulmonary auscultation showed bilateral crackling rales on both lung bases.
Paraclinics performed at admission are reported: gasometry values suggesting metabolic acidosis with added respiratory alkalosis and leukocytosis of 17,000 with predominance of polymorphonuclear cells. A chest radiograph was obtained and demonstrated the presence of a pneumonic process with basal pulmonary consolidations. A subsequent simple chest CT was performed, which demonstrated bilateral pleural effusion . Bronchoalveolar lavage was performed, and collected samples were placed on blood agar, chocolate agar and MacConkey agar. Gram-negative bacilli were isolated on blood agar, which were later identified using the VITEK technique and PCR sequencing as oxidase and catalase positive and determined by results such as Weeksella virosa.
When this culture was subjected to the Kirby-Bauer method and MIC bacterial susceptibility test using a Mueller-Hinton agar plate, the presence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) negativity, sensitivity to ciprofloxacin, intermediate sensitivity to tigecycline and resistance to ampicillin/sulbactam, piperacillin/tazobactam, cephalosporins (cefoxitin, ceftazidime, ceftriaxone and cefepime), carbapenems (meropenem, imipenem, ertapenem and doripenem) and aminoglycosides (amikacin and gentamicin) were reported.
The results of these tests were as follows:
We then decided to start treatment with ciprofloxacin for 10 days with a favorable response, with resolution of the pneumonic process after 10 days of antibiotics.