A 74 year old European female patient approached her dentist due to pain in the right lower jaw. A panoramic X-ray was performed, presenting an osteolysis of unknown origin in the mandible on both sides, right more than left . The patient was then referred to the clinic of cranio-maxillo-facial surgery for further evaluation. She reported pain in the area of the right angle of the mandible for several months; additionally, pain in the right calcaneus and in both forearms has been noted. She denied fever and weight loss, but reported cough and dyspnoea on exertion. Furthermore, a sicca-symptomatic in both eyes and the oral cavity was present. The patient was diagnosed with hypertensive cardiac disease, rhytmogene cardiopathy, hyperlipidaemia, cutaneous psoriasis with psoriasis arthritis, and lumbar vertebral syndrome several years before. Her home medication included pantoprazol, candesartane, acetylsalicylate, spironolactone, and simvastatine.
At the day of first presentation there were no signs for locale infection on the oral and extraoral examination, and no palpable lymph nodes in the cervical region. Only the tooth 47 showed percussion sensitivity and was not sensitive to cold. There were no abnormal laboratory findings, specifically normal C-reactive protein, serum calcium and alkaline phosphatase.
A computed tomography with 3D reconstruction of the osteolysis was performed. The radiography showed loosening of cancellous bone with extension of the mandibular canal and partially interrupted cortical bone on the right side. The findings were suspicious for osteomyelitis or a malignant lesion. Additional Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT-CT) examination was completed presenting increased bone metabolism in the area of the vertex and the jaw angles of both sides, right more than left . Further increased metabolism was detected in both forearms and in the right calcaneus. A biopsy of the alveolar process of the lower jaw was carried out for further investigation of the unknown osteolysis together with the removal of the second lower molar . Histology revealed chronic granulomatous inflammation with non-caseating epitheloid granuloma, consistent with sarcoidosis. Ziehl-Neelsen’s staining was negative and mycobacterial culture showed no growth. Fungal and other bacterial infections were excluded. To confirm the suspicion of sarcoidosis further examinations were initiated: The CT-Scan of the lung showed enlarged intrathoracic lymph nodes, and pulmonary function testing revealed a restriction of diffusion capacity of carbon monoxide. Based on a recently developed vertigo a MRI scan of the brain and the spinal cord was performed, showing a suspicious lesion in the area of the vertex compatible with neuro-sarcoidosis. Levels of interleukin-2-receptor and angiotensin-converting enzyme were in the range of normal. Finally, biopsy of an additional skin lesion in the area of the medial canthus of the left eye histologically confirmed the diagnosis of sarcoidosis.
Due to relevant multi-organ disease with symptomatic bone involvement and strong suspicion of neuro-sarcoidosis immunosuppressive therapy with azathioprine was installed. A follow-up SPECT-CT scan after six months of treatment revealed regressive bone metabolism of all previously described lesions, and no new lesions were detected. The patient was free of pain and the immunosuppressive treatment was well tolerated.
A couple of differential diagnosis should be considered when evaluating intrabony lesions of the jaws, in particular of the lower jaw: osteomyelitis, metastatic tumors, multiple myeloma, Langerhans histiocytosis. All these findings may present a similar radiographic image and could be confounded with a sarcoidotic lesion and had therefore to be considered in our patient.
There are a few cases in literature reporting sarcoidosis with manifestation in the lower jaw. Monasebian et al. described the diagnosis of sarcoidosis by means of a recurrent swelling of the chin in 1997 . Swelling followed by tenderness were the first clinical signs of systemic sarcoidosis. The lesion was excised and histologically investigated. It showed a florid granulomatous inflammation. Suresh et al. presented a case where the bone lesion in the lower jaw occurred one year after sarcoidosis was diagnosed . Here, loose teeth were the consequence of the destroyed bone by osteolysis. Authors postulated not to confound this clinical sign with an aggressive periodontitis. A different case was reported by Grimaldi et al. . They revealed that the first sign of sarcoidosis was a fistula in the area of the lower left canine. The panoramic X-ray showed an intra-bony lesion within the correspondent area. However, the tooth was not mobile and there were no other clinical signs.
Our case differs from aforementioned studies as it began with an osteolysis of unknown origin in the mandible on both sides. To our knowledge there is no scientific literature about the onset of sarcoidosis on the lower jaw.
Systematic signs could be even missed in some cases. This fact may not lead astray. We suggest considering a chronic granulomatous disease in cases of intra-bony lesions. Each obscure bone lesion has to be biopsied to get the accurate diagnosis followed by the adequate therapy.