A 63-year-old male presented at the pulmonology outpatient clinic, complaining of cough, loss of appetite, and left-sided chest discomfort. The patient had a history of hypertension and was taking amlodipine 5 mg. No prior history of allergic tendencies or skin disorders was reported. Following diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis, the patient was initiated on antitubercular treatment (ATT), which comprised rifampicin, isoniazid, and ethambutol for two months.
Two months after beginning ATT, the patient returned to the clinic, describing a new onset of skin rashes, hair loss, and black-pigmented patches on the skin lasting one month. A physical examination revealed violaceous eruptions over the patient’s anterior chest, back, hands, and legs [see ]. A diagnosis of ATT-induced lichen planus was subsequently made, with rifampicin, ethambutol, or isoniazid being the suspected offenders. All antitubercular drugs were discontinued, and the patient was prescribed hydroxyzine 10 mg, liquid paraffin, and clobetasol ointment.
Two weeks later, the patient’s condition had improved and a modified ATT regimen, comprising levofloxacin 500 mg and linezolid 600 mg, was initiated. Unfortunately, after a month, the patient developed oral lesions and reported slow resolution of existing lesions. A chest radiograph revealed persistent centrilobular emphysematous changes in the bilateral lower lobes and a few enlarged subcentimetric superior mediastinal lymph nodes. The patient was treated with a combination of prednisolone 10 mg, fluticasone cream, apremilast 10 mg, and triamcinolone acetonide oral paste, while continuing with levofloxacin and linezolid.
After four months of discontinuing ATT, the patient showed signs of recovery, and plans for reintroduction of antitubercular medications were initiated. Individual drugs were reintroduced consecutively, while monitoring for any new lesions. Following 1.5 months of initiating rifampicin, no new lesions were observed, and the oral lesions appeared to be subsiding. Subsequently, isoniazid 300 mg was added to the regimen [see ]. Serial blood tests performed including a complete hemogram, liver function test, and renal function tests were all within the normal limits.
The patient returned for follow-up after one month, reporting joint pain that was likely attributed to the levofloxacin therapy. However, there were no new complaints of exacerbation in skin rashes. Consequently, the treatment plan was modified to discontinue the use of levofloxacin while adding pyrazinamide 750 mg to the regimen [see for detailed timeline].
Due to strong index of suspicion of ethambutol being the culprit drug and prior case reports showing ethambutol induced lichenoid drug eruptions, it was not reintroduced in the challenge regimen. The patient’s skin lesions gradually started to improve and only hyperpigmentation was left, which also significantly improved with treatment as compared to prior lesions. With all other drugs reintroduced, the patient completed 9 months of antituberculosis treatment (isoniazid, rifampicin, and pyrazinamide). Repeat CT scan of the chest showed no new lesions and insignificant mediastinal lymphadenopathy with no feature suggestive of active disease. The antituberculosis treatment regimen was stopped subsequently.