A previously healthy and fully immunised six-year-old girl was admitted to our hospital with right otalgia, progressive trismus and right neck pain for the previous 3 days. She had been on oral antibiotic treatment for right AOM with amoxicillin-clavulanate (80 mg/kg/day) for 2 days without improvement. There was no history of trauma. On admission, the child was in good general conditions and presented with torcicollis, trismus, right preauricular swelling over the temporomandibular joint. On otoscopy right tympanic hyperemia with the evidence of middle ear fluid consistent with AOM was observed. Significant pain on chewing and right-sided cervical lymphadenopathy were also reported. She was apyretic and the rest of her clinical examination was normal. An ultrasound scan revealed a fluid collection of 4 mm in size in the right TMJ. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the head and neck confirmed the presence of effusion in the right TMJ, consistent with the diagnosis of septic arthritis, with surrounding lymphadenopathy and initial signs of bone rarefaction of the right mandibular condyle. An opacity of the right mastoid was detected radiologically, but there were no clinical signs of mastoiditis. These findings were also confirmed by the subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and neck . On admission, laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 23,420/mm3 with neutrophil predominance and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) of 8.1 mg/dL (normal value < 0.5 mg/dL). A blood culture was also performed but resulted negative. On the basis of these findings, broad spectrum intravenous antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone (75 mg/kg/day) was introduced, but 3 days later it was replaced with a combination of piperacillin-tazobactam (100 mg/kg/day) and vancomycin (40 mg/kg/day) due to minimal clinical improvement. This antibiotic regimen was well tolerated by the patient and it was continued for a total of 4 weeks with a gradual resolution of the symptoms and normalisation of the white blood cell count and CRP. The patient was discharged in good general conditions under an oral antibiotic treatment with clindamycin (20 mg/kg/day) for 2 weeks. The MRI of the head and neck performed 1 month later revealed a further improvement in joint effusion and a reduction in bone involvement ; ten months after onset a complete resolution was observed on MRI .