A 74-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our emergency department in May 2013 with severe exertional dyspnea. She was known to have SLE and Sjögren’s syndrome, diagnosed in 1985. Her treatment consisted of hydroxychloroquine, which was then switched to low-dose oral prednisolone because of retinopathy. She was in a good overall medical condition until seven months before admission. From then on, she was hospitalized several times because of presumed respiratory infection, which temporarily responded to repeated courses of empirical antibiotic treatment.
Three months before admission, a computed tomography (CT) scan of her chest showed a mild pericardial and right-sided pleural effusion, ruling out pulmonary embolism and lung parenchymal abnormalities. Echocardiography showed concentric biventricular hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A month later, she presented with atrial fibrillation and chest pain with elevated cardiac enzymes. We made a diagnosis of SLE perimyocarditis and started treatment with 32mg of methylprednisolone once a day combined with 100 mg of azathioprine once a day. A few weeks later, she was hospitalized because of another pneumonia of her right lower lobe. She was empirically treated with moxifloxacin. After an initial improvement she was discharged, but after a short period she presented again at our emergency department with severe exertional dyspnea, bilateral pleuritic pain, headache, night sweats, fatigue and weight loss.On admission, her vital signs were normal. Lung auscultation revealed bilateral basal crepitations and there was mild bimalleolar edema. The most prominent laboratory findings were a moderate normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 9.7g/dL) and elevated inflammatory parameters (C-reactive protein 147mg/L; white blood cell count 19760/μL). Chest radiography showed cardiomegaly, elevation of her right diaphragm, a right-sided pleural effusion and small bilateral consolidations. Echocardiography showed no pericardial effusion. Because of a highly elevated N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide level (>25,000ng/L), a diagnosis of global heart failure was made and therapy was initiated. Because of her long-standing general symptoms, blind blood cultures were taken and high-resolution CT (HRCT) was planned. Two days after admission she developed fever. At that time, HRCT showed multiple mildly enlarged lymph nodes. There were multiple pleural lesions (mostly right-sided), partial compression atelectasis of her right lobe, a mild right-sided pleural effusion, thickening of the fissures and interlobular septa, and bilateral diffuse micronodular opacities (miliary pattern) .
Urgent bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) led to further respiratory distress for our patient, necessitating intensive care unit (ICU) admission. Piperacillin-tazobactam was empirically started and the BAL results showed Pseudomonas aeruginosa, susceptible to the initiated antibiotics. Acid-fast stains were repeatedly negative (BAL and sputum). Four days later, one blood culture turned positive for Nocardia species. Her antibiotics were switched to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole combined with piperacillin-tazobactam. Intubation and mechanical ventilation proved necessary because of further respiratory deterioration. Given the findings on CT of her thorax, a diagnostic thoracoscopic lung biopsy was performed, which showed multiple sub-pleural abscesses. Overnight, an overwhelming septic shock developed with diffuse intravascular coagulation, lactic acidosis, liver failure, acute renal failure with anuria and need for high-dose noradrenaline. Continuous hemodialysis was started and amikacin was added to the antibiotics regimen. A CT scan of her brain, performed because of anisocoria, showed lesions compatible with abscess formation in her occipitotemporal area and brainstem. A tracheal aspirate and pleural biopsy confirmed the presence of massive amounts of Nocardia without evidence of other co-existing pathology.
Ten days after our patient’s ICU admission she died of multiple organ failure. To uncover the full extent of the infection, an autopsy was performed. A brain autopsy was refused by the family on emotional grounds. Surprisingly, multiple abscesses and necrotic areas containing both Nocardia and Mucorales were detected in both lungs , as well as in her heart (endo-, myo- and pericardium and tricuspid valve; Figure ) and some septal arteries . Nocardia was also found in both her kidneys and her intestines. Behind the left lobe of the thyroid gland an abscess was detected containing Nocardia. The Nocardia isolate was further identified as Nocardia farcinica. Identification was obtained on the basis of sequence determination of the 16S rRNA gene, as described previously , and by comparison of the sequence with those obtained in a previous study . Antibiotic sensitivity was tested using the disc diffusion method.