A 42-year-old woman complained of abnormal vaginal discharge for over one month and was admitted to our hospital in Dec 2018 (Sichuan, China). We show the treatment timeline in . She had 4 pregnancies, including 3 induced abortions and 1 spontaneous delivery. Prior personal and family history were negative. After the diagnosis of cervical cancer, the gynecologist performed a transabdominal extensive hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and pelvic lymph node dissection under general anesthesia. Histopathological examination of the surgically obtained samples led to a squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix diagnosis. This pathological examination showed a tumor size of 4*2.5*2 cm with greater than 1/2 invasion of the cervical mesenchyme and vascular invasion. No metastasis were found in 12 left and 16 right pelvic lymph nodes. Pathological staging of surgery identified the disease as FIGO 2018 stage IB2.
According to Sedlis standards, the patient had intermediate risk factors for recurrence. The radiation oncologist performed postoperative adjuvant therapy. She underwent pelvic intensity-modulated radiotherapy (IMRT) (4510 cGy given in 25 fractions) for 5 weeks from Jan 2019 to Mar 2019. Subsequently, the patient received intracavitary brachytherapy with a prescription dose of 3000 cGy for 2 fractions. After treatment, follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCCA) revealed no evidence of disease for 9 months.
In Dec 2019, the patient had an abnormal SCCA (36.78 ng/ml). Her MRI showed bilateral multiple inguinal lymph nodes, which were considered as possible metastases (enhanced partial circumferential enhancement). To further define the lymph nodes, the patient received a positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT). The result showed bilateral multiple inguinal lymph nodes, with some slightly enlarged, and no abnormalities in glucose metabolism. Combining the patient’s imaging and physical examination, the oncologist suggested continued follow-up. During the next 8 months of follow-up, the patient’s SCCA was abnormal but persistently decreasing (3.56-36.78 ng/ml), and MRI showed no significant progressive enlargement of the inguinal lymph nodes.
In Sep 2020, she visited our hospital for significantly enlarged bilateral inguinal masses. MRI showed additional anterior lower abdominal wall lesions, and bilateral enlarged and increased lymph nodes in the inguinal region (compared with the previous image). Cytologic aspiration biopsy confirmed the inguinal mass as metastatic carcinoma. Meanwhile, computed tomography (CT) showed a 4 mm solid nodule in the posterior segment of the upper lobe of the right lung (small nodule of 4 mm, not amenable to biopsy) . Based on the above clinical results, we considered that our patient had inguinal lymph nodes, anterior abdominal wall, and right lung metastases after postoperative radiotherapy for stage IB2 cervical squamous cell carcinoma.
After receiving 8 cycles of palliative chemotherapy and targeted therapy (bevacizumab, 7.5 mg/kg, d0 + albumin paclitaxel, 175 mg/m2, d1 + cisplatin, 75 mg/m2, d2-3, q21d) from Sep 2020 to Mar 2021, the patient achieved a CR in the abdominal wall metastasis and lung metastasis . Additionally, she achieved a partial response (PR+; regression of all lesions without complete resolution) in the inguinal lymph nodes. In May 2021, the radiation oncologist created 3D-printed templates to guide interstitial brachytherapy on the inguinal lymph node metastases, and the prescription dose was 2500cGy. This is a single hypofractionated radiotherapy that utilizes a high dose rate (HDR) of Ir-192 radioisotope for interstitial brachytherapy. we performed it using a microSelectron v3 after-loader (Elekta, Holland) with a planning system of oncentra 4.5. shows the 3D printed molds and three-dimensional conformal dose assessment for interstitial brachytherapy. MRI and CT 1 month later confirmed a PR.
Since Apr 2021, she has been started on the tyrosine kinase inhibitor (RTK) anlotinib (10 mg, qd) on the advice of the oncologist. From May 14, 2021 to Oct 8, 2021, she took a total of 7 cycles of the fluorouracil-based chemotherapy drug capecitabine (1250 mg/m2, bid, for 14 days with 7 days rest). In Sep 2021, her MRI showed shrinking inguinal lymph nodes. We considered that the patient’s inguinal lymph nodes remained stable during maintenance therapy. During maintenance therapy with capecitabine and anlotinib, her serum SCCA levels have remained low and stable (0.91-2.79 ng/ml). Considering the relatively great toxicity of dual-agent combination maintenance therapy and the patient’s personal preference, she subsequently chose to remain on single-agent maintenance therapy with anlotinib. Her latest serum SCCA was 1.01 ng/ml (Sep 20, 2023). Meanwhile, follow-up MRI (from Jun 16, 2021, to Sep 20, 2023) confirmed that the bilateral inguinal lymph nodes had not shown progression after showing shrinkage. shows the MRI of the patient before and after interstitial brachytherapy in the inguinal region. After radiotherapy, the patient had slight localized redness and swelling. The patient now has no skin ulcers, no bilateral lower extremity edema or other complications, and only mild localized skin pigmentation. As of Sep 2023, the PFS reached 36 months.
During maintenance therapy, the patient experienced adverse events (AEs) of hypertension and hand-foot syndrome (HFS). The patient’s blood pressure has ranged from 109-143/78-102 mmHg. Currently, the patient is taking the oral calcium channel blocker amlodipine to treat hypertension, and her blood pressure is now well controlled. Since Sep 2021, the patient has been experiencing grade 3 HFS with desquamation, but no blistering or bleeding. The patient has been using topical medications to alleviate this adverse reaction, and her skin is currently in fair condition.