We report a 27-year-old European woman patient, gravida 1, para 1 at 27 + 2 weeks of gestation, with dichorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy and a bicornuate bicollis uterus. In 2021 the patient had undergone diagnostic laparoscopy with chromopertubation and hysteroscopy because she wished to have children. The procedure revealed a bicornuate bicollis uterus with two separate cervical canals arising from one portio. The uterus was seen on laparoscopy with a heart-shaped external contour , V0 C1 U2 A0 M0 per the VCAUM classification . After six unsuccessful inseminations and one frustrated intracytoplasmic sperm injection, parallel embryo transfer into one uterine horn each was performed in February 2023. This resulted in successful implantation of the embryos in one uterine horn each. The subsequent course of pregnancy history was initially physiological. The patient had an unremarkable first-trimester and second-trimester screening.
On 4 August 2023 the patient developed contractions and cervical shortening to 10 mm in the leading pregnancy. She received the first antenatal steroid prophylaxis consisting of 12 mg celestane under nifedipine tocolysis with supersaturation, and was then transferred to our level III perinatal center. On admission she continued to be symptomatic, with a prolapsed amniotic sac in the leading pregnancy and an otherwise unremarkable concordant dichorionic diamniotic twin pregnancy (first fetus: vertex presentation, estimated weight 916 g, left lateral placenta; second fetus: vertex presentation, estimated weight 1161 g left lateral placenta) with physiological amniotic fluid and fetal/fetomaternal Doppler findings. The tocolytic agent was switched to atosiban. The patient received antibiotic therapy with cefuroxime 1.5 g intravenously according to the regimen and a single oral dose of 1 g azithromycin for prolapse of the amniotic sac. She was admitted to the delivery room for further cardiotocography (CTG) monitoring. Detailed discussions were held with the patient about the possible mode of delivery. In view of all potential risks (including emergency cesarean section, cesarean section on the second fetus after spontaneous delivery of the first, atony, hysterectomy), we decided on a spontaneous delivery of the leading fetus with a possible wait-and-watch approach in regard of the second. The patient was informed verbally and in writing about the potential need for an emergency cesarean section and hysterectomy with bilateral salpingectomy. Our neonatologists and anesthesiologists also informed the patient about the subsequent procedures and the risks of preterm birth. Red blood cell concentrates were kept on call. With increasing labor activity, intravenous magnesium as neuroprotection was started per schedule. Nine hours later the patient presented with strong contractions, a sensation of pressure, and prolapse of the amniotic sac to the middle of the vagina. Tocolysis with atosiban was stopped, an amniotomy performed, and a male infant was born with the short-term support of an oxytocin infusion. With a birthweight of 1150 g (P 69), an Apgar score of 9/9/9, an arterial umbilical cord pH of 7.29, and base excess -7.70 mmol/l, the infant was transferred immediately to the neonatologists. The placenta followed spontaneously, the anesthesiology and surgery nursing team were sent away, and the patient remained well in the delivery room under further CTG monitoring. The ultrasound investigation revealed an empty right cavum while the left cervix appeared long and closed. In order to avoid uterine atony, the recommencement of tocolysis was initially postponed; the patient was currently labor free. After three hours her unstoppable contractions started again. With a pushing contraction she delivered the second infant: male, 1115 g (P 62), Apgar score 8/7/9, an arterial umbilical cord pH of 7.36, and base excess − 7.80 mmol/l. The infant was immediately transferred to the neonatologists. Three units of oxytocin as a short infusion were given and the placenta followed spontaneously. On ultrasound both uterine horns were empty and there was no birth injury or hemorrhage. The mother could be discharged after three days in good health.
Postnatally the first-born twin suffered from respiratory distress syndrome and was therefore given a surfactant twice by less invasive surfactant application (LISA) within the first 24 h after birth. The infant’s respiratory situation remained stable thereafter under non-invasive airway support. A patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) was treated successfully with ibuprofen. The clinical surveillance remained uneventful in regard of enteral feeding and there was no intraventricular bleeding.
The second twin also needed surfactant treatment for respiratory distress syndrome. A routine chest X-ray on the first day of the infant’s life suggested a sacculation of the esophagus, demanding endotracheal intubation for airway protection. Detailed imaging after transesophageal administration of a contrast agent revealed a remarkably large esophageal sacculation. The examination showed no fistulation towards the surrounding tissue or organs and no other signs of malformation. The newborn was extubated and a stable respiratory situation was maintained by non-invasive respiratory support. Next, endoscopic esophageal examination was performed to establish the need for any therapeutic intervention. A hemodynamically significant PDA was treated with ibuprofen and paracetamol. To date, a minimal residual PDA is being monitored closely and has revealed no hemodynamic irregularities. Similar to the twin brother, intracranial examinations in the second infant were uneventful and enteral feeding was established without complications.
Figures and are intraoperative images of the uterine malformation on laparoscopy and an ultrasound performed during parturition.
The patient underwent a checkup, a 3D ultrasound investigation, and an MRI of the pelvis at eight weeks after delivery to confirm the diagnosis of a uterine malformation established previously by other colleagues. After a regular puerperium, the patient was in a good general condition. The speculum examination revealed an inconspicuous singular portio and the bimanual examination showed an enlarged anteflexed uterus with otherwise unremarkable findings. Three-dimensional ultrasound revealed a bicornuate uterus with a prominent septum extending to the portio . The ovaries as well as the kidneys appeared physiological on 2D ultrasound.
A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis confirmed our diagnosis of a functional bicornuate unicollis uterus with the postpartum condition of a residual, partly strong cervical septum apically, which possibly ruptured peripartum . Therefore, our diagnosis according to the VCUAM classification was V0 C + U2 A0 M0, a bicornuate uterus with a functional unicollis and a prominent septum.