A 54-year-old woman with a diagnosis of NF1 according to the National Institutes of Health criteria was referred to the Breast Service of the Hospital Universitário Antônio Pedro of Universidade Federal Fluminense by the Oral Diagnosis Service from the same institution with the complaint of a “secretion from a mass in her left breast”. The patient reported that she delayed consulting a physician because she thought the mass was a manifestation of NF1. She was post-menopausal and had no family history of breast or ovarian cancer.
On physical examination, we observed thousands of neurofibromas all over her body, including both breasts . Left breast palpation revealed a large, tender mass occupying the whole breast of approximately 10 cm in diameter. Ipsilateral enlarged axillary lymph nodes were also palpated. Identification of the nipple-areolar complex was difficult because of the extension of her neurofibromas. At consultation, a needle core-biopsy was performed, and histopathological analysis revealed a grade 1 ductal carcinoma in situ. Digital mammograms were performed, but they were very difficult to interpret due to the extension of the cutaneous lesions. A large breast density associated with diffuse microcalcification was identified .
The clinical decision was to precede with a modified radical mastectomy and axillary clearance of levels I and II, because of the size of the mass. The surgical procedure was uneventful, with the skin incision contouring the neurofibromas. Of note, the skin flaps dissection showed some large vessels irrigating the skin, which necessitated great care when raising the flaps. Dissected axillary lymph nodes were large and soft. The healing process was normal, and the patient had a favorable evolution.
The histopathological analysis of the surgical specimen showed extensive high-grade ductal carcinoma in situ, comedo type, 10 cm in diameter and located in all breast quadrants, associated with an invasive ductal carcinoma measuring 0.4 cm. Mastectomy margins were free of disease. Histopathological analysis confirmed that the nodular cutaneous lesions were neurofibromas. Forty lymph nodes were isolated and showed only inflammatory reaction. Immunohistochemistry analyses revealed tumor cells negative for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), pan-cytokeratin (pan-CK), S100, vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). Ki-67 was positive in 25-50% of tumor cells; Her2/neu was also positive (2+/3+). Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was inconclusive due to exhaustion of the invasive component of the tumor in the paraffin block. There was a small invasion of the pectoralis fascia in the upper inner quadrant, though no invasive tumor was found in the breast directly over it. Final pTNM staging was pT1N0M0.
The patient completed the chemotherapy treatment (cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and fluorouracil; six cycles), and is currently on a course of radiotherapy because of the size of the tumor. The medical oncologist decided on chemotherapy based on the size of the tumor mass, even with an invasive portion of less than one centimeter because of the aggressive biology of the tumor observed by immunohistochemistry and also because of the worse prognosis of breast cancer in NF1 patients reported in the literature.