A 30-year-old man referred to our hospital presented with a 3-month history of recurrent onset of persistent mild epigastric pain, which worsen when eating. The patient took a lot of sugary beverages one week before his admission to the hospital. He had no history of diarrhea, dry mouth, polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, and gastrointestinal disease. The family history was noncontributory. His mother died of gynecological cancer at age 50. His father had no history of hyperglycemia or chronic abdominal pain, and the abdominal CT scan showed a normal pancreas. His only younger sister had no special medical history as well. A physical examination revealed that the patient was in good shape (body mass index 22.7 kg/m2). He was conscious but dehydrated. He had a soft but tender abdomen, and his heart and lung functions were normal. His vital signs were also normal.
Laboratory tests revealed metabolic acidosis with an arterial blood pH of 7.3 and a base excess of − 8.9 mmol/L. The random plasma glucose level was 576 mg/dL, with urinalysis revealing glycosuria and ketonuria. The glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level was 147 mmol/mol, and the serum lactic acid level was within normal range. Levels of carcinoembryonic antigen and cancer antigen 199 were also within normal ranges. The results of liver function, serum amylase, lipase, C-reactive protein, and microalbuminuria tests, as well as the 24-h urine protein level, were within normal ranges. The patient was negative for the glutamic acid decarboxylase antibody, islet cell antibody, and insulin autoantibody. The patient was diagnosed with DKA and received standard treatment for the condition, which included intravenous fluids, insulin therapy, and potassium replacement.
DKA resolved gradually after insulin therapy, but the abdominal pain continued. Additional phase contrast CT of the abdomen was performed and revealed an enlarged pancreatic head , without the body and tail of the pancreas . A further investigation of MRCP revealed the absence of the dorsal pancreatic duct and a short duct of Wirsung running into the major papilla . On the basis of these findings, a diagnosis of complete ADP was evident, and we believed that the pain was due to dysfunction of the pancreas. Low-fat diet was recommended, and pancreatic enzyme supplements as well as mosapride citrate were given with meals to facilitate the digestive process. The pain gradually resolved and went away in 7 days after the treatment.
A standard mixed-meal tolerance test was performed one month later to evaluate β-cell function. The fasting C-peptide level was 0.05 ng/mL, and the postprandial C-peptide levels at 1, 2, and 3 h were 0.05, 0.07, and 0.06 ng/mL (normal range, 1.1–4.4 ng/mL), whereas the fasting plasma glucose level was 261 mg/dL, and the postprandial glucose levels at 1, 2, and 3 h were 433, 455, and 433 mg/dL, respectively. According to the patient’s medical history and laboratory results, we speculated that the sugary beverages might resulted in high blood glucose, which may contribute to DKA in this patient. According to the ADA’s standard of classification and diagnosis of diabetes, the diagnosis of “Specific types of diabetes due to other causes” was established [, ]. The patient received insulin therapy (insulin glargine 12 units at bedtime and biosynthetic human insulin 16 units with meals) and was followed up.