A 74-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for symptomatic anaemia during direct oral anticoagulant treatment. Her past medical history reported an ischaemic stroke at the age of 55, at that time significant carotid artery disease and AF were excluded. A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) showed a PFO presenting significant left-to-right interatrial shunt, inverted by Valsalva manoeuvre. A successful transcatheter PFO occlusion was performed, with the implantation of a device available at that time (STARflex™ 23 mm, NMT Medical, Boston, MA, USA). At the age of 70 paroxysmal AF was diagnosed and OAC with rivaroxaban 20 mg was commenced due to a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 5. After several and ineffective pharmacological attempts of rate and rhythm control, an ablate and pace strategy was carried out 2 years later.
On initial assessment, the patient showed dyspnoea and mild hypoxia with pulse oxygen saturation of 90%. The blood pressure was 100/65 mmHg, physical examination showed normal cardiac murmurs and no signs of congestion. The electrocardiogram showed paced ventricular rhythm. Blood tests revealed severe microcytic hypochromic anaemia (haemoglobin 7 g/dL). Following anticoagulation discontinuation and red blood cell transfusion, gastrointestinal endoscopic examination was planned. Colonoscopy showed multiple colonic angiodysplasias carrying signs of recent bleeding, deemed unsuitable for endoscopic invasive treatment. At this stage, the patient was referred to our division for an evaluation focused to the feasibility of LAA occlusion. A TOE showed a single-lobe ‘chicken-wing’ LAA morphology, free from thrombi. The PFO occluder was regularly in site, without residual leaks nor thrombi. The interatrial septum had a small free residual portion suitable for transseptal catheterization, just posteriorly to the interatrial device.
A pre-procedural cardiac computed tomography (CT) scan was performed in order to comprehensively assess the anatomical relationship between the atria, the septal occlusion device, the residual device-free interatrial septum and the aortic root. Based on the CT scan images, a three-dimensional (3D) accurate model of patient’s atria was printed. In this case, we selected the LAmbre™ (Lifetech, Shenzhen, China) as LAA occluder device, for the smaller diameter of its delivery sheath (10 F) compared to other devices. The procedure was then simulated with the printed patient’s cardiac 3D model and a demo model of the LAmbre™ , confirming its technical feasibility.
Under general anaesthesia and continuous TOE monitoring, transseptal puncturing was performed at the posterior-inferior edge of the STARflex™ device, in the small free residual portion of the interatrial septum . Following successful access in the left atrium, an LAA closure device (LAmbre™ 22/28 mm, Lifetech, Shenzhen, China) was successfully delivered, resulting in optimal LAA closure without acute complications or residual leaks . The patient was successfully discharged two days after the procedure, with single antiplatelet therapy with acetylsalicylic acid for the high bleeding risk. At 40-days of follow-up, a TOE was repeated, showing a correctly positioned device at the LAA ostium without leaks or thrombi. No residual shunt was observed in the interatrial septum and the PFO device was correctly positioned. The patient is currently asymptomatic, and haemoglobin levels are stable around 10 g/dL.