A 57-year-old woman with no comorbidities was admitted to the Clinic of Surgery due to a growing tumor mass in the thyroid gland for the last year. No symptoms of compression in the cervical region were reported, only weight loss of 5-6kg. Her preoperative examinations were: Asthenic woman, height 162sm, weight 48kg, BMI 18.3; Auscultation revealed normal breathing without wheezing, normal hearth sounds; BP 130/80mmHg, heart rate 100/min, ECG - sinus tachycardia, left position, no registered pathological deflections, no ischemic changes in all leads, chest X-ray - normal, blood tests showed mild anemia: Hb 106g/L. A thyroid function tests were normal: free T3 of 2,9pg/mL, free T4 of 0,93ng/dL, and TSH of 0,72uIU/mL. Local status of neck lesion – thyroid gland enlargement 4th degree, solid consistency, immovable to surrounding structures, mobile when swallow. CT preoperatively: thyroid gland - generally enlarged with a spherical shape, mostly at the expense of the left lobe. Its dimensions reach 93/115/130mm. The cranial part of the gland is visualized dorsolaterally to the left at the C4 level. The caudal part of the gland is established at the level of the upper thoracic aperture, without passing distally to the mediastinum. The gland presents with an inhomogeneous structure. Cystic components are not demarcated. There was a significant mass effect for major vascular structures in the neck region. The formation dislocated left cricoid and thyroid cartilage, with preserved structure. The trachea was compressed and shifted to the right, with a reduction of the lumen. The CT revealed no distant metastatic lesion . Perioperative risk assessment reported only smoking as a risk factor.
The patient underwent thyroidectomy and lymph node dissection under general anesthesia after informed consent was signed. Intraoperatively 1 unit of blood was transfused due to blood loss of about 800mL. The operation was completed successfully. Hemodynamic fluctuations were not observed intraoperatively and in the early postoperative period. Histological findings revealed anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.
On the first POD, with persistent bleeding from the surgical wound and dynamic hemoglobin values as follow: Hb100g/L, 98g/L, 87g/L, respectively, a wide-complex tachycardia with a ventricular frequency of up to 260/min was recorded on the ECG, which spontaneously passed within a minute and restored sinus rhythm. Amiodarone infusion was started. The patient was conscious, reported a transient feeling of chest pain and inability to breathe. Immediately after the accident hemodynamic measurements reveled mild hypotension - BP 90/50mmHg; sinus tachycardia - HR 120/min; left pathological type of electric axis, elevation of the ST-segment up to 2mm in V2-V6, I, II, negative T-wave in aVL, high sharp symmetrical T-waves on ECG (, , , ). An echocardiography revealed severe decreased LV systolic function with an EF of 27% and extensive hypo-akinesia of middle and apical region, preserved kinetics only of the basal segments of the LV . A coronarography was performed - no coronary artery stenosis.
The main changes in blood tests during the treatment of the patient in the intensive care unit after the manifestations of SC are shown in .
There are no specific treatments for the LV failure characterizing SC. We use upright posture, oxygen therapy, provided by non-invasive ventilation and diuretics for pulmonary pre-edema, amiodarone and magnesium sulfate to treat arrhythmia. The patient received analgesia – combination of Tramadol 100mg and Paracetamol 1.0g three times daily. Anticoagulation was performed as a continues infusion of unfractionated heparin with monitoring of activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), aiming levels between 40 and 60s up to 3rd POD, changed to LWMH – Enoxaparine 0.4mL s.c. twice daily. For 72 h after the accident inotropes – Dobutamine in doses 0.5-6μg/kg/min. Mean BP above 60mmHg was maintained with low-dose norepinephrine. Antibiotics, PPI, parenteral/enteral feeding were administrated. Cardiac function was measured by bedside ultrasonography. Subsequently, the patient's condition gradually improved, and she was transferred to the Department of Cardiology for subsequent observation and follow-up.
Two months after the surgery patient underwent through follow-up measuring myocardial function. Echocardiography revealed EF of 57% without any areas of hypokinesia, ECG was normal . Clinical examination showed no signs of heart failure. We consider the patient was fully recovered.