A 79-year-old man presented to our hospital with a 3-month history of shortness of breath and chest tightness. He was admitted to the cardiology department for further treatment. During this hospital stay, the patient developed progressive muscle loss of the right limb with aphasia. The cardiologist asked a neurosurgeon to evaluate the patient. The patient had a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 10, grade 3 muscle strength of the right lower limb, and motor aphasia. The family denied that the patient had any history of head trauma. The patient had a 10-year history of prostate cancer and received radionuclide targeted therapy in another hospital before hospitalization. The patient was never treated with antiplatelet or anticoagulant drugs.
Preoperative emergency cranial computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a left CSDH. The maximum thickness was 2.6 cm, and the midline structure was shifted to the right side by 1.3 cm. There was no evidence of primary craniocerebral injury or skull fracture . The coagulation examination showed a prothrombin time of 15.4 s (reference range 11.5-14.5 s), activated partial thromboplastin time of 44.2 s (reference range 29.2-41.2 s), international standard rate of 1.25 s (reference range 0.9-1.1), and prothrombin time percent activity of 71% (reference range 80-120%). Blood routine showed platelets of 131*109/L (reference range 125-350*109/L).
We performed burr hole drainage for the CSDH, and dark red fluid was seen during the operation. The patient’s symptoms significantly improved after surgery. The repeat head CT indicated that the midline structure was in the middle . The subdural drainage tube was removed 2 days after surgery. Three days after the tube was removed, the patient’s symptoms worsened again. The patient was re-examined immediately with head CT, which showed recurrence of the left subdural haematoma . We performed emergency craniotomy to remove the haematoma, and during the operation, we found that the haematoma capsule was thickened and that the fluid was a pale red. Considering the patient’s history of malignant tumours, the haematoma capsule was excised to the maximum extent and submitted for pathological examination. We were concerned about a second recurrence of the haematoma or even cerebral hernia, and after talking to the family, the flap was removed. There was no recurrence of the chronic subdural haematoma in the follow-up . The patient died of liver failure one month after the second surgery, not due to intracranial causes.
Haematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining showed a multifocal tumour cell nest on the haematoma envelope, the nuclei were obvious and large and deeply stained, the arrangement was sieve-like or solid, and necrosis was visible in the centre . ERG immunostaining showed vascular endothelium around the tumour cells. All tumour cells were located in the vascular lumen . Staining for PSA, PAP, P504S, and AR was positive, proving that the tumour cells originated from prostate cancer .