The patient is a 13-year-old female with growth retardation (nanism, 137 cm), a short neck, low hair growth on the neck, widely spaced nipples, a shield chest, secondary sexual characteristics deficiency, and the presence of episodic hyperglycemia. Her body mass index is 25. The parents of the patient have normal growth (mother – 175 cm, father – 180 cm). MRI study revealed Dandy-Walker syndrome and hydrocephaly. Hypoplasia of segment A1 of the anterior cerebral artery and segment P1 of the posterior cerebral artery were revealed.
The patient has karyotype 45,X/46,X,+mar. The marker chromosome was found in 33.8% of the metaphase spreads (N = 80). It was small and comparable in size with chromosome 20. Although DAPI staining showed that this chromosome looks such as a small acrocentric chromosome, localization of the telomeric probe revealed no signals on it . However, as shown previously, the absence of telomeres cannot indicate unambiguously that the chromosome is a ring . FISH of the set of human whole chromosomes-specific probes showed the localization of chromosome X painting probe on the whole length of the marker chromosome . To visualize the boundaries of the derivate formation, the marker chromosome was microdissected, and the derived probe was localized on chromosomes of the patient and a healthy control. In total, we obtained 4 libraries. In the patient cells each probe painted the marker chromosome and the centromeric region of chromosome X . In the healthy control, probes painted the centromeric region of chromosome X only . This localization showed the marker chromosome was derived from region Xp11.23-q13.2. .
To test whether XIST gene presents in marker chromosome or not we made PCR screening of two separate copies of microdissection-derived probes of the marker chromosome (mar1 and mar2) and painting probes of chromosomes X and 3 as controls (see Materials and Methods). Both analyzed marker chromosomes do not contain XIST sequences whereas X centromeric sequences are presented in marker chromosomes painting probes .