A 68-year-old man presented with swelling on the right thigh. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a contrast-enhanced tumor with a hemorrhagic and unclear border . An open biopsy was performed, and the tumor was diagnosed as leiomyosarcoma. Subsequently, the patient underwent extensive tumor resection of the right thigh leiomyosarcoma. Microscopically, a dense proliferation of tumor cells comprising spindle and epithelioid cells with pleomorphic nuclei was observed. Necrosis and hemorrhage were also observed [ and ]. As pathological examination revealed no tumor cells at the resection margin, the patient did not receive additional therapy. However, 1 year after surgery, computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple lung metastases. Although four courses of adriamycin were administered as first-line chemotherapy, the lung lesions progressed. Unfortunately, pazopanib as second-line chemotherapy did not stabilize the disease. Two years after the initial surgery, MRI revealed multiple brain tumors in the frontal and temporal lobe, and brain stem [ and ]. Treatment with eribulin and stereotactic radiotherapy for brain metastases was performed. Two months later, the patient suddenly complained of the left-sided hemiparesis. CT and MRI demonstrated a progressive tumor of the right frontal lesion, which was 50 mm in maximum diameter, including peritumoral hemorrhage [-]. On the other hand, the other three brain metastases disappeared. To avoid further neurological deterioration, we performed an en bloc tumor and hematoma resection . Macroscopic findings indicated that the tumor had extended to the subpial surface and was surrounded by hemorrhage . Microscopic examination revealed spindle and epithelioid cells with marked nuclear pleomorphism and necrosis and hemorrhage [-]. Tumor cells were present in the hematoma . Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that the tumor cells were positive for smooth muscle markers (desmin and caldesmon), and the Ki-67 index was approximately 15% [-]. These pathological findings were similar to those of the primary lesion and were compatible with brain metastasis of thigh-derived leiomyosarcoma. In addition, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) was diffusely expressed in the tumor cells , and abnormal blood vessels with thin walls were prominent within the tumor . After surgical resection, the hemiparesis improved, and the patient was discharged from the hospital. However, 3 months after surgery, the patient died due to the deterioration of his general condition.