A 67-year-old male patient was referred to our hospital on 6 April 2022 due to upper abdominal discomfort for half a month. He had a long history of untreated chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection and alcohol use with 200 ml daily intake for 40 years. He reported no other underlying diseases, including hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, and no family history. On physical examination, his body mass index (BMI) was 22.49 kg/m2 (weight, 65 kg; height, 170.0 cm). No unremarkable presentations, including ascites and encephalopathy, were detected. A multiphase liver protocol computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated the bulky bilobar liver masses with a characteristic radiological appearance of HCC (hyperenhancement during the arterial phase and delayed washout in the venous phase)—an exophytic left-lobe lesion measuring 7.2 cm × 7.1 cm × 6.4 cm and a right-lobe lesion measuring 5.6 cm × 5.1 cm × 5.0 cm . The diagnosis of bilobar HCCs was further identified by the gadoxetate disodium–enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan and Sonazoid-enhanced contrast-enhanced ultrasound (CEUS). The right hepatic artery (RHA) originating from the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) was noticed. Additionally, intrahepatic multiple dysplasticnodules were also observed in the context of liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension. A sign of mild esophageal varices was revealed by upper gastrointestinal endoscopy. No hepatic or portal venous invasion or thrombosis and the evidence of extrahepatic disease were identified. Using the elastomeric techniques of fibroscan, the measured liver stiffness (LSM) was 14.3 kPa and the controlled attenuation parameter (CAP) indicating moderate hepatic steatosis was 250 dBm. Laboratory tests were as follows: alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), 3.68 ng/ml; protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II (PIVKA-II), 931.85 mAU/ml; HBV-DNA, 5.56 × 105 IU/ml; total bilirubin, 13.4 μmol/L; albumin, 45.3 g/L; prothrombin time, 13.3 s. Her liver function was well preserved with a calculated indocyanine green retention test after 15 min (ICG-r15) at 12.5%, and the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status score was Grade 0. A three-dimensional liver model was constructed to observe the lesions intuitively and evaluate the liver volume (calculated using the West China formula and the IQQA-Liver system).