A 32-year-old female patient with chronic renal failure due to secondary hypertensive nephrosclerosis and a history of renal transplantation from a cadaver 4 months ago after 7 years of peritoneal dialysis and 4 years of haemodialysis was reported. Most patients with genetic hemochromatosis have mutations of the HFE gene and excess amount of ferrum in blood. She had been receiving desferrioxamine treatment for the last year. The patient had been treated with antithymocyte globulin, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and corticosteroid for immune suppression and trimetoprim sulfamethoxazole and acyclovir for prophylaxis. The patient was currently receiving tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and corticosteroid treatment. In the post transplantation period, a urinary infection was detected in patient and treated successfully with piperacillin and imipenem. After transplantation, the patient was discharged with a serum creatinine level of 0.7 mg/dL. The patient arrived to our clinic with a complaint of ulcerative nodular lesion which is 2 × 2 cm in size located at fronto-superior right-knee area .
The pathological examination of biopsy taken from the lateral border of ulcerative lesion revealed that it had pseudoepithelial hyperplasia, polymorph plasma cells, inflammation areas with histiocytes and hypha like constractions among inflammatory cells . Coagulase negative staphylococci were assessed in specimen cultures. In mycological Sabouraud dextrose agar (Himedia, India) cultures, greenish-brownish grey colonies with black punctations on the middle mold colonies with a loose structure grew within 3 - 4 days. The colonies evaluated to have fulfilling the whole plaque, brown-greenish grey in color, black punctuations on the middle loose hypha structure . In micromorphological evaluation, hypha structure had compartments. At the distal ends of the structures, colorful macroconidia with dark brown colors, cylindrical, branching or breeding, horizontal or vertical comportments are detected . With these evaluations, the agent was thought to be Alternaria spp. The patient received 200 mg × 2/day itraconazole as treatment together with reduction in mycophenolate mofetil intake to 360 mg/day. Serum tacrolimus level inspected during antifungal treatment and reduced during itraconazole treatment. The macroscopic healing of the lesion was observed in the first two weeks and surgical nodulectomy performed in one month. The healing of lesion followed periodically and no recurrent or new lesion occurred.