A 48-year-old female was referred to our hospital for a bulge in her left inguinal region. She had been aware of a nodule in her left groin for a year. She was a teacher and had no notable medical history. A subsequent medical examination revealed a golf ball-sized nodule in the left inguinal region that could not be pushed back into the abdominal cavity. Blood chemistry findings were unremarkable. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a multicystic tumor in the same region and the tumor was 38 mm in diameter. Bilateral normal ovaries were found in the pelvis with no ascites .
Owing to the difficulty in differentiating BMPM from hernia and hydrocele of Nuck’s canal, we decided to perform surgery for obtaining a diagnosis and treating the lesion. The surgery was performed via the anterior approach. After complete resection, the multicystic tumor was determined to have originated from the end of the hernia sac in the medial inguinal ring. The hernia was repaired using the mesh plug technique, and the patient was discharged without any complications.
The surgically resected specimen contained a multicystic tumor at the end of the hernia sac that was 80 mm in length and 35 mm in diameter. No substantial components were found in the cyst. The inside of the cyst was filled with serous fluid . Pathological examination revealed that the cyst wall was lined by a single layer of cuboidal to single layer squamous epithelium. No cellular or structural atypia was observed. The tumor, which showed positivity for calretinin in the epithelial cells, was finally diagnosed as BMPM by immunohistochemistry .
The patient was followed up after the first postoperative visit. However, the patient returned to our hospital 5 years later with similar symptoms contralaterally but in the right inguinal region this time. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed fluid collection in the right inguinal canal and the size of the content was 27 mm in diameter . No recurrence was noted in the left inguinal region or any other intra-abdominal space; we suspected a hydrocele of Nuck’s canal or cystic tumor, such as BMPM. Therefore, the tumor was resected and an inguinal hernia was repaired using the mesh plug technique in a procedure similar to the previous one.
The resected specimen contained a multicystic tumor at the end of hernia sac that was 45 mm in length and 25 mm in diameter. Macroscopic findings were very similar to the previously resected tumor . Moreover, pathological findings showed characteristics similar to the previous, with epithelial cells being positive for calretinin and D2-40 following immunostaining. Therefore, the tumor was diagnosed as BMPM. After surgery, the patient was discharged with no complications, and no tumor recurrence was found for 33 months.