An 11-year-old female patient with TSC presented a medical history of levetiracetam-responsive epilepsy since the age of 1 year, associated with multiple cortical tubers, cardiac rhabdomyomas, hepatic and renal angiomyolipomas, and iris hamartomas. Genetic analysis identified a heterozygous, de novo mutation (c. 1444-1G > A) in the TSC2 gene, which has been previously described . During a routine morning-fasting blood sampling for biochemical monitoring, the patient experienced an acute episode characterized by stereotyped and jerky movements of the upper limbs, followed by drowsiness. The patient was admitted to the Emergency Room. The external body temperature was 36.3°C, and the general condition of the patient was good. No signs of cutaneous or mucosal bleeding were observed. Slurred speech and fine tremors of the upper extremities were reported, with no other neurological signs or symtpoms present. Cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations yielded normal findings. Blood testing revealed isolated hypoketotic hypoglycemia, with a glucose level of 26 mg/dl (1.4 mmol/L), below the normal range of 70–100 mg/dl (3.9–5.6 mmol/L). The ketone level was 0.06 mg/dl (0.01 mmol/L), within the normal range of 0–0.34 mg/dl (0–0.6 mmol/L). Immediate administration of a 3 ml/kg bolus of intravenous 10% glucose solution over a 10-minute period resulted in a rapid restoration of normal consciousness. This was followed by a continuous infusion of the same glucose solution at a rate of 20 ml/h. Electroencephalography (EEG) results were normal. A comprehensive medical history revealed a pattern of frequent post-prandial confusion, inappropriate verbal responses, dysarthria, and drowsiness that had been ongoing for approximately two years. A 72-hour fasting test was initiated. Intermittent blood glucose monitoring during the fasting test revealed alternating episodes of hypoglycemia, accompanied by distinct metabolic features consistent with hyperinsulinism . Insulin and C-peptide levels were measured—simultaneously with glicemia—on five occasions, including two measurements during fasting and three after meals. The fasting test had to be discontinued due to significant symptomatology.
An abdominal multiphase computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an arterial phase enhancing lesion (maximum diameter 29 mm) at the pancreas tail, which was further confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). 68Ga-DOTATOC positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) imaging demonstrated selective radiotracer uptake by the lesion, consistent with insulinoma (,). Laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy allowed the excision of the insulinoma and the full correction of clinical and metabolic picture . Pathological examination revealed an organoid growth of a well-differentiated tumor, with no signs of necrosis or vascular invasion. Neither perineural infiltration nor infiltration of the peripancreatic adipous tissue was observed. The mitotic count was 6/10 per High Power Field. Immunohistochemical staining showed positive results for cromogranine A and insulin. The proliferation index, evaluated with anti-Ki67 coloration, was 10%. The diagnosis was a pNET G2 with positivity for insuline, classified as pT2 according to the UICC VIII ed. 2017 staging system. After surgery the patient had no recurrence of seizures at 18 months of follow up.