A 63-year-old, Caucasian and thin (BMI 17.06 kg/m3) female presented to the emergency department for 2 months of progressively worsening shortness of breath, loss of appetite, and weight loss (15 pounds). She also reported worsening fatigue limiting her ability to exercise, and also dyspnea with mild-moderate exertion. The patient denied any additional constitutional symptoms. Medical history was notable for hypothyroidism secondary to Hashimoto thyroiditis and well-controlled essential hypertension. Patient was up to date on screening tests including a negative colonoscopy 3 months prior. Social history included intermittent social tobacco use (defined as using 1–2 cigarettes in a setting, while at parties or social gatherings over a 5-year period in her early 30 s). Additional pertinent history included occasional alcohol use, no illicit drug use, and a healthy lifestyle with focus on healthy eating and outdoor bicycling. Family history was only notable for type II diabetes mellitus and obesity.
One week before admission, the patient underwent primary care directed evaluation for symptoms noted above with a computed tomography angiogram (CTA). Results showed diffuse nodular opacities throughout the lungs bilaterally with areas of coalescence and no lymphovascular invasion . On admission, the differential included infectious versus inflammatory processes, interstitial lung disease, or lymphangitic carcinomatosis. The patient was considered high risk for fungal and atypical mycobacterial infections due to living in mid-west and thin body habitus. Vitals upon admission included a temperature of 37.6 °C (99.6 Fahrenheit), blood pressure of 138/92 mmHg, heart rate of 116, respiratory rate of 39, and oxygen saturation of 97%. Comprehensive metabolic panel was notable for a sodium of 134 mmol/L (N: 136–145), lactic acid of 2.0 mmol/L (N: 0.5–1.9), alanine transaminase (ALT) 54 U/L (N: less than 33), and alkaline phosphatase 140 U/L (N: 35–104). Further studies included a procalcitonin that was negative at less than 0.05 ng/mL, C-reactive protein (CRP) elevated at 5.3 mg/dL (N: 0.0–5.0), sedimentation rate (ESR) of 80 mm/h (N: 0–20), and complete blood count only notable for an elevated white count of 23.91 × 103/uL (N: 4.0–11.0 × 103) with 95% neutrophils. Urinalysis was negative and imaging was obtained as shown below .
The patient was admitted to the pulmonology service for thorough diagnostic evaluation and started on empiric antibiotics. Respiratory film array including SARS-CoV-2, urine streptococcus and legionella antigens, cryptosporidium, cytomegalovirus, histoplasma, aspergillus, herpes simplex virus, and clostridium difficile were performed and were all negative. The patient subsequently underwent a bronchoscopy with right middle lung biopsy and bronchial washings showing lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma, interpreted as primary lesion without stromal or lymphovascular invasion . Patient subsequently developed an iatrogenic right apical pneumothorax picked up on post procedure chest X-ray (CXR) showing a right pneumothorax with 3.2 cm pleural separation and prominent diffuse bilateral interstitial alveolar opacities . A 14 French right anterior chest tube was placed on suction. This was followed by a positron emission tomography (PET) scan showing diffuse hypermetabolic interstitial and airspace abnormality of the lungs without lymphadenopathy or distant metastatic lesions in addition to right hydropneumothorax and left pleural effusion .
Due to the patient’s atypical presentation and worsening hypoxemic respiratory failure requiring supplemental oxygen and persistent right apical pneumothorax, the patient underwent a video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) along with talc pleurodesis and placement of a right apical and basilar chest tube. Surgical intervention included two right upper lobe wedge biopsies (3.4 cm and 1.9 cm at greatest length) and pleural peel biopsy (0.6 cm at greatest length) confirming lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma, moderately differentiated with positive parenchymal margins (invasion of visceral pleura). Programmed death ligand 1 (PDL-1) staining showed 2% expression. Advanced genomic testing showed a PTEN mutation.
Although the patient was being considered for trial of chemoimmunotherapy, the patient unfortunately perished from worsening respiratory failure on day 15 of hospitalization after family opted for comfort measures.