A 65-year-old male phakic, patient came to our service with a previous diagnosis of open-angle glaucoma, and intolerance to all topical antiglaucomatous treatments he had been prescribed. At that moment, he was being treated with topical latanoprost and brinzolamide. IOP was 22 mm Hg in the right eye (RE) and 24 mm Hg in the left eye (LE), measured with the Goldmann tonometer, and pachymetry yielded values of 530 and 541 microns, respectively. A surface study was carried out with a keratograph (OCULUS Optikgerate GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany) and the following results were obtained: noninvasive keratograph break-up time (Nikbut): 3 seconds (RE); 4 seconds (LE); ocular surface disease index (Osdi test, range 0–100): 38; tear meniscus height: 0.2 mm; osmolarity 315–320 (Tearlab), and examination with slit lamp revealed corneal punctate epitheliopathy in the lower corneal area.
Due to the poor condition of the ocular surface, we ruled out invasive procedures and treatment with HIFU was planned, by means of the Eye-OP1® device (Eye Tech Care, Eyetechcare-Rillieux-la-Pape, France). After signing the informed consent, the procedure was performed in both eyes, with a 12 mm probe. Treatment consisted in the sequential activation of six piezoelectric transducers for 8 seconds.
After the intervention, the patient presented mild anterior uveitis for 10 days, more than usual with this treatment according to our experience, 10 cases of mild uveitis, with a maximal duration of 3 days, among 42 pseudophakic patients treated (non-published data). It remitted with topical cycloplegic and corticosteroid treatment. After withdrawing this and the usual period of clearance (14 days after the HIFU treatment), the patient reported loss of near vision. Biomicroscopy showed pupillary ovalization, which persisted to the same degree 6 months later , with a normoreactive pupil. Near visual acuity did not recover the levels previous to the intervention, presenting an accommodation loss of 1 diopter, according to Donders’ test. The IOP during the first week decreased to 11.5 mm Hg (RE) and 12.5 mm Hg (LE), but after disappearing of the uveitis, it increased to 19.5 and 17.5 mm Hg, respectively. At 6 months, values were 25 and 24 mm Hg, without topical treatment.