An 86-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for lower abdominal distension and pain that lasted for 5 d. The patient had a sudden high fever of 39 °C.
Five days prior to hospital admission, the patient suffered from intermittent abdominal distension and pain. He did not visit his doctor, the symptoms of lower abdominal pain gradually worsened the night prior, and the symptoms were accompanied by frequent nausea, vomiting, and loose watery stools. After symptomatic treatment in a local hospital, there was no obvious remission, so he came to our hospital for emergency treatment. He had no jaundice or anorexia symptoms.
The patient underwent surgical treatment for benign prostatic hyperplasia 2 years prior and took finasteride + tamsulosin hydrochloride intermittently after the operation. Last year, he had difficulty urinating. Ultrasound examination showed that there was an increase in the residual urine volume and urinary retention. He had an indwelling catheter. The catheter was regularly removed and replaced in the outpatient clinic, which led to dysuria recurrence. The patient also experienced hypertension for many years, which was partly controlled with medications.
No relevant family history, travel history, or animal contact was reported.
The patient’s initial vital signs at admission were as follows: Blood pressure 146/79 mmHg, pulse 62 bpm, respiratory rate 18 breaths/min, and body temperature 39 °C. He had an altered mental state, slight abdominal distension, slightly weak bowel sounds (3/min), obvious tenderness and rebound pain in the lower abdomen, slightly tense abdominal muscles, and percussive tympany abdominal sounds. He had an indwelling urinary catheter, drainage was unobstructed, urine was dark yellow, and flocculent was visible. Scrotal symmetry, bilateral testis, and epididymis tenderness were observed.
The in-hospital laboratory examination showed the following: White blood cell (WBC) count: 12.61 × 109/L (79.1% neutrophils and 11.7% lymphocytes); C-reactive protein: 82.6 mg/L. The routine urine examination showed red blood cells 85/UL and WBCs 291/UL, indicating hematuria and pyuria. However, the patient's liver and kidney function, electrolytes, myocardial enzymes, and coagulation at the first day of admission were normal.
Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed 2 d after admission, which showed a lumpy and patchy left lower abdomen, with a high possibility of inflammation, a thickened sigmoid wall, blurred fatty space surrounding the pelvic cavity, and a possible left SVA . Combined pelvic and abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed encapsulated effusion and gas accumulation in the left lower abdomen with peripheral exudative changes, suggesting the possibility of an abscess. The left seminal vesicle was unclear with corresponding cystic foci, suggesting the possibility of an abscess . Chest CT revealed scattered chronic inflammation in both lungs.