The patient, a 22-year-old white Caucasian woman, presented with a long history of recurrent left colicky flank pain. An ultrasound scan revealed a dilated left kidney. Intravenous pyelography studies indicated left renal pelvis duplication with concomitant ureter duplication. Furthermore, UPJ obstruction was apparent in the lower of the two systems . Despite the presence of outflow obstruction, the kidney's functional capacity was only moderately decreased implying that prompt obstruction relief would likely result in complete remission and a fully functional kidney. After extensive counseling and discussion of the various therapeutic options and likely outcomes with the patient, pyeloplasty was chosen. Previous experience with laparoscopic surgery, the patient's young age and the already reported success of the procedure in the upper pole of a duplicated collecting system, pointed toward a laparoscopic rather than an open approach.
After general anesthesia induction, the patient received a single dose of intravenous second-generation cephalosporin and a second one 8 hours postoperatively. In addition, subcutaneous heparin was also administered at the same time, and a urethral Foley catheter was placed.
The patient was then placed in a lateral decubitus position and was ready to be securely stabilized on the operating table. Using the Hasson technique, pneumoperitoneum was established by insertion of a 10 mm port, 2 cm laterally to the umbilicus. A three-port technique was utilized and two additional laparoscopic ports were inserted below the costal margin and at the ipsilateral lower quadrant along the midclavicular line. After Toldt line incision, the duplicated UPJ was identified along with the two ureters located medially to the lower pole of the kidney.
After cranial mobilization of the lower ureter, accessory crossing vessels were identified at the level of the UPJ. Crossing vessels ran anteriorly to both ureters which originated from the upper and lower moiety, respectively. During the procedure, the normal upper moiety ureter was identified and protected from inadvertent accidental injury. After mobilization of the renal pelvis, the UPJ was circumferentially transected, the ureter spatulated towards the lower pole of the kidney over 2 cm and the renal pelvis reduced appropriately. Before the initiation of the anastomosis, the ureter was transposed to the opposite (anterior) side of the crossing vessels. A classic Hynes-Anderson dismembered pyeloplasty was performed using two 4-0 absorbable running sutures for both anterior and posterior anastomosis. Intracorporeal knot tying was performed in a free-hand fashion. When the posterior part of the anastomosis was concluded, a guidewire was inserted through a trocar in the ureter reaching the bladder and antegrade stenting (using a double J stent) was performed. A 14F suction drain was finally placed through one of the port sites.
Overall, operative time was 260 minutes and blood loss was minimal (approximately 30 ml). The drain was free of output on the third postoperative day, when it was removed and the patient discharged. Four weeks postoperatively, the ureteral stent was removed. Currently, 18 months postoperatively, the patient is doing well and is free of any symptoms. Intravenous pyelography studies at 6 months revealed a normal UPJ, free of signs of obstruction .