The patient was a 59-year-old woman diagnosed with right breast cancer who underwent a right mastectomy in 2007. The patient complained of persistent chest pain and ulcers for 1 year, and she had low quality of life.
The patient was sent to Guoyitang TCM Clinic, Beijing University of Chinese medicine on 29 June 2017. She reported having developed an ulcer on the right side of her chest 1 year prior, after receiving RFA treatment in Guangdong hospital. The patient reported coughing with a lot of white sputum. She reported that she had persistent pain on the right side of her chest and there was secretion at the scar, and she had poor mental status. We observed that her tongue was pale-white-with tenderness and the tongue coating was white with exfoliative tongue fur. The patient's pulse was deep.
In October 2007, the patient had an invasive ductal carcinoma that was diagnosed by puncture. Grade II was confirmed in the right breast tissue and lymph node via microscopy, with metastases involving the axillary lymph node (7) 4/7 and lymph node (9) 5/9 depicted in the surgical pathology report. Immunohistochemical analyses revealed the following: ER (+++), PR (+++), C-erbB-2 (-), VEGF (++), P53 (+++), and Ki-67 (+++). Having received postoperative radiotherapy, the patient continued taking toremifene as a means of endocrine therapy for 5 years.
In May 2016, a CT scan demonstrated a recurrence of right breast cancer and aroused suspicions of lung metastasis, after which ultrasound and CT-guided right recurrent breast lesions and radiofrequency ablation of the lung metastases were conducted. Following radiofrequency ablation of the lesions within the lung and right chest wall, the wound did not heal completely, and a chest wall sinus was formed. Next, the patient started taking tegafur gimeracil oteracil potassium capsules (20 mg per day) until January 2020. And is currently being administered fulvestrant injections.
In March 2017, the patient received a secondary radiofrequency ablation for the metastasized lesion in her left lung. Unfortunately, the patient complained of persistent chest pain and ulcers; a chest CT revealed a mass measuring 12 mm at its thickest point, suggesting the presence of recurrence and that the lesion was inoperable. The wound was covered with dressing, and the surgeon recommended the patient use a saline cleaner for the wound 1~2 times daily. However, in the patient's perspective, she said there has been almost no improvement. She felt that the condition gradually worsened. This clearly devastated the patient and seriously affected her quality of life.
Regarding her psychosomatic symptoms, the patient had suffered chronically from dysthymia after cancer diagnosis. Depressive symptoms increased with cancer diagnosis and multiple RFA therapy regimes. And her psychiatric profile became worse when the wound was still unhealed after 1 year. The timeline for medical history and treatment is shown in .
According to TCM syndrome differentiation, the patient was diagnosed with Yang (spleen and kidney) deficiency and Qi deficiency. Professor Dr. Zhang's (Doctor of CHM) main treatment goal was to relieve the patient's pain. She used the internal vitality supporting method to strengthen the patient's anti-pathogenic ability. A treatment course lasted for 7 days. The composition formula is displayed in the . First, the patient was instructed to take the herbal decoction once a day for 7 days. At the second visit, the patient appeared cheerful and lively. The improvement elicited during the treatment was highly significant .
Currently, the patient continues to take Chinese herbs after completing five treatment courses. Over the last 6 months, the wound has healed and the overall situation has remained stable with a slight cough. “I was very surprised at my change because I could hang out easily at home with my family with a comfortable mind”, the patient said.
In March 2018, the CT report pointed out that the lesion in the right chest wall with its thickest part measuring 9 mm, was smaller in size than previously reported (12 mm) in June 2017. The tumor marker test was sustained within the normal range .