A 43-year-old married female patient was brought to our institution by the Emergency Medical Service, from an Integrated Psychiatric Care (Assistência Psiquiátrica Integrada) unit where she had been hospitalized for 13 days with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, with a current depressive episode with psychotic symptoms and emotionally unstable personality disorder. She was under treatment with lithium carbonate (300 mg, three times a day), valproic acid (250 mg, three times a day), risperidone (2 mg, twice a day), diazepam (10 mg, once a day), omeprazole (20 mg, once a day) and chlorpromazine (according to medical criteria).
She was conscious the night before admission, but was found unconscious and presenting breathing difficulty the next morning. Chest compressions were performed for three minutes, which returned SatO2 (oxygen saturation) from 35% to 90%. No medications were found with the patient.
In the emergency room at Hospital São Paulo, the patient presented Glasgow 3, and she was tachycardic (100 bpm), with hypotension (80 x 50 mmHg), blood glucose of 125 mg/dl and SatO2 of 86%, but without pupil description. Flumazenil was administered, without providing any improvement, and then orotracheal intubation (OTI) was performed.
The electrocardiogram input (ECG) indicated sinus bradycardia and a long QT interval. The computed tomography (CT) scan showed no signs of bleeding or acute ischemia.
At the evaluation, the patient had hypertensive peaks (140 x 70 mmHg), hyperthermia (38.5 °C), increased creatine phosphokinase (CPK) (600 U/l to 1000 U/l), but with the absence of muscle stiffness, twitching or hyperreflexia. Nevertheless, treatment for neuroleptic malignant syndrome was administered, comprising use of bromocriptine (2.5 mg every eight hours) in a nasogastric tube for a few days, without improvement.
The urine sample was sent to the Toxicological Assistance Center, which confirmed the presence of benzodiazepines, with only qualitative results, and suggested the hypothesis of exogenous benzodiazepine intoxication, despite the chronic use of this medication for the patient.
Two days after admission, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), and she presented worsening of her clinical parameters. A new cranial CT scan showed diffuse edema with intracranial hypertension, and therefore treatment without using mannitol was started. After a week, another cranial CT showed no signs of abnormality. Throughout this period, the patient was being monitored by the hospital’s neurology service. After the intracranial hypertension had been resolved, a hypothesis of hypoxic encephalopathy was put forward.
The electroencephalogram (EEG) examination showed marked diffuse depression of brain electrical activity. Later, another EEG exam was performed and this showed somatosensory evoked potentials, which made it possible to infer that the patient presented cortical activity and that the EEG would be compatible with a conscious individual, but with a slight downgrade that would be compatible with use of benzodiazepine. The cerebrospinal fluid examination did not show any significant changes.
After 20 days of hospitalization, the patient had two episodes of crying, for approximately 20 minutes, expressing grief, which could not be related to pain, time or presence or absence of family.
A psychiatric assessment was requested in order to evaluate the possibility of interference of psychiatric disorders in the patient’s clinical improvement.
According to the family, for the last three years, the patient has been under psychiatric treatment for major depression, bipolar disorder and borderline personality disorder. She had previously attempted suicide with rat poison and had three times tried to slit her wrists over the last three years. She also had had five prior psychiatric hospitalizations, ranging from three to 30 days and averaging 10 days. There were also reports of command auditory hallucinations for suicide. From the history collected from the family, it was only possible to make the hypothesis of severe depressive episodes with psychotic symptoms. There were few criteria for bipolar disorder and cluster B personality disorder. The patient possibly presented a depressive syndrome, but this seemed to be less important than the current clinical situation.
There was still uncertainty regarding suicide attempts, since the patient did not have any medication, there was no reversion with flumazenil, the urine test was only qualitative, she was a chronic user of benzodiazepine drugs (BDZ) and there were medications on her prescription that could cause a drop in the level of consciousness.
Therefore, the hypotheses were organic mental disorders (hypoactive delirium) and depressive syndrome, and monitoring was maintained. The patient was stable, maintaining mutism, immobility and autonomic abnormalities. The possibility of malignant catatonia was therefore suggested and, considering the risks and benefits, oral lorazepam (1 mg every eight hours) was introduced. The psychiatric diagnosis was based on exclusion, and in this case there was a possibility of clinical improvement with medication.
After the introduction of lorazepam, the patient became afebrile after a few hours and, two days later, was already responding to verbal commands (like shaking hands and moving the upper limbs). Therefore, malignant catatonia remained a hypothesis, possibly associated with hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy.