A 53-year-old man from Mexico was referred to the San Francisco General Hospital chest clinic for the evaluation of a chronic cough and pulmonary nodules. His respiratory symptoms began in 1985 as an intermittent cough. The cough gradually progressed over the years and was now chronic, productive of yellow sputum, and associated with mild dyspnea. In 1997, he was diagnosed with asthma in Mexico and treated with inhaled bronchodilators with minimal relief. In 2004, he immigrated to the United States and was seen by a primary care provider for these symptoms and treated with a steroid inhaler without relief. At that evaluation, a chest radiograph was performed , and he was then referred to a chest clinic.
At his chest clinic visit, he denied any current fevers, chills, sweats, weight loss, eye pain, arthralgias, rash, or sinusitis. He had no pets or mold at home, no recent travel, and no environmental tobacco smoke exposures. He reported no other medical conditions. He denied any tobacco, alcohol, or illicit drug use.
His occupational history was significant for work at a charcoal production plant in Mexico when he was 18–26 years of age. He spent 10–12 hr/day burning wood to make charcoal, and he stood very near the fire. He described the environment as being very smoky. He did not use any protective respiratory masks. He denied mining, construction, or asbestos-related occupations. For the past year, he had been working in a restaurant as a dishwasher.
On physical examination, he appeared healthy without any signs of distress and had normal vital signs and an oxygen saturation of 97%. The remainder of the examination was normal except for bilateral forced expiratory wheezes. He had no signs of pulmonary hypertension, right heart failure, or clubbing. Routine laboratory tests revealed a complete blood count and blood chemistry panel that were normal. Three sputum samples for mycobacteria had no growth at 56 days. Serologies for fungal diseases were negative.
We performed thoracic high-resolution computed axial tomography (HRCT), using 7 mm helical technique after intravenous contrast administration followed by high-resolution imaging, using 1 mm collimation every 1 cm from lung apex to base . Pulmonary function test results were as follows: forced vital capacity (FVC), 3.46 L (91%); forced expiratory volume in 1 sec (FEV1), 2.31 L (74%); FEV1:FVC ratio, 67; total lung capacity, 5.27 L (95%); residual volume, 1.57 L (91%); diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide, 23.1 mL/mmHg/min (81%); and diffusion capacity for CO corrected for total lung capacity by single breath, 4.61 mL/mmHg/L (87%). Arterial blood gases were normal.
The patient underwent bronchoscopy for the suspected diagnosis of sarcoidosis. Bronchoscopy demonstrated a large black and gray plaque in the left mainstem bronchus and multiple smaller gray and black deposits in the left upper lobe, left lower lobe, and right lower lobe. Transbronchial biopsies were obtained . Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid showed normal cell differential counts.
The patient was diagnosed with “hut lung,” or domestically acquired particulate lung disease .