A 32-year-old female patient with a history of bronchial asthma of two-year duration came to our hospital for evaluation of uncontrolled asthma. Since her diagnosis, she was started on short acting β-agonists followed by inhaled steroids.
Not long after, long acting β-agonists and Montelukast were added to the treatment because of persistent asthma consisting of a persistent cough, shortness of breath and wheezes that were not responding to the treatment previously prescribed. She also was prescribed steroids as needed for relapses which happened frequently.
She sought help by multiple pulmonologists and internists, because it was interfering with her life activities, who prescribed her the same treatment and would put her on oral steroids which would improve the patient's condition partially but not completely.
Frequent exacerbations were noticed but since she was already taking the maximal optimal dose for asthma medications, nothing else could be done.
In our hospital, the patient was reevaluated with a detailed history focusing on the place of residence, degree of ventilation of her house (which was well ventilated) and exposure to allergens and animals at home. There was nothing of significant value with no allergen exposure, no history of NSAIDs or β-blockers use and no heart burn. She did however mention a brownish colored sputum with a plug like consistency and multiple courses of antibiotics.
She also mentioned that her husband is an avid smoker but not in front of her and her past medical and surgical history was unremarkable despite the asthma. She affirmed to be compliant with her medication but still suffering from frequent exacerbations that were partially relived by oral or IV steroids.
This led to the suspicion of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and thus further investigations were done which included:
A chest-CT scan that showed atelectatic bands. Blood and sputum samples that showed increased IgE levels (450 kU/L), increased eosinophils count (1200 cells/mcL) and a sputum culture that revealed hyphae .
Conclusively, the diagnosis of allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis was made, and the patient was started on itraconazole (400 mg x 1) and steroids (40 mg x 1).
After two weeks, on her follow up the patient showed significant improvement in her respiratory symptoms, thus her medications were tapered.
In a further follow up after two weeks, all her medications and nebulizers were stopped, and she was feeling well and free of symptoms.
In conclusion, after one month of our correct diagnosis and treatment, the patient was off medications and feeling well.