This 40-years-old Caucasian woman, with a history of childhood atopic dermatitis and asthma, underwent surgery for breast lobular carcinoma of 30 mm, histological grade III, expressing estrogen and progesterone receptors, with no lymph node involvement. In accordance with French guidelines, she received post-surgery chemotherapy including 3 cycles of the FEC100 protocol – 5Fluoro-Uracile 500 mg/m2/cycle (Accord, France), epirubicin 100 mg/m2/cycle (Mylan, France) cyclophosphamid 500 mg/m2/cycle (Baxter, France) – and 3 cycles of docetaxel 100 mg/m2/cycle (Docetaxel Kabi © (ATC-Code L01CD02), Fresenius, France).
Ten days after the second cycle of docetaxel, she had abdominal pain with diarrhea (2–5 stools/day), which increased after the third cycle of docetaxel at the same dose. The eosinophil count was 2001/mm3 at day 60, and 4685/mm3 at day 92 .
Systematic biological tests and digestive biopsies were performed at day 92. No parasitological, bacteriological, virological, immunological or hematological cause was found; only seric IgE were elevated (Additional file : Table S2). The systematic biopsies of the upper and lower digestive tract showed similarities in the gut and colonic biopsies. All four biopsies had diffuse edema of the lamina propria, lymphocytic infiltrate and CD117-expressing cells both in the epithelium and in the lamina propria (see Additional file : Methods and Fig. ). We used electron microscopy, and anti-tryptase and anti-eosinophil peroxidase antibodies to differentiate and count mast cells and eosinophils in the two compartments (see Additional file : Methods and Fig. , and Tables , ). The diagnosis of eosinophilic gastro-enteritis was excluded because of the small number of tissue eosinophils . Electron microscopy showed a large number of degranulating mast cells. No sign of thrombosis, necrosis or vascular-wall damage was found.
The blood eosinophil count decreased after day 96, three months after the last injection of docetaxel. Despite 4 months of hypereosinophilia, we did not detect cardiac, respiratory, liver or renal complications.
After day 182, the hypereosinophilia and symptoms resolved. This spontaneous evolution, the history of atopic dermatitis and asthma, and the negativity of all biological tests performed led us to hypothesize a diagnosis of a drug-induced hypersensitivity reaction (HSR). Using two validated pharmacovigilance scales, we found that docetaxel had the highest imputability score compared to the other drugs (Additional file : Figure S1 and Table ).
Docetaxel, a semi-synthetic taxoid that inhibits depolymerization of microtubules, is currently approved for the treatment of breast, lung and prostate cancers. The most frequent adverse effects of docetaxel are hematological (pancytopenia) and digestive. Diarrhea is reported in 30 to 60 % of patients (Additional file : Table S3), often associated with severe oral mucositis. These toxic lesions (Type A adverse drug reaction) are predictable, dose-dependent reactions linked to prolonged or daily exposure to the drug , whereas HSR under docetaxel treatment (Type B immunologically-mediated adverse drug reaction according to Gell-Coombs classification, ref ) is dose-independent . Severe HSR to docetaxel is observed in 3 % to 7.7 % of patients (Additional file : Table S, and Reference for review). Lethal drug-induced HSR has been reported in 0.05 % of 36,983 pati ents .
In the case of our patient who developed diarrhea and severe hypereosinophilia after the second injection of docetaxel, the two available pharmacovigilance scales concluded to docetaxel imputability. Since our patient had neither pancytopenia nor oral mucositis, and since docetaxel had not been administered daily or for a prolonged period, we concluded that the diarrhea was not related to a classic digestive toxicity but to Type B immune-mediated adverse drug reaction. The digestive symptoms occurred after the second injection of docetaxel, and the blood hypereosinophilia after the third injection concomitantly with elevated seric IgE. The digestive biopsies showed that the whole digestive tract was involved, with edema, large numbers of mast cells, and few eosinophils. Under electron microscopy, both eosinophils and mast cells were degranulated. Overall, these findings are in favor of a systemic digestive Type 1 hypersensitivity reaction.
Using specific antibodies (see Additional file : Methods), we showed that mast cells and eosinophils were distributed within the epithelium and the lamina propria. In bronchial biopsies of mild to moderate TH2-high asthma associated with blood eosinophilia , intra-epithelial mast cells co-expressed tryptase and carboxypeptidase A3, whereas mast cells of the lamina propria co-expressed tryptase and chymase. We also found these differential enzymatic co-expressions in epithelial and lamina propria mast cells in the digestive biopsies of our patient . In asthmatic and atopic patients, a similar immunoreactivity for IL-3, IL-5 and GM-CSF has also been found in bronchial and gut mucosa .