A 19-year-old Caucasian man presented to our emergency department complaining of right hip pain and fever. Our patient had been in excellent health until pain developed three days before his presentation. A day before admission, his temperature rose to 38.5°C, with rigors and sweating. He had no history of tobacco use, alcohol use, intravenous drug use, or any other factors for HIV infection. Our patient's medical history was unremarkable. A physical examination revealed painful hip movement and a positive straight leg raise sign, without any other significant abnormalities. Further investigation was deemed necessary and our patient was subsequently admitted to the hospital.
Results of a hip X-ray were unremarkable. Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 14,900 cells/mm3 (normal 4000 to 11,000 cells/mm3) with 70% neutrophils (normal 50% to 70%). He also had elevated inflammatory markers with erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 120 mm/1 hour (normal: 0 to 20 mm/1 hour) and a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 16.76 mg/dL (normal: <0.8 mg/dL). His creatine phosphokinase (CPK) level was 52 IU/L (normal: <190 IU/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level was 366 IU/L (normal 120 to 230 IU/L). Specimens of blood and urine were obtained for culture. The same day, he was submitted to a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen, which did not show any significant abnormality.
A pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed two days later with a 1 Tesla Gyroscan Intera scanner. Imaging included spin-echo (SE) T1-weighted imaging, short tau inversion recovery (STIR), and SE T1-weighted imaging fat suppression with intravenous gadolinium contrast injection (FAT-SAT+GD) images in the axial plane and SE T1-weighted imaging, TSE T2-weighted imaging, STIR, and T1-weighted imaging SE FAT-SAT+GD in the coronal lane.
The examination revealed a markedly enlarged right piriformis muscle on the T1-weighted image . On the STIR images there was an abnormally high signal intensity in the muscle, suggestive of edema .
After gadolinium administration there was widespread pathological enhancement, consistent with the presence of myositis. Inflammatory changes were also depicted in the adjacent soft tissues, spreading along the fascial planes .
Serology with a standard tube agglutination test revealed a titer of >1/1280 for B melitensis. Two blood culture tests were also positive for B melitensis. Antibiotic treatment for brucellosis was initiated, with doxycycline 100 mg twice daily, rifampin 900 mg daily and ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily.
Then, three days after the initial MRI scan our patient was submitted for a bone scintigram, which showed an increased uptake of radiopharmaceutical agent in the right hip, as well as high osteoblastic activity in the right sacroiliac joint. Our patient was dismissed from hospital three weeks later. After six months of antibiotic treatment our patient was asymptomatic. At that time he was submitted to a follow-up MRI, which exhibited complete resolution of the previous findings . Our patient has remained asymptomatic to date.