A 17-year-old male without any medical history was admitted with ascending weakness of both lower extremities that had progressed for about two weeks. He had upper respiratory infection one week ago. At the time of admission, his upper respiratory infection was improved and physical examinations in neck, chest and abdomen were unremarkable. On neurologic examination, he had symmetric weakness of both lower extremities (MRC grade 4) with paresthesia of both hands and feet. Deep tendon reflexes were absent in the upper and lower extremities. Routine laboratory findings, including serum complete blood count, biochemistry, urine analysis and C-reactive protein, were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein level was elevated at 72 mg/dL without pleocytosis and immunoglobulin G levels in serum (3370 mg/dL) and CSF (13.8 mg/dL) were increased. Extensive laboratory investigations including, thyroid function, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-ganglioside, myelin-associated glycoprotein and viral markers, were all negative. Motor nerve conduction study (NCS) of the median, ulnar, tibial and common peroneal nerves showed prolonged motor terminal latencies and F-wave latencies, and decreased compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitudes, sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) amplitude and nerve conduction velocity (NCV) . Conduction block and temporal dispersion were also seen in the NCS, compatible with demyelinating polyneuropathy . With the impression of AIDP, we started intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg per day) for 5 days and the patient was discharged after subjective improvement of neurological symptoms.
Eight weeks after the first onset of symptoms, he complained of further progressive motor weakness and tingling sensations in the four extremities. Electrophysiologic studies showed that the demyelinating sensory-motor polyneuropathy had worsened since the previous study . Guillain-Barré syndrome with treatment-related fluctuations or acute-onset CIDP was considered, and intravenous immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg per day) was administered for 5 days, again with clinical improvement of symptoms.
Four months after the second event, the patient complained of recurrent progressive motor weakness and sensory changes. Repeated NCS showed no evoked responses in the median, ulnar, tibial and common peroneal nerves, which was compatible with severe demyelination . With the impression of CIDP, immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg per day) was administered for 5 days and there was only slight improvement of symptoms.
Four days after the last discharge, the patient visited the emergency department on account of newly developed severe pain in the right lower abdominal quadrant with fever. He had no gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhea, prior to development of the abdominal pain. Physical examination of the abdomen revealed tenderness and rebound tenderness on the right lower quadrant. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) prompted suspicion of a periappendiceal abscess, and emergent surgical resection of the ileum, cecum and appendix was performed. Appendiceal biopsy revealed diffuse wall thickening due to transmural lymphocytic infiltration and fibrosis, with scattered non-necrotizing granulomas, which was compatible with Crohn’s disease . Since it was localized to the appendix and subsequent gastrofiberscopy and colonofiberscopy were unremarkable, he was diagnosed with appendiceal Crohn's disease. After resection of the appendiceal Crohn's disease his motor weakness and the sensory change in all four limbs gradually recovered without any maintenance treatment. Motor nerve conduction study after seven months showed improvement of electrophysiologic parameters and waveforms . After 12 months of appendectomy, he only showed minimal motor and sensory deficits on extremities and he was able to run. Also there are no gastrointestinal symptoms including diarrhea after surgery until that time.