A 61-year-old male patient was referred to our neurosurgical department with a 10-day history of an intermittent weakness of the right leg, mild holocephalic headache, beginning cognitive deficits and lethargy. A recent stay in America, China and East Africa was reported. There was no fever and no weight loss. Physical examination showed an ataxic gait. During the hospital stay, the patient developed a focal seizure of the right leg, which was treated with levetiracetam.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) obtained from the referring hospital reported two well-defined frontal bihemispheric masses, 54 and 40 mm in diameter, with a slight perifocal edema. The patient was admitted to the intermediate care unit and a computed tomography angiography was performed. The latter showed two large lesions in both frontal regions, partly inhomogeneous, with central hyperdense parts and with partial mural calcifications. A thorax and abdomen CT showed no tumor manifestation. A time-of-flight MRI (TOF-MRI) demonstrated the right ACA shifted to the lateral wall of the lesion, whereas only the proximal left ACA (A1-segment) was displayed. Time-resolved angiography with interleaved stochastic trajectories MRI (TWIST-MRI) was also performed and showed neither contrast enhancement nor intraluminal filling of both masses.
Blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) screening presented no signs of infection. There were no tumor cells in the CSF. Parasitological examination of blood and CSF was performed. A low antibody concentration against Echinococcus multilocularis was detected in the patient’s CSF (1:20).
Because of the recent foreign stay in East Africa and the above-mentioned CSF results, the diagnosis of a cerebral cystic echinococcosis was suspected. Consequently, no digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed, as a GIA in this case was besides radiologically considered extremely unlikely, and a microsurgical resection of the lesion was indicated. Thus, a left frontal craniotomy was performed. The preparation showed a very hard cystic lesion with vasa vasorum at the lesion wall evoking the differential diagnosis of a thrombosed aneurysm. The preparation of the GIA was most difficult due to the absence of a proximal control through the performed frontal craniotomy. After a careful and meticulous dissection, the lesion could be finally prepared in all directions. Furthermore, the aneurysmal parent vessel was found. The intraoperative Indocyanine green angiography demonstrated a very low blood flow in this thrombosed vessel. After clipping of the parent vessel, the two aneurysmal sacs were opened, and the thrombi and calcifications were resected.
Histopathological examination revealed wall fragments of an artery of large caliber adjacent to thrombotic material. The vessel wall was irregularly thickened with eccentric fibrosis or abnormal wall thinning; an internal elastic lamina was seen only focally. Hemosiderin deposits, calcifications and inflammatory infiltrates were detectable within the remnants of the vessel wall.
Postoperatively, the patient did well and had no neurological deficits. A DSA showed no aneurysmal remnant after clipping. A collateral circulation coming from both MCAs and the posterior circulation was detected. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient recovered from the operation and could walk without assistance.