A 76-year-old white German woman was referred to our clinic for an endoscopic treatment of a recurrent granulation polyp in her left main bronchus causing dyspnea, coughing, and mucus retention for more than a year. Furthermore, she had arterial hypertension and von Willebrand disease (type 2A). She took her antihypertensive medication regularly. When the first intervention took place sarcoidosis was diagnosed by a lymph node biopsy. Three resections via bronchoscopy were performed within less than a year. After each intervention the polyp regrew inside her left main bronchus causing a repeat of the initial symptoms. She presented to our clinic less than 1 month since the last intervention. Moreover, a corticosteroid therapy over a month did not prevent polyp growth. No other family member had the described disease. She used to work as a musician many years ago (guitar, alto recorder). An exposure to any toxic substance could not be identified. She lived with her husband with whom she had three healthy children. The medical family history was without pathological findings. On admission her vital signs were unremarkable: temperature 36 °C, blood pressure 120/70 mmHg, pulse 84 beats/minute, and breathing rate 14/minute. In the physical examination she presented a normal, rhythmic heart sound. Her abdomen was soft, there was no pressure pain, and peristaltic sounds were heard. Tapping on the renal bed did not cause any pain. Peripheral pulses could be detected. No edema was found. Also, no paresis, paresthesia, or other neurological abnormality could be identified. The only pathological finding was an inspiratory stridor over her lung. Capillary blood gas analysis showed a respiratory failure with a respiratory alkalosis due to compensatory hyperventilation: partial pressure of oxygen (pO2) 65 mmHg, partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2) 32 mmHg, pH 7.48, base excess 2 mmol/l, and bicarbonate 26 mmol/l. Apart from a reduced potassium level (3.3 mmol/l), the laboratory findings did not show any pathological findings.
First we performed a computed tomography to visualize the polyp . Twice we performed a rigid bronchoscopy in total anesthesia where we resected the granulation polyp with a snare wire loop and did an argon plasma coagulation (APC) of the base . APC is used for hemostasis and ablations of lesions in endoscopy. It is a form of noncontact electrocoagulation involving the use of ionized argon gas . After each intervention our patient’s symptoms disappeared and she was discharged from our clinic. Due to the recurrent growing of the granuloma despite interventional attempts, we planned a HDR brachytherapy as a therapeutic option with the radiation department. After informed consent and another interventional bronchoscopy with a resection of the polyp and APC of the base due to another relapse , a HDR brachytherapy was performed in conscious sedation. After visualization of the tumor with flexible bronchoscopy a flexible brachytherapy catheter containing seeds was inserted with the bronchoscope and placed at the target position. The bronchoscope was then removed and the catheter was fixed. The position of the catheter was confirmed by fluoroscopy. The applied dosage was four times 5 Gy. The procedure was performed four times overall and it was well tolerated.
Three months after brachytherapy our patient came to our clinic for a follow-up. None of the above mentioned symptoms recurred in the meantime. In the performed bronchoscopy only a small remnant of the polyp without a significant occlusion of the bronchus was visualized . Even 6 months after brachytherapy our patient did not have any of the initial symptoms.