A 27-year-old female with a pertinent medical history of tobacco use and intrauterine device implantation presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of progressively worsening shortness of breath for two days. Associated symptoms included a non-productive cough, tactile fevers, diaphoresis, muscle aches, and chest pain when coughing. Symptoms were present for two weeks and were felt to be improving until four days prior. The patient was also evaluated in the ED the previous day and was prescribed prednisone and doxycycline for a diagnosis of atypical pneumonia. Additional review of symptoms was negative for hemoptysis, extremity pain or swelling, history of venous thromboembolic disease, or any travel.
Physical examination was significant for an anxious and diaphoretic female in moderate respiratory distress. She appeared uncomfortable and was in a tripod position. Auscultation revealed bilaterally diminished breath sounds with mild expiratory wheezing. The rest of the examination was unremarkable except for tachycardia. Initial vital signs were a temperature of 98.1° degrees Fahrenheit (36.7° Celsius), pulse of 107 beats per minute, blood pressure of 134/75 millimeters of mercury, respiratory rate of 24 breaths per minute, and pulse oximetry of 91% on two liters oxygen via nasal cannula.
In view of the patient’s respiratory distress, she was given nebulized ipratropium bromide and albuterol, in addition to an intravenous (IV) anxiolytic. This resulted in an improvement in her respiratory effort and work of breathing. The hypoxia improved through the implementation of 100% oxygen via a non-rebreather mask, which was subsequently converted to a high-flow nasal cannula. Oxygen saturations stabilized and remained greater than 95% after she received the above treatments. The patient was empirically treated with IV ceftriaxone and doxycycline and two liters of IV normal saline. Both plain chest radiograph and computed tomography angiography of the chest were negative for acute findings.
Laboratory findings were significant for leukocytosis of 15.4 x 103 microliters (μL) (reference range 3.6–11 × 103//μL); lactic acid of 2.3 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range 0.4 – 2.0 mmol/L); C-reactive protein of 5.12 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (ref range 0.00–0.30 mg/dL); creatine kinase of 7,646 units/L (ref range 26–192 U/L); and creatine kinase MB (CK-MB) of 42.0 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) (ref range 0.0–5.6 ng/mL). Rapid influenza diagnostic testing was negative. M. pneumoniae antibody testing and viral panel studies were also collected but did not result until later in the admission. Patient denied illicit drug use, including methamphetamine abuse, which was confirmed by a negative urine drug screen. She was admitted to the intensive care unit and treated with aggressive IV hydration therapy, supplemental oxygen, and antibiotics.
During her hospitalization, both the serum creatine kinase and CK-MB levels were monitored serially and continued to rise with peaks on day two of 29,427 U/L and 87.3 ng/mL, respectively. These levels gradually trended down to a normal reference range by day seven and day four, respectively ( and ). Renal function was unaffected and remained normal with an initial creatinine of 0.76 mg/dL and a peak of 0.79 (reference range 0.43 to 1.13 mg/dL). Relevant admission findings included reactive immunoglobulin M antibodies to M. pneumoniae. She also remained persistently hypoxic for several days but ultimately was successfully weaned off all supplemental oxygen and discharged home after a seven-day hospitalization.