A 55-year-old woman was brought into the emergency room after reportedly ingesting 120 pills of 25 mg clomipramine in a suicide attempt two days before admission. Gastric lavage was performed a few hours after the ingestion in another emergency department, and 80 pills were removed. On admission to our service, she was awake, but disoriented, complaining of a dry mouth and tremors at the extremities. Her pupils were equal and reactive; she was dehydrated; and her vital signs were 86 bpm and 122/74 mmHg. An electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm with narrow QRS complexes.
Laboratory results showed high creatine phosphokinase (CK = 15,094 U/l on admission; normal range = 26 to 140 U/l), hypocalcemia (ionized calcium = 1.05 mmol/l; normal range = 1.15 to 1.32 mmol/l), slightly increased serum transaminases (alanine aminotransferase = 130 U/l, aspartate aminotransferase = 176 U/l; normal ranges are up to 31 and up to 32 U/l, respectively) and mild metabolic acidosis (bicarbonate content in venous blood = 19.5 mmol/l; normal range = 22 to 26 mmol/l). TSH and free T4 levels were within the normal ranges. Troponin I = 0.03 ng/ml (normal values are up to 0.04 ng/ml); urine analysis presented pH = 5.0.
The patient's medical history included depression with previous suicide attempts, obsessive-compulsive disorder, hypothyroidism and osteoporosis. The psychoactive drugs that had been used to treat depression were clomipramine and fluoxetine.
On the day of admission, the patient presented cardiac arrest with pulseless electric activity for seven minutes, which was treated in accordance with the Advanced Cardiac Life Support protocol, in the emergency department. A total of 100 mEq of sodium bicarbonate was administered. Spontaneous circulation returned, with sinus bradycardia and narrow QRS complexes, which were reversed with atropine. On the following day, after sedation was turned off, there was only a response to painful stimuli. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit without sedation, showing continuous side-to-side eye movement. The tremors at the extremities and in the lips ceased after benzodiazepine administration. The first cranial computed tomography scan, produced two days after the cardiac arrest, showed signs of brain swelling, without cerebellar tonsil herniation.
The patient's urine was alkaline (pH = 7.0), and, since she had been receiving vigorous volume expansion since admission, acute renal failure did not occur. The creatine phosphokinase levels decreased and, one week after the ingestion, the CK level was 385 U/l.
A chest X-ray subsequent to the cardiac arrest revealed alveolar opacity in the left hemithorax and in the lower right hemithorax, and also diffuse bronchi and low PaO2/FiO2 ratio. Ceftriaxone and clindamycin administration was started because of a hypothesis of bronchoaspiration. The patient developed refractory hypotension, with the need for vasopressors.
Even after cessation of midazolam and fentanyl administration, the patient remained unresponsive, with continuous side-to-side eye movement and a decerebrate posture. Midazolam use was resumed, and was maintained continuously thereafter, in order to inhibit status epilepticus. The cranial computed tomography scan was repeated 48 hours after the first one, and no changes were observed. After it had been determined that the neurological prognosis was unfavorable due to anoxic brain damage, palliative care was instituted, and the patient died two months later.