A 20-year-old female was investigated for recurrent abdominal pain, abdominal distension, constipation and nausea. She had a bowel movement every 7–10 days, with straining at defecation and hard or lumpy stools. She was non-smoker and was not currently taking any medications. This patient had suffered from these symptoms since her childhood. Her mother had similar symptoms and had a diagnosis of IBS. Her symptoms affected her schoolwork and isolated her socially; she has been hospitalized on many occasions. The patient submitted to a complete physical examination and was investigated by means of blood (full blood count, electrolytes, calcium, and inflammatory markers), liver, and thyroid function tests. She also underwent gastroscopy with duodenal biopsy sampling and colonoscopy with segmental biopsy sampling. The findings of all these examinations and tests were normal. The patient fulfilled Rome III criteria and was thus given the diagnosis of IBS with constipation (IBS-C). She was asked to complete the three following questionnaires : Birmingham IBS Symptom scores, Short-Form Nepean Dyspepsia Index (SF-NDI) measuring the reduction in quality of life and Irritable Bowel Syndrome quality of life (IBS-QOL) [-]. She was then submitted to a non-pharmacological treatment program at our clinic, which includes provision of information and reassurance, dietary guidance, regular exercise and regular intake of probiotics . Her symptoms subsequently reduced and her quality of life improved.
Seven months later, the patient was referred to the causal department because of a 3-day history of bloody diarrhoea occurring between 10 to 15 times daily, extreme fatigue and dehydration. She did not have a fever and with the exception of C-reactive protein (CRP), which was 17 mg/l (normal range 0–10 mg/l), her blood tests were normal. Colonoscopy revealed severe colonic inflammation with erythema, oedema, friable mucosae, haemorrhagic spots and ulcers. Biopsy samples taken during colonoscopy revealed preserved crypt architecture. However, a focal increase in the density of immune cells in the lamina propria and focal cryptitis and crypt abscesses were observed. Stool culture was positive for Campylobacter jujeni. The patient was treated with 400-mg metronidazole, twice daily for 2 weeks.
The findings of a physical examination and blood tests performed at follow-up visits at the outpatient clinic 2, 4, 6 and 12 months after Campylobacter infection were normal. Colonoscopy at 2 and 4 months visits revealed a normal endoscopic appearance. Moreover, the patient’s general condition was improved. Her symptom pattern had changed and she experienced an improvement in her quality of life . Reassessment of her symptoms according to Rome III criteria put the patient into the IBS-M subtype. Six months following the Campylobacter infection, the patient suffered from abdominal pain, abdominal distension, constipation and nausea in the same degree as before the infection. She was treated with 2 mg prucalopride daily. Six months later, the patient’s symptom was reduced and her quality of life improved .
Colonic and rectal biopsy samples obtained during colonoscopy before, during, and 2 and 4 months after Campylobacter infection were fixed overnight in 4% buffered paraformaldehyde, embedded in paraffin, and cut into 5-μm sections. The sections were immunostained with the avidin-biotin –complex (ABC) method using Vectastain ABC-kit and 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) peroxidase Substrate Kit (Vector laboratories). The sections were incubated with the primary antiserum/antibody at room temperature for 2 h. The sections were then washed in PBS buffer and incubated with biotinylated swine anti-mouse (in the case of monoclonal antibodies) or anti-rabbit IgG (in the case of polyclonal antibodies) diluted 1:200 for 30 min at room temperature. After washing the slides in PBS buffer, the sections were incubated for 30 min with avidin-biotin-peroxidase complex diluted 1:100, and then immersed in 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) peroxidase substrate, followed by counterstaining in hematoxylin. The following primary antisera/antibodies were used: monoclonal mouse anti-N-terminal of purified Chromogranin A (Dako, code no. M869), monoclonal mouse anti-serotonin (Dako, code no. 5HT-209), polyclonal anti-porcine peptide PYY (Alpha-Dagnostica, code PYY 11A), polyclonal rabbit anti-synthetic-human PP (Diagnostic Biosystems, code no. #114), polyclonal rabbit anti-porcine glicentin/glucagon (Acris Antibodies, code BP508), polyclonal rabbit anti-synthetic-human somatostatin (Dako, code no. A566); monoclonal mouse anti-human CD45 (Dako, code no. M0701), monoclonal mouse anti-human CD47 (Dako, code no. I5647), monoclonal mouse anti-human CD68 (Dako, code no. M0814) and monoclonal mouse anti-human mast cell tryptase (Dako, code no. M7052). CD45 is considered as a leucocyte common antigen and is expressed exclusively on cells of the hematopoietic system and their progenitors. CD57 is expressed by subsets of NK cells and CD8+ lymphocytes, and by a small percentage of CD4+/CD45R0+ T lymphocytes. CD68 labels human monocytes, macrophages and myeloid cells. Human mast cell tryptase comprise a family of trypsin-like neutral serine proteases that are predominantly expressed in mast cells. The total leucocytes, lymphocytes and mast cells, as well as chromogranin A, serotonin, peptide YY (PYY), and somatostatin cells. The densities of these cells were quantified by computerized image analysis using Olympus cellSens imaging software (version 1.7) on a computer linked to an Olympus microscope type BX 43 with an Olympus camera (DP 26). A ×40 objective was used, for which each frame (field) on the monitor represented a tissue area of 0.14 mm2 of the tissue. The number intraepithelial leucocytes cells and the endocrine cells as well as the area of the epithelial cells were measured in each field. The number of leucocytes, lymphocytes, and mast cells in lamina propria were counted per microscopic field. All measurements were done in 10 randomly chosen fields for each individual.
The densities of both intraepithelial and lamina propria leucocytes and lymphocytes were increased in both the colon and rectum at 2 and 4 months after the Campylobacter infection , as were the number of mast cells in the lamina propria in both the colon and rectum . The total number of endocrine cells in the colon and rectum prior to Campylobacter infection (as detected by chromogranin A staining) was low, but within the normal limits . This is in agreement with previously published results in IBS-C patients [,]. Although chromogranin A is used as a common marker for peptide hormone containing cells, chromogranin A immunoreactivity varies between gastrointestinal segments and even within population of the same endocrine cell type . It has been found that chromogranin A- immunoreactive cells are not representative of the entire population of endocrine cells and that they are the least numerous of all of the endocrine cells combined . The densities of serotonin and PYY cells had increased in both the colon and rectum during, 2 and 4 months post-infection . However, somatostatin cell density in the rectum was reduced in the rectum during and after Campylobacter infection.