A 21-year-old East-Asian female presented to our clinic with peripheral vision loss and impaired night vision. Past medical history included congenital hearing loss, for which cochlear implant surgery was done in her early childhood. The patient is the product of a reportedly nonconsanguineous union between healthy parents and had no pertinent family history. The patient reported an unaffected brother and no history of smoking and drinking.
At the time of presentation, the patient displayed a best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/50 and 20/40 in the right eye and left eye, respectively. Initial color fundus images revealed mild, bilateral retinal vessel attenuation and bone spicule pigment deposits in the mid-periphery of both eyes .
Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) images revealed an abnormal parafoveal hyperautofluorescence (hyper-AF) ring, surrounded by hypo-AF spots in both eyes (see Table and Fig. a). Initial spectral domain-optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) images revealed the preservation of the external limiting membrane (ELM) and inner segment ellipsoid (ISe) band in only the foveal region. Significantly reduced outer nuclear layer (ONL) thickness in the parafoveal and perifoveal area suggested heavy photoreceptor degeneration . Cystoid macular edema was observed in the inner nuclear layer . The aligned FAF and SD-OCT images revealed that the outer border of the hyper-AF ring aligns with the point of ELM disruption. These observations correspond with previous assessments of hyper-AF ring structure in patients with RP . Full-field electroretinogram (ffERG) tests displayed an extinguished rod response, combined rod-cone response, cone response, and 30 Hz flicker response in both eyes since the time of presentation (Supplementary Fig. ).
Follow-up examinations were conducted over a course of 10 years. At 31-years of age, the patient’s BCVA remained consistent to initial measurements at presentation (see Table for details). However, the patient’s fundus image shows a progression in bilateral retinal vessel attenuation and retinal depigmentation, along with an increased amount of bone spicule pigment deposits in the mid-periphery region, extending towards the near-peripheral retina .
Follow-up FAF and SD-OCT images show a progressive diameter-wise constriction in the perifoveal hyper-AF ring (see Table and Fig. c), with an equivalent shortening in ELM and ISe bands in both eyes . An additional reduction in ONL thickness was also observed in the follow-up SD-OCT images in both eyes .
The patient was diagnosed with Usher syndrome type 1 based on the presented characteristics of congenital hearing loss and syndromic RP. Subtype USH1F was confirmed by whole exome sequencing (WES) that revealed a previously unseen homozygous variant, c.60_61del in the PCDH15 gene (NM_001384140.1), which is predicted to create a stop codon (p.Phe21Ter) after the 20th amino acid. The variant was further confirmed by Sanger sequencing (Supplementary Fig. ).