A 13-year-old male with no past medical history presented to our emergency department (ED) with one day of fever (Tmax 103.3), three weeks of fatigue, myalgias, mild cough, two episodes of hemoptysis, and shortness of breath. In the ED, he was noted to have the following vital signs: temperature of 98.0° F, heart rate of 96 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 50 breaths per minute, pulse oximeter reading of 93% on room air, and blood pressure of 119/77. His respiratory exam was most notable for diffuse crackles which were worse at the bases of both lungs. His CBC demonstrated a white blood cell (WBC) count of 8.1 k/mm3, normocytic anemia (Hgb 9.7 g/dl, Hct 29%), and a platelet count of 261 k/mm3. Additional bloodwork demonstrated acute renal insufficiency with a blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level of 86 mg/dL and a creatinine (Cr) of 8.06 mg/dL. Electrolytes were normal apart from a mild metabolic acidosis, bicarbonate 17 mEq/L, and hyperkalemia with a potassium of 5.7 mEq/L. Complement levels were normal. C-reactive protein (CRP) was 18 mg/dL and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 55 mm/hr. His urine demonstrated microscopic hematuria (149 RBCs/high power field) and sub-nephrotic proteinuria (urine protein to creatinine ratio of 1 g/g). ANCA laboratory tests were sent in the ED given his constellation of symptoms. He was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit due to respiratory insufficiency and acute renal failure. The initial exam performed by the admitting intensivist noted that the patient was tachypneic with shallow respirations and had decreased breath sounds on right. An initial chest x-ray demonstrated a dense right infiltrate. On admission, he was placed on continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) for respiratory support. By hospital day two, he was noted to have improvement in his respiratory status and was weaned from CPAP to nasal cannula. Given the improvement in his respiratory status and the need to establish a diagnosis for his worsening renal insufficiency (BUN 88 mg/dL and Cr 9 mg/dL) the decision was made that the patient was stable enough to proceed with a renal biopsy. However, during induction of anesthesia, he developed frank pulmonary hemorrhage requiring intubation. The hemorrhage resolved with positive pressure ventilation. Computed tomography of his chest demonstrated concern for alveolar hemorrhage. At that time, laboratory results returned positive for c-ANCA antibodies (elevated PR-3) but were negative for p-ANCA. His other rheumatologic labs were found to be negative. He also was noted to have significant anemia secondary to pulmonary hemorrhage (Hgb 5.4, Hct 15.9%). Renal biopsy was thus deferred until his respiratory status stabilized and was completed at bedside on hospital day three. Given his pulmonary hemorrhage, completed renal biopsy, and laboratory findings consistent with GPA, he was started on plasmapheresis, pulse steroids with intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone and rituximab (375 mg/m2/dose) as part of induction therapy. His BUN/Cr continued to rise, reaching a maximum of BUN 113 mg/dl and Cr 10.09 mg/dL. He was able to make adequate urine, but due to worsening uremia, he was started on intermittent hemodialysis (HD). His respiratory status deteriorated due to recurrent hemorrhage. He failed conventional ventilation and was escalated to high frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) in an effort to tamponade the bleeding. At that time, his renal biopsy results demonstrated pauci-immune crescentic glomerulonephritis, consistent with ANCA-mediated renal disease.
Unfortunately, he continued to have active pulmonary hemorrhage and developed pneumothoraces and pneumomediastinum from high mean airway pressures. He had poor oxygen saturations, saturating in the 60’s. He required multiple chest tubes for adequate lung re-expansion. Given his complications from high mean airway pressures and worsening hypoxemia from airway hemorrhage, and concern for impending cardiac arrest, it was decided to cannulate for VV- ECMO. The goal was to provide adequate oxygen delivery until blood could be cleared from his airways through therapeutic bronchoscopy. To minimize the risk of rebleeding, the ECMO circuit was not anticoagulated for 48 h after which time low-dose heparin was started. Once the patient was clinically stable, a bronchoscopy was able to remove significant blood clots in his airways which had been the cause of his refractory hypoxemia. While on VV-ECMO, daily intermittent HD was transitioned to continuous veno-venous hemodialysis (CVVHD) due to his critical status. In summary, his induction treatment included the following: methylprednisolone (a total of 3 doses of 30 mg/kg/dose, maximum of 1 g/dose), rituximab (375 mg/m2/weekly dose administered 4 times), plasmapheresis (a total of five rounds), and intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG). Given that his clinical status continued to worsen, he was also given low dose cyclophosphamide (15 mg/kg) with mesna (225 mg, for bladder protection) for two doses, two weeks apart. He was decannulated after 16 days and extubated after 21 days later. He remained on CVVHD for a total of eight days and subsequently became anuric. He was transitioned to intermittent hemodialysis, which was discontinued after 40 days. Secondary to his renal insufficiency, he also developed hypertension, which was managed with nicardipine and esmolol intravenous drips and later transitioned to oral amlodipine, atenolol, and clonidine for subsequent management.
Considering his significant risk of superimposed infection given persistent fevers and leukocytosis, his prednisone was ultimately weaned to 20 mg daily. Upon discharge, his hemoglobin was 12.5 g/dL, Hct 37.5%, his serum creatinine was 1.97 mg/dl with mild uremia (BUN 61 mg/dL), and his other electrolytes were within normal range. He was making approximately 2 L of urine per day (1.6 mL/kg/hr).
Four weeks after discharge, his BUN and creatinine began to rise again (100 mg/dL and 3.8 mg/dl, respectively). In hopes of recovering his renal function even further, he was started on prednisone 60 mg daily and azathioprine 50 mg daily (renally dosed). Azathioprine was initiated with hopes of preserving his renal function. Despite intensifying his immunosuppression, his serum Cr slowly increased from 3.8 mg/dl to 6.7 mg/dl within another six weeks. His BUN also continued to rise (maximum value of 110 mg/dl). In the setting of worsening renal function despite of intensifying immunosuppression, hemodialysis was initiated and later transitioned to peritoneal dialysis. After starting dialysis, his azathioprine and steroids were then weaned off and he was maintained on rituximab approximately every 6 months. After one year of disease quiescence, he successfully received a kidney transplant.