A 7-year-old boy presented to the Outpatient Department of Ophthalmology, Himalayan Institute of Medical Sciences, with a complaint of drooping of the left upper eyelid with downward and outward position of the eye ball since birth, and it was associated with poor vision without diplopia. He had no past history of birth trauma or ocular surgery. His best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) for the right and left eyes were 20/20 and counting fingers at 3m, respectively. The pupils were equal, round and reactive without evidence of a relative afferent papillary defect. The results of right eye examination was unremarkable, but the left eye showed severe ptosis with 3 mm of vertical palpebral aperture without a lid crease and poor (2 mm) levator action. Bell's phenomenon was good and corneal sensations were normal. Jaw-winking phenomenon, head tilt and chin elevation were not seen.
Elevation was absent in left eye in all upward gazes [–]. The rest of the extraocular movements for both eyes were normal. His left eye had 50 prism diopters (PD) of exotropia (XT) and 30 PD of hypotropia . The forced duction test (FDT) was performed for restriction of the IR, but the result was negative. Fundus findings were unremarkable for the both eyes.
Full neurological and pediatric work up was done to rule out acquired DEP. A diagnosis of left eye congenital DEP with sensory XT and sensory amblyopia was established.
In view of strabismic and sensory amblyopia, surgical management was mandatory. Other indications for surgery were the vertical deviation in primary gaze, ptosis, and poor cosmesis. Surgery for strabismus of left eye was planned under general anaesthesia. Left eye lateral rectus recession of 8 mm and medial rectus resection of 6 mm was performed along with the vertical transposition of the upper split half of the lateral and medial recti to the temporal and nasal half of the split SR .
Postoperatively, the Hirschberg test was central without any evidence of anterior segment ischemia or overcorrected hypotropia . After 1 month, left eye ptosis surgery was performed via a frontalis sling by using silicone rod. Postoperatively, no residual strabismus or ptosis was seen. Proper closure of left eye was observed without any evidence of the lagophthalmos [–]. Thereafter, amblyopia therapy was instituted for the left eye, and the BCVA improved to 20/120 after 3 months.