The presented case report describes a 73-year-old male (born in 1944). There was no case-relevant information in his family history – his father died at a high age of 83 and his mother at 78 after a stroke. The patient experienced his first paroxysm of AF in 2001 (57 years old) and this was related to decompensated thyrotoxicosis (thyroid stimulating hormone <0.01 mU/l, free T4 32.40 pmol/l). He was also followed-up for hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and was administered an appropriate therapy – theophylline, perindopril, betaxolol, furosemide, and due to the decompensated thyrotoxicosis, thyrosol. After the initial diagnosis, he underwent several successful electrical and pharmacological cardioversions that were sufficient until 2009 (65 years old), where no available means of cardioversion were able to end the arrhythmia. Thus, since 2009, his AF has been categorized as permanent and was indicated for full anticoagulation therapy using vitamin K antagonists (VKA, i.e. warfarin).
In 2017, after 8 years, he was admitted to the Cardiology Clinic. The precipitating reason for his admittance was progressive and exertional dyspnoea – New York Heart Association (NYHA) grade II-III. A transthoracic (TTE) and transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed a giant LA sized 75x105mm, his left ventricular (LV) diastolic diameter was 60mm and the ejection fraction (EF) was 65%. Echocardiographists further described the presence of mitral annular dilatation with ruptured and flailed chordae tendinea of the prolapsed anterior leaflet, and significant mitral regurgitation with a regurgitation volume of 50ml. A supplementary finding was tricuspid regurgitation of borderline hemodynamic significance .
According to the current guidelines , a surgical procedure was indicated. Under extracorporeal circulation, as a minimally invasive cardiac surgery, the patient underwent mitral valve replacement by bioprosthesis, tricuspid valve annuloplasty with a ring and LAA occlusion by Gore stitch. The TEE performed during the surgery showed normal functioning of the mitral prosthesis and the tricuspid valve. LV EF was normal. LAA was without any residual leaks after occlusion. Effective warfarinization was set up aiming for an international normalized ratio (INR) between 2 – 2.5.
After 3 months post-surgery, the patient came in for his regular check-up, without any cardiac symptoms and with effective INR (2.13). A large sessile intra-atrial mass on the posterior wall of the giant LA was detected by TTE . The echocardiograph could not exclude the suspicion of mitral bioprosthesis dysfunction due to limited leaflet opening and increased LA/LV maximal gradient from the postoperative values from approximately 2-3 mmHg to 7-8 mmHg. Within a differential diagnostic procedure to differentiate possible thrombus from other intra-atrial masses (especially myxomas), CMRI was performed according to the standard protocol using a 1.5T scanner (Ingenia, Philips Medical Systems, Best, The Netherlands). Early gadolinium enhancement (EGE) images in both long-axis views and short axis views were acquired 1 minute after an intravenous bolus of 0.2 mmol/kg of the gadolinium-based contrast agent gadobutrol (Gadovist, Bayer-Schering Pharma, Germany). Extreme dilatation of LA (91x84mm) and a large sessile thrombus (60x30mm) on the posterior wall of the LA were confirmed by EGE images .
Due to lasting suspicion for mitral valve dysfunction, i.e. suspected incomplete opening of the leaflets and increased LA/LV maximal gradient from 2-3 mmHg (postoperatively) to 7-8 mmHg, the patient was indicated for another cardiac surgery and concomitant thrombectomy was planned. During the surgery, mitral valve bioprosthesis function was verified as normal and the thrombus on the posterior wall of the LA was extracted and histologically verified. The patient was without any clinical or laboratory signs of inflammation and the thrombus did not contain any bacteria. Genetic mutations such as Leiden G1691A and prothrombin G20210A were tested for and found to be negative. The following TTE performed 24 hours after the thrombectomy showed only moderate smoke in the LA (reviewed as 2 out of 4 on the SEC Scale - Smoke EchoContrast) and excluded the presence of a thrombus. Effective warfarinization was set up and according to the current guidelines, acetylsalicylic acid was added to VKA therapy for potentiation of anticoagulant therapy . At the scheduled check-up 6 months after the first surgery, the patient was again in good clinical condition, with effective INR (2.49), but a recurrent thrombus (60x25mm) was again identified in the gigantic LA using echocardiography. The function of mitral bioprosthesis was good. As the patient did not shown any signs of embolic events or cardiac decompensation, a conservative approach was recommended and clopidogrel was added to the VKA instead of the previous acetylsalicylic acid. The target INR was increased to 2.5 – 3.
After this second recurrence, complex screening for potential causes was initiated. The patient was closely examined by a haematologist for hypercoagulable conditions such as the presence of immunoglobulin G and M (IgG and IgM) against cardiolipin, glycoproteins, antithrombin, fibrinogen, homocysteine – all of these markers were negative. Platelet function was assessed using a platelet function analyser with collagen, epinephrine and adenosine diphosphate and turned out to be normal. Screening for potential hematooncological malignancy also came out negative. Further oncological screening included computed tomography of the chest and an endoscopic examination of the colon (colonoscopy), as well as plasmatic oncomarker screening and there was no sign of any oncological process.
Nine months after the initial cardiac surgery, the combination of clopidogrel and increased anticoagulant therapy (INR 2.89) still had not resolved the thrombus that was verified and quantified by the CMRI. The left atrial size remained approximately the same (93x79mm) and the size of the recurrent thrombus was 90x30mm. The function of mitral bioprosthesis remained normal and the patient was in good clinical condition. A conservative approach was advised as there were no signs of embolic events or cardiac decompensation. The therapy was actually reduced to VKA monotherapy due to patient-referred excessive epistaxis, subcutaneous hematoma formation and pruritus. As long as these bleeding side effects continued to occasionally occur even after the therapy was reduced and laboratory tests furthermore revealed signs of the precipitating hepatopathy, VKA was discontinued after another 6 months from the previous visit (i.e. 15 months after the initial surgery). As all of the guideline-directed therapies had already been applied, combination therapy using rivaroxaban together with clopidogrel was initiated in order to keep effective anticoagulation of the patient and in order to try to dissolve the thrombus. During the last two follow-up visits that occurred after another 3 and 6 months from the last therapy adjustment (i.e. approximately 18 and 21 months after the initial surgery), the patient was still in good clinical condition, without any embolic events and without any signs of clinically relevant bleeding. Subsequent thrombus measurement by echocardiography finally showed a significant gradual decrease in size to 22x36mm and to 14x22mm, respectively . The tailored therapy was maintained without any changes and the patient has been invited for a regular check-up in another 12 months.