We present the case of a 50-year-old Japanese woman with TCS and related conditions suffering from severe spasticity and pain in the lower limbs. She was born in February 1969 with a lumbosacral myelomeningocele. Surgery to close the myelomeningocele was successfully performed in the neonatal period. For 4–5 years before the current presentation, the patient had experienced exacerbating spasticity in the lower limbs without any evident cause. She had received rehabilitation and pharmacotherapy from a local doctor, but symptoms remained unimproved, and she was referred to her previous doctor, who in turn introduced her to this department. On presentation, spasticity of the lower limbs was very severe. The degree of spasticity was evaluated using the Modified Ashworth Scale (MAS) . MAS was evaluated for eight sites: the hip extensors (4/4), hip adductors (4/4), knee extensors (3/3), and ankle plantar flexors (3/3) in both lower limbs. She was unable to sleep in bed in a supine position due to severe spasticity of both legs. Touching her thighs resulted in painful muscle spasms. She was able to walk with two crutches. X-ray images showed lumbar scoliosis, excessive lordosis, and osteoarthrosis of the right hip joint. The X-ray image showed that the left L3/4 facet joint had disappeared and that spina bifida occulta was evident in the sacrum . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with modified scoliosis revealed the spinal cord located anteriorly in the thoracolumbar spinal canal and continuing to the subcutaneous tissue of the sacrum . Spasticity gradually increased in severity over 4–5 years, and the decision was made to evaluate the efficacy of ITB. Baclofen was administered intrathecally as a single dose of 50 μg, yielding an excellent response with complete resolution of spasticity. She consented to implantation of a programmable pump that could deliver ITB continuously. The catheter was introduced into the intrathecal space with the tip positioned over the T9–T10 interspace under fluoroscopy by paramedian puncture for catheter entry at the T12–L1 level . A pump for continuous delivery of baclofen (SynchroMed II, Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was implanted in the right abdomen . After ITB pump implantation, spasticity was greatly improved, and MAS at the eight sites was as follows: hip extensors, 1/1; hip adductors, 1/1; knee extensors, 1/1; and ankle plantar flexors, 1/1. During 24 months of follow-up, spasticity has remained under excellent control on baclofen at 38.5–41.0 μg/day without adverse effects. The patient was able to sleep in bed in the supine position and was able to walk with two crutches without feeling weak after ITB pump implantation. ITB therapy proved extremely effective for improving spasticity in this adult with severe spasticity from TCS.