The authors present the case of a 40-year-old female who initially presented 13 years previously (October 2008) at the age of 27 years. The patient was 6-month postpartum complaining of progressive left-sided headaches. Initial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on T1-weighted series demonstrated a 5.5 cm × 3.9 cm × 4.8 cm left frontotemporal peripherally located mass with solid and cystic components with evidence for internal hemorrhage but relatively little surrounding parenchymal T2 hyperintensity .
Following radiological diagnosis, initial craniotomy and resection were performed (October 2008), with gross total resection (GTR) being satisfactorily achieved. Indeed, the postoperative MRI demonstrated postsurgical gliotic changes with focal atrophy in the left temporal lobe with no evidence of residual tumor . The postoperative period was unremarkable with the patient being weaned off steroids quickly, with no residual neurological deficit and rapid recovery. Subsequent histological analysis deemed the tumor to be an astroblastoma, based on morphological criteria of the then current 4th edition of the World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors of the CNS, with typical features such as perivascular rosettes , hyalinization of the vascular wall , and positive immunostaining for glial fibrillary acid protein . It is important to remind the reader that the WHO grading was not formally applicable to astroblastomas at that time and that molecular analysis was not available to the laboratory then; yet, features suggestive of a high-grade anaplastic tumor such as conspicuous mitotic activity, cytological atypia, architectural disorganization, and pseudopalisading necrosis were not apparent.
Initial postoperative management consisted of close surveillance with 3 monthly MR imaging, with clinical follow-up thereafter. At initial follow-up in May 2009, the patient was clinically well with the MRI demonstrating postoperative changes only with no visible residual or recurrent tumor.
At 26-month postdiagnosis (December 2010), the corresponding MRI revealed two lesions in the left temporal surgical site. One anteriorly, in close proximity to the optic nerve, with the second more superior and posterior, located within the Sylvian fissure. At this stage, re-do craniotomy with excision of the recurrent tumor was decided on. Ultimately, GTR was again achieved, with histological analysis revealing frequent mitoses and more cytological atypia, suggesting the presence of a high-grade astroblastoma.
Adjunct treatment was discussed at this stage; considering the rapid timeline of recurrence and potential high-grade transformation, “glioblastoma-targeted” treatment was offered. The patient underwent concurrent radical chemoradiotherapy (60 Gy in 30 fractions along with 75 mg/m2 temozolomide daily) given from February to March 2011. On completion, she was started on cyclic single-agent temozolomide (cycle 1: 150 mg/m2 daily for 5 days; cycles 2–6: 200 mg/m2 daily for 5 days). Unfortunately, due to excessive suppression of the bone marrow despite of subsequent dose reduction, cyclic chemotherapy had to be discontinued after just two cycles (May–June 2011).
During routine MR surveillance in January 2014, an asymptomatic relapse was identified, and the patient was treated with Gamma Knife radiosurgery. Despite of the latter, the tumor recurred in August 2015 and the patient was reoperated with craniotomy and excision; the pathology reports confirmed the recurrence, with tumor cells present in the scar tissue at the site of the previous Gamma Knife surgery. This process of recurrence occurred again in September 2016 and May 2018, with the patient being treated with re-do craniotomy followed by 4 cycles of procarbazine (75%), lomustine, and vincristine (PCV) with granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) cover (lipegfilgrastim) due to hematotoxicity (July–December 2018). In January 2020, she experienced a further relapse, this time managed only with surgery due to previous low tolerance to chemotherapy; as expected, the tumor progressed further in July 2020 . No further neurosurgery was deemed appropriate at this stage, due to the tumor’s close proximity to the left middle cerebral artery with the inherent risk of cerebrovascular accident-related morbidity and intraoperative mortality. As such, after careful consideration, she underwent 8 cycles of reduced temozolomide (50%) from October 2020 to May 2021; G-CSF cover was not required as she tolerated treatment well. Gladly, the MRI follow-ups of December 2020–April 2021 showed satisfactory response to treatment, with decreased contrast enhancement and cerebral blood volume (CBV) at the site of the lesion. Although the surveillance MRI of July 2021 showed a small contrast enhancement in the medial aspect of the left temporal lobe, there was overall less tumor volume compared to the previous studies ; the nature of the enhancing lesion remains unclear as the most recent MRI (September 2021) showed minimal changes compared to the previous study of July.
Despite the recurrences, transformation, and progression of this high-grade histology, the patient remained clinically stable at the time of paper submission, with a performance status of 0 and no new or evolving neurological symptoms. Further chemotherapy with reduced temozolomide will be considered in case of recurrence on upcoming interval imaging.