The case was an 18-year-old male student with shortness of breath, chest pain and chest tightness for 1 day. The patient reported a history of smoking 20 cigarettes one day, on average, for one year.
Chest x-ray was normal. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed that the lesion with abundant blood supply within the LMB, measuring 14 × 9 mm in size . Pulmonary function testing revealed a restrictive pattern with reduced vital capacity to 1.44 L. There were no metastases on the bone scintigraphy, cranial magnetic resonance imaging and abdominal ultrasonography. Super selective angiography showed the tortuosity of branches of bronchial arterial, and the mass in blood supply area stained with contrast agent. In order to dismiss intraoperative bleeding and shrink the lesion, the supper selective bronchial arterial embolization was performed. Subsequent electron bronchoscopy under general anesthesia showed that the opening of the LMB was normal, and a spherical soft tissue mass was observed blocking the lumen about 3 cm from the carina . The tissue mass was removed out through endoscopic polypectomy with the snare and alligator biopsy forceps. The base of the tumor was wide and there were still residual tissues. The argon plasma coagulation (APC) catheter was taken and inserted, and the end of APC electrode was 5 mm away from the residual tissues. With repeated multiple points of cauterization for 1 to 3 s each time, the coagulated tissues were removed by biopsy forceps continuously until all the residual tissues were cauterized and crusted. When no active bleeding was observed, the bronchoscope was withdrawn.
Pathological diagnosis revealed that the IMT with low-grade malignancy of LMB may be possible. Under the epithelial mucosa of the respiratory tract, there were lots of spindle cell tumors consisting with scattered lymphocytes and foamy histiocytes cells infiltrated . Immunohistochemical staining results as follows: EMA (-), Vim (+), SMA (-), S-100 (-), CD34 (-), STAT-6 (-), CD99 (-), bcl-2 (-), Ki67 (5%+), SOX-10 (-), ALK (+), Desmin (-), p63 (-), FLI-1 (-), HMB45 (-) and Myo-D1 (-) . The targeted next generation sequencing (NGS)-based genomic profiling of his tumor using formalin-fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE) tissue was performed and a EML4-ALK fusion was detected. Although bronchial sleeve resection was recommended, the patient and his parents strongly rejected the further surgery, hence we proposed an individualized therapy that the patient began to receive Crizotinib, a ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitor, at a dose of 250 mg twice daily orally. The patient has recovered well after the operation, and no recurrence or metastasis has been found after 12 months’ follow-up . Pulmonary function tests were measured at 3 and 6 months after interventional bronchoscopic resection, indicating the pulmonary function improved to 2.78 and 3.03 L, respectively. There were no serious side effects during Crizotinib treatment. At the beginning of treatment, however, the patient had a transient blurred vision and liver dysfunction, that the highest alanine aminotransferase was 210.6 U/L. With the extension of treatment time and the use of liver protection drugs, liver function gradually improved to normal level.