A 58-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with hemorrhagic shock due to suicidal cervical stab wounds. On admission, her blood pressure was 69/46 mmHg, which recovered and remained stable after resuscitation. No active bleeding was observed from the two stab wounds, which were observed at zone II with surrounding hematoma to the right of the midline . No extravasation was noted on cervical post-enhanced computed tomography (CT). We undertook local wound exploration under general anesthesia, and found lacerations of the right internal jugular vein and the facial vein, which were repaired with sutures. Intubation care under sedation was continued until the following day. On the next day, 80-row 3-D CT angiogram (CTA) showed occlusion of the right VA at the C3 level . No arteriovenous fistula was noted. A retrospective review of the reconstructed CT the day before also showed occlusion of the right VA. The patient immediately underwent conventional angiography. The right VA angiogram revealed termination of the right VA at the C3 level after muscular branching, and the left VA angiogram revealed anterograde flow in the basilar artery, and retrograde flow across the VA union down to the right VA and posterior inferior cerebellar artery . A high-flow single AVF communicating with the right distal VA and paravertebral veins at the C2–3 level was also observed . The right internal carotid artery angiogram revealed no congestion of the intracranial venous drainage. Although the patient had no symptoms, we carried out elective endovascular obliteration within a week, but the patient’s consent for the treatment could not be obtained due to psychological anxiety. Magnetic resonance (MR) angiogram 3 days later showed no apparent VVF . Eventually, after 10 days, the patient agreed to the treatment. A follow-up angiogram 10 days later revealed an enlarged fistula with a venous drainage route from the fistula through the paravertebral veins, pterygoid plexus, and posterior cervical veins . Successive percutaneous coil embolization of the fistula was carried out. Briefly, using a guiding catheter (7 Fr Roadmaster; Goodman, Nagoya, Japan) at the left VA, a balloon occlusion catheter (Scepter HC 4 × 11 mm; Terumo Corporation, Tokyo, Japan) was settled at the C1 level of the right VA across the VA union to control shunt flow. Following this, a microcatheter (Excelsior SL-10; Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) was positioned at the fistula point, which was occluded with seven detachable coils (Target coils, Stryker; and Hydrosoft coils, Terumo Corporation) . Immediately after the embolization, the bilateral posterior cerebral arteries became clearly visible on the left VA angiogram , compared with the preoperative angiogram where each posterior cerebral artery was visualized through the posterior communicating artery. This suggested an improvement in circulation of posterior cerebral arteries. The patient was transferred to psychological care at a different hospital 2 weeks after the surgery with slight dysphagia due to right recurrent nerve injury. Follow-up CTA after 8 months showed no detectable recanalization of the fistula. Follow-up conventional angiogram has not been obtained due to continued psychological care.