A 52-year-old Caucasian woman with SS secondary to AIH/primary sclerosing cholangitis overlap was admitted to our emergency department owing to bilateral keratolysis and corneal perforation in the left eye. The patient had had filiform keratitis and recurrent erosions for the previous 3 years. The dramatic worsening of her dry eye disease followed corneal exposure in an artificially induced coma during her stay on an intensive care unit owing to sigmoid colon perforation and sepsis. At the time of admission, the patient’s right eye had deep corneal melting, and best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.2 decimal. In the left eye, there was a corneal perforation, and BCVA was hand motions. Table documents the surgical therapies performed in the right and left eyes owing to fulminant relapses of keratolysis and corneal perforations in the subsequent 10 months. Postoperative topical therapy consisted of dexamethasone disodium phosphate 1 mg/ml six times per day, cyclosporine 0.1% twice per day, ofloxacin eye drops four times per day, and hourly application of artificial tears and human albumin. Additionally, mycophenolate mofetil (2 g/day) was administered systemically. An enhancement of the systemic immunosuppression by corticosteroids or azathioprine was contraindicated because the patient had a history of sepsis . Intravitreal injection of the FAc implant was performed off-label in her left eye 2 weeks after the second penetrating keratoplasty (PKP) because of new signs of corneal melting and was followed by the third PKP and amniotic membrane transplant (AMT) 2 weeks later.
In the 6 months of follow-up after the third PKP, no more surgical interventions were needed in the left eye that had been treated with the FAc implant. In this eye, there was a closed epithelium, BCVA was 0.16, intraocular pressure was normal without any intraocular pressure-lowering medication . However, during this period, two further PKPs, one vitrectomy, five AMTs, and three tarsorrhaphies were performed in the right eye owing to recurrent keratolysis and perforations .