An 89-year-old gentleman had been referred for consideration of aortic valve intervention for severe aortic stenosis and preserved left ventricular systolic function (peak gradient 67 mmHg, aortic valve area 0.6 cm2), and background of transitional cell carcinoma of the left ureter with a ureteric stent in situ, and stage 5 chronic kidney disease with baseline estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 14 mL/min/1.73 m2. Coronary angiography 4 years prior demonstrated moderate–severe atheroma affecting the proximal left anterior descending artery, the mid-circumflex artery, and the mid-posterior descending coronary artery. The patient had been assessed for via haemodialysis via a radiocephalic arteriovenous fistula, which had not been created. In the months prior to the admission, exercise tolerance had declined, with dyspnoea upon walking ∼100 m.
Whilst awaiting aortic valve assessment, the patient attended an elective admission for routine cystoscopy and ureteric stent change (Day 0). Following the procedure, the patient experienced chest pain and electrocardiography (ECG) demonstrated bifascicular block with first degree atrioventricular (AV) block and planar ST-segment depression in the lateral leads. Troponin level rose to 835 ng/L. Renal function had deteriorated, with creatinine level of 512 µmol/L (5.8 mg/dL); eGFR 8 mL/min/1.73 m2. The patient was transferred for consideration of aortic valve and/or coronary intervention.
Clinical signs included a slow rising pulse, a grade 3/6 ejection systolic murmur and a diminished second heart sound. Echocardiography demonstrated peak aortic gradient of 140 mmHg and mean gradient of 89 mmHg, with mild–moderate regurgitation. The case was discussed by a multidisciplinary heart team. Operative risk was deemed prohibitive. The likely diagnosis was felt to be critical aortic stenosis, leading to restricted coronary perfusion and a type II myocardial infarction (though a type I coronary event was possible). The first priority was treatment of aortic stenosis and coronary revascularization would be considered if symptoms persisted following TAVI. Balloon aortic valvuloplasty was contraindicated due to aortic regurgitation. Transcatheter aortic valve implantation was therefore offered at substantial procedural risk, quoted at a 20–30% risk of mortality. Following careful discussion of risks and benefits, the patient opted to proceed. The risk of pre-procedural contrast medium administration for CT imaging was also felt to be substantial with a high risk of precipitating haemodialysis. However, haemodialysis would lead to haemodynamic shifts likely to be poorly tolerated due to critical aortic stenosis.
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance was performed using a Siemens 1.5 T MR system (Avanto Fit, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) with twin 32-channel surface coils covering the aorta and femoral arteries.
Axial imaging covering the entire aorta was performed using steady state free precession (SSFP) single-shot imaging [repetition time (TR) 288 ms, echo time (TE) 1.14, slice thickness 8 mm]. Cine imaging of the left ventricular outflow tract was used to derive precise annular diameters for valve sizing (24.6 and 25.1 mm respectively, ). The left coronary artery arose 11 mm above the aortic valve plane, and the right coronary artery 9 mm above. Non-contrast angiography of the thoracic aorta using respiratory and ECG gating (sequence parameters TR 274 ms, TE 1.56 ms, 320 mm × 320 mm × 110 mm) was used to predict fluoroscopic angle (LAO19 CAU12, ) and to measure aortic dimensions. Cine imaging using a radial acquisition clarified aortic valve anatomy, with right and left cusp fusion with severe aortic stenosis by direct planimetry (0.6 cm2) and flow assessment (4.9 m/s, ).
We used a three-dimensional time-of-flight sequence with higher spatial resolution to assess femoral arterial anatomy, with image contrast weighted according to phase contrast from blood motion (TR 481 ms, TE 7 ms, 320 mm × 160 mm × 175 mm). This demonstrated a 9.6 mm right femoral artery suitable for primary access , with a stenosis of the left femoral artery which was selected for secondary access. Three-dimensional reconstructions of the non-contrast angiograms of the thoracic and abdominal aorta documented tortuosity, though the aorta was patent. Total imaging time was 30 min. Gadolinium was not used.
Image analysis was performed using cvi42 5.11 (Circle Inc., Calgary, Canada).
Following imaging review, the procedural plan was to use the right femoral artery to deliver a 25 mm Lotus Edge valve.
Under conscious sedation, access to both femoral arteries was achieved using ultrasound-guided micropuncture and a temporary transvenous pacing wire placed. The working view predicted by CMR was verified by placing a pigtail catheter in the non-coronary sinus and assessing the predicted projection to ensure visible leaflet calcification was in plane. The aortic valve was crossed and a Safari wire was advanced into the left ventricle. Valvuloplasty was performed using a 24 mm Truflow balloon. Asystole occurred and pacing was delivered via the temporary wire. A 25 mm Lotus Edge valve was positioned using fluoroscopy and echocardiography. Before deployment, valve position was confirmed to be fully axial with no parallax. The valve was deployed with near-normalization of the aortic valve gradient and no significant valvular or paravalvular regurgitation on echocardiography . No contrast was used. Haemostasis was achieved using Proglides and an 8 Fr Angioseal device. A right-sided dual-chamber pacemaker was placed on account of ongoing AV block.
The patient made an uncomplicated post-procedure recovery. Following treatment of aortic stenosis, renal function improved [creatinine 512 µmol/L (5.79 mg/dL) to 383 µmol/L (4.3 mg/dL)] and the need for dialysis was avoided. He experienced no further chest pain and was discharged on post-procedural Day 7 following additional rehabilitation. At review 4 months later, the patient remained free from symptoms of angina or dyspnoea, without need for renal replacement therapy.