A 63-year-old man was evaluated for anemia (hemoglobin 11.8 g/dl) and hypoalbuminemia (albumin 3.7 g/dl) in another hospital. He had been diagnosed with gastric polyposis 5 years ago. He underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy, which showed multiple reddish polyps accompanied by bleeding and erosion throughout the stomach and two elevated lesions with irregular margins in the anterior wall of the corpus and lesser curvature of the angular region of the stomach. Histopathological diagnosis of the two elevated lesions by biopsy showed well-differentiated adenocarcinomas. He was referred to our hospital for treatment of gastric polyposis with gastric cancers. He had no medical history except for gastric polyposis, no family history, and no physical findings such as skin pigmentation or abnormalities of the hair and nails. Blood biochemical tests were negative for tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen, 0.6 ng/ml; carbohydrate antigen 19–9, 6.7 U/ml). Computed tomography showed gastric wall thickening, but no lymphadenopathy or distant metastasis. Colonoscopy showed only a polyp in the transverse colon, with a histopathological diagnosis of adenoma. The clinical stage was T1a N0 M0 stage IA according to the Japanese Gastric Cancer Association staging system (14th edition). He underwent laparoscopy-assisted total gastrectomy with D1+ dissection and Roux-en-Y esophagojejunostomy. The resected specimen revealed numerous small and large polyps throughout the stomach and two elevated lesions in the corpus and angular region, respectively . Histopathological examination showed the polyps to comprise edematous lamina propria with hyperplastic foveolar epithelium and cystically dilated glands, indicating hamartomatous polyps . The elevated lesion in the corpus was a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, restricted to the mucosa . The other elevated lesion in the angular region was a well-to-poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma invading the submucosa with lymphatic permeation in the submucosa and muscularis propria detected by immunohistochemical staining with D2-40 . The carcinoma showed tubular formation in the mucosa , dedifferentiating gradually as it invaded the submucosa . Seven of 50 lymph nodes were metastasized by carcinoma cells, which was histopathologically similar to the primary tumor (no. 4d and 7). The final pathological stage was T2 N3 M0 stage IIIA. After receiving informed consent, we analyzed the patient’s genomic DNA to obtain a definitive diagnosis of hamartomatous polyposis. Genomic DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded specimens of hamartomatous polyps and carcinoma, and target genes were comprehensively analyzed by next-generation sequencing with a multiple cancer-associated gene panel. The analysis identified somatic mutations in APC, KRAS, TP53, and ERBB2 genes in carcinoma, but failed to detect any germline mutations, including in SMAD4, BMPR1A, or PTEN, in hamartomatous polyps and carcinoma. However, based on the few characteristic physical findings and the histopathological features of the polyps, the final diagnosis was juvenile polyposis restricted to the stomach with gastric cancers. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 8 and has been monitored carefully with no adjuvant chemotherapy, by his request. There is no evidence of recurrence 16 months after surgery.