A 54-year-old gentleman presented with a 7-year history of right neck swelling which had progressively increased in size without compressive or infiltrative symptoms. He complained of a pulling discomfort exerted by the weight of the mass, accentuated by gravity in the erect position. He denied history of malignancy in the family or exposure to radiation. On examination, he was clinically euthyroid. The 10 × 10 cm swelling was located at the right anterior triangle of the neck extending from the submandibular region to the level of the cricoid cartilage and medially not crossing the midline . The swelling was non-tender, soft in consistency and had a smooth lobulated surface. It did not move with deglutition or tongue protrusion and there were no changes to the overlying skin. Biochemical thyroid function was within normal limits. Ultrasonography revealed an ill-defined, homogenous, hyperechoic mass arising from the right submandibular space. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a atypical lipomatous tumour with a deep extension into the right parapharyngeal space . A fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was performed but results were inconclusive. Therefore, we decided to proceed with surgical excision without further attempts to obtain preoperative biopsy in order to reduce the risk of tumour seeding along the biopsy tract and also because the lesion looked well encapsulated on MRI except at the right parapharyngeal fossa region.
A multidisciplinary team discussion between general surgery, radiology and otorhinolaryngology team was undertaken to discuss the MRI images and possible approaches to excise this lesion. The patient subsequently underwent excision of the lesion with the otorhinolaryngology team on standby for radical surgery if findings were suggestive of malignancy. Intraoperatively, a single, lobulated, lipomatous tumour measuring 10 × 12 cm in size with multiple engorged vessels on its surface was found to be located at the right parapharyngeal fossa . It was well-encapsulated with minimal adhesions to surrounding structures except at the superior part which was densely adhered to a part of the right submandibular gland. The right submandibular gland was excised en-bloc as it was most likely the origin of the tumour . There were no enlarged loco-regional lymph nodes to suggest malignancy. A small calibre vacuum drain was placed at the submandibular fossa to prevent sialocoele for a day before removal. The patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged home on day 2 with no complications upon follow up.
Histopathological examination revealed a fairly circumscribed lesion composed of lobules of various sizes and mature univacuolated adipocytes separated by fibrous septae . It measured 9.5 × 12.5 × 8.5 cm. There were multiple congested blood vessels of varying sizes and nodules composed of benign salivary gland ducts and acini with foci of squamous metaplasia. No fibrin thrombi were seen. An unremarkable salivary gland tissue was identified with no microscopic evidence of malignancy. No atypical stromal cells or lipoblasts were seen. These features were consistent with a benign adipocytic tumour of sialolipoma variant. During follow up at 1 month post-operatively, he was well without any evidence of complications or recurrence.