A 30-year-old woman, gravida 3 para 0, was included in this study. There was no prenatal diagnosis for two previous pregnancies, one ectopic pregnancy and one missed abortion. Neither the pregnant woman nor her husband had a family history of genetic diseases. Foetal CHDs were diagnosed by routine prenatal ultrasound at 21 weeks of gestation. Umbilical cord blood and parents’ peripheral blood were collected after written informed consent was obtained. G-banding karyotype analysis with peripheral blood samples were collected from the parents. Cytogenetic analysis was performed according to the standard protocol with a 400-band resolution.
In the CMA experiment, the detection of CNVs was applied with the use of Infinium Global Screening Array (Illumina, San Diego, CA) comprising 650 K Oligo Probes. Peripheral blood from parent and foetal cord blood samples was applied for the following measurement. A QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used to extract the DNA. This microarray was constructed for the sole purpose of identifying DNA copy number gains and losses associated with chromosomal imbalances. The array was scanned by the Illumina iScan microarray scanning system. Raw data were uploaded in KaryoStudio 1.4.3.0 Build 37 software (Illumina, San Diego, CA), and log R ratios and BAFs were calculated by normalization to a reference ‘cluster’, which was generated from a set of 2000 ~ 3000 clinical samples.
The MLPA was applied by Chengdu Precision Medicine Laboratory following the manufacturer’s instructions . DNA was isolated from foetal cord blood for further detection. MLPA (P160) was utilized to detect gene exon duplications in the sample to be tested, and normal DNA was used as a control. Twenty-three probes of NLGN4X, PUDP, STS, ANOS1 and GPR143 exon located at Xp22.32 in the kit were included for detection. Data were analysed using Coffalyser Software from MRC-Holland (Amsterdam, The Netherlands). The results were considered to have six duplications when the ratio was between 3.0 and 3.5. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed using standard protocols with an Aneuploidy analysis kit (Abbott Molecular Inc., Des Plaines, IL, USA) with the cells from the nonculture cord blood samples located within the X/Y,18 chromosomal centromere region. Data analysis was performed using a BX61 Olympus epifluorescence microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) with Applied Spectral Imaging FISH View 6.0 software (Applied Spectral Imaging, Inc., Carlsbad, CA, USA). The chromosome region with the information was provided by the DECIPHER Database , the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database , ClinGen database , DGV database , the UCSC database and the National Venter for Biotechnology Information .
This female foetus showed an approximate 8.5 mm primary atrial septal defect and blood communication between the left and right atrium at 21 weeks of gestation. A vascular shadow with an inner diameter of 2.6 mm was detected on the left side of the pulmonary artery , which merged into the dilated coronary sinus . A partial endocardial pad defect and a permanently dilated coronary sinus and left superior vena cava were diagnosed as foetal CHDs. Foetal cord blood samples were collected to measure the morphological structure of chromosomes, which depicted a normal karyotype . Furthermore, FISH depicted a normal result, indicating that the duplication region does not include the X centromere region . The peripheral blood of the parents was also used to analyse the karyotype, which were normal. The CMA results of the foetus demonstrated that there were recurrent CNVs at Xp22.33-p11.22 (arr [hg19] Xp22.33-p11.22 (178,624-54,151,362) × 6) . The pathological CNVs in this female foetus were approximately 53.973 Mb and encompassed 266 OMIM genes. It has been suggested that these CNVs are associated with CHD occurrence . The duplications of recurrent CNVs were confirmed by MLPA. The results illustrate that there are six duplications in this region . To define the source of these recurrent pathological CNVs, the peripheral blood of the parents was collected for CMA analysis. The results showed that both parents had normal CMA results. In addition, based on guidelines for the interpretation of genetic variants and similar CNV phenotypes observed in the literature , we classified the variant as clearly pathogenic based on the ACMG /ClinGen guidelines . The couple was informed of the genetic test results and the meaning of the CNV findings, and in conjunction with the foetal ultrasound results and family history, they requested termination of the pregnancy based on informed consent.