A 27-year-old previously healthy woman was transferred to the emergency department of another hospital in June 2012 because of sudden onset right upper abdominal pain radiating to her back. She was afebrile and other vital signs were normal. Physical examination revealed no abnormality except for right upper abdominal tenderness. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a multilocular cystic mass with enhanced septa, measuring 82 × 66 mm in liver segment 8 . No other lesion was detected in the CT scan. Ultrasound-guided aspiration biopsy of the liver mass obtained bloody, mucinous fluid and bacterial examination of the fluid revealed that it was sterile. Cytological examination showed clusters of small round atypical cells with high nuclear/cytoplasm ratio, but the diagnosis was inconclusive. Blood examination showed leukocytosis (white blood cells, 13.0 × 103/μL) with normal transaminase levels and negative hepatitis B surface antigen and antibody. Serum antibodies for hepatitis C virus, human immunodeficiency virus, and Entamoeba histolytica were negative. Levels of tumor markers of carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 were within normal limits.
The patient was transferred to our hospital three weeks later. Color Doppler ultrasonography showed the multilocular cystic mass consisted of thickened irregular septa and nodal walls with blood flow . Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography using Sonazoid (Daiichi-Sankyo, Tokyo, Japan) described the enhancement of septa and nodal walls in the vascular phase to the same degree as the surrounding parenchyma . Magnetic resonance imaging was performed but provided no additional information. We made a presumed diagnosis of mucinous cystadenoma of the liver based on the imaging studies and the patient underwent an extended right hepatectomy in August 2012 with no postoperative complications including hepatic failure. R0 resection was achieved. Histopathological examination revealed monotonous solid and sheet-like proliferation of small- to medium-sized round cells with rosette formation . Tumor cells were positive for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) reaction and immunoreactive for CD99 , NKX2.2 and the neuroendocrine markers CD56 and synaptophysin. EWS-FLI-1 fusion transcript type 1, which is the result of translocation between exon 7 of the EWSR1 gene on chromosome 22q12 and exon 6 of the FLI1 gene on chromosome 11q24, was detected by reverse transcriptase real-time polymerase chain reaction. Pathological and molecular analysis confirmed the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma. Postoperative technetium bone scintigraphy and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography revealed no bone or soft tissue lesion as a primary site of Ewing sarcoma, no residual lesion in the liver, and no distant metastases. Also, bone marrow aspiration and biopsy revealed no malignant cells. These findings supported a diagnosis of localized Ewing sarcoma arising in the liver. The patient received adjuvant systemic chemotherapy as follows: VDC (vincristine 1.4 mg/m2, doxorubicin 75 mg/m2, and cyclophosphamide 1200 mg/m2 followed by mesna) alternating with IE (ifosfamide 1.8 g/m2 with mesna each day for five days, and etoposide 100 mg/m2 for five days) until September 2013. We found no evidence of recurrence 15 months after completing chemotherapy.