We present the case of a 44-year-old, otherwise healthy, Caucasian German woman who had been experiencing paresthesia in both forearms and hands for 3 months. Occasionally, she had pain and paresthesia in her face when moving her head. Physical examination showed normal muscle strength in both upper limbs and a discrete sensory loss. Movement of the cervical spine was almost free but painful at the end of the motion range. X-ray showed osteolysis of C7. Magnetic resonance images (MRI) indicated increased signal intensity on T2-weightened images. The osteolysis was diagnosed as a metastatic osteolysis of C7 . The CT scan showed that the stability of the vertebra was compromised. "Hemangioma-typical" radiological findings could not be observed either on MRI or CT scans. Angiography did not show an arteriovenous malformation around the lesion and no accumulation of contrast medium was found in the vertebra. The laboratory investigations, including blood count, electrolytes, renal and liver values and infection parameters, were normal.
A complete staging including thoracic and abdominal CT scans, skeleton scintigraphy and MRI of the whole spine revealed no further lesions. The osteolysis was regarded as an unstable metastasis from an unknown primary tumour. Therefore we decided to perform corporectomy of the seventh cervical vertebra and implantation of a customary titanium cage via a lateral approach. A biopsy was ruled out because the lesion was already seen as unstable. We did not want to risk a pathologic fracture with further complications for the patient.
During corporectomy, an intra-operative consultation was performed. The frozen sections showed a cellular lesion displaying spindle-shaped cells with predominantly small, partly elongated nuclei with moderate chromatin density interspersed with immature, partly calcified osteoid. Thus, the intra-operative diagnosis was a mesenchymal tumor.
The postoperative recovery was uneventful and the patient's complaint of neck pain and paresthesia in the forearms disappeared soon. Ten days after surgery she was discharged.
Further microscopic examination of the paraffin-embedded tissue revealed vessel-like structures adjacent to and within the dense mesenchymal cells as well as osteoid . Typical linings of osteoblasts or osteoclastic giant cells were not observed. Thus, our working diagnosis was that of a mesenchymal lesion consistent with an aneurysmal bone cyst, in particular with a solid variant because of the solid areas containing capillaries and osteoid.
This atypical presentation represented a severe diagnostic challenge prompting consultation with a specialist pathologist. Intensive immunohistochemical work-up by the pathologist revealed a distinct vascularization of the lesion with partly collapsed sinusoidal and slit-like blood vessels . Criteria of malignancy such as cytologic atypia or an increased mitotic rate were not fulfilled; the lesion was classified asa hemangioma with reactive osteoid formation.
Since the final histopathological diagnosis rendered was "hemangioma with reactive osteoid formation", we recommended postoperative radiotherapy, which was refused by the patient. Six months later movement of the cervical spine was painless with a loss of rotation of 20 degrees. There was no sensorimotor loss in the upper limbs. X-ray examination affirmed a good and maintained position of the cage and a normal alignment of the cervical spine .