A 25-year-old housewife, with no prior medical illness presented to Kapit Hospital, Sarawak, Malaysian Borneo, with fever associated with dysuria, urinary frequency and vaginal discharge 1 week prior. She denied cough, shortness of breath or chest pain. She divorced 4 years prior, and was living with a healthy male partner and her two children.
Upon arrival at the hospital, her general condition was stable. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 132/76 mmHg, pulse rate of 123 beats/min and temperature of 38.6 °C. Her respiratory rate was 20 breaths/min and the oxygen saturation on room air measured by pulse oximetry was 96%. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Haematological analysis showed a haemoglobin of 13 g/dL, white blood cell count of 19 × 103/μL and platelet count of 431 × 103/μL. She was noted to have mild renal impairment with a raised serum creatinine at 129 μmol/L, while the electrolytes and liver function tests were within the normal range. The blood gas analysis revealed a compensated metabolic acidosis with good arterial oxygenation (pH 7.41, PaO2 107 mmHg, PaCO2 21 mmHg, HCO3 13 mmol/L, base excess - 12 mmol/L). Urinalysis revealed leukocyturia and the presence of Trichomonas vaginalis identified by microscopic examination. A urine pregnancy test was performed, and the result was positive. Serological tests for leptospirosis and dengue were negative and so were the hepatitis B, C and HIV tests. The chest radiograph was normal.
She was subsequently admitted to the medical ward for further management. She was started on first-line antibiotics, intravenous amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and metronidazole as treatment for a presumed urinary tract infection and trichomoniasis respectively. However, her condition did not improve after 3 days of treatment as persistent fever and a worsening trend of metabolic acidosis were observed (pH 7.36, HCO3 8 mmHg, base excess - 17 mmol/L). An abdominal ultrasonography revealed multiple splenic abscesses and normal pelvic organs. Her antibiotics were changed to intravenous ceftazidime 2 g 8-hourly as empirical treatment for melioidosis.
A detailed gynaecological examination was performed, followed by sampling of HVS for culture. Transvaginal ultrasound scan demonstrated an intrauterine pregnancy of 6 weeks and 4 days period of gestation but of unknown viability. Serial serum beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) was employed to determine its viability. The β-hCG test taken at 0-h and 48-h showed a reducing trend, which was indicative of a failing pregnancy. Two weeks later, she had an uneventful complete spontaneous abortion. Culture and histopathological examination of the products of conception did not reveal any significant pathology and there was no evidence of foetal infection with B. pseudomallei.
Blood and HVS cultures yielded B. pseudomallei, grown on modified Francis culture medium without gentamicin, as the B. pseudomallei isolates from Sarawak are predominantly susceptible to aminoglycosides . Preliminary identification using API2ONE test (Biomerieux) and Gram staining identified B. pseudomallei, which was later confirmed by real-time PCR targeting the type III secretion system . The organism was confirmed to be susceptible to ceftazidime, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole by the Etest (Biomerieux, France) according to CLSI standard. ELISA for the detection of IgM against B. pseudomallei was negative. The urine culture was negative. She responded well to treatment, with fever and metabolic acidosis resolving by day 10. She received intravenous ceftazidime for a total of 4 weeks and repeat abdominal ultrasonography upon completion of intensive therapy showed resolution of the splenic abscesses. She then completed a 20-week course of oral doxycycline and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole as eradication phase treatment according to the local treatment protocol . During follow-up review, she remained well and showed no signs of disease recurrence.
The patient’s partner was totally healthy and asymptomatic. He denied having fever, penile discharge, genital ulcer or dysuria. He was offered screening for sexually transmitted diseases and melioidosis, but declined. Hence, we were unable to establish the potential sexual transmission route of B. pseudomallei in this case.