A 40-year-old Caucasian man with liver cirrhosis and nephrotic syndrome, presented to our Liver Unit in December 2007. His liver disease had been diagnosed when he was 14 years old. Viral and autoimmune etiologies as well as inborn errors of metabolism were then excluded. After the occurrence of an episode of variceal bleeding at the age of 28, a successful prophylaxis of rebleeding with propranolol was started. From histological examinations, he had been diagnosed with hepatoportal sclerosis at age 30 and membranous glomerulonephritis at age 33 requiring the administration of furosemide (125 mg/day).
In January 2008, he was admitted as an inpatient to our Unit for a full evaluation for potential liver transplantation. He was asymptomatic and a physical examination revealed a slight hepatomegaly and splenomegaly, without asterixis, jaundice or ascites. An ultrasonography of our patient demonstrated evidence of portal hypertension, including an enlarged portal vein diameter and the presence of collateral circles. His proteinuria was 3.7 g/24 hours, despite the administration of losartan 50 mg/day prescribed six weeks previously, with normal creatinine values. Thus, ramipril 2.5 mg/day was added.
About 12 hours after the first dose of ramipril, our patient became unconscious. His Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 6 (O1, V1, M4), blood pressure (BP) 130/80 and heart rate (HR) 60 bpm. No substantial changes from baseline were observed in biochemistry and blood gas analysis ; while his toxicological screening was negative. A cerebral computed tomography (CT) scan revealed no signs of compression or bleeding, while an electroencephalogram (EEG) showed overall slow brain activity compatible with toxic or metabolic alterations. His oral therapy was withdrawn and treatment with lactulose enema and intravenous hydration with branched-chain amino-acids was started, leading to recovery within 30-36 hours. After return to full consciousness, angiotensin block was re-introduced and after 48 hours his encephalopathy symptoms relapsed (GCS = 6). His CT scan was again negative and his EEG was similar to the previous one; while his blood ammonia concentration was dramatically elevated to 990 μg/dL. Our patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), where the episode was successfully treated.
Angiotensin block was re-introduced for a third time with an addition of maximal lactulose therapy (oral and by enema) and oral rifaximin. By then, our patient was awake and conscious, although imperceptive and detached from his environment. After four days, ACEIs and ARBs were withdrawn, leading to a complete neurological recovery. He was discharged and remained asymptomatic with no further episodes of hepatic encephalopathy with low (normal) ammonia levels at repeated checks for 10 weeks.