A 72-year-old Caucasian woman presented with squeezing chest pain. The pain had started 30 minutes previously and was associated with nausea, vertigo, shortness of breath and weakness. Her history was significant for hypertension and coronary artery disease. Two years before admission, she had undergone coronary angiography because of angina, which revealed three-vessel coronary disease. The examination was followed by repeated angioplasty with stent implantation. A drug-eluting stent had also been applied. The first intervention had been complicated by a haematoma at the femoral puncture site.
On physical examination, the patient had a blood pressure of 130/60 mmHg and a heart rate of 65 beats per minute. The lung and heart sounds were clear on auscultation. Her weight was 60 kg, her height was 156 cm and her body mass index was 24.65 kg/m2. An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm without signs of myocardial ischaemia. Laboratory testing was significant for haemoglobin at 11.4 g/dL, blood urea nitrogen at 10.45 mmol/L and creatinin at 131 μmol/L. The creatinin clearance calculated with the Cockroft-Gault equation was 26.47 mL per minute. There was no elevation of cardiac troponin-I and creatine phosphokinase-MB isoenzyme levels.
After admission, her symptoms soon subsided. Repeated electrocardiography did not show signs of ischaemia, and the troponin-I value remained in the normal range. A diagnosis of unstable angina was established. The patient received early conservative treatment with the following pharmacotherapy: 2 × 60 mg enoxaparin subcutaneously, 75 mg clopidogrel, 100 mg aspirin, 50 mg metoprolol, 20 mg atorvastatin, 0.2 mg per hour transdermal nitroglycerin, 80 mg valsartan and 12.5 mg hydrochlorothiazide.
On the fifth day of her hospital stay, an exercise stress test was performed on a bicycle ergometer where she reached 3.9 metabolic equivalent and no ischaemic response occurred. A few hours later, she experienced pain in the left side of her abdomen. On examination, a palpable, growing tender mass was detected in the lower left quadrant. An abdominal ultrasound scan demonstrated a rectus sheath haematoma with a depth of 20 mm and a width of 40 mm. The upper margin of the haematoma was at the umbilicus, the lower reached the pubic bone. As continued haemorrhage was suspected, the patient underwent surgical exploration with haematoma evacuation, and received a blood transfusion. She remained on a reduced dose of enoxaparin (1 × 60 mg). Since she was febrile and showed a decreasing haemoglobin level, on the 9th postoperative day a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed. This showed a recurrence of the rectus sheath haematoma and its extension in the abdominal wall. A second haematoma evacuation was performed. Subsequently, no recurrence of bleeding was observed, but the patient developed an ascending superficial thrombophlebitis on the left lower limb, which was treated with ligature. She was finally discharged in good health.