A 29-year-old man with a medical history of tuberous sclerosis was admitted to our hospital for fever, vomiting, and weight loss (4 kg/month). His serum C-reactive protein and hepatic enzyme levels were increased. Tests for all evaluated markers of hepatic viruses and tumors such as alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, protein induced by vitamin K absence-2, and cancer antigen 19–9 were negative.
Abdominal dynamic CT revealed faint hypervascular hepatic tumors in segments 5 (S5; 67 mm) and 6 (S6; 10 mm), with rapid washout and clear borders but without definite fatty densities. CT also revealed multiple tumors with fat components in both kidneys, but these did not show definite enhancements .
Abdominal MR imaging (1.5 T Magnetom Symphony; Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) revealed that the hepatic lesions were slightly hypointense on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI), slightly hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI), and hyperintense on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) with no apparent fat component . The tumors in both kidneys were mildly hypointense on both T1WI and T2WI and mildly hyperintense with fat components on DWI.
18 F-FDG PET/CT (Biograph 16; Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) imaging revealed that the hepatic tumors exhibited high maximum standard uptake values (SUVmax) of 6.27 (S5) and 3.22 (S6; Figure ). No definite FDG-uptake was observed in the renal AMLs.
Although a preoperative percutaneous biopsy was performed and a histological examination of the specimens suggested the diagnosis of angiomyolipoma, the high FDG uptake and increasing tumor sizes made it difficult to exclude a malignant transformation of angiomyolipoma. A right hepatic lobectomy was performed and a part of the middle hepatic vein was also excised. The patient recovered well after surgery. His initial symptoms resolved completely, and his serological parameters of inflammation returned to normal by the time of release from hospital. Currently, the patient remains in a healthy condition and has exhibited no signs of recurrence at 4 years after surgery.
Histological examination revealed that these tumors were characterized by the background infiltration of numerous inflammatory cells, including spindle-shaped cells, and an absence of fat and thus resembled inflammatory pseudotumors. On immunohistochemical analysis, the tumors stained positively for HMB-45, CD31, vimentin, and α-smooth muscle actin. However, the tumor cells were negative for keratin, epithelial membrane antigen, hepatocyte paraffin1, c-kit, CD34, CD56, and S-100. The tumor was hence diagnosed as an inflammatory pseudotumor-like AML.