A 47-year-old man was admitted for pain in the left posterior nuchal and shoulder regions and left-sided weakness and numbness.
Three hours prior to admission, he had received a cervical epidural block for head and neck pain. One hour after this block, he felt severe neck pain followed by left-sided weakness.
The patient had diabetes and had recently received medication (Amaryl M 2/500 mg). He had experienced a traffic accident six months prior to admission and since then had taken intermittent conservative treatments for persistent head and neck pain from another local hospital. The patient reported that he did not undergo magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and that X-ray scanning had revealed no significant abnormalities.
The patient had a free personal and family history.
Upon admission, a neurological examination revealed global weakness on the left side (hand grasping (V/II), elbow extension (V/III), elbow flexion (V/III), knee flexion (V/III), knee extension (V/III), hip flexion (V/III), and hip extension (V/III)). Sensory testing revealed painful numbness (allodynia) on the lateral side of the left upper arm. The anal sphincter tone was intact.
Laboratory findings were normal.
Emergency MRI revealed an epidural hemorrhage at the C2-T6 level causing central spinal canal stenosis and cord compression at the C3-T1 level .
Following the diagnosis of a cervical epidural hematoma, the patient was transferred to the Neurosurgery Department for continued care. A total C3-6 laminectomy with a partial laminectomy at the C2 level (dome-like enlargement) and the upper lamina at the C7 level, with hematoma removal and lateral mass screw fixation at C3-6, as well as posterior fusion were performed. Postoperatively, neurologic recovery was initially observed, but five days later, the patient’s neck pain worsened severely. Continuous oozing was seen at the hemovac removal site and swelling was observed in the posterior nuchal area. A follow-up MRI demonstrated fluid collection (5.6 cm × 6.6 cm × 11.2 cm) at the posterior operative site at the C3-6 level .