A 65-year-old female hemodialysis patient with ESRD due to IgA nephritis was offered a kidney from a 70-year-old deceased donor on May 27, 2020. Her waiting time was nearly 6 years. Donor eGFR was 94 ml/min, the cause of brain death was intracerebral bleeding. Additional donor risk factors were hypertension and history of smoking.
The recipient herself was hospitalized for 7 days due to Covid-19 pneumonia from March 23 to April 7, 2020. Her symptoms at onset were fever and shortness of breath, and she subsequently tested positive with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for SARS-CoV-2 in a nasopharyngeal swab on March 16, 2020 . In hospital, she received nasal oxygen supplementation and supportive antibiotic treatment. High-flow O2-therapy or non-invasive ventilation (NIV) was not necessary. The two following PCR-tests in April were negative, and she had been discharged without respiratory symptoms 7 weeks before the organ offer. She did not report intercurrent infections.
At the time of admission for transplantation, the patient was completely symptom-free with no residual signs of infection: CRP was normal, as were leukocyte and lymphocyte counts. Chest X-ray did not show infiltrates. She again tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 by PCR, however this test result was not known until after transplantation. The transplantation into the right fossa was without surgical complications. She received our standard immunosuppressive regimen consisting of Tacrolimus, Mycophenolate and steroids after induction therapy with Basiliximab. She received Valganciclovir as her and the donor’s CMV-serostatus was positive. Her antibiotic prophylaxis was Ampicilline/Sulbactame for 7 days. The allograft developed primary function with a serum creatinine level of 1.5 mg/dl at discharge without signs of recurrent COVID-19. Laboratory results are depicted in Table .
Eight weeks after transplantation the patient developed acute kidney injury KDIGO I. She was admitted to our hospital and again tested PCR-negative for SARS-CoV-2 in the nasal swab. The biopsy diagnosis was suspicious (Borderline) for acute T-cell-mediated rejection, mild acute tubular damage with isometric vacuolization of tubular epithelial cells, the latter suggestive of calcineurin-inhibitor toxicity at a tacrolimus trough level of 10 ng/ml. No viral particles could be found with electron microscopy in tubular epithelial cells or podocytes (not shown). Under a three-day course of high dose steroids and intravenous fluid, serum creatinine levels reached baseline again. At present, more than 9 months after transplantation, the patient has an uncomplicated follow-up with a stable serum creatinine of 1.6 mg/dl.
At the onset of COVID-19 pneumonia, the patient tested PCR-positive for SARS-CoV-2 on March 16, 2020 . Subsequently, the nasopharyngeal swab became negative on April 2nd. Between this sample and the sample before transplantation, no tests were performed as the patient did not have typical symptoms of COVID-19. At time of transplantation in May, PCR was still negative, as were the following tests which were done before scheduled admissions to the hospital .
For a complete overview of the antibody reaction to SARS-CoV-2, we retrospectively analyzed plasma which was assessed on the waiting list before she suffered COVID-19 pneumonia. While SARS-CoV-2 PCR in the throat wash and nasal swabs remained negative on all tests since convalescence, antibody testing for IgG and IgM showed a classic serological response . As can be seen, SARS-CoV-2 antibodies were not detectable in January, where the routine HLA-testing was performed before her infection with SARS-CoV-2. After returning on the waiting-list the serum of April already shows an antibody response. Directly before and after transplantation in May, IgG detection remains stable with decreasing intensity of IgM detection, a trend continuing until July.
Renal function declined on July 30 during follow up, due to biopsy-proven Borderline rejection and possible mild CNI-toxicity. Despite lack of symptoms of upper respiratory tract infection, we wanted to rule out COVID-19 associated renal injury. Electron microscopy did not show viral particles (not shown).