A 22-year-old Turkish female was admitted with headache and vomiting. She presented with a history of frontal lobe brain abscess which had been operated on in the previous 2 months. The abscess was surgically resected using resorbable hemostatic agents in the operation area. After the initial surgery, third-generation cephalosporin was started and continued for 10 days. The neurologic examination was normal. There was no fever and routine laboratory tests (including complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein and blood biochemistry) were all normal. Microbiologic and pathologic investigations of the abscess revealed no pathogens, only exudative encapsulation. Two months after the operation, the patient admitted to our clinic with increasing frequency of severe headaches. Subsequent computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans revealed a new contrast enhancing mass in the frontal lobe at the site of her prior abscess which was associated with extensive edema in the surrounding brain . The clinico-radiological differential diagnosis included recurrent abscess, hemorrhage into abscess bed, venous infarction, tumor and radiation necrosis.
Reoperation was performed for resection of the lesion to relieve the mass and provide tissue for a definitive diagnosis so that the appropriate treatment could be administered. The patient was operated on using a bicoronal reincision, and exploration of the frontal lobe area revealed a retained sponge. The sponge was found adherent to the surrounding soft tissue by the newly formed fibrotic tissue, and individual dissection of these fibrotic attachments was required before the abscess was found. The lesion was removed with no intraoperative complications.
Histopathology revealed mononuclear clear cell infiltration and fibrosis formation around the retained sponge . Third generation cephalosporin was continued postoperatively. The patient’s initial symptoms of vomiting and headaches disappeared with no further neurologic deficits, and she was discharged on postoperative day ten without complications.