A 78-year-old Japanese female was admitted with repeated aspiration pneumonia. She presented with bilateral ptosis and dysphasia that had gradually progressed since she was 62 years of age. She had a history of levator muscle resection at 66 years of age; however, her bilateral ptosis recurred five years after the operation. She underwent gastrostomy after admission since her swallowing function was significantly impaired. Her son had the same symptoms (ptosis and dysphasia), but the clinical history of her parents was not available .
A physical examination of the patient revealed muscle weakness of the neck and limb muscles with muscle atrophy. Her muscle strength based on the Medical Research Council (MRC) grading system showed symmetrical proximal-dominant upper and lower limb and neck muscle weakness of the neck extensor (MRC 4), neck flexor (MRC 2), deltoid (MRC 4), pectoralis major (MRC 3), latissimus dorsi (MRC 4), iliopsoas (MRC 3), quadriceps (MRC 4), gluteus maximus (MRC 2), and biceps femoris (MRC 2) muscles. She had no weakness in the tibialis anterior and gastrocnemius muscles. Although she could walk independently, she required assistance to climb stairs and could not run. She had a nasal voice and difficulty in swallowing and speaking in the absence of tongue muscle atrophy.
The results of electrocardiography revealed no abnormalities. The creatinine kinase level was not elevated (45 U/L). Anti-AchR and anti-Musk antibodies were negative. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed a mild increase in CO2 (45.9 mmHg). Muscle imaging (MRI and muscle ultrasound) showed impairment of the tongue, proximal muscles of the upper limbs, and flexor muscles of the lower limbs, being consistent with the clinical presentation . Repetitive nerve stimulation testing yielded normal results. Needle-electromyography (needle-EMG) identified low amplitude and multiphasic motor unit potentials without active denervation potentials in her tongue and orbicularis oculi muscles, which indicated a chronic myopathic change.
Based on slowly progressive bilateral ptosis and dysphagia, the symmetrical proximal-dominant muscle involvement without myocardial disorder, the patient’s family history that suggested an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance, and the myopathic pattern on needle-EMG, we initially suspected OPMD. This was confirmed by direct sequencing of PABPN1, which revealed a heterozygous c. 35G > C (p. Gly12Ala) point mutation. We could not perform gene analysis of her son.