A 17-year-old male patient presented to ENT clinic with history of facial heaviness and chronic headache located in the left frontal area. Associated with bilateral nasal obstruction, anosmia and recurrent epistaxis. His medical history includes diabetes mellitus type 2 on insulin regimen. His surgical history includes FESS done one year back. Ophthalmic examination showed displaced left eye downward and outward. ENT examination showed bilateral nasal pale polyps grade 3-4 with white discharge. Otherwise examination was unremarkable.
The patient was evaluated by CT scan of the brain and paranasal sinuses which revealed a marked enlargement of the frontal sinuses, more pronounced on the left side with associated dehiscence of the posterior wall of the sinus and intracranial extension of soft tissues within epidural space measuring 5.3 × 4.1 cm on axial image .
MRI of the brain and sinuses showed significant expansion of both frontal sinuses by the mucopyoceles with largest on the left measuring 4.7 × 6.5 × 6.7 cm with avid heterogeneous enhancement. The mucopyoceles were displacing and compressing the underlying dura with significant mass effect .
Under general anesthesia, image guided endoscopic sinus surgery was undertaken. Examination revealed extensive nasal polyposis grade 4 that was removed by microdebrider and frank pus was drained, removal of the obstructing polyps from the ethmoidal cavities was done, frontal recess was identified full of obstructing infected polyps that was removed and drained . Draf type 2 b procedure was performed bilaterally to adequately drain and ventilate the frontal sinuses , that facilitate identifying the mucopyoceles cavities which were full of frank mucopus that was drained and the cavities were irrigated with antibiotic soaked irrigations . The cavities of both mucopyoceles were completely evacuated and checked by the help of navigation .
6 months post operative follow up CT scan of the sinuses showed complete resolution and normal aeration of the sinuses (, )