An 80-year-old man was diagnosed with PCa when his initial serum PSA level was 13.3 ng/mL, and he underwent radical prostatectomy (9 years previously). Microscopic findings of the prostate tissue suggested adenocarcinoma with a Gleason score of 8. During the first year of postoperative follow-up, serum PSA gradually increased to 0.529 ng/mL. We suspected local recurrence of PCa because no obvious distant metastasis was identified elsewhere by abdominal CT and bone scintigraphy. The patient underwent 64 Gy external radiation therapy. However, serum PSA continued to rise to 0.997 ng/mL after the therapy. The patient went on to receive hormonal therapy using leuprorelin and bicalutamide/flutamide. The serum PSA remained stable for 3 years but rapidly increased to 19.781 ng/mL in the following 6 months. Abdominal CT revealed a solitary liver tumor with a diameter of 35 mm in segment 6 of the liver . No metastasis to other organs was observed. Bone metastasis was not detected by 99mTc bone scintigraphy. Serum alpha-fetoprotein and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II were within the normal range. We extremely suspected the liver metastasis from PCa after consultation with liver surgeons and radiologists according to the rapidly increasing serum PSA level and the absence of obvious metastasis in other organs. Tumor biopsy was not performed due to the risk of percutaneous root dissemination. Although a definitive diagnosis could not be made preoperatively, the surgery was performed after careful explanation to the patient because of previous reports of metastasectomy for liver metastasis from PCa., Macroscopic examination of the excised specimen revealed a solid tumor diameter of 35 × 30 × 27 mm . The pathological examination showed moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with cribriform pattern, mild polygon nuclei, large nucleoli, and fine granular abundant cytoplasm. The tumor cells showed positive immunobiological staining for PSA and cytokeratin-19 immunobiologically , which is a characteristic of PCa cells. The resected tumor was consistent with metastatic PCa, and the margin was microscopically free of cancer cell. One month after the operation, serum PSA decreased to 0.280 ng/mL. Scanning via nuclear medicine did not recognize apparent relapse. The patient received adjuvant hormonal monotherapy with leuprorelin to reduce the risk of recurrent PCa. Five years after surgery, low serum PSA <0.01 ng/mL has been achieved so far.