A 42-year-old woman with worsening chest pain was admitted to our institution. She had become aware of chest discomfort with stress and at dawn for 1 month before her visit, but the symptoms had increased in frequency without any triggers. She was a non-smoker, and her medical history included anxiety disorder controlled by medication. On admission, the blood pressure was 125/69 mmHg, heart rate was 66 bpm, and oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed a new negative T wave in V1–4. On arrival, her troponin I levels were 181.3 pg/ml (normal range, <15.6 pg/ml). Her low-density lipoprotein level was 135 mg/dl (upper limit of normal, 140 mg/dl); high-density lipoprotein level, 64 mg/dl (lower limit of normal, 35 mg/dl); triglyceride level, 128 mg/dl (upper limit of normal, 150 mg/dl); and glycated hemoglobin level, 5.3% (upper limit of normal, 6.2%). Chest radiography revealed a normal-sized heart with no lung consolidation or abnormalities. Transthoracic echocardiography showed mild hypokinesis of the ante-septal wall with preserved left ventricular systolic function and an ejection fraction of 60%.
The patient was loaded with 200 mg of aspirin and immediately taken to the cardiac catheterization laboratory. Emergency coronary angiography revealed severe stenosis proximal to the left anterior descending artery (LAD) despite the intracoronary injection of nitroglycerin , which was determined to be the culprit lesion. Immediate percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was indicated, for which 20 mg of prasugrel was administered. OCT of the LAD was performed to evaluate the underlying etiology of the ACS. The OCT (Dragonfly™ OPTIS™ and ILUMIEN™ OPTIS-System™; Abbott Vascular, St. Paul, MN, USA) revealed the presence of healed plaque (white arrowhead) with partial accumulation of macrophages (yellow arrowhead), and the minimum lumen area was 0.87 mm2 (–). Plaque disruption and thin-cap fibrous atheroma were not identified in the culprit lesions. In contrast, IVUS (AltaViewTM; Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) confirmed high-intensity marginal irregular masses in the culprit site, suggesting thrombus formation by plaque erosion rather than lipid plaque or necrotic tissue (–). Considering that the patient was a young premenopausal woman, we decided to proceed with lesion modification with ELCA and complete the procedure with balloon dilation without stenting to shorten the antiplatelet therapy period. ELCA was subsequently performed using a pulsed xenon-chloride excimer laser system with a wavelength of 308 nm; pulse duration of 135 ns; and output of 175 mJ/pulse (CVX-300P; Royal Philips, Amsterdam, Netherlands). A 0.9-mm concentric ELCA catheter (ELCA™ Coronary Laser Atherectomy Catheter; Royal Philips) was advanced slowly at a speed of 0.5 mm/s through the lesion while excimer laser was delivered. We started with laser energies at a fluence of 30 mJ/mm² and a repetition rate of 25 Hz. The laser energy was then increased to 80 mJ/mm² with a repetition rate of 80 Hz for three additional sequences. OCT examination of the LAD after ELCA showed a significant reduction in plaque burden and preserved lumen size (–). The irregularity of the endoluminal surface after ELCA suggested that some of the plaque containing thrombus was partially evaporated by the laser, exposing the underlying thrombus. To achieve optimal lesion preparation and prevent dissection progression prior to dilation with drug-coated balloon (DCB), a 3.00 × 10 mm cutting balloon (Wolverine; Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was utilized for pre-dilatation up to 8 atm pressure. Subsequently, a 3.0 × 20 mm DCB (SeQuent PleaseTM, B. Braun Melsungen AG, Berlin, Germany) was used for 30 s at 8 atm. Final OCT images (–) revealed favorable results, with the minimum lumen area expanding to 5.49 mm². Post-PCI angiography demonstrated no stenosis, with a TIMI grade 3 flow .
The peak troponin I levels were 1,535.1 pg/ml. Based on her mild bleeding risk (HAS-BLED score of 1, PRECISE-DAPT score of 9) and the absence of stent implantation, the patient received dual antiplatelet therapy with 100 mg of aspirin and 3.75 mg of prasugrel for 12 weeks, followed by continuation of prasugrel as a single antiplatelet therapy. Rosuvastatin 10 mg was also added for secondary prevention of ACS. As the patient's chest pain with stress and at dawn suggested the association of coronary vasospasm in the development of plaque erosion, calcium channel blockers (CCBs) were administered. A 1-year follow-up coronary computed tomography scan showed a small soft eccentric plaque with very mild positive remodeling and less than 20% luminal stenosis (–), and the patient remained symptom-free (The timeline was summarized in ).