A 62-year-old British white Caucasian female presented with a 2-year history of Canadian Cardiovascular Society (CCS) Class II exertional angina and mild dyspnoea. Her medical history consisted of hypertension, hypercholestrolaemia and Hodgkin’s disease 32 years previously for which she underwent radiotherapy to the chest and pelvis. The total radiotherapy dose delivered was 5330 rads (cGy). She underwent coronary angiography following a strongly positive exercise test. This showed severe (>90%) stenosis at the origin of left main stem associated with a significant pressure drop across the lesion. There was also significant stenosis in the proximal circumflex artery, intermediate artery and proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery . Injection of the right coronary system demonstrated severe ostial stenosis (>90%) again associated with a pressure drop across the lesion . Her left ventricular function was preserved on ventriculogram. The patient underwent urgent CABG using saphenous vein to bypass the right coronary artery (RCA), a radial artery graft to the obtuse marginal (OM) and left internal mammary artery (LIMA) to the mid-LAD. She was weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) without inotropic support. Her initial recovery was unremarkable, and she had a fast-tracked extubation. Within a few hours, however, she developed signs of low cardiac output syndrome with oliguria. Fluid challenges were administered resulting in rapidly raised central venous pressures (CVP) and dyspnoea secondary to pulmonary oedema. Invasive monitoring with a pulmonary artery wedge catheter (PAWC) demonstrated high filling pressures (pulmonary artery wedge pressure of 20 mmHg) with a low cardiac index of 1.8. The features were suggestive of severe diastolic dysfunction. Inotropic support with adrenaline was commenced with good clinical response. She improved with circulatory support and continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) over the following 3 days and was discharged home 8 days later.