An 80-year-old man who underwent triple aortocoronary bypass surgery was affected by an aneurysm of the abdominal aorta, bilateral obstructive arteriopathy of the lower limbs, colonic diverticulosis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. He came to our attention in June 2006 for evaluation of a normocytic hypochromic anaemia (Hb, 9.7 g/dl; haematocrit, 34%; sideremia, 28 mcg/dl). He did not complain of melena or haematemesis, although a faecal occult blood test was positive. The patient did not complain of abdominal pain or alvus changes, and abdominal examination did not suggest an expansive process. During hospitalisation, routine haematology and biochemical tests were repeated and anaemia was confirmed. Tumour markers (alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, tissue polypeptide specific antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, cancer antigen 15-3, cancer antigen 125, prostate specific antigen) were negative, except for gastrin (155 pg/ml).
To identify the cause of the anaemia, oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy was performed, which did not reveal any pathological finding, Anorectal-colonoscopy that confirmed diverticulosis only, with no signs of inflammation or past or present haemorrhage.
A lesion located in the small bowel was suspected to be the cause of the anaemia, after an episode of enterorrhagia led to a fall in the patient's haemoglobin (Hb, 6.0 g/dl). Since a double balloon enteroscopy was not possible, a capsule endoscopy was performed. This investigation revealed the presence of a polypoid lesion located in the terminal ileal loop, occupying two-thirds of the lumen and covered by strongly congested and hypervascularised mucosa .
Abdominal pre- and post-contrast enhancement computed tomography scans showed only slight thickening and an anomalous impregnation of the mucous profile of the terminal ileal loop, with no loco-regional lymphadenopathy.
The patient underwent a second colonoscopy with a retrograde ileoscopy to obtain a tissue diagnosis of the lesion. This examination confirmed the presence of ileal sessile polypoid lesions with a hypervascularised basement, covered by a strongly congested mucosa . As it was not possible to carry out a biopsy of the lesion, the histological pre-operative diagnosis was not defined.
Surgical exploration by laparotomy was performed. The respiratory insufficiency in our patient, with an American Society of Anesthesiologists status IV, meant laparoscopic surgery was contraindicated. An enterotomy was made in the terminal ileal loop about 30 to 40 cm from the ileocaecal valve. The polypoid lesion (2 × 1.5 cm2) was removed. Frozen section histological examination was conducted and showed a submucosal lesion consisting of richly vascularised fibro-adipose tissue consistent with a lipoma and/or angiolipoma, and an ulceration on the mucosal surface with a fibro-inflammatory reaction, but without any cellular atypia.
It was not necessary to proceed to resection because the lesion was not malignant, even if there is no difference in risk between an enterotomy and small bowel resection. The surgical procedure was finished after careful haemostasis and enterorrhaphy.
The definitive histological diagnosis was a submucosal angiolipoma . The patient was discharged from the hospital on the fourth postoperative day.