A 48-year-old Persian man was referred to our clinic with cough and dyspnea. He was relatively well until 1 year ago, with no significant past medical history, when he developed generalized bone pain, especially in the back and chest wall area. After numerous workups, a diagnosis of immunoglobulin A (IgA) monoclonal kappa plasma cell neoplasm was made, and treatment was started. Initially, the patient was treated with multiple cycles of bortezomib, dexamethasone, and lenalidomide (VRD). The patient was able to withstand all four cycles of the VRD regimen. Complete remission was obtained without any major adverse effects after the first course of therapy. After autologous stem cell transplantation, lenalidomide maintenance treatment was administered.
The patient was considered in remission until 2 months before his admission to our center, when he developed cough, dyspnea, fever, and left side pleural effusion. He underwent reevaluation with suspicion of disease relapse, in which pleural plasmacytoma was detected without bone marrow involvement. No evidence of remarkable monoclonal band was observed in the protein electrophoresis (albumin: 65.7%; gamma: 13.4%; alpha 1: 3.2%; alpha 2: 8%; beta 1: 5.5%; beta 2: 4.2%; total protein: 6.6). Chest sonography showed left side moderate-to-severe pleural effusion. The insertion of a pleural drainage needle catheter on the patient revealed crimson pleural fluid. Multiple polypoid nodules and masses were seen in the parietal pleura and diaphragm during pleuroscopy. A pleural biopsy of affected pleural nodules revealed plasma cell infiltration.
Fluorodeoxyglucose–positron emission tomography (FDG–PET) scan findings showed hypermetabolic multiorgan involvement in the left parietal and visceral pleura, pericardial invasion, left diaphragmatic crus lymph node involvement in thoracic (bilateral internal mammary, prevascular) and also abdominal (celiac) regions, as well as bone involvement (in T5, L4, and right pubis) and in left side oblique muscles .
The diagnosis of relapse was based on pleuroscopy and biopsy, and immunoelectrophoresis; therefore, in terms of the aggressiveness of the tumor, the patient received salvage therapy DT-PACE (a regimen consisting of six chemotherapy drugs: dexamethasone, thalidomide, cisplatin, adriamycin, cyclophosphamide, and etoposide) due to unavailability of second-line standard treatment in our center. The patient had no serious adverse effects, the medication was effective, and he became asymptomatic. After 6 months, the patient had no concerns or issues during his follow-up appointments. The patient had immunoelectrophoresis, free light chain, and beta-2 microglobulin testing as part of his follow-up examination and is now a candidate for a second autologous transplant. Figure demonstrates the timeline of events in our patient.