A 58-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with diffuse swelling of the penis, followed by sclerosis and ischemic changes in the glans and anterior segment of the penis, without bloody or purulent discharge. On review of systems, he denied fever, night sweat, and weight loss. Past medical and family history are not contributory. On admission, his vital signs were within normal limits. On physical examination, his face was thin and worn. No lymphadenopathy was palpated in the neck and supraclavicular region; visual examination of the genitals manifested a diffused enlargement of the penis with local ulcer and necrotic tissue in the glans penis.
Laboratory findings showed the white blood cell count as 8100/mm3, hemoglobin as 12.5 g/dL, and a platelet count of 276,000/mm3, and liver function, kidney function, and the serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were within normal limits. The EBV IgG was positive in the serum, the EBV DNA determination was negative in the blood, and CRP was 22.9 mg/mL.
Pelvic enhanced MRI showed space-occupying lesions in the forward part of the penis, urethral orifice stenosis, and cavernosal swelling . No lesion in the bladder was identified upon cystoscopy. CT scans of chest and abdomen did not detect enlarged lymph nodes. The liver and spleen were of normal size and shape. Bone marrow biopsy showed lymphoma cell infiltration up to 3.2%.
Microscopic findings of the penile mass showed infiltration of medium-sized cells with irregular nuclei, inconspicuous nucleoli, and many apoptotic bodies. The lymphoma cells exhibited a notable angioinfiltrative growth pattern, with homocentric arrangement around small arteries, and coagulative necrosis was also observed . On immunohistochemical staining, the atypical cells were positive for CD3, CD56, vimentin, LCA, TIA-1, and granzyme B, but negative for cytokeratin, CD20, bcl-2, bcl-6, and ALK . In the case of in situ hybridization for EBV encoded RNA (EBER), most atypical cells were also labeled . These findings were consistent with NK/T-cell lymphoma.
By detailed history, we learned that the patient had nasal obstruction for more than 10 years. PET-CT found a high-FDG metabolic mass in the nasal cavity and the nasopharyngeal cavity. Space-occupying lesion in the nasal cavity was observed and biopsied with sinoscopy. Histological examination showed diffuse infiltration of small to medium-sized lymphoid cells with angio-destructive growth pattern, and apoptotic bodies were present . The tumor cells were positive for CD3, CD56, EBER; they were negative for CD20 and granzyme B . Based on the endoscopic and immunophenotypical findings, the diagnosis of penile metastasis from extranodal nasal-type NK/T-cell lymphoma was established.
Twenty days after neoplasm resection, the patient consented to chemotherapy treatment followed by radiotherapy and autologous stem cell transplantation. CHOP-L regimen (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone, and L-asparaginase) was planned to be given every 3 weeks, with six cycles in total. However, the third cycle of chemotherapy was delayed due to ascites, fever, and grade 4 myelosuppression. Subsequently, he developed tachypnea, abdominal pain, fever, and diarrhea. According to the CT results, His lymphoma was refractory to chemotherapy and metastases developed in the adrenal gland, liver, spleen and lymph nodes. The patient died of disease 1 month later, which is approximately 4 months after the diagnosis was made.
Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying image.