A 76-year-old Caucasian male with history of acute Stanford type A aortic dissection, initially managed by aortic root and ascending aortic replacement, developed a pseudoaneurysm of his graft anastomoses one year thereafter, mandating reoperative aortic reconstruction and total arch replacement. Two years subsequent to this, he presented with localized chest wall pain after being struck by a car door. He demonstrated no overt symptoms of sepsis, was afebrile, and felt otherwise well. Clinical examination was largely unremarkable, notwithstanding localized chest wall tenderness corresponding to the point where he had sustained his recent trauma. More specifically, he exhibited no signs suggestive of endocarditis or even of any infective process in general. He had no leukocytosis or relative neutrophilia, although he did have moderately elevated biochemical inflammatory markers, specifically erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP).
A computed tomography angiogram (CTA) incidentally demonstrated fluid surrounding his aortic graft, as well as in the left axilla, wherein he had had an extraanatomic bypass to his left subclavian artery as part of his reoperative total arch replacement . An echocardiogram confirmed no vegetations on his bioprosthetic aortic valve.
The patient was taken to the operating suite for an initial diagnostic procedure. Purulent fluid was aspirated from the presternal area and from the left axilla. All sternal wires were removed, the presternal tissues were debrided, and a vacuum wound dressing was placed. The left axilla was opened and drained, and vacuum wound dressing was used at this site also. Microbiology was positive for Aspergillus species.
Given the inherent risks of another reoperative sternotomy with redo complex aortic reconstruction, a decision was made to approach further debridement in a nonconventional fashion, via a minimally invasive technique, with robotic assistance.
The patient was returned to the operating room for more definitive treatment. Utilizing the da Vinci robotic platform (Intuitive Surgical, Sunnyvale, CA), the prosthetic ascending aorta was exposed through the right chest, utilizing three ports. Aggressive debridement of the aortic root, ascending aorta, and proximal arch were undertaken utilizing the robotic instruments.
Part of the greater omentum was then harvested, using typical laparoscopic techniques, but with the assistance of the robot. The vascularized pedicled omental flap was then passed cephalad through a defect created in the diaphragm, just to the right lateral aspect of the central tendon. This was wrapped around the prosthetic ascending aortic graft and tacked into position with a number of interrupted polypropylene sutures.
The patient made an uncomplicated postoperative recovery. After 48 hours in the intensive care unit, he was transferred to a regular telemetry bed, where he continued to demonstrate good progress. A repeat CTA obtained one week postoperatively demonstrated significantly less periaortic fluid . The patient was then discharged home on indefinite antifungal therapy, as advised by Infectious Diseases, given that we had left all of his prosthetic graft material in situ. At 18 months’ follow-up, the patient remained clinically well, and interval CTA confirmed no reaccumulation of perigraft fluid.