A 6-year-old boy was referred to our centre (Imam Khomeini Hospital) by our paediatrician colleagues due to bradycardia found during physical examination which was confirmed by ECG as 3rd degree AVB. Due to dyspnoea and 3rd degree AVB, need for permanent pacemaker implantation was proposed for the patient.
The boy was the only offspring of the unrelated parents. He was diagnosed at the age of 3 years during workup for painful swelling of his left knee and genu valgum when hyperphosphataemia was detected (9.6 mg/dL; normal range: 2.7–4.5 mg/dL). This was the sole symptom at that time. Left knee X-ray showed hyperostosis and periarticular calcification. At the age of 4 years, he developed dental abnormalities, facial nerve palsy, and decreased visual acuity. The physician in charge suspected osteopetrosis as the underlying disease, and therefore, scheduled him for bone marrow transplantation as a curative treatment (although finally delisted after the diagnosis of HHS and taking into account that bone marrow transplantation has no role in the treatment of HHS). Despite treatment with high-dose Sevelamer (non-calcium phosphate binder) in 2015, the serum phosphate level remained high (8.6 mg/dL). Other serum biomarkers were calcium = 10 mg/dL (normal range: 8.5–10.4 mg/dL), creatinine = 0.5 mg/dL (normal range for children up to 12 years old: 0.0–0.7), PTH = 30 pg/mL (normal range: 9–64 pg/mL), and 25 (OH) vitamin D = 50 pg/mL (normal range: 15–60 pg/mL). Genetic assessment did not show any mutations in the T-Cell Immune Regulator 1 (TCIRG1) or Chloride Voltage-Gated Channel 7 (CLCN7), the usual mutations in the setting of osteopetrosis. Further genetic studies showed a mutation in Fibroblast Growth Factor 23 (FGF23) (homozygous mutation in exon 3). This finding was consistent with the diagnosis of HHS.
Cardiology evaluations began in 2013: bradycardia found during physical examination which was confirmed by ECG. Electrocardiography showed 1st degree AVB . In 2014, electrocardiography was suggestive of Mobitz I (Wenckebach) block . At that time the patient had dyspnoea on exertion. Echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular systolic and diastolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction was 55% and normal tissue Doppler indices of lateral mitral annulus), aortic valve calcification (without significant stenosis), and mitral stenosis (mean mitral valve gradient was 3 mmHg and mitral valve area was 1.7 cm2). In 2016, the patient developed complete AVB . Physical examination revealed blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, variable first heart sound and jugular venous pulsation (cannon A wave). Twenty-four hour ECG Holter monitoring showed CHB with a junctional escape rhythm of 70–80 b.p.m. . Echocardiography showed normal left ventricular systolic and diastolic function (left ventricular ejection fraction was 55% and normal tissue Doppler indices of lateral mitral annulus), thick and calcified mitral valve leaflets, calcified chordae, and significant mitral annular calcification leading to mitral stenosis (mitral valve area: 1.4 cm2, mean mitral valve gradient = 4 mmHg) (, Videos S1 and S2). Aortic and pulmonic valves were also affected (peak aortic transvalvular gradient was 15 mmHg, and also aortic valve calcification was present).
The heart team discussed the risk and benefit of pacemaker in this boy with multiple organ involvement and the risk of general anaesthesia. The family decided to postpone pacemaker implantation taking into account that the patient was asymptomatic (no syncope or presyncope), presence of junctional escape rhythm (75–80/min), minimum heart rate of 56/min and absence of pause in Holter monitoring. Treatment with high-dose phosphate binders and then acetazolamide (as the last resort) was required to keep the serum phosphate level at 9–10 mg/dL. In December 2017, he developed progressive multiple organ failure (kidney, liver, heart, and lung) due to phosphate deposition and died in the hospital. Prior to death, CHB with regular narrow QRS escape rhythm was present.