A 75-year-old Greek man, resident in an urban area, presented to our hospital complaining of high fever with chills and rigors, night sweats, fatigue and weight loss of 3kg in one month. His previous medical history was unremarkable. A physical examination revealed a moderately enlarged spleen.
Laboratory investigation showed leukopenia (leukocytes: 2100/μL), normochromic-normocytic anemia (hemoglobin: 11.3g/dL) and moderate thrombocytopenia (platelets: 101,000/μL). A high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (90mm/hour) and C-reactive protein (4mg/dL) were also noticed. The biochemical tests were normal except for elevated serum globulins (4.2g/dL). The serum protein electrophoresis revealed a polyclonal γ-globulin pattern without detection of a monoclonal component. His chest X-ray and urine analysis were normal. His blood and urine culture results were repeatedly negative. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed no pathology and his tuberculin skin test result was negative. An abdominal computed tomography scan with contrast medium revealed the presence of a few hyperechogenic splenic lesions. Serology results for hepatitis A, B, and C, Coxsackie virus, enteric cytopathic human orphan virus, herpes simplex virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, human immunodeficiency virus, human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 and 2, toxoplasma, Bartonella henselae, Francisella tularensis, Coxiella burnetii and Rickettsia conorii were negative. Wright and rapid plasma reagin tests were also negative. A full immunological screening with rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, antibodies to double-stranded deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), anti-Sm, anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB, anti-ribonucleoproteins, anti-Jo-1, anti-Scl-70, anti-histones, anti-mitochondrial antibodies, anti-smooth muscle antibodies, centrally accentuated antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (c-ANCA), perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (p-ANCA), anti-cardiolipin, and lupus anticoagulant was negative. A bone marrow aspiration showed numerous protozoan parasites (Leishmanian spp.) within macrophages. Serum test results for leishmania antibodies and K39 antigen were positive.
After confirming the diagnosis of VL, the patient was treated with L-AmB 3mg/kg/day on days one to five, 14 and 21 intravenously. His tolerance of amphotericin was excellent with no significant changes in his kidney and liver functions. Treatment was completed uneventfully and was associated with prompt remission of the patient’s symptoms in conjunction with a gradual recovery of leukocyte and platelet counts and hematocrit level.
Six months later, he reported intermittent fever and deterioration of his health. The laboratory tests showed leukopenia, anemia and thrombocytopenia again. The physical examination was normal. His blood and urine cultures were still negative and a new abdominal computed tomographic scan showed no pathological findings. A bone marrow smear revealed the presence of leishmania amastigotes, though in much lower numbers than those detected six months previously. The patient received another complete course of intravenous L-AmB at the same dose, which resulted in complete clinical and laboratory remission.
However, three months later, the patient had to be hospitalized again for a new episode for VL that was confirmed with a new bone marrow smear. The laboratory and serological findings were compatible with the previous results. A total lymphocyte count and CD4+ percentage, as well as their absolute count, were measured in order to evaluate the immune status of our patient. CD4+ cell percentage and absolute count were found to be relatively low (22% and 450/μm3, respectively). Mitelfosine (Impavido® 50mg/Zentaris GmbH, Germany) was administrated in a dosage of 150mg per day (three capsules once daily) for 28 days. Treatment was generally well tolerated; gastrointestinal symptoms such as vomiting and anorexia were controlled with a split of the daily dose into two doses, which were co-administered with food.
Three months later, the patient required another hospitalization for irregular fever, sweats and fatigue. The laboratory tests once again revealed pancytopenia. His test results for leishmania antibodies and K39 antigen were positive. The patient was reluctant to be subjected to an additional bone marrow biopsy. However, there was a strong clinical evidence for a new episode of VL, therefore a new course of L-AmB administration was decided in a dose of 10mg/kg on days one to two, in combination with oral mitelfosine. Unfortunately, the tolerance of mitelfosine was very poor this time because of vomiting; this led the patient to stop the drug three days after initiation. Nevertheless, the administration of high-dose L-Amb resulted in complete clinicolaboratory response. In order to prevent further disease relapses, a secondary prophylaxis with L-AmB once per month at a dose of 3mg/kg was scheduled. Currently, almost a year after the last VL episode, the patient remains in good health with normal hematological indices.