In September 2019, a 70 year-old male patient presented with diplopia in his right eye that progressed during the last two months, in addition to limited right eye movement and right temporal headache. His past medical history included the surgical removal of myxofibrosarcoma tumor from his left gluteal region 5 years ago. It was treated by neo-adjuvant radiotherapy followed by wide local surgical excision and finally by adjuvant radiotherapy. The ophthalmic examination revealed a diplopia and paralysis of abducens nerve in his right eye, normal left eye examination, normal visual acuity and normal appearance of optic disc of both eyes.
Head and neck MRI revealed a low signal mass in T1-Weighted image with contrast (-A) and High signal in T2-Weighted image (-B), measuring 4 × 5x2 cm in his right pterygopalatine fossa and extending superiorly to the right orbital fissure. This extension of the tumor compressed the abducens nerve, causing diplopia. A CT scan with contrast was performed to screen head, neck and chest but no other tumors or metastases were detected. Based on these findings, the decision was made to remove the tumor surgically.
Under general anesthesia, a skin incision was made on the anterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle at the level of the hyoid bone to expose the right external carotid artery. It was ligated superiorly to the branching point of the superior thyroid artery to avoid excessive bleeding. A Weber-Fergusson incision was made from the middle of the upper lip, along the nasofacial groove to the medial canthus, and the incision was extended below the subcilliary line to the lateral canthus. The skin and musculature layers in the area were swung laterally to expose and ligate the infra-orbital neurovascular bundles. The bone flap of the anterior surface of the maxillary sinus was removed separately. The posterior and medial walls of the maxillary sinus along with the perpendicular plate of the palatine bone were swung laterally, and the internal maxillary artery was ligated and cauterized. The tumor in the pterygopalatine fossa was completely isolated and the maxillary nerve (V2) was intact. The tumor was resected with the posterior wall of the maxillary sinus using the standard partial maxillectomy approach. The dissection was carried on until the round foramen and dura mater were reached. An endoscope was used to make sure the entire tumor was resected (-A). The removed bone flap was returned and fixed in its place using wires that went through pre-made holes (-B) and the bone's sutures were filled with bone wax (-C).
Gross examination showed a white soft tissue mass. The microscopic examination revealed moderate pleomorphic spindle cells in variable shapes and sizes in a myxoid stroma with nuclear atypia, scattered mitosis, and a considerable curvilinear reactive vascularity. These findings were compatible with a grade 2 myxofibrosarcoma ( – A,B). Immunohistochemically, the tumor was immunopositive for CD34 (-B). Whereas, it was immunonegative for S100. Ki-67 proliferative index marker was >20% (-A). The pathology lab was unable to detect the microscopic negative margins because the tumor was resected gradually and in pieces.
The patient was scheduled for having 30 sessions of adjuvant radiotherapy 5 days a week for 6 weeks. Unfortunately, the patient did not start the treatment on time and did not fully commit to it. So after four months of the surgery, the tumor recurred at the same location of the previous surgery. However, the patient refused to receive any additional treatment. After 6 months of follow up, his general health status was still stable.