An 83-year-old woman (height: 147 cm; weight: 42 kg) visited our emergency room owing to suddenly aggravated right lateral thigh pain. The pain intensity assessed using the numeric rating scale (NRS) was 9.
This right lateral thigh pain had persisted for several years and had suddenly worsened on the day of the visit to the emergency room. It was aggravated while standing and walking and was relieved upon sitting or lying. She did not have nausea, vomiting, or abdominal pain.
The patient had no specific history of past illnesses.
The patient had no specific personal or family history of illnesses.
Physical examination revealed no tenderness of the right lateral thigh and no motor or sensory deficits. Furthermore, the patient did not exhibit any signs of obturator nerve irritation, such as sensory deficit or pain in the medial thigh area. Deep tendon reflexes in relation to the bilateral knees and ankles were normoactive. The straight leg raise test yielded normal findings for both legs. The patient did not have a specific medical history but had mild chronic back pain (NRS score, 1), which had persisted for > 10 years.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right thigh revealed no abnormal findings in the lateral thigh. The right lateral femoral cutaneous nerve was intact. However, an obturator hernia between the pectineus and obturator externus muscles was observed by chance . Retroperitoneal computed tomography (CT) revealed a herniated small bowel with an incarceration point at the right obturator canal and a dilated loop of the small bowel upstream . Ultrasonography (USG) of the right inguinal region revealed a distended bowel loop in the right pectineus muscle .
Because the patient had chronic lower back pain, we suspected that her lateral thigh pain might have been caused by lumbar radicular pain due to spinal disorders. Therefore, we conducted imaging studies of the lumbar spine. Lumbar radiography revealed multilevel degenerative lumbar spondylosis. Moreover, central stenosis at L4-5 was observed on lumbar spine CT. Because the patient’s pain was aggravated while standing and walking, we suspected that her pain was caused by right L5 radiculopathy due to lumbar stenosis at L4-5. We performed selective nerve root injection on the right L5 with dexamethasone 40 mg (1 mL), 2% lidocaine (0.3 mL), and normal saline (0.7 mL). However, no pain was provoked during the injection. Additionally, at 30 min after the selective nerve root injection, no pain relief was achieved. Further, at the 1-week follow-up, no pain reduction was observed.