A 3-year old girl presented with swelling over the root of the nose. Her parents had noticed swelling 7 months previously, which was gradually progressive and was the size of a small lemon at the time of presentation. The swelling was not associated with fever, nasal obstruction, bleeding or any other nasal complaints. The patient was prescribed antibiotics and anti-inflammatory drugs by the general practitioner, following which the swelling decreased slightly. The patient had recurrent episodes in which the swelling increased in size. The size of the swelling decreased on medication, but never completed resolved. There was no history of tubercular contact or any other family history of tuberculosis. On examination, the root of the nose was broadened by the ill-defined 2.5×2.0 cm swelling, but the overlying skin was normal .
On palpation, the swelling was soft and non-tender with a normal temperature. Anterior rhinoscopy revealed no abnormality. Blood analysis showed raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; 38mm). The patient had a positive Monteux test, and a chest X- ray showed no abnormality. Contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the nose revealed an enhancing soft tissue mass lesion in the superior aspect of both of the nasal cavities, measuring 2.0 ×1.8 × 2.8 cm (AP × TR × CC), eroding the intervening nasal septum, frontal and nasal bones at the glabella and reaching to the subcutaneous tissue .
The base of the skull was eroded with a small intracranial extension. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain and paranasal sinus revealed enhancing soft tissue mass in the basifrontal extra-axial region with dural enhancement extending inferiorly into the superior parts of the nasal cavities with osseous destruction .
The patient underwent endoscopic examination and biopsy under general anesthesia. On endoscopy, a smooth reddish mass was seen in the left nasal cavity. The mass was friable and found to be eroding the nasal septum, reaching the opposite nasal cavity .
The mass was also found to be eroding the most superior aspect of the nasal septum with intracranial extension. As the mass was invasive with intracranial extension, a biopsy was taken and further definitive surgery was deferred for final histopathology diagnosis. Histopathology showed lesional tissue focally lined pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium with subepithelial epithelioid cell granuloma admixed with Langhans giant cells, suggestive of tuberculosis .
The patient was started on category I anti- tubercular treatment. Isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol was prescribed for the first 2 months followed by isoniazid and rifampicin for the next 4 months. The swelling subsided on anti-tubercular therapy. At the time of writing, the patient has completed 6 months of anti-tubercular treatment and has been symptom free for 7 months following anti-tubercular therapy.