A 24-month-old Japanese boy was referred to our hospital for evaluation of his short stature. He was born at a gestational age of 38 weeks and 4 days and had a submucous cleft palate and micrognathia. His birth weight was 3225 g (+0.53 standard deviation (SD) of average Japanese male infants), and his birth length was 45 cm (−1.80 SD). His submucous cleft palate was repaired at 18 months of age. Tympanostomy tubes were placed at the same time for secretory otitis media. Auditory brainstem response testing showed normal findings. At 22 months, he was found to have bilateral leukocoria. Phacoemulsification and anterior vitrectomy for bilateral lens opacities were performed at another hospital. He was considered to have Pierre Robin sequence, but the association with the ophthalmic symptoms was not investigated. He received speech therapy for speech delay.
At presentation, the patient weighed 11.6 kg (−0.33 SD) with a height of 79.1 cm (−2.52 SD). His arm span was 79 cm, and his sitting height was 48.5 cm (sitting height/height ratio 0.61). He showed ocular hypertelorism; prominent eyes due to shallow eye sockets; a flat midface with a depressed nasal bridge; anteverted nares; micrognathia; low-set ears; and limitations in bilateral elbow flexion; but no hypotonia, hyperextensible joints, or joint pain. All other family members, which included his parents and two brothers, were healthy. His parents are not consanguineous. His father’s height was 182 cm (+1.93 SD of average Japanese adult men), and his mother’s height was 147 cm (−2.09 SD of average Japanese adult women). Radiographs showed thickening of the calvaria, widening of the distal humeral metaphysis, lack of femoral head ossification, deformity of the femoral neck, and distal femoral and proximal tibial epiphyseal ossification centers. These features suggested mild spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia . Serum insulin-like growth factor-1 was 20.17 nmol/L (154 ng/ml) (normal range 2.36–20.17 nmol/L [18–154 ng/ml]). An L-arginine stimulation test for growth hormone (0.5 g/kg arginine) showed a peak growth hormone level of 16.4 ng/ml. A luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone/thyrotropin-releasing hormone stimulation test (3 μg/kg luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone; 10 μg/kg thyrotropin-releasing hormone) showed prepubertal and normal thyroid-stimulating hormone responses. His karyotype was 46,XY. A brain magnetic resonance imaging scan showed no abnormalities. Echocardiography showed no evidence of mitral valve prolapse. At that time, we suspected Marshall syndrome, but no mutation was identified in exons or exon/intron boundaries of the COL11A1 gene.
At the age of 8 years, the patient’s height was 116.2 cm (−1.89 SD) , and his orofacial characteristics appeared unremarkable. Although 3D reformatted computed tomographic scans showed atlantoaxial dysplasia, he had no clinical symptoms of atlantoaxial instability . He developed no symptoms of retinal detachment, deafness, or osteoarthritis. The patient studied at a normal elementary school and his mental development was normal. We next suspected Stickler syndrome and conducted COL2A1 genetic analysis. Genomic deoxyribonucleic acid was extracted from the patient’s peripheral blood. Polymerase chain reaction primers were designed to amplify all coding exons and exon/intron boundaries of the COL2A1 gene. Primer sequences are available upon request. Sequence analysis showed a novel heterozygous mutation in exon 19 of COL2A1, c.1142G > A (p.Gly381Asp) , and no other mutation was identified. The glycine at amino acid 381 was located in the Gly-X-Y triplet repeats region of the type II collagen triple helix, and it is phylogenetically conserved throughout species . This variant has not been described in the Single Nucleotide Polymorphism database, the 1000 Genomes Project, Leiden Open Variation Database 3.0, or the Human Genetic Variation Database in Japanese. In silico analysis showed that this mutation was predicted to be “probably damaging” by PolyPhen-2 (score 0.999) and to be “disease causing” by MutationTaster (score 94) [, ].