A 64-year-old female patient complaining of progressive shortening of the left lower limb for the past 1 year was admitted to our hospital. She was operated for left THA 3 years ago in some other hospital. The clinical examination of the left hip showed restricted flexion range, abduction range, and external rotation of the hip with a true shortening of 3 cm. Surgical scars from previous surgery had healed well. There was no fever, local warmth, local redness, or tenderness present. A plain anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis with both hips showed acetabular component loosening and superior migration. Screws used for acetabular shell fixation were found to be protruding into the pelvis, medial to Kohler’s line (Ilioischial line) in the unsafe zone . Unfortunately, we did not have access to radiographs before and after primary surgery and during follow-ups for detailed assessment. Obturator and iliac views of the pelvis were taken, which revealed all acetabular screws to be intrapelvic, far beyond the safe zone. One screw had broken due to prosthetic migration. Three dimensional computed tomography confirmed our findings. Acetabular bone loss was classified by Paprosky classification as Type 3A that is, superior and lateral migration ≥3 cm with intact medial support (Kohler’s line). To assess the proximity of these screws with the intrapelvic vasculature, a computed tomographic (CT) angiography of the pelvis with the lower limb was performed which, to our surprise, revealed one screw tip being interposed between the external iliac artery and vein ( and ) and a catastrophic vascular injury waiting to happen. Normal blood flow was noted through these vessels without any evidence of pseudoaneurysm formation.
Long-standing symptoms led us to believe that there will be adhesions all around the screw, entangling the surrounding vascular structure. After a detailed discussion with the patient, an early intervention was planned in two stages. Revision surgeries are extensive with longer surgical duration, more blood loss, and a prolonged rehabilitation period. This case, in particular, was more extensive as it required two approaches, one for releasing adhesions around the screw and freeing the vessels and the second for prosthesis removal and definitive surgery. Furthermore, early prosthesis loosening, just 3-year post-primary surgery, made us suspicious of prosthetic joint infection. It had to be ruled out even in the absence of any clinical signs of infection and hence we felt a two-staged intervention to be appropriate. Intraoperative cell salvage facilities were not available to us. Attempting to remove the screw without adhesiolysis will lead to vessel avulsion injury, having very high mortality.
Pre-operative total leukocyte counts (TLC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were found to be within normal limits. In the first stage, adhesions between the vessels and the intrapelvic screw were released using an ilioinguinal incision to prevent any possible injury to the vessels while removing the screw. This stage was performed in the presence and guidance of a vascular surgeon who was well-versed in dealing with vascular complications. During the procedure, it was found that the screw was strongly adhered to the vessel. The external iliac vessels had to be carefully dissected away from the screw by releasing the adhesions all around . Once the adhesions were released, the external iliac vessels were protected with saline-soaked gauze, the incision was temporarily closed and the patient was carefully repositioned from supine to lateral decubitus position. The hip joint was exposed through the posterior approach. After removal of the femoral component and the acetabular polyethylene liner, the screws were gently removed to explant the acetabular shell. The broken screw was completely embedded in the pelvic bone and could not be removed. We decided to leave it behind as it was not abutting any important structure. Intraoperative frozen section was not available at our hospital and therefore tissue samples were collected and sent for bacterial cultures. Antibiotic-laden polymethylmethacrylate cement containing 80mg Gentamicin and 2g Vancomycin was used to fill the acetabular cavity and proximal femoral canal . Incision was closed, keeping a negative suction drain. The integrity of the external iliac vessels was reconfirmed and then the anterior incision was finally closed.
Postoperatively, the patient was observed closely for any signs of internal bleeding and delayed injury to vessels. Infection assessment with parameters such as TLC, ESR, CRP levels, and daily drain output was done. Intraoperative samples for bacterial cultures turned out to be inconclusive, showing no bacterial growth after 2 weeks of incubation period.
Definitive surgery was then scheduled and during this surgery, the cement filler was extracted and the acetabular bone defect was reconstructed using trabecular metal augment in a flying buttress mode . Impaction bone grafting using morselized allograft was done to build up the medial acetabular floor and a multi-hole uncemented acetabular shell was implanted. Acetabular screws were placed carefully according to the maximum bone available for fixation, the screw lengths were determined using the pre-operative CT scan. Screw insertion in the posterosuperior zone was not feasible due to the trabecular metal augment. A long hydroxyapatite-coated femoral stem was press-fitted. Post-operative radiograph shows correction of the limb length discrepancy . In bed and bedside rehabilitation was started on the same evening. Toe-touch weight bearing, giving 20–30% of body weight was started on the third post-operative day with the help of a walker and full weight bearing was gradually allowed after 6 weeks.