In June 2018, a 62-year-old healthy Caucasian woman underwent a standard follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of subpectorally placed textured anatomical breast implants [Allergan (Dublin, Ireland)] in situ for 26 years after cosmetic augmentation. She had never experienced any complaints related to the breast implants. In 1990, she was treated for a basal cell carcinoma on her left shoulder but has no other comorbidities except for past tobacco use. Her eldest son was diagnosed with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma at age 12. In August 2018, the patient started experiencing pain and Baker grade III capsular contraction of the right breast. Control MRI showed breast implant leakage. Explantation of both implants in January 2019 showed bilateral leakage after which symptoms went into remission. About three months later our patient noted an erythematous area on the lateral side of the inframammary fold of the right breast (, ). She recalled that the scar of this breast had been swelling increasingly followed by leakage of some serous fluid out of the scar. Although not ill she was prescribed oral antibiotics (amoxicillin clavulanate) for one week, without alleviating symptoms. Ultrasound echography of the right breast showed “snowstorm sign”, suggestive for residual silicone after leakage. Subsequently, the siliconomas and old scars were removed under local anesthesia and send for pathological assessment. The pathology report stated that the skin contained some macroscopic cystic abnormalities filled with a mucous substance. Microscopically extensive fibrosis was observed with round nucleate inflammatory cell infiltration, multinucleated giant cell macrophages and foreign material, likely silicone. Yet, the discomfort and inflammatory response continued to exist for which another MRI was made. This showed bilateral subpectoral residual silicone particles, with the largest silicone pocket of about 2,3 × 1,5 cm in the left breast (, ). In June 2019, revision surgery was performed in order to remove the siliconomas. Several superficially located siliconomas were excised on the right side on the right side. On the left, a thickened capsule was found containing a substantial amount of silicone. Therefore, a partial capsulectomy was performed simultaneously removing the substance. Histopathology and immunohistochemical analysis showed monotonous small cell B-lymphocytic infiltration (CD20+, CD5+, CD23+, ALK-) in both capsules, highly suggestive for CLL/SLL (a–e). Breast implant associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma (BIA-ALCL) was considered but excluded as CD30 tested negative. Microbiology tested positive for Staphylococcus epidermidis. After diagnosis, the hematology department was consulted for systemic medical workup and further guidance. Complete blood count (CBC) indicated a mild hypogammaglobulinemia (0.32 g/L IgM and 5.6 g/L IgG) and leukocytosis (10.5 × 109/L). In the peripheral blood there was an absolute number of 0.04 10e9/L (CD19+, CD20+, CD5+, Lambda+, CD23+, CD43+, CD45+, and CD200+) monoclonal B-cells. Abdominal ultrasound was made to investigate the spleen and abdominal lymph nodes while thoracic X-rays were made to assess the mediastinum and hilar lymph nodes; no significant abnormalities were reported. Subsequent bone marrow biopsy showed cell-rich tissue with large fields of atypical lymphocytes and grumulee pattern. Additionally, a low percentage of monoclonal B-cells (0.04 × 10e9/L) in the peripheral blood after explantation of the breast implants suggested either CLL/SLL localized in the bone marrow and periprosthetic capsule or induced by the prosthesis material. Time between follow-up appointments will gradually be extended to six months if the lymphoma remains in remission. No additional treatment was necessary. Follow-up CBC and immunophenotyping will take place every three months (or earlier in the case of new symptoms) and will be extended to six months if the lymphoma remains in remission. Bone marrow biopsy may be utilized in the future to follow-up on disease activity and the effect of explantation.