A 52-year-old woman was referred to the Department of Pain Medicine from a local orthopedic clinic because of suspected CRPS for excruciating neuropathic pain in her right first toe. She was 160 cm tall and weighed 55 kg. She was taking antihypertensive medications and had undergone a surgery for varicose veins in both legs five years ago.
Six weeks previously, she bumped into something with her right first toe. She complained of gradually worsening pain in her right foot after the incident, and the skin over the region had turned cold and purple due to edema over time .
She complained of gait dysfunction and severe pain in the right foot, especially in the first toe, of burning, tingling, prickling, stabbing, heavy and of aching type. Pain gradually spread to the right ankle, calf, and thigh, and she reported the average pain intensity assessed using the visual analog scale (VAS) as 90 (0: no pain, 100: the worst pain imaginable). She presented with numbness, pinprick hyperalgesia, pressure hyperalgesia, static mechanical allodynia and dynamic mechanical allodynia in her right foot. Neuropathic pain was dominant in her foot with a score of 6/10 on Douleur neuropathique 4 (DN4) and 36/38 on the painDETECT questionnaire (PDQ).
Blood tests and radiographs of the right foot did not show any abnormal findings. Ultrasonography showed a chip fracture in the first distal phalanx of the right first toe . Therefore, she was diagnosed with post-traumatic neuropathic pain associated with a toe fracture. However, the pain worsened over time despite multimodal pain management. Additional tests such as three-phase bone scan, digital infrared thermal imaging, quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test, electromyography and a nerve conduction study were performed to exclude CRPS.
The three-phase bone scan showed decreased uptake in the right foot during the blood pooling phase, and mildly increased uptake in the right first toe during the osseous phase, which were unusual findings suggestive of CRPS .
Digital infrared thermal imaging showed that the temperature of the right foot was lesser than that of the left, and the difference in temperature was approximately 1.38 °C. No sweating dysfunction or peripheral neuropathy in the lower extremity were noted in the quantitative sudomotor axon reflex test and electromyography and nerve conduction study. Clinically, the patient could be diagnosed with subacute CRPS type I according to the Budapest research criteria for CRPS.
Although various pain management techniques, such as the use of pregabalin, amitriptyline, tapentadol, morphine, ketamine, lidocaine, epidural blocks and sciatic nerve blocks, were employed in accordance with the diagnosis of CRPS type I, she only had temporary pain relief, and her gait function worsened. The pain continued to worsen and her right toe turned dark purple in color, making it impossible to maintain her daily activities.
The dark purple skin color was suspected to be caused by gangrene as it was accompanied by weak femoral pulses on physical examination. The ankle-brachial index (ABI) score was 0.4, suggestive of severe PAD. Lower-extremity computed tomography (CT) angiography, performed in anticipation of PAD, revealed total occlusion between the infrarenal abdominal aorta and the bilateral common iliac arteries .
As a result, the patient was diagnosed with Leriche syndrome. She underwent an aortic-bifemoral bypass surgery, following which the patient required cardiopulmonary rehabilitation for two months and showed no other complications.
One month later, her neuropathic pain improved with a DN4 score of 1/10 and PDQ score of 5/28, and average pain intensity improved to 30 on the VAS (0–100). Her gait and the color of the skin over the toe also improved. Five months postoperatively, she was only prescribed pregabalin 75 mg/day, with a normal color of the skin over the toe and mild pain intensity with a VAS score of 10 (0–100) in the absence of gait-evoked pain.