A 67-year-old female with a medical history of congenital dislocation of the hip, which required six surgeries, suffered from an asymptomatic large aneurysm of the left paraclinoid ICA, with agenesis of the right ICA [ and ] and asymptomatic dilatation of ventricles. To prevent aneurysm rupture, endovascular coil embolization was performed. However, cerebral angiography performed 2 years after endovascular coiling showed coil compaction and persistent filling into the aneurysm , and the patient underwent placement of a PED . The distal end of the stent was positioned just proximal to the posterior communicating artery (PCoA). Cerebral angiography performed 1 year after insertion of the PED demonstrated reduced filling into the aneurysm, but not complete occlusion. Unfortunately, she suffered from severe osteoarthritis of the knee and her symptoms, persistent pain, and gait disturbance, rapidly worsened. She needed to undergo orthopedic surgery, but her treatment was complicated and was required to stop antiplatelet therapy. Time-of-flight magnetic resonance angiography and cerebral angiography performed 2 years after insertion of the PED revealed increased filling into the aneurysm [ and ], and we believed that it would be difficult to cease antiplatelet therapy under these conditions. The patient strongly desired to proceed with orthopedic surgery promptly, and we decided to perform ICA trapping with EC-IC high-flow bypass to withdraw antiplatelet therapy.
In the operation, the superficial temporal artery (STA) and radial artery (RA) were prepared. The cervical neck was exposed, and the common carotid artery, ICA, and external carotid artery (ECA) were preserved. The Sylvian fissure was opened widely, and the middle cerebral artery (MCA) was exposed. STA-MCA (M4) bypass was performed to ensure cerebral blood flow during occlusion of the MCA (M2), and subsequently, an ECA-RA-MCA (M2) bypass was performed. The PED was clearly confirmed using indocyanine green (ICG) angiography [ and ], and ICA trapping was completed from the cervical ICA to the proximal portion of the PCoA . Final ICG angiography revealed that PCoA flow through EC-IC high-flow bypass was preserved and complete occlusion of the aneurysm was achieved .
A postoperative magnetic resonance imaging and angiography showed bypass patency without ischemic change [ and ]. During the postoperative course, she experienced mild worsening of her gait due to inactivity. She was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital 1 month after the surgery and discharged home after 2 months of rehabilitation. Antiplatelet therapy was completed 3 months after the surgery, and she underwent orthopedic surgery.