A one-month-old boy presented to the outpatient department of our hospital with an enlarged right eyeball and persistent crying since birth in 2008. He was carried to term and delivered by Cesarean section to a first-time mother. The infant had no familial history of glaucoma or other ocular disorders. On initial physical examination, the right eye was notably larger than the left one and had a horizontal corneal diameter of 14 mm. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 30 mmHg in the right eye and 14 mmHg in the left eye, as measured by a Tono-pen (Medtronic, Inc., Jacksonville, Florida). In the right eye, corneal edema and bullous keratopathy were present and fundoscopy revealed optic disc cupping and relatively healthy rim tissue. Orbit ultrasonography and brain computed tomography were unremarkable. On the basis of the above findings, a clinical diagnosis of primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) was made in the right eye and a trabeculectomy, with mitomycin C (MMC) therapy, was subsequently performed. The operation was successful but postoperative follow-up was limited because of parental non-compliance. Three year later, in 2011, the boy again presented to our clinic, but this time with an even larger right eye and a gradually expanding left one. Because the boy was also irritable and agitated, further examination was performed under anesthesia. Megacephaly (head circumference = 60 cm; body weight = 14 kg; height = 93 cm) was present and remarkable facial features included swollen, soft upper eyelids and a flat, broad nose . Both corneal edema and Haab’s striae were apparent in the right eye . The corneal diameter was 15.5 mm and IOP, as measured by a Tono-pen, was 35 mmHg. In the left eye, the corneal diameter was 12.5 mm and IOP was 14 mmHg. A failed filtering bleb, mydriasis, and a dissolved lens were apparent in the right eye and iris ectropin was present in both eyes. Lisch nodules were also present in both eyes, but were slightly more prevalent in the left. Cup-to-disk ratios were 1.0 and 0.6 in the right and left eyes, respectively, and blood vessels were shifted nasally in both eyes. Anterior chamber angles were wide open in both eyes, but abundant pigmentation was visible. Axial length was 31 mm in the right eye and 27 mm in the left eye, as measured by ultrasound examination. The boy also had multiple café au lait patches all over his body. Focal areas of high signal intensity on T2-weighted MRI images showed likely gliosis or abnormal myelination in the left brainstem and the right cerebellum. Sphenoid wing dysplasia was also clearly present . Eyelid thickening, bony orbit enlargement, extensive orbital soft tissue infiltration, choroidal/scleral layer enhancement, and irregular nodule optic nerve sheath thickening were present and were thought to all be caused by orbital plexiform neurofibromas (PNF) of the posterior ciliary nerves surrounding the optic nerve. Multiple café au lait patches and non-tender, clear-cut, soft subcutaneous nodules were found on the boy’s father upon examination .
Given the familial link, and the newly emerged macrocephaly, Lisch nodules, multiple café au lait patches, cerebral gliomas and cognitive impairment, a diagnosis of NF1 was made. An Ahmed valve was successfully implanted in the right eye to control IOP and post-operative IOP was 12–15 mmHg and remained well-controlled. The importance of continued ophthalmologic and neurological monitoring was stressed to the family before they were sent home.