The patient was admitted because of having abnormal urine test results when she was 3-year and 11-month old. Physical examination showed she had significant short stature of 93 cm in height (− 2 SD) and relatively lighter weight of 13.6 kg. Neither other physical disorder nor dysmorphia detected. Her unrelated parents and elder sister are normal, and there is no family history of renal disorders.
Laboratory tests indicated that she had LMWP, hypercalciuria, hypophosphatemia, and growth hormone deficiency . The results for tests parathyroid hormone, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), coagulation spectrum, ceruloplasmin, blood lead concentration, determination of trace elements, antinuclear antibodies (ANA), thyroid function, and cytokines by flow cytometry were normal. The renal biopsy was not performed.
Imaging studies: The renal ultrasound showed bilateral normal-sized kidneys for her age, and no evidence of calculus or nephrocalcinosis. The X-ray imaging indicated the delayed bone age, and the ultrasound scan showed the infantile uterus and bilateral absence of the ovaries.
Gene sequencing and Karyotyping: The trio copy number variation sequencing (CNV-seq), a HTS-based method for genome-wide CNV analyzing , showed a large de novo CNV on the X chromosome, a heterozygous loss of almost the whole X short arm and a heterozygous duplication of the rest region of the X chromosome . Karyotyping showed the patient has i(X)(q10) and inv(9)(p11q13) pat . Using trio whole exome sequencing (WES), we identified a de novo variant NM_000084:c.941C > T, p.S314L in the CLCN5 gene on Xp , and Sanger sequencing confirmed the variant is de novo and “homozygous” . The variant S314L is pathogenic according to the ACMG (The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics) clinical practice guidelines . The defects in CUBN, the cubilin-coding gene, was reported the other single-gene cause of asymptomatic LMWP , which was excluded by pathogenic or likely pathogenic variant screening in our case. Using HUMARA method , X chromosome inactivation (XCI) test showed extremely skewed (98:2) inactivation of the i (Xq) chromosome.
Based on the above results, the patient was diagnosed with Dent disease 1 and Turner Syndrome. In the next 18 months, the child came to the clinic regularly for follow-up, and the condition was stable after examination .