A 39-year-old Vietnamese male presented with a five month history (from June to November 2016) of recurrent and progressive skin lesion. Initially, the patient had painless papules distributed at multiple locations, including the chest, arms, hands, thighs, and feet. The papules then progressed into nodules, which later on expanded, ulcerated and became painful.
At the age of 27, the patient was diagnosed with myasthenia gravis (MG), was treated with prednisolone and pyridostigmine since August 2004 and had surgical removal of thymus gland on November 2004. The regimen for his MG from 2010 to 2016 was methyl prednisolone and periodically combined with IMDH inhibitors (mycophenolate or azathioprine) based on his weakness. The starting dose on September 2010 were azathioprine 100 mg/day and methyl prednisolone 48 mg/day. These doses were adjusted afterwards under the consultance of his doctor for 2 years and he did self adjusted later by his objective feeling of weakness. At the time of admission, he was under azathioprine 50 mg/day and methyl prednisolone 16 mg/day.
The patient was also diagnosed with type II diabetes one month after his first eruption (July 2016). Since then, his blood glucose level has been monitored and controlled by dietary modification, his periodically HbA1C were under 6%. From June to September 2016, the patient had completed twelve weeks of directly-acting antivirals (DAAs) for his chronic hepatitis C and he had gained virologic response (HCV RNA negative after 3 months of stop treatment).
Additionally, he had been diagnosed with TB pneumonia at the Pham Ngoc Thach Hospital which is one of the top ranked TB centers in Vietnam for his cough, hemoptysis, shortness of breath, prolonged fever with body temperature from 38 °C - 39 °C, abnormal chest X ray and the Acid-fast bacilli positivity of the sputum. He was started on anti-tuberculosis regimen (2RHZE/4RHE) since September 2016. The regimen consisted of rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide and ethambutol for two months, then withdrawn pyrazinamide for the next four months. His symptoms and chest X ray improved after two weeks of RHZE treatment. He was still on the last week of the first 2RHZE at the time of admission.
The chronological order of the patient’s medical history is shown in Fig. .
It is worth mentioning that the patient had been breeding birds and had close contact with them for the past three years. He had no history of skin trauma within 1 month before the outbreak of painless papules.
On admission, the patient’s main complaints were mild fever, painful and persistent skin lesions with painful and swollen left knee that made him unable to stand or walk. For the past few days, he also had headache that was dull in nature, extended from anterior to posterior and was worse in the afternoon. He also had 5–6 bowel movements/day with loose stool. He did not have symptoms of cough and short breaths during this illness.
He looked thin, pale, anemic, and was only able to sit with support. His temperature was 38.5 °C. He had no neck stiffness, no hepatosplenomegaly or lymphadenopathy. His left leg had intense inflammation (red, swollen, hot, and tender) that resembled cellulitis.
He also had multiple ulcers on his body. The 10 × 15 cm ulcer on his left chest was deep with visible capillaries at the base, purulent and bleeding. A group of skin lesions 5 × 10 cm was seen on his right arm . There were multiples papules, which some of them progressed into nodules and ulcers . The largest and deepest ulcer (15 × 20 cm) was on his right thigh . It was necrotic, purulent, bleeding, and had visible capillaries and small bullous with cloudy fluid in the margins. The presentation of the ulcerative skin lesions simulated Pyoderma gangrenosum.
On complete blood count, the patient was found to have low hemoglobin (7.6 g/dL) and low red blood cells (RBC) count (2.64 M/mL). The white blood cells (WBC) and platelets counts were within the normal ranges. The first blood culture was negative. HIV testing was negative while his CD4 count was remarkably low (236 cells/mL). The MRI of the head did not reveal any lesions in the brain and the chest X-Ray was normal.
The fluids from his bullous skin lesions were collected for microbiology stain and culture. These results came back negative for bacteria. Despite the negative culture, the patient was treated empirically with a combination of meropenem and vancomycin for fourteen days. During the time under antibiotics, the patient was still fever. The headache and skin lesions and were not improved.
The skin biopsy of the chest and leg ulcers was performed subsequently. The histopathological results detected the spores of cryptococcosis inside the macrophages .
The patient underwent a lumbar puncture at admission. The cerebral spinal fluid opening pressure was 9 cm H20 and all the opening pressures afterwards were normal. The analysis of the cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) detected elevated protein levels (1.61 g/L), mildly decreased glucose level (2.14 mmol/L, serum glucose: 4.84 mmol/L), lactate of 3.76 mmol/L and a white cell count of 112 cells/μL with neutrophilic predominance (78%). Lateral flow assay (LFA) test of the CSF was positive for cryptococcal antigen. The CSF cultures, however, were negative for both bacteria and fungi. Hence, the second culture of the smear of the skin ulcers was performed and was positive for C. neoformans and negative for bacteria.
Subsequently, the patient was started on amphotericin B (1 mg/kg/day) and fluconazole (800 mg/day) firstly in parallel with methyl prednisolone, azathioprine, pyridostigmine and anti-tuberculosis regimen. As planned, amphotericin B and fluconazole would be continued for 28 day. Fluconazole, for consolidation, would be continued for 11 months later.
The fever subsided after 4 days of treatment with amphotericin B and fluconazole but the patient still complained a severe headache. The neurologist considered the immune suppression effect of azathioprine, the stable status of MG and the low CD4 cell count and decided stopping azathioprine and lowered the methyl prednisolone dose to 4 mg/day for better control of Cryptococcal infection. The patient’s hypokalemia, attributed to amphotericin B, was also corrected via oral potassium replacement.
A dramatic clinical and microbiologic improvement was observed after 11 days of treatment: the anemic status improved with hemoglobin level increasing to 9.0 g/dL without RBC transfusion, the headache subsided, the meningeal signs disappeared and the patient became afebrile. The ulcers became smaller, with no exudates, granulated and improved quickly. The culture of skin ulcers on day 10 post-treatment was negative for both bacteria and fungi.
On day 14 of treatment, the WBC count of the CSF dropped to 19 cells/mL and the LFA test became negative; the glucose level was 3.53 mmol/L (serum glucose: 10.87 mmol/L) and the protein remained high (1.66 g/L).
On day 28 of treatment, the WBC count of the CSF was 12 cells/mL, the protein was 1.34 g/L, the glucose was 2.82 mmol/L (serum glucose: 6.02 mmol/L). The lactate level dropped to 2.48 mmol/L but the LFA test was positive again although the fungus culture was still negative in the CSF. The skin ulcer cultures were negative also for both bacteria and fungi.
After 28 days of treatment, amphotericin B was stopped and fluconazole (1000 mg) was consolidated until 12 months of treatment as recommended. We used a high dose of fluconazole because the patient was using rifamycin (anti-tuberculosis) which is known to reduce the level of fluconazole.
The patient was finally discharged on day 32. He had also been advised to avoid contact with birds. The cutaneous lesions on the day of discharge are shown on . The patient will be re-examined every two months during the time of fluconazole maintenance.