A 19-year-old female was found unconscious in a commercial complex and was brought to our emergency department (ED) by the emergency medical service. It was unclear why the patient was unconscious at the location at which she was found because there were no witnesses. According to the patient's friend, who accompanied her at the party, the patient had started drinking alcohol 2 h before the emergency call. Prior to copious alcohol consumption, the patient was reported to behave normally. Additionally, her parents and friend informed us that she was a social drinker but had no history of alcohol abuse, medication, or any relevant medical history. In the ED, the patient's Glasgow coma scale (GCS) was three, blood pressure was 107/51 mmHg, pulse rate was 75 beats/min, body temperature was 36.5°C, respiratory rate was 24 breaths/min with a patent airway and a normal breathing pattern, and oxygen saturation was 95% in room air. Although we did not measure the exact body weight in the ED, the patient's body mass index was 20.6 after admission. During the physical examination, only slight abrasions were observed on the face and ankle. Laboratory tests showed slight hypokalemia (3.3 mEq/L), although albumin, total protein, liver enzymes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, sodium, magnesium, glucose, hemoglobin, mean cell volume, white blood cell count, and C-reactive protein levels were within the normal range. Blood gas tests showed slight acidemia (pH 7.330) with elevated lactate (2.6 mmol/L) and an anion gap (19.2 mmol/L). Urine toxicology screening test results were negative for methamphetamine, tetrahydrocannabinol, cocaine, opiates, benzodiazepines, barbiturates, and tricyclic antidepressants. Computed tomography of the head revealed no abnormal findings. Based on these findings and the history of binge alcohol consumption at the party, we made a tentative diagnosis of acute alcohol intoxication with dehydration. Normal saline was administered, and the patient was admitted to the observational unit. However, the patient remained in a coma for 12 h after admission. Therefore, detailed investigations were conducted. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) test results were normal. Electroencephalography (EEG) showed diffuse slowing of background activity with poor response to stimuli but no epileptiform discharge. The blood gas analysis revealed a mixed disorder of metabolic and respiratory acidemia (pH 7.287, HCO3− 0.3 mmol/L, BE −6.2 mmol/L, pCO2 42.5 mmHg) with elevated lactate (3.3 mmol/L), although glucose was within the normal range (111 mg/dL). A change in electrolyte concentration from admission was also noted: sodium (from 140 to 145 mEq/L), potassium (from 3.9 to 3.3 mEq/L), chloride (from 104 to 110 mEq/L). Subsequently, the maintenance fluid was modified to a hypotonic solution containing potassium. At this moment (approximately 18 h after admission, just preceding the MRI), the net fluid balance was negative, with a total of 1500 mL of normal saline infusion and 1700 mL of urine output. Brain MRI showed an area of high signal intensity on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) with a decreased apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) in the corpus callosum and hemispheric white matter but showed no abnormal findings on the other sequences . Additionally, we checked the blood alcohol concentration (BAC) at that time (20 h after admission) which was extremely high (435 mg/dL), and vitamins (thiamine, cyanocobalamin, and folate) which were within the normal range (51.5 ng/mL, 331 pg/mL, and 5.4 ng/mL, respectively). As we could not perform these laboratory tests in our hospital, these results were obtained a few days later. We considered a diagnosis of MBD and administered thiamine at a dose of 500 mg/8 h following the MRI and comprehensive vitamin testing (21 h after admission). Six hours after the thiamine injection (i.e., 27 h after admission), the patient gained consciousness and showed a GCS of nine. Approximately 40 h after admission, the patient recovered completely and returned home without any neurological symptoms. At a follow-up visit conducted 50 days after discharge, the lesion observed on the brain MRI had resolved completely, and she had no other symptoms. The patient informed us that she was a social drinker, drank alcohol once or twice a week, and consumed 40 mg of alcohol at a time. Moreover, she started drinking 5 months before hospital admission when she started going to the university. Based on a thorough examination and detailed medical history, we concluded that the ALCC was caused by binge alcohol consumption and was within the spectrum of MBD.