A 69-year-old woman was referred to the Department of Neurosurgery at Cannizzaro Hospital, Catania, Sicily, complaining of pain and severe swelling associated with ecchymosis of her right forearm. The patient was on treatment for underlying paranoid schizophrenia. On physical examination, hypoesthesia in the segments innervated by the median nerve and reduced motor strength of her right hand (Medical Research Council, MRC grade 1/5) were noted. A gadolinium-enhanced MRI showed a large tumor (13 x 8 x 7 cm) arising from the median nerve at the level of the forearm .
The patient underwent microsurgical en-bloc tumor resection . The median nerve fibers were spared during surgery. Radical resection was achieved, but by microsurgical technique rather than compartmental approach so as to reduce surgical morbidity, thus sparing the function of the healthy surrounding tissue, including the parental nerve, surrounding muscles, tendons, and subcutaneous tissue.
On histopathological examination, the tumor depicted a classic marbled appearance due to alternating hypocellular and hypercellular areas with perivascular distribution of neoplastic cells. The hypercellular areas of the neoplasm comprised uniform spindle cells with hyperchromatic, thin, wavy, nuclei. Nuclear atypia, numerous mitotic figures, and surrounding skeletal muscle infiltration were observed .
The immunohistochemical analysis of the tumor showed diffuse positivity for vimentin and INI1 and focal positivity for desmin, S100, GFAP, CD99, and CD34. It was negative for a-actin, HMB45, caldesmone, calponin, MYF4, CKAE1/AE3, and EMA. The morphological and immunophenotypic findings were compatible with the diagnosis of a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) stage III with focal rhabdomyoblast differentiation.
Thirty-five days postoperatively, the patient was posted for adjuvant RT following R1 resection of the tumor. The clinical target volume was decided as the whole tumor bed including the entire flexor muscle compartment of the right forearm, extending from the elbow to the wrist. The tumor bed was irradiated with a total dose of 70 Gy in fractions of 2 Gy/day under ExacTrac image guidance as described by Ferini et al. . To avoid excessive radiation-induced injury to the radius and ulna, which closely abutted the high-dose radiotherapy target, we adopted an image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT)-volumetric modulated arc therapy (VMAT) approach rather than three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy verified through classic low-contrast resolution kilovoltage imaging systems or megavoltage electronic portal imaging devices.
The patient did not require chemotherapy. Serial MRI scans of the forearm with Gadolinium and whole-body CT scan with contrast enhancement at 30 days, 6 months, 1 year, and 18 months postoperatively documented no tumor recurrence, remnants, or metastases . She fully recovered her motor strength, with only mild hypoesthesia reported in the lateral three fingers of the right hand. At the latest follow-up in Sep 2022, no recurrence or toxicities were observed. The patient timeline is depicted in .