We present a case of a previously healthy 6-month-and-16-day-old male patient who was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit of our hospital on day 4 of illness due to shock in the context of high-grade fever; erythematous maculopapular rash affecting the face, trunk, palms, and soles ; clefted lips; strawberry tongue; and diarrhea. Initial blood tests showed normocytic normochromic anemia (hemoglobin 11.3 g/dL), leukocytes 3300/uL with neutrophilia of 58.1%, platelets at 455,000/uL, an elevation of C-reactive protein (CRP) of 158.2 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 85 mm/h, aspartate transaminase (AST) of 399 U/L, and alanine transaminase (ALT) of 393 U/L.
Repeated blood tests showed hemoglobin levels of 9.1 g/dL, CRP of 259.4 mg/L, procalcitonin of 51.12 ng/mL, and ESR of 75 mm/h. The lumbar puncture exhibited aseptic meningitis. Chest X-rays showed a bilateral reticular interstitial pattern with unilateral cisuritis. The echocardiogram was normal. The diagnosis of bacterial infection was considered, so ceftriaxone, clindamycin, and vancomycin were started.
The respiratory virus panel detected enteroviruses. Blood cultures; antigen stool tests for rotavirus, adenovirus, and norovirus; and PCR for SARS-CoV-2 on nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs were negative. Serologies for the Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis A, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Rickettsia conorii, Leptospira interrogans, and Borrelia spp. were also negative. Antistreptolysin O and anti-DNase B titers were negative.
The fever disappeared on day 5 of the illness, but mucocutaneous changes remained .
On day 7, normochromic normocytic anemia (hemoglobin level of 9.1 g/dL), hypoalbuminemia of 26.3 g/L, ALT elevation of 393 U/L, and sterile pyuria fulfilled the criteria to diagnose incomplete KD, presenting with shock. The echocardiogram remained normal until this time. The first dose of intravenous immunoglobulin IVIg 2 g/kg was administered. Treatment with methylprednisolone 2 mg/kg/day and oral lysine acetylsalicylate in a dose equivalent to 30 mg/kg/day of acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) was started.
On day 8, albumin dropped to 19.2 g/L, so intravenous albumin 1 g/kg was administered.
The fever returned on day 9, with blood pressure normalizing and the echocardiogram remaining normal . Considering refractory KD, a second dose of IVIg 2 g/kg was administered, with resolution of the fever for 2 days.
Alternative diagnoses were definitely ruled out by this time. Evidence of infection was no longer found. Blood cultures remained negative. The respiratory virus panel was repeated, and no viruses were detected. Stool PCR for enterovirus was negative, and no bacteria or parasites were found in stool analyses. MIS-C was also ruled out because the PCR for SARS-CoV-2 was negative on nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swabs, SARS-CoV-2 antibodies were not detected in blood, and the patient had not had close contact with a person with SARS-CoV-2 infection. Toxic shock syndrome was ruled out because diagnostic criteria were not fulfilled. Although soluble CD25 showed a high value of 20,500 pg/mL, the criteria for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis were not fulfilled. The diagnosis of autoimmune diseases was unlikely since a low titer of antinuclear antibodies (ANA) of 1:80 was found, with a fine granular speckled pattern.
Other types of vasculitis were also ruled out since serum complement levels were normal (C3 1.67 g/L, C4 0.19 g/L, and CH50 49 U/mL), serum cytoplasmic and perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies (ANCAs) were negative, and cerebral magnetic resonance angiography was normal. Adenosine deaminase 2 (ADA2) levels were normal, excluding their deficiency.
The fever reappeared on day 15. The echocardiogram performed on that day showed diffuse and irregular coronary dilatation for the first time. Giant CAAs appeared on day 16, with an echocardiogram showing a left anterior descending artery (LAD) with a maximum dilatation of 4.2 mm (z-score +12) and a right coronary artery (RCA) with a proximal dilatation of 3.1 mm (z-score +5.5) .
On day 17, anakinra was added to methylprednisolone, and enoxaparin in therapeutic dose was added to ASA. Anakinra was started on a low dose of 4 mg/kg/day on the first day and 6 mg/kg/day during the next 10 days. Antibiotic therapy was stopped on day 17.
The patient had no more fever since anakinra was started, rash and palpebral edema improved, and inflammatory markers decreased . ASA was reduced to a low dose of 4 mg/kg/day, and IV methylprednisolone was switched to oral prednisolone.
However, the echocardiogram performed on day 19 showed an escalation of the giant CAAs, which continued to increase with new areas of dilatation . Despite this, inflammatory markers were decreasing, so treatment with anakinra was maintained.
While treatment continued with anakinra, inflammatory markers decreased for a few days without reaching a normal value and ended up increasing . On day 30 of illness, inflammatory markers were high, and the echocardiogram showed the enlargement of giant CAAs, so a third dose of IVIg 2 g/kg was administered and methylprednisolone pulses at 30 mg/kg/day were given daily for 5 days. The anakinra dose was also increased to 8 mg/kg/day.
By day 35 of illness, the patient remained without fever, a rash involution was observed, and inflammatory markers were normalized . Methylprednisolone was then kept at a low dose of 2 mg/kg/day.
However, coronary aneurysms continued to increase . Therefore, we decided to stop anakinra and start propranolol at a low dose of 1 mg/kg/day 8/8 h, which was increased to a maximum dose of 2.5 mg/kg/day 3id. One single dose of infliximab 5 mg/kg was also administered. The patient was admitted to the cardiology unit for a close follow-up, and captopril 0.3 mg/kg/dose 3id was added.
From day 36 of illness, stability of the giant CAAs was achieved ( and ). Methylprednisolone was switched to prednisolone; oral warfarin was started, and enoxaparin was stopped when a therapeutic INR was reached.
The patient was discharged from the hospital on day 69 of illness. Prednisolone was discontinued after 4 weeks, but he remained in treatment with warfarin, AAS, propranolol, and captopril. Echocardiograms and coronary computed tomography angiogram performed after discharge showed that CAAs were regressing, and some of them had even disappeared, with LMCA, the distal part of LAD, and the distal part of RCA showing the resolution of aneurysms. Two aneurysms were still seen in the proximal and medium parts of LAD, with a maximum diameter of 4.5 mm (z-score +13.7), and one aneurysm was observed in the proximal part of RCA, with a maximum diameter of 3.4 mm (z-score +6.5) . At 17 months of follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic and could easily climb stairs, and CAAs were decreasing, with LAD having only one proximal aneurysm of 3.6 mm (z-score +9.6) and RCA having only one proximal aneurysm of 3.5 mm (z-score +6.8), .