A 5-year-old boy reported to the Department of Pedodontics, Postgraduate Institute of Dental Sciences, Rohtak, Haryana, India, with a history of falling from a bike on the same day. The patient was awake with normal vitals. Clinical examination revealed a bruise over the chin, anterior open bite, deranged occlusion, step deformity on the left side mandible, and deviation to the right side, with limitation during mouth opening . A slight swelling was present over the right side of the face . An orthopantomogram (OPG) was advised for the radiological examination which revealed a right condylar fracture and left parasymphysis fracture . The child was young with primary dentition, so open reduction and internal fixation was not considered for the treatment as it could traumatize the developing tooth buds. Moreover, mouth opening was limited, so a cap splint could not be fabricated. Considering all the factors, immobilization using orthodontic archwires was planned. Under local anesthesia, banding was done on all the second primary molars, and orthodontic brackets were bonded under isolation. A 018 nickel–titanium (NiTi) archwire was placed in the upper arch, and a 014 NiTi archwire in the lower arch as the step was present in the parasymphyseal region and secured with elastic modules. Red elastics were used for traction in order to reduce the step deformity, and MMF was done for 1 week . The patient was kept on a liquid diet for this period. After 1 week, MMF was removed, and guiding elastics were placed in order to guide and stabilize the occlusion, which was advised to be changed daily by the parents. . Various mouth exercises were taught to the patient so that the risk of ankylosis could be reduced, and porridge with a liquid diet was advised to the patient. The patient was recalled after 2 weeks, and an OPG of the fractured site was taken to check the proper reduction of fractured segments at the parasymphysis area . Debonding was done, and bands were removed. The patient was advised to have a semisolid diet for 1 month and was kept on follow-up at 1, 3, and 6 months. Mouth opening, occlusion, and deviation were evaluated at every follow-up visit. OPG was taken at 6 months, which revealed complete healing of the fractured sites (parasymphysis as well as condylar area), and clinically fully satisfactory occlusion was present with good mouth opening having no deviation .