A 15-year-old girl presented with a 3-month history of mild episodic headache refractory to medical treatment. Neither consciousness impairment nor any comorbidities were observed. A neurological examination revealed bilateral extreme lateral and upward gaze nistagmus, global hyperreflexia, and bilateral papilledema, without hemorrhage signs. A radiological evaluation showed an abnormal mass lesion in the fourth ventricle. On a computed tomographic (CT) scan, the mass lesion was hyperdense with contrast enhancement [Figure and ]. A well-delineated mass within the ventricle was present, determining a gross obstructive hydrocephalus and effacement of the convexity sulci . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed on the patient, demonstrating a large 3 × 4 × 3 cm3 intraventricular lesion with irregular contrast-enhancing margins .
A midline suboccipital approach was used to excise the fourth ventricle tumor, while the patient was maintained in the sitting position. Concern that may be necessary to rapidly decompress the lateral ventricles intra- or postoperatively, a burr hole was drilled in the right posterior occipital region before the craniotomy was performed. There was no external drainage throughout the operation, but intravenous mannitol was administered. The fourth ventricle was exposed by separating the cerebellar tonsils, widening the vallecula, and allowing tumor resection in an “en bloc” fashion.
Postoperatively, the patient presented with severe left palsies in the VI, VII, IX, and X cranial nerves (CN). She opened her eyes in response to voice, responded with exclamatory articulated speech and obeyed commands, with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 12. Approximately 4 hours later, systemic arterial pressure increased and the girl's consciousness deteriorated: she did not open her eyes, uttered incomprehensible sounds, and localized painful stimuli, with a GCS score of 8. The CT scan, performed immediately after decline of the patient's condition, revealed the presence of prominent intraventricular air with dilatation of the lateral and third ventricles as transependymal fluid passage . The patient was rushed to the operating room.
Postoperative tension pneumoventricle was treated via the right occipital burr hole made during the elective operation. We chose our insertion site based on the presence of an existing burr hole in the skull. Intracranial air gushed out under pressure through the external ventricular drain immediately after insertion. Approximately 60 mL of air was drained during occipital burr hole aspiration, resulting in pressure relief and clinical recovery. The patient's consciousness level also improved to a GCS score of 12.
The following day, a CT scan demonstrated a marked improvement of the pneumoventricle . The patient was subjected to tracheostomy and gastrostomy. Thirteen days later, the external ventricular drain was removed from the patient. Her condition continued to improve (GCS = 15), and she was discharged on day 60 postoperative. At 9-month follow-up, the patient remains with mild left CN VI palsy and left peripheral CN VII palsy (House-Brackmann II). An MRI revealed total tumor resection . Histopathological analysis demonstrated choroid plexus papilloma.