A 51-year-old Caucasian woman presented to the emergency department with several hours of recurrent vomiting, associated with abdominal cramping but no diarrhea. There was no history of unwell contacts or culprit dietary intake, nor was there a history of fevers or any symptoms to suggest another focus of infection. There was no hematemesis or melena. She had no history of illicit drug use. Her past medical history included depression, treated with fluoxetine 20 mg, orally, daily. She had no cardiac history, and no significant family history of sudden cardiac death. She was managed with antiemetics, including ondansetron and metoclopramide, and intravenous fluid rehydration with normal saline. Clinical examination demonstrated dehydration, without any apparent cause of the vomiting detectable on clinical examination. Investigations revealed hypokalemia (2.5 mmol/L) and hypomagnesemia (0.47 mmol/L), and replacement was commenced. Her initial electrocardiogram (ECG), showed sinus rhythm, with corrected QT interval (QTc) of 680 msecond and had nonsustained runs of TdP and T wave alternans . She then had a witnessed cardiac arrest, with the presenting rhythm of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. She received 30 seconds of chest compressions and was successfully resuscitated without requirement for defibrillation, and recovered to a normal neurologic baseline. Her postresuscitation ECG showed a prolonged QT interval. Her postresuscitation venous blood gas showed a pH of 7.304, bicarbonate of 20.3 mmol/L, sodium of 142 mmol/L, potassium of 2.6 mmol/L, and glucose of 7.5 mmol/L. The sequence of events is represented in Fig. . She underwent further cardiac structural assessment, which was normal. Investigations into alternative causes of the vomiting, including septic screening, liver and kidney function testing, and exclusion of pancreatitis did not reveal a specific cause, and her vomiting resolved spontaneously. She was presumed to have had a viral illness. Her QT normalized after several days of observation, following withdrawal of offending medications and replacement of electrolytes, and she was discharged home with a diagnosis of acquired long QT syndrome. At follow up clinic review at 2 months and at 12 months, she remained asymptomatic with a normal QT interval, and will have ongoing follow-up.