A 19-year-old woman presented with a chief complaint of swelling and pain in the left upper arm that had been growing slowly over the previous 1 year. Physical examination showed thickened left upper arm and shoulder, which, on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was identified as a mass lesion (147 × 116.8 mm) occupying the soft tissue of postbrachium extended to the left axillary, serratus anterior muscle, and latissimus dorsi muscle. During the operation, a mass with irregular boundary, adhered to the blood vessel and nerves, was exposed, which could not be resected completely, subsequently, the partial tumor resection was performed.
Macroscopically, the lesions exhibited a white to tan fleshy cut surface. Microscopic examination at low power revealed the dense spindle cells proliferation. The tumor cells were arranged in fascicular or haphazard patterns with irregular borders from surrounding skeletal muscle, accompanied by admixtures of inflammatory infiltrate with an abundance of plasma cells and lymphocytes in a hyalinized or myxoid background. At high-power view, the tumor cells were spindle-shaped with eosinophilic abundant cytoplasm, occasionally lightly vacuolated cytoplasm, and slightly pleomorphism. Nuclei were oval with smooth nuclear contours, pale, dispersed chromatin, and nucleoli were prominent. Mitoses were 2/10HPF, and no atypical mitoses were demonstrated. No necrosis was found.
Immunohistochemical staining was diffusely positive for SMA and p16. The staining of MDM2 was moderately positive. The tumor cells did not express pan-cytokeratin, desmin, MyoD1, Myogenin, Melan-A, HMB45, EMA, S-100, SOX-10, IgG4, and pan-TRK. ALK staining showed negative results using two different clones (1A4 and D5F3). The Ki-67 index was about 10% in the hot spots.
Given the expression of MDM2 immunohistochemically, fluorescence chromosome in situ hybridization (FISH) for MDM2 was performed, but no copy number variation of MDM2 gene was detected. Moreover, the FISH assay validated that ALK rearrangement was absent.
Gene fusion analysis was conducted using the targeted Illumina TruSight RNA Fusion Panel which included 507 genes. Sequence reads were aligned to the following genome build: Homo sapiens (human) genome assembly GRCh37 (hg19) from Genome Reference Consortium. A fusion variant between TPD52L2 3’ end of exon 1–4 (NM_199360) and ROS1 5’ end of exon 36–43 (NM_002944) was revealed. The result was validated by the Sanger sequencing. Furthermore, ROS1 rearrangement was also identified by FISH. ROS1 immunohistochemical staining was negative. In the presence of this ROS1 mutation, the patient started anlotinib (receptor tyrosine kinases inhibitor, 12 mg orally, daily) as a treatment after the detection. A significant dimensional reduction of the mass was observed (108 mm×86.2 mm, pre-treatment the size was 147 × 116.8 mm) one month later. The movement of the patient’s arm was freer than pretreatment with the medicine, and the swelling was alleviated. Given the good clinical response, the patient did not receive chemotherapy. After two-month treatment with anlotinib, the tumor regression had stagnated, and then crizotinib was used for treatment (250 mg orally, daily) instead of anlotinib. Arm pain and other clinical symptoms were alleviated after one week of treatment. No evidence of progression is observed, and the patient has been in a stable condition. The follow-up is 9 months.
Based on the morphological, immunohistochemical, molecular findings and the good response to receptor tyrosine kinases inhibitors, the final diagnosis of the inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor with a previously undescribed ROS1 fusion is made, although ALK rearrangement is negative.