A 12-year-old Chinese boy complained of swelling and pain of the right 1st metatarsophalangeal joint combined with tophi at age 10, and then arthritis affected the bilateral ankle. Therefore, he went to our hospital.
The physical examination was unremarkable, except for tenderness, redness and swelling in the right 1st metatarsophalangeal joint and bilateral ankle with tophi . Laboratory data showed serum creatinine 61.7 μmol/L (reference range 50-80 μmol/L) and blood urea nitrogen 5.65 mmol/L (reference range 2.9–7.14 mmol/L). Laboratory tests revealed hyperuricaemia 461.4 μmol/L (serum uric acid reference range 155–357 μmol/L) and decreased excretion of UA (24 h urine UA 0.51 mmol, urinary UA excretion: 0.109 mg·kg− 1·h− 1, urinary UA clearance: 1.22 ml/min per 1.73m2, fractional excretion of UA: 1.1%). Normal or negative blood pressure, routine urinalysis, serum complements, ANA, anti-dsDNA, ANCA, rheumatoid factor, electrolytes and ultrasound of kidneys. Feet CT shows multiple bone destruction and bony defects of the ankles and feet, as well as soft tissue swelling. Light microscopy of renal biopsy specimens showed that one-in-six glomeruli had global sclerosis and extensive tubular atrophy . Electron microscope analysis showed vacuolar and granular degeneration of renal tubules, segmental basement membrane thickening (500–1000 nm), interstitial fibrosis, inflammatory cell infiltration and foot process fusion . Direct immunofluorescence staining was negative for immunoglobulin and complement. In the family history, the proband’s older brother was diagnosed with gout at age 17 , his mother was diagnosed with gout with stage 4 CKD at age 38 , his cousin was diagnosed with gout at age 28, his uncle died of gout and CKD at age 33, his maternal grandfather and two brothers of his maternal grandfather died of similar diseases when they were in their mid-forties. All of them had no other chronic disease. All participants in the study gave their informed consent. Clinical data, blood and urine samples of 3 affected members and 8 unaffected members were collected. Genetic testing of eight genes associated with hyperuricaemia (UMOD, HPRT1, PRPS1, MTHFR, REN, HNF1b, URAT1 and G6PC) revealed that the 3 affected members carried a novel heterozygous missense variant (c.674C > G, p.T225R) in the UMOD gene . In contrast, this likely pathogenic variant was not found in 8 unaffected members.
Finally, we diagnosed the three patients with ADTKD-UMOD. The proband and his elder brother were treated with allopurinol (100 mg/day) and colchicine (0.5 mg/day). However, several months later, they both discontinued regular therapy after the frequency of gouty flares was reduced for financial reasons. The two brothers have not developed ESRD to date, but their mother has received haemodialysis since March 2018.