A 66-year-old woman with a history of DM presented with left ureteral calculus detected by her previous physician. Relevant comorbidities included left ureteral calculus, DM, hypertension, and cerebral hemorrhage. Her previous physician scheduled ESWL for the left ureteral calculus. She developed a fever and visited her previous physician the same day. She was then referred to our hospital, a tertiary care facility, for transport due to a drop in blood pressure at the previous hospital the same day.
On physical examination upon arrival at the hospital, her blood pressure was 82/59 mmHg, pulse rate was 115 beats per minute, body temperature was 39.0 ℃, respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 95 % on room air. Her state of consciousness was maintained. qSOFA was 2 points (respiratory rate, blood pressure). Results of routine laboratory tests showed elevated leukocytes (15,220/㎕; normal range 3300–8600/㎕) with 99 % neutrophils, 1 % lymphocytes, elevated C-reactive protein (19.72 mg/dL; normal range 0.00–0.14 mg/dl), elevated glucose (292 mg/dL; normal range 73–109 mg/dL) and elevated HbA1c (11.8 %; normal range 4.9–6.0 %). Urinalysis showed elevated urinary red and white blood cell counts. Chest radiography revealed no abnormalities. Non enhanced abdominal CT showed a stone in the left ureter and left hydronephrosis with gas images in the left renal pelvis .
Initial evaluation in the emergency room determined that the patient was in septic shock due to left obstructive pyelonephritis and she was admitted to the ICU. Antimicrobials were started using Tazobactam/Piperacillin (4.5 g every 8 h), empirically and two pairs of blood cultures were taken before initiating intravenous antibiotic therapy. Noradrenaline was started as a hypertensive agent and was increased to a maximum dose of 0.05γ (㎍/kg/min). On day 3, blood pressure stabilized to 110/70 mmHg, and noradrenaline was terminated. Her general condition gradually improved. We suggested ureteral stenting, but she preferred to have the procedure done by her previous physician, so we did not place the stent at our hospital. On day 5, she was transferred to her previous physician for the purpose of ESWL, which was originally scheduled at her previous hospital. On the day of transfer, two blood cultures turned positive using the BACTEC system (Becton, Dickinson and Company, Tokyo, Japan).
The species was identified as Kluyvera intermedia and its susceptibility was determined by using the colorimetric method of the Microscan WalkAway system (Beckman Coulter, Tokyo, Japan). Urinary culture turned positive for Enterobacter cloacae. Regarding drug susceptibility, Kluyvera intermedia showed resistance to cephalosporins, so Tazobactam/Piperacillin, which is also effective against Enterobacter cloacae, was continued.
After transferring hospital, she was improved after antibiotic therapy for 14 days, and on day 28, she was discharged home after rehabilitation. ESWL was performed at a later date and no recurrence was observed. No stone component detection was performed. Eventually, we diagnosed Kluyvera intermedia bacteremia with septic shock due to left obstructive pyelonephritis.