A 51-year-old Pakistani man with diabetes was seen in postoperative care for hypocalcemia following parathyroidectomy of his parathyroid adenoma. He was a non-tobacco smoker, with a history of bilateral pedal edema for 1.5 months, and myalgia and dyspnea for less than 1 month. There was a history of renal stones treated with lithotripsy 7 years earlier. His medications included Mixtard-30 (human insulin), sitagliptin, metformin, and furosemide. His family history was insignificant. On examination he was well oriented and his vital signs were stable. A general physical examination revealed only mild pedal edema. A systemic examination was unremarkable. Preoperative investigations showed a calcium (Ca) level of 12.7 mg/dl, phosphate (PO4) 1.9 mg/dl, and serum albumin of 4.8g/dl; his alkaline phosphate 94 U/L and serum intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) level was 413.8 pg/ml. His serum creatinine was 1.04 mg/dl and he had an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) of 75.28 ml per minute/1.73m2. An ultrasound of his abdomen showed bilateral medullary nephrocalcinosis. An ultrasound of his neck revealed that his right thyroid lobe was mildly enlarged and both lobes showed a few small scattered solid nodules less than 10 mm. His right inferior parathyroid gland was markedly enlarged measuring 3.9×1.3×2.3 cm. Thyroid function tests were normal. A technetium-99m (99mTc) sestamibi parathyroid scan was carried out, which showed a focal area of intensely increased tracer uptake in his right thyroid lobe, which after washout still showed intense tracer accumulation with a probability of parathyroid adenoma or hyperplasia in the right group of parathyroid glands . On further workup, a chest X-ray revealed a left-sided mediastinal mass . Computed tomography of his chest with contrast showed an anterior mediastinal mass measuring 142 mm in diameter showing calcification . He underwent Tru-Cut biopsy of this mass and histopathology revealed fibrocollagenous tissue showing sheets of neoplastic cells. After immunohistochemical staining and based on raised proliferative index (Ki-67 10%), this tumor was classified as atypical carcinoid tumor. He was planned for resection of this tumor as well as parathyroidectomy in a one-stage surgery.
He developed hypocalcaemia postoperatively which was adequately treated. His postoperative PTH came down to 45.90 pg/ml. The histopathology of the mediastinal tumor measuring 18×15×14 cm and level 5 mediastinal lymph node measuring 0.5×0.3 cm retrieved during surgery revealed an encapsulated lesion comprising diffuse sheets and nests of neoplastic cells, separated by thick and thin fibrous bands. An occasional mitotic figure was seen: up to 2/10 to 3/10 high-power field (HPF). In some areas the tumor cells formed rosette-like structures. Large areas of necrosis were seen along with extensive homogenous, fibrotic areas . These areas were negative for Congo red or Sirius red special stains. An immunohistochemical examination showed the same reactivity pattern as the Tru-Cut biopsy. Histopathology of the parathyroid tissue showed fragmented tissue, without cytological atypia, mitotic activity, perineural invasion, indicating parathyroid adenoma . There were clusters of neuroendocrine cells, suggestive of involvement by mediastinal atypical carcinoid. A section from his lymph node was also positive for tumor metastasis. These features were consistent with atypical carcinoid tumor with lymph node metastasis. His urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) was only mildly elevated: 7.9 mg/24 hours (2–7). His serum prolactin level was 5.90 U/L (<23.8). Later, somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) revealed a well-defined focus in his left hypochondriac region between the inner border of his spleen and his left upper renal pole, consistent with SRS-avid tumor . Another area of increased tracer uptake was noted involving his right thyroid bed. He has been started on everolimus and planned for octreotide therapy. He is currently asymptomatic and recovering well.