A 64 year-old African female was brought to the emergency room in January 2016 with a chief complaint of recurrent syncope. Her serum blood glucose on arrival was 39 mg/dL. A detailed review of systems was notable for non-specific abdominal bloating and distension and a 50 lb weight loss over the preceding year. Vital signs on presentation were within normal limits; physical exam revealed a firm palpable right lower quadrant mass. Her past medical history revealed a history of pelvic EGIST that had been diagnosed in March 2010 at an outside facility. A computed tomography (CT) scan at that time demonstrated a large pelvic mass involving the right ovary, the mesovarian, and the mesometrium. Pathological analysis of the tumor revealed diffuse staining for c-Kit, CD-34, and the smooth muscle marker caldesmon, while stains for pancytokeratin, S-100, Human Melanoma Black (HMB-45), Melan-A, actin, myogenin and desmin were all negative. The mitotic index was noted to be high at 28/50 high power fields, and tumor necrosis was noted. Following a debulking procedure, all intestinal specimens were found to tumor-free. Hence, the diagnosis of a primary EGIST was made. Post-operatively, she was started on immunotherapy with the TKI, imatinib. Since that time, the patient missed most of her follow-up appointments. During the current admission, she reported discontinuation of imatinib several months ago. She further noted that hypoglycemia had indeed been the initial manifestation of her EGIST in 2010, but this symptom had resolved post-operatively.
During the current admission, initial inpatient evaluation revealed a suppressed insulin (<1uIU/mL), pro-insulin (<1.4pmol/L), C-peptide (0.4 ng/mL) and β-hydroxy butyrate (0.4 mg/dL), when the serum blood glucose was 26 mg/dL. A urine sulfonylurea screen was negative, and adrenal insufficiency was ruled out following documentation of a normal cortisol response to cosyntropin stimulation. A repeat CT scan revealed evidence of a diffuse metastatic disease with innumerable soft tissue peritoneal nodules of various sizes scattered throughout the abdomen . The largest mass was seen in the right lower quadrant and was >7 cm in the largest dimension . Given biochemical and imaging findings, consideration for EGIST-associated NICTH was made. IGF-I and II levels were assayed and found to be 27 ng/ml (reference range: 75–263 ng/mL) and 262 ng/ml (reference range: 47–350 ng/mL), respectively. The ratio of IGF-II to IGF-I was calculated as 9.7:1.
Fine needle aspiration and core biopsy of the right lower quadrant mass were performed. H&E staining revealed the typical spindle shaped morphology . Immunostaining for CD117 and Discovered on GIST-1 (DOG-1) were diffusely positive. Muscle specific actin (HHF-35), a mesenchymal marker present in 47% of GIST biopsies, was positive, while immunostaining for carcinoma markers were negative (not shown). Hence, a diagnosis of recurrent metastatic EGIST was made. Tumor sections were next stained with an antibody that recognized both big IGF-II and mature IGF-II (Abcam, Cambridge MA). Consistent with the patient’s presentation with severe hypoglycemia, the tumor stained positive for big IGF-II/IGF-II .