We presented the case of a 31-year-old male who had acquired HIV infection through unprotected sex with another man in 2016. He had a CD4+ T lymphocyte count of approximately 300, and had been prescribed antiretroviral therapy (ART) from 2016. On May 1, 2019, he had non-obvious caustic irregular fever and occasional chills, with his body temperature reaching 41.0 °C. The patient then went to a privately operated clinic for 2 days and received unknown medical infusion in Kaiyuan City, Yunnan Province, China. There was no improvement in his condition after 2 days, on May 3, 2019, and he was consequently referred to Kaiyuan People’s Hospital, where a routine blood examination was conducted. The laboratory results showed low leukopenia, low thrombocytopenia, and low hypokalemia. The patient was prescribed cephalosporin, hypothermia, and treatment to replenish fluids for 3 days, but the fever persisted.
On May 7, 2019, the patient returned to Chengdu from a business trip in Yunnan. He was hospitalized in Chengdu Center for Disease Control and Prevention on the same day. He received ART and biapenem anti-infective treatment for fever, chills, and bloodstream infection. The next day, he underwent a color Doppler ultrasound examination and the results of the scan revealed enlarged spleen, enlarged bilateral cervical lymph nodes, and enlarged bilateral inguinal lymph nodes. The routine blood examination revealed that he had neutropenia . The patient continued to receive ART and biapenem anti-infective treatment during this period.
On May 11, clinical laboratory reports confirmed the presence of gram-negative bacilli in blood culture, which was considered to be co-infected with severe immunodeficiency infection. The smear tested positive (+++) for acid-fast bacilli. This was initially suspected as tuberculosis infection, but the tuberculosis infection was ruled out by the X-ray check. Two days later, blood culture confirmed Malta Brucella. An epidemiological investigation was conducted eventually, and it was found that the patient lived in a farmhouse 20 days ago, and had eaten mutton soup in a local restaurant half a month before the onset of symptoms. Considering all the symptoms, such as fever, splenomegaly, and lymph nodes and the results of the blood culture positive for Brucella, the case was diagnosed as brucellosis. The biochemical identification confirmed B. melitensis biovar 3 , which belongs to the dominant strain responsible for brucellosis in China. Then, the patient was given rifampin and doxycycline, and his fever gradually disappeared and his condition improved. He was discharged on May 21, 2019.