A 19-year-old non-smoker female patient with MYH9 mutation (missense variant in exon 2: c.287C > T, (p.Ser96Leu)) was referred to our department for investigation of a painful, thick right tongue ulcer with reactive lymphadenitis. She had been diagnosed with oral thrush but had not responded to antifungal therapy. Her symptoms had persisted for some months. Her assessment was compromised by the unavailability of face to face consultation with her general practitioner during the early days of the Covid-19 pandemic.
She was diagnosed with Epstein syndrome at 12 years of age with severe thrombocytopenia (baseline count ~ 5 × 109/L), nephrotic syndrome with proteinuria (creatinine 298 with eGFR 19), and sensorineural deafness. When she was 18 months old, she was referred to a tertiary paediatric hospital by a local paediatrician for a sudden onset of bruising and a platelet count of 13 × 109/L. The giant platelets were seen on blood films. Her parents both had normal platelet counts and blood films. The only family history was her maternal great-aunt, who died of leukaemia at 40 years of age. She was commenced on treatment for acute idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP). A bone marrow aspirate and trephine were performed when she turned 7 years old. The trephine showed a normocellular marrow with increased megakaryocytes consistent with peripheral destruction. Cytogenetics confirmed a 46XX karyotype. She developed a life-threatening epistaxis when she was 8 years old, for which she was resuscitated with a pack red cell and platelet transfusion. She received intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) then, which was complicated by aseptic meningitis. Her platelet count rose from 1 to 87 × 109/L, which was likely due to the platelet transfusion rather than the IVIG. She remained well until she was 12 years old when she had profound menorrhagia with haemoglobin (Hb) of 55 g/L and platelets of 4 × 109/L. again she was administered blood product replacement as well as commenced on medroxyprogesterone and prednisolone 4 mg/kg/day for the provisional diagnosis of chronic ITP. The maximal platelet count during this admission was 38. This was likely due to transfusion rather than prednisolone. Following this episode, she participated in the multi-centre international randomized controlled trial of romiplostim versus placebo in children with chronic ITP (Amgen study 20,080,279). Pre-trial screening incidentally revealed 3+ proteinuria. Her serum albumin, creatinine and blood pressure were all normal. Her DNA was sent to Bristol Genetics Laboratory for steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome gene panel testing. Analysis of the MYH9 gene revealed a pathogenic heterozygous missense mutation in exon 2, c.287C > T, (p.Ser96Leu), which confirmed the diagnosis of MYH9-RD . Her phenotype was that of autosomal dominant Epstein Syndrome.
Once the diagnosis of MYH9 related disorder diagnosis was confirmed, she withdrew from the trial. Later it was notified that she was receiving romiplostim, not a placebo. Since she was 18 months old, the highest recorded platelet count was 86 × 109/L when she received six weeks of 2 mg/kg/day prednisolone and was up to 9 mcg/kg/dose per week of romiplostim concurrently.
At initial surgical consultation, the patient reported a non-healing, painful, tongue ulcer unrelated to any trauma. She noticed the ulcer eight months prior, but unfortunately, the presentation was delayed due to COVID-19 and its surrounding safety measures. By the time of presentation, the ulcer has grown to 4 cm in size (Image ).
Point of care ultrasound revealed lymphadenopathy. The working provisional clinical diagnosis was SCC. Tissue biopsy required preoperative platelet transfusion. The biopsy confirmed SCC in the primary site, but no malignancy was found in the palpable ipsilateral neck lymph nodes. Computed tomography (CT)/FDG PET showed suspicious avidity in the right tongue and 2A cervical node (Image ).
Following extensive multidisciplinary consultation and planning, she underwent surgery which comprised tracheostomy, right hemiglossectomy, third molar tooth extraction, bilateral neck dissection (right level 1–4, left level 1–3), and radial forearm free flap reconstruction with microvascular anastomosis. Radial forearm free flap with 4 by 6 cm fasciocutaneous paddle was harvested with a vascular pedicle consisting of the radial artery, venae commitantes, and the cephalic vein. They were anastomosed to superior thyroid artery, internal jugular vein and common facial vein, respectively. Vessel diameters were between 2 and 4 mm. Polyglactin 910 (Vicryl™; Ethicon) 3–0 suture was used for the inset of the free flap to intraoral defect, and Vicryl™ 3–0 and poliglecaprone (Monocryl™; Ethicon) 4–0 sutures were used for skin closure. She received 2 HLA matched pool platelets perioperatively aiming for the count above 50 × 109/L. One unit of packed red cell and 2 g of tranexamic acid were administered intraoperatively. The surgical procedure was completed with a total operative time of 6 h 42 min with an ischaemic time of 1 h 20 min for the free flap harvest. The tourniquet time was 58 min. The estimated total blood loss was 200 mL. The platelet count was 69 × 109/L, and Hb was 94 g/L at the completion of the case. She received routine postoperative orders, including monitoring in the high dependency unit (HDU), hourly flap observations, 48 h of intravenous (IV) antibiotics (cephazolin 1 g three times per day and metronidazole 500 mg twice per day), nasogastric feeding, but no chemical venous thromboembolism (VTE) prophylaxis. She had an uneventful recovery including the removal of her tracheostomy on day 4 and was discharged home on day 6 postoperative day on a soft diet.
On day 15, she was assessed by the speech and language pathologist. Part of this assessment was a modified barium swallow study. During this test she had a coughing paroxysm. This precipitated neck swelling and airway embarrassment. She was transported to the Emergency Department for urgent assessment. Due to impending respiratory arrest, an emergency airway was established via the existing tracheostomy site which had not fully healed and the patient was then transferred to theatre for neck exploration and control of haemorrhage. Bleeding was found from the free flap pedicle vessels. After two days of intensive care unit (ICU) then surgical ward stay, she was discharged home with surgical and radiation oncology follow up.
Her pathology demonstrated a moderately differentiated SCC of the oral tongue with a maximum dimension of 35 mm and up to 14 mm thick. The tumour had an endophytic growth pattern, and multiple foci of lymphovascular invasion (LVI) and perineural invasion (PNI) were seen. Margins were clear. Two (level IB and IIA) out of 38 right neck nodes contained metastatic SCC, measuring 22 mm, and both had a focal extranodal extension of 1 mm (Image ). None of the 34 lymph nodes from the left neck was involved. Her pathological tumour stage was Stage 4 (pT3, pN3b), according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) 8th edition.
She had clear indications for adjuvant chemoradiotherapy, including nodal involvement, extracapsular extension and multifocal LVI and PNI. She received adjuvant radiotherapy but, despite disease indications, was unable to receive chemotherapy due to her renal impairment. She received 60Gy RT in 30 fractions. On clinical examination and PET at 6 months after surgery she had no evidence of disease recurrence (Image ).