A 38-year-old female with DM and hypothyroidism presented to our hospital with 6-month history of headaches, blurred vision, and vomiting, noting that the headache severity suddenly worsened 3 days previously. Brain computed tomography (CT) scans from her local hospital were reviewed, indicating increased intracranial pressure associated with dilated lateral ventricles. A neurological examination performed on admission revealed bilateral papilledema without any other focal signs.
The findings yielded by all initial basic laboratory investigations were within normal limits. As shown in and , brain CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a third ventricle CC with dilated ventricles.
The patient underwent emergency bilateral external ventricular drainage (EVD) insertion and was subjected to a third ventricular CC excision under neuronavigation through a right frontal craniotomy 3 days later. Although the CC was large and strongly adhered to the roof of the third ventricle, contained gelatinous material with a whitish cheesy solid portion, and was surrounded by the plexus of veins, the procedure was performed without any complications.
Histological sections from the cyst wall showed a small piece of fibrovascular tissue with no epithelial lining, consistent with a CC, whereas the section from the cyst nodule contained eosinophilic, colloid-like material .
Twelve days after surgery, the patient developed further headaches. A few days later, she experienced a 5-min generalized tonic-clonic seizure, during which she bit her tongue and her eyeballs rolled upward. At this time, she also noticed oozing from the surgical site on the right side of the head but reported no new neurological deficits. However, as shown in , brain CT venography confirmed extensive thrombosis of the superior and inferior sagittal sinuses, right sigmoid sinus, and right internal jugular vein. Heparin infusion for CVT and levetiracetam for seizures were initiated immediately. Vasculitis and hypercoagulability screening revealed no abnormalities. As the patient’s headaches improved and no further seizures occurred, she was discharged on warfarin, which was discontinued after 12 months. Ten years after her illness, the patient remained stable without neurological deficits, but had chronic mild headaches.