Patient presented to pediatric rheumatology clinic as a 14-year-old White male with history of poorly-controlled asthma, recurrent parotitis and idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) referred for evaluation of a positive antinuclear antibody (ANA). Previously, he was diagnosed with asthma in preschool-age and had clinical response to therapy including inhaled corticosteroids. At age 8, he started to develop recurrent bilateral episodes of parotitis despite multiple treatments with sialoendoscopy with irrigation and steroid lavage by pediatric otolaryngology. At age 14, respiratory symptoms including wheeze, cough and shortness of breath particularly with exercise began to significantly worsen despite treatment with multiple asthma controllers, including inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting beta agonist, and allergy medications. This prompted further work up by pediatric pulmonology. Pulmonary function tests (PFTs) consistently showed an obstructive process .
CT of chest was abnormal with evidence of significant small airway disease, bronchial wall thickening, ground glass nodules, and linear opacities in bilateral lower lobes consistent with atelectasis or scarring . Bronchoscopy was notable for large amounts of purulent secretions with bronchoalveolar lavage cultures positive for Haemophilus influenzae. Ciliary biopsy was negative. He was treated with several courses of oral antibiotics targeting H. influenzae with some improvement but still suboptimal control of symptoms. Further testing included negative alpha-1 antitrypsin, negative angiotensin-converting enzyme level, and negative sweat chloride test with otherwise unremarkable immunoglobulin levels, mitogen titers (tetanus, diphtheria and pneumococcal) and total complement (CH50). However, ANA was positive with 1:160 titer prompting further evaluation by pediatric rheumatology. Concurrently, he continued to have persistent episodic parotitis, and a repeat CT sinus ordered by pediatric otolaryngology was unremarkable. Pediatric otolaryngology on report continued to treat symptomatically with repeat sialoendoscopy with steroid lavage as needed.
Review of systems was negative for fever, sicca symptoms, rash, easy bruising or bleeding, hemoptysis, bloody stools, abdominal pain, joint pain/swelling, weight loss, hair loss, and mouth sores. Additional pertinent positive symptoms included recurrent loose stools. There was no family history of autoimmune diseases. Physical exam was remarkable for coarse breath sounds and rhonchi, with unlabored breathing and prolonged expiratory phase, and mild joint hypermobility. There was no alopecia, oral ulcers, rash, skin tightening, and nailfold capillaroscopy was grossly normal. Initial rheumatology work up included repeat ANA 1:320 (speckled pattern) and positive Sjogren’s Syndrome A (SSA) and SSB antibodies. Rheumatoid factor, double-stranded DNA, ribonucleoprotein, and scleroderma-70 antibodies, complement 3 and 4 levels, and thyroid studies were normal or negative. Vasculitis work up, including antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and urinalysis, was negative . He underwent wedge resection biopsy of lingula with pathology positive for interstitial lymphocytic inflammation consistent with the cellular variant of nonspecific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP) pattern of chronic ILD . At this point, the constellation of findings, including recurrent parotitis, recalcitrant poorly-controlled asthma with significant small airway disease on HRCT, NSIP pattern on lung wedge biopsy, and IIH in the context of a positive ANA and SSA/SSB, were consistent with a clinical diagnosis of primary SS associated with mixed airway and pulmonary parenchymal disease.
He was started on treatment with high-dose oral prednisone taper over 3 months, hydroxychloroquine (HCQ), and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) with gradual improvement in all symptoms overtime with only residual occasional cough. He had no persistent wheezing or shortness of breath, and exercise tolerance improved. He had no further episode of parotitis. He became active in Taekwondo. He was able to taper off acetazolamide for IIH and wean down on asthma medications without worsening chest symptoms. Flows on spirometry improved, although he still had evidence of air trapping with elevated total lung capacity (TLC) and residual volume (RV) on PFTs . Repeat CT of chest showed marked improvement in lung disease. Subsequent tonsillectomy for sleep apnea and enlarged tonsils revealed benign lymphoid follicular hyperplasia without concern for lymphoma. Given his overall positive response to therapy, a clinical diagnosis of primary SS was felt sufficient and, as such, further invasive testing with salivary gland biopsy or imaging were not pursued.