A 64-year-old male with a past medical history significant of end-stage renal disease on haemodialysis via a tunnelled catheter and bilateral hydronephrosis with bilateral nephrostomy tubes presented with right shoulder pain and hypoxia. The patient denied having any fevers, night sweats, or weight loss. Physical examination was not significant for a heart murmur, Janeway lesions, Osler nodes, Roth spots, or splinter haemorrhages. He was diagnosed with community-acquired pneumonia at an outside facility 1 month prior with positive blood and urine cultures for methicillin-sensitive staphylococcal aureus (MSSA). At that time, he was treated with intravenous vancomycin and transitioned to oral cephalexin on discharge for 10 days. He reported compliance with antibiotics. Repeat blood cultures were positive for MSSA in two samples. Trans-oesophageal echocardiogram demonstrated an ejection fraction of 60–65% and a large independently mobile echogenic density consistent with vegetation (3.0 × 1.6 cm) on the EV .
The patient was initially started on broad-spectrum antibiotics with vancomycin and cefazolin, but effectively de-escalated to ceftriaxone per culture sensitivities. The tunnelled catheter was replaced with a temporary dialysis catheter. A Structural Heart Team approach was undertaken. Given his actively persistent bacteraemia and multiple co-morbidities, he was considered a high-risk candidate for surgery. Therefore, he was deemed a candidate for percutaneous vacuum-assisted mechanical aspiration (AngioVac®). He was brought to the hybrid operating room, placed under general anaesthesia, intubated, and intraprocedural TEE was performed. A 26 Fr Gore DrySeal sheath was inserted via the right internal jugular vein and a 17 Fr left femoral venous return cannula was inserted via the standard modified Seldinger technique. The patient was fully heparinized with activating clotting times of >250 s. A standard C20 AngioVac® cannula was prepared and inserted into the 26 Fr sheath (see , ). Using fluoroscopic and TEE guidance, the C20 cannula was advanced towards the mass, and using a combination of two-dimensional, X-plane, and three-dimensional imaging, the entire vegetative focus was aspirated from the EV (see , and ). No foci were seen on the tricuspid valve or pulmonic valve (see , ). Once the procedure was complete, all access sites were closed using a figure of eight stitch with adequate haemostasis. Repeat blood cultures were finally negative within 24–48 h of the procedure. He was transitioned to high-dose cefazolin and he completed a 7-week course. One week after completing the antibiotics, the patient came for a follow-up visit and was doing well. He had no new symptoms or issues. Repeat blood cultures were negative.