In 2013, a 45-year-old male patient experienced progressive tetraparesis over about 1 week, which led him to seek medical attention. Based on the currently available British medical research council (MRC) grading system, neurosurgical evaluation revealed grade IV tetraparesis and global hyperreflexia with pyramidal liberation. Therefore, urgent brain and cervical spine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was requested, but he did not undergo said exam on the same day.
Four days after his first medical visit, he represented with subtle respiratory impairment, for which he was urgently admitted to our hospital for evaluation. An MRI was expeditiously obtained and showed an intramedullary lesion extending from the C5 level to the bulbar region with heterogeneous appearance and hypointense signal on T1-weigthed imaging, and without cystic or calcified components . T2-weighted images showed a heterogeneous hyperintense intramedullary lesion, featuring signs of invasion of the bulbar region; administration of MRI contrast agent showed significant enhancement of the lesion . Use of STIR sequences did not show an adipomatous component of the lesion . Neuroaxial MRI did not show any additional lesions. He did have to undergo tracheostomy placement on the day of admission and underwent partial resection of the cervical lesion on the next day. Microsurgical resection was limited since intraoperative monitoring showed discrete evoked motor potential worsening during the case. After surgery, the patient displayed a discrete loss of motor function with global grade III tetraparesis but the remainder of the postop course was uneventful. The worsening of motor function of the patient has occurred due to surgical manipulation and by tumor aggressiveness. Histopathological analysis showed a high number of small blue cells in loose arrangement, scarce cytoplasm, round hyperchromatic nuclei, and perivascular pseudorosette formation .
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed positive staining for the following markers: AE1/AE3, Fli-1, S-100, and vimentin. Besides this, CAM 5-2, CD-34, EMA, GFAP, HMB15, and Melan A stains were negative. Ten percent of the analyzed cells were positive for Ki-67, and the pathological characteristics were thought to be the most compatible with PNET.
Unfortunately, 3 weeks after establishing the diagnosis, he presented with severe worsening of motor and respiratory function, and with significant progression of the lesion on imaging, and he was subsequently referred for radiotherapy as adjuvant therapy. Due to clinical worsening, radiation of the neuroaxis was given only with 1,620 centigray. After 2 weeks of radiotherapy, he developed severe febrile neutropenia, and despite aggressive treatment, he died during the hospitalization.