A 10-year-old girl (, II-3) was the third child with two healthy older sisters born to nonconsanguineous parents (FC390). Neurologic and electrophysiologic examinations revealed that the parents (I-1 and I-2) and two sisters (II-1 and II-2) did not exhibit distal motor weakness, sensory deficit, or abnormal electrophysiologic findings. However, the patient had delayed motor milestones, with autonomous walking not present until 24 months of age. During childhood she developed gait difficulties with clumsiness and balance problems; however, the disease progression was very slow. A neurologic examination at 10 years of age revealed bilateral pes cavus, scoliosis, and a broad-based gait. She had severe weakness of foot eversion without proximal muscle involvement. Her sensitivities to pinprick, touch, position, and vibration were decreased; the vibration sensation was more severely disturbed than pain sensations in all limbs. Sensory ataxia and a positive Romberg sign were present. Deep tendon reflexes were absent and pathologic reflexes were not found. Her CMT neuropathy score was 20.
Electrophysiologic studies were performed at 7 and 10 years of age. Sensory nerve action potentials were absent in the median, ulnar, and sural nerves. Compound muscle action potentials were severely reduced in the median nerve (range, 0.2-0.5 mV) and absent in the ulnar, peroneal, and tibial nerves. Median MNCVs were markedly reduced (range, 2.6-3.0 m/s), and distal latencies were dramatically prolonged (range, 39.6-44.8 ms). The needle electromyogram was consistent with chronic neuropathy.
MRI scans of the hip and thigh were normal . Lower-calf MRI revealed hyperintense signal abnormalities . T1-weighted images demonstrated mild signal changes and atrophy in the peronei muscles; however, the tibialis anterior and soleus muscles were not involved.
The results of a histopathologic study performed at age 10 years are summarized in . Light-microscopy examination of longitudinal and cross-sections of nerve fibers revealed nerve fascicles that were markedly decreased in size, diffuse subendoneurial edema, and moderately to markedly decreased numbers of myelinated fibers (MFs) of all calibers, with suggestion of onion-bulb formation and endoneurial fibrosis . The mean diameter of MFs (3.14 µm) and the percentage area of MFs (1.39%) were also lower than in age-matched controls (4.5 µm and 25.2%, respectively) . Electron-microscopy examination revealed findings consistent with abnormal myelin, such as focally folded, uncompacted, or deteriorating myelin, irregular myelin thickness, or fragmented myelin structures in Schwann cells or nearby macrophages .
Exomes were captured using a SeqCap EZ device (version 3.0, Roche-NimbleGen, Madison, WI, USA), and sequencing was performed using a genome analyzer (HiSeq 2000, Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA). The University of California, Santa Cruz assembly hg19 (National Center for Biotechnology Information build 37.1) was used as the reference sequence. The candidate variants considered to be causative were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The total sequencing yield of WES was approximately 10.47 Gbp, with a 91.72% coverage rate for the targeted exon regions (≥10×). The total number of observed variants was 69,592 single-nucleotide polymorphisms, of which 349 variants were observed in CMT-relevant genes that have been reported previously. Subsequent filtering was achieved for functionally significant variants, where the functionally significant variants indicate all variants that change the amino acid, such as nonsynonymous, splicing site, stop-gain/-loss, and coding indels. Filtering isolated 25 functionally significant variants in the CMT-relevant genes. Most variants have been reported in the dbSNP137 or 1000 Genome databases, except for three variants [one in the gene encoding dynactin subunit 1 (DCTN1) and one in PRX]. Mutation in DCTN1 c.2054T>G (p.V685G) was excluded because the variant was detected in unaffected family members (father and an elder sister) as well as a healthy control by capillary sequencing. However, a pair of compound heterozygote nonsense mutations, c.1174C>T (p.R392X) and c.2035C>T (p.R679X), in exon 7 of PRX were well fitted with an autosomal-recessive inheritance model within the family, and neither was found in normal controls (n=300). The c.1174C>T and c.2035C>T mutations were inherited from the patient's mother and father, respectively . Thus, it was postulated that both mutations lead to enzymatic defects, and that these compound heterozygous mutations were the underlying cause of the DSN phenotype in this patient.