A 27-year-old white man with an unremarkable medical and family history presented to our emergency department with nausea, vomiting, fever reaching 38.8°C, and bloody-mucoid diarrhea 10 to 13 times a day for the past 2 days. In that period, Salmonella had been found in some meat cultures in the city center of Sivas and an endemic diarrhea presenting with the same clinical manifestations had been defined. He stated that he had eaten from the meat that had previously been shown to contain Salmonella. His blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg and his pulse rate was 78/minute, but other physical examination findings were normal. His baseline biochemical analysis was unremarkable except for leukocytosis of 21.6×103/mm3. Stool microscopy demonstrated 7 to 8 red blood cells per high-power field and 1 to 2 white blood cells in some fields. No growth was detected in his blood or stool cultures. He was hospitalized in the infectious diseases clinic for gastroenteritis, and he was started on ciprofloxacin 500 mg treatment twice daily.
One week after hospitalization, his laboratory results were as follows: blood urea nitrogen 75 mg/dL, serum creatinine 10.4 mg/dL, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 1539 U/L, total protein 4.5 g/dL (5.7 to 8.2), and albumin 2.8 g/dL (3.2 to 4.8). His urine analysis results were normal. He was transferred to our nephrology department because he was anuric, and the possibility of HUS was under consideration. In that period, his blood pressure was 130/80 mmHg, pulse rate was 84/minute, and body temperature was 36°C; there were no pathologic findings in his physical examination. There was no growth in the specific stool culture performed for enterohemorrhagic Escherichia coli. Two days later, his hemoglobin (Hb) concentration dropped to 10 g/dL, direct Coombs test was negative, his reticulocyte ratio was 6 %, and there were schistocytes in his peripheral blood smear. His serologic tests were negative for anti-nuclear antibodies, cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, hepatitis B surface antigen, antibodies to hepatitis B surface antigen, antibodies to hepatitis C virus and human immunodeficiency virus, perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody and anti-glomerular basement membrane results; his C3 was 0.511 g/L (0.9 to 2.1) and C4 was 0.151 g/dL (0.1 to 0.4).
A urine analysis performed 2 weeks later when his urine output began to increase, revealed +4 proteinuria and normal microscopy, whereas micro-total protein in 24-hour urine was measured as 18 g/day. In addition, valsartan 160 mg/day and prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day was added to the treatment because his blood pressure increased (maximum to 170/100 mmHg), and hemodialysis and plasma exchange were commenced for aHUS plus acute renal failure. His hemodialysis therapy was discontinued after eight sessions because his creatinine levels decreased and urine output increased. Plasma exchange was performed for a total of 12 sessions until his platelet count and LDH levels returned to normal. He also received a red blood cell transfusion (two units) for symptomatic anemia (Hb 7 g/dL, hematocrit 22 %). The pathology report of the samples obtained through renal biopsy was consistent with C3 glomerulonephritis; therefore, azathioprine 100 mg/day was added to his treatment. A renal biopsy specimen stained with hematoxylin and eosin revealed six glomeruli with increased mesangial cells and matrix, and minimal focal interstitial lymphocytic inflammation. There was no pathologic finding in the tubules and blood vessels . Direct immunofluorescence staining of the tissue sections revealed a total of eight glomeruli, which showed only mild to moderate mesangial granular staining for C3; no immunofluorescent staining was detected with immunoglobulin A, immunoglobulin G, immunoglobulin M, C1q, and fibrinogen. Congo red staining was negative. One month later, his serum creatinine was found to be 1.1 mg/dL, LDH was 232 mg/dL, his platelet count was 190,000/mm3, Hb was 12.8 g/dL, albumin was 3.5, C3 was within the normal ranges, and the micro-total protein in 24-hour urine was 1.3 g/day.