A 30-year-old man of Pakistani descent was referred to ophthalmology with a history of sudden profound diminution of vision in his right eye 3 days earlier associated with transient diplopia and dizziness. He had a recent history of febrile illness marked by constitutional symptoms including headache and myalgia 20 days earlier when he traveled to his native country. Although no peripheral blood smears or rapid diagnostic testing were obtained, on suspicion of malaria, he was immediately treated by a local physician with 2500 mg of chloroquine over 3 days, followed by 15 mg of primaquine daily over 14 days, and then with 1500 mg of mefloquine in three divided doses over 24 hours. Apart from symptoms related to his initial febrile illness, he was asymptomatic until he received mefloquine. Its introduction was associated with an onset of diplopia, blurred vision in his right eye, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting after intake of the first dose, with blurred vision progressing over the course of dosing. These symptoms prompted the temporary addition of omeprazole and domperidone, and the combination chlordiazepoxide-clidinium bromide, the latter of which was discontinued the day prior to presentation to ophthalmology, by which time all symptoms had resolved but the progressive blurred vision.
There was no history of observed nystagmus nor was there a history of obvious psychiatric symptoms. He smoked tobacco occasionally but did not consume alcohol or recreational drugs. He denied prior use of steroid drugs.
On examination 4 days after the onset of visual symptoms, his uncorrected visual acuity for his right eye (OD; oculus dexter) was 20/100 at distance and 20/50 at near, and for his left eye (OS; oculus sinister) his uncorrected visual acuity was 20/20 near and distance. His best-corrected visual acuity was unchanged with a manifest refraction of +1.5 diopters (D) sphere OD and +0.25 D sphere OS. Extraocular muscles were unrestricted in both eyes and the cover test demonstrated orthophoria. There was no diplopia. His right eye anterior segment was quiet and had no evidence of cornea verticillata. There was no relative afferent pupillary defect or anisocoria. The intraocular pressure was 18 mm Hg in both eyes. An Amsler grid suggested a large area of central metamorphopsia in his right eye and, corresponding to this, a fundus examination revealed a large ovoid area of dome-shaped serous elevation of retina between the temporal arcades of the retina in his right eye, including the entire macula and reaching close to the temporal border of the disc . His left eye was normal. His color vision as tested on Ishihara’s tests (38 plates) was normal. Optic coherence tomography (OCT) revealed serous elevation of his right eye neurosensory retina . Fluorescein angiography revealed focal leaks of the retinal pigment epithelium within one disc diameter superotemporal to the disc that appeared hyperfluorescent in the arterial phase. One of them acquired an ink blot appearance in the late phase . A diagnosis of unilateral CSCR was made, and he was referred to an internist for further evaluation. His vital signs were normal, and neurological, musculoskeletal, and psychiatric evaluations were noncontributory, although a detailed neuropsychiatric evaluation was not performed. He was asked to discontinue all medicines. His visual acuity steadily improved and the neurosensory retinal elevation receded. Eleven weeks after presentation, he had an uncorrected visual acuity of 20/20 distance and near in both eyes with no abnormality on OCT.
Six months later, he reported visual disturbance in his right eye but a clinical examination and OCT ruled out recurrence. However, 1 year after his initial presentation, he reported mild blurring in his right eye. His best-corrected visual acuity was 20/25 distance and 20/20 near, and a leak similar in location to the primary one was noted and treated with focal laser photocoagulation. His visual acuity returned to baseline after 7 weeks. When last seen, 44 months after the initial episode, his visual acuity was stable at 20/20 near and distance in both eyes, and a scar was visible between the macula and the disc representing the area that had focal laser treatment .