A 58-year-old male was admitted to the General Surgery Department with a 24-h history of paroxysmal colicky abdominal pain, abdominal distention, anus stop exhaust and defecation. The abdominal pain was persistent, and he had no nausea or vomiting. His symptoms gradually worsened. He had no previous medical history of abdominal pain, chronic diseases, chronic use of medication, infectious diseases like tuberculosis and abdominal surgery. He only had a history of tension-free repair for indirect inguinal hernia.
The vitals were as follows: temperature 36 °C, pulse rate 96 beats per minute (regular), blood pressure 120/80 mmHg and respiratory rate 20 per minute. Abdominal examination showed a distended abdomen with tenderness. There were no palpable masses or gut sounds. The digital rectal examination was unremarkable.
The laboratory examinations showed white blood cells 4.0 × 10^9/L, neutrophils 2.65 × 10^9/L, haemoglobin 13.2 g/dl, platelets 216 × 10^9/L, CRP 119.38 mg/L and PCT 0.32 ng/ml. Other lab findings were normal, including renal function tests, lactate and coagulation. Abdominal imaging examination was as follows: Erect abdominal X-ray detected hugely dilated small intestinal and multiple air-fluid levels in the rectum, which indicated the partial intestine obstruction . Abdominal CT revealed:1. Gallstones . 2. Congenital intestinal malrotation . 3. Small intestine obstruction with envelope wrap, fluid density around the liver can be seen, multiple gas in the intestine can be seen, accompanied by gas and liquid level .
He received conservative treatments with fasting, gastrointestinal decompression, anti-infection, acid suppression and nutritional support. After 72 h, his abdominal pain and distension were aggravated. Upon physical examination, abdominal tenderness was obvious, but rebound pain wasn’t found. Abdominal CT reexamination showed dilated small intestinal was more severe than before. It indicated progressive acute intestinal obstruction. Based on clinical and radiological features, decision of laparotomy and sac release was made.
During exploratory laparotomy, about 200 ml light yellow ascites were found in peritoneal cavity. Then congenital colon malrotation was seen. Splenic colon and descending colon turned to the right and attached to the liver and ascending colon, and sigmoid colon transferred to right iliac fossa. At the same time, a cocoon-like fibrous membrane enclosing the small intestine . The large intestine, stomach, liver, and spleen were not affected. When the cocoon-like fibrous membrane was opened, normally dilated intestines were released. It was easy to separate the fibrous membrane from small intestine. The whole cocoon membrane was excised carefully and avoided damaging any bowel. Postoperative histopathology examination of the resected membrane showed that cyst wall was composed of fibrous connective tissue with a small amount of necrosis and inflammatory cell infiltration .
On postoperative day (POD) 6, the patient complained of seriously abdominal pain, distension and vomiting. Bowel function was gradually recovered on POD 10 and the patient started oral intake on POD 11. He was discharged from the hospital on POD 14. A 6-month follow-up was carried out and no recurrence was detected.