Herein, we present a case of 11 year old girl, who presented to our clinic with history of gradual onset pain around right elbow associated with limitation of right forearm rotation for last 3 months. Initially she was treated at her native place with some analgesic medications. Since pain and limitation of her activities in school was increasing, she approached our hospital for further investigation and treatment. She didn’t give any history of weight loss or any other constitutional symptoms. On detailed examination, we found that there was diffused swelling around dorsofeatures were suggestive oradial aspect of proximal right forearm with local tenderness over proximal radius. Active and passive flexion was 0-100* and rotation was from 30* supination to 20* pronation. Plain radiograph showed huge cystic bony lesion with multiple septae and CT scan images showed markedly expansile lytic lesion measuring 4.5 cm X 3.8 cm in transverse diameter at proximal radial shaft with thinning of cortex, short trasitional zone, without periosteal reaction or surrounding soft tissue involvement .
After getting informed consent, we performed needle biopsy and histopathologically it was reported as Psammomatoid type juvenile ossifying fibroma (JPOF) of proximal radius . The overall clinical, imaging and histopathological features were suggestive of non-aggressive type of JPOF. Considering this diagnosis, we considered extensive curettage and fibular strut graft interposition rather than enbloc excision of the tumor. Through Kaplan’s dorsal approach, we performed extensive debridement and curettage of entire cystic lesion involving the proximal radius. We broke the tumor cortex, removing the mechanical block involving the proximal radioulanr joint. We later filled the cavity with allograft bone granules and intramedullary titanium elastic nail through autologous fibular strut graft, bridging the cystic lesion . On table there was significant increase in range of rotational movement of forearm. She was put on above elbow back slab for 4 weeks and followed by gradual range of motion and strengthening exercises. She was on regular follow up thereafter. At 18 months follow up, she was symptom free with almost full range of active elbow motion, without any functional limitation and follow up radiograph shows incorporation of allograft and fibular strut graft without any signs of recurrence .