A 31-one-year old Caucasian woman was referred to the endocrinology department for a facial lipodystrophy. She was the second child of non-consanguineous, healthy parents. The neonatal period and her psychomotor development were unremarkable. She had chickenpox during her childhood, and later mumps at the age of fifteen. Her first menstruation was when she was 12 years old, and she had had regular menstrual cycles ever since. At puberty, she noted that her subcutaneous adipose facial tissue gradually began to decrease . No abnormality in her past medical history existed, and she had never used any drug that could cause lipodystrophy. There was no family history of the same condition and furthermore, she did not report any symptoms. A physical examination revealed facial lipoatrophy, with loss of buccal fat pads and prominent zygomatic arches. She presented bilateral breast hypoplasia. The subcutaneous fat was preserved in other anatomic regions, particularly in the lower abdomen and thighs . She presented normal thyroid palpation. Hepatosplenomegaly, umbilical hernia, acanthosis nigricans, clitorimegaly, hirsutism or acromegalic features were all absent. Ophthalmic and other systemic examinations were unremarkable, including her neurological status and deafness was excluded. Laboratory tests, including a complete blood count, biochemical parameters (with renal and liver function tests), urine analysis with urinary albumin excretion, insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and sexual and thyroid function tests revealed no abnormalities. Her fasting glucose (70, 82 mg/dL) and insulin (2.7 mU/mL), A1c (5.2 %) and oral glucose tolerance test (2 h plasma glucose 96 mg/dL) presented normal values. There was a discrete elevation of LDL-cholesterol (139 mg/dL), and reduced HDL-cholesterol (54 mg/dL), with normal triglycerides level. The C3 levels were low, detected as <18 mg/dL (normal: 83–177 mg/dL). The patient presented no renal disease, nor more severe metabolic disorders up until our last observation. She underwent surgical correction of facial lipoatrophy, with good aesthetic results.