A 59-year-old Caucasian man was admitted with lethargy and progressive weight loss for 6 to 8 months prior to presentation. He had no history of loss of appetite, diarrhoea, excessive sweating, heat intolerance or visual disturbances. His medical history included ankylosing spondylosis with previous prosthetic aortic valve replacement for aortic regurgitation 20 years before presentation. Physical examination revealed an emaciated and lethargic man with a body mass index of 16. He was slightly pale, jaundiced and febrile with a diffused non-tender multinodular goiter with tremor on upper extremities. His pulse rate was 40/minute with a blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg. Examination of his cardiovascular system revealed prosthetic S2 without any evidence of aortic regurgitation. There were no signs of heart failure or infective endocarditis. His lungs were clear and his abdomen revealed two-finger breath tender hepatomegaly with smooth edges without any ascites or splenomegaly. Investigations revealed the following: haemoglobin 9.8 gm/dl, mean cell volume 88.6 fl, white cells 5.2 × 109/L, platelets 80 × 109/L, potassium 5.6 mmol/L, urea 18 mmol/L, creatinine 250 μmol/L, blood glucose 8.9 mmol/L, C-reative protein 66 mg/L, magnesium 0.94 mmol/L, bilirubin 54 μmol/L, alkaline phosphatase 187 μ/L, alanine aminotransferase 80 μ/L, gamma glutamyl transferase 184 μ/L, total protein 82 gm/L, albumin 34 gm/L and adjusted calcium 2.77 mmol/L. On top three sets of blood cultures were negative of bacterial aerobic and anaerobic growths. His chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly but no pulmonary oedema. However his 12-lead electrocardiogram showed complete heart block with underlying atrial fibrillation . Interestingly his thyroid function confirmed a toxic state with thyroid stimulating hormone of < 0.03 mU/L, tri-iodothyronine (T3) at 24.1 pmol/L, and free thyroxine (T4) at > 100 pmol/L. Of note, the autoimmune thyroid antibodies were negative for both thyrotropin receptors and microsomes. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed stable aortic valve prosthesis without any regurgitation. His left ventricle was notably dilated but did have a preserved good systolic function and no other valvular abnormalities were seen. However the ultrasonogram (USG) of his abdomen revealed a smoothly enlarged liver without any evidence of focal lesions or biliary obstruction. Similarly USG his neck confirmed enlarged thyroid gland with multiple nodules.
The patient was briefly managed with temporary pacing during the period of the hemodynamic instability. He was treated with 40 mg of carbimazole once daily for 3 weeks, subsequently achieving both clinical and biochemical euthyroid state with improvement in his renal functions. Similarly his heart rhythm was stabilised restoring sinus rhythm with PR interval of 180 msec with normal QRS complexes . His subsequent prolonged cardiac monitoring showed sinus rhythm without any evidence of bradycardia or heart blocks. Subsequently, the patient underwent an uncomplicated subtotal thyroidectomy.