A 70-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with a visual analog scale (VAS) score of 7 and a body temperature of 38.5°C due to acute discomfort in the cervical-thoracic-lumbar spine that radiated to the lower extremity. He had back and neck pain for two weeks, which restricted the spine's range of motion, affected his lower limbs, and caused physical weakness. He reported a history of diabetes mellitus and underwent lumbar discectomy and transpedicular screw fixation (L4/5) 4 months previously.
On admission, the muscle power was 3/5 in the left lower extremity but normal in the other extremities. Reflexes were reduced in the quadriceps and ankle jerks. The left straight leg raise test result was positive at 30°. Negative pathological reflexes were observed in the upper and lower extremities along with neck stiffness and positive Brudzinski signs.
Laboratory test results showed a marked increase in white blood cell (WBC; 13.99 × 109/l), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR; 78.00 mm/h), and C-reactive protein (CRP; 123.96 mg/l) levels, suggesting a severe infection. Blood culture results were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed extensive SEA from C2 to L4 and a spondylodiscitis at the L3/4 segment .
The patient's general condition was critical, with progressive weakness of the left lower extremity. The extensive SEA was the ultimate cause of this weakness. Therefore, laminectomy and abscess drainage were performed urgently. During the surgery, the internal fixations in L4 and L5 were taken out firstly. Then, L3/4 left hemilaminectomy was performed to break through the posterior longitudinal ligament, and a pale-yellow purulent fluid was observed. A 3-mm-diameter ventricular drainage tube was gently and gradually guided cephalad along the ventral side, and the operating table was tilted (reverse Trendelenburg) for drainage . In total, about 20 ml of purulent fluid was drained. The collected samples were sent for Gram staining and bacteriological culturing. Irrigation and evacuation procedures were repeated until no abscess or purulent material was observed. The incision was repeatedly and carefully douched with iodine and saline with vancomycin. Finally, the incisions were closed after the negative pressure drainage vessel was retained. As the patient was allergic to vancomycin, empirical intravenous antibiotics with ceftriaxone (2.0 g/day) were administered on the right postoperative day. After surgery, the patient was placed on the bed with his head elevated and his foot lowered and drainage was continued. The patient's blood and drained pus cultures were positive for multidrug-resistant S. epidermidis. Antibiotic therapy was, therefore, changed to linezolid (0.6 g/day) and rifampicin (0.6 g/day) based on the antibiotic sensitivity profile of the bacteria. Seven days after surgery, the patient's lower back pain persisted, with a VAS score of 6, and the muscle power was 4/5 in the left lower extremity. Twelve days after surgery, re-examination of the spinal MRI showed that the abscess volume was slightly reduced and the pressure in the purulent cavity was relieved. However, mixed-high signals appeared in the lumbar incision on T2-weighted imaging, indicating aggravation of local infection .
To further relieve spinal cord compression and clean up local infection and necrotic tissue of the original lumbar incision, hemilaminectomy was performed again at the center of C6/7 and L3/4 on the 14th day after the first surgery. During surgery, part of the C6/7 lamina was removed, the posterior longitudinal ligament was broken through, a ventricular drainage tube was inserted into the caudal sides along the ventral side, and about 3 ml of purulent fluid was drained. The abscess was repeatedly irrigated with saline. The incision was repeatedly and carefully douched with iodine solution and saline with vancomycin, and a negative-pressure drainage vessel was retained outside the epidural space. Thereafter, the original lumbar incision was opened again, and the local necrotic tissue was cleaned. L3/4 right hemilaminectomy was performed, and a ventricular drainage tube was guided cephalad along the ventral side. Approximately 6 ml of purulent fluid was drained, and the purulent cavity was repeatedly irrigated with saline. The intervertebral infection and lesion tissues were cleaned again; gentamicin sulfate (4 ml) and vancomycin-loaded calcium sulfate (10 ml) were added to sterile water (6 ml); the mixture was converted into artificial bone granules, approximately 3 mm in size, and implanted into the L3/4 intervertebral space. Finally, the incisions were closed after the negative pressure drainage vessel was retained.
After surgery, linezolid (0.6 g/day) and rifampicin (0.6 g/day) were continued for anti-infection therapy. Blood and drained pus cultures were negative three days after the second surgery. Twelve days after the second surgery, pain was relieved, with a VAS score of 2, and the muscle power remained 4/5 in the left lower extremity. Re-examination of the spinal MRI showed that the abscess in the spinal canal had almost disappeared, and the compression was significantly relieved . The schema of antibiotics application and time course for CRP, WBC, and ESR are shown in . Thirty days after the second surgery, almost all neurological symptoms disappeared and the muscle power of the extremities was 4–5/5.