A 40-year-old Caucasian man presented at our emergency department after a high-energy car accident, complaining of pain to his right elbow and on the medial side of his right hand. A clinical examination revealed tenderness to palpation and swelling. He was unable to actively reach full extension of his forearm. Radiographic examination revealed complete avulsion of the proximal aspect of his olecranon and displaced fracture of the base of his fifth metacarpal bone. Ultrasonography examination was performed, which showed complete triceps tendon avulsion from the dislocated olecranon fragment. He underwent surgery for triceps tendon relocation, open reduction and fixation of the olecranon avulsion and fixation of his fifth metacarpal bone two days after the injury.
He lay in a supine position with his right arm in a flexed position. His upper extremity was draped free so that his elbow could be manipulated comfortably. A posterior surgical approach, which consisted of a Z incision over his elbow, was used so that wound healing was not hindered by postoperative ROM, as the tip of the olecranon becomes more prominent during elbow flexion. The exposure was made distal enough to visualize the entire insertion of the tendon over the ulnar surface. His ulnar nerve was identified and tied. The olecranon bony insertion site was excoriated to remove interposed soft tissues. An intraoperative examination revealed that his olecranon was displaced and divided into two fragments. A locking-type whipstitch according to Krakow technique was placed on the tendon with nonabsorbable sutures and four throws were placed on each side. Using fluoroscopy, the displaced olecranon fracture was reduced and fixated with two 1.6 K wires. The sutures were then passed through a transosseous drill hole 2cm distal to the tip of the fixated olecranon fragment (to avoid joint penetration) and subsequently tied over a bone bridge. His arm was held in approximately 35° to 40° of flexion for optimal tensioning and the sutures were tied. Another transosseous drill hole was performed in an oblique way 3cm distal to the first drill hole and using Zuggurtung tension bands, a metal wire was passed under the previously placed K wires on the olecranon. Tension was held on the sutures to reduce the triceps tendon to its desired position on the footprint .
Postoperative treatment did not include splinting; rather, a sling was used for his comfort. He was allowed to discontinue use of the sling when he felt comfortable. Active motion exercises, including pronation and supination, were begun immediately. He was left free to hang the arm against gravity as long as tolerated. No weight bearing was permitted for the first four weeks postoperatively. Strengthening was begun four weeks postoperatively. At 30 days postoperatively he had regained full elbow flexion/extension and pronation/supination.