A 43-year-old male patient with marfanoid habitus (190 cm, 73 kg with long extremities) has been treated for hypertension since 2013 (ramipril 5 mg daily and felodipine 5 mg daily). Ultrasonography revealed nephrocalcinosis, and a CT scan described atherosclerotic aorta and common iliac arteries with mural thrombi. A geneticist excluded Marfan syndrome and found a heterozygous factor V. (Leiden) mutation. A cardiologist started treatment with aspirin 100 mg daily and atorvastatin 10 mg daily. A nephrologist diagnosed slightly decreased renal function (CKDG2) with normal albumin/creatinine (ACR) and protein/creatinine (PCR) ratio, normal urine analysis, and hypercalciuria and initiated the treatment with hydrochlorothiazide (12.5 mg daily). The patient was referred to an endocrinologist for possible hypoparathyroidism (serum calcium levels at the lower limit of the normal range and low PTH) in 2019.
The patient denied any history of renal stones and fractures. His father had hypertension and died of colorectal cancer, and his mother, siblings, and two children were healthy. There was no history of nephrolithiasis in the family.
At the endocrinological examination, the physical finding (except for marfanoid habitus) was normal, and no bone abnormalities were observed. The laboratory test revealed hypoparathyroidism but did not confirm hypocalcemia (serum calcium/S-Ca 2.50 mmol/l). Genetic analysis of the calcium-sensing receptor (Ca-SR) gene, performed due to low PTH and initially lower serum calcium, did not find any pathogenic variants.
Serum calcium levels progressively increased during the follow-up, and thus, hydrochlorothiazide was stopped in 2020, with practically no effect on calcium levels. The patient kept visiting both his nephrologist and his endocrinologist, however, very irregularly, and he missed his appointment several times; thus, the parameters were quite sparse (in overview in ).
The highest level of serum calcium (3 mmol/l) was observed during the summer of 2021. In between, the detailed work-up was carried out for the exclusion of PTH-related peptide-associated hypercalcemia and granulomatosis-associated hypercalcemia. Complete laboratory tests showed normal serum protein electrophoresis including immunofixation, normal serum level of ACE/angiotensin-converting enzyme, and normal level of 1,25OHD. The markers of bone turnover were within the normal range (cross laps 331 ng/l: normal range 182–801; and P1NP 27.6 μg/l: normal range 15–80).
There were normal findings in densitometry (Z-score of lumbar spine 1.1; Z-score of proximal femur −0.1 and trabecular bone score 1.485), and 99mTc/technetium scintigraphy and 18FDG-PET/CT (fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography) did not reveal any pathology.
In the end, in January 2022, the genetic examination for CYP24A1 was performed by massively parallel sequencing using a Clinical Exome Solution (CES, Sophia Genetics, Switzerland) comprising ~5,000 Mendelian disease-related genes. DNA library was sequenced on the NextSeq platform (Illumina, USA). Sequencing data were processed and analyzed by Sophia DDM software. Variant prioritization was also performed by Sophia DDM software and supported by Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV; Broad Institute), Alamut Visual (Interactive Biosoftware), and VarSome Clinical software. Variant prioritization was carried out on the basis of frequency in the general population (gnomAD and dbSNP databases), presence and frequency in clinical databases (i.e., ClinVar), interspecies conservation of the residue and coherence, and in silico predictions using tools integrated into VarSome Clinical software (DANN, DEOGEN2, EIGEN, FATHMM-MKL, M-CAP, MVP, MutationAssessor, MutationTaster, PrimateAI, REVEL, PolyPhen, and SIFT). The pathogenicity of the detected variants was classified into five categories according to the evidence criteria proposed by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) and the Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP) guidelines . We identified two pathogenic variants in the CYP24A1 gene: NM_000782.5(CYP24A1):c.443T>C p.(Leu148Pro) and NM_000782.5(CYP24A1):c.1186C>T p.(Arg396Trp). The ACMG classification of these pathogenic variants is as follows: NM_000782.5(CYP24A1):c.443T>C p.(Leu148Pro)—class 5 (PM2, PP2, PP3, PP5, and PS3) and NM_000782.5(CYP24A1):c.1186C>T p.(Arg396Trp)—class 5 (PM2, PP2, PP3, PP5, and PM5). Detected variants were validated by Sanger DNA sequencing.
We strongly recommended the genetic analysis of the patient's relatives; however, neither of them has undergone the blood sampling yet. Nonetheless, we advised the patient to inform his relatives that vitamin D supplementation and excessive calcium intake could be risky in terms of developing severe hypercalcemia if CYP24A1 mutation is present.
The patient was instructed to maintain higher fluid intake, not to be expose to vitamin D (including sun exposure if possible), and to avoid excessive calcium intake. During further follow-up, calcium levels remained stable and slightly above the upper normal range.