Under the approval of the ethics committee of Kawasaki Medical School (approval number 2723), a 25-year-old male volunteer who was able to have mSQ was recruited. The volunteer laid down on a bed in the lithotripsy position and a transrectal ultrasound probe was inserted into the rectum. The penis was manually stimulated by a female assistant. Normal spurting of semen was induced with orgasm, and after ejaculation penile stimulation continued and the penis remained erect during manual stimulation by the female assistant. The phenomenon of squirting was induced 20 s after normal ejaculation.
Antegrade ejaculation was clearly observed and was identical to that observed in healthy males, as reported in our previous studies., Briefly, the bladder neck flattened and closed in association with contraction of the prostate before ejaculation. Immediately afterwards, rhythmical ejection of seminal fluid from the seminal vesicles through the ejaculatory duct and into the bulbous urethra was observed .
The squirting phenomenon (mSQ) was also clearly observed in Doppler image analysis. With continued stimulation of the penis for 20 s after ejaculation, translucent misty fluids came out from the extra-urethral orifice for about 60 s. Color Doppler ultrasonography recorded strong contraction of the prostate and pelvic striated muscles just before mSQ, and then the fluid stream rapidly went from the urinary bladder through the prostatic urethra . Subsequently, approximately 1 cm ballooning of the prostatic urethra was observed. Rhythmical contraction and slackness of the prostate and pelvic striated muscles were repeated around 20 times for 60 s . In other words, mSQ of gushing of fluid from the extra-urethral orifice synchronized contractions, with this series resembling pumping of urine. The bladder neck remained closed during mSQ. At the end of mSQ, the neck opened and the configuration of the prostate returned to its former state at 30 s after the end of mSQ. Therefore, the open bladder neck may be a sign of the end of mSQ. The volunteer felt orgasm during mSQ similar to normal ejaculation and urination after patience with urination. The creatinine level in the misty fluid was 55.9 mg/dL, which was similar to that of urine. The bladder was not empty. The decrease of approximately 100 mL of echographic urine volume in the bladder was observed.