A 74-year-old man with no history of uveitis, keratitis, or allergic eye disease underwent uneventful bilateral cataract surgery with one day interval in August 2015. His best corrected distant visual acuity (CDVA) following surgery was 1.0 and 1.2 in the right and left eyes, respectively . Intraocular pressures and the number of corneal endothelial cells (2301/mm2 in the right eye and 2171/mm2 in the left) were within the normal range. The patient reported hyperemia and reduced visual acuity in both eyes one evening at 6 weeks postoperatively and visited Maejima eye clinic the following day. On examination, extensive hyperemia and corneal stromal edema with Descemet’s folds were observed in both eyes. His CDVA was 0.2 in both eyes, and central corneal thicknesses were 786 μm and 756 μm in the right and left eyes, respectively . Intraocular pressure measurements and detailed observations of the anterior chamber were not possible due to the presence of corneal edema. We first suspected bacterial endophthalmitis; however, we considered this an atypical case due to the simultaneous development of symptoms in both eyes 6 weeks postoperatively. No apparent vitreous opacity, retinal hemorrhage, or vasculitis was evident. After obtaining a detailed patient history, it was apparent the patient had performed gardening work during the day of onset. The patient had been engaged in the cultivation and sale of ornamental plants and had heard of eye toxicity on exposure to certain plants. We requested the patient list the plants he had handled and conducted a literature search. His clinical symptoms were consistent with those reported for corneal damage due to Asclepias physocarpa
1. We therefore diagnosed plant toxin-induced corneal edema accordingly. His eyes were initially thoroughly rinsed with normal saline. Topical levofloxacin 1.5% (6 times/day) and bethamethasone 0.1% (6 times/day) were administered, and he was re-evaluated daily on an outpatient basis. Small doses (10 mg) of oral steroids were added as the presence of retinal and vitreal inflammation could not be completely excluded.
The next day, conjunctival injection and corneal edema had increased, and his CDVA had decreased to 0.05 and 0.03 in the right and left eyes, respectively . Corneal edema began to improve on day 3 and had almost completely resolved by day 6. The oral steroid was ceased immediately after recovery of the visibility (day5).
On day 8, his CDVA had recovered to 1.0 in both eyes . No clinical signs were evident at 1 month. The intraocular pressure and number of corneal endothelial cells (2171/mm2 in the right eye and 2247/mm2 in the left) were within the normal range.