A 47-year-old, Lebanese–Canadian male with a chronic history of recurrent skin and soft tissue infection requiring intravenous antibiotics, and recurrent pneumonias in the past several months without history of underlying lung disease was referred to the immunodeficiency/infectious disease clinic for immunodeficiency workup. The patient endorsed a remote history concerning systemic immune disease for cyclic fevers with fatigue, chronic otitis media, polyarthritis, recurrent abdominal pain, and aphthous stomatitis . These symptoms stopped spontaneously during puberty at approximately age 15 years, at which point they were replaced by a constellation of acneiform rash on his face that recurs annually, daily headaches with inconclusive investigations including negative electroencephalography, and alopecia areata. At age 42 years, his prior symptoms relapsed, with onset of cyclic fevers with fatigue, polyarthritis, aphthous and genital ulcers, and recurrent infections. His infections consisted of pneumonia, chronic otitis media, and mastoiditis. The aphthous stomatitis was initially thought to be caused by dental abscesses; however, they persisted despite total teeth removal. Interestingly, a swab of the ulcer was positive for herpes simplex virus (HSV)-1 deoxyribonucleic acid on one occasion. He also developed intermittent blurry vision of both eyes, assessed by an ophthalmologist who gave a diagnosis of uveitis. At age 47 years, he began to have chest and abdominal pain associated with his intermittent fevers. There was no relevant psychosocial history.
Splenomegaly was noted on a CT scan of abdomen and pelvis. Laboratory tests revealed maintained antibody titers to measles, mumps, rubella, diphtheria and tetanus; normal levels of immunoglobulin (Ig)G, IgA, and IgM including IgG subclasses; normal T and B cell counts; normal bone marrow (BM) biopsy; and normal complement function, CH50. He had a slightly positive antinuclear antibodies (ANA) (1:80) with no other positive serology. His blood tests also revealed very low vitamin D level and he was treated for microelement deficiencies that may explain his recurrent infections. It was felt that his presentation was in keeping with probable Behçet’s disease, although it was recognized by the clinical team that he did not meet complete diagnostic criteria for Behçet’s disease. HLA-B51 status was not available.
The patient reported that his mother was diagnosed with Behçet’s disease due to chronic mouth sores, upper arm ulcers and abdominal pain. Notably, his sister also endorses chronic ulcers and arthralgias and his 11-year-old son had developed alopecia. He was subsequently referred for gene panel testing for inborn error of immunity due to strong familial phenotypes. Genetic testing revealed heterozygous mutations of pathogenic MEFV c.2080A > G (p. Met 694Val) and c.2082G > A (p.Met694IIe) genes. This confirmed the genetic diagnosis of FMF syndrome. Anti-IL-1 blocker was considered as the next therapeutic agent; however, treatment initiation was limited by recurrent infection. He has been restarted on colchicine in the interim. His children were also referred for genetic analysis.
The diagnosis of FMF can be made based on clinical symptoms and supported by genetic testing. There have been several proposed diagnostic criteria [, ]; however, the most widely accepted is the Tel-HaShomer criteria, which was further simplified by Livneh et al. [, ] . Our patient was diagnosed with FMF based on the Livneh et al. criteria, in that he satisfies at least two minor criteria for incomplete attacks. He also meets five supportive criteria, including appropriate ethnic origin, age < 20 years at disease onset, severe attacks requiring bed rest, spontaneous remission of attacks, and symptom-free interval. His diagnosis is also supported by the presence of pathogenic mutations.
Supportive criteria include family history of FMF, appropriate ethnic origin, age < 20 years at disease onset, features of attacks including requiring bed rest due to severity, spontaneous remission, symptom-free interval, transient inflammatory response, episodic proteinuria/hematuria, unproductive laparotomy or removal of appendix, consanguinity of parents. Diagnosis with ≥ 1 major criteria, or ≥ 2 minor criteria, or 1 minor criterion plus ≥ 5 supportive criteria, or 1 minor criterion plus ≥ 4 of the first 5 supportive criteria .
In accordance with the International Criteria for Behçet Disease (ICBD), the patients symptoms place him in the category of definitive diagnosis of Behçet’s disease with a score of at least four for oral and genital ulcers . Uveitis is also known to be a significant predictor of Behçet’s disease . As such, this patient has both clinical diagnoses of FMF and Behcet’s disease. Notably, body mass index (BMI) > 30 kg/m2 has previously been found to be independently associated with incidence of Behcet’s disease . However, the patient’s BMI (21.5 kg/m2) was not felt to be contributory. He also did not experience any nonclinical-related challenges during the diagnostic process.
The patient first underwent a trial of colchicine 0.6 mg twice daily for 1.5 months with mild improvement of joint pain only. His fevers were transiently mitigated with high-dose oral prednisone however returned when dose of prednisone was reduced below 20 mg daily. This was discontinued following two subsequent episodes of pneumonia. He was subsequently treated with azathioprine 100 mg daily for 3 months with a decrease of aphthous stomatitis; however, it was ineffective at reducing fevers or joint pain. An anti-IL-1 blocker anakinra was considered as the next therapeutic agent; however, treatment initiation is limited by recurrent infection.
He has been restarted on colchicine 0.6 mg three times daily in the interim, which the patient has yet to begin. At the time of this case report, the patient continues to have acute on chronic otitis media and mastoiditis requiring Port-a-cath for regular intravenous antibiotics. He also continues to have twice weekly fevers, headaches, blurry vision, and joint pain. The patient requires approximately 90 tablets of Tylenol-3 to relieve his pain. There is no current evidence of amyloidosis.