A 39-year-old female presented to a metropolitan tertiary hospital with a 1 week history of irritated and red eyes, with no associated eye pain or altered visual acuity. On further inquiry, 1 month prior to presentation she developed an episode of sinusitis and nasal crusting/erosions involving her nasal septum and left nostril. This was managed by her General Practitioner with a 5 day course of oral antibiotics (amoxicillin and clavulanic acid) and 7 days of 50 mg prednisolone daily. Her nasal erosions improved however her nasal congestion continued. She also had a 1 month history of fatigue and migratory arthralgias involving her wrist. There was no cough, dyspnoea, fever, night chills or weight loss.
Her past medical history was significant for previous TB infection. She had been treated in 1996 for pulmonary TB with a four drug regimen (2RHEZ/10RH), and in 2005 with a five drug regiment (2RHEZS/13HRZ) after being investigated for cervical lymphadenopathy. Subsequent to these treatments her TB was reported to be quiescent. Previous chest x-rays had showed bilateral apical calcified nodules.
The patient was born in India and moved to Australia in April 2017.
On examination she had bilateral conjunctival injection with normal visual acuity and extraocular eye movements. There were no rashes, no lymphadenopathy, no active synovitis, and no nasal lesions. General examination was unremarkable.
Blood tests showed elevated inflammatory markers with a C Reactive Protein of 72 (< 5 mg/L) and an Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate of 104 (1-20 mm/hr). She had an eosinophilia of 1.6 (< 0.5X 10^9/L). PR3-ANCA was positive at 21 (< 2 U/ml).
Urine microscopy demonstrated an active urinary sediment with blood, protein and leucocytes detected. Albumin:creatinine ratio was elevated at 22.8 (< 3.5 mg/mmol) with a normal serum creatinine.
A chest X-Ray (CXR) confirmed new lesions within multiple lobes. A subsequent CT chest demonstrated multiple irregular calcified nodules in both lungs, with cavitation in a nodule in the right upper lobe . A further nodule in the left upper lobe demonstrated adjacent cortical irregularity involving the rib. There was evidence of thoracic calcified lymphadenopathy.
Three separate samples of induced sputum were sent for microscopy, culture and sensitivities. This was negative with no acid fast bacilli seen. Bronchoscopy was considered but not performed due to the availability of CT guided lung biopsy at the centre. This enabled direct sampling of the lung lesions which would have a greater diagnostic yield over bronchoscopy. Numerous samples were obtained from multiple lesions to provide optimal tissue to investigate the differential diagnoses. This was done as a staged procedure by an experienced chest radiologist. From the left upper lobe lesion two fine needle aspirates and two core biopsies were performed. From the right middle lobe lesion two fine needle aspirates and three core biopsies were performed. Histopathological analysis demonstrated necrotising granulomatous inflammation with adjacent eosinophil-rich interstitial inflammation, organising pneumonia and sclerosis. No suppuration, infective organisms or definite vasculitis was identified. The fine needle aspirate samples were sent for cell block and microscopy, culture and sensitivities (MCS). No acid fast bacilli, fungi or pyogenic organisms were identified on special stains (Ziehl-Neelsen, Fite, PAS + D, Methenamine silver and Gram). Direct molecular testing by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex DNA on the left upper lobe FNA sample.
From these investigations it was concluded that GPA was the most likely diagnosis given the negative sputum and core biopsy microscopy, clinical history of extended TB treatment and location of pulmonary nodules. The positive TB PCR was felt to be reflective of the previously treated TB rather than active infection.
The patient was induced with IV methylprednisolone (500 mg for 3 days) and two doses of rituximab (1 g two weeks apart). Cyclophosphamide was considered but decided against due to fertility concerns. She was then continued on oral prednisolone at 50 mg daily with a weaning regimen. On ophthalmological review her eye symptoms were attributed to a marginal keratitis and treated with fluorometholone eye drops.
Following her initial induction treatment the patient had a good clinical response with improvement in her sinus and joint symptoms. CT chest at 3 months showed interval improvement with decrease in size multiple previous pulmonary masses and right upper lobe cavitation. Given a decreased Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) level and thus mycophenolate was chosen over azathioprine as a steroid sparing agent. She had complete peripheral B cell depletion and normalisation of her PR3 within 4 months and her prednisolone dose was weaned down to 10 mg within 6 months of starting treatment. At 11 months after rituximab therapy she had B cell recovery associated with positive PR3-ANCA at 15 U/ml and clinical relapse with recurrence of ocular symptoms with uveitis and enlargement of pulmonary nodules on CT. Her corticosteroid dose was increased and she was retreated with 2 g of rituximab with resolution her ocular symptoms, normalisation of PR3-ANCA with interval improvement on CT and she remains under regular clinical review.
Her urine protein:creatinine ratio increased to 324 (< 13 mg/mmol) before stabilising at 60 mg/mmol with a normal renal function.