A 53-year-old man with end-stage renal disease due to hypertensive nephrosclerosis received a kidney from his sister in 2009. No induction therapy was used, and immunosuppressive therapy (IT) maintenance consisted of prednisone (5 mg/day), mycophenolate sodium (1080 mg/day) and tacrolimus trough levels of 5–7 ng/mL. Thirty-four months post-transplant he developed erythematous papules on the middle and proximal phalanges of fingers on both hands. Some of the papules were ulcerated and with crusts . A biopsy of a skin lesion showed chronic epithelioid granulomas with neuritis on the dermis, a lack of bacilli by Fite-Faraco staining but a positive immunohistochemistry staining (IHC) for BCG on the nerves . A diagnosis of BT leprosy was made. The characteristics of the skin lesions, resembling vasculitis, and the presence of giant cells and mild edema permeating the granulomas in the biopsy were suggestive of a mild type 1 upgrading reaction . A subsequent re-evaluation disclosed left ulnar and tibial nerve enlargement and loss of sensation in the affected areas of the hands .
He denied contact with individuals with known leprosy, and examination of close relatives was negative for leprosy, including the sister who donated the kidney graft; she is doing well and has never developed signs or symptoms suggestive of leprosy. Two biopsies were taken from the kidney graft during the patient’s follow up; histopathology analysis of both did not disclose alterations compatible with leprosy. The patient was born in the countryside of Bahia State, an area of leprosy high endemicity, but moved to São Paulo city in 1977. São Paulo state was classified as a high endemicity area up to ~1996 but since then there was a marked reduction in the number of cases and it has been reclassified as a low endemicity area.
The patient started 12 months of multidrug therapy (MDT: rifampicin 300 mg/month, dapsone 100 mg/day and clofazimine 100 mg/day). During all MDT, the immunosuppression remained unchanged, except for the dosage of prednisone, which was kept at 10 mg/day instead of 5 mg/day. The patient completed the MDT treatment, with full resolution of the skin lesions and partial improvement of hand anesthesia. One month after completion of MDT, he presented with painful erythemato-violaceous papules and edema of both hands, especially of the fingers of the left hand, with marked functional impairment . A biopsy of a left hand lesion disclosed a chronic granulomatous dermatitis characterized by intense lymphomonocytic infiltrate, epithelioid granulomas, edema and focal areas of fibrous exudation, features typical of upgrading T1R leprosy. With this diagnosis, prednisone was increased to 40 mg/day. Mycophenolate sodium and tacrolimus were maintained, but one month later, mycophenolate was removed due to persistent diarrhea. Four weeks later, as the manifestations of the upgrading T1R were partially improved, the prednisone dose was tapered, and everolimus was introduced to replace mycophenolate sodium. By week 16, the prednisone dose was reduced to 5 mg/day, and the upgrading T1R achieved complete remission. The patient remains without relapses at the time of this publication. However, because of the development of proteinuria, everolimus was subsequently removed, and the patient remained on prednisone 5 mg/day and tacrolimus, with trough levels between 5 and 8 ng/mL. Renal function was stable throughout follow up (serum creatinine ≤1.5 mg/dL; estimated glomerular filtration rate ≥ 52 mL/min/1.73 m2).
Circulating Treg numbers were measured by flow cytometry and in situ (biopsies) by IHC (see Additional file with the strategy and methods for the Treg measurements). Written informed consent was obtained from the patient before performing the immunoassays and the study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Clinics Hospital (protocol #107.460). The patient’s results were compared with those recently reported in a group of BT leprosy patients with severe upgrading T1R but not under immunosuppression (T1R group, n = 14) . The in situ frequency of Tregs in the first skin lesion biopsy obtained for diagnosis of leprosy while the patient was undergoing a mild reaction (71 cells/mm2) further decreased when he developed a severe reaction (55 cells/mm2). Both frequencies were much lower than the results observed in the biopsies taken during a severe reaction episode in the T1R group (170 ± 23 cells/mm2).
Peripheral blood Tregs could be assessed only during severe T1R and in two moments after its remission. The patient had very low levels of circulating Tregs (CD4+CD25+CD127low/−Foxp3+ cells) both during the severe reaction (0.76%) and after its remission (1.2%) 4 months later, compared with the 3.4 ± 0.4% of circulating Tregs in the T1R group. Over two years after the reaction episode, while at a higher tacrolimus trough level (7 ng/mL), the percentage of Tregs persisted at a subnormal level (2.35%).
We also examined the capacity of the circulating Tregs to expand in response to a non-specific stimulus (phytohemagglutinin) and to M. leprae. In agreement with the ex vivo and in situ low Treg numbers, during the reaction episode, the Tregs of the patient exhibited markedly reduced expansion with both stimuli (3.0 and 0.93%), compared to the T1R group (18.9 ± 1.4 and 6.9 ± 0.7%). Of note, the expansion driven by M. leprae remained hindered at each of the three times it was tested, while the expansion driven by phytohemagglutinin increased to “normal” levels after remission of the severe reaction.
A functional study of the Tregs of the patient was not possible due to insufficient cell yield. However, we were able to measure the Tregs expression of CTLA-4, a molecule tightly related to their suppressive capacity . Both during reaction and after remission, few Tregs expressed this molecule either ex vivo or in vitro compared to the T1R group.