A 76-year-old British Caucasian woman presented with a seven-month history of bilateral knee pain, caused initially by moving heavy furniture. Her symptoms were exacerbated on her left side after striking her knee against a parked car door five weeks prior to presentation. She could recall initial mild swelling which settled but no bruising. Her pain was worse when weight bearing, particularly on her left leg. An examination of her lower limbs was unremarkable except for tenderness over the medial proximal tibias bilaterally. She was initially diagnosed with cellulitis around her knee by the emergency department, though the C reactive protein was only mildly elevated at 23, and was prescribed 5 days oral flucloxacillin. Subsequent investigations for deep vein thrombosis by her primary care physician were negative and her symptoms persisted.
Her relevant medical history included seropositive erosive rheumatoid arthritis for over 30 years, osteomalacia and osteoporosis. Her relevant drug history included calcium 1200 mg/day, vitamin D3 800 units/day, prednisolone 5 mg/day, rabeprazole 20 mg/day, folic acid 10 mg once a week, intravenous methotrexate 15 mg once a week, and 30 mg intravenous pamidronate every three months. She had been taking prednisolone and methotrexate for seven years continuously. Blood tests revealed that her vitamin D, calcium, phosphate, parathyroid hormone and alkaline phosphatase levels were within normal limits.
Our patient had been treated with oral alendronate for three years but due to poor tolerance and compliance, her therapy was changed to intravenous pamidronate for the following six years. Measurement by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) was performed at her hip and lumbar vertebrae three years before bisphosphonate treatment was commenced and again three years after. Her T scores at her hip improved from -1.55 to -1.3 and at her lumber vertebrae from -2.86 to -2.5.
Her rheumatologists initially treated the knee pain with single intra-articular hydrocortisone injections. Subsequent plain radiographs of both her knees were reported by the radiologists as having linear areas of sclerosis involving the medial metaphyseal regions of both her proximal tibiae. The changes were reported as more marked on her left side associated with a periosteal reaction suggestive of either insufficiency or stress fractures. No radiographic changes were demonstrated around her left distal femur .
Our patient was referred to the orthopedic department where she stated her bilateral knee pains had now significantly improved. On examination, she was found to have a normal gait, mildly swollen knees bilaterally with tenderness over her left proximal medial tibia and a good equal range of knee, hip and ankle movement.
Magnetic resonance imaging scans were organized and demonstrated extra-articular linear signal change on T1, T2 and short inversion time inversion recovery images with surrounding marrow edema associated with insufficiency or stress fractures at the level of the proximal tibiofibular joint within both tibiae. Her left knee also demonstrated a fracture line through her distal femur with associated edema more marked medially and centrally. Her left medial collateral ligament had a slightly increased signal in keeping with a recent sprain with marked edema in the suprapatellar fat pad and surrounding soft tissues. There was spotty bone marrow edema within her right distal femur, but no discrete linear fracture line was demonstrated .
Her treatment consisted of bilateral knee supports, rest and protected weight bearing with crutches as tolerated until her symptoms fully resolved within two months.
Our patient was reviewed one year after presentation with up-to-date radiographs demonstrating healed fractures around both knees . Unfortunately, though her knee symptoms were no longer an issue, she had sustained a right sided extracapsular femoral neck fracture six months previously after a mechanical fall. This fracture had been treated operatively with a dynamic hip screw and she was making good progress with rehabilitation and recovery, mobilizing at her last review without any walking aids. Her rheumatologists had stopped her intravenous pamidronate as a caution over the last six months in view of her multiple insufficiency fractures.
A follow up DXA scan four months previously showed no significant change in her bone mineral density from the last result. No other changes were made to her drug therapy during or after this period.