A 33-year-old Japanese man presented to the department of gastroenterology in our institution with the chief complaint of shortness of breath on exertion. His past medical history was unremarkable; however, he had a family history of polyposis of the stomach (mother, aunt, and cousin) and cerebral infarction (grandmother). He had a history of occasional drinking and smoking (4–5 cigarettes/day for 6 months). Blood tests at the initial visit revealed iron deficiency anemia. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), colonoscopy (CS), and capsule endoscopy revealed multiple polyps in the region extending from the duodenum to jejunum . Biopsy revealed cystic dilation of the glandular ducts with inflammatory cell infiltration. Furthermore, genetic testing revealed a 4 bp deletion (TGAA) in exon 5 of the SMAD4 gene.
Based on the aforementioned findings, the patient was diagnosed as having protein-losing gastroenteropathy associated with inflammation from the duodenum to the jejunum due to JPS. Because medical therapy was ineffective, approximately 25 cm of the most inflamed portion of the jejunum was partially resected. His symptoms improved temporarily; however, the inflammation of the intestinal tract worsened again, and the albumin level dropped to 1 mg/dL due to protein-losing gastroenteropathy. A totally implantable central venous access port was placed, and central venous nutrition was started; however, the albumin level did not improve, and persistent pain secondary to small intestinal inflammation reappeared. The polyps in the stomach and duodenum, and especially those in the jejunum, were enlarged ; hence the symptoms were considered to have been caused by the polyps in the jejunum. Accordingly, 2 years and 2 months after the initial surgery, a partial jejunectomy of approximately 72 cm was performed. Unfortunately, the surgery was ineffective. His height, weight, and body mass index were 182 cm, 56 kg, and 16.9 kg/m2, respectively; these were indicative of emaciation. Three years earlier, his weight was 77 kg, indicating a weight loss of 21 kg in 3 years. Marked iron-deficiency anemia (hemoglobin, 6.0 g/dL; Fe, 27 μg/dL; ferritin, 13.0 ng/mL; total iron binding capacity 242 μg/dL; and unsaturated iron binding capacity, 215 μg/dL) and hypoproteinemia (albumin, 2.0 g/dL) associated with protein-losing syndrome were also observed. Thus, frequent blood transfusions were required to alleviate the symptoms. No abnormalities were noted in the tumor marker levels; furthermore, EGD performed 31 months after the first EGD revealed multiple rapidly enlarging polyps, bleeding in the stomach, and a black residue in the stomach indicative of chronic bleeding . Double-balloon enteroscopy revealed a cluster of polyps in the jejunum, at 15 cm anal side from the ligament of Treitz; these were only scattered on the anorectal side of the same area . CS revealed a single polyp and no apparent abnormality in the mucosa . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed wall thickening in the stomach and from third portion of the duodenum to the jejunum . No ascites was observed. There were no findings suggestive of hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, such as pulmonary or hepatic arteriovenous fistulas. Tc-99 m-human serum albumin dextran protein leak scintigraphy revealed an accumulation in the small intestine at 2 h and 4 h on planar images, while single-photon emission CT revealed an accumulation in the small intestine, indicating protein-losing gastroenteropathy. Therefore, TG and PD were performed for JPS caused by the SMAD4 mutation, which presented with anemia and protein-leakage gastroenteropathy that were difficult to treat medically. Because the patient was undernourished and considered as having high risk of pancreatic fistula formation, complete external drainage of pancreatic juice with the intention of subsequently performing second stage pancreatojejunostomy was applied during the first stage surgery. Surgical findings indicated an anastomosis in the jejunum located 40 cm from the Treitz ligament, and the jejunal wall was thickened to that point. The stomach was dilated, and polyps were palpated in clusters throughout the stomach, especially in the lower part of the gastric body. The jejunum was resected approximately 60 cm anorectally from the Treitz ligament, and the remnant small intestine measured approximately 320 cm. The reconstruction methods used were variants of Roux-en-Y reconstruction and Child’s reconstruction. Gross examination revealed multiple clusters of polyps in the stomach and duodenum and pathological findings showed prominent glandular epithelium forming an elevated lesion with hyperplastic changes . The glandular ducts were dilated and irregularly branched, and the mucosal lamina propria was edematous . These findings were indicative of JPS; however, no malignancy was observed. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 47. At four months after the first stage surgery, a second stage pancreatojejunostomy was performed. At 1 year and 6 months postoperatively, there was no evidence of worsening polyps, anemia, or nutritional status . Because this disease is hereditary, his older sister underwent complete examination and was diagnosed with JPS. She has been prescribed regular check-ups with a gastroenterologist.