A 68-year-old nonsmoking female presented to the emergency unit in Aleppo University Hospital with a dry cough for more than a month. At the time of admission, she complained of dyspnea, fever, chills, myalgia, and intermittent diarrhea. She denied any contact with anyone who was known or suspected to have TB. In the past medical history, she had diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension, and she underwent a cholecystectomy 2 years ago.
The patient was diagnosed as being infected with COVID-19 by PCR 40 days ago, which required hospitalization, where she was treated with standard COVID-19 care (antipyretics, steroids, anticoagulants, and intravenous fluids).
Physical examination revealed crackles in the right lung, her oxygen saturations were 80% on ambient air, blood pressure was 118/80 and her pulse was 97 beats per minute. Laboratory investigations revealed white blood count of 33 000/mm3, C-reactive protein 194 mg/dl .
Chest radiography showed a caveated density in the upper lobe of the right lung, and computed tomography (CT) scan of thorax showed another density in the base of the right lung that was not seen in the previous radiograph .
According to the previous finding, the differential diagnosis could be necrotizing pneumonia, lung abscess, TB disease, or a necrotic tumor. After a sputum culture and antibiotic sensitivity test, the patient was treated with Tazobatam and Tycoplanine, but she did not show a very favorable response.
To investigate TB infection, an early morning sputum specimen was examined using Ziehl–Neelsen stain to detect Koch bacilli, but the result was negative.
So, the patient underwent bronchoscopy, where complete obstruction of the right bronchi was found. Meanwhile, a biopsy was taken for histological examination, which did not reveal any abnormalities. Whereas a bronchoalveolar lavage sample examined by Gene-Xpert at the Tuberculosis Center proved the presence of tuberculosis bacilli.
On the next day of the bronchoscopy, she coughed up a piece of tissue, which was sent for pathology examination, and it appeared to be necrotic lung tissue without malignancy.
The patient started to improve after treatment with four-drug therapy (isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide) on the seventh day of hospitalization and was discharged to complete anti-TB medications with telephone follow-up.