After obtaining written informed consent from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images, we present the case of a 37-year-old woman (gravida 2 para 1, gestational age 38 weeks + 5 days) who requested epidural analgesia for labor. The measured patient's height was 153 cm and her weight, on the day before delivery, was 151 kg, with a calculated BMI of 64.5 kg/m2. Past medical history was relevant for pharmacologically treated gestational hypothyroidism and diabetes during the previous pregnancy.
Manual palpation of the spine was carried out with the patient in sitting position; certain localization of interspinous spaces was not possible .
Lumbar spine ultrasound imaging was then acquired using a standard ultrasound (s-US) machine (SonoSite M-turbo®) with a convex probe . Insonation of the spine was performed by placing the probe midline at sacrum level, in the transverse orientation, and then shifting it cephalad to recognize intervertebral spaces and posterior and anterior complexes. Even with s-US aid, locating interspinous spaces was not feasible, owing to the quantity of subcutaneous tissue that made identifying target structures arduous.
As a last resort, we decided to employ AI-US, a dedicated handheld device combining real-time ultrasound with machine learning to assist identification of anatomical structures of the spine (Accuro®, Rivanna Medical, Charlottesville, VA, USA). With it, we could identify desired intervertebral space, correct needle insertion point—marked on the patient's skin—and estimated skin-to-epidural space distance—estimated 8 cm, with a slight inclination to the left. It is important to note the inconsistency between the insertion point localized with Accuro® and that presumed after landmark palpation.
The epidural catheter was then placed by a senior attending physician, requiring a single attempt; epidural space was encountered at a 10 cm depth (with a slight discrepancy compared with AI-US esteem—most likely due to tissue compression during images acquisition). Satisfactory labor analgesia was then administered through the epidural catheter. No procedural complications are to be reported.