A 79-year-old Japanese woman presented with bilateral leg edema and reported a weight gain of 7 kg over a month before admission. Urinary examination revealed increased urinary protein levels, and blood tests revealed hypoalbuminemia; thus, she was diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome. She reported a history of liver disorder diagnosed 10 years earlier along with an approximately 5-year history of dryness of mouth. Physical examination revealed attenuated breath sounds in the left lower lung field without pulmonary adventitious sounds. Examination of the bilateral lower extremities revealed pitting edema. Laboratory data are shown in . Urinary examination revealed urinary protein levels of 5711 mg/day, hematuria (20–29 red blood cells/high-power field), and urinary N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase and β2-microglobulin levels were elevated at 129.3 U/L and 2539 U/L, respectively. Blood tests revealed the following results: total protein 6.3 g/dL, serum albumin 1.7 g/dL, blood urea nitrogen 14.9 mg/dL, creatinine 0.65 mg/dL, aspartate aminotransferase 65 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 33 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 392 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 1235 U/L, and gamma-glutamyltransferase 664 U/L. Anti-SS-A and anti-SS-B antibody test results were negative; however, the salivary glands showed reduced secretory activity, and the Saxon test results were positive. The Schirmer test also showed a positive test result. A lip biopsy revealed lymphocytic infiltration. Tests for anti-nuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor showed positive results. Salivary gland scintigraphy was not performed. Based on the American College of Rheumatology criteria determined from Sjögren International Collaborative Clinical Alliance data, she was diagnosed with SjS [, ]. In addition, her hepatobiliary enzyme level was elevated. Although a liver biopsy was not performed, she was clinically diagnosed with primary biliary cholangitis (PBC) based on her chronic liver disorder and positive results with anti-mitochondrial M2 antibody testing .
A kidney biopsy was performed, and the specimen included 33 glomeruli, with 1 showing global sclerosis and 3 showing segmental glomerulosclerosis, with a few showing collapse of the glomerular capillary loops, proliferation of glomerular epithelial cells, and sclerotic lesions identified at the tubular poles. Spike or double contour lesions were not detected in the glomerular basement membrane. Notably, histopathological findings of TIN were not detected in the specimens . There was one glomerulus in the immunofluorescence specimen. Immunofluorescence staining showed no glomerular deposition of immunoglobulin (IgG, IgA, and IgM), C3, or fibrinogen. Based on these findings, she was diagnosed with FSGS. Unfortunately, the specimen used for electron microscopy did not include any glomeruli. The current patients did not show any electrolyte disturbances in the blood or excess electrolyte excretion in the urine. The blood pH level of the patient did not show the acidemia. In addition, the ability to concentrate urine was normal. Concerning the pathological findings of the tubular interstitial area, it was only slight lymphocytic infiltration, and the patient did not develop obvious tubulointerstitial nephritis. Unfortunately, urinary amino acid analysis was not conducted, or titratable acid levels were not evaluated. According to these results, we considered that the current case did not have the clinical manifestations of renal tubular disease.
Steroid therapy was initiated (oral prednisolone at a dose of 40 mg/day). Four weeks after initiation of steroid therapy, the proteinuria was not sufficiently decreased; hence, we added cyclosporine therapy (oral dose at 50 mg/day). Her blood cyclosporine level 2 hours after the oral administration of cyclosporine was controlled at 800 ng/mL. Angiotensin II receptor blocker (irbesartan) was added to her regimen after which her urinary protein level gradually decreased with an increase in serum albumin levels. Complete remission was achieved on day 269 after treatment initiation. The urinary protein/urinary creatinine ratio was 0.09 g/g Cr, her serum albumin level increased to 3.7 g/dL, and her leg edema disappeared .