An 11-year-old neutered male domestic shorthair cat presented to the referral
emergency service with a 4-week history of an intermittent and progressive
cough and dyspnoea. The cat presented to its primary care practice with
pleural effusion, which was drained, but 48 h later, the cat redeveloped
respiratory signs.
On presentation, apart from tachypnoea (respiratory rate 40 breaths/min,
without respiratory effort), other vital parameters were within normal
limits. On auscultation, cardiopulmonary sounds were muffled throughout the
chest. The cat weighed 5.42 kg with a body condition score of 5/9. The rest
of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Emergency thoracocentesis was performed and the examination of the fluid was
consistent with modified transudate effusion. The results showed fluid
cholesterol (Chol) 2.5 mmol/l, fluid triglycerides (Tg) 0.30 mmol/l, fluid
Chol:Tg rate 8.33 and fluid protein 34.2 g/l. Cytology of the fluid revealed
exudate with mixed inflammation (predominantly neutrophilic). Bacterial
culture was negative. Haematological and serum biochemistry revealed no
significant findings.
Echocardiography was performed, which showed normal cardiac structure. CT of
the thorax was performed under general anaesthetic and demonstrated an
irregular, large (0.8 × 1.7 × 2–7 cm) contrast-enhancing heart base mass
located cranial to the heart, indenting and invading the cranial vena cava
.
Therefore, an exploratory thoracotomy was pursued as the next diagnostic and
therapeutic step.
The cat was premedicated with methadone 0.2 mg/kg intravenously (IV) and had an
intercostal block with ropivacaine 1 mg/kg and lidocaine 2 mg/kg. Cefuroxime
20 mg/kg IV was also administered before and during surgery. Anaesthesia was
maintained with isoflurane in oxygen, with no intraoperative complications
were recorded. A right fourth intercostal thoracotomy was performed.
Following a temporary occlusion of the cranial vena cava, a rounded and
well-defined mass with irregular margins was identified and excised from the
cranial vena cava at the level of the azygous vein . The caval incision was
reconstructed with a continuous suture of 7-0 prolene. A pleural port was
placed and secured to the caudodorsal thoracic fascia through a separate
more caudal incision. Postoperatively, the cat was managed overnight in the
intensive care unit, with close monitoring. The cat made a good recovery,
with no major or minor complications, and was discharged 5 days
postoperatively. The pleural port was removed 14 days postoperatively, with
no evidence of residual pleural effusion.
Histopathology of the mass was consistent with an incompletely excised
chemodectoma. Subsequently, immunohistochemistry was performed using
thyroglobulin antibodies; neoplastic cells did not exhibit thyroglobulin
labelling, ruling out an ectopic thyroid carcinoma. To our knowledge,
chemodectoma in the vena cava has not been reported previously.
The cat was re-examined 2 weeks later. Clinical examination was unremarkable,
and there was no evidence of pleural effusion. Given residual microscopic
disease, adjuvant treatment with toceranib phosphate (Palladia; Zoetis) was
initiated (10 mg [1.8 mg/kg] on a Monday–Wednesday–Friday schedule).
Complete blood count, serum biochemistry, urinalysis and oscillometric blood
pressure monitoring at the referring practice were advised every 4 weeks
after starting the treatment. The cat’s respiratory rate and effort were
monitored at home. Treatment with toceranib phosphate was well tolerated,
with no adverse effects reported.
Three months later, a repeat CT showed no evidence of local recurrence and no
other lesions were identified. Treatment with toceranib phosphate was
discontinued after 1 year as the cat remained well at that time. The cat
re-presented with dyspnoea 31 months later and a repeated CT scan identified
a recurrent heart base mass with cranial vena cava and azygos vein invasion,
and pleural effusion. A humane euthanasia was elected by the client.