A 24-year-old white male with past medical history of recurrent acute pancreatitis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and obesity presented for evaluation following a referral from an outside hospital after a 3-week hospitalization due to refractory acute pancreatitis. The patient reported gastrointestinal symptoms including colicky discomfort and reflux as a teenager that evolved into sharp, severe abdominal pain requiring over 20 hospitalizations for pancreatitis in the last 10 years. Hospitalizations for recurrent acute pancreatitis ranged in severity from multi-day hospitalizations for pain management, anti-emetic therapy, bowel rest, and supportive care to one- and two-day hospitalizations where symptoms severity was less intense; less severe episodes that did not require hospitalization were also increasingly common. With the initial episodes, alcohol use increased the likelihood of symptoms occurring, but complete abstinence for the last two years did not alter the likelihood of recurrence. While episodes occurred initially every 6–12 months, the frequency increased over recent years to approximately every 3 months. He denied episodes correlated to diet, but alcohol use did increase the frequency of pancreatitis events. Prior ultrasound and computed tomography imaging for pancreatitis ruled out gallstones or anatomical etiologies. The patient was treated with proton-pump inhibitors and avoided spicy foods and alcohol with minimal resolution of symptom severity or frequency.
On presentation, the patient reported intermittent right upper quadrant pain with nausea and episodes of constipation and diarrhea, but without evidence of fat malabsorption. He denied emesis, fever, or weight loss, and also denied sinus or respiratory symptoms. He had no current alcohol use. Family history included a brother with CF carrier status who suffered from recurrent acute pancreatitis.
Physical examination was significant for obesity (BMI = 39.4 kg/m2), mild right upper quadrant tenderness, and negative pulmonary findings. Laboratory evaluation was notable for normal LFTs with mildly elevated lipase (116 U/L). Despite obesity, he had severely diminished fecal elastase (< 15.0 μg/g feces) and decreased Vitamin D (11.7 ng/mL), suggesting at least intermittent or evolving pancreatic insufficiency. Computed tomography of abdomen demonstrated acute interstitial edematous pancreatitis without evidence of necrosis and thickening of duodenum likely due to pancreatic inflammation. Abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly with hepatic steatosis with abnormal flow within hepatic veins suggesting possible hepatic fibrosis. Pulmonary function testing resulted in 87 and 90% of predicted FVC and FEV1, respectively, with a preserved FEV1/FVC (0.80) High-resolution computed tomography of the chest showed modest air trapping in the dependent lungs with early signs of bronchial wall thickening; sputum cultures were negative for CF pathogens. Sweat chloride testing indicated CFTR dysfunction (57 mmol/L). Genetic testing demonstrated disease causing CFTR mutations: R1117H/7 T/F508del.
Awaiting genotyping, the patient was prescribed pantoprazole 40 mg daily and pancrelipase 20,880 USP units TID with meals, and he declined other respiratory interventions. On follow-up 6 weeks later, he reported that low dose pancrelipase worsened gas and diarrhea symptoms. Pancrelipase was discontinued and the patient was prescribed ivacaftor 150 mg BID. After 6 weeks of ivacaftor treatment, patient reported improved gastrointestinal symptoms. For an additional 19 months, patient reported no episodes of pancreatitis, representing a marked improvement in frequency , until he discontinued ivacaftor. Over the next 3 weeks, patient experienced progressive nausea and sharp epigastric pain and laboratory studies confirmed pancreatitis with elevated amylase (231) and lipase (1221), but normal LFTs. Patient experienced 2 episodes of pancreatitis in the first month off medication. They were instructed to resume ivacaftor but subsequently lost to follow up.