A 24-year-old male presented to the outpatient department with complaints of pain, difficulty in flexing, and extending the left knee for 9 years. The patient had a history of trauma to the left knee in a road traffic accident 9 years back. The patient then was taken to a local hospital where he was given an above knee slab for 6 weeks. No radiographs were taken at that time. The patient is also complaints of clicking sound during the knee movements.
On examination, the patient had mild tenderness over the lateral aspect of the left knee with 10–90 degrees of knee range of motion with no swelling, deformity, laxity, and no neurovascular deficit.
Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the left knee were taken which revealed the non union of left lateral Hoffa fracture (Letenneur type II) (, 2).
As the patient was having chronic knee pain and difficulty in knee range of motion due to Hoffa fracture non-union, we planned for open reduction and internal fixation surgery. The patient was operated in the supine position, under tourniquet using a lateral para patellar approach . The knee joint was exposed by retracting the patella medially and the non-union site was reached . The fibrous tissue at the non-union site was removed and the edges were debrided till the fresh punctate bleeding comes. There was no loss of bone fragment and cartilage was in good condition. After reducing the fracture, k-wires were used to hold the reduction. Fracture fixation was done using two 4.5 mm cannulated cancellous screws perpendicular to the fracture line from anterior to posterior direction. Hemostasis was achieved and the wound was closed in layers.
The post-operative X-ray showed good alignment and compression at the non-union site (, ), long knee brace was given for 3 weeks, and the knee range of motion was started. Full weight-bearing was started after 3 months.
At present 1.5 years follow-up, the patient is having complete knee range of motion from 0 to 140 degrees (, ) with no pain and difficulty in walking and the X-ray knee shows healing of non-union site with no displacement of the fracture.(, ).