A 30-year-old male presented with symptoms of hypoesthesia and dysesthesia of the L5 nerve root distribution, with right positive Lasègue, and normal strength and reflexes for 60 days. The patient presented no comorbidities, except the previous treatment of a testicular seminoma with orchiectomy and adjuvant RT 20 years ago. The radiation dose utilized for the treatment of the seminoma was 30.6 Gy, irradiating the cervical and para-aortic regions. There was no personal or family history of neurofibromatosis. He had undergone coronal, sagittal, and axial T2-weighted contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbar spine that revealed a contrast enhancement of two nodular formations placed in the L4 nerve root, the first located proximally, measuring 1.1 cm × 0.6 cm, and the second distally in the right lateral recess of the spinal canal, measuring 2.1 cm × 0.9 cm . Investigation with a neurophysiologic study of lower limbs, genetic analysis, and brain, cervical, and thoracic MRI was indicated.
The results of the electroneuromyography of lower limbs revealed subacute and chronic right L5 neuropathy without muscle denervation. The genetic analysis was normal. The brain and cervical spine MRI were normal .
A surgical indication for diagnosis and treatment as well its complications were discussed with the patient and his family. The patient was afraid of motor deficit complications and decided to control the pain with physiotherapy and oral analgesic medication. The patient was closely observed. The pain was well-controlled with physiotherapy and oral analgesia when necessary during 6 months. After this period, the patient complained of a progressive increase of sciatica, the paresthesia became worse, and the motor strength was quickly and severely reduced with Grade 2 dorsiflexion of the right foot strength. The lumbar MRI showed that a tumor of the nerve root had grown .
Surgery was indicated and accepted by the patient and his family. The surgical planning was total tumor removal with free margins. A right hemilaminectomy from L3 to S1 was performed. After the incision of the dura mater, a fusiform tumor was visualized adjacent to the L5 foramen and adjacent of the cauda equina nerve roots. The L4 nerve root was individualized and sectioned proximal to the upper margin of the tumor. The distal tumor was dissected, and the nerve root distally to the tumor was individualized and sectioned. The entire segment of L4 nerve root was resected with clear margins . The dura mater was sutured with 4.0 mononylon. The paravertebral muscle was tightly sutured to avoid cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak. The subcutaneous tissue and skin layer were closed in the standard fashion.
The patient was discharged from hospital 3 days after surgery with better resolution of pain, hypoesthesia in the L5 dermatomes, and motor strength Grade 3 of the L5 nerve root. The anatomopathological and immunohistochemical studies showed a hypercellular malignant spindle cell tumor with a high mitotic index and moderate pleomorphism in a nerve root, compatible with a malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST) .
Thirty days later the patient reported somnolence, anisocoria, diplopia, severe Grade 2 paraparesis, neurogenic bowel with flaccid anal sphincter tone, and neurogenic bladder. Sagittal T1-weighted contrast-enhanced MRI of brain and spine demonstrated a hypertensive hydrocephalus, leptomeningeal enhancement, and contrast-enhanced masses throughout the cervicothoracic spinal cord surfaces . The patient underwent urgent cervical decompression via C7-T2 laminectomy with partial resection of the fibrous tumor and a ventricular catheter to monitor intracranial pressure and CSF drainage. Biopsy staining with hematoxylin and eosin revealed features characteristic of the malignant peripheral nerve sheath.
The patient died from acute respiratory failure 48 h after the second surgery. The patient's total time of survival from the time of MPNST diagnosis was 9 months.