An apparently healthy 32-year-old male patient complained of reduced strength in his left hand. Over the past few months this phenomenon occurred especially and repeatedly when holding a frying pan, but there was no pain or weakness in any of the other muscles. He had two operations on his left middle finger at the ages of 10 and 18 due to a macrodactyly. Neurological examination gave evidence for a reduced sensitivity for touch in his left middle finger. In neutral position, there was no deficit of strength. Electroneurography showed mild CTS, without sign of axonal lesion of the radial nerve. In abduction of the left arm, there was a slight weakness in pronation, radial deviation and elevation of his left hand. Occasional fasciculations were observed in his left brachioradial muscle. Overall, we hypothesized a possible brachial plexus pathology. MRI of the left brachial plexus showed an accessory muscle, attached to the medial aspect of the first rib and superior border of the scapula near the base of the coracoid process. The muscle caused a significant narrowing of the costoclavicular space . No regular subclavius muscle could been identified on either side. Arm abduction or weight bearing would most likely accentuate the narrowing of the costoclavicular space, with subsequent compression of the brachial plexus.
Overall, NTOS with compression of the brachial plexus which increases with arm elevation and abduction was likely . The muscle having this negative effect was identified as SPM which was first described by Rosenmuller and was recently described in a post-mortem study of a patient suffering from Edward’s syndrome . In this Japanese study , 124 corps were examined and SPM was found to be present in 11 patients (8.9 %) and identified as a possible cause of NTOS . The first case report on the presence of SPM in a live patient with NTOS was published in 2010 . NTOS can trigger CTS , but CTS may also be associated with macrodactyly . Electroneurographical changes in NTOS may be absent. Therefore, NTOS diagnose depends on clinical examination and imaging . Muscle strength should always be tested in the position in which the patient feels weaknesses or constraints, as SPM is not constantly active . This is in accordance with our patient’s weakness when carrying a frying pan in his left hand, whereas other muscles are at normal strength. According to a telephone interview after 6 months of the MRI examination, he reported that targeted physiotherapy over 3 months resulted in an almost full recovery and loss symptoms.