A 40-year-old Caucasian man was referred to our intensive care unit for further diagnostic work-up because of gastrointestinal bleeding of unknown location. After blood transfusions in the referring hospital, he presented with a hemoglobin level of 12.3 mg/dL at 3:45 pm.
In March 1997, he received a simultaneous pancreatic-duodenal transplantation connected to the right iliac artery and renal transplantation connected to the left iliac artery on the basis of long-standing diabetes mellitus type I. The transplantation procedure was more difficult due to abdominal adhesions caused by peritoneal dialysis over five years with recurrent bacterial peritonitis. Two episodes of hemoglobin-relevant bleeding occurred; the first five days after the transplantation and the second 14 days after. These were followed by surgical revisions of the severe adhesive abdomen without finding the bleeding site. In April 1998, July 1998, February 1999, and August 1999 acute and hemoglobin-relevant gastrointestinal bleeding episodes occurred. Repeated gastroscopy and colonoscopy, in addition to conventional and magnetic resonance (MR)-angiographies, and repeat exploratory surgeries with intra-operative endoscopies in cooperation with skilled endoscopists and Tc-erythrocyte scintigraphies, could not reveal the location of the bleeding. The renal graft lost function due to rejection in August 1998. In June 1999, he received a second renal graft on his left side, leaving the first kidney graft in place. The second renal graft also lost function due to rejection in April 2003 and hemodialysis was started in October 2003. The pancreas graft lost function in 2002 due to rejection.
At about 10 pm on the day of his admission to our unit, he complained of severe, colic-like diffuse abdominal pain. An ultrasound did not show cholelithiasis, kidney or bladder problems and an X-ray of the chest and abdomen did not show any air-fluid levels. Administration of butyl-scopalamine relieved the colic-like pain completely. At 2 am, in a routine blood-gas check, his hemoglobin was down to 7.9 mg/dL and two units of blood were transfused with adequate rise to 9.4 mg/dL after one unit of blood. At 5 am, he again complained of severe colic-like diffuse abdominal pain with nausea, tachycardia, and hypotension. His hemoglobin levels dropped to 5.7 mg/dL without showing bloody stools. Intravenous fluids, blood transfusions and catecholamines were administered immediately. Suddenly, he vomited massive amounts of blood mixed with large blood clots, making intubation impossible. He died of hemorrhagic shock.
Autopsy revealed extensive intra-abdominal adhesions. Meticulous exploration by the pathologist finally revealed an arterio-enteric fistula between his left common iliac artery, where the initial kidney was engrafted, and the adjacent ileum . In addition, large blood clots were found distal to the fistula in his small intestine which led to intestinal obstruction; explaining the eruptive vomiting of blood instead of showing bloody stools. The obstruction with intestinal distension might also explain the colic-like pain which was alleviated after administration of butyl-scopalamine.