A 49-year-old male (159 cm, 71 kg) with a fractured mandible angle and symphysis was scheduled to undergo mandible reconstruction. Although it was difficult to evaluate the Mallampati class, the patient’s neck extension seemed appropriate, and the thyromental distance was more than 3 cm. Upon arrival to the operating room, he remained alert with stable vital signs. Despite appropriate positioning, fiberoptic nasal intubation failed because of swollen oral mucosa around the soft palate and uvula, which obstructed the view of the airway . Moreover, swollen mucosa interfered with manipulation of the fiberoptic bronchoscope. At this time, effective ventilation was maintained through a face mask. After we proceeded with oral intubation with the McGrath video laryngoscope (Aircraft Medical Ltd., Edinburgh, UK), surgical reduction of the swollen part of the mucosa was performed. We planned to replace the oral tube with a nasal tube.
First, the left naris was prepared with epinephrine-soaked gauze to prevent bleeding. The nasal endotracheal tube was inserted through the naris with an endotracheal tube exchanger (Cook airway exchange catheter, C-CAE-11.0, Bloomington, IN) until it reached the oropharynx . Once it appeared in the mouth, we took the tip of the airway exchange catheter out of the mouth with the magill forceps, taking care not to damage the tube cuff . After the tube exchanger was removed from the nasal endotracheal tube , the tube exchanger was advanced through the orotracheal tube, which remained inside the trachea . The balloon of the orotracheal tube was deflated, and we slowly removed the tube while making sure to keep the tube exchanger inside the trachea . The outer side of the exchanger was inserted retrograde through the tip of the nasotracheal tube, which had been pulled out of the mouth beforehand . Running along the tube exchanger, the nasotracheal tube was finally advanced into the trachea . The patient received 100% oxygen during every procedure, and desaturation below 90% was not observed. Total apneic time for the tube exchange (from the time the tube exchanger was advanced through the orotracheal tube until ventilation) was 45 s.
A 45-year-old male (164 cm, 60 kg) with no underlying medical problems was scheduled for mandible and oral cavity reconstruction. He had undergone gingival cancer surgery, including left mandible resection and radiation therapy 8 years previous. Preoperatively, the patient’s airway was reviewed as Mallampati class IV, his mouth opening was about 2 cm, and his neck was somewhat stiff. In the operating room with the patient awake, we used the fiberoptic bronchoscope to explore from the nasal and oral airway to the vocal cords after applying epinephrine-soaked gauze into the nares. The patient had a bone defect in the left mandible angle and ramus and a skin defect in the left mandibular area with an orocutaneous fistula resulting from complications of radiation therapy following surgery for gingival cancer . The bone defect in the left mandible made it difficult to enter the glottis with the fiberoptic bronchoscope. Since failed intubation leads to increased risk of epistaxis and swelling of the soft tissue, we performed nasal intubation with the tube exchanger in the manner described above.