A 76-year-old man was referred for a lung mass in December 2018. He was a smoker (30 pack years with intermittent stops) and parking attendant for 30 years. There was no history of lung cancer in the immediate family of the patient. The patient was administered a dual bronchodilator for COPD.
CT scan showed a 1.4 cm × 1.3 cm mass in the right upper lobe (RUL) and a right lower lobe (RLL) mass-like consolidation . Histopathologic examinations of CT-guided-percutaneous needle biopsy (PCNB) of the RUL mass revealed adenocarcinoma (ADC) with clinical staging cT1bN0M0 on ultrasonic-guided transbronchial needle biopsy (EBUS-TBNB) and fluorodeoxyglucose F18-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) scan. RLL mass showed no metabolism on the FDG-PET scan. The FEV1 was 56% of the predicted value. We planned a lobectomy for the RUL cancer and a follow-up for the RLL mass. However, the patient refused to undergo surgery and was treated with stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) on the RUL mass in January 2019. The RLL mass-like consolidation did not show any changes on the follow-up chest CT or FDG-PET scan in November 2019.
In June 2020, the RLL mass-like consolidation was found to have increased on a chest CT scan . PCNB of the RLL mass was performed, and histologic examination revealed anthracofibrosis. Five months later, the RLL mass increased further , and a new nodule appeared at the periphery of the RLL . PCNB was performed again on the same RLL mass , and histological examination demonstrated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) . There was no metastasis except for hypermetabolism of the new nodule in the RLL periphery on the FDG-PET scans. We could not perform a biopsy for the new peripheral nodule due to cystic changes. We concluded the clinical staging of the RLL SCC as cT3N0M0 on the EBUS-TBNB and PET scan. SRSs were performed separately for the RLL SCC and the new RLL peripheral nodule, respectively in February 2021.
We performed chest CT scan for surveillance of lung cancer. Five months later after 2nd SCC diagnosis, a new nodule emerged at the left lower lobe (LLL) . Two months after that, the nodule increased further . Bronchoscopy showed new total obstruction of the anterobasal segmental bronchus of the LLL . Histologic examinations of bronchial biopsy and EBUS-TBNB for LLL lesions demonstrated small cell lung carcinoma (SCLC) . Clinical staging was limited stage. The patient was treated with chemotherapy (etoposide/carboplatin) and concurrent thoracic radiation.