A 30-year old male, who immigrated to the United States from Mexico three years prior, presented to the ED with complaints of a headache, weight loss, and vomiting. The patient reported the headache was localized to his bitemporal area without radiation, and progressively worsened over the two weeks prior to his arrival for evaluation. He also reported neck pain and stiffness associated with the headache. His neck pain increased with flexion and extension, and acetaminophen and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs did not provide relief. Additionally, the patient denied previous similar headaches, cough, congestion, sore throat, chest pain, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, back/hip pain, or changes in bowels or bladder.
His initial temperature was 37.5° Celsius. On exam he was noted to have an ill and sickly appearance. He had neck rigidity and decreased range of motion. Brudzinski’s sign was noted; however, Kernig’s sign was not present. The rest of the exam was normal.
Complete blood count, comprehensive metabolic panel, chest radiograph (CXR), head computed tomography (CT), and lumbar puncture (LP) were performed. The patient’s labs revealed a white blood count of 4.0 per high power field, mild hyponatremia, but were otherwise unremarkable. His initial head CT revealed no acute abnormalities. However, the CXR showed reticulonodular diffuse lung pattern as typically seen with infection . LP results (neutrophils 91% (normal 0–2%), protein 351 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (normal 15–45 mg/dL), and glucose 14 mg/dL (normal 40–70 mg/dL) were concerning for bacterial meningitis; therefore, ceftriaxone and vancomycin were administered. The patient was then admitted for further evaluation and management pending further cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) study results.
An infectious disease physician (ID) was consulted by the hospital medicine team given concern for bacterial meningitis and worsening clinical symptoms. Initial cultures, meningitis/encephalitis CSF polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and HIV test results were negative, and so antibiotics were narrowed. On hospital day (HD) four, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed as no bacteria was yet identified to explain the abnormal CSF results. Brain and spine MRI showed multiple ring-enhancing foci in the brain parenchyma and diffuse enhancement along the thoracic spinal cord consistent with leptomeningitis . Additionally, the MRI showed a large paraspinous abscess, a left epidural abscess compressing the thecal sac, and an abnormal signal enhancement in the left sacrum indicating sacral osteomyelitis with septic arthritis of the left sacroiliac joint . However, they were again broadened given MRI findings. Following these results, ID recommended repeating the LP to specifically test for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) cultures and smear to determine whether mycobacterium was the source of the infection. Fluoroscopy-guided incision and drainage (I&D) of left paraspinal abscess drainage was also performed by interventional radiology to determine the source of the paraspinal abscess.
On HD seven, the cultures from both the LP and abscess drainage were positive for M. tuberculosis complex (MTC). The patient was diagnosed with disseminated TB to the meninges and spinal cord, with paraspinal abscesses, sacral osteomyelitis, and sacroiliac septic arthritis. A high sensitivity chest, abdomen, and pelvic CT confirmed this diagnosis as there was no evidence of active disease, but rather signs of disseminated TB. The patient was treated with rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol (RIPE) therapy, pyridoxine, and dexamethasone taper, and he was confined to a negative pressure room until three negative sputum cultures were obtained. Vancomycin and cefepime were discontinued. On HD 12, per orthopedic surgery, an I&D of paraspinal abscesses and left sacroiliac joint was successfully completed. The specimen from this surgery grew AFB; therefore, the patient’s RIPE therapy and steroids were continued. On HD 27, the patient was hemodynamically stable and discharged with RIPE, pyridoxine, and steroid prescriptions, and instructed to follow up with the Department of Health and Infectious Disease. The Department of Health was aware of the case and following it through the patient’s hospital stay and follow-up.