An 18-year-old Japanese male complained of right groin pain for approximately two years. He had been playing football at a junior and high school club for the last six years. He initially felt pain on the right side of the groin, particularly while kicking a ball. He could not participate in a football game without pain but had no complaints regarding activities of daily life.
He had consulted many hospitals and clinics. And he was performed physical examination and ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), but the cause of this pain was nuknown. As a result he had been suffering from this pain and taking a pain killer which is not effective.
Although the pain was worse on the right side, it extended across the midline and involved the rectus abdominis muscle and pubic bone . There was no obvious swelling or injury mark on the bilateral inguinal wall, and no inguinal hernia was seen upon physical examination, no lipoma was seen on Ultrasound. Additionally, enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdominal region showed no signs of inguinal hernia . Based on these findings, the patient was admitted to the Department of Surgery at Shiroyama Hospital. He was suspected a sports hernia and was scheduled for laparoscopic examination with the possibility of laparoscopic hernioplasty if the hernia was identified.
Surgery was performed with the patient under general anesthesia and in the supine position. A port was placed 12 mm below the umbilicus at the midline, and two working ports were placed in the midline between the umbilicus and the pubis. The lower port was placed two finger breadths above the pubis symphysis (i.e., the three-port method). We determined the presence of a bilateral inguinal hernia with laparoscopic examination using an intra-abdominal scope [,]. In this case, findings on the right and left side pertained to direct hernia. The size of right direct hernia measured as 2 fingers (M2)and its left as 1 finger (M1) according to the EHS groin hernia classification . Thus, a sports hernia with bilateral internal inguinal hernia was diagnosed.
We dissected the Retzius space inside the epigastric arteriovenous dissections were made through a subumbilical incision without a balloon. Lateral dissection of the preperitoneal space was performed. We isolated cord structures (parietalization), and PROGRIP™ (COVIDIEN) was subsequently placed in the preperitoneal space and tacking was accomplished using AbsorbaTack™ (COVIDIEN). The total operative time was 150 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was <5 ml. The patient had a good postoperative course and was discharged from our hospital in remission after 3 days. After over 6 months of follow-up, no pain was observed and the patient was able to play soccer without groin pain. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images.