A 21-year-old Chinese man was hospitalized in August 2019 due to the symptoms of thirst, polydipsia and fatigue . The laboratory findings showed a random blood glucose level of 65.14mmol/L along with positive urine ketone and acidemia. This patient was diagnosed as DKA and received insulin infusion for glucose control and fluid replacement to correct dehydration. After 8 days of treatment, he was transferred to our hospital for further clinical assessment. The patient did not present personal or family history of diabetes, pancreatitis, abdominal pain, or other diseases.
On physical examination, the patient was lean in shape with body mass index (BMI) 19.0 kg/m2. His vital signs were normal with blood pressure 121/74mmHg, body temperature 36.8°C and heart rate 78 beats/minute. Physical examination disclosed no obvious abnormality with negative abdominal tenderness and rebound pain. The patient had no clinical manifestation of dehydration and 24-hour urine volume was around 1500-2000mL. Fasting blood glucose (FBG) on admission was 13.26 mmol/L with glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) 11.9% and C peptide 0.17ng/mL, indicating a poor β-cell function. Howbeit, tests for diabetes-related autoantibodies were all negative, which do not support the diagnosis of autoimmune diabetes. Moreover, the diabetic complications were screened and no signs of diabetic retinopathy, neuropathy or nephropathy was identified. Liver transaminases significantly increased in this case while blood tests for viral hepatitis and autoimmune liver diseases were negative. To identify the cause of abnormal liver function, the abdominal contrast computer tomography (CT) was performed and the result revealed a regular biliary tree, agenesis of the pancreatic body and tail with a normal pancreatic head , and multiple renal cortical cysts in bilateral kidneys . The patient refused further examinations of endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) due to a high medical expense. In addition, hypomagnesia (magnesium 0.41mmol/L) and hyperuricemia (uric acid 445μmol/L) were identified in this case . Based on the above findings, the patient was diagnosed as ADP with diabetes, renal cortical cysts, increased liver transaminases, hypomagnesia, and hyperuricemia.
To further explore the etiology, genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood leukocytes of this patient and his parents for the all-exon gene sequencing (Second generation, Kindstar global, ABI, 3730xl, USA). A heterozygous variant of c.513G>A-p.W171X in exon 2 of HNF1B gene was found in this patient , which was further verified by first generation DNA sequencing. Importantly, his father also showed a heterozygous variant in HNF1B gene , while his mother showed a wild-type genotype . Thus, the patient’s father underwent a comprehensive evaluation including blood biochemical tests, glucose and HbA1c levels, ultrasound of abdomen and kidney. All these findings were normal.
Hence, insulin subcutaneous pump was set up due to the glucose excursion in this patient and daily dose was tittered to a total dose of 46IU per day. After 5-day treatment with insulin infusion, the FBG was controlled between 5-6mmol/L and 2-hour postprandial blood glucose (PBG) 5-7mmol/L. Thereafter, the treatment was changed to the combination of glargine and insulin aspartate and the patient agreed to this therapeutic regimen. In addition, the abnormal liver function was considered to be related to HNF1B variant as well . After the treatment with magnesium isoglycyrrhizinate and polyene phosphatidylcholine, the alanine aminotransferase (ALT) descended from 288U/L to 71U/L and aspertate aminotransferase (AST) from 150U/L to 28U/L. Besides, low-dose magnesium was supplemented orally and the blood level of magnesium reached normal range on discharge .
The follow-up visits were performed every 3-6 months. The most recent return visit was performed on May 9th, 2021 . The blood glucose was well controlled with fasting C peptide 0.67 ng/mL and HbA1c 5.7% .