A 35-year-old female, para 8, gravida 8 presented to the emergency department on the ninth day postpartum having experienced of severe headaches and confusion, in the ER she had two episodes of generalized seizures, the generalized seizure action was firstly observed in the ER. On Her severe headaches started in the last trimester but worsened postpartum. She has history of spontaneous, similar postpartum headaches after her last pregnancy, although she had not attended antenatal care for any previous pregnancies. On ER admission the patient's blood pressure was 200/120 mmHg, and biochemistry tests and urine analysis were taken on presentation at the ER. Treatment of presumed postpartum eclamptic seizure was started at 6g/8mL bolus of intravenous magnesium sulfate diluted 12mL of normal saline slowly over 20 minutes and hydralazine 20mg/2mL intravenously over 4 minutes for blood pressure control. After that, the patient was transferred to the ward where she continued having seizures while presumed eclamptic treatment was administered. She also developed left sided weakness with altered mental status. An urgent MRI with Magnetic Resonance venography (MRV) were performed. The MRV with MRI showed acute thrombosis involving the anterior aspect of the superior sagittal sinus and left transverse sinus with subcortical and deep white matter T2/FLAIR hyperintensities involving the parasagittal regions of both sides of the frontal, parietal and occipital lobes and left temporal lobe also reported no evidence of intracerebral hemorrhage or recent arterial ischemia . After that, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU), where endotracheal intubation was done to secure the airway and sedated to stabilize and control the seizures. To do this, a therapeutic dose of enoxaparin 4000I.U/0.4mL (40mg) was administered subcutaneously twice a day while an anti-coagulant was initiated according to the patient’s body weight of 80kg (1mg/kg/bid) and levetiracetam tablet of 500mg two times a day for seizure treatment through nasogastric tube. Days later, the neurological symptoms slowly improve while the initial laboratory investigation of the coagulation profile indicate that prothrombin time (PT) was 13.4 sec equivalent to INR of 1.1, partial thromboplastin time was 45 sec and D-dimer was 550ng/mL in the normal range. After four days in the ICU, the patient was transferred to an inpatient ward. After two days of post-ward admission, the patient clinically (GCS 15/15) and mentally improved, on this day we repeated CT head angiography/venography with contrast and reported no evidence of filling defects in the dural venous sinuses . On day 16 postpartum, she was discharged fwith warfarin 5mg/day for 3 months with INR follow up.