A 64-year-old man with a 13-year history of coronary heart disease and 7-year history of hypertension was admitted to our hospital for acute onset dizziness and unsteady gait for one week. He reported acute onset of dizziness and difficulty in walking, and these symptoms would become worsened when he got up from the bed or sofa. On admission, his blood pressure was 135/85 mmHg and heart rate was 66 beats/min; and neurological examination revealed nystagmus on horizontal gaze. His pupillary reflexes and extraocular movements were intact, no limb weakness and sensory deficits were found; and bilateral finger--to-nose and heel-to-shin tests were normal. Additionally, bilateral Babinski signs were absent. However, Romberg sign was impossible to evaluate as the patient could not be able to cooperate with further examination.
Similarly, laboratory tests were within normal limits. Brain MRI performed 10 h after admission demonstrated two areas of restricted diffusion on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) in the left hemisphere . However, no acute infarction was seen in the posterior cerebral artery territories. Considering the location of infarction area could not well explain his clinical symptoms, a digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was done which revealed that the left ICA was occluded . Meanwhile, it showed that the left middle cerebral artery and bilateral anterior cerebral artery were supplied by the basilar artery via a PTA . Based on that we presumed that in the setting of acute left ICA occlusion, a cerebral blood flow steal phenomena occurred from posterior circulation to anterior circulation which caused the patient to have acute onset of dizziness and difficulty in walking. We also speculated that the PTA may play a protective role in preventing the patient from having severe anterior circulation ischemic stroke. Furthermore, CT perfusion showed no remarkable difference between the two hemispheres , which was consistent with the above conclusion. Therefore, the patient was given 100 mg aspirin and 20 mg atorvastatin daily and discharged one week later. During two years follow-up, the patient had no recurrence of stroke.