A 55-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with “intermittent fever with weakness of right limbs for half a month” on June 28, 2019.
Half a month ago, the patient experienced right limb weakness without obvious cause, coinciding with two episodes of low-grade fever with diarrhea. After oral administration of cephalosporins at a local clinic (details unknown), the patient exhibited marked improvement in diarrhea and return to normal body temperature. However, the right-sided weakness persisted, and there the patient tended to lean towards the right rear while standing. Subsequently, she was referred to our neurology clinic, and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed multiple intracranial space-occupying lesions with surrounding edema. Considering the possibility of a brain abscess, metastases were not excluded . On the same day, the patient was admitted to our department with a diagnosis of brain abscess from the neurology clinic. Since the onset of disease, the patient had paroxysmal headache, dizziness, and blurred vision, without limb twitching or numbness.
The patient had a history of “liver abscess” for half a year and underwent puncture drainage of liver abscess and anti-infection treatment in the Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery of our hospital.
The pus culture from the puncture revealed Klebsiella pneumoniae, and the remaining medical history was unremarkable.
Physical examination on admission revealed a temperature of 36.9 °C; heart rate, 86 beats/min; respiration, 18 breaths/min; and blood pressure, 131/75 mmHg, and physical examination of the heart, lungs, and abdomen showed no significant abnormalities.
Laboratory tests indicated a white blood cell (WBC) count of 10.9 × 109/L (3.5-9.5 × 109/L), neutrophil percentage of 82.4% (40%-75%), and direct neutrophil count or 9 × 109/L (1.8-6.3 × 109/L). Other blood biochemical parameters showed no significant abnormalities.
Neurological examination revealed clear consciousness, clear and fluent speech, normal orientation, intact calculation, and memory functions. Pupils were equal and round bilaterally, responding well to light sensitivity. Fundus examination identified bilateral papilledema. Eye movements were well-coordinated, and there were no abnormalities in the examination of other cranial nerves. Muscle strength was graded as V in the left limb and IV in the right limb, with normal muscle tone. Tendon reflexes were brisk (++), while pathologic reflexes were absent (-). Sensory and synkinesis examinations showed no abnormalities, and there was a normal sense of resistance in the neck.