In June 2009, a 41-year-old Caucasian woman with no previous history of illness went to the Emergency Room with systemic symptoms, including headache, generalized weakness, and chills. The physical examination showed nothing remarkable. The workup included a computed tomography (CT) brain scan without contrast that showed nothing unusual. The patient received empirical treatment for a diagnosis of a suspected viral infection. A week later, she presented with dysphasia and deviation of the right corner of her mouth. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with gadolinium contrast of the brain suggested a mass 1.5×2cm in diameter in the temporal lobe with a non-uniform vasogenic edema. This lesion was implanted in the meninges and indicated possible meningioma . There was no evidence of malignancy on chest, abdominal or pelvic CT. In July, left frontal craniotomy surgery was performed. It showed a meningeal lesion in the dura mater extending to nearby tissue. The lesion was excised in its entirety . The histological finding described a lesion in the meninges with a diameter of 3×2cm. The histological findings also revealed a diffuse non-cohesive proliferation of neoplastic cells that looked like a histiocyte. The cells were variable in size, with large and abundant foamy eosinophilic cytoplasm. The cytoplasm presented numerous neutrophils and phagocytosis by tumor cells. The nuclei were irregular and large with mono- or multi-nucleation displaying a vacuole appearance with granular chromatin. It frequently presented prominent eosinophilic nucleoli. There was a lymphocyte and neutrophil inflammatory background . The entire lesion was neoplastic. The pathologist suggested a lymphoma but an immunohistochemistry study was done the results of which showed positive expression of CD68 , CD163 and lysozyme consistent with histiocytic lineage and weak expression of S100. The cells, however, presented negative expression of cytokeratin, B or T cells, and myeloid markers, including anaplastic lymphoma kinase 1 (ALK-1), CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20, CD21, CD23, CD30, CD1a, Bcl2, Bcl6, CD15, CD31 and CD10. The polymerase chain reaction study did not show clonal B or T cells. After these results, the pathologist diagnosed a HS. We presented the case in the multidisciplinary meeting and we decided on adjuvant treatment with chemoradiotherapy: temozolomide (120mg daily) concomitant with 1.8Gy of radiotherapy 5 days a week. The radiotherapy was intensity-modulated radiation therapy guided by imaging: planning target volume (PTV)1 received 45Gy, PTV2 received 54Gy and PTV3 61.2Gy. The patient remains disease free after 42 months.