We describe the case of a 50 year old Caucasian female patient who was born with tricuspid atresia and transposition of the great arteries. At the age of 4, she underwent a modified Glenn procedure followed by a classical left Blalock-Taussig shunt at the age of 16. Since then, she has had two major cardiac operations. In 1990, at the age of 25, she had a fenestrated modified atrial pulmonary Fontan. Following a very difficult pregnancy 18 years later, she underwent conversion to a total cavopulmonary anastomosis Fontan circulation, modified MAZE procedure and implantation of an epicardial defibrillator with biventricular pacemaker system. Cardiac catheterisation at that time showed a ventricular end diastolic pressure of 16 mmHg and a Fontan chamber pressure of 18 mmHg, giving a transpulmonary gradient of 2 mmHg. Her cardiac medical history was further complicated with arrhythmias requiring ablation in 1998 and episodes of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia in 2014.
This lady has been under regular follow-up by our team since 2008. Various medications have been trialled over the last 8 years due to her progressive reduction in exercise capacity and exertional dyspnoea. She had initially taken part in a trial to test the safety of bosentan in 2010 and at the time had shown good response to the drug with improvement in 6-min walk test. Bosentan was discontinued at the end of the study.
Unfortunately, over the course of the next few years, she continued to deteriorate with worsening breathlessness (NYHA III), four-pillow orthopnoea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, ventricular function was preserved. She noticed a significant limitation in everyday activities, requiring social care input and a mobility scooter for outdoor travel. Sildenafil was commenced however this was discontinued shortly after due to symptomatic hypotension.
Cardiac CT scan confirmed non-restrictive Fontan pathway, and normal ventricular function.
In early 2016, bosentan was re-commenced with good symptomatic improvement. Unfortunately on this occasion, this was poorly tolerated with significant side effects (peripheral oedema, pruritus) and thus stopped. On the basis of her symptomatic improvement with bosentan we decided to try an alternative endothelin-receptor antagonist, macitentan to alleviate symptoms.
Macitentan (10 mg once daily) was initiated in April 2016. At 5-month review, the patient reported symptomatic improvement and this was associated with an increase in her incremental shuttle walking test distance from 160 m pre-treatment (prior to bosentan administration) to 200 m post-treatment with macitentan. She has not reported any significant side effects. Her echocardiogram remained unchanged with normal systemic ventricular internal dimensions and good radial systolic function (ejection fraction 55–60%).