A 66-year-old woman presented with abdominal pain and was found to have an intrapelvic tumor with lung and peritoneal metastasis. Biopsy was performed and she was diagnosed with stage IVB endometrial carcinosarcoma, and the international federation of gynecology and obstetrics IVB. The patient had a clinical complete response after adjuvant chemotherapy, followed by abdominal total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. However, the intrapelvic tumor relapsed and dysuria occurred. The patient received a total pelvic exenteration with ileal conduit as a salvage operation and was treated with standard chemotherapies for endometrial carcinosarcoma and carcinoma. Two episodes of febrile neutropenia occurred during the chemotherapies, which were treated with antibiotic therapy. The carcinosarcoma was classified as MSI high, and was eligible for treatment with an immune checkpoint inhibitor, pembrolizumab. Pembrolizumab at a dose of 200 mg/day was intravenously injected. The patient had the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status (PS) of 1 and did not have neurological symptoms, impaired consciousness or sleep-wake disorders. At 14 days postinjection, the patient developed a fever of 39°C . CT showed an increase in the size of the pelvic tumor, but the cause of fever was not apparently identified. However, as bacteriuria was found, the cause of fever was suspected to be urinary tract infection, and the patient was treated with piperacillin/tazobactam in our hospital. At the same time, excessive daytime sleepiness and sleep attack occurred and persisted. The sleepiness was too intense to answer questions, causing disorientation or sleep even during conversation. The intensity of the sleepiness was temporarily weakened after naps or nocturnal sleep. No signs of paralysis or meningitis were observed. All electrolyte levels in the serum were normal. No medications that induce sleep were administered. Administration of vitamin B1 could not improve the somnolence. Delirium due to neoplastic fever was suspected, and dexamethasone 6.6 mg/day was administered at 23 days postinjection. The steroid reduced the fever, however, did not improve the somnolence. During pleasant conversations with her family at the hospital, temporary muscle weakness affecting the whole body including the face occurred, and lasted for a few seconds. The patient showed her muscle weakness despite being fully conscious. Brain CT and MRI demonstrated no brain metastasis, degenerative disease or infarction. The MRI image did not show hypothalamic inflammation . Gadolinium-enhanced MRI was not performed. Surgical intervention that disrupts the blood-brain barrier had not been performed. A CSF examination showed clear fluid, normal pressure, negative oligoclonal bands, no cancer cells and no evidence of infection. The CSF revealed slightly elevated white blood cell count (10/mm3, lymphocytes 93.3%). Serum paraneoplastic antibodies were negative (AMPH, CV2, PNMA2/Ma2, Ri, Yo, Hu, recoverin, SOX1, titin, zic4, GAD65, Tr/DNER). Serum immunoglobulin G (IgG) was elevated from 1490 mg/dL at preinjection of pembrolizumab to 2091 mg/dL at postinjection, suggesting activated immune system. Autoimmune encephalitis as an irAE associated with pembrolizumab was suspected. Prednisolone 1 mg/kg was initiated and dexamethasone was discontinued at 35 days postinjection. However, the steroid treatment did not improve somnolence, disorientation or temporary muscle weakness. Pembrolizumab therapy was permanently discontinued due to the irAE, and the patient died by progression of carcinosarcoma at 72 days postinjection of pembrolizumab. Her family did not permit an autopsy.