Male patient 35 years old with accidental discovered Diabetes Mellitus, admitted in the hospital with diabetic Ketoacidosis. On admission, the patient had no chest complaint. A pre-admission CT chest was done as this was the hospital's policy during the COVID pandemic and revealed to be free. The patient was discharged on insulin and followed up in the endocrinology clinic. After 1 month he started to complain of hoarseness of voice and dry irritating cough that didn’t respond to antitussives and nonspecific treatment. CT chest was done and revealed left total lung collapse . Fiberoptic bronchoscopy was done and revealed total occlusion of the left main bronchus with whitish fungating glistening tissue. Endobronchial biopsies with cryoprobe were performed . Multiple attempts of tumor extraction with the cryoprobe was done. However, the attempts were unsuccessful as the mass was very elastic, and firmly attached to the underlying lung tissue. Biopsies were sent for fungal tissue culture as well as histopathology. Fungal tissue culture revealed to be negative. Histopathological examination of the biopsies revealed hyalinized fibrous tissue, granulation tissue, necrotic material and debris infiltrated by large number of broad ribbon like puaciseptate hyphae, irregularly branching at 90 degrees which was consistent with mucormycosis . The patient received liposomal amphotericin B 5 mg/Kg for 2 weeks. Repeated bronchoscopies as well as Chest imaging didn’t show signs of improvement. A trial of mechanical debulking of the tissue was done through rigid bronchoscope but was unsuccessful. Finally, the patient was referred to cardiothoracic surgery.
After intubation, venovenous ECMO (Cardiohelp, Maquet) was connected to the patient. Right femoral vein and right internal jugular vein were canulated with 27 French and 19 French canula respectively and gas flow was adjusted to 3–4 liters/minute to achieve oxygen saturation of 88–92%.
A clamshell incision was done (bilateral anterolateral thoracotomies plus transverse sternotomy), dissection of right and laft main bronchus was done, exploration revealed destruction of the whole length of the left main bronchus, so a decision of left carinal sleeve pneumonectomy was taken.
The distal trachea was cut, left pneumonectomy was done and the right main bronchus was anastomosed to the distal trachea. Extensive adhesions were encountered especially between the left main bronchus and the left pulmonary artery making it an extremely challenging lengthy operative procedure that lasted for 10 h.
Mechanical ventilation was resumed and after skin closure, the patient was decannulated from ECMO intraoperatively. The patient was extubated after 24 h postoperatively. Intensified rehabilitation program was done together with intensified pain control measures. The patient was discharged from the ICU after 10 days. Final hospital discharge was after another 10 days. The patient was given oral Posaconazole 300 mg/day for 1 month.