A two-year-old 11 kg boy was admitted to our medical unit after hearing a persistent systolic cardiac murmur at the second and third intercostal margins of the left sternum, and oxygen saturation measured in indoor air is 100 %. There was no family history of cardiovascular disease and no history of heart disease treatment. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm and right ventricular hypertrophy. The chest radiography showed cardiomegaly and increased pulmonary vascular markings. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a secundum-type ASD with 6 mm in diameter (A–C). The diameter of the right atrium and right ventricle is above the normal range (D). According to guidelines for cardiac catheterization and intervention in pediatric cardiac disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association , patients over two years of age and weight more than 10 kg should receive interventional treatment. Furthermore, the parents strongly requested interventional treatment and signs informed consent.
Under general anesthesia, 100 IU/kg intravenous heparin was administered and percutaneous closure of ASD was performed. We selected a 6-Fr MPA2 catheter and inserted it into the right femoral vein. After conventional cardiac catheterization, the average pressure in the right and left atria was 6 and 9 mmHg, respectively. Blood samples were collected from the inferior vena cava, superior vena cava, pulmonary vein, and pulmonary artery for blood gas analysis. The oxygen saturation values were 0.79, 0.85, 0.99, and 0.87, respectively. Therefore, Qp/Qs was calculated as 1.75:1. Accidentally, when MPA2 was sent into the left atrium through the ASD, an abnormal channel was discovered while probing the left superior pulmonary vein with a 0.035-in × 260-cm J-tipped Radifocus® Guide wire (Terumo Corp, Tokyo, Japan), which could extend to the veins of the superior cavity, the right atrium, and the inferior vena cava (A). Given the possibility of a partially anomalous pulmonary venous connection, angiography was performed in the left superior pulmonary vein. It showed that part of the blood flow in the left superior pulmonary vein approached the brachiocephalic vein through the VV (B). After entering the right atrium through the superior vena cava, a partial supracardiac connection to the left superior pulmonary vein was diagnosed. After puncturing the left femoral vein, we used a guide wire and an MPA2 to reach the left atrium from the inferior vena cava via the right atrium, the superior vena cava, the brachiocephalic vein, the VV and the left superior pulmonary vein. We fix the distal end of MPA2 in the left atrium, exit the soft guide wire, withdraw MPA2 after entering the hard guide wire, and send the prepared 7F long sheath to the left atrium along the hard guide wire. The inner diameter of the vertical vein is approximately 3.5 mm and the length is approximately 8 mm. The 6/8 mm patent ductus arteriosus occluder (Shape Memory Alloy Corp, shanghai, China) was selected to block the VV. Before releasing the occluder, axillary venous angiography showed no obstruction in blood flow from the left subclavian vein to the brachiocephalic vein (C). Meanwhile, the left upper pulmonary vein angiography showed that the left upper pulmonary vein returned smoothly to the left atrium (D). After the occluder was released, an angiography was performed again to confirm that no obstruction was found (E). The ASD was occluded with a 12 mm waist diameter occluder. Finally, ASD and VV were closed with interventional therapy (F). Postoperative fluoroscopy and ultrasound examination showed that the occluders were in good position, without residual shunt or mitral regurgitation, and the blood flow velocity of the vena cava and pulmonary vein was normal. On the second day after the operation, enteric coated tablets with aspirin (3 mg/kg·d) were taken orally for anticoagulation and no abnormalities were found in any echocardiography, electrocardiogram, or chest radiograph. All above three examinations were normal at 18-month follow-up .