A 47-year-old Caucasian male former MMA fighter from Nevada presented to liver clinic for elevated liver injury tests (LIT) and a 35-pound weight loss associated with nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. He endorsed symptoms of lower extremity edema, dyspnea on exertion, and fatigue which had worsened over 6 months and was treated with diuretics. Physical exam revealed jugular venous pressure (JVP) of 15 cm with a steep y descent, without Kussmaul’s sign. He had hepatomegaly with a firm liver edge 4 cm below the right costal margin. He had normal S1 and S2 without additional sounds. He had no evidence of pleural effusion or ascites but did have trace peripheral edema.
The patient has a past medical history of concussion, migraine headache, hypertension, chronic pain related to musculoskeletal injuries and fractures secondary to MMA competition, and right bundle branch block . Past surgical history is notable for fracture surgeries, diagnostic right knee scope, right shoulder surgery, and foot surgery. He reported a 20-year history of performance enhancing drugs (PEDs), including testosterone use that ceased 8 months prior to presentation. Notably, the patient had an 8-year history of being a professional MMA fighter and a 13-year history of MMA fighting with recurrent trauma to the chest wall.
Differential diagnosis included pulmonary hypertension, chronic pulmonary emboli, heart failure, cirrhosis, and constrictive pericarditis. As patient initially presented to liver clinic, preliminary work-up showed hepatic congestion with ALT and AST of 1155 U/L and 219 U/L respectively. Abdominal computerized tomography demonstrated hepatomegaly with steatosis, ascites, a dilated inferior vena cava, and a calcified pericardium . During liver biopsy, the patient had documented right atrial pressure (RAP) of 12 mmHg, free hepatic vein pressure of 12 mmHg, wedged sinusoidal pressure of 13 mmHg, and hepatic vein portal vein gradient of 1 mmHg, diagnostic of post hepatic portal hypertension secondary to right heart failure. These findings warranted referral to cardiology, where echocardiogram revealed abnormal septal motion suggestive of ventricular interdependence (Additional file : Video S1, Additional file : Video S2, Additional file : Video S3). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed marked thickening of the pericardium, MRI signal void consistent with pericardial calcification, and profound late gadolinium enhancement on both standard and high-resolution inversion recovery images. There was no significant myocardial late gadolinium enhancement, suggesting that any potential inflammatory involvement of the myocardium has resolved without myocardial scar formation . Right and left heart catheterization revealed normal coronary arteries and normal pulmonary artery pressures with right ventricle-left ventricle (RV-LV) discordance, consistent with constrictive physiology .
Pericardiectomy was performed via sternotomy with cardiopulmonary bypass. During the procedure, calcification and thickening of the pericardium was evident . The pericardium was removed from phrenic-to-phrenic nerve anteriorly and was removed in the oblique sinus and posterior to the phrenic nerve on the left. Histology confirmed pericardial tissue with fibrosis and inflammation consistent with chronic pericarditis . These changes can be seen in chronic pericarditis of various etiologies; however, there was no evidence of acute or granulomatous inflammation, and the dense fibrosis without chronic inflammation implicated repeated trauma as a potential etiology, where in the setting of lack of other risk factors, appears to be the likely cause. Fungal and bacterial cultures were negative.
After pericardiectomy, the patient’s hospital course was uncomplicated. At his 7-week post-operative clinic visit, the patient reported he had returned to jogging and no longer had any of his previous symptoms of lower extremity edema, dyspnea on exertion, fatigue, diarrhea secondary to small bowel edema, or hepatic congestion. In the absence of poor predictors, a good prognosis is anticipated, and patient is now NYHA functional class I.