Our patient, a 45-year-old African male presented with end stage renal failure and was awaiting a kidney transplant.
The end stage renal failure was due to IgA nephropathy which was biopsy proven and with secondary focal segmental glomerular sclerosis. He was established on haemodialysis.
He was diagnosed in his early teenage years to have pituitary gigantism but was left untreated.
There were no relevant histories.
His physical stature [Height = 247 cm, weight = 200 kg, body mass index (BMI) was 33 kg/m2, and body surface area (BSA) with the DuBois formula = 3.7 m2], was twice than the normal upper limit.
The laboratory investigations were not relevant apart from deranged kidney function due to end stage renal failure.
A pre-transplant computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed normal iliac vessels bilaterally.
There was a therapeutic dilemma as to whether a single kidney transplantation would be sufficient for a patient of his body surface to alleviate his kidney failure to a degree that would not require further renal replacement therapy. With the above dilemma into consideration the patient was added to the United Kingdom deceased donor kidney transplant waiting list for dual kidney transplantation from a single deceased donor after discussion in our multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting and approval by the NHS Blood and Transplant’s Kidney Advisory Group.
Less than a year after being waitlisted and after having received a few offers from extended criteria donors that were deemed unsuitable, the patient received and accepted a deceased donor dual kidney transplant offer from a 24-year-old male donation after circulatory death (DCD) donor who suffered irreversible hypoxic brain injury following a road traffic accident. The donor’s past medical history was insignificant and had normal kidney function. His height was 179cm, weight was 75kgs, BMI was 23 kg/m2, and BSA with the DuBois formula was 1.9 m2 (almost half of our prospective recipient). Furthermore, there was a 1-0-1 HLA mismatch between the donor and recipient, the latter of which had a calculated reaction frequency of 0% (and therefore only a virtual crossmatch was performed). Immunosuppression consisted of induction with a depleting monoclonal antibody, alemtuzumab (50 mg) and steroid-free maintenance with tacrolimus as the only immunosuppressant. The organ retrieval in the donor hospital was uneventful.
For the recipient, a customised anaesthetic protocol was implemented based on previous general anaesthetic experience with the patient. He was ventilated using a large (size 6) oropharyngeal airway and a large (size 6) face mask. A long Macintosh blade and size 10 endotracheal tube was used for intubation. Patient was anaesthetized on a hover mattress to enable safe transfer to the operating table, which can take up to 300 kgs body weight. The only issue was the patient’s height; two table extensions were added to the operating table on either side and an instrument trolley was used to support the feet .