A 60-year-old woman with hyperlipidemia presented to the emergency room with severe aortic stenosis, moderate aortic valve regurgitation, and heart failure. The patient underwent open aortic valve repair (valvuloplasty) to treat aortic stenosis. Four days later, an evacuation was necessary because of a postoperative hematoma, which resulted in sternal instability and DSWI. Intravenous piperacillin and tazobactam were administered for two weeks, and a wound swab culture and a tissue culture revealed methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA). During the initial period of DSWI, intravenous cefazolin was administered, and the patient exhibited a positive response.
After three weeks of multiple debridements and NPWT application changed twice a week for the open wound on the anterior chest, three consecutive wound swab cultures and tissue cultures identified no bacterial growth. As no signs of wound infection were noted, a repeat sternotomy was subsequently performed in the cardiothoracic surgery department to achieve sternal fixation and wound closure, ensuring sternal stability. Unfortunately, this resulted in a right ventricle injury due to severe adhesion and fibrosis in the retrosternal space. Owing to the patient's rapidly declining blood pressure, extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was initiated with vasopressor administration, and the patient was immediately moved to the intensive care unit (ICU). Daily dressing using an open-wound approach was applied to the defect with an exposed pericardium, and delayed flap reconstruction was planned.
The patient was referred to our department for soft tissue defect coverage three days after the second sternotomy and ventricle injury. Upon examination, a significant 10 × 20-cm defect in the anterior chest wall was discovered, extending from the jugular notch to the xiphoid process . Necrotic tissue was visible, and the heart was exposed. Careful curettage and debridement were performed to avoid damage to the heart, and the margins of the nonviable tissue were trimmed. Approximately one-fourth of the upper sternum remained intact, providing stability as it was connected to both clavicles and rib bones. In contrast, for the lower portion, the viable sternum accounted for about 50% of its preoperative width. To address the soft tissue and bony defect, a pedicled VRAM flap was used for coverage . ECMO was decannulated on the same day, and the patient's vital signs stabilized.
Following flap reconstruction, the patient experienced partial flap congestion due to vascular insufficiency, leading to partial necrosis in the distal one-quarter of the flap on the ninth postoperative day . Subsequently, debridement of necrotic soft tissue was performed, and wound closure was facilitated with the assistance of NPWT. On the twelfth postoperative day, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was identified in the tip culture of the Hemovac inserted underneath the flap. There was no direct clinical evidence of infection. However, with concerns regarding flap site infection or the recurrence of DSWI, intravenous vancomycin was promptly administered for two weeks. This treatment continued until tissue cultures revealed negative bacterial growth at the open wound site following partial flap necrosis. It is essential to clarify that the vancomycin administration was not aimed at treating mediastinitis (DSWI), as the presence of MRSA was not considered the causative bacteria of the mediastinitis. Vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) was performed twice a week in the operating room, accompanied by copious irrigation with betadine solution. After one week, the secondary wound bed was covered with healthy granulation tissue without signs of infection, and primary closure was performed without tension on the bilateral skin. Fortunately, complete wound healing was achieved in the third postoperative month after the initial flap surgery. During the 8-month follow-up period, the patient showed excellent recovery progression and was healthy .