A 42-year-old female presented with continuous dull pain of the right knee for the past 7 years. She denied a history of trauma, and spontaneous severe pain or cold sensitivity had not been observed. However, severe pain was experienced after walking a few hundred meters, or climbing up or down stairs. The pain was relieved after rest, but occasionally worsened at night. She had been initially diagnosed with osteoarthritis 7 years previously, and at that time sodium hyaluronate was proposed, but refused by the patient. Soon thereafter, the patient was diagnosed at another medical center with synovitis of the knee. Although diclofenac sodium was administrated, her symptoms were not significantly relieved. In addition, 3 years prior, she had not received a confirmed diagnosis at two other hospitals.
The patient had a slight limp, and upon physical examination, the lateral superior aspect of her right knee was tender to palpation, initially preventing thorough evaluation of the area. Subsequently, an area of unbearable tenderness, with a diameter of ~ 50 mm, was observed ~ 25 mm above the lateral side of the right tibia . The range of motion and skin around her right knee were normal. A neurovascular examination was unremarkable, and radiographs failed to demonstrate any abnormality. However, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right knee revealed a well-defined abnormal lesion on the femoral lateral supracondylar, confluent with the periosteum of the femur . Examination of T2-weighted images revealed that the lesion was homogeneously hyperintense. Moreover, a neoplasm was discovered on the femoral medial supracondylar, implying osteochondroma.
Surgical exploration was suggested by our team and accepted by the patient. During surgery, a purple mass was located on the anterolateral aspect of the femur periosteum and did not appear to scallop the periosteum or outer cortex . The mass was totally excised and measured 10 × 7 × 4 mm. Hematoxylin–eosin (H&E) staining revealed numerous mononucleated globus cells, with pale and eosinophilic cytoplasm, as well as thin- and thick-walled vessels. Moreover, the results of immunohistochemical staining with monoclonal antibodies was positive for vimentin, h-caldesmon, and smooth muscle actin, but negative for cytokeratin, S-100, CD34, CD31, and desmin. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 10%. Pathological results confirmed that the mass was a GT . After surgery, the pain disappeared, and the patient was discharged three days postoperatively. At the 18-month follow-up visit, the patient reported sustained pain relief, and regular follow-ups were continued.