A 56-year-old man with past medical history of dyslipidemia had been complaining of sleep disturbance, loss of motivation and appetite, and had lost 8 kg in weight in the last 6 months. He was diagnosed with depression and began treatment with antidepressant agents, sulpiride 150 mg and paroxetine 10 mg, at a local hospital. His symptoms deteriorated despite treatment, and he was admitted to a local mental hospital. Head computed tomography (CT) disclosed a mass suggestive of tumor near the sellar region and he was referred to our hospital .
On admission, he was drowsy and biochemistry revealed severe hyponatremia, with serum sodium level of 117 mEq/l. Treatment with intravenous saline and 200 mg hydrocortisone was started immediately. Magnetic resonance (MR) angiography demonstrated a large aneurysm of the left ICA, and T2-weighted MR imaging revealed the aneurysm extending to the suprasellar region [Figure and ]. Basal pituitary hormone levels were as follows: morning cortisol, 2.2 μg/dl; adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), 12.9 pg/ml; free thyroxine, 0.40 ng/dl; thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 1.47 μIU/ml; growth hormone (GH), 0.06 ng/ml; follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), 1.0 mIU/ml; luteinizing hormone (LH), 0.4 mIU/ml; and prolactin 6.2 ng/ml. After treatment with intravenous saline, hydrocortisone 100 mg, and levothyroxine 50 μg, his impaired consciousness recovered and hyponatremia normalized in a couple of days; his depressive symptoms disappeared within a week.
Several hormone load tests were conducted . The LH-releasing hormone load test showed poor reactions of LH and FSH. The thyrotropin-releasing hormone load test showed delayed TSH reaction. The corticotropin-releasing hormone load test showed poor reactions of ACTH and cortisol. The GH-releasing factor load test showed delayed reaction of GH. Cerebral digital subtraction angiography of the left ICA revealed a giant aneurysm at the cavernous portion extending in the medial direction . Based on these findings, we diagnosed pituitary dysfunction secondary to mass effect of giant suprasellar ICA aneurysm. To decrease the mass effect on the pituitary gland and prevent aneurysm rupture, we decided to perform high-flow bypass from the cervical external carotid artery (ECA) to the middle cerebral artery (MCA) using RAG and ligation of the cervical portion of the ICA.
Operation was conducted as described in our previous report. Neuroanesthesia was induced under monitoring with somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) of the right extremities. The left cervical carotid bifurcation was exposed, a curvilinear frontotemporal skin incision was made, and the superficial temporal artery (STA) was meticulously prepared under the operating microscope. The RAG was harvested concurrently by another neurosurgeon. Frontotemporal craniotomy was performed, and a subzygomatic tunnel was formed for the RAG. The sylvian fissure was split under the operating microscope, and the M2 and M3 portions of the MCA were exposed. First, an “insurance” STA-M3 bypass was made distal to the M2 portion for RAG anastomosis. Then, the harvested RAG was gently pulled through the subzygomatic tunnel, that is, between the lateral pterygoid muscle and the temporal muscle from the cranium to the neck through the lateral corridor of the stylohyoid muscle and the posterior belly of the digastric muscle toward the external carotid artery (ECA). The distal end of the RAG was anastomosed to the M2 of the MCA, and the proximal end was anastomosed to the ECA. The patency of the anastomosis was confirmed with microvascular Doppler flowmetry. The cervical ICA was permanently ligated after confirming no change in the SSEPs 5 minutes after temporary ligation. Microvascular Doppler flowmetry confirmed anterograde bypass flow from the STA and RAG. No significant SSEP changes were observed throughout the operation.
CT obtained on the day after the operation disclosed thrombosis of the aneurysm and cerebral angiography performed at 8 days after the operation demonstrated good patency of the bypasses and disappearance of flow to the aneurysm [Figure and ]. The patient did not develop diabetes insipidus or visual field defect throughout the course. Hormone load tests conducted 3 weeks after the operation during administration of hydrocortisone 10 mg daily showed recovery of the rapid reactions of ACTH and GH . Follow-up examination at 1 year showed normal pituitary hormone levels, which were elevated by the hormone load test without hormonal replacement therapy . Therefore, his pituitary dysfunction was considered to have recovered well after the operation. He has been followed up as an outpatient without hormonal replacement therapy, and the latest MR angiography and MR imaging findings at 8 years after the operation disclosed good patency of the RAG and shrinkage of the aneurysm [Figure and ].