A 37 year-old Caucasian female, G6P3033, post-partum day (PPD) #4, presented to labor and delivery as a transport from an outside hospital for symptoms of malaise, dyspnea, and tachycardia. The patient had had a vaginal delivery 4 days prior of a healthy male infant, complicated only by a midline episiotomy that was cut to expedite delivery in the setting of a non-reassuring fetal heart tone. Estimated blood loss was 300 cc. Her past medical history was significant for methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase heterozygous mutation, asthma, chickenpox in childhood, anxiety, and panic disorder. Her medications included ibuprofen and a prenatal vitamin. Her initial post-partum course was uncomplicated except for a new onset tachycardia of 120/min and transient shortness of breath of unknown etiology on PPD#1. This prompted a chest x-ray and pulmonary computed tomography (CT) scan, both of which were negative for an acute process or pulmonary embolus. Beside the new onset tachycardia, all other vital signs remained stable, the patient remained afebrile, and it was thus decided to send the patient home on PPD#2. A script for ibuprofen 600 mg q6 h was written for pain management.
Later that day, on PPD#2, the patient presented to an outside Emergency Room complaining of palpitations. She denied fevers, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, or purulent vaginal discharge. She complained of only minimal lochia, not excessive for a recent vaginal delivery. Vital signs were again stable, except for a tachycardia to 130/min. The patient remained afebrile. Hemoglobin and hematocrit were 9.5 g/dL and 28.5 % respectively, white blood cell count was 8.9 × 103/μL and thyroid stimulating hormone was 1.28 UIU/mL. Electrocardiogram was performed showing a persistent sinus tachycardia. Echocardiography was within normal limits, showing a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60–65 %, normal left ventricular systolic function, no wall abnormalities, and no pericardial effusion. With no clear indication of infection, the etiology of the sinus tachycardia remained unknown and the patient was discharged from the ER on metoprolol 12.5 mg PO BID.
Two days later, on PPD#4, the patient presented to a second ER complaining of palpitations and dyspnea. She now complained of generalized body aches, and felt that she was too weak to walk. The patient again had tachycardia ranging from 120 to 135/min, with otherwise normal vital signs. Patient was again afebrile and denied uterine tenderness or purulent vaginal discharge. Chest CT and electrocardiogram were again normal with no acute processes. A right upper quadrant ultrasound and abdominal CT scan were significant for peri-hepatic fluid and mild splenomegaly but were otherwise unremarkable. At this time, the decision was made to transport the patient to the initial hospital where the delivery was performed, and where the first Emergency Room visit had occurred. Although slight suspicion of endometritis was raised, in the absence of a fever, uterine tenderness, or reported purulent discharge clinical suspicion remained low and there was no documentation of a pelvic or speculum examination.
Upon arrival at the new Emergency Room, the patient continued to complain of palpitations, shortness of breath, malaise, and generalized body aches. She felt unable to walk and developed diarrhea. Vital signs were again normal except for tachycardia into the 130’s/min. Patient remained afebrile with complete blood count showing a white blood cell count of 2.5 × 103/μL, a creatinine of 1.0 mg/dL, and a blood urea nitrogen of 19 mg/dL. Three days early these values were white blood cell count of 9.6 × 103/μL, creatinine of 0.8 mg/dL, and blood urea nitrogen of 6 mg/dL. Pelvic ultrasound showed no signs of retained products of conception. At this time, the decision was made to transport to our hospital, a tertiary care center for the region.
Shortly after arrival to our institution’s labor and delivery unit, a rapid response was called secondary to a pulse of 140/min, respiratory rate of 30/min, and blood pressure of 121/66 mmHg. Due to increasing concern for sepsis, the patient was sent to the Surgical Intensive Care Unit (SICU) and was started on piperacillin-tazobactam 3.375 g IV q 8 h. In the SICU a full physical exam was performed. On abdominal examination there was an approximately 2 cm × 2 cm area of erythema close to the umbilicus. A pelvic exam revealed diffuse erythema on the labia minora and labia majora. The cervix was noted to have two 0.5 cm white ulcerative lesions. There was foul smelling copious thick yellow liquid coming from the external cervical os. An endometrial curette was used to obtain an aerobic and anaerobic uterine culture. Bimanual exam revealed no retained products in the vagina or lower uterine segment. With close interaction between Obstetrics and Gynecology, Infectious Disease, and Surgical Intensive Care Unit services, a suspected diagnosis of Toxic Shock Syndrome (TTS) from probable Group A Streptococcus infection was made. This concern gained further validity when the patient provided information that both her husband and 2 year old child at home had streptococcus pyogenes (Strept Throat) infections over the previous 4 weeks. Results of blood cultures and uterine cultures later confirmed GAS infection. At this time the patient was started on intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy. The recommendation from the Infectious Disease consultant was to achieve source control in this critically ill patient by performing a hysterectomy.
In the operating room, a laparotomy was performed, and a large boggy uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries were visualized. A decision was made to perform a total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (TAHBSO) secondary to the diffuse nature of the infection. The proximal aspect of the vaginal cuff was also noted to be necrotic and this tissue was gradually debrided. Intra-operatively, Colorectal Surgery was consulted to inspect the integrity of the rectum. They performed a rigid proctoscopy which showed no visible rectal lesions. Exam of the perineum revealed no grossly necrotic areas in the vagina. Intraoperatively, the patient required 7U packed red blood cells, 5U fresh frozen plasma, 3U platelets, 10U cryoprecipitate. The patient remained intubated upon return to the SICU. She was started on ampicillin/sulbactam 3 g IV q6 h, and clindamycin 900 mg IV q8 h. Over the next twenty-four hours in the SICU, she required persistent use of norepinephrine and vasopressin, and developed hemorrhagic shock and disseminated intravascular coagulation. She returned to the OR for an exploratory laparotomy, where bleeding sites in the posterior cul-de-sac, and ovarian pedicles were again ligated and pelvic packing was placed. She required an additional 4U packed red blood cells, 4U fresh frozen plasma, 2U platelets, and 2U cryoprecipitate. She was taken to the operating room twenty-four hours later for reopening of the laparotomy site, perineal lavage, and removal of packing. The ovarian pedicles and vaginal cuff were both hemostatic, and cystoscopy showed bilateral ureteral jets. Forty-eight hours later she underwent one last abdominal washout procedure.
In the forty-eight hours after the TAHBSO, she developed an acute kidney injury with a creatinine spike of 1.8 mg/dL, urine output of approximately 30 cc/hr, and significant metabolic acidosis. She was started on continuous renal replacement therapy, and required this for the next 5 days. Vasopressors were utilized for a total of 4 days after the TAHBSO. Six days after the TAHBSO the patient was extubated in the SICU. Seven days after the TAHBSO, she began to develop compartment syndrome in her left forearm as well as paresthesias on the left median nerve distribution. She was consequently taken to the OR for a decompressive fasciotomy of the forearm, flexor and extensor compartments as well as carpel tunnel release with median nerve neurolysis . Finally, 13 days after the TAHBSO she was transferred out of the SICU to a floor bed where she remained for two more weeks before discharge. At discharge, the patient was to have extensive physical, occupational, and recreational therapy. Patient was feeling well upon discharge and had been following with multiple specialty clinics.