A 17-year-old Yemeni male patient with rheumatic heart disease and a travel history to Hadhramout governorate in the east of the country was admitted to the hospital complaining of yellowish discoloration of the sclera and skin along with dark urine but without dysuria or frequency. Then, he developed an intermittent high-grade fever, headache, fatigue, myalgia, and abdominal discomfort together with food-related nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite. On examination, the patient was febrile and had yellowish discoloration of the sclera along with a skin rash on his trunk and upper limbs. Systemic examination revealed bilateral basal lung crepitation along with mild tenderness and hepatomegaly, while cardiovascular and other systems were initially normal. The patient underwent tonsillectomy 10 years earlier and was on benzathine penicillin 6 months before admission. Socially, the patient was not a smoker, alcoholic, or drug-addicted.
The investigations performed on presentation (3 July 2019) to the Emergency Department revealed a normal white blood cell (WBC) count of 10.6 109/L (normal range: 4–11 109/l), with a slightly increased neutrophil percentage to 83% (normal range 40–75%). Serum C-reactive protein (CRP) was 253 mg/L (normal level < 5 mg/L). The platelet count decreased to 115 109/L but then gradually increased. Peripheral blood smear examination showed normocytic, normochromic red blood cells (RBCs) with normal morphology of all cell types. Serum albumin concentration was 27.4 g/L (normal 35–45 g/L), and urine was positive for bilirubin but did not contain RBCs and pus cells. Alanine aminotransferase level was 401 U/L (normal < 50 U/L), while aspartate aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and serum creatinine were within the normal range. Direct bilirubin concentration was 6.6 mg/dL (normal < 0.3 mg/dL) and increased to 8.96 mg/dL on the readmission day (8 July 2019) but then decreased gradually to 1.65 mg/dL on discharge (17 July 2019). International normalized ratio and prothrombin time were 1.69 and 20.4 seconds (normal 13.5 seconds), respectively. The other investigations done during clinic visits, readmission, and before discharge are summarized in Table .
The clinical diagnosis of acute liver injury as a result of possible dengue and hepatitis coinfection was made based on the travel history to Hadhramout governorate, clinical presentation, and clinical examination. Both viral infections were confirmed by dengue immunoglobulin M (IgM) and hepatitis A IgM antibodies test using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (16 and 11.66; negative results for dengue and hepatitis A are less than 9 and 0.8, respectively) on admission (3 July 2019). Tests for malaria and brucellosis were negative.
In the emergency department, supportive therapies for both hepatitis A and dengue were commenced using intravenous fluids, antipyretics, and antiemetic. Then, the patient was discharged home on intravenous dextrose saline, paracetamol 1 g four times a day as needed, and azithromycin 500 mg once daily for 3 days. Azithromycin was given for suspected bacterial infection.
Five days later, the patient was readmitted (8 July 2019, the first day of readmission) to the Medical Male Ward complaining of high-grade fever not relieved by simple antipyretics associated with nausea and vomiting, malaise, myalgia, and decreased appetite. His heart rate and blood pressure were 112 beats/minute and 100/60 mmHg, respectively. The total WBC count increased to 21.77 109 /L, with 93.4% of the cells being neutrophils, while CRP was 67 mg/L on the first day and increased to 140 mg/L on the second day of illness.
Parenteral empirical therapy using meropenem (500 mg three times a day) with moxifloxacin (400 mg once a day) was started on the readmission day, and vancomycin (1 g twice a day) was added on the third day (10 July 2019) after a noticeable increase in the CRP levels. Further clinical examinations and laboratory investigations were performed to identify the source of infection. On examination, there was a systolic murmur (grade 3) at the mitral area and sacral edema on his back. The patient's chest echocardiogram revealed moderate mitral regurgitation and two vegetations on the mitral valve. The large one (24 11 mm) attached to the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve, while the small one (2.1 0.9 cm) attached to the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve as shown in Fig.A, B. There was also mild tricuspid regurgitation with moderate pulmonary hypertension. The estimated ejection fraction by M-mode was 72%. Other valves and the dimensions of the cardiac chambers were normal with no pericardial effusion. On the same day, the chest echocardiogram was repeated and showed the same findings as the first day. According to the modified Duke criteria, the diagnosis of infective endocarditis was made based on one major criterion (presence of vegetation) and two minor criteria (single positive culture and fever). On the fourth day of hospitalization, a single blood culture yielded CoNS sensitive to ampicillin–sulbactam, cefoperazone–sulbactam, ceftriaxone–tazobactam, ciprofloxacin, clindamycin, doxycycline, gentamicin, imipenem, levofloxacin, lincomycin, moxifloxacin, and vancomycin, but it was resistant to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and co-trimoxazole. At this time, meropenem and moxifloxacin were discontinued, and the patient was treated with ceftriaxone/sulbactam (1.5 g twice a day for 4 weeks) with a daily dose of gentamicin (240 mg) with 100 ml normal saline over 1 hour for 2 weeks.
On the seventh day of hospitalization, the patient complained of diarrhea (four times per day) for which upper abdominal ultrasound and Clostridium difficile antigen were requested. Ultrasound showed moderate hepatomegaly (16 cm) with mild bilateral pleural effusion, while C. difficile antigen test was negative. Therefore, the treatment plan was not modified.
Treatment progress was monitored through the daily investigation of CRP, WBCs, and alanine aminotransferase. The patient was discharged on the tenth day of hospitalization after revealing a marked improvement on clinical and laboratory investigations. Other medications were added to the above-mentioned antibiotics, including bisoprolol (5 mg tablet once daily for 1 month) to control tachycardia, paracetamol (500 mg tablet for fever) as needed, furosemide (40 mg tablet once daily in the morning for 1 month) along with metolazone (1 mg tablet for 10 days) for pleural effusion and sacral edema. No additional echocardiogram was performed after discharge. During the first and second follow-up visits to the medical clinic, on day 3 and day 10 after discharge, the clinical features and laboratory investigations of the patients showed obvious improvement as summarized in Table .