The patient was a 34-year-old unmarried male who worked in farming and was admitted to the hospital on August 5, 2019, due to a chief complaint of a right orbital mass with right nasal obstruction for more than 2 mo.
In June 2019, the patient noticed redness and swelling of the lower right eyelid; this swelling gradually developed into a mass on the lower eyelid that obstructed his vision. He visited another hospital for treatment and received intermittent anti-infective therapy with antibiotics based on a diagnosis of right nasolacrimal abscess with sphenoid sinusitis. Treatment slightly alleviated the redness and swelling. Over the next month, his symptoms recurred, and the right orbital mass gradually grew and ulcerated. Moreover, the patient developed visual impairment in his right eye, right nasal obstruction, and an odor caused by local infection. No photophobia or lacrimation was observed during the disease course. He experienced no pain, itching, epileptic seizure, headache, dizziness, cold intolerance, fever, nausea, or vomiting.
Clavicular fracture was treated with internal fixation 10 years before this incident.
He had no family history of similar diseases and denied previous special drug use.
The physical examination performed at admission showed an Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group performance status of 1. Examinations of his heart, lung, and abdomen revealed no special findings. Palpation of the neck revealed no enlargement of the superficial lymph nodes. Specialized examination: His visual acuity was 1.2 in the left eye, and he had light sensation in the right eye. Intraocular pressure: The intraocular pressure in the right eye could not be measured, and that in the left eye was 20 mmHg. The infraorbital mass in the right lacrimal sac was as large as a duck egg, and a small, ulcerated area was evident on the surface. The mass pushed the eyeball upward and outward, which damaged the medial and inferior rectus muscles and complicated eyelid opening. The mass exhibited moderate rigidity and demonstrated adhesion to the maxillary tissue and was thus unmovable. The submandibular gland was also enlarged. The preauricular and cervical lymph nodes were enlarged with little mobility but were without redness or tenderness. No enlargement of the axillary lymph nodes was observed. No abnormality was found in the left eye on fundus examination. Lacrimal passage irrigation indicated no obstruction in the left eye and showed reflux from the lower lacrimal punctum to the upper lacrimal punctum without purulent exudate in the right eye. Otolaryngology revealed hyperemia and edema in the right nasal mucosa, obvious inward shifting of the lateral wall of the right nasal cavity, and hyperemia and ulceration in the mucosa of the middle and lower nasal passages (easy bleeding). No obvious secretion or mass was found in either nasal passage .
No obvious abnormality was found in tests for infectious diseases, such as human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, and hepatitis C.
Pathological examination: On August 8, 2019, right lacrimal sac tumor biopsy was performed under local anesthesia. Pathological examination indicated moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma. Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor was CK19 (+), CK20 (-), GCDFP-15 (-10), P40 (+), p53 (+), p63 (+), and CK5/6 (+). Hematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining: The primary lacrimal sac squamous cell carcinoma exhibited a nest-like arrangement of many tumor cells of different sizes and their stromal infiltration by microscopy at 200 × magnification. Under 400 × magnification, tumor cells were clearly atypical and large in size with pink cytoplasm, a high nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio, and both visible and pathological mitosis. The pathological manifestations seen by HE staining are shown in Figure and .
Eye computed tomography (CT) + reconstruction performed on August 5, 2019 showed the following: (1) The nature of the soft tissue mass (52 mm × 60 mm × 65 mm) in the right orbit was uncertain. The bones in the inner wall, top wall, and orbital plate of the right maxillary sinus had been destroyed and absorbed. Hypoattenuating areas were observed in the right maxillary sinus, nasolacrimal duct, and orbital medial wall, and the right eyeball was displaced; and (2) Multiple nodular lymph nodes in the right parotid region were enlarged .