A 67-year-old Chinese man was referred to our hospital with diarrhea for more than 5 mo and for management of early colon cancer discovered by colonoscopy in another hospital.
The patient visited a hospital for the first time due to diarrhea of yellow watery stool 8-9 times per day on December 20, 2018. Colonoscopy suggested colon polyps with a pathology of tubular adenoma. No significant improvement was observed in the symptoms after antidiarrheal treatment. The patient underwent colonoscopy in another hospital again, which revealed multiple polyps in the liver curvature of the colon, cecum, and descending colon on April 23, 2019. The biopsy pathology of the polyp (liver curvature) in our hospital’s consultation indicated villous adenoma, and some glands showed moderate-to-severe dysplasia with focal early carcinogenesis, roughly showing in situ adenocarcinoma changes. Therefore, the patient was admitted to our hospital for evaluation and treatment of early colon cancer.
The patient underwent right lung nodule resection 1 year prior and lumbar disc herniation surgery 28 years ago. He had no history of other diseases or allergic drugs. He had a smoking history of 30 years and had quit smoking for 8 years. His younger brother died of lung cancer. The patient had no familial history of genetic diseases.
The patient’s personal and family history was unremarkable.
On physical examination upon admission, the patient’s height and weight were 160 cm and 55 kg, respectively, and he had a blood pressure of 96/58 mmHg and pulse rate of 80 beats/min. There were no other pathognomonic signs during physical examination, except for enhanced bowel sounds at 8 beats/min.
After admission, the patient underwent thorough evaluations including routine blood tests, routine urine tests, routine fecal tests, occult blood tests, blood biochemistry, infection indices, and serum tumor markers. He had hypoproteinemia and hypokalemia with serum albumin and potassium levels of 29.61 g/L and 3.37 mmol/L, respectively. The C-reactive protein level was 7.79 mg/L. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate and white blood cell count were normal. He had a slightly elevated carcinoembryonic antigen level of 5.11 ng/mL. The levels of IgG antibodies to Epstein-Barr virus capsid and nuclear antigen were more than 50.00 and 7.42 AU/mL, respectively. The antinuclear antibody was positive, with a titer of 1:3200. Immunoglobulin E significantly increased with a value of 265.30 IU/mL. The fecal occult blood test results were negative, and stool flora analysis was normal. No other significant abnormal laboratory results were recorded in this patient.
Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a clear lung field . We observed a liver cyst and part of the small intestine that was slightly dilated on abdominal CT . Chest CT on April 14, 2020 revealed new nodules in the lower lobe of both lungs. However, multiple masses in both lungs had progressed more than before excluding tumorous lesions on chest CT on May 31, 2020 . Abdominal CT revealed multiple nodules in the right lobe of the liver and multiple soft tissue nodules in the abdominal cavity with a greater possibility of tumor and ascites, and the colorectal wall was slightly thickened .
Colonoscopy in our hospital revealed a hemispherical polyp with a diameter of approximately 5 mm in the liver curve and a long-pedicle polyp in the descending colon, with a lobular pattern of 10 mm in diameter at the tip. At the same time, it was found that the terminal ileum, ileocecal valve, and entire colonic mucosa were slightly swollen, with pit patterns of types I-II, which were finely grained .
In addition, gastroscopy showed swelling of the whole gastric mucosa and flaky erosions in the gastric angle and antrum with fine granular mucosa. The mucosa of the descending duodenum was also swollen in the form of fine granules .
After admission, we performed endoscopic mucosal resection to remove the two polyps located in the liver curve of the colon and descending colon, respectively. Simultaneously, the entire colonic mucosa was swollen and finely granular. Routine hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed tubular adenoma with diffuse proliferation of atypical lymphocytes in the mucosal layer in the polyp of the liver curve.
The polyp of the descending colon was diagnosed as villous adenoma with focal carcinoma–adenocarcinoma (moderately differentiated) limited to the mucosal layer. However, the high-magnification view showed that diffusely proliferated atypical lymphocytes infiltrated mainly in the mucosal epithelium and lamina propria, partially invading the submucosa. The lymphocytes had a relatively simple morphology and medium-sized cell bodies containing few cytoplasm and large oval or irregular nuclei with some visible nucleoli . Additionally, immuno-histochemical staining was positive for CD3, CD7, CD8, CD43, and Bcl-2 but negative for CD20, CD4, and CD56, and the Ki-67 index was approximately 80%. In situ hybridization, Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA, and IGH, IGK, and IGL rearrangement were negative.