In September 2015, a 64-year-old Asian man presented to our Urology department with gradual left scrotal swelling for 2 years. His medical history included hypertension treated by orally administered Plendil (felodipine) and Acertil (perindopril), and diabetes treated by orally administered Amaryl (glimepiride) for 10 years, and hepatitis B treated by orally administered nucleos(t)ide analogs (NAs). His medical history did not include renal injury, renal biopsy, or percutaneous nephrolithotomy. He was born in Nanjing, China, and grew up in the city proper of Nanjing. His occupation is civil servant; he did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol. No familial genetic disorder of our patient was found. On admission, his blood pressure was 141/92 mmHg, heart rate was 85 beats/minute, body temperature was 37.1 °C, and oxygen saturation was 99% on room air. A physical examination showed grade 3 left varicocele . No abnormality was found in a neurological examination. Blood chemical analyses are shown in Table . A urine analysis revealed urine glucose level of 2+, while other indexes including white blood cell count (3.5/ul) and red blood cell count (4.5/ul) were in the normal range. Ultrasound showed a low echo mass with fluent blood flow in the upper pole of his left kidney and bilateral varicocele (diameter, 2.7 mm for right side and 4.5 mm for left side). Ultrasound also showed a low echo of 3.7 × 4.2 cm in the upper pole of his left kidney, with affluent blood flow signals.
CT showed early enhanced dilated renal vein and irregular lesion in the upper pole of left kidney, which consisted of unusual dilated enhanced vessel in renal cortical phase . CT demonstrated left-side varicocele , a space-occupying lesion sized 3.6 × 4.3 cm in the upper pole of left kidney, and early enhanced dilated left renal vein with its ostial stenosis . CT also showed an unusual dilated vessel derived from left kidney and dilated lumbar vein in arterial phase, which demonstrated a local AVF . Axial T2-weighted MRI demonstrated large abnormal early flow voids within this mass, suggesting a vascular lesion . Selective right renal arteriography confirmed a cirsoid-type renal AVM by demonstrating abnormal arterial communication with vein in the upper pole with premature visualization of the dilated venous system, which included renal vein, lumbar vein, and his left gonadal vein . Two arterial feeders arising from apical and upper segmental artery of his left kidney supply the renal AVM. He underwent selective renal artery embolization . His varicocele was alleviated obviously after selective embolization, and no relapse or abnormal blood chemical analyses were found during a follow-up time of 12 months.