The patient was a 39-year-old pre-menopausal Caucasian female with otherwise an unremarkable medical history who initially palpated a lump in her left breast approximately 4-months before presenting to the clinic for evaluation in May, 2011. She had no cancer history in her family. Her diagnostic assessment included (1) a left breast ultrasound which showed a macro-lobulated mass with Doppler positive blood flow and internal echoes measuring 3.4 × 2.3 × 2.6 cm, (2) core needle biopsy of the lesion showed a grade 3 invasive ductal carcinoma that was estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR) positive (100% and 10% positivity, respectively) and HER2 negative by fluorescence in situ hybridization (HER2/CEN17 ratio = 1.0). There were no lymphovascular invasion or ductal carcinoma in situ component. Additionally, ultrasound-guided biopsy of an enlarged palpable axillary lymph node was also positive for metastatic carcinoma. In mid-June 2011, the patient initiated neo-adjuvant chemotherapy with 4 cycles of dose-dense doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide followed by 1 cycle of paclitaxel because she has clinical stage IIb (T2N1M0) breast cancer. She subsequently received 3 cycles of docetaxel due to a paclitaxel shortage. Following completion of neo-adjuvant chemotherapy, she underwent left mastectomy and axillary lymph node dissection in late 2011. Surgical pathology of the left breast revealed invasive ductal carcinoma measuring 1.2 cm in the largest diameter which had therapy related cytopathic effect . Complete axillary node dissection was done and revealed that seven of eleven axillary lymph nodes were involved with metastatic breast carcinoma and the patient had pTNM staging of ypT1c pN2. All surgical margins were negative. She then completed standard adjuvant radiation therapy and was started on Tamoxifen. Additionally, the patient underwent genetic testing that revealed no detrimental germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes.
The patient was well until approximately 3 years (July 2014) after the initial diagnosis, when she began to experience right-sided headaches, right temple numbness and syncopal episodes. Her neurological examination was significant for 4/5 reduced motor strength in the left upper and lower extremities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed an enhancing mass in the left thalamus measuring 1.6 cm in diameter . Computed tomography scan of chest, abdomen and pelvis with contrast and whole-body nuclear bone scan showed no evidence of extra-cranial metastases. She then underwent a biopsy of the left thalamic mass under MRI guidance which revealed metastatic breast cancer that was 80% positive for ER , 15–20% positive for PR and negative for HER2 (IHC 0, HER2/CEP17:1.34). Circulating CA15-3N and CA27.29 levels were measured at the time of the diagnosis of metastatic disease and were within normal levels (21.5 U/mL and 13.7 U/mL respectively). She subsequently received fractionated stereotactic radiotherapy (3000 cGy in 5 fractions) to the left thalamus. She had resolution of her symptoms and was started on exemestane with GnRH agonist goserelin. Goserelin was discontinued after the patient underwent bilateral oophorectomy due to concerns of inadequate ovarian suppression.
The patient continued to do well until a follow up brain MRI in December 2014 demonstrated a new focus of enhancement in the left cerebellar hemisphere measuring 5 × 5 mm . She was treated with stereotactic radiation therapy to the left cerebellar lesion. Unfortunately, brain MRI in March 2015 demonstrated interval enlargement of the enhancing lesion involving the left thalamus now measuring 1.9 cm. She therefore underwent whole brain radiation therapy with 30 Gy over 10 fractions . She did well without evidence of disease progression and neurological deficits with stable MRI scans until April 2016, when she was found to have worsening gait, dizziness and tremor. Brain MRI in May 2016 demonstrated progression of the left cerebellar lesion for which she underwent posterior fossa craniotomy that revealed necrotic debris, calcifications, granulation tissue and hemosiderin-laden macrophages consistent with post-radiation treatment effects and without any viable tumor. Unfortunately, the patient’s functional status continued to deteriorate and in August 2016 she presented with status epilepticus. Brain MRI did not show any evidence of disease progression. She refused lumbar puncture for evaluation of leptomeningeal carcinomatosis. Despite adjustment of her antiepileptic medications, she was admitted multiple times with refractory seizures. Of importance, all staging scans up to this point have not demonstrated any evidence of metastatic disease outside of the CNS. She elected to pursue hospice care and passed away soon after in December 2016.