A 14-year-old female handball athlete (160 cm; 52 kg) presented with a history of left knee injury during her participation in a handball training session. She had no history of past musculoskeletal surgery or any other illness and no relevant family background. The patient had been playing handball (position: goalkeeper) for 3 years. On physical examination, the patient presented with knee locked at 20º and tenderness at the medial joint line. Her gait was slightly painful with no full range of motion (ROM). Clinical tests were not applicable due to the locked knee. The neurovascular examination was normal.
The radiographs were normal and she underwent a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Siemens MAGNETOM Avanto Fit with BioMatrix technology, 1.5 Tesla) in a supine position with her knee in 20 degrees of flexion. Intravenous contrast was not administered. The MRI revealed a hypertrophic medial parapatellar plica and a horizontal tear of the medial meniscus. Based on the clinical image and MRI findings, knee arthroscopy was recommended.
A standard knee arthroscopy was performed under general anaesthesia. An extremely hypertrophied medial parapatellar plica was identified using the arthroscopic probe. The plica was covering a great part of the medial femoral condyle extending up to the femoral trochlea. Distally, it was attached into the inter-meniscal ligament . The plica was completely excised from its proximal attachment on the medial wall of the synovial pouch to its distal insertion using a mechanical shaver. The medial meniscus tear was repaired using an all-inside suture meniscal repair device (Fast-Fix, Smith & Nephew, USA). No other intra-articular pathology was found. The patient was discharged on the same day and allowed full weight-bearing as tolerated with arm crutches. Histological findings revealed fibrous and inflammation characteristics, covered with synovial membrane cells . At 1-month follow-up, the patient was completely asymptomatic and at 3-months follow-up, she has returned to her weekly training routine.