We present the case of a 62-year-old man who was brought to the emergency department because he was found to have difficulty in walking as he sustained multiple falls over the preceding 2 days. He did not experience any limb weakness or numbness. There was no history of an altered state of consciousness or slurred speech. The past medical history of the patient was remarkable for multiple medical comorbidities, including longstanding hypertension and diabetes mellitus with resultant chronic renal disease. He had not undergone any previous surgeries. The social and family history was non-contributory.
On examination, the vital signs revealed a normal temperature (36.7°C), tachycardia (105 bpm), elevated blood pressure (148/92 mmHg), and normal respiratory rate. The patient was not noted to have any facial asymmetry. He was not able to maintain his posture with a positive Romberg’s test. His gait was wide-based, and he was not able to tandem walk. The heel-to-shin test was impaired bilaterally. Sensory examination revealed loss of tactile, vibratory, temperature, and proprioceptive sensations below the spinal level of T4. Further, the Babinski sign was positive, and the ankle and knee reflexes were increased. Examination of cardiorespiratory system revealed normal findings. Initial laboratory investigations, including hematological and biochemical parameters, were non-contributory.
The provisional diagnoses of the patient were transverse myelitis or central cord compression. The patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine, which demonstrated degenerative changes in the cervical spine, most notably at the C5/C6 and C6/C7 levels, with reduced intervertebral disc space, osteophyte formation, and posterior element degenerative changes in the form of facet joints arthropathy and thickening of ligamentum flavum resulting in marked central canal stenosis and spinal cord compression with increased T2 signal intensity at the affected levels representing myelopathy changes .
The clinical and radiological findings were discussed in the multidisciplinary meeting. Surgical intervention for cervical spine decompression was planned. The procedure was made using the anterior approach. The surgery was performed under neuromonitoring. Complete discectomy for the levels C3/C4, C5/C6, and C6/C7 was performed. Integrated plate/cage devices placed after being pre-filled with bone graft. Then, screws have been inserted into each device. Fluoroscopy confirmed the correct placement of the plates and screws. The wound was irrigated and closed in a regular manner. The patient had uneventful recovery. Examination of the upper and lower limbs revealed no motor or sensory deficit postoperatively.
One day later, the patient experienced progressive weakness in his both upper and lower extremities with 0/5 motor strength throughout. Whole spine MRI study was performed to identify the underlying cause of neurological deterioration. The study demonstrated abnormal signal intensity in the spinal cord on T2-weighted images at the levels C5 to C7 . However, no localized fluid collection or hematoma were observed. The aforementioned findings represented changes of cord reperfusion syndrome. The patient was administered intravenous methylprednisolone therapy at a dose of 8 mg twice daily for 4 days. Gradual improvement in the muscle power in his both extremities was noted. The patient was discharged in a satisfactory neurological outcome. One month later, the MRI study was repeated and showed regression of the previously seen high T2 signal intensity in the cervical spine .