An 82-year-old male presented with a remote history of prior falls and a recent traumatic compression fracture of his L1 vertebral body. He reported no previous fractures, weight loss or antecedent pain. He was initially treated with a brace and underwent physical therapy. At follow-up, he had no neurological deficits but demonstrated severe recurrence of pain with progressive functional impairment refractory to conservative management. An MRI showed a worsening L1 vertebral body collapse, a T12 inferior endplate fracture, and a L2 superior endplate fracture . The imaging was suspicious for a pathologic etiology. With his intractable pain and collapse at the thoracolumbar junction, we proceeded with a kyphoplasty of L1, vertebroplasty of T12, and obtained a bone biopsy for pathology and culture . The initial smear testing for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) was negative with an interim negative report at 2 weeks, and final identification of M. abscessus at 6 weeks. The infectious disease (ID) service was consulted for further management. The smear was presumed to be a contaminant given his history and presentation.
At the 2-month follow-up, he remained neurologically intact, but continued to have functionally limiting pain. A repeat MRI demonstrated a psoas and paravertebral abscess with evidence of continued vertebral collapse. An image-guided bone biopsy confirmed the presence of M. abscessus and Propionibacterium acnes. Per the recommendations of the ID-team, he was started on Rocephin, then transitioned to a multi-agent regimen, including tigecycline, amikacin, meropenem, and oral-linezolid. After a completed course of antibiotics, he still continued to demonstrate clinical signs of infection with persistent pain. Again, advanced imaging confirmed progression of disease. He underwent an anterior T12-L2 corpectomy and debridement with instrumented fusion, as well as a posterior T9-L4 instrumentation and fusion . Repeat AFB culture and smear redemonstrated M. abscessus. Postoperatively, he was placed on a regimen of amikacin, azithromycin, tigecycline, and meropenem.
His postoperative course was complicated by gastroparesis leading to poor oral intake and malnutrition requiring the total parental nutrition. In addition, he developed a right upper extremity deep venous thrombosis by his prior PICC line site. He required inpatient rehabilitation for functional retraining. The side effects of his multi-agent therapy included persistent nausea, antibiotic-induced Clostridium difficile colitis, and new-onset Barrett’s esophagus most likely secondary to tigecycline. Due to ongoing adverse treatment effects and poor quality of life, the patient and family elected to withdraw aggressive care and continue with palliative measures only.