A 73-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted for elective shoulder replacement for an arthritic shoulder. She was being treated for hypertension with beta-blockers and thiazide diuretics and her blood pressure was well controlled. She had a history of diverticulitis and varicose vein surgery with an uneventful outcome. Her body mass index (BMI) was 34 during pre-operative anesthetic evaluation. She had no family history of DVT/PE. Blood investigations including electrolytes, liver function tests and coagulation screening were normal. Results of her electrocardiogram (ECG) and chest X-ray were unremarkable. The comorbidities were well optimized and she was admitted a day before her operation.
The patient was operated under general anesthesia supplemented with an interscalene block for postoperative analgesia. An intermittent calf compression device was used for mechanical thromboprophylaxis intraoperatively. The operation was performed through an anterior deltopectoral approach. The patient had no intraoperative complications. The patient recovered satisfactorily from general anesthesia and was monitored in a high dependency care unit for postoperative optimization. The operated shoulder was supported in an arm sling support for comfort. The patient was prescribed postoperative opioid analgesics and antibiotic prophylaxis with three doses of cefuroxime. No chemical or mechanical thromboprophylaxis were used postoperatively.
The patient was already feeling well on the next postoperative day and her blood parameters were satisfactory. Her pain was well controlled and her arm continued to be immobilized by the sling. There was no excessive oozing from the surgical wound and there were no distal neurovascular deficits. The patient's calves were soft and nontender and she was ambulating well postoperatively. A systemic examination of the patient was unremarkable. However, while being monitored she suddenly became breathless, hypoxic and hypotensive and experienced intense sweating. She did not complain of chest pain and an ECG was negative for cardiac ischemic changes. Her PaO2 was 84% on room air. She was resuscitated with oxygen by mask and initiated on low molecular weight heparin in a therapeutic dose. Despite all resuscitative measures the patient could not be revived. A post-mortem examination was requested, which confirmed pulmonary embolism and left calf deep vein thrombosis.