A 78-year-old woman was injured in a traffic accident while riding a motorcycle and thrown to the farmyard floor. The patient was transported to our hospital by helicopter. On arrival at the hospital, she was conscious and her vital signs were maintained. Fractures of AO classification 42B2 and 4FB2 were observed on the left lower leg and a Gustilo-Anderson classification Type IIIA open fracture was observed on the posteromedial surface of the lower leg (, ). She also suffered multiple traumas, including multiple rib fractures, clavicle fracture, pelvic wing fracture, and liver injury, which were treated conservatively. An operation on the mandibular fracture was performed later.
On the same day of the injury, debridement and external fixation for the tibial open fracture were performed in the operating room . Three days after the injury, internal fixation with intramedullary nails was performed . Twelve days after the injury, local heat and pus discharge from the wound were observed, and Aeromonas hydrophila was detected in the wound culture examination. Redness and swelling were observed at the nail insertion wound and throughout the posteromedial part of the lower leg , suggesting that the infection had spread along the whole nail, resulting in a large subcutaneous hematoma on the calf. In addition, an increased white blood cell count and C-reactive protein levels were recognized in the blood examination, which matched the major and minor criteria of FRI .
Curettage of the infected lesion and CLAP was initiated (, ). Bone marrow needles (Senko Medical, Tokyo, Japan) with a diameter of 3 mm as an iMAP pin were percutaneously inserted at the proximal end of the nail and distal part of the fracture site. Both iMAPs confirmed that fluid flow was observed throughout the fracture gap allowing intensive washout along the nail. Using this method, intramedullary contaminated bacteria were eliminated during surgery and the antibiotic solution was perfused postoperatively, instead of hematoma pooling along the nail for recurrent risk of infection. A 22Fr double-lumen tube (Salem sump tube: Coviden Japan) as an iSAP tube was placed from the proximal end of the hematoma area to the fracture site and the fluid flow from the iMAP pin was aspirated by this tube. Therefore, CLAP systems were constructed in the water stream for the entire infection area, including inside the tibia and affected soft tissue. Immediately, after surgery, 1200 μg/ml gentamicin was administered at 2 ml/h through three routes (two needles and the in-route of double-lumen tube). Negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) was applied to the subcutaneous dead space area to prevent pooling hematoma and to connect the out-route of the double-lumen tube to the NPWT tube for drainage collection. In this way, negative pressure was applied to the NPWT of the soft port as well as the iSAP tube. This system may help to effectively circulate the CLAP system under negative pressure.
According to the trough value of gentamicin (1.0 mg/ml), we applied a protocol in which the upper limit of the blood concentration of gentamicin was set at 1.0 mg/dl, and the administration dose was decreased if the blood concentration exceeded the upper limit. In this case, the blood concentration of gentamicin was 1.8 mg/ml on the 7th day after beginning CLAP, so the three in-routes were changed to 600 μg/ml. The blood concentration of gentamicin dropped to the safe level at the next blood examination and was maintained until termination of CLAP. The local concentration of gentamicin was monitored by collecting fluid using NPWT. The gentamicin concentration was maintained at more than 600 μg/ml to confirm that a sufficient dose was distributed in the infected area.
On the 18th day after the start of CLAP, the bone marrow needles were removed, local administration of gentamicin was terminated, and NPWT was continued until the discharge fluid was diminished. Two days later, fluid discharge was stopped from the tube, the double-lumen tube was removed, and NPWT was discontinued on the 20th day after the start of CLAP. Local findings improved a few days after CLAP and completely disappeared at the end of CLAP. Furthermore, the inflammatory response became negative 3 weeks after CLAP was applied .
In combination with systemic administration of antibiotics, 6 g/day of ABPC/SBT was administered for 6 weeks at the same time as CLAP. During the CLAP treatment, a continuous passive motion machine of the knee was applied during the daytime to facilitate fluid circulation in the CLAP system and prevent knee stiffness. Therefore, the patients maintained a knee range of motion from 0° to 130° by the end of CLAP. She started 1/3 partial weight bearing (PWB) 6 weeks after internal fixation and 2/3 PWB at 8 weeks. She was allowed to walk with a walker from 9 weeks. Bone union was achieved 6 months postoperatively. Three years and 6 months after CLAP, she returned to her pre-injury life with no signs of infection and no abnormalities in her motor function .