A 36-year-old para 1+0, gravida 2{previous caesarean delivery due to fetal distress, no miscarriages/abortion, with one living child} black woman of African descent was diagnosed with Graves' thyrotoxicosis at seven weeks gestation. Her antenatal profile had been unremarkable and she did not have any comorbidities. There was no relevant family history, and she neither smoked cigarettes nor consumed alcohol. Her previous pregnancy had been uneventful, and she had delivered a healthy baby normally. She presented to our hospital with unexplained palpitations, tachycardia, and excessive sweating. Her examination revealed that she had obvious proptosis. Her cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were normal. We ordered thyroid function tests in view of this presentation. Her thyroid-stimulating hormone level was 0.06 μU/mL (normal range, 0.27 to 4.2 μU/mL), free tri-idothyronine (T3) was 21.08 pg/mL (normal range in first trimester, 2.5 to 3.9 pg/mL), and free thyroxine (T4) was 54.39 ng/mL (normal range in first trimester, 0.9 to 1.5 ng/mL). Her antenatal booking tests and ultrasonography were unremarkable. At 10 weeks gestation, following consultation with an endocrinologist, she was commenced on PTU 100 mg thrice daily, which led to significant improvement in her thyroid function tests. At 17 weeks gestation, she developed scleral icterus. Upon further evaluation at a hospital in the US, a diagnosis of fulminant hepatitis was made. Conservative management with plasmapharesis and intravenous steroids was attempted, but her condition deteriorated to stage IV liver failure, necessitating intensive care with ventilatory support. Subsequently, a liver transplant was performed at 18 weeks gestation, followed by a thyroidectomy two weeks later.
After undergoing transplantation, she was continued on immunosuppressive therapy with tacrolimus, cyclosporine, prednisolone, and thyroid hormone replacement with levothyroxine. Her antenatal care was continued in Nairobi, Kenya, after her discharge from the hospital in the US.
Ultrasonography performed at 33 weeks gestation confirmed fetal growth restriction, oligohydramnios, and communicating ventriculomegaly with reduced cerebral volume. The mother underwent elective cesarean section at 37 weeks gestation. A female baby was delivered with Apgar scores of 8 at one minute and 10 at five minutes, weight 2050 g, and microcephaly (head circumference 28 cm). The baby had MRI features suggestive of antenatal ischemic encephalopathy and had frequent episodes of focal seizures, which were controlled with clonazepam. Steady but slow growth was reported, with delayed developmental milestones, and the baby is currently undergoing rehabilitation. Since delivery, the mother's thyroid and liver function tests have remained normal.