The patient was a 13-year-old Japanese girl with no family history of renal disease or hypertension. There was no history of medication with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or RAAS inhibitors during her mother’s pregnancy. Prenatal ultrasonography revealed an abdominal mass lesion in the fetus. At around 26 weeks of gestation, the mother underwent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which revealed fetal renal mass lesions indicative of MCDK . The patient was naturally delivered at full term; her birth weight was 3076 g. General laboratory examinations did not reveal any clinical abnormalities; therefore, the mother and patient were discharged. However, the patient presented with increasing blood pressure around 1 month after birth, and gradually developed hypertension. On admission at 6 months of age, her development was observed to be normal. Physical examination also revealed normal weight and height without surface malformation. Blood pressure was checked multiple times and was 110/80 mmHg on the first day of admission. Urinalysis demonstrated no proteinuria, hematuria, and glycosuria. Serum sodium (138 mEq/L), potassium (4.8 mEq/L) and calcium (11.7 mg/dL) results and the serum creatinine level (0.25 mg/dL) were normal. Elevated plasma renin activity (17.1 ng/mL/hr.; normal: 0.2–2.3 ng/mL/hr) and serum aldosterone levels (731 pg/mL; normal: 29.2–159.0 pg/mL) were observed. Brain MRI demonstrated no signs of microvascular lesions. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed left renal hypoplasia without scarring on the kidney surface. MRI revealed an atrophic left kidney with multiple cysts and no sign of adrenal enlargement. Renal DTPA scintigraphy with Tc-99 m dimercaptosuccinic acid revealed differential glomerular filtration rates (GFR) of 68 mL/min and 7 mL/min for the right and left kidney, respectively, suggesting that the left kidney was nonfunctional. These findings suggested small vessel renovascular hypertension, although neither large vessel renovascular stenosis nor obstruction was observed during MRI. She was initiated on benazepril hydrochloride (0.03 mg/kg/day); however, because the response to the drug was poor, the left kidney was removed at the age of 7 months. Analysis of the renal specimen revealed interstitial fibrosis, cell invasion, and marked arterial wall thickening; glomeruli and tubular formation were absent in the same region . Diffuse immature glomerulus was observed in the cortex area that was retained partially . Fibromuscular tissue proliferation was observed around the renal calyx . Immunohistochemical staining with anti-renin antibody revealed that renin was partially localized in the proximal tubules and the parietal epithelium of the Bowman’s capsule in the immature glomeruli . The blood pressure normalized after the nephrectomy. The renin and aldosterone levels also gradually reduced to 3.4 ng/mL/hr. and 94.2 pg/mL, respectively, reaching normal levels on the 90th postoperative day. The serum creatinine level and eGFR at the latest examination were 0.56 mg/dL and 129 ml/min/1.73 m2, respectively. The baby undergoes routine check-up with blood pressure monitoring and is currently not on any medications.
Briefly, the kidney specimens were fixed in 10% neutral buffer formalin, and were embedded in paraffin for light microscopy analysis with routine staining with hematoxylin and eosin, periodic acid-Schiff, Masson’s trichrome, and periodic acid-methenamine-silver stains. For renin staining, Discovery Ultra Autostainer (Ventana Medical Systems, Inc. Tucson, AZ, USA) with I-VIEW DAB kit was used on paraffin-embedded specimens. Following deparaffinization and antigen retrieval (CC1 Mild), mouse anti-renin antibodies (clone 411,507) (R & D Systems) were used as the primary antibody with × 100 dilution for 32 min. For a negative control, normal mouse IgG1 (R & D Systems) was used on the same specimen. In order to compare the present case with other cases concerning the distribution of renin at the vascular pole of the glomerulus, a case of diabetes mellitus glomerulopathy at the same age without hypertension was used.