A 61-year-old man complained about early satiety and postprandial fullness 2 d after VATS right lower lobectomy.
The patient drank clear fluid 2 h after VATS and had his first meal the next morning after surgery, which was in line with routine care in our hospital. At first, he complained about early satiety and postprandial fullness after eating food. Two days after surgery, gastrointestinal symptoms were aggravated, as the patient appeared to have upper abdominal pain and vomited a large amount of yellow-green fluid. During the process of the disease, exhaust and defecation were not impeded.
He presented to our hospital with coughing for the past three months. He had a chest computed tomography (CT) one month before, which showed a 6.0 cm × 4.4 cm mass in the right lower lobe of the lung with hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. The subsequent bronchoscopic pulmonary biopsy failed to confirm the pathological nature of this mass.
Since the onset of symptoms, he lost 6 kg of weight even though there was no significant change in his diet and appetite.
VATS right lower lobectomy was carried out under general anesthesia combined with a paravertebral block. We exposed the thoracic cavity using a horizontal incision through the muscle between the fourth and fifth intercostal spaces, and no malignant pleural nodules or pleural effusions were found during thoracoscopic exploration. As the tumor was closely adhered to the pleura, electrocautery was used for dissection, and the right lower lobe was sealed smoothly with an endoscope linear stapler (PSE60-GIA, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, United States). Subcarinal, paraesophageal and bronchial lymph node stations were dissected using monopolar electrocautery. The surgery was performed with caution, and there was no direct evidence of iatrogenic nerve injury. During the surgery, an accumulated dose of 25 µg sufentanil was intermittently administered, and the target concentration of remifentanil at the effect site was maintained at 3 ng/mL. The total duration of this surgery was 3 h and 52 min, and the total blood loss was 300 mL. The patient used patient-control analgesia with sufentanil (1 µg/mL), which was programmed to deliver 2-mL boluses with a lockout interval of 8 min and a background infusion of 1 mL/h. According to paraffin pathological sections, the tumor was invasive adenocarcinoma with a maximum diameter of 4 cm, and no metastasis was observed in any of the examined lymph nodes (T2aN0M0 according to the eighth edition of TNM classification of lung cancer).
The patient had no symptom-related medical history but had smoked for many years. He denied any family history of gastrointestinal dysfunction.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.8 ℃; blood pressure, 127/68 mmHg; heart rate, 79 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 19 breaths per min. Furthermore, abdominal examination revealed a distended abdomen, and the bowel sounds were diminished on auscultation. When we rocked him back and forth from the hip, a succussion splash was elicited.
The electrolyte levels were within the normal limits . No abnormalities were found in routine blood and urine analyses.
Emergency abdominal CT showed multiple effusions in the esophagus, while the massively dilated stomach and proximal duodenum contained a mass of fluid. The inferior edge of the distended stomach reached the pelvic cavity . Oral iohexol X-ray imaging was carried out after gastrointestinal decompression and demonstrated delayed gastric emptying (10 min after ingestion of iohexol, the first sign of passage into the duodenum was observed, and some contrast agent was retained in the stomach 4 h after administration) .