A 34-year old Caucasian woman treated for ankylosing spondylitis (AS) with certolizumab for 6 months was admitted to our department with symptoms of palmoplantar pustulosis of 2 months duration accompanied by painful abscesses on the arc of the feet, painless abcesses on the breast and pubic mount and hair loss and severe desquamation in the frontoparietal area.
The patient was diagnosed with AS in 2006 with positive HLB27 antigen and a family history of AS. Due to its progressive course complicated by recurrent uveitis, the patient was being treated with certolizumab 200 mg injected subcutaneously (s.c.) every 2 weeks, with good clinical response. No side effects had been reported until the onset of skin lesions. During month 6 of treatment with certolizumab, pustules on an erythematous base with desquamation developed symmetrically on the patient’s palms and feet. Enhanced sweating of the palms and soles was noted. A layer of thick yellowish scale on the scalp appeared simultaneously. Initially the patient was suspected of acquiring a Coxsackievirus infection. No improvement was noted with either topical treatment with hydrocortisone, natamycin and neomycin cream and salicylic oil or following treatment with more potent steroids, including clobetasol propionate. The lesions kept exacerbating despite discontinuation of the anti-TNFα treatment. Extensive scaling of the scalp with hair loss, painful abscesses on the lower surface of the right breast and pubic area, abscesses on a violaceous base that excreted pus and blood and several tiny pustules on the back and left calf were noted. There was no personal or family history of psoriasis or other skin diseases. The patient has been an active smoker for 15 years and denied abuse of other substances.
One week prior to admission the patient had received an empiric treatment with oral clarithromycin 500 mg twice daily due to an upper respiratory tract infection. Following treatment initiation, the respiratory symptoms subsided but the skin lesions persisted, causing a significant decline in the patient’s quality of life due to severe pain and disability. Smaller pustules on a violaceous basis appeared a few days prior to the admission, on the left calf.
On admission the patient presented symptoms of pustular psoriasis of the palms and soles accompanied by abscesses on a violaceous basis with a clinical resemblance to pyoderma gangrenosum . Two smaller abscesses were found on the right breast, in the pubic area and on the left calf. Plaque with silver scale developed on the occipital area of the scalp, with an alopecia, that was positive for the pull test.
Swabs for bacteriological and mycological cultures were performed, and both were negative. The only deviations in the laboratory test results were slightly elevated inflammatory markers, including C-reactive protein (10.9 mg/l) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (50 mm/h), minor leucocytosis (10.62 × 103/ul) and neutrophilia (6.88 × x103/ul). Chest X-ray showed no obvious pathology.
Treatment was initiated with a once-daily dose of hydrocortisone 200 mg administered intravenously. Additional therapy was implemented with an oral antibiotic treatment comprising doxycycline 200 mg daily combined with nonsteroidal non-inflammatory drugs (ketoprofen) and a topical treatment with a boric acid solution and betamethasone with gentamycin cream. However, there was only a mild improvement in the condition and only a mild reduction in pain intensity. Secukinumab (anti-interleukin [IL] 17A) was then added as a new biologic treatment of both the AS and the reaction to certolizumab, at a dose regimen of 150 mg at weeks 0, 1, 2, 3 and 4, followed by a dose of 150 mg every 4 weeks. After two doses of secukinumab, a new lesion developed on the patient’s right thigh which subsequently developed into an abscess from which there was a constant purulent discharge that appeared on the lateral surface of the right thigh ; there was increased desquamation on the scalp and feet; and there was an enlargement of the plantar and breast lesions, with a purulent discharge . The pain was severe (numeric rating scale 10/10), and the patient required opioid analgesics. A pathergy phenomenon was observed at the site of venipuncture . Onychomadesis and onycholysis of the fingernails became visible . A surgical skin biopsy was taken from the patient’s left calf for histopathologic examination. It showed an erosion filled with neutrophils, epidermis with irregular acantholysis and abundant underlying neutrophilic infiltration in the dermis, with a tendency to perivascular accumulation and leukocytoclasis. This clinical picture was interpreted by the pathologist to be indicative of pustular psoriasis .
Having taken into consideration the clinical and histological picture, a diagnosis of overlapping palmoplantar pustular psoriasis, scalp psoriasis and pyoderma gangrenosum as a paradoxical skin reaction to the anti-TNFα drug was made.
A decision was taken to add once-weekly methotrexate (MTX) 20 mg s.c to the treatment with secukinumab. Follow-up after 2 months of combined therapy with secukinumab and MTX showed a regrowth of hair and less undermined lesions with less inflammatory borders, as well as ulcerations that were healing, with cribriform scars on the previously pustular lesions .