Our patient is a 2-year-old white girl born at 39th week of pregnancy through caesarean section to non-consanguineous Italian parents. The proband’s mother is obese and suffers from mild MR and minor dysmorphism.
Her growth parameters at birth were in the normal ranges (weight 3.3 kg and length 46 cm). Apgar scores were 6/8/9. The newborn presented dysmorphic signs, which is the reason why genetic screening was performed when she was 18-months old; the genetic screening enabled us to hypothesize three pathologies: RASopathy (that is, pathologies caused by mutations on genes codifying for RAS proteins), Noonan syndrome, and Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome. At the age of 2 years she was hospitalized at Unit of Neonatology and Pediatrics of Matera, because of poor height and weight development, and anorexia. After medical examination, the girl appeared slightly dehydrated, presented a weight of 5,910 kg and an height of 67 cm, a cranial circumference of 47 cm.
Clinical observation revealed the following: brachycephalic face with a prominent forehead and frontal bossing, slight midface hypoplasia, hypertelorism (interpupillary distance of 2.9 cm); with mildly downslanting palpebral fissures, synophrys, small nose with anteverted nostrils and deep-set nasal root, mild prognathism, deep-set posterior rotated ears, full cheeks, and prominent philtrum. She held her mouth mostly opened with a cupid bowed upper lip, full lower lip, and a slightly protruding tongue.
To better explicate the causes underlying the above described health state, the following instrumental investigations were performed:Brain ultrasound: the structures of the median line are on the axis. Normal ventricular morphovolumetry. Modest non-homogeneous of the cerebral parenchyma most pronounced in the periventricular region. Hyperechogenicity of streaked thalamus arteries. Renal ultrasound: left kidney renal pielectasia or pyelectasis with “ballooned” aspect of pelvis as of suspected joint pathy. Notes: useful scintigraphic evaluation. Scintigraphy: left calico-pyelic stasis, a little responsive to diuretic and orthostasis. Conserved parenchymal functionality but asymmetric, leading to a reduction in left kidney functionality. Rachis magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): reported fusion of D4 to D5 and D9 to D10 vertebral bodies. Accentuation of proximal kyphosis with a tendency to reverse dorsal distal portion. Cervical hypolordosis. Conserved posterior metameric alignment. Doppler color echocardiography: normal atrium-ventricular connection of large vessels. Normal morphovolumetry of cardiac chambers. Patent foramen ovale. Slight pericardial effusion. Discrete thinning of the interventricular septum.
Parameters from routine blood tests and biochemical screenings for metabolic disorders were in the expected ranges. The karyotypes performed for the proband and her parents were normal. Before proceeding with biomolecular investigations as suggested by the geneticist, the pediatrician requested a genomic study by means of CGH array in order to exclude an eventual genomic pathology.
A CGH array highlighted a 597,84 microdeletion within the short arm of chromosome 16 (16p11.2). Based on the dimension of the deleted genomic fragment, 16p11.2 microdeletion syndrome is part of the first group .
The microdeleted chromosomic region (29,592,751-30,190,593) contains the following OMIM genes: ALDOA, CDIPT, DOC2A, FAM57B, GDPD3, HIRIP3, KCTD13, KIF22, MAPK3, MAZ, MVP, PAGR1, PPP4C, PRRT2, QPRT, SEZ6L2, SPN, TAOK2, TBX6, YPEL3 and ZG16.
To verify if the observed microdeletion was a de novo mutation or has been inherited from parents, a CGH array on parental samples was performed. The analysis highlighted that the proband’s mother presented the same microdeletion as the daughter.