Here we report the case of a 25-year-old German man, with no prior history of chronic illness or substance abuse. Nevertheless, toxicological screening was positive for cannabis and amphetamines. After a 72 h period of progressively increasing headache and psychiatric alteration he was admitted to a community hospital in a delirant state with somnolent phases. The patient was in good physical condition with aggressive fits, co-operative and orientated when awake and conscious and showed no signs of acute infection apart from an elevated C-reactive protein (61.6 mg/l) and leukocytes (21.6 G/l). Additional signs as fever, tachycardia or tachypnoe to diagnose severe inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) were not seen. Upon physical examination there were no signs of meningism or impairment of motor or sensory function. Cranial nerve examination was discreet, pupils reactive to light and isocore.
Clinical examination showed multiple scratches and infected pustules on both outer upper legs and arms. According to the family this situation had been longstanding and was not acute. The dermatologists classified these lesions as Prurigo subacuta. Six h after hospitalization the patient deteriorated rapidly to Glascow coma scale (GCS) 3, was intubated and put on mechanical ventilation. Pupils were dilated. A native computer tomography (CT) brain scan showed massive brain swelling with brain stem compression and a space occupying lesion (SOL) in the left cerebella hemisphere causing an occlusive hydrocephalus .
An external ventricular drainage (EVD) was inserted immediately and produced cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) under very high pressure. Cell counts and laboratory analysis of CSF showed increased polymorphic granulocytes (1116/mm3), lymphocytes (115/mm3) and red blood cells (3000/mm3). The lactate and protein concentration was markedly elevated (17 mmol/l and 12967.1 mg/dl, respectively) and glucose levels were low (<1 mg/dl).
Despite these findings antibiotic therapy with flucloxacillin, ceftazidime and metronidazole had no clinical effect. Microscopy of gram stained CSF specimen showed a massive number of leucocytes but no bacteria. Aerobic and anaerobic cultures were performed but remained negative. Specific polymerase chain reactions (PCR) excluded typical pathogens causing meningitis, e.g. Neisseria meningitides and Streptococcus pneumoniae[,]. However, a PCR product was detected with 16S ribosomal deoxyribonucleic acid (rDNA) primers as previously described in . PCR product sequencing detected genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) from Fusobacterium nucleatum with 98% homology.After the positioning of an EVD a CT brain scan with contrast agent was performed revealing no enhancement of the SOL but suspected occlusion of the basilar artery. The digital subtraction angiography (DSA) performed afterwards showed absence of perfusion compatible with brain death. Subsequently, an magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to complete the diagnostic imaging. Figure documents abscess formation in the left cerebellum hemisphere. Despite maximal therapeutical effort to lower the intracerebral pressure reactivity of pupils could not be restored and brain stem reflexes vanished within hours. Brain death was declared within 12 hours after the initial drop in GCS.
Pathological examination revealed an abscess in the left cerebella hemisphere with cerebellar oedema and brain stem herniation. There were signs of embolism of both main trunks of the pulmonary arteries. Microscopic analysis of the heart muscle showed hypereosinophilia as seen in necrosis and apoptosis.