A 44-year-old Caucasian woman came to our outpatient clinic for a 3-month follow-up appointment after undergoing an open two-level (L4-S1) TLIF procedure with dorsal spondylodesis. She had been treated for spondylolysis with second-degree lumbar spondylolisthesis (L4/L5) and for osteochondrosis (L5/S1) (Figures and
). At her follow-up visit, she complained of pain in her whole left leg.
A physical examination revealed pain upon palpation of the lumbar spine. The patient’s spinal muscles were tense. Intermittent paresthesia of her left lower limb and constant paresthesia at the ball of the left foot were present. There was no saddle block paresthesia. Her motor function was MRC (Medical Research Council) Scale 5/5 in all muscles of both legs. Her Lasègue and Bragard signs were positive on the left side. Her bilateral patellar and Achilles tendon reflexes were regular, as was her perianal sensitivity and sphincter muscle tone. No urinary or defecation problems were observed. The patient was in good general condition, but overweight (108 kg weight, 170 cm height). She had sustained no trauma. She had been compliant with the given instructions for sitting and working in a manner that is easy on the back. However, she had not lost any body weight as we had advised.
Her past medical history included arterial hypertonus, restless legs syndrome and an axial esophageal hernia. Her past surgical history consisted of a hysterectomy and tonsillectomy, 6 and 31 years ago, respectively. Upon admission to the hospital, she was taking several painkillers, blood pressure medication, a dopamine agonist and a proton pump inhibitor.
Her social history revealed that she had consumed nicotine since she was 14 years old (46.5 pack-years). Her family history and review of her organ systems were non-contributory, except for the above-mentioned diseases.Radiography and computed tomography were performed (Figures and
). A diagnosis of implant failure with a combination of cage dislocation left dorsally and breaking of the set screws on both sides with dislocation of the rods was made. All polyaxial screws were intact and in place, except for the S1 screws, which had become loose and dislocated dorsally on both sides.
A revision surgery was performed by the same surgical team that had done the primary operation. The patient was placed in prone position. A midline incision was made through the existing scar. Removal of cicatricial tissue was performed until all of the screws could be exposed. The S1 polyaxial screws were loose and dislocated on both sides. Metallosis was observed in the surrounding tissue. The S1 set screws were then inspected and removed. They showed a breaking of the worm. The other polyaxial screws were in place and intact. The L5 nerve root was prepared, followed by exposure of the dura. From there, preparation toward the cage in the L5/S1 intervertebral disc space was done. Palpation showed that it had become completely loose. The cage was removed. Next, expansion of the intervertebral disc space, rasping of the edges and insertion of a new cage was done. After that, the whole dorsal instrumentation system was exchanged. Pedicle screws with a 0.5-mm-larger outer diameter than those previously used were placed. Finally, the wound was closed layerwise, and two drains were placed. No intra-operative complications occurred.A post-operative X-ray showed a regular position of the implants (Figure ). The drains were removed on the second post-operative day. The wound healing was primary and without signs of infection. The patient’s neurological complaints (pain and paresthesia) disappeared completely. Again, physiotherapists instructed the patient to sit and work in a manner that is easy on the back, and she was advised to lose weight and quit smoking. Twelve days after the operation, the patient was discharged to home. From there, she went into a rehabilitation clinic. No peri-operative complications occurred.Six weeks post-operatively, the patient was seen at our outpatient clinic for a follow-up examination (Figure ). She complained of back pain without radiation to the legs, which was controllable with pain medication. In addition to that, she complained that the dorsum of her left foot had decreased sensitivity. A physical examination revealed a regular scarring of the wound. Paresthesia was present on the dorsum of her left foot. Apart from that, sensitivity was the same bilaterally. Her motor function was MRC (Medical Research Council) Scale 5/5 in all muscles of the legs bilaterally, and she had regular reflexes. Her Lasègue and Bragard signs were negative bilaterally. No post-operative complications were observed.