A 22-year-old woman with a known history of giant cell tumor of the left first metatarsal was evaluated for worsening left medial midfoot pain. She had previously undergone curettage and polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) cementation of a biopsy-proven giant cell tumor of the first metatarsal two and a half years prior at a different institution. Six months following the index surgery, she had a recurrence treated with repeat curettage, liquid nitrogen local adjuvant, and placement of bone substitute graft. After the second procedure, she was ambulatory, but occasionally used a boot for comfort and avoided high-impact activities. Physical examination demonstrated a prominent first metatarsal base and a well-healed dorsal incision. She exhibited tenderness to palpation throughout the area of the scar.
Radiographs of the left foot showed an expansile, radiolucent lesion of the first metatarsal base surrounding the known cement implantation of the first metatarsal . Magnetic resonance imaging showed a large soft-tissue mass surrounding the first metatarsal circumferentially and abutting the second metatarsal . There was high T2 signal with no T1 signal changes at the base of the second metatarsal. Computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated an expansile lucency at the proximal aspect of the first metatarsal base toward the dorsal lateral side . There were some areas of cortical breach, and the bone was expanded and abutting the base of the second metatarsal. There was no evidence of direct extension into the second metatarsal or areas of osteolysis within the second metatarsal base. She was diagnosed with a second recurrence of giant cell tumor of bone of the first metatarsal base. As the tumor was recurrent, with destruction of the articular surface and little residual bone of the first metatarsal base, a wide resection of the tumor was recommended.
The procedure began by harvesting iliac crest bone graft (5 cm in length, 2 cm in depth). The prior dorsal incision was extended along the entire first metatarsal and proximally across the tarsometatarsal (TMT) joint. A wide resection was performed by disarticulating the TMT joint, maintaining periosteal coverage surrounding the metatarsal, and osteotomizing the metatarsal about 4.5 cm from the TMT joint. The damaged cuneiform articular surface (from articulation with cement) was resected with a wafer osteotomy. The resection bed was treated with adjuvant thermal necrosis. Margins were extended further with 10% hydrogen peroxide. The first toe was held in appropriate length and rotation and pinned to the second metatarsal. The iliac crest graft was fashioned to fit appropriately, contouring the angles for an appropriate junction. The graft was secured with an anatomic plate and screw construct .
Nonweight bearing was maintained until the three month postoperative visit, at which time she began weight bearing as tolerated through the heel and 50% weight bearing through the forefoot with a removable boot. Four months following her operation, she was advanced to full weight bearing as tolerated in the boot. Five months after surgery, she began weight bearing as tolerated in a regular shoe and nonimpact exercises. Nine months after surgery, plain radiographs and CT demonstrated osseous bridging at both the proximal and distal graft sites with no signs of tumor recurrence . At one year following surgery, she denied pain in the left foot and was able to complete all activities of daily living without difficulty. Eighteen months following surgery, the patient had no left foot pain, was exercising without difficulty, and there was no radiographic evidence of recurrence. The patient was informed that data concerning the case would be submitted for publication, and she agreed.