A 53 year old white female patient Jeovah witness was referred to our institution because of general and respiratory symptoms of several days consisting in malaise, weakness, decreased appetite, dyspnea, nonproductive cough, bleeding disorder compatible with idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) and sudden headache associated with diplopia and blurred vision. Her medical history included localized scleroderma type morphea in the lower limbs, vitiligo since 25 years ago, autoimmune hypothyroidism, carpal tunnel and obesity.
At physical examination on admission, her cardiopulmonary and abdominal examination was normal, no evidence of oral ulcers, alopecia, malar rash, synovitis, sclerodactyly, Raynaud phenomenon or dry symptoms. Hypopigmented lesions of vitiligo were observed in the lower limbs associated to atrophic violaceous plaques (Figure ), these last lesions showing interstitial inflammation and homogenization of collagen in the histopathology study which was consistent with morphea (Figure ). The neurological examination revealed diplopia and mild dysmetria. Initial studies showed pulmonary infiltrates and lung nodules of unclear etiology by X-ray and chest tomography. A fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed evidenced only erythema of mucosa with negative bacteriological cultures. Echocardiogram was reported as normal. Laboratory test reported negative BK serial sputum. Clotting studies, renal function, C-reactive protein, bilirubin level and urine analysis were normal. Leukocytes count of 9830 cells/mm3 with normal hemoglobin and differential count and thrombocytopenia in the range of 41.000 which limited performing lung biopsy. Aspirate and flow cytometry in bone marrow were reported as normal, and there was no evidence of schistocytes in peripheral blood spread. Abdominal ultrasonography not demonstrated splenomegaly. Secondary infectious (HIV, hepatitis B and C, blood and urine cultures) and drug-related causes of thrombocytopenia were ruled. A brain computed tomography (CT) reported right and left gangliobasal and left lamellar intraventricular hemorrhage with ventricular drainage without evidence of arteriovenous malformation. Pulses of methylprednisolone were initiated in the context of intracerebral bleeding and autoimmune thrombocytopenia with unfavorable response and due to the inability of transfusion, hyperimmune human gamma globulin (0,5 gr/kg/day) was indicated. Refractoriness was presented to the application of gamma globulin and so it was necessary to use thrombopoietin receptor agonists (Eltrombopag) with a slow good response. Complementary autoimmune laboratory showed C3 136 mg/dl (90–180 mg/dl), C4 18 mg/dl (10–40 mg/dl), direct Coombs test, rheumatoid factor, Scl70, lupic anticoagulant, ANAs, AntiDNA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAS) and anticardiolipins titles within normal limits, as well as extractable nuclear antigens (anti-Ro 7.7 U (<20), anti-La 2.7 U (<20), anti-Sm 1.9 U (<20), and anti-RNP 4.8 U (<20)). The antimicrosomal (45 UI/ml) and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies (21 UI/ml) were positive with TSH in normal range. Control lung imaging showed improvement of pulmonary involvement. Persistent headache, photophobia, nausea, emesis and diplopia made it necessary the realization of a cerebral magnetic resonance angiography that reported multiple cerebral parenchymals infarcts (right external capsule, left head caudate nucleus and bilateral occipital) with hemorrhagic transformation (Figure ). Irregularity in cerebral arteries in "beads" pattern compatible with central nervous system (CNS) vasculitis was observed (Figure ). Intracranial neoplasms of a primary and secondary nature, aneurysms and vascular malformations were ruled out by this study. A diagnosis of cerebral vasculitis was made in the light of findings requiring initiation of intravenous steroids (methylprednisolone 1 gr/day per five days) and intravenous cyclophosphamide (1 gr monthly) with clinical improvement and satisfactory recovery.