A 45-year-old woman of a height of 153 cm and weighing 49 kg, who was an employee of the sales industry, was admitted to our department. She complained of nodules in the right upper lobe that had been observed during a routine physical examination 1 mo previously.
During anesthesia induction, midazolam (2 mg), etomidate (20 mg), sufentanil (25 µg), and cisatracurium (10 mg) were administered intravenously. A left 35 Fr DLT tube (PVC; Wellhead, China) was inserted orally and smoothly with an ordinary laryngoscope. Then, endotracheal intubation was performed by an anesthesiologist with 1 year of experience, and the position of the DLT tube was examined carefully by fiberoptic bronchoscopy. The patient underwent thoracoscopic wedge resection of the right lower lobe without re-positioning the DLT tube.
After surgery, her respiratory signs, muscle strength, and consciousness recovered well, and after 80 min intubation, the DLT tube was removed. The patient experienced hoarseness for 1 mo after discharge but did not seek any medical remediation.
She denied having a history of hypertension, diabetes, surgery, drug or food allergies, drug use, smoking, alcohol consumption, or a family history of vocal granuloma formation. The patient had no preoperative complaints of sore throat, hoarseness, cough, or gastroesophageal reflux.
She denied having a history or a family history of vocal granuloma formation.
According to the Classification System of the American Society of Anesthesiologists, Mallampti II, her physical status included a normal thyromental distance and a low risk of airway difficulty.
According to preoperative laboratory examinations, she had no history of syphilis, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or other infectious diseases.
She underwent fibrolaryngoscopy due to "snoring and dry mouth" 7 mo before the thoracic surgery, and no significant abnormalities were observed . There was no neoplasm of the glottis on preoperative chest computed tomography . A repeat fibrolaryngoscopy revealed her bilateral vocal cords to be slightly swollen, with a smooth surface, normal motility, poor closure, and granulation tissue protrusions in the bilateral arytenoid region . Later, her bilateral vocal cords became more swollen under fibrolaryngoscopy. Granulation was observed in the bilateral arytenoid area, and the area of granulation of the right vocal cords was larger than that in the previous examination and virtually blocked the glottis. On day 105 after thoracic surgery, during follow-up, a fibrolaryngoscopy showed no granulation tissue formation at the glottis .