A 68-year-old woman had had a fever for 18 days after total hysterectomy for repeat urinary tract infection by Enterococcus faecalis due to uterine prolapse. An echocardiogram revealed a large mobile vegetation at both the aortic and mitral valves with severe regurgitation. Her blood cultures were positive for Enterococcus faecalis. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed asymptomatic small embolic infarction at the right middle cerebral artery region. She was treated with adequate antibiotic therapy, and her heart failure was abated with medication.
She was transferred to our hospital for surgery for endocarditis 18 days after the administration of antibiotics.
Follow-up cerebral MRI revealed multiple new embolic infarctions and ruptured infectious aneurysms at the left posterior cerebral artery. We conducted transcatheter arterial embolization of the aneurysm and postponed the cardiac surgery due to residual aneurysmal blood flow. Follow-up echocardiogram revealed no change of vegetation size and severeness of regurgitation.
While awaiting surgery for 3 weeks, she suffered sudden dyspnea followed by cardiac arrest. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was applied after cardiopulmonary resuscitation. An echocardiogram revealed diffuse severe hypokinesis, and emergency coronary angiography was performed under suspicion of ACS. It revealed obstruction of the left main coronary trunk by a vegetation .
Considering the size of the emboli, emergent cardiac operation was performed. At surgery, a 3 × 6-mm aortic vegetation was found to have occluded the left main coronary trunk , three aortic valve leaflets were destroyed , and the mitral valve had multiple perforations at the anterior leaflet. Valve replacement with bioprosthetic valves (Carpentier-Edwards INSPIRIS 19 mm for the aortic valve and Medtronic Mosaic 25 mm for the mitral valve) and coronary artery bypass to the left antero-descending branch were performed. Regarding her cardiac function, she still required extracorporeal membrane oxygenation after the operation. She ultimately passed away 19 days after surgery due to multiple organ failure under extracorporeal membrane oxygenation.