A 70-year-old Chinese man with bilateral axillary lymphadenopathy was diagnosed with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified through lymph node biopsy 5 years before this study. Immunohistochemical analysis showed the following results for lymphoma cells: CD3 (-), CD10 (-), CD20 (+), BCL2 (+, 80%), BCL6 (+), C-MYC (+, 40%), CyclinD1 (-), MUM1 (+), CD21 (-) and Ki-67 (+, 80%). EBER by in situ hybridization test (ISH) was negative in the lymphoma cells. The fluorescence in situ hybridization test (FISH) yielded negative results for MYC, BCL2/IGH and BCL-6 rearrangement. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET-CT) revealed multiple lymphadenopathies on both sides of the mediastinum with larynx and stomach involvement. Bone marrow biopsy was negative. A diagnosis of DLBCL, non-GCB subtype with MYC/BCL2 double expression was made. The Ann Arbor stage was IV A and the international prognostic index was 3, suggesting a poor prognosis. The patient then received 6 courses of R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone) and achieved the first complete remission (CR). The patient declined autologous stem cell transplantation (auto-SCT). However, 9 months later, the patient experienced his first relapse, developing a single lesion on his tongue. The mass biopsy confirmed the relapse. Two courses of dose-adjusted R-EPOCH (etoposide, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, and rituximab) and two courses of R-DHAP (rituximab, dexamethasone, high-dose cytarabine, and cisplatin) only allowed the patient to achieve stable disease (SD). Therefore, involved field radiotherapy was given and the patient reached his second CR. However, 7 months later, the patient relapsed for the second time, showing bilateral cervical lymphadenopathy confirmed by biopsy. Four courses of L-GemOx (lenalidomide, gemcitabine and oxaliplatin) were given and the patient reached CR as confirmed by PET-CT evaluation. Then, lenalidomide was given as maintenance treatment. However, another 7 months later, the patient relapsed for the third time with a new lung mass confirmed by biopsy as DLBCL, which was CD19 positive.
The patient was then referred to our center and recruited in a clinical trial of CD19-targeted CAR-T therapy with costimulatory 4-1BB endodomain (ClinicalTrials.gov ID: NCT04833504). Pretreatment PET-CT showed a large lung mass with multiple lymph node involvements . The patient underwent FC regimen lymphodepletion chemotherapy (fludarabine 30 mg/m2 day -5 to -3, cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2 day -5 to -3) before CAR-T infusion. The patient was infused with a total of 1.1×108 CAR-T cells (2×106 cells per kilogram) on day 0. After CAR-T infusion, the patient suffered from grade 1 cytokine release syndrome (CRS) without immune effector cell-associated neurotoxicity syndrome (ICANS) according to the American Society for transplantation and cellular therapy (ASTCT) guidelines. PET-CT examination confirmed complete metabolic remission 3 months after CAR-T cell therapy .
Unfortunately, 12 months after CAR-T infusion, the patient relapsed for the fourth time with lung mass , which was confirmed by biopsy. Notably, immunohistochemical analysis showed that CD19 was still positive. Circulating tumor DNA (ctDNA) of DLBCL (a 49 cancer-related gene panel, ) performed with next-generation sequencing (Illumina, Wuhan Sitaide Medical Laboratory) detected the mutations in TP53 (c.524G>A, p.R175H, 47.60%) and NOTCH1 (c.3539G>A, p.C1180Y, 35.02%), without mutations in MYD88, CD79b, EP300 or CREBBP. During the salvage chemotherapy with two courses of GDP regimen, the patient suffered from grade IV bone marrow suppression and infective fever. However, the patient failed to achieve any remission and lung lesion progressed with increasing pleural effusion . His chest distress and shortness of breath worsened, and he could not tolerate any further aggressive chemotherapy. Thereafter, He was given oral chidamide 30 mg twice a week and oral zanubrutinib (a novel BTK inhibitor) 160mg twice daily as salvage therapy. Surprisingly, his symptoms were relieved after 2 weeks of this treatment, and a CT scan 2 months later showed significant remission of lung lesions . This regimen was well tolerated with only grade 1 leukopenia. Peripheral blood CAR-T cells of the entire course management were monitored of this patient . There were no CAR-T cells by flow cytometry and CAR copies by ddPCR detected at relapse after CAR-T therapy and there was no CAR-T cell expansion at the remission of this regimen. At the last follow-up, the patient remains in radiographic CR at 22 months after CAR-T infusion and 10 months after the initiation of chidamide and zanubrutinib. The timeline of diagnosis and treatment was shown in .