A 15-year-old female patient with medically refractory epilepsy was treated surgically in N. N. Burdenko Neurosurgery Institute, Moscow, in October 2008. The patient had no family history of epilepsy. Pregnancy and delivery were reported as normal. First seizures occurred at the age of 9. The patient suffered from pharmacoresistant complex partial seizures without aura appearing with loss of consciousness, aversion to the right, falling, and sometimes with secondary generalization, with a frequency of 2–4 seizures per month, without any response to antiepileptic drug therapy. Therapy on admission was as follows: valproate — 2000 mg per day and carbamazepine — 1000 mg per day. She had no neurological deficit, and she was able to attend a regular school. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed bilateral malformation of cortical development and bilateral periventricular NT associated with CD in the right temporo-parietal region; the latter appeared in slight MRI abnormalities such as thickening of the cortex and dysgyria, which could be considered as CD. Mild atrophy of the right hemisphere was also noted . The left hemisphere had no signs of CD. Surface EEG recording showed bilateral interictal epileptic discharges, without any focal seizure onset.
At first, the patient was considered as an unfavorable candidate for surgery because of bilateral lesions, but in view of the health hazard of unexpected falling during seizures, the decision was later made to continue presurgical evaluation and to make invasive neurophysiological investigation.
Invasive monitoring was performed with the use of intra-cerebral electrodes placed according to stereotactic methods in the medial temporal and parietal regions and nodules of heterotopia on both sides. There was a marked disorganization of background activity with periods of rhythmic theta–delta activity in the medial temporal and parietal regions on the right side during the interictal period. Ictal onset was characterized by the appearance of fast activity in the right medial temporal regions followed by the rapid spreading of epileptic discharge to the left hemisphere .
Based on the neurophysiological data, the right temporal and parietal cortices were considered as part of the epileptogenic zone, but we supposed that the real dimension of the epileptogenic zone was more extensive than only the right temporal and parietal cortices. It was entirely possible that the left-side NH would be epileptogenic too. Nevertheless, we took the decision to perform a right-side partial disconnection procedure expecting a palliative result — the prevention of secondary generalization of seizures. The surgery was performed in December 2008.
The surgery procedure consisted of anterior temporal lobectomy and the opening of the posterior part of the temporal horn by dissection through the medial margin of the superior temporal gyrus to the trigonum, the removal of the right heterotopy nodus, the dissection of the parahippocampal gyrus and the medial part of the parietal lobe at the level of the posterior part of the ambiens cistern, the dissection of the posterior part of the corpus callosum, and the detachment of the temporo-parieto-occipital complex by dissection through the white matter of the parietal lobe just behind the sensorimotor cortex .
Histological examination of the basal temporal and parietal cortices and the hippocampus revealed CD type I according to the ILAE classification with immature neurons — type 1B according to the Palmini classification .
The patient was noted to have permanent hemianopia and transient hemiparesis for the first 2 months after surgery with complete recovery.
Standardized follow-up evaluations were performed every 6 months after surgery. The patient has been seizure-free for more than 4 years after surgery and was treated with the same therapy as that used before surgery. She goes to college now.