A 65-year-old Caucasian male, a cigarette smoker of 50 pack-years, presented with dysphasia. A computed tomography (CT) revealed two 2 cm lesions in the left parietal lobe and bilateral enlarged axillary lymph nodes, with multiple pleural infiltrates in both lung apices, diaphragms and mediastinum. The patient previously had multiple pigmented skin lesions excised which were reported to be malignant. The brain lesions were completely excised and found to be vimentin and S100 positive on immunohistochemistry, confirming the diagnosis of malignant melanoma. The patient had no actionable BRAF V600E mutations (wild-type).
The patient was initially treated with anti-CTLA4 antibody (Ipilimumab) for 3 months achieving a best response of stable disease, before progression of his chest lesions. He was then treated with anti-PDL1 antibody (pembrolizumab) for 2 months. The best response attained was a partial response; however, he went on to develop increasing pleural and axillary disease . Following a 3-month wash-out period, the patient consented to the clinical trial of BCT-100 therapy (NCT02285101).
Arginase (BCT-100) therapy was initiated at the established Recommended Phase II Dose (2 mg/kg intravenously weekly) that induces a persistent depletion in systemic arginine to < 8 μM. CT evaluation (week 13) revealed a partial response in all pleural-based lesions and therapy was continued. Restaging 20 weeks after the first dose of BCT-100 dramatically revealed a complete remission with clearance of all pleural-based and axillary disease. Thirty months from commencement of BCT-100, the patient remains on weekly dosing and in radiologically confirmed complete remission at all sites of disease . BCT-100 has been well tolerated with the patient experiencing only nausea, skin rash and diarrhoea, which were not deemed drug-related. He had no dysphasia since excision of the brain lesions. He continues to tolerate treatment with no SAEs greater than grade II.
Tumour tissue from the relapse surgery was evaluated by RNA-sequencing and compared to a control dataset obtained from the Genetic Expression Omnibus (GSE20156). Volcano plot shows significant differential expression between the melanoma patient treated and the control cohort . The 30 top differentially expressed genes are shown in Fig. . Specific analysis of the arginine metabolic pathway identified that the tumour had relatively higher expression of arginase II catabolic enzyme to control melanomas. Expression of the recycling enzymes ASS and OTC expression were extremely low in all samples . Immunohistochemistry confirmed the almost complete absence of ASS and OTC enzymes, consistent with a state of arginine auxotrophy that defines sensitivity to arginase therapy . Interrogation of a further 44 samples of metastatic melanomas held with the R2: Genomics Analysis and Visualization Platform confirms the majority of tumours have lower OTC than ASS expression .