A 54-year-old African American male with a past medical history of hypertension and left total hip arthroplasty presented to the emergency department complaining of chest pain, decreased appetite, weight loss, and fatigue. He reported one melanotic bowel movement approximately three weeks prior. He denied diarrhea, headache, shortness of breath, palpitations, flushing, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, hematemesis, dysuria, hematuria, skin lesions, or other symptoms. Physical examination revealed a heart rate of 101 bpm and respiratory rate of 25 breaths per minute. The patient was alert and oriented with no neurological deficits and did not appear cachectic. The remainder of the examination revealed scleral icterus and no heart murmurs or wheezing. Bowel sounds were normoactive, no abdominal tenderness was elicited, and no palpable mass or organomegaly was appreciated. Digital rectal examination revealed no hemorrhoids, masses, or frank blood. Petechiae were visible on the skin, without ecchymosis or bruising, and extremities were thin and without edema; fecal occult blood was positive.
Initial laboratory studies revealed hemoglobin 3.1 g/dL, platelets 9 × 109/L, creatinine 1.5 mg/dL, AST 124 U/L, and ALT 37 U/L. Other laboratory findings included reticulocyte count 6.54%, total calcium 10.1 mmol, D-dimer >4.3 mcg/mL, fibrinogen 234.2 mg/dL, uric acid 10.4 mg/dL, CEA 62.6 ng/mL, PTH 13.9 pg/mL and LDH 2417 U/L. Examination of the peripheral smear revealed circulating blasts, leading to suspicion for acute myeloid leukemia (AML). An initial CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis without contrast showed diffuse interstitial markings with dependent atelectasis at the lung bases, small bilateral pleural effusions, and small right diaphragmatic lymph nodes. The liver demonstrated no focal lesions; there was mild hepatic enlargement, but contours were maintained. The spleen was noted to have a 3.5 cm ill-defined hypodensity. Per the radiologist’s review, differentials included an infarct, hemangioma, or metastatic disease. A previously noted fracture in the left iliac crest was unchanged, concerning for a lytic lesion. A review of previous CT findings from approximately three weeks prior (when the patient presented for left leg pain) revealed the known left total hip arthroplasty with streak artifact in the pelvis, a fracture of the anterior aspect of the left iliac crest, and a possible associated lytic lesion, which had not been noted on left hip x-ray from that same day. Further evaluation included a CT brain without contrast which revealed small bilateral occipital hemorrhages (approximately 1.5 cm), a left basal ganglia hemorrhage, a questionable small infarct in the right frontal cortex, as well as concern for hemorrhagic metastases; there was no fluid collection, mass effect, or shift.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for acute severe anemia with concern for acute myeloblastic crisis. He received pantoprazole, octreotide, and packed red blood cells. A bone marrow biopsy was scheduled but was delayed due to thrombocytopenia and the patient’s critical condition. Oncology recommended transferring the patient to a tertiary cancer center to initiate treatment; however, the patient was too unstable. He was started on allopurinol for elevated uric acid to protect against tumor lysis syndrome. Although the CT findings warranted further evaluation via MRI, the patient had had a metal pellet in his head which prohibited MRI studies. A repeat CT chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed multiple lytic lesions in the left clavicle, with possible fracture, as well as in the sacrum and ilium . The bone marrow biopsy was completed on the fourth day of hospitalization. The immunohistochemistry ( and ) was positive for synaptophysin, pancytokeratin, patchy chromogranin, CDX2, and villin, the combination of which supported the diagnosis of metastatic, high-grade, poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC) favoring a gastrointestinal pancreaticobiliary origin, invading the majority of the bone marrow.
On the tenth day of hospitalization, the patient started the first course of chemotherapy with reduced dose carboplatin and etoposide, along with rasburicase for prevention of tumor lysis syndrome, and dexamethasone. He received three days of carboplatin and etoposide. The patient continued to have hemoglobin levels in the 7–9 g/dL range during the hospitalization and required numerous blood and platelet transfusions; the persistently low hemoglobin was attributed to bone marrow infiltration and bleeding due to thrombocytopenia. His clinical condition deteriorated during the hospitalization; four weeks after admission the patient required mechanical ventilation as well as emergent hemodialysis for worsening renal function. He subsequently expired on the thirty-eighth hospital day.