A man in his late 60s with a history of orthotopic cardiac transplant in 2002 was diagnosed 17 years post-transplant with metastatic melanoma of unknown primary. The transplant was performed secondary to non-ischemic cardiomyopathy in the context of cytomegalovirus infection. The graft maintenance strategy initially included mycophenolic acid plus tacrolimus, however was modulated several times due to complications including calcineurin-induced thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, seizures, and immune-suppression related malignancies including stage IIA colorectal cancer, melanoma in situ of the right cheek and cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in situ. The previous melanoma lesion was treated with wide local excision and close observation, without obvious evidence of recurrence. Additional medical comorbidities included chronic kidney disease, recurrent venous thrombosis, and pulmonary embolism associated with positive lupus anticoagulant. He was eventually on sirolimus alone, which was the regimen at the time of melanoma diagnosis.
In October 2019, the patient developed increasing dyspnea. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest demonstrated diffuse nodular ground-glass infiltrates and widespread nodularity bilaterally . Bronchoscopy with fine needle aspiration demonstrated rare atypical cells positive for HMB45 and SOX10, suggestive of melanoma.
The patient presented to medical oncology in December 2019. Staging PET/CT demonstrated extensive disease in the lung and multifocal osseous metastases. A percutaneous CT-guided biopsy of the right upper lobe lung mass confirmed metastatic melanoma expressing HMB45, S100 and SOX10. Next generation sequencing revealed wild type status of BRAF and NRAS, stable microsatellite status, and mutations in: NF1 K476, RAC1 P29S, TERT C229T, EZH2 Y646N, CBL Y371N, and FANCA Q1044. The specimen also showed copy number loss in MTOR, ERBB4, ROS1/ESR1, CHEK1/CBL, and SMAD4. Tumor mutational burden (TMB) was 29.0 mutations/Mb.
Options for treatment including immune-checkpoint inhibition, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and off-label use of MEK inhibitors were considered. Cytotoxic chemotherapy was deferred given the poor general toxicity/benefit ratio. The risk of graft rejection and lack of clear evidence of safety for checkpoint inhibition in transplant patients nominated MEK inhibition as the initial treatment approach. Trametinib was initiated on January 6, 2020. Simultaneously sirolimus dosing was minimized with a new goal level of 6-8 ng/mL (from previous of 10-12 ng/mL). Three weeks after initiating therapy the patient experienced clinical decline with increased shortness of breath, hypoxia, and extreme fatigue felt to be due to worsening of the underlying metastatic melanoma.
Although tumor expression of PD-L1 was 0%, response to immune-checkpoint inhibition was felt to have a potential for success given the extreme TMB at 87.5 percentile of melanoma samples. Additionally, the presence of the NF1 mutation and the location of the previous melanotic lesion on the cheek raised the possibility of this melanoma being of desmoplastic lineage, a sub-type associated with extremely high rates of response to anti-PD1 . Risks and benefits were reviewed, including the extreme possibilities of cardiac allograft rejection and death versus treatment response and long-term survival for melanoma. The patient chose to pursue immunotherapy and was given one dose of anti-PD1 with pembrolizumab 200 mg intravenous infusion on January 27, 2020. Follow up bloodwork revealed a precipitous drop in the serum lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), eventually below the upper limit of normal . Over the next three weeks the patient demonstrated noticeable improvement in shortness of breath and energy level. While an adverse effect from the initial MEK inhibitor therapy such as pneumonitis was considered, it seemed less likely given the improvement in clinical status with no intervention such as steroids and the long half-life of trametinib of approximately 4.5 days. As such, the drug would have still been at clinically significant levels for three to four weeks following discontinuation, even while the patient was clinically improving. The rapid improvement upon initiation of anti- PD1 therapy further supported that the initial decline was due to worsening of the melanoma. Further pembrolizumab was held in an attempt to minimize allograft rejection risk. Re-staging CT scans were performed three months later demonstrating slight improvement in the right upper lobe and otherwise stable lesions compared with the baseline PET/CT. Stable disease was maintained for six months until he began to clinically decline again, and CT suggested progressive disease. Two further doses of pembrolizumab 200 mg were given three weeks apart, six months from his first dose. His cardiac allograft status was monitored with serum B-natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels, troponin I levels, and echocardiograms. His BNP became elevated above baseline after his third dose of pembrolizumab, and he was admitted and treated for heart failure. Cardiology did not feel the patient was experiencing graft rejection, but rather right heart failure due to mild volume overload and the consequences of extensive disease burden. Unfortunately due to his progressive disease he continued to decline, and despite attempts at salvage therapy with ipilimumab and nivolumab as well as stereotactic radiosurgery for new brain metastases, he transitioned to hospice in October 2020 and passed away. A graphical representation of the case is shown in .