The case is presented according to the Case Report (CARE) guidelines .
An otherwise healthy, 37 year old female patient consulted our outpatient clinic in June 2002 for a newly arose, atraumatic low back pain. The x-rays showed an early-stage degenerative scoliotic curve and conservative treatment with painkillers and physiotherapy was begun. The patient sought consultation again in September 2003 due to an increase of the low back pain associated with left sciatic pain without neurological deficits: the x-rays and CT scan showed a marked progression of the deformity with endplate erosion . Further diagnostics through imaging (MRI, bone scintigraphy) and blood tests could rule out a septic, malignant or rheumatic process, which could have offered an explanation for the rapid evolution of the deformity and for the endplate erosion. In particular, leucocyte count and C-reactive protein were within normal values, as well as the rheumatoid factor, the anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide and the erithrocyte sedimentation rate.
The symptoms and the endplate erosion further worsened in April 2007 . Due to severe functional impairment, the patient was scheduled for surgery with the diagnosis of Aebi I (de novo) scoliosis secondary to rapidly progressive disk degeneration – however, a precise diagnosis for this fast-evolving process could not be pinpointed. In May 2007 a L1-L4 posterior fusion with L3/4 PLIF was performed . A microbiological analysis of the intervertebral disc confirmed the absence of infection. One year after surgery the patient reported a reduction in pain levels and could go back to moderate physical activity.
In December 2012 the patient consulted again for increasing back pain and sagittal imbalance, and a distal junction kyphosis (DJK) was diagnosed . A surgical revision was conducted in the same month and allowed to restore a physiological sagittal alignment .
Shortly after surgery (March 2013), however, the patient presented again with increasing pain and coronal and sagittal imbalance. The x-rays and CT scan showed a subsidence of both TLIF cages, along with a T8 fracture. For this reason, a posterior revision with a T7-pelvis instrumentation was performed. After surgical revision a satisfactory sagittal balance was obtained again .
Unfortunately, in October 2019 the patient consulted again for a relapse of the lumbar pain and sagittal imbalance. In the meantime, an open reduction and internal fixation of the left proximal femur had been performed due to accidental trauma. An osteoporosis evaluation with bone densitometry and blood tests (creatinin, vitamin D, phosphate, TSH and calcium) had been performed after the femur fracture and could rule out an osteoporotic process. Due to the successive and multiple implant failure, the case was reviewed to search for a possible explanation for this particular clinical course. The patient still did not present signs of rheumatic, septic or tumorous illness and the blood tests did not show any alteration. The available imaging was compared with the literature on hip and shoulder joints, leading to test the hypothesis of spinal RDOA, which is currently based on radiographic findings. RDOA first presents with bone marrow edema and subchondral fractures, which are evident in Fig. B. This phase is followed by extensive bone remodelling and osteophyte formation as shown in Fig. . We believe that these observation are consistent with the diagnosis of spinal RDOA. This diagnosis offers an explanation for the quick evolution of the symptoms and degenerative changes at presentation, and for the otherwise inexplicable failures that the patient presented.
The x-rays performed in October 2019 showed multiple rod breakages along with the breakage of the left iliac screw : revision surgery was planned but it was delayed due to the Covid 19 pandemic. The operation was conducted in January 2021 and once again the sagittal balance could be restored . At the last surgery, a 4-rod construct was employed with an ALIF cage to restore the sagittal balance and maximize the stability of the implant. At the last follow up the obtained sagittal balance was maintained and there was no sign of subsidence of the ALIF cage.
A timeline of the evolution of the clinical course is provided in Table .