A 30-year-old man with no past medical history (in particular, he had no prior evidence of pericarditis or any inflammatory/autoimmune disease) was admitted to our cardiac intensive care unit (CICU) because of cardiac tamponade with large circumferential (mainly anterior) pericardial effusion, in the context of acute pericarditis, with diffuse ST elevation and PR depression on the electrocardiogram (ECG) . The cardiovascular examination showed increased heart rate (100 b.p.m.), muffled heart sounds, jugular vein distension, low blood pressure (90/55 mmHg). He had received his second dose of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (Comirnaty, Pfizer-BioNTech) 40 days before and had complained of fever and typical pleuritic chest pain for the next 5 days, with subsequent reduction of the symptoms (which had never completely disappeared though), followed by presyncope about 30 days later. The patient’s anti-spike SARS-CoV-2 IgGs and IgMs were found positive. Laboratory tests for Epstein–Barr virus (serology and genoma), Echovirus, Coxsackevirus, Adenovirus, Cytomegalovirus (serology), as well as Quantiferon and autoimmunity tests (ANA, ENA SSB/La, anti-dsDNA antibodies, pANCA-MPO, cANCA-PR3) were negative. High-sensitivity Troponin I was also negative in three samples over 4 days. The emergency echocardiogram showed normal biventricular global and regional function, right ventricular diastolic collapse, transmitral E wave peak velocity respiratory variation by 30%, distended inferior vena cava without respiratory variation. He underwent emergency pericardiocentesis, and ibuprofen 600 mg t.i.d. and colchicine 0.5 mg b.i.d. were started, with symptom remission and a downward trend of inflammatory markers at discharge. Pericardial fluid analysis was negative for bacteria, mycobacteria, fungi, yeasts, moulds, and Enterovirus genome. After 1 week, ibuprofen tapering was started, and the patient had a disease flare with fever, pleuritic chest pain, increased inflammatory markers [C-reactive protein (CRP): 306 mg/L; cut-off <0.5 mg/L], neutrophil leucocytosis, ECG signs of acute pericarditis consisting again in PR depression and diffuse ST elevation with inverted T waves , sinus tachycardia. The echocardiogram showed large pericardial effusion, up to 25 mm anteriorly , with no clear signs of tamponade but incipient 2D signs of impaired ventricular filling . He was readmitted to the CICU for pericardiocentesis and strict multiparameter monitoring. However, we decided to defer the procedure and to start the interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor inhibitor anakinra subcutaneously at a dose of 100 mg b.i.d. on the first day, thereafter 100 mg/day. Few hours after the first administration, the patient reported complete resolution of his symptoms and remained afebrile and asymptomatic throughout his hospital stay. After 24 h, his heart rate got back to normal. Within 72 h, complete reabsorption of the pericardial effusion was observed , and the inflammatory markers showed an abrupt reduction in the next 6 days (CRP from 306 to 34 mg/L). After reduction of the CRP, the patient was discharged uneventfully on anakinra 100 mg/day for 6 months (then it will be gradually tapered), ibuprofen 600 mg t.i.d. (tapering as per current guidelines), colchicine 0.5 mg b.i.d. for 6 months, and a proton pump inhibitor. At 1-month follow-up visit (28 September) and on a further telephonic contact (1 December), he was still asymptomatic.