A 43-year-old gravida 5, para 1 (previous preterm birth at 24 weeks) patient with a twin pregnancy from in vitro fertilization (IVF). Her past medical history was significant for three previous first trimester miscarriages (the latter with a cervical cerclage) and a preterm delivery at 25 weeks’ gestation of a girl of 1000 g who died at 1 month of life in Madagascar. Due to an infertility problem for the past 3 years, the patient had undergone IVF in Spain to get pregnant. An ultrasound performed at 7 weeks confirmed a dichorial-diamniotic twin pregnancy with a long cervical length (>40 mm). She had been placed on hormonal treatment (estrogens and progesterone) during the first 14 weeks of pregnancy. The cervix had been checked again at 9, 12, and 16 weeks both clinically (long, posterior, and closed) and sonographically (>40 mm and without funneling). However, during a regular pregnancy visit at 19 3/7 weeks, the ultrasound examination showed a long cervix (48 mm), but open at about 18 mm along all of its length . Clinically, the patient was asymptomatic (no uterine contractions, no signs/symptoms of infection) and her uterine cervix was long and almost closed (the membranes were not visualized through the external cervical os [ECO]). We decided to place an Arabin pessary after performing wet mount and vaginal and cervical cultures (all examinations were negative). One week later (20 3/7 weeks), she came back for a check-up. The pessary was well tolerated and well positioned at speculum examination; the ECO was 1 cm open and the fetal membranes were visualized through it, but not bulking.
At 21 2/7 weeks, the patient consulted the emergency unit for suspicion of rupture of the membranes. At clinical examination, rupture of the membranes was excluded. The pessary was well positioned, but the membranes were bulking through the ECO and around 2 cm in the vagina. The ultrasound showed normal amniotic fluid, normal growth of both fetuses, and a long (58 mm), but open cervix (approximately 4 cm) . The patient had no uterine contractions, no fever, vaginal secretions were normal and the blood examinations showed no leucocytosis (12 G/l and 6.7 G/L 6 h later), but high C-reactive protein (CRP) levels (142 mg/l and 114 mg/l 6 h later). The patient was hospitalized for a threatened second trimester miscarriage. Several hours later, the patient started to shiver and developed a high temperature (39.5 °C). She complained about slight abdominal pain and rupture of the membranes occurred. A blood test showed high leucocytes (18.5 G/l, 9.5% non-segmented) and a high CRP (242 mg/l). The patient was transferred to the labour suite, put on intravenous antibiotics (amoxicillin and gentamicin) and the pessary was removed. The cervix was 1 cm long and 1 cm dilated. Two hours later, the cervix was dilated at about 4–5 cm.
The patient delivered the first baby, a stillborn girl (395 g) in breech presentation, followed by delivery of the second twin, a live boy of 480 g, after artificial rupture of the membranes. The baby died afterwards. The patient developed septic shock, with hypotension and bradycardia. She was transferred to the operating theatre to remove the placentas after intubation and then to the intensive care unit where she continued the antibiotic treatment (clindamycin had been added before placental removal). She was transfused and extubated 18 h later. She was put on continuous positive airway pressure and respiratory physiotherapy due to lung oedema. Blood cultures became negative and placenta culture became positive for vaginal flora. She was transferred to the maternity unit 24 h later where she continued the respiratory physiotherapy and the antibiotic treatment was switched to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid orally after 48 h without fever. The histological examination of the placenta showed acute and diffuse choriomnionitis and vasculitis.