A woman in her twenties underwent right carotid body tumor removal at a different hospital 6 years before presentation. During the operation, the right carotid artery was injured and the right common carotid artery and internal carotid artery were replaced with an artificial vessel comprised of expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE, outer diameter of 4 mm). The patient was discharged without any neurological deficits. Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed no obvious stenosis 2 years after the surgery . Furthermore, cervical computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed no obvious stenosis 3 years after surgery .
Four years after the surgery, MRA showed suspicious stenosis in the artificial vessel , and antiplatelet medication (aspirin 100 mg) was administered. Carotid ultrasonography showed intimal thickening with isointense fibrous tissue in the vessel, and the peak systolic velocity (PSV) was 242 cm/s in the most stenotic portion. The patient was referred to our hospital in the same year. The PSV of the stenosis 2 years after the previous examination was increased to 255 cm/s on ultrasonography , and stenosis had clearly progressed. On MRA, the right carotid artery appeared almost occluded . CTA showed that the stenosis was slightly distal to the anastomosis of the artificial vessel . The patient had no neurological symptoms. A cerebral blood flow (CBF) study on SPECT with Diamox stress showed no obvious hemodynamic compromise.
Although the patient was asymptomatic and CBF was maintained, we decided to perform endovascular revascularization with her informed consent because of the risk of long-term hemodynamic stress and the possibility of adhesion after the previous surgery. We planned percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) with a non-compliant balloon to fully dilate the stenosis and then deployed an open-cell stent to prevent restenosis. The common carotid artery was difficult to detect on the cervical MRA ; however, CTA revealed severe stenosis immediately before the treatment.
The patient was treated under local anesthesia and near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) monitoring. An 8Fr long sheath was inserted into the left femoral artery. Heparin was administered at a dose of 5000 units and added to maintain an ACT ≥250. An 8Fr OPTIMO (Tokai Medical Products, Aichi) guiding catheter with a balloon was navigated to the right common carotid artery. Common carotid angiography showed pseudo-occlusion of the stenosis [ and ]. The diameter of the common carotid artery proximal to the stenosis was approximately 4.8 mm. Under proximal flow control with a balloon, the stenosis was easily passed with a carotid Guardwire (Medtronic, Santa Rosa, CA, USA), then we expanded the distal protection balloon. Due to an unsatisfactory expansion, we performed pre-dilation twice with Rx-Genity 3.5 mm × 40 mm (Kaneka Medics, Osaka, Japan) at 8 and 14 atm for 60 s, respectively. Then, we advanced an aspiration catheter and aspirated a large, dark-red thrombus. After aspiration, we deployed a Protage RX stent 8.0 mm × 60 mm (Medtronic, Santa Rosa, CA, USA). Post-dilation was performed with Rx-Genity 4.5 mm × 30 mm at 8 atm for 5 s. In the final image, the stenosis was well dilated, and the common carotid artery and intracranial internal carotid artery were well visualized [ and ]. There was no neurological deficit after treatment and no change in NIRS monitoring during the intervention. No new ischemic lesions were observed on the postoperative magnetic resonance imaging. Carotid ultrasonography showed that the outer diameter of the artificial vessel did not change, but the stenosis inside the artificial vessel was dilated . There was no restenosis as of the 1-year follow-up appointment.