We report the case of a 65-year-old female patient, currently receiving medication for high blood pressure, who consulted our ENT department for an ulcerating lesion of the nasal pyramid.
The history of the disease dates to one year ago, with the appearance of this highly bleeding lesion, without any other associated ENT symptoms, in particular no cervical lymph nodes.
On physical examination, the patient was in good general condition, with a clean, moist tongue. On rhinological inspection, we note an ulcerative lesion covering the entire nasal pyramid and stopping at the peri-orifice region of the nose .
On rhinoscopy, the left nasal cavity showed a wide septal deviation and inferior turbinate hypertrophy with turbino-septal junction, preventing exploration of the rest of the nasal cavity . In the right nasal cavity, septal deviation is also noted, but the inferior and middle meatus are unobstructed . The rest of the physical examination was normal.
As part of the paraclinical examination, a CT scan of the face revealed an ulcerated, budding lesion of the nasal pyramid measuring 38 mm in long axis, which appeared to come into contact with the anterior part of the nasal septum, with no clearly detectable extension to the nasal cavities (, ).
A biopsy of this process was performed, showing a pathological result consistent with an infiltrating basal cell carcinoma .
On the basis of these data, the decision was made to perform a surgical resection after preparing the patient by starting a drug treatment combining antibiotics for 10 days and corticosteroids for 5 days.
Surgery was performed by an ENT specialist in two surgical procedures.
The 1st stage consisted of total surgical removal of the tumor, with a 6-10 mm limit of removal including the anterior part of the septum . The postoperative evolution was excellent, showing positive outcome after 3 months with no tumor recurrence.
The 2nd stage of surgery consists of reconstruction of the nasal pyramid using a frontal flap.
Reconstruction with a forehead flap is scheduled one year after tumor resection surgery. The reason for delaying the 2nd stage surgery is the large size of the tumor, which is not always easy to remove with good safety margins. Reconstruction will therefore be performed 1 year after the primary surgery, making sure that there is no recurrence.
The postoperative evolution was excellent, showing positive outcome after 3 months with no tumor recurrence.