A 44-year-old Hispanic woman presented to the hospital with a six-month history of generalized weakness, weight loss of 40 pounds over a four-month period and a two-week history of progressively worsening dyspnea. She had had hypertension for five years for which she was being treated with lisinopril but had been noncompliant for over three years because of financial constraints. The patient denied any alcohol or illicit drug use and was a lifelong non-smoker.
On admission, her blood pressure was 102/66 mm/Hg, her temperature was 37°C, her respiratory rate was 24 breaths/minute, her oxygen saturation level was 92% on room air and her pulse rate was 88 beats/minute. A physical examination revealed an ill-looking woman with mucosal pallor, generalized wasting and non-tender, rubbery axillary and inguinal lymphadenopathy. There was no evidence of cyanosis, digital clubbing, pitting edema, skin rash or joint deformities. Her abdomen was mildly distended but non-tender, with no organomegaly detected. Dullness to percussion and decreased breath sounds over the left base were noted on the respiratory system examination. The cardiovascular and neurological examinations were unremarkable.
Initial laboratory investigations revealed anemia, leukopenia, elevated blood urea nitrogen and elevated serum creatinine. Urinalysis showed trace proteinuria. Chest radiography revealed bilateral pleural effusions that were determined to be exudative in nature on the basis of thoracocentesis. There was a high index of suspicion for malignancy; however, the results of chest, abdomen and pelvis computed tomography scans and an axillary lymph node biopsy did not confirm this. Human immunodeficiency virus and tuberculin skin tests were negative.
On day four of admission, she developed acute inflammatory arthritis of the elbows and knees. A serological workup revealed high anti-nuclear antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA antibody and anti-Smith antibody titers, with low complement 3 levels. An active sediment was noted on the basis of urinalysis . The patient's renal impairment persisted, and her glomerular filtration rate was estimated to be 53 ml/min/1.73 m2. A review of blood results since admission showed evidence of documented leukopenia on more than two occasions.
On day 5 of admission, the patient experienced dyspnea and pleuritic chest pain. Reaccumulated pleural effusions were noted on a chest radiograph, and an echocardiogram showed evidence of pericardial effusion. Arterial blood gas interpreted in conjunction with a corresponding basal metabolic panel revealed the presence of a non-anion gap hyperkalemic metabolic acidosis consistent with type 4 RTA. Analysis of morning serum sample showed a serum aldosterone level less than 1 ng/dl.
The renal ultrasound obtained showed normal kidney morphology and no evidence of nephrolithiasis. A renal biopsy was done, which revealed diffuse global proliferative and membranous glomerulonephritis. This was consistent with lupus nephritis Renal Pathology Society/International Society of Nephrology 2003 class IV-G(A) and V, moderate activity index 9/24, minimal chronicity index 1/12; minimal tubulointerstitial fibrosis and acute tubular necrosis .
She was diagnosed with SLE complicated by a generalized lupus flare, with a SLEDAI score of 29. Overall during this single admission, she demonstrated six of the 11 American College of Rheumatology criteria used in the diagnosis of SLE.
The patient was treated with a course of hydroxychloroquine and intravenous methylprednisone 1 g daily for three days. Thereafter she was placed on a prednisone, mycophenolate mofetil and hydroxychloroquine regimen. Complete resolution of the renal impairment and type 4 RTA was achieved. She was discharged after 19 days to follow-up in the Rheumatology and Nephrology clinics. Her renal function remained normal at the one-month follow-up clinic visit.