We report a case of 18-year-old female patient, Asian Indian in origin presenting with one-month history of pain right hip, limp and fever off and on. On examination patient was febrile, there was localized tenderness over ilium, no swelling, had restricted internal and external rotation of right hip and an apparent lengthening of 1.5 cm. Patient had no rectal or urinary complaints. Investigations revealed a sedimentation rate of 45 mm, hemoglobin 10.6 gm%, TLC of 12500, PCR for tuberculosis was negative. Plain radiograph pelvis in AP view showed reduced right hip joint space with subtle, hard to pick changes in the right ilium . Digital radiograph pelvis in same view showed reduced right hip joint space with displaced fat planes suggestive of possible effusion. Left hip was normal . Patient was treated with conventional non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, intravenous antibiotics and a below knee skin traction with little benefit to her. MRI pelvis was done which revealed an altered marrow signal of right acetabulum and iliac bone (hypointense on T1W and hyperintense on T2W/STIR images) with a large soft tissue component on its posterior-medial aspect indenting the urinary bladder. The adjacent muscles and intramuscular planes were normal. Both SI joints were normal. The left hip joint was normal. There was no pelvic lymphadenopathy or free fluid . Keeping in view the MRI findings, biopsy was sought. The incision was given over the suspected area and tumor tissue was identified. This tissue was preserved for histopathological examination and sent to the pathologist. The pathologist reported it as densely packed, small, round cells arranged into sheets or lobules separated by fibrovascular connective tissue septa consistent with ES . Immunohistochemistry for CD99 marker was positive. The patient is being treated currently with multidrug chemotherapy using drugs, which include vincristine, doxorubicin, ifosfamide and etoposide. Patient has now been on primary chemotherapy for 5 months and it will be continued for a month more.