A 68-year-old woman presented with a one-year history of progressive weakness in both lower limbs with gait disturbance. Physical examination revealed normal muscle force of both lower limbs and hypoesthesia with a sensory level below T10. Babinski and pathological signs on both sides were weakly positive.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a mass between the T10 and T11 levels causing severe compression of the spinal cord . Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed complete ossification of the mass . 18F-Fluoro-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography CT (18F-FDG PET/CT) scan combined with MRI revealed that the mass was an intradural extramedullary high-density ossified nodule (spinal meningioma)? .
Under general anesthesia, T9 to T12 transpedicular screw fixation was performed. Subsequently, the complete T10 to T11 spinous process and bilateral lamina of vertebra, and part of the spinous process and bilateral lamina of vertebra at the lower margin of T9 were removed under intraoperative neuromonitoring. Dorsal complete ossification of the intradural mass was revealed after full exposure of the dura of the corresponding segment . Then, the dura was cut along the edge of the mass and the mass was found to be heavily adhered to the arachnoid and spinal cord. After the careful separation between the tumor base and the adherent arachnoid, the mass was removed intact and then the dura mater was closed with a dural patch. Histopathological examination of the resected tissue revealed that the mass was a meningioma with diffused psammomatous bodies .
The postoperative examination reported no residual mass compressing the spinal cord . The weakness in both lower limbs improved immediately. However, the patient was hospitalized for five weeks because of complications. This patient developed cerebral fluid leakage within three days after the operation (Day 1:300ml, Day 2: 500ml and Day 3: 450ml) because of the inevitable incision of the dura during the operation. In addition, on the 4th postoperative day, the patient began to have an unexplained low-grade fever, so the patient was treated with antibiotics (ceftriaxone sodium, vancomycin, and meropenem). Finally, the patient was discharged five weeks after the operation with a normal temperature.