A 5-year-old boy was hospitalized for persistent cough for 4 mo.
The patient’s parents reported the occurrence of recurrent cough over the past 4 mo, without hectic fever, expectoration, hemoptysis, night sweats, weight loss, or wheezing. Initially, the patient was diagnosed with cough-variant asthma in the outpatient department because of his impulse oscillometry examination result, which showed that the response frequency was 22.26 Hz before inhalation and decreased by 8.09% after inhalation. The intradermal allergen tests were positive for dust mites (++) and mycetes (++). He was treated with inhaled corticosteroid therapy for 3 mo, but his cough did not improve significantly.
The patient had a clear medical history, without allergies, eczema, or repeated wheezing. He had already received vaccines for bacillus Calmette–Guérin, hepatitis B, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, polio, measles, and epidemic encephalitis B.
The patient lived with his parents since birth and was oriented to his parents. There was no history of psychological stress or substance abuse. There was no family history of hereditary disorders.
The patient had a body temperature of 36.2 °C, heart rate of 95 beats/min, respiratory rate of 27 breaths/min, blood pressure of 92/63 mmHg, and SpO2 level of 98%. He was conscious, able to answer age-appropriate questions accurately, breathing slightly faster, and without circumoral cyanosis. He had bilateral grade 2 tonsils without exudate, no nasal discharge, and no conjunctivitis. His skin was warm and moist, without any lesions. The breathing sounds were rough in both lungs without moist rales or wheezes. No arrhythmia, enlargement of the liver and spleen, or palpable abdominal lump were observed. Physical examination of the nervous system showed no obvious abnormality. No signs of abuse were observed.
The complete blood cell count test showed all components to be within the normal range, with the exception of increased eosinophils (10.5%). The erythrocyte sedimentation rate and blood biochemistry parameters (including analyses of arterial blood gas, electrolytes, liver enzymes, creatinine, myocardial enzyme, and lactic acid) were normal. Serological testing for pathogens gave negative results for hepatitis viruses A, B, and C, herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, rubella virus, tuberculosis, Toxoplasma gondii, human immunodeficiency virus, varicella-zoster virus, Treponema pallidum, respiratory syncytial virus, coxsackievirus, Legionella pneumophila, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, adenovirus, influenza viruses A and B, parainfluenza virus,and Epstein–Barr virus. Blood autoantibodies and tuberculin skin tests showed negative results. Tests for humoral immunity showed normal results.
Chest computerized tomography (CT) showed right upper lobe pneumonia with segmental atelectasis . Abdominal ultrasonography findings were normal. Electrocardiogram results were normal. Accordingly, our first clinical consideration was lobar pneumonia, and treatment with amoxicillin-clavulanate potassium (iv 30 mg/kg once every 8 h) was initiated after sputum culture and blood culture were completed.
During hospitalization, the patient developed expectoration and had no significant improvement in cough symptoms. One week after treatment, although blood culture and sputum culture tests showed negative results, repeat chest CT results showed that the inflammatory lesions in the right upper lung were expanded and new lesions appeared in the right lower lung . The patient was evaluated further by flexible bronchoscopy, histopathology examination, and next-generation sequencing of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. Serological tests for schistosomiasis, lung flukes, cysticercosis, liver flukes, metacercaria, Trichinella spiralis, glucan (G test), and galactomannan (GM test) were performed. The results of flexible bronchoscopy showed bronchial casts and endobronchial inflammation , next-generation sequencing of the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid showed that it was positive for Botrytis cinerea, the serological G test was positive, the serological tests for parasites and the GM test were negative, and histopathology examination revealed an eosinophilic abscess . Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with plastic bronchitis associated with Botrytis cinerea pneumonia, and the subsequent treatment consisted of fluconazole and symptomatic and supportive treatment (detailed below). Following treatment, the patient showed substantial recovery, his cough and expectoration almost disappeared, and he was discharged home.