A 53-year-old man was initially diagnosed with melanoma of the left forearm: nodular melanoma, Breslow thickness 2.4 mm, at least Clark level IV, mitotic rate of 2-4/mm2, no lymphovascular or perineural invasion, and no regression, ulceration, or satellitosis. He underwent wide local excision and sentinel lymph node biopsy with one lymph node with metastatic melanoma (microscopic metastases with 2 foci <1 mm) and no additional involved lymph nodes on completion lymph node dissection of the left axilla. He was followed with close observation and did not receive adjuvant therapy. The patient had consented to an institutional melanoma registry for prospective observation and data collection which was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Pennsylvania. Approximately one and half years later, he presented with recurrence of his melanoma with right groin lymph node involvement and bilateral small lung metastases, BRAF V600 wild-type. He was treated with temozolomide and sorafenib for six cycles with initial stability of disease, then subsequent progression. During this treatment, he was diagnosed with a pulmonary embolus and received enoxaparin for anticoagulation. He was then treated with carboplatin and paclitaxel for 11 cycles. He initially tolerated treatment well and had stable disease for a period of time; however, he subsequently experienced disease progression and developed intolerable peripheral neuropathy. He then participated in a clinical trial for compassionate use of ipilimumab (prior to FDA approval) a year and a half after initial disease recurrence. He received ipilimumab at 3 mg/kg every 3 weeks for three doses. He developed a rash (Grade 2) and intermittent diarrhea (Grade 1) after his first dose of ipilimumab, both of which were managed with supportive therapy, and did not require anti-TNFalpha treatment. Nine weeks after initiation of ipilimumab, he reported new headaches. Given concern for possible hypophysitis, serum hormone levels were evaluated and found to be abnormal – cortisol −1.8 mcg/dl (6–19 mcg/dl), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)-16.1 mIU/ml (1.5-12.4 mIU/ml), luteinizing hormone (LH)-6.3 mIU/ml (1.7-8.6 mIU/ml), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)-0.07 (0.27-4.2 mIU/ml), and testosterone-24 ng/dL (280–800 ng/dL). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain confirmed inflammation and edema of the pituitary gland consistent with a diagnosis of hypophysitis . The fourth dose of ipilimumab was held and prednisone 1 mg/kg/day, testosterone replacement, and thyroid hormone replacement were initiated. His headaches resolved with steroid treatment.
He presented 4 months after initiation of ipilimumab with shortness of breath and acute vision loss in his left eye while on prednisone taper (40 mg daily) and therapeutic enoxaparin. Work up revealed a new small pulmonary embolus. Ophthalmological examination revealed no light perception vision in the left eye along with a left afferent pupillary defect, optic nerve swelling, and retinal whitening . MRI of the brain and orbits, magnetic resonance angiogram (MRA) of the cerebrovascular system, carotid dopplers and an echocardiogram with bubble study were unremarkable without evidence of brain or orbital metastases. Neuro-ophthalmic evaluation revealed findings consistent with an ophthalmic artery occlusion. The vision in his left eye remained at no light perception and he continued on a steroid taper and his enoxaparin was increased to twice daily dosing.
Five months after the initiation of ipilimumab, he described blurred vision in his right eye along with postural amaurosis. Ophthalmologic examination was notable for visual acuity of 20/50 in the right eye with associated right eye decreased color vision, visual field constriction, and optic disc swelling; left eye vision remained no light perception . He was admitted to the hospital and work-up included a normal head computed tomography (CT) scan, brain MRI and magnetic resonance venography (MRV). Two lumbar punctures were performed and revealed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with elevated white blood cells (WBC) (lymphocytic predominance) and protein, but negative for malignancy or infection . He was continued on enoxaparin for a possible embolic or thrombotic etiology of visual loss. The elevated CSF white blood cells and protein raised concern for an inflammatory optic neuropathy and aseptic meningitis, prompting treatment with methylprednisolone one gram intraveneously (IV) daily for three doses followed by an increased prednisone dose. The patient reported subjective improvement in his right eye vision and the optic disc swelling improved. However, three days following his last dose of methylprednisolone, the vision in his right eye worsened and he developed a headache. He was readmitted to the hospital and repeat MRI of the brain and orbits demonstrated circumferential enhancement of the right greater than left intraorbital optic nerves (highlighted by arrows) suggestive of optic neuritis . MRA of the cerebrovascular system did not demonstrate any significant arterial stenoses. Repeat lumbar puncture demonstrated elevated WBCs and protein and was negative for infection or malignancy. The enhancement of the optic nerve and the noninfectious inflammatory CSF findings suggested an immune-mediated optic neuritis related to ipilimumab. He received five days of IV methylprednisolone and the vision in his right eye stabilized. He was discharged on a prednisone taper, but had a third recurrence of blurred vision in his right eye, double vision, and headaches. He was readmitted to the hospital for IV steroids and further evaluation. His vision stabilized with intravenous methylprednisolone 250 mg every six hours for 10 days. Given multiple failed attempts at steroid weaning, he was initiated on mycophenolate mofetil 1000 mg twice daily and then successfully transitioned to prednisone 100 mg daily without changes in vision. He again had no evidence of brain metastasis and stable inguinal lymphadenopathy on repeat imaging.
Fifteen months after the initiation of ipilimumab, he was clinically stable on mycophenolate mofetil and a slow prednisone taper; his ophthalmologic examination was notable for visual acuities of 20/20 in the right eye, and no light perception in the left eye; the right optic disc swelling had resolved, and the left optic nerve remained atrophic. He was again intolerant of further steroid taper with recurrent right eye blurred vision prompting hospital re-admission and another course of intravenous methylprednisolone 250 mg every 6 h. During this stay, he received five treatments with plasmapheresis. A lumbar puncture performed during this hospital stay was negative for malignancy or infection and he was discharged on mycophenolate mofetil 1000 mg twice daily and prednisone 80 mg daily . At this time, his metastatic melanoma was slowly progressing with increasing lymphadenopathy and his visual acuity ranged from 20/20 to 20/40 in the right eye, and no light perception in the left eye. He also experienced several adverse effects from high dose steroids, including catatonic depression, severe deconditioning, and steroid myopathy.
Seventeen months after initiation of ipilimumab, the patient experienced increased fatigue, lightheadedness, and multiple falls at home. Head imaging demonstrated multiple hemorrhagic brain metastases. Anticoagulation was stopped and an inferior vena cava filter was placed. Four days later the patient was found to be obtunded. Comfort measures were initiated and the patient passed away shortly afterward.