A 25-year-old Occidental man was referred to our sarcoma unit after an inadequate “whoops” surgery excision for a 5.3 cm mass of the biceps brachial muscle of his right dominant upper extremity. A histological analysis revealed a high-grade MPNST sarcoma. He had no significant past medical history. He smoked half a pack of cigarettes a day for 5 years. No case of NF1 had been found in his past family history. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan and positron emission tomography (PET) scan work-up for spread were negative, and a postoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. The tumor was staged T2N0M0 according to the TNM classification.
Our multidisciplinary staff decided to start a neoadjuvant radio-chemotherapy treatment, which was urgent in view of the aggressivity of the tumor, the incomplete initial surgery, and the macroscopic residue shown on the MRI. Our patient initially refused this treatment. He came back 5 months later with a voluminous painful and fast-growing mass affecting the anterolateral surface of his arm with a radial paralysis. The tumor worsened and was evaluated T3bN0M0 at this time. He finally accepted the treatment.
Chemotherapy with an anthracycline and ifosfamide, that is Adriamycin (doxorubicin) and Holoxan (ifosfamide), and concomitant radiotherapy were administered. More specifically, four cycles of doxorubicin and ifosfamide, including 3 days of treatment every 21 days, were administered. Regarding radiotherapy, our patient received 50.4 Gray in 28 fractions of 1.8 gray each.
The surgical procedure was planned 6 weeks after the last radiotherapy session . A MRI showed a tumor with a 15 cm long axis and the different ratios of the tumor to the neurovascular elements were specified . The surgery was performed in lateral decubitus. Carcinologic excision was performed “en bloc” removing all tissues surrounding the tumor. A macroscopically complete resection was performed, without fragmentation or visualization of the tumor . The removal of elbow flexor muscles, long head of the biceps muscle, coracobrachialis muscle, anterior brachial muscle, and brachioradial muscle, was necessary. A part of the deltoid muscle and the short head of the triceps were also removed without major consequences to their function. The vascular and nerve pedicles could all be preserved, except the musculocutaneous nerve. The resection was carried out deep down to the bone with removal of the periosteum. Distally, the vessels and nerves were released up to elbow groove and the tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii was preserved. After tumor resection, the tissue defect was extensive .
The skin coverage and elbow flexion restoration were performed by a large homolateral pedicled latissimus dorsi (LD) flap with a large vertical skin island (30 × 12 cm). The LD muscle was harvested with its distal insertion fascia, on the iliac crest, in order to create a neotendon. There was no detachment of the LD muscle from his humeral tendon. A subcutaneous tunnel was made under the remaining skin of his arm and the flap could go from the back to his arm. Reconstruction of the flexion of his elbow was done suturing the remaining tendon of the biceps brachial muscle to the LD flap neotendon. The donor site was closed with high tension because of lack of laxity in this young patient.
The mass was sent to histology, showing a complete excision of the tumor R0 with a minimum margin of 0.5 mm against the humeral impression including the interposition of the periosteum , other margins were: 4 mm opposite the impression of the radial nerve, 9 mm laterally, and more than 10 mm in the other directions.
This high-grade spindle cell and pleomorphic sarcoma had a dual heterologous component of cartilage and striated muscle type and long bundles of nerve appearance in some areas. This was a rare subtype of sarcoma: a malignant triton tumor (MTT) or MPNST with heterologous chondrosarcomatous and rhabdomyosarcomatous heterologous contingent. There was 50% necrosis and 25% viable tumor cells indicating a partial therapeutic response to chemotherapy. No postoperative complication was noticed . Our patient was healed at a 3-week postoperative consultation.
Physiotherapy was started at 6 weeks. At 6 months, he was able to get back to work and physical activity. He recovered a full range of motion of the elbow (video 1). The average active bending of the elbow was 140°. At 2-year follow-up, no recurrence was diagnosed (local MRI and thoracic CT scan).