Recurrence of abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting in a kidney transplant patient.
A 65-year-old man reported the appearance of rectal blood in March 2017 and visited a proctologist. He started local mesalamine therapy for proctitis, but the drug was discontinued a few days later due to abdominal pain and constipation. During the subsequent 6 mo, he presented several times to the emergency department complaining of severe abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting. He related an anxious mood and low energy level in addition to tachycardia and an increase in blood pressure which was no longer well-controlled with his usual therapy. He presented to the emergency room eight times for various complaints : Epigastric pain without mention of mesalamine, agitation and anxiety, thoracic pain, abdominal pain, and precordial pain.
The patient had been treated for hypertension since 1994 and developed ischemic heart disease. His renal function gradually deteriorated over the years due to suspected nephroangiosclerosis and chronic interstitial nephropathy, as ultrasound examination demonstrated small echogenic kidneys. He started hemodialysis in 2008 and was evaluated for renal transplantation; a left nephrectomy was performed for a small incidental renal carcinoma. The histopathologic examination of the nephrectomy specimen revealed angiosclerosis and tubulointerstitial fibrosis. He underwent a deceased-donor kidney transplant in 2015, for which he was treated with tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and methylprednisolone. He developed diabetes mellitus post-transplant and insulin therapy was initiated (see Table ).
The patient had no known family history of porphyria.
The patient was hemodynamically stable with a heart rate of 90 bpm and blood pressure of 160/90 mmHg, but appeared in mild distress. The physical examination revealed an intermittently tender, non-distended abdomen with normal bowel sounds and absent rigidity, rebound, and guarding. The remainder of the physical exami-nation was unremarkable.
Serum levels of hemoglobin, electrolytes, hepatic transaminases, amylase, thyroid function, protein electrophoresis, and C-reactive protein were normal, as was the urine analysis. Renal function was stable with a serum creatinine of 1.2 mg/dL; the urine culture was negative.
Plain X-rays of the abdomen showed distended colon and fecal impaction, and ultrasound revealed that the liver, spleen, pancreas, and transplanted kidney were of normal size and consistency and that the site of the left nephrectomy was occupied by intestinal loops.