A 26-year-old Chinese female was admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University with recurrent abdominal pain for 4 years and splenomegaly for 1 year. Four years ago, she began to suffer from dull recurrent upper abdominal pain, especially while sleeping at night. The pain gradually became more localized to the left subcostal region where an abdominal mass (measuring about 2.0 × 1.5 cm) could be palpable for 1 year. The patient complained that the mass enlarged, with a new measurement of about 4.0 × 3.0 cm, and was accompanied by moderately aggravated pain especially during deep breath over the past month. The mass was later confirmed to be the enlarged spleen by abdominal ultrasonography. Since disease onset she experienced nausea and retching, and recently, sporadic headache and left periorbital pricking and melena. The patient had a past history of excision of two bony lumps of the left ankle and the right knee at the age of 16 and 18 respectively without post-excision detailed pathological classification.
Physical examination revealed that the spleen was palpable 3 cm subcostal on the left anterior axilllary line with solid texture, dull-smooth margin and mild tenderness. In addition, there were two tender soft-tissue masses, perhaps venous malformation, on the lateral side of the right foot Apart from those, firm multiple nodular lesions were found on the extremities, especially on the fingers and toes . The patient informed us that the bony lesions of the hand appeared more than 10 years ago.
Radiography revealed irregularly shaped radiolucent areas with stippled calcification within the tubular bones of both hands and feet, which were diagnosed as enchondromas . CT scan of the upper abdomen demonstrated nodular hyperplasia of the spleen, most likely considered as benign angioma, and some vascular lesions of the left 8th~10th ribs, suspected as hemangiomas, were found as well . Gastroscopy discovered upper-esophageal venous angioma measuring 0.5 × 0.7 cm. Cranial CT showed no abnormalities. Based on these findings, the development of multiple enchondromas in the extremities and the presence of both subcutaneous and visceral vascular lesions, the diagnosis of Maffucci syndrome was established.
The patient underwent a laparoscopic splenectomy. Macroscopically, the excised specimen was measured 14 × 6 × 6 cm, with the excised surface displaying a mass of coalescing red-brown nodules embedded in a dense fibrous stroma .
Microscopically, multifocal ectopic granulomatous reaction and numerous red blood cells were presented, and a mass of coalescing small nodules were composed of slit-like, round or irregular-shaped vascular spaces lined by plump endothelial cells and interspersed by a population of spindly or ovoid cells. Nuclear atypia was minimal, mitotic figures were extremely rare, and necrosis was consistently absent . Immunostaining revealed 3 distinct types of vessels in the angiomatoid nodules: CD34−/CD8−/CD31+ small veins, CD34−/CD8+/CD31+ sinusoids, and CD34+/CD8−/CD31+ capillaries . Furthermore, some endothelial cells expressed CD68 while lacking staining of actin, desmin, S-100 and CD163 . Based on these findings, the diagnosis of sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation (SANT) of the spleen was rendered.