A 50-year-old Caucasian man was admitted with an acute right hemiparesis, affecting his arm, leg and face, and a right homonymous hemianopia. His vascular risk factors included a 25 pack-year smoking history and a previous myocardial infarction. An initial computed tomography (CT) head scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed a left parieto-occipital infarction in the posterior cortical watershed territory. A carotid ultrasound Doppler scan showed a complete occlusion of his left internal carotid artery (ICA) which was confirmed on magnetic resonance angiography . Left carotid dissection was suspected but could not be proven as a precipitant for his arterial occlusion because no intramural haematoma was visible via a standard neck MRI. He was discharged after making a good recovery at 12 days after he was admitted. He was started on aspirin, dipyridamole and simvastatin.
Two months later he was readmitted following a primary focal seizure with secondary generalisation and mild post-ictal right-sided weakness. The results of his routine blood tests, renal function, glucose, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), Chest X-ray, echocardiogram (ECG) and 24-hour ECG were normal. A repeat MRI showed a new infarct in his right anterior cortical watershed territory. He made a reasonable recovery and was independently mobile within one week of admission.
Over the following year he suffered numerous collapses. He described these as comprising right-sided weakness and jerking movements prior to a loss of consciousness. On each occasion he demonstrated good recovery of physical function although subtle cognitive impairment was noted by serial mini-mental state examination on subsequent outpatient visits. A diagnosis of post-stroke epilepsy was made and he was commenced on oral sodium valproate. Despite this he continued to present with recurrent seizures.
A magnetic resonance scan was performed, which confirmed the presence of numerous deep watershed infarcts in addition to his two cortical infarcts. There was persistent occlusion of his left ICA on this imaging. In an attempt to understand the aetiology of our patient's recurrent strokes, we applied a hypercapnia BOLD fMRI technique to assess his cerebrovascular reserve capacity (CVR). The technique is detailed elsewhere . In brief, however, serial magnetic resonance scans sensitised to tissue oxygenation (blood oxygenation level dependent [BOLD] contrast) are obtained during periods of normocapnia and hypercapnia (during inhalation of 10% CO2). Using these images, CVR maps are generated, where an increase in BOLD signal is used as a marker of cerebral vasodilatory capacity.
Our patient demonstrated a significant loss of CO2-induced BOLD reactivity in the hemisphere distal to his carotid occlusion, suggesting maximal compensatory vasodilation at rest . This represents stage 2 cerebral haemodynamic impairment. He was offered an extracranial-intracranial vascular bypass surgery (EC-IC bypass) but declined it.