The patient is a 41-year-old female who presented with a 1-year history of paroxysmal left ear pain and tingling sensation in her tongue. The pain in her ear radiated to the ipsilateral side of her face as well as posteriorly in the distribution of the lesser occipital nerve. She reported associated jaw clenching and allodynia to teeth brushing and mastication. The pain worsened at the end of the day to a severe intensity, at which time there was red discoloration of the ear. The patient alternated between a constant dull aching pain at 5 out of 10 and periods of paroxysmal pain reaching 8 out of 10 on a numerical rating scale and lasting between 1 and 5 consecutive days.
During exacerbations, the patient also complained of dysphagia and dysarthria. Other symptoms included postprandial abdominal pain and diarrhea.
There was a history of sports-related mild traumatic head injury as a young adult and a whiplash involving subluxation of the C4–C5 cervical vertebrae. Past medical history also included mononucleosis, two previous superficial lower extremity venous thromboses postpartum and heterozygous factor V Leiden thrombophilia.
Examination of her cranial nerves revealed diffuse hypoesthesia to touch, pinprick and temperature in the left trigeminal distribution. No intraoral trigger points were identified. There was decreased sensation to touch and pinprick in the area of the greater and lesser occipital nerves. The gag reflex on the left side was absent. Lateral neck flexion to the right was limited with diffuse tenderness on palpation of the left paracervical muscles. Neck compression testing for radiculopathy and facet syndrome using Spurling’s maneuver was able to provoke the patient’s red ear discoloration after a 15-second compression.
The patient’s workup included a 3T cerebral angio-magnetic resonance imaging with contrast, Constructive Interference in Steady State sequence imaging of the circle of Willis and magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical spine. A contact between the superior cerebellar artery and the cisternal portion of the left trigeminal nerve was seen, but without evidence of compression. A chest X-ray was normal. Rheumatological workup showed mildly elevated antinuclear antibodies, but was otherwise inconclusive for collagenosis. Gastrointestinal workup, including food allergy testing, gastroscopy and colonoscopy with biopsies were negative.
Drug trials included acetaminophen, naproxen, tricyclic antidepressant, gabapentinoids, carbamazepine, topical analgesics, bupropion, muscle relaxant, tapentadol, morphine, hydromorphone and methadone. Pharmacotherapy was unsuccessful in this patient. In addition, she developed a multiple drug intolerance syndrome, including a probable Stevens–Johnson with carbamazepine.
She was evaluated by an allergist. Due to the serious nature of side effects, all pain medications had been stopped at least 2 weeks prior to the ultrasound-guided infiltrations described below.
A diet at the patient’s own initiative proved slightly successful in reducing her postprandial abdominal pains.
The patient was initially diagnosed with trigeminal neuralgia. The diagnosis was later revised to great auricular neuralgia, given the distribution of the pain. Additional symptoms were attributed to a dysfunction at the level of the ansa cervicalis.
We initially performed a GAN block using ultrasound guidance . We used a GE Logiq e® Ultrasound machine equipped with a 12 MHz high-frequency transducer. The GAN was identified at its emergence from the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, at the level of the cricoid cartilage located by palpation., Once the hypoechoic round shaped nerve was visualized, a 25G, 50 mm needle was introduced in plane with the ultrasound probe, and we injected a mix of 1 mL 2% xylocaine, 1 mL 0.5% bupivacaine and 1 mL of triamcinolone (40 mg). This technique proved successful in relieving the patient’s paroxysmal earaches for over 1 month with reduction of pain intensity of 60%. The patient reported improvement within 48 hours following nerve block of the GAN. No adverse events were reported.
Three months later, the patient’s pain was back at baseline. We combined the GAN block with ultrasound-guided facet blocks of the C2 and C3 spinal nerves as well as lesser occipital nerve block. We injected 2 mL of the same analgesic mix at each infiltration point. The combination of these blocks reduced not only the intensity of her paroxysmal ear pain, but also the duration of exacerbations from 1 to 5 days to <24 hours and the background pain by >50%. The relief was more prolonged, lasting for over 2 months.