In February 2018, an 8-year-old Istrian Pramenka ewe from a flock counting 500 sheep served by 16 different rams delivered a male lamb weighing 6 kg at term by caesarean section. The lamb died in less than a minute. At necropsy, severe craniofacial deformations were found. The lamb had dorso-ventrally deformed and shortened nasal region, very small oral aperture (microstomia), the tongue was missing (aglossia), and the hard palate was clefted (palatoschisis) . The lower jaw was not found (agnathia). The auricular pinnae were located at the medioventral part of the head and neck (synotia) and without communication to the external auditory canal (meatus acusticus externus) . Between the pinnae, there was an oval opening, measuring 1 × 0.5 cm, into a 2 cm long blind tubular structure. A later computed tomography (CT) scanning (Somatom Scope CT scanner, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) of the head revealed deformed frontonasal bones and hyoid bones in abnormal position . The oesophagus had a 1 cm long segmental stenosis and a proximal cystic dilatation. Additionally, two thin-walled cysts filled with yellow, translucent fluid were found on the surface of the liver. The brain and other organs were normally developed. The lungs had diffuse congenital atelectasis. Specimens of the brain, lung, heart, kidney, liver, adrenal gland, thymus and spleen were sampled for histopathology, fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, processed by routine methods, embedded in paraffin and sectioned at 4 µm and stained with haematoxylin and eosin. Histopathological examination revealed normally developed organs, complete pulmonary atelectasis, mild generalised congestion, focal haemorrhages in the meninges and thymus and mild hydropic degeneration of the hepatocytes. The gross lesions and CT imaging findings were consistent with otocephaly.
Genomic DNA of the lamb’s skin and from EDTA blood of all sampled adults including the dam and 16 possible fathers was isolated using standard protocols. All 18 animals were genotyped for single nucleotide variants (SNV) on Illumina OvineSNP50 BeadChip array. PLINK v1.9 was used for quality control of the data and parentage confirmation. Pruning based on missing genotype calls per marker (> 10%) resulted in 41,571 markers in the final dataset. Paternity status was checked for all 16 potential sires of the affected lamb and resulted in the exclusion of 15 rams and validation of a single ram as the sire. Subsequently, whole-genome sequencing of the affected lamb and both parents was carried out. Therefore, Illumina TruSeq PCR-free libraries were prepared for sequencing 2 × 150 bp paired-end reads on an Illumina HiSeq 3000 instrument. Read mapping to the Oar_rambouillet_v1.0 ovine reference genome assembly and variant calling and annotation was done as described previously . The genotypes of the affected lamb were compared with both parents and 54 additional sheep genomes of various breeds that had been sequenced in the course of other ongoing studies (European Nucleotide Archive accession no. PRJEB30931). Due to the strong effect of the mutation, it was hypothesized that a loss-of-function variant affecting the coding sequence of a gene most likely would be responsible for the disease. In addition, it was hypothesized that the mutant allele of the causative variant should be completely absent from all other 54 sheep genomes in the control sample set. Adopting an assumption of a possible recessive mode of inheritance, 12 missense variants were found to be homozygous in the affected offspring and heterozygous in the parents (Additional file ). Genome-wide filtering for protein-changing sequence variants in the whole genome that were present heterozygous only in the affected lamb and homozygous wild type in the genomes of both parents, resulted in four variants representing putative de novo sequence variants (Additional file ). The list of private protein-changing variants includes a de novo heterozygous nonsense variant in OTX2 (Chr7: 71478714G > A), a gene which is associated with otocephaly in people. The Integrative Genomics Viewer (IGV) was used for visual inspection of the identified variants and confirmed that the variant was absent in both parents without any evidence for low-level mosaicism in any of the parents . Therefore, this variant was finally considered as the candidate causal mutation.
The variant was predicted to produce an early premature stop codon truncating more than 70% of the OTX2 open reading frame (p.Arg89*) and resulting in a significantly shorter protein lacking the C-terminal OTX1-transcription factor binding domain of the protein . In comparison to the normal 289 amino acid-long OTX2 protein, also the homeobox domain of the protein is truncated , which alters this evolutionary highly conserved and functionally important protein region . Therefore, the OTX2: XM_015097088.2:c.265C > T variant most likely leads to a complete loss-of-function.