A 48-year-old German man was admitted with a large scrotal tumor. He had noticed a tumor mass in his right groin 10 years prevoiusly. After a decade of steady state, the tumor was growing rapidly in both his groins and perineum . Our patient was unable to sit because of pain and tumor mass. After a histological examination, a giant condyloma acuminatum was diagnosed. On examination, the patient was in good condition (Karnofsky-Index: 90%, size: 189cm, weight: 75kg). Further examination showed enlarged groin lymph nodes on both sides and a large cauliflower-like, polycyclic scrotal tumor reaching from pubic eminence to anal fissure (width: 20cm, height: 18cm, depth: 25cm). His medical history reported fatigue, but no neuromuscular weakness, polyuria, polydipsia, nausea, vomiting or psychotic phenomena. Arrhythmia was not observed. A supplement of cholecalciferol was not taken. His laboratory results were unremarkable except for a hypercalcemia (Ca2+= 3.64mmol/l). A lower than normal level (LNL) of parathyroid hormone (PTH) and phosphate (parathyroid hormone 9.9 pg/mL, LNL 15 pg/mL; phoshate 2.2mg/dL, LNL 2.7mg/dL) was found . His bone scan was normal and a computed tomography scan of his pelvis did not show any evidence for bone affection . Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was excluded.
A reactive hypoparathyroidism with low phosphate caused by paraneoplastic hypercalcemia was suspected. After a single dose of pamidronate (60mg), saline infusions (3000mL/day) and diuretics (60mg furosemide/day) serum calcium was normalized, and the patient was discharged after six days. In follow-up examinations, slightly elevated calcium levels without clinical significance were detected. Due to the size of the tumor, a combined neoadjuvant therapy which involved radiotherapy of the tumor area up to 45Gy (gray) with a single dose of 1.8Gy plus acitretin was conducted (50mg daily for 43 days). The intensity-modulated radiation therapy technique (IMRT technique) was used. During this therapy, the patient was readmitted with fatigue and elevated calcium levels (3.36mmol/L). His serum phosphate level was normal. Our patient was again treated with a single dose of pamidronate (60mg), infusions and diuretics and discharged three days later. The neoadjuvant treatment resulted in a significant regression of the tumor mass. Pain while sitting had gone and calcium levels remained within normal range. During follow-up examinations no further episodes of hypercalcemia occured.