A 61-year-old male presented at our emergency department with a swelling of the left side of the neck that increased over a period of 4–6 weeks and hoarseness. Clinical examination revealed a clearly visible enlarged, hard, and fixed left thyroid gland. Fiberoptic laryngoscopy was able to exclude primary neoplasia of the vocal cords, but confirmed paresis of the left vocal cord. Ultrasound displayed a thyroid gland with a total volume of 60 ml (left lobe: 48 ml; right lobe: 12 ml) as well as a large hypoechoic nodule with microcalcification and irregular margins in the left lobe measuring 40 × 39 × 52 mm, which was highly suspicious for a malignant thyroid tumor . Laboratory findings were as follows: TSH 1.50 µIU/ml (reference: 0.27–4.20 µIU/ml), free T4 11.9 pg/ml (reference: 9.1-0.19.1 pg/ml), free T3 3.5 ng/l (reference: 2.6–5.1 ng/l), thyroglobulin-antibody (Anti-Tg) < 20 IU/ml (reference: < 40 IU/ml), thyroid-peroxidase-antibody (Anti-TPO) 16.2 IU/ml (reference: < 35 IU/ml), TSH receptor antibody < 0.3 IU/l (reference: < 1.7 IU/l), calcitonin < 2 pg/ml (reference: < 8 pg/ml).
Although fine-needle aspiration with cytology is the gold standard in the evaluation of suspicious thyroid nodules, we decided against it because of the new onset hoarseness suggestive of a locally invasive process and ultrasound findings indicative of a rapidly growing thyroid carcinoma, and performed a left hemithyroidectomy with central lymphadenectomy under curative intend. Intraoperative invasion of the esophageal muscle was noted, requiring tangential resection of the muscle. Importantly, all resection margins were free of tumor on intraoperative frozen section examination. Histopathological examination revealed a partial necrotic mesenchymal tumor with capsular invasion and blood vessel infiltration that spread into the perithyroidal soft tissue. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for vimentin, SMA and CD10, and partially positive for CD68/KP1, but negative for Cdk4, MDM2, Bc12, Muc-4, S100, desmin, CD34, EMA, CK AE1/3, TTF1 and TLE-1. In addition, Ki67 labeling index was up to 80% in tumor hotspot areas and immunohistochemistry showed a strong expression of CD99 in myxoid and more densely packed tumor areas, whereas staining of the remaining thyroid follicles was negative. Thus, the combination of morphological and immunohistochemical aspects indicated a high-grade MFS . Moreover, a total of 8 lymph nodes were resected, and a 0.1-cm lymph node metastasis of the tumor was detected in one lymph node. Importantly, final histopathology confirmed the complete resection of the tumor with negative resection margins.
Given the diagnosis of highly aggressive MFS and due to its untypical localization, F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) scan was performed 2 weeks after the operation to find a primary localized elsewhere and to complete tumor staging. Unfortunately, PET/CT-scan excluded a primary somewhere else in the body but demonstrated local recurrence with a 9.6 × 7.1 × 9 cm left cervical tumor mass expanding from the esophagus to the carotid sheath that infiltrated the trachea, the front-edge of the lower cervical vertebrae and the higher thoracic vertebrae . In addition, a 3-mm measuring nodule in the medial right lung lobe and locoregional lymph node metastases were detected.
After discussing the case in our multidisciplinary tumor board, an urgent radiotherapy followed by chemotherapy with doxorubicin and ifosfamide was recommended. The patient was admitted to our department of radiation oncology to receive 70 Gy of radiation in fractions of 2 Gy five times a week in a time frame of 7 weeks. Between the radiation sessions, he twice developed dyspnea, supraglottic edema and inspiratory stridor and had to be admitted to the intensive care unit. Both times the symptoms were alleviated with corticosteroid therapy, tracheotomy was avoided, and the patient was able to continue its radiation treatment. Two months after surgery and after the first 30 Gy of radiation, a CT scan of the thorax demonstrated a tumor mass in the ventral upper thorax infiltrating the larynx, esophagus and left common carotid artery . Unfortunately, due to the tumor's progression, its non-resectability and significantly reduced general condition of the patient, palliative care was initiated.