A 14 year old girl developed diarrhoea and vomiting and presented to hospital four days after symptom onset following a fainting episode. She had also experienced sharp colicky pains in her abdomen. She had been on holiday in the United Kingdom prior to the episode.
The patient had developed nephrotic syndrome at age 13 with a renal biopsy showing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. She also had mild asthma, menorrhagia and pulmonary stenosis (diagnosed on echocardiogram).
Her medications included tacrolimus, enalapril, atrovastatin, omeprazole, penicillin-V, levothyroxine and ferrous fumarate. The tacrolimus had been stopped a day before the start of illness as it had not produced any improvement in renal function or reduction in proteinuria. The tacrolimus had been commenced 14 months earlier at a dose of 5 mg twice daily. A tacrolimus level had last been assayed 2 months before onset of her illness. This was 7.3 µg l−1 i.e. within the normal therapeutic range.
On admission, she was felt to be fluid-depleted with mild dehydration and after initial treatment with a bolus of 500 ml of normal saline in the emergency department, was commenced on intravenous fluids in view of abdominal pain and vomiting. Her renal function was deranged with an acute kidney injury score of 2. Urea was 22.8 mmol l−1, previously having being in the range of 6.5–11.8 mmol l−1 and creatinine was raised to 157 µmol l−1, previously having being in the range of 70–95 µmol l−1. Liver function tests were normal. White blood cell count was normal (6.1×109 l−1). Enalapril was stopped in view of these results. She improved after 24 h of maintenance IV fluid therapy with 0.9 % saline and 5 % dextrose, renal function returning to previous levels (urea 16.7 mmol l−1, Creatinine 94 µmol l−1) and she was discharged. Subsequently, Cryptosporidium was detected on stool microscopy. This was confirmed to be Cryptosporidium hominis by PCR at the national reference laboratory. The sample was negative for all other pathogens tested for, including Escherichia coli 0157, Campylobacter, Salmonella and Shigella. Following discharge she continued to have some episodes of diarrhoea but no vomiting. She re-presented 19 days later with significant abdominal pain and infrequent small vomits which were non bilious, her diarrhoea had resolved.
On examination she had epigastric tenderness but no hepatomegaly. Her perfusion was adequate with a capillary refill time <2 s, pulse rate of 89, blood pressure was 104/58, both within the normal range for her age. However, her peripheral pulses were poor. She was commenced on maintenance intravenous fluids with 0.9 % saline and 5 % dextrose. Liver function tests were noted to be deranged with raised aspartate transaminase (451 IU l−1), alanine transaminase (267 IU l−1), gamma-glutamyl transferase (115 IU l−1) and lactate dehydrogenase (853 IU l−1). Her renal function showed raised urea (10 mmol l−1) and creatinine (72 µmol l−1) which were above baseline but within her usual range. Her liver function continued to deteriorate over the next 24 h (peak aspartate transaminase 1062 IU l−1, alanine transaminase 1292 IU l−1, lactate dehydrogenase 882 IU l−1, gamma-glutamyl transferase 209 IU l−1). An ultrasound showed a thickened gall bladder but otherwise normal liver and bile duct.
After discussing the history and results with specialist paediatric hepatologists who, in view of the facts, that her stool was positive for Cryptosporidium hominis, she had worsening liver function tests and ultrasound evidence of cholangitis, recommended a three day oral course of nitazoxanide 500 mg twice daily. Following this, her liver function tests rapidly improved, returning almost to baseline after 4 days. Her appetite returned to normal and her abdominal symptoms resolved.