A 72-year-old woman presented with upper abdominal pain for more than 3 days and was admitted to the hospital. The patient had a history of hypertension and pacemaker implantation; therefore, the use of oral antihypertensive drugs and blood pressure control were acceptable Physical examination revealed that the patient’s skin and sclera were moderately yellowish, with radiating pain in the shoulder and back. Obstructive jaundice was diagnosed upon admission. Abnormal prothrombin, cancer antigen 19-9, and alpha-fetoprotein levels were within the normal range; however, the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level increased to 8.41 ng/mL; total bilirubin level increased to 180.14 μmol/L, and direct bilirubin level increased to 125.84 μmol/L. Computed tomography (CT) enhancement of the upper abdomen revealed gallstones and dilated bile ducts. Endoscopic nasobiliary drainage was considered due to high total bilirubin levels; however, duodenal stenosis resulted in the failure of nasobiliary duct placement. An electronic duodenoscope showed irregular bulging of the nipple, poor biopsy elasticity, and nipple occupancy. Biopsy pathology suggested ampullary adenocarcinoma. After PTCD was placed and treated for obstructive jaundice, laparoscopic-assisted pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed under general anesthesia on June 22, 2020. The tumor tissue was sent for pathological examination, which indicated moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma . The size of the tumor is 2.0*1.5 cm, and the tumor is infiltrated into the full thickness of the duodenal wall, pancreas, and common bile duct. Therefore, the patient was stratified as T3bN0M0 and IIB stage. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed the following: HER-2 (-), MLHI (+), MSH2 (+), MSH6 (+), PMS2 (+), EP-CAM (+), P53(-), Ki-67 (40%+), CK (+), CEA (+), CK7 (+), CK19 (+), CK20 (-), and CDX2 (weak+).
The adjuvant chemotherapy regimen of FOLFOX was started on August 24, 2020, postoperatively. The regimen was oxaliplatin (150 mg intravenous [IV], D1) + calcium levofolinate (100 mg IV, D1–D5) + fluorouracil (750 mg IV, D1–D5) for two cycles. The patient was admitted to our department on November 15, 2020, to continue the FOLFOX regimen. Re-examination on December 27, 2020, revealed multiple new liver metastases on enhanced CT of the upper abdomen .
Owing to the poor effect of the patient’s chemotherapy, we tested the patient’s sample again. The sample was subtyped first by H&E staining and then by the evaluation of an IHC panel composed of CK20, CDX2, MUC1, MUC2, and MUC5AC . The IHC results are CK20 (-), CDX2 (-), MUC1 (-), MUC2 (-), and MUC5AC (-) . Based on the H&E and IHC evaluations, the pathologists concluded that the patient’s sample was of the PB subtype.
Therefore, the chemotherapy regimen was changed to gemcitabine and S-1 for 3 weeks as a cycle. Gemcitabine (1000 mg/m2) was administered intravenously on the first and the eighth day of each cycle, and S-1 (40 mg) was administered orally, once in the morning and once in the evening. The medication was stopped for 1 week after 14 consecutive days of oral administration. After the patient regularly received three cycles of chemotherapy, CT enhancement on March 22, 2021, showed that the lesions had significantly decreased in size . The CEA and CA125 levels continued to decline after changing the chemotherapy regimen . Neutropenia was present during the chemotherapy, but the situation improved with G-CSF treatment.