A 54-year-old Arab Jordanian woman who had a history of breast cancer 11 years prior to her current complaint, presented in 2012 with a left breast mass due to recurrence of her cancer. The mass of the recurrent cancer was excised and chemotherapy with docetaxel, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide was started. However, in October 2012 and 7 days after the second cycle, she was admitted because of fever, chills, and right lower quadrant pain of 3 days’ duration. Her physical examination showed epigastric and right lower quadrant tenderness and her white blood cell count (WBC) was 1.28×109/L (neutrophils 10 %). Therefore, she was treated with imipenem with moderate improvement and was discharged after 4 days on cefixime orally.
Later, and after the third cycle of chemotherapy which consisted of docetaxel and cyclophosphamide, she was admitted again for fever. Her laboratory tests were unremarkable except for hemoglobin of 7.9 g/dL, WBC 2.6×109/L (neutrophils 15 %), and platelets of 161×109/L. During her stay, however, she complained of left hip and knee pain. Her examination showed tenderness over her great trochanter with full range of movement. Therefore, a dedicated left hip magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), without pelvic cuts, was performed and was reported as normal. Her blood and urine cultures remained negative. She was treated with imipenem and vancomycin and was later discharged after 8 days of hospital stay.
In December 2012, before receiving the fourth cycle of chemotherapy, she developed fever, chills, and night sweats. Her physical examination showed that she was ill with temperature of 38.7 °C and pulse rate of 90/minute and her laboratory tests showed WBC of 13.5×109/L (neutrophils 73 %). An abdomen computed tomography (CT) was subsequently performed, 50 days after onset of symptoms, and showed large bilateral psoas abscesses: the right measuring 13×8×5 cm and the left 9×5×3.5 cm . Therefore, a bilateral CT-guided percutaneous drainage (PCD) was inserted. Culture from the pus grew MRSA which was sensitive to vancomycin, gentamicin, tigecycline, levofloxacin, erythromycin, clindamycin, and chloramphenicol by disk diffusion test. A lumbosacral MRI with pre- and post-contrast sagittal sequences showed no evidence of spondylodiscitis. A transthoracic echocardiogram was normal. She denied unsafe sexual practice, recent travel, trauma, alcohol, or recreational drug use.
After 24 hours of drainage, she became afebrile, was able to move her hip without pain, and had dramatic improvement. She was treated with vancomycin 1 gm administered intravenously every 12 hours for 1 week which was then switched to teicoplanin 400 mg administered intramuscularly once daily as an out-patient for another 3 weeks. One week after drainage, the catheters were removed and she went home. She received her fourth cycle of chemotherapy (docetaxel and cyclophosphamide) after 4 weeks of drainage without complications and later on completed another three cycles of chemotherapy. At follow up of 18 months, she was doing well and had no evidence of recurrence of infection on repeat CT imaging.