An 82-year-old Japanese woman presented with hemorrhagic shock. In the primary hospital, she was diagnosed with a hemorrhagic pancreatic pseudocyst on computed tomography (CT), and then transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE) was performed. However, hemostasis was not obtained, and the patient was transferred to our hospital for close examination and treatment. Laboratory examination showed a red blood cell count of 401 * 104/µl, a platelet count of 39.4 * 104/µl, a white blood cell count of 13,300/µl, an aspartate aminotransferase level of 806 U/L, an alanine aminotransferase level of 443 U/L, a lactate dehydrogenase level of 736 U/L, an alkaline phosphatase level of 2664 U/L, a γ-glutamyl transpeptidase level of 545 U/L, a pancreatic-type amylase level of 66 U/L, a C-reactive protein level of 1.35 mg/dl, a carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level of 2.2 ng/ml, and a carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level of 217.5 U/ml. Mild anemia, inflammation, and elevated CA19-9 and pancreatic-type amylase levels were revealed. The patient had a history of surgery for CBD in the 1950s. However, the details of the surgical procedure are unknown. There was no history of pancreatic disease or drinking.
Enhanced CT at our hospital showed high-density collection, which indicated rather flesh blood and pseudoaneurysm within the cystic lesion measuring 50 mm in the pancreatic head . The gallbladder had already been resected, and the intestinal tract, which was suspected to be the lifted jejunum, was adjacent to the cystic lesion . Angiography was reperformed for diagnosis and treatment at our hospital on the day of admission, and extravasation from the pseudoaneurysm measuring 11 mm in the peribiliary vascular plexus (PBP) branched from the proper hepatic artery was recognized. The PBP was embolized as selectively as possible with n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate (NBCA), and hemostasis was obtained . The clinical course after TAE was uneventful and no liver dysfunction occurred. Based on the CT findings, interventional radiology (IVR), and considerations that IDS was the standard operation for CBD in the 1950s, the cause of hemorrhage shock was determined to be due to hemobilia of the remaining dilated bile duct after IDS.
After the general condition of the patient improved, resection of the extrahepatic bile duct with bilioenteric reanastomosis was performed to prevent rehemorrhage 16 days after TAE. The operation performed 62 years ago was determined as IDS in which side-to-side anastomosis was made with the lifted jejunum and dilated bile duct in a Roux-en-Y fashion . The resected extrahepatic bile duct presented severe adhesions due to chronic inflammation. During dissection around the dilated bile duct, special attention was paid not to damage the right hepatic artery by checking its pulsation with palpation and ultrasonic probe. Since the inflammation around the dilated bile duct was severe, the dissection between the bile duct wall and the pancreas head was troublesome. For fear of insufficient closure of the biliary stump, complete dissection of the bile duct was abandoned, and the anal stump of the common bile duct was closed slightly caudal to the hemorrhagic point which was identified by the clot on the inner lumen of the dilated bile duct. Reanastomosis with the oral stump of the bile duct and the elevated jejunum used for the prior surgery was performed. Although a postoperative pancreatic fistula (Clavien–Dindo classification II) developed, the patient had an almost uneventful postoperative course. Postoperative recovery was relatively slow due to the patient's advanced age. The patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital 28 days after surgery, including a 1-week waiting period. After follow-up for 2 years, there were no symptoms of rehemorrhage or cholangitis.
Resected specimen of extrahepatic bile duct was severely inflamed, and was processed into sequential sections for the pathological examinations. Carcinoma and scattering ulcerative lesions in the bile duct mucosa were microscopically and pathologically diagnosed on these sections. Obstruction with embolic material used in TAE was observed in the ruptured artery, and hemorrhage was revealed in the bile duct lumen. The hemorrhage site was accompanied by vascular proliferation and severe inflammation that were considered to have existed before the hemorrhage . As for the ruptured artery, the loss of elastic fibers was recognized and suggested that an aneurysm might have been present. Additionally, incidental CIS was found at a distance from hemorrhage site on the membrane of the bile duct. The patient was diagnosed with well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, TisN0M0, pStage0, R0 .