A 27-year-old white male patient with Marfan syndrome was admitted to Rouen University Hospital to undergo a scheduled ascending aorta replacement due to a 46 mm aneurysm in the context of family history of aortic dissection . The patient did not have any other past medical history or baseline medications. Early after extracorporeal circulation weaning, the patient developed refractory cardiogenic shock with biventricular systolic dysfunction, requiring veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation implantation. Post-surgery coronary angiogram was normal, and the most likely diagnosis was post-cardiotomy severe biventricular dysfunction due to suboptimal heart protection.
After 24 h, there was no cardiac or haemodynamic improvement despite intensive care, including intravenous Levosimendan. Therefore, the patient was put on the emergent heart transplant waiting list. After 10 days without an appropriate eligible donor, a SynCardia temporary TAH (SynCardia, Tucson, AZ, USA) was implanted as a bridge to transplantation.
Two months after TAH implantation, the patient presented with a high-grade fever, with leucocytes and C-reactive protein elevation (23 G/L and 412 mg/L, respectively). Blood cultures were positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus Aureus, and the patient was put on intravenous Daptomycin and Gentamicin. After 48 h, both fever and biological inflammation were persistent while the sternotomy lower part demonstrated skin reopening and leakage. Redo surgery was performed for mediastinitis suspicion.
After 10 days of effective antibiotic therapy, fever persisted while repeated blood cultures were still negative. Moreover, it was associated with acute respiratory failure syndrome. Further physical examination revealed no further abnormalities.
The differential diagnoses were cardiogenic pulmonary oedema, ventilator-associated pneumonia, pulmonary embolism, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) secondary to bacterial or viral infection including severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2).
Chest X-ray showed a diffuse alveolo-interstitial syndrome and blood gas showed severe hypoxaemia (PaO2 47 mmHg, pH:7.48, PaCO2 35 mmHg). Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram showed diffused peripheral opacities (frosted glass infiltrate and ‘crazy paving’), pulmonary condensation with atelectasis, pleural effusion without pulmonary embolism, which was compatible either with the diagnosis of coronavirus disease 2019 or any another infectious pneumonia . Since echocardiography was not feasible and brain natriuretic peptide level not interpretable with the TAH, the TAH external device was interrogated and did not demonstrate low cardiac output or high filling pressure. Thus, the diagnosis of cardiogenic pulmonary oedema was ruled-out.
Blood cultures, bronchial sampling and pneumococcal and legionella antigenuria were negative. Finally, reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) assay was positive for SARS-CoV-2 and a SARS-CoV-2 ARDS diagnosis was retained, also probably favoured by recent mediastinitis.
High-flow oxygen therapy was initiated in addition to intravenous corticosteroids (7 mg once daily for 10 days). While the clinical response was initially favourable, the patient deteriorated 7 days after disease onset occurred and the patient was intubated (PaO2/FiO2 ratio 39). After 48 h of follow-up, PaO2/FiO2 ratio dramatically decreased from 235 to 110, and the patient was placed in the prone position. After two prone position sessions without deteriorating TAH function or global haemodynamic, the PaO2/FiO2 ratio reached 262 followed by progressive ventilatory parameter improvement . Four months after TAH implantation and 5 weeks after SARS-COV-2 onset, the patient received a successful heart transplantation.
Two months after the heart transplantation, the patient has been discharged, and he is currently at home with a normal 27-year-old man quality of life. Patient’s therapy and vital parameters at discharge are provided in .