A 64-year-old female patient presented to our hospital with a vulvar mass. Over the previous 10 years, the patient noticed a slowly-growing mass in the left labia majora. Her vital signs were normal.
Physical examination showed a firm, painless and immobile mass in the labia majora with an extension to the Mons pubis in size of 7 × 4cm. laboratory tests were normal. Surgical history showed that the patient had had a recurrence of vulvar tumors in the past. In 2000, The first mass was in Bartholin’s gland. It was excised in 2007, and the histopathologic examination revealed Chondroid Syringoma (mixed tumor of the skin). There was a proliferation of tubules and cystic structures lined by double-layered epithelium and filled sometimes with eosinophilic material and embedded in an abundant stroma made up of mucoid material and fibrous connective tissue sometimes hyalinised. After one year, a recurrence happened in the labia majora. The patient underwent a repeat excision, and the histologic examination revealed Clear Cell Hidradenoma, where it showed a lobular glandular proliferation of cuboid cells with no anaplasia. She also had benign breast lumpectomy and Cholecystectomy. Her medical history was unremarkable. Transvaginal Ultrasound revealed a heterogeneous, regular, hypervascular mass that is located under the skin directly. The Ultrasound’s mass dimensions were 4.2 8 cm. The abdominal and pelvic multi-slice CT scan revealed a 3.8 × 7.2 cm heterogeneous, well contrast-enhancing, high-density area located on the right side of the left labia majora with an extension to the anterior border of the perineum. CT scan also showed a low-density focus in the left hepatic lobe that is suspected to be a simple cyst or Haemangioma. The mass was excised and sent to the Pathology department. Grossly, it was a 7 × 3 × 4 cm, grey-coloured tumor and the conclusion of the histopathologic examination was Chondroid Syringoma. After 3 months of follow-up, the patient had another recurrence in the Left Labia minora close to the fourchette. It was excised, and the histopathologic examination revealed Adenoid Cystic Carcinoma.
Histopathology showed proliferation of uniform small cells having dark, compact nuclei and scant cytoplasm, reveals some mitotic figures.
There are epithelial components that made up of elongated branching tubular structures with two cell layers. The stromal components are made up of chondroid to fibrous/hyaline stroma . the patient underwent 25 sessions of bilateral radiotherapy, one session per day, 5 days a week, for a month and a half. The radiotherapy was performed on the perineum. A new CT scan was ordered after the radiotherapy, and the results revealed no metastases. Due to the repeated recurrence, it is believed that the first three recurrences were misdiagnosed and were malignant tumors instead of benign ones. Unfortunately, immunohistochemistry could not be performed due to sanctions and lack of resources in the case's country.