A 56-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital with a 4-year history of discomfort during swallowing. His medical history was unremarkable. A physical examination revealed no abnormality. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed a diverticulum filled with food residue just under the esophageal orifice . An esophagogram revealed an 18 × 10 × 12-mm diverticulum at the left side of the cervix . Contrast-enhanced cervical computed tomography (CT) showed an air-contained diverticulum arising from behind the left lobe of the thyroid . The diverticulum was diagnosed as ZD based on these endoscopic and radiographic findings.
The patient underwent transcervical diverticulectomy under general anesthesia. He was placed in the supine position with neck extension. The cervical esophagus was accessed through a 6-cm left oblique incision on the anterior border of the left sternocleidomastoid muscle . The carotid artery was retracted laterally. The esophagus was detected at the medial side of the carotid artery, and the diverticulum was exposed by dissecting the layer of the prevertebral fascia. The diverticulum was carefully dissected toward the orifice and found to actually arise from the left wall of the esophagus. In detail, this diverticulum protruded from the level of the cricoid cartilage and below the cricopharyngeal muscle. This area is compatible with the Killian–Jamieson space, the muscular gap created between the esophageal longitudinal muscle and cricopharyngeal muscle . Therefore, we diagnosed the diverticulum as KJD during the operation.
The diverticulum was transected longitudinally using a linear stapler at the level of the orifice under endoscopy . We preserved the cricopharyngeal muscle and the left recurrent nerve and confirmed the function of the recurrent nerve via intra-operative neuro monitoring (IONM) . The staple line was buried and reinforced with absorbable suture. The histopathological diagnosis of the specimen was pseudodiverticulum without a muscular layer, compatible with KJD. No evidence of malignancy was found.
The postoperative course was uneventful, without vocal cord paralysis. Barium esophagography on postoperative day 3 confirmed that there was no leakage or remnant diverticulum. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 7 with a good food intake. At 2 months after surgery, he remains asymptomatic without recurrence of the diverticulum or stenosis at the surgical site.