This case concerns a 76-year-old Caucasian male with a medical history including idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), atrial fibrillation, arterial hypertension, obesity (BMI 36kg/m2), and a 5–10 pack-per-year smoking history.
A left upper lobe pulmonary nodule of 12.4 mm was discovered in March 2019 following symptoms of coughing . A PET scan showed an hypermetabolism of the left upper lobe pulmonary nodule (SUVmax: 3.29) and an intense hypermetabolic focus in the left interlobular lymph node (SUVmax: 5.55) . The rest of the spreading assessment was negative.
A left upper lobectomy with mediastinal lymph node dissection by lateral thoracotomy was performed on April 3, 2019. Anatomopathological examination of the surgical specimen prompted the diagnosis of primary invasive pulmonary adenocarcinoma, associated with a sarcomatoid contingent with spindle cells (10%) of 1 cm, not infiltrating the visceral pleura, and complete exeresis, but with the presence of endolymphatic tumor emboli. PDL1 was 70%. Six metastatic lymph nodes and 9 lobar and peribronchial lymph nodes were present. No mediastinal lymph nodes were involved. The tumor was classified pT1aN1M0, stage IIB (TNM 8th edition).
The patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin AUC 5 and Vinorelbine 25.00 mg/m2, for which he received four courses from June 6 to August 30, 2019, instead of taxol-carboplatin because he did not want an alopecia-causing treatment. At the end of the adjuvant treatment (September 2019), the patient was in complete remission for 5 months. In February 2020, the CT scan revealed a mediastinal lymph node progression (RECIST 1.1) with a 21 mm adenopathy in front of the aortic arch and a second one of 18 mm in the pretracheal space . At that time, a complementary molecular analysis by next-generation sequencing (NGS) was realized on the initial surgical specimen. A c.3082+3A>T mutation in the MET gene was identified with no EGFR mutation, ALK or Ros 1 translocation. This substitution is in the splice donor site of intron 14 and most likely causes a jump in exon 14. This mutation confers susceptibility to anti-MET tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Based on his history of idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, his age, the COVID-19 pandemic and the presence of a mutation in MET intron 14, treatment with crizotinib was initiated with an initial dose of 250 mg/day for 15 days and then increased to 250 mg twice a day, in accordance with recommendations for use.
An early CT scan at six weeks (April 9) showed an excellent and almost complete response to mediastinal lymph node involvement, according to RECIST 1.1 (adenopathy of the aortic arch at 5 mm and of the pretracheal space at 5 mm) with a good clinical and hematological tolerance .
After an additional two months of treatment, the re-evaluation CT scan (June 2020) found a continuation of the partial response aspect (RECIST 1.1), while the initial target mediastinal adenopathies were no longer measurable and appeared partly calcified (3 mm in front of the aortic arch or prevascular upper mediastinal). In September 2020, after 7 months of treatment with crizotinib, the disease was still stable according to RECIST 1.1. However, at the end of September 2020, the patient developed anemia and deep thrombocytopenia, which led to the discontinuation of crizotinib. The myelogram revealed 70% of medullary blasts in favor of acutization of the CMML in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), excluding a toxicity of crizotinib. In December 2020, 3 months after discontinuation of crizotinib, the patient presented a lymph node and pleural progression .
To date, no case of transformation of CMML in acute leukemia on crizotinib has been described in the literature. Studies have shown the efficacy of crizotinib in cases of AML with ALK rearrangement/ALK expression, which in some cases resulted in a reduction in cell load until normal hematopoiesis was restored.,