A 45-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our institution for deep dyspareunia, chronic pelvic pain, and dysmenorrhea. Her medical history revealed antidepressant treatment with no other family or personal history. She had previously undergone two failed in vitro fertilization treatments for infertility and had a history of previous treatments for endometriosis, including one laparoscopy. Her previous laparoscopy was performed in another institution (excision of superficial peritoneal nodules and uterosacral ligament). No bowel involvement was observed at first operation. Clinical examination showed absence of abdominal masses, mild pain on palpation of the lower abdomen, moderate pain on vaginal touch on uterine mobilization, and discomfort on rectal touch when the rectovaginal septum was palpated. Transvaginal ultrasound (TVU) with bowel preparation showed signs of deep endometriosis with rectal involvement (9 cm of anal verge, 40% of the circumference of the rectum, 2.0 × 0.7 × 1.3 cm), retrocervical lesions, and a 4.5-cm right ovarian endometrioma with no suspected lesions in the appendix. The patient did not undergo any other radiological imaging. She underwent laparoscopic surgery. A systematic intraoperative evaluation during laparoscopy revealed suspected involvement of the appendix with deep endometriosis. The patient then underwent ovarian cystectomy, excision of the pelvic endometriosis lesions, appendectomy, and anterior stapler discoid resection . She was discharged in 1 day and had no postoperative complications. Histopathological analysis of the rectum and ovarian cystectomy confirmed extensive endometriosis involvement , and the analysis of the appendix revealed endometriosis and a well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma at the appendix tip that was 1.3 cm in size and infiltrated the adipose appendicular tissue with angiolymphatic invasion and free surgical margins . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed positivity for Ki67/MIB-1 in 1.5% of the cells . Right colectomy was indicated due to infiltration of the adipose tissue and due to angiolymphatic invasion, but the patient refused. She is currently being followed up, and, after 2 years, she has no signs of recurrence.