A 14-year-old girl presented to our emergency department following a direct fall onto her left shoulder sustained riding a pushbike. This was an isolated, closed and neurovascularly intact injury. The skin was not threatened. The child presented with swelling and pain around the left shoulder. There was a clear deformity of the clavicle and palpable posterior displacement of the medial fragment. The patient suffered from asthma and no other significant medical co-morbidities and did not take any regular medications. This was her non-dominant hand. Radiographs and a CT scan demonstrated a Dameron and Rockwood Type IV lateral clavicular physeal injury with posterosuperior translation of the metaphyseal fragment (, ). This is associated with an ACJ pseudo subluxation. After clinical review of the patient and a discussion with the parents about risks and benefits of surgery, the decision was made to proceed with surgical management with informed consent from the child’s parents. These factors which guided us towards specific management were grade of injury, degree of posterior displacement of the proximal fracture fragment and patient’s age. A 14-years-old girl has a lack of superior periosteal cover and limited remodelling potential and hence, she was a candidate for surgical intervention.
The operation was performed a day after admission. The patient was given general anaesthetic and was placed in beach chair position. Posterior displacement of the proximal fracture fragment was marked out. After prepping and draping, a skin incision over the distal end of the clavicle. Careful soft-tissue dissection was carried out to protect neurovascular structures and protect deltotrapezial fascia for later repair. The posteriorly displaced medial fragment was then identified, having buttonholed through the trapezius. As expected, there was no superior periosteal sleeve in a child of this age but, the inferior periosteal sleeve of the clavicle was still attached to the coracoclavicular (CC) joints . There was also an epiphyseal fragment of the lateral end of the clavicle still in continuity with the ACJ, with the maintained alignment of ACJ.
We elected to use the Acumed (acumed ) clavicle plating system for fixation. Due to the patient’s age our plan was to use the Acu-Sinch anchor alone, rather than through the plate as per normally recommended in adults. Prior to reducing the fracture, the coracoid process was exposed. The Acu-Sinch drill was used to drill the near cortex only of the coracoid. One Acu-Sinch anchor was inserted into this drill hole using the Acu-Sinch Driver, to a depth where it was almost flush, under direct visualisation. The sutures were released and the free ends were identified and protected anteriorly. The proximal fragment was then released enough to allow fracture reduction. The reduction was held with 2 × 1.6 mm K wires, directed across the ACJ . The area in the clavicle directly superior to the suture ends was identified. A 2.8 mm drill was used to drill through both cortices of the clavicle at this point, creating a tract for the suture ends to be passed through. A suture retriever was used to pull both suture strands superiorly from the anchor through the hole in the clavicle. The suture ends are designed to be passed through a suture retainer, which normally sits in the clavicle plate . We, therefore, decided not to use the retainer as when used alone, it would sit prominently on the superior clavicle and risk causing a stress fracture. Instead, the sutures were tied through and over a 5mm Smith and Nephew EndobuttonTM, ensuring adequate tension and reduction of the fracture site and ACJ. The deltotrapezial fascial flaps were then closed with 2-vicryl to supplement and reinforce the fixation. The arm was placed into a polysling.