The patient, a 66-year-old male, had been undergoing outpatient hemodialysis treatment for one year for end-stage renal failure with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease. Transthoracic echocardiography performed at the start of hemodialysis showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of approximately 30% and severe MR from between the middle scallop of anterior leaflet (A2) and posterior leaflet (P2). The patient had functional MR due to valve ring enlargement and tethering. Tricuspid regurgitation was mild. There was no vegetation on the mitral valve or other valves. Hence, Bio-Flex® Tesio® Cath for long-term hemodialysis was inserted through the left subclavian vein and the patient was hemodialyzed using it as a blood access.
The patient initially consulted the department of cardiology because of decreased left ventricular contraction shown by transthoracic echocardiography, shortness of breath, cardiac enlargement and pulmonary congestion on a chest X-ray. Although coronary angiography showed that there was no significant stenosis, transthoracic echocardiography revealed a shallow valve coaptation and marked progression of tethering MR due to left ventricular dilation. The tricuspid valve coaptation was also very shallow and tricuspid regurgitation was severe. According to the 2020 guidelines of the Japanese Circulation Society, the patient had secondary MR, which was very frail and difficult to operate on. Transesophageal ultrasonography showed that the mitral valve morphology was suitable for the MitraClip® procedure, and intervention was expected to relieve the symptoms. In the heart team conference with a cardiovascular surgeon, intervention with MitraClip® was recommended, and percutaneous catheter mitral valve repair was performed. A 1 Clip (MITRACLIP® NT Device) was implanted between the middle scallop of the anterior leaflet (A2) and the posterior leaflet (P2) of the mitral valve after preoperative administration of antibiotics to prevent surgical site infection. There were no intraoperative complications, including adverse events that impaired valve function. MR improved from severe to mild after mitral valve junction repair with placement of a single MitraClip® between the middle scallop of the anterior leaflet and the middle scallop of the posterior leaflet.
The patient continued to have good fluid management on outpatient hemodialysis at another hospital after discharge from our hospital. However, 8 months after MitraClip® implantation, the patient had a fever of 38 °C or higher and hypotension, and dialysis could not be performed even with the use of continuous intravenous administration of noradrenaline during dialysis. He was referred to our hospital with suspicion of septic shock. MRSA was cultured from all blood cultures and also from the tip of the Bio-Flex® Tesio® Cath, which was used as a hemodialysis blood access. Transthoracic echocardiography performed in our hospital showed a large vegetation at the site of the MitraClip® implantation. The vegetation had extended to the medial site and lateral site and was mobile. MR was mild to moderate with outflow from both sides of the clip. . Head magnetic resonance imaging performed as a screening test also showed multiple cerebral infarctions. After admission, blood culture tests were performed, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) was cultured in all three sets. The diagnosis was CDRIE at the site of MitraClip® implantation, and the causative organism was MRSA based on the clinical course and examination.
During the course of the disease, the patient developed disturbance of consciousness, which was suspected to be another cerebral infarction caused by embolization from the vegetation. Transthoracic echocardiography showed that the left ventricular ejection fraction had decreased to about 10%, and adequate water removal with dialysis treatment was difficult. A heart team conference was held with the cardiovascular surgeon, and it was decided to perform only conservative treatment with antibiotics, gentamicin and vancomycin, and not to perform surgery.
On the 7th day, the patient died of peripheral circulatory failure due to septic shock. After his death, we received consent from his family to perform an autopsy. The autopsy specimen showed a large vegetation of 5 cm in size. The vegetation had spread to the left and right sides around the tip of the MitraClip® arm where it was joined .
The autopsy pathology showed severe destruction of the mitral valve. Hematoxylin and eosin (H-E) staining showed marked infiltration of neutrophils in the mitral valve tissue at the site of contact with the verruca and a large amount of bacterial mass in the darkly stained area of the valve tissue. Gram staining of the pathology specimen showed positive cocci, a finding consistent with MRSA cultured by various culture tests. Elastica-Masson staining (a staining method that clearly shows connective tissues such as elastic fibers and collagen fibers) also showed a high degree of neutrophilic infiltration in the atrial and trabecular layers, and the valve structure was destroyed. The fibrous layer showed a high degree of neutrophilic infiltration, and all layers, including the myocardial layer, were destroyed .