A 46-year-old woman with walking difficulties, motor deficits, dysesthesia and sensory loss in the lower limbs for at least 6 years, presented with rapid neurological deterioration since 4 months, developing also sphincter dysfunction (urinary incontinence and fecal retention). She was able to walk with support.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine showed marked edema and patchy contrast agent enhancement of the spinal cord from the T7 level to the conus medullaris, and enlarged perimedullary veins predominantly on the left side . Spinal angiography revealed an SDAVF in the left L2-L3 intervertebral foramen, fed by a branch from the second lumbar segmental artery (L2) on the left . From the very same segmental artery, the artery of Adamkiewicz (AA), a main supplier of the ASA system, branched off about 0.5 cm proximal to the fistula. Due to this anatomical particularity, endovascular embolization of the fistula was considered contraindicated and microsurgical treatment was opted for.
Laminectomy at the L2 level was done. Upon opening the dura mater, the veins along the nerve roots were found to be enlarged and tortuous. Two arterialized veins running along the left L2 nerve root were coagulated and cut. The intradural veins then became more bluish in color and less congested. Thus, it was deemed that closure of the SDAVF had been achieved.
The patient experienced some immediate neurological improvement, with reduced dysesthesia in the lower limbs bilaterally. She was sent for rehabilitation at the referring hospital. Three months later, follow-up MRI showed persistent medullary edema with tortuous perimedullary vessels, and the only notable difference from the pre-operative images was the evidence of laminectomy on the L2 level. The patient was re-admitted for spinal catheter angiography. On clinical examination at admission, her motor and sensory deficits were slightly improved and her sphincter dysfunction was unchanged, in comparison to before surgery.
On spinal angiography, the same SDAVF as before was visualized, still intact, and the AA branched off the same artery about 0.5 cm proximal to the fistula site . It was decided to attempt embolization past the branching point of the AA. The segmental artery supporting the fistula was catheterized using a 4 F catheter. A microcatheter (UltraFlow 1.5 F, used with guidewire Mirage, both from Micro Therapeutics, Inc., Irvine, CA, USA) was navigated into the fistula just distally to the origin of the AA . Embolization was done using 0.1 ml glue (50% N-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate and methacryloxysulfolane in Lipiodol: Glubran-2®, GEM Srl, Viareggio, Italy, and Lipiodol® Ultra-Fluide, Laboratoire Gerbet, Aulnay-Sous-Bois, France), and the distal feeder and the fistula were filled over a length of 1 cm. The microcatheter was removed and final angiography through the guide catheter showed adequate flow to the ASA and no remaining SDAVF . Postoperatively, her neurological status remained unchanged. The patient was transferred to her local hospital for rehabilitation.
The patient did not improve clinically, and dysesthesia, walking difficulties, urinary incontinence and fecal retention remained as before embolization. Follow-up MRI done 2, 6, and 11 months later showed markedly less-intensive engorgement of the spinal cord, but persistent signal changes compared to previous examinations. Since the latest MRI also showed clearly dilated perimedullary veins on the left side , we decided to perform a new spinal angiography.
Catheterization of the left L2 segmental artery was achieved using a 5 F catheter, and angiography revealed the artery of the lumbar enlargement and a persistent SDAVF arising from the same segmental artery . A microcatheter was navigated into the lumbar artery and superselective angiography done with the microcatheter just proximal to the AA permitted to discern in detail the origins of two arterial branches – one branch leading to the AA and the previously embolized feeder (which remained closed) and another more lateral and caudal branch that fed the fistula . The SDAVF was catheterized through the newly identified feeder, and embolized using 0.3 ml glue (67% Glubran-2 in Lipodol) . Final angiography of the left L2 segmental artery showed preserved flow through the artery of the lumbar enlargement without any remaining arteriovenous shunt . Angiography of the adjacent segmental arteries showed no flow to the SDAVF through these arteries.
The patient could be discharged to her local hospital for rehabilitation the day after the procedure. The patient had extensive rehabilitation, and regained the ability to walk without support and managed to climb stairs and drive a car. On follow-up 6 years after the last intervention, her paraparesis improved to the point that she is able to walk 70 m without support, but uses a walker for longer distances. She has reduced temperature sensation from her knees down bilaterally, and still experiences paresthesias in the soles of her feet. She uses incontinence protection daytime and experiences urgency incontinence both daytime and nighttime.
MRI scan taken 1 month after embolization showed complete regression of the medullary edema and the one taken 68 months after embolization revealed a somewhat atrophic spinal cord with visible central canal and no recurrence of medullary edema .