We present a 27-year-old healthy female nurse of Indian descent who presented to the emergency room shortly upon awakening in the morning with right eye vision loss, and no other neurological complaints. The patient’s past medical, ophthalmic, and familial history was unremarkable.
At presentation, visual acuity (VA) was counting figures for the right eye and 20/20 for the fellow eye, with a positive relative afferent pupillary defect. Anterior segment and intraocular pressure were unremarkable in both eyes. Fundus examination of the right eye revealed a mild hyperemic disc, a pale posterior pole, edema temporal to the macula, a few intraretinal hemorrhages, and mildly engorged retinal veins, with no peripheral retina findings . Fundus examination of the left eye was unremarkable .
The patient was referred immediately for fluorescein angiography (FA) test, which revealed a significant delay in the arterial filling, lasting 13 seconds in the right eye; a delay in the venous filling; and a mild “hot” disc in late stages . She was diagnosed with central retinal artery occlusion (CRAO) combined with mild central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO).
On admission, To promote retinal perfusion and improve visual outcomes, a paracentesis was performed on the affected right eye. This procedure leads to a rapid reduction of intraocular pressure, which is particularly beneficial in the first few hours following CRAO [, ]; she has immediately referred afterward to a hyperbaric chamber in another hospital. She underwent a series of 3 consecutive sessions of hyperbaric oxygen treatments over 24 hours; The therapy was initiated within less than 20 hours from the onset of her symptoms, which falls within the acceptable time frame for this treatment . The patient recalled rapid and substantial improvement in visual function during the second hyperbaric treatment. The VA improved to 20/40 in the right eye. Fundus examination revealed slightly more intraretinal hemorrhages . A second FA showed marked improvement in arterial filling time, with remnant delay on arterial and venous filling. (About 5 seconds for the completion of the arterial phase—Fig. ). Optical coherence tomography showed macular edema in the right eye and a normal fellow eye . She completed a systemic evaluation, including complete blood count, chemistry, hypercoagulable evaluation, echocardiogram, and carotid Doppler, which were all normal.
At a one-week follow-up examination, VA remained 20/40 in the right eye. The fundus examination of the right eye showed one focus of phlebitis, nasally to the optic disc . FA revealed staining if vascular wall and late leakage , which is consistent with vasculitis. The patient was admitted for reevaluation. Infectious, inflammatory, and hematologic etiologies were excluded, except for the Mantoux tuberculin skin test, which was positive (13 mm); this could indicate previous exposure as a healthcare worker.
During the following two days, VA decreased to 20/125 in the right eye, and the vasculitis spread to the posterior pole, with retinal hemorrhages close to the macula Systemic steroidal treatment of intravenous Solumedrol 1 g\day was initiated to control the vasculitis. The VA of the right eye gradually improved to 20/32, without any new vasculitis foci. On the fifth treatment day, new foci of vasculitis appeared on the upper and lower arcades, and a large subretinal hemorrhage at the superior temporal mid-periphery in the same eye. Up to this stage, the fellow eye was not involved.
One week later, small peripheral foci of vasculitis appeared in the left eye for the first time. VA was 20/20 in the left eye. Later, the patient developed peripheral retinal neovascularization in the right eye, treated with sectoral scatter laser photocoagulation for the capillary nonperfusion. The patient was followed closely, in which visits were extended to 6 and then to 12 monthly intervals to date.
She has been followed for over a decade and has remained stable with no disease activity or recurrence.