A 48-year-old Chinese woman presented with difficulty moving her right hip from abduction and external rotation after falling from 3 m that occurred 3 d ago.
Due to right hip pain, the patient underwent an X-ray examination in the outpatient department and was diagnosed with “right acetabular fracture,” after which she was admitted to the hospital.
The patient exhibited pain and external rotation of the right hip. Tenderness was present near the hip joint and movements were painful and limited. The neurovascular status was normal.
Standard radiographs at admission revealed fractures of the right acetabular anterior wall in association with fractures of the AIIS and the iliac wing, with preservation of the pelvic brim . Computed tomography showed fractures of the acetabular anterior wall, the AIIS, and the iliac wing with retained integrity of the pelvic brim .
The patient underwent interim management by closed reduction of the hip dislocation and skin traction for 6 d.
For the treatment of right atypical acetabular anterior wall fracture and iliac fracture, open reduction and rigid internal fixation were performed via a modified pararectus approach under general anesthesia.
The surgery was performed on the 7th day following the traumatic injury. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed supine on a radiolucent operating table and the ipsilateral leg was prepared and draped freely, facilitating reduction maneuvers. To reduce the tension of the iliopsoas muscle and protect the femoral nerve, hip joints were slightly flexed by putting a bump underneath both knees. In order to monitor potential iatrogenic bladder injury during surgery, a Foley catheter was placed in the bladder before surgery.
A modified pararectus approach was used, in which the skin incision was started from the junction of the medial and middle thirds of the line connecting the ASIS with the umbilicus to the junction of the middle and lateral thirds of the line connecting the symphysis with the ASIS, and extended distally-laterally to the AIIS .
To facilitate exposure of the anterior layer of rectus sheath, the subcutaneous fatty tissue, fascia of Camper, fascia of Scarpa, and external oblique muscle aponeurosis were dissected. The incision of the anterior fascial layer of rectus sheath and the transversalis fascia was made to expose the extraperitoneal space in the true pelvis, with care taken to identify the round ligament and the inferior epigastric vessels. The expanded first window of pararectus approach was developed between the iliac crest and iliopsoas muscle by dissecting the iliacus muscle along the inner surface of the iliac crest and dragging it medially. By retracting the iliopsoas muscle laterally and the external iliac vessels medially, the second window was created. Through the expanded first and second windows, both the anterior wall and anterior column could be seen .
Once the approach was complete, the fracture fragments were identified, namely, two main fragments of the anterior wall with superior extension of fracture above the iliopectineal line into iliac wing, and a fragment of AIIS that was attached by the direct head of the rectus femoris tendon. The reflected head of the rectus femoris tendon was released to allow mobilization of the fragment. Manual distraction was performed by placing a subtrochanteric Schanz screw parallel to the femoral neck, which was then used to visualize the joint after incision through the hip capsule, and the articular impaction was addressed.
The fracture fragments were anatomically reduced under direct visualization, and the cancellous bone void left beneath the elevated impacted fragments was filled with allograft. Interfragmentary lag screws were used to fix the AIIS and iliac wing. The fixation of anterior wall was achieved by using a nonlocking, precontoured, low-profile reconstruction plate and a nonlocking T-shape plate. The T-shape plate was situated near the border of the acetabulum, and was slightly under-bent to enable compressing and buttressing of the fragments. Intraoperative fluoroscopy was used to evaluate the reduction and position of the implants. The hip capsule and rectus release were repaired, and the anterior layer of rectus sheath, subcutaneous tissue, and skin were sutured sequentially. A suction drain was placed for 24 h.
Prophylactic intravenous antibiotic was used from 30 min before surgery to 24 h postoperatively. Rivaroxaban was employed for 5 wk as prophylaxis against deep venous thromboembolism. The patient was started on muscle strengthening as soon as medically possible but with restricted mobilization to toe-touch weight-bearing for the first 3 mo. The postoperative X-rays and computed tomography scans revealed good reduction of the fracture .