A 26-year-old lady, diagnosed with CDG-1 in infancy, presented to the emergency department with acute-onset dyspnoea. She denied any chest pain, palpitations, or wheezing. However, she had upper respiratory tract symptoms for the past 2 weeks. On arrival at the emergency department, she was lethargic, hypotensive (78/60 mmHg), tachycardic (127 b.p.m.), tachypnoeic (32 breaths/minute), and feverish (38.8°C). Auscultation of her lungs revealed bilateral crepitations with no other significant cardiovascular examination findings. Her blood results showed type 1 respiratory failure, significantly elevated infective markers, mildly increased troponin of 21 ng/L (normal range <15 ng/L), and an increased NT-pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) of 7511 ng/L (normal range <150 ng/L). Her chest X-ray revealed globular cardiomegaly with consolidations in the right middle and both lower zones . Electrocardiography was interpreted as sinus tachycardia with no features of arrhythmias . She was diagnosed with severe multilobar pneumonia with septic shock and was subsequently intubated, ventilated, and commenced on broad-spectrum antibiotics and an intravenous infusion of noradrenaline.
Further history revealed that she was the youngest child of non-consanguineous parents and was previously diagnosed with autosomal recessive CDG-1 in infancy. She had three surviving siblings, including an eldest sister also diagnosed with CDG and another sister who had likely passed away from complications of CDG. There was no reported history of cardiac disease. She was previously under the care of a metabolic physician; however, she had been lost to follow-up. Due to her cognitive impairment, she required partial assistance with her activities of daily living.
An echocardiogram was performed, which revealed a dilated LV with severe global systolic dysfunction (, ). Moderate pericardial effusion was noted, with no evidence of pericardial tamponade. She subsequently underwent cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging on her sixth day of admission for further characterization of her myocardium. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed increased left ventricular volume (indexed end-diastolic volume of 147 mL/m2) with severe systolic dysfunction, left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVEF) of 19% and moderate circumferential pericardial effusion. Elevated T2 mapping values and globally elevated T1 mapping values were noted ( and ). Late gadolinium enhancement sequences revealed subepicardial hyperenhancement throughout the lateral and basal inferior segments and mid-wall hyperenhancement in the basal to mid-septal segments ( and ). Overall, these findings indicate a non-ischaemic DCM with acute myocarditis.
A revised diagnosis of acute decompensated heart failure with an underlying DCM precipitated by severe pneumonia and acute myocarditis was made. The diagnosis of heart failure was made as she had dyspnoea with clinical signs of pulmonary and venous congestion, an elevated NT-proBNP level, and severe LV systolic dysfunction. Anti-failure medications and i.v. methylprednisolone (1 g daily) were started. Throughout her stay in the ICU, she showed gradual clinical improvement and was extubated 4 days later. A repeat echocardiogram was done the following day, which showed an improved LVEF to 35%. Blood cultures, polymerase chain reaction (PCR), and viral swab results were negative. She was discharged home well with anti-failure therapy (sacubitril/valsartan 24.3/25.7 mg twice daily, spironolactone 25 mg daily, furosemide 40 mg daily, and bisoprolol 1.25 mg daily) and a reducing prednisolone dosage of 12.5 mg for the first 3 days followed by 5 mg for the next 3 days, with a planned repeat echocardiogram and review in the cardiomyopathy clinic.
Patient failed to attend her clinic follow-up 2 months later. A subsequent phone call made to the patient’s family revealed that she had died from heart failure–related complications and a decision by the patient and her family to pursue a palliative approach to treatment.