A seven-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) for fever and headache for one day. She was reportedly very tired after returning from school and took a nap. Upon waking, she complained of a headache and had a documented fever of 40° Celsius. Shortly after taking ibuprofen, she had an episode of emesis and subsequently sought medical attention. In the ED, she reported headache, decreased appetite, photophobia, and nausea. She had received induction of infliximab 20 days prior to presentation after a diagnosis of Crohn’s disease, and had her second infusion two days prior. She was also taking prednisone daily. She was tachycardic, febrile, uncomfortable-appearing and photophobic. She had no focal neurologic deficits. She did display nuchal rigidity, but Kernig’s and Brudzinski’s signs were negative.
Blood work was obtained and the patient was given 20 milliliters per kilogram normal saline bolus with minimal improvement in tachycardia. The patient’s white blood cell count was 13.7 × 103/ microliter (μL) (reference range 4.5–13 × 103/μL), absolute neutrophil count 8.79 × 103/μL (reference range 1.5 – 8.0 × 103/μL), and urinalysis was within normal limits. Blood and urine cultures were obtained, and a respiratory viral panel returned positive for coronavirus.
Empiric treatment of suspected meningitis was initiated with vancomycin and ceftriaxone. Lumbar puncture was performed under ketamine sedation and the patient was admitted to the pediatric hospitalist service. CSF analysis showed 2025 total nucleated cells (90% neutrophils, reference range < 7) and 6 red blood cells (RBCs)/μL (reference range < 2) in Tube 1; 1640 total nucleated cells (92% neutrophils) and 6 RBCs/ μL in Tube 3. CSF glucose was 56 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (reference range 60 – 80 mg/dL), protein was 99 mg/dL (reference range 15 – 45 mg/dL). Gram stain showed +4 white blood cells but no organisms noted. Shortly after admission, CSF PCR returned negative for L. monocytogenes, E. coli K1, H. influenzae, N. meningitidis, S. agalactiae, S. pneumoniae, C. neoformans/gatti, cytomegalovirus, enterovirus, herpes simplex virus 1 and 2, human herpesvirus 6, human parechovirus, and varicella zoster virus.
Upon admission, the patient’s immunosuppressive medications were discontinued. Antibiotic coverage was not broadened from vancomycin and ceftriaxone owing to the negative CSF PCR. She continued to be intermittently febrile and displayed worsening mental status. On the second day of hospitalization, the patient’s CSF and blood cultures were positive for L. monocytogenes, and her antibiotic regimen was changed to ampicillin and gentamicin. Her fevers resolved, her mental status and symptoms improved, and she was discharged from the hospital on day eight after a peripherally inserted central catheter was placed to receive a total of 21 days of ampicillin. The patient did not have recurrence of her Crohn’s symptoms while hospitalized, and she was switched to methotrexate for outpatient therapy.