On August 19, 2021, a 79-year-old female with a history of diabetes mellitus, ischemic heart disease, and hypertension was hospitalized with a possible diagnosis of COVID-19 in Shahid Beheshti Hospital, Kashan, Iran. Physical examination of her head and neck, chest, heart, abdomen, and limbs showed no abnormal findings. Nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal swab samples became positive in real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (rt-RT-PCR) test performed by Light Cycler 96 system (Roche) to detect SARS-CoV-2 targeting N and RdRp genes (Pishtaz Teb)., The patient was managed with antibiotics for suspected bacterial superinfection, and with corticosteroids, including prednisolone (125 mg/day) and dexamethasone (8 mg intravenously/daily) for a week until PCR for SARS-CoV-2 was negative.
The patient was admitted again to the hospital 1 month later, presenting right facial swelling and deviation of the angle of the mouth to the left, complete ophthalmoplegia, no perception of light, and ptosis along with the right eye. She suffered from headaches, cough, dyspnea, and weakness. Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 37.3°C, blood pressure of 111/60 mm Hg, pulse rate of 79 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 86% while the patient was breathing ambient air. The laboratory tests revealed an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 16 mm in the 1st h and a mild increase in CRP (26 mg/L). Both oropharyngeal rt-RT-PCR for COVID-19 and blood/urine culture for bacteria and fungi were negative. The chest computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated multiple peripheral patchy grand glass and consolidation with air bronchogram in the left lower lobe (LLL) and right middle lobe (RML), highly suggestive of COVID-19 pneumonia . With the possibility of post-COVID-19 bacterial superinfection, the antibiotics azithromycin, meropenem, and vancomycin were started. Because of persistent headache and considering the possibility of mucormycosis, a paranasal computed tomography scan was performed that showed mucosal thickening and opacification in the right maxilla, frontal and ethmoid sinuses, and right and left sphenoid . Gradually, the right eye movement decreased. After consulting with an ENT specialist, the patient was undergoing endoscopic surgery. Anterior and posterior ethmoidectomy and sphenoidotomy were performed, and the necrotic tissue was resected. With increased hypoxia and progressive reduction of SPO2, the patient was subjected to mechanical ventilation and transferred to ICU.
The resected tissue specimen was subjected to direct microscopic examination with 20% potassium hydroxide (KOH) and histopathological preparation stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). The direct microscopy demonstrated broad aseptate hyaline hyphae with right-angle branching . The histopathology showed infiltration of acute and chronic inflammatory cells, including lymphoplasma cells and neutrophils, as well as fungal aseptate hyphae . These conditions suggest a proven invasive mucormycosis; therefore, intravenous liposomal amphotericin B (5 mg/kg/day) was initiated. Despite antifungal and antibacterial treatment and debridement during two endoscopic surgeries, the patient's condition deteriorated. Finally, after 15 days, on September 2, 2021, the patient died due to respiratory failure, hemodynamic instability, and mucormycosis with the invasion of the orbit and probably the brain.
Parts of the samples were inoculated at three points of Sabouraud dextrose agar (Merck) plates containing 50 mg/L chloramphenicol and incubated at 25 and 37°C. After 4 days of incubation, colonies with coarse woolly gray surfaces rapidly covering agar plate with fluff resembling gray cotton candy , and with a white reverse, indicative of a mucoralean fungus, were grown . Slide culture and staining with aniline blue revealed the microscopic morphology suggestive of Lichtheimia species . DNA of the colony was extracted using glass bead extraction followed by phenol-chloroform purification method as described previously, the entire ITS region of nuclear ribosomal DNA was PCR-amplified using the universal primer pairs ITS1 and ITS4, and the products were purified and sequenced (Core Facilities Laboratory) by forward primer. After analysis of the sequence by BLAST , the isolate was identified as Lichtheimia ramosa, with 99.87% sequence identity (only one adenine (A) deletion). The sequence was deposited in GenBank under accession number ON239992. Finally, the clinical and laboratory findings confirmed the diagnosis of the disease as rhino-orbito-cerebral mucormycosis due to Lichtheimia ramosa.
Antifungal susceptibility testing (AFST) of the isolate was tested for amphotericin B, isavuconazole, posaconazole, and itraconazole according to CLSI M38-A2. As per the protocol, RPMI-1640 medium with 3-(N-morpholino) propanesulfonic acid and without bicarbonate, an inoculum of 0.4–5 × 104 CFU/mL fungal spores, and incubation at 35°C were used. The results were read visually 24 h after incubation, and the lowest concentration at which the fungal growth was completely inhibited was recorded as the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) value. C. parapsilosis ATCC 22019 was used as a quality control strain. AFST of the isolate against amphotericin B, isavuconazole, posaconazole, and itraconazole revealed MIC values of 0.25, 1, 0.0313, and 0.0313 μg/mL, respectively.