A 17-year-old Japanese girl noted a painless mass in her left calf. Seven months later, because the mass gradually increased in size, she visited our department. Our patient had no history of major traumatic injury. There was no family history or relevant medical history. Physical examination revealed a 3 cm × 3 cm hard, mobile, tender mass in her soleus muscle. No Tinel-like sign was elicited. Blood examination, including inflammatory response, was negative.
Plain radiographs did not reveal any abnormal shadow. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed two well-demarcated lobular masses in her soleus muscle . T1-weighted images showed a mixture of areas of signal intensity equal to that of the surrounding muscles and areas of low signal intensity. T2-weighted images showed areas of low signal intensity, suggestive of a tumor containing fibrous tissue. On gadolinium-enhanced T1-weighted images, the lateral mass showed significant enhancement, whereas the medial mass presented irregular focal areas of enhancement. Preoperative differential diagnoses included solitary fibrous tumor and inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor (IMT). Since MRI showed contrast enhancement, a malignant tumor such as fibrosarcoma or synovial sarcoma could not be completely excluded. Two months after the initial visit to our department, an open biopsy was performed, and a sample of yellowish-white, solid, fibrous tissue was obtained. Microscopically, the sample was composed of collagen-rich, hyalinized fibrosclerotic tissue and infiltrated inflammatory cells. Calcifying fibrous pseudotumor was the most likely pathological diagnosis. There was no evidence of malignancy.
Because the tumor was considered benign, simple excision of the mass was performed two months after the biopsy. At the time of excision, two masses were found in her soleus muscle. There was no feeding vessel and no hemorrhage originated from the tumor. On gross examination, the lesions were found to be solid, lobular, well-circumscribed, non-encapsulated, and gray-white masses . The two lesions were connected by fibrous tissue. The cut surface was gray-white and homogenous .
Microscopically, the lesion was composed of hyalinized collagen fibers with fibroblasts. Psammomatous calcifications and infiltration of inflammatory cells were observed . Immunostaining was positive for factor XIIIa and CD34, rarely positive for Ki-67, and negative for anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK).
Our patient was discharged without having experienced any postoperative complications. She could walk without any pain or functional disability. At 30 months after surgery, there was no evidence of recurrence.