A 32-year-old Iranian woman, primigravida, with 38 weeks of gestational age was referred to our center due to her high risk obstetrical course. No significant point was detected in her thorough physical examination. She had no history of infertility or any significant medical disease or surgery before pregnancy. Her first trimester of pregnancy had normal course with no pathologic finding in sonography or lab data. When she was at 26 weeks of gestational age, she developed with acute abdomen and vomiting and was transferred to the operation room by an obstetrician in her local area. Her operation notes revealed a 4.5 cm degenerated posterior wall uterine myoma with active bleeding and about 3 liters of intra-abdominal blood loss. Patient hemostasis by suturing and blood transfusion was performed.
At gestational age of 36 weeks and 4 days, she was referred to our high-risk perinatology clinic affiliated to Shiraz University of Medical Sciences which is a referral center of perinatology in the south of Iran due to suspicion to cervical malignancy in a local sonography. In perinatology ward sonography, there was a single living fetus with breech presentation. The biometry revealed a biparietal diameter of 97th centile, abdominal circumference of 23rd centile, and estimated fetal weight of 2851, which is the 41st centile for 36 weeks and 4 days of gestational age. Reassuring pattern of color Doppler and normal amniotic fluid index (14 cm) were reported. There were multiple hypo-echoic areas in the placenta as well as a heterogeneous mass measuring 77*88*66 mm in the lower part of the uterus. For further evaluation, pelvic MRI was performed, reporting enlarged uterus with circumferential mass-like thickening in the lower segment of the uterus with vascularity, leading to differential diagnosis of cervical cancer . In addition to multiple non-significant uterine myomas, a well-defined iso-signal in T1 and heterogeneous hypo-signal in T2 structure, measuring 29*39 mm, was diagnosed in the lower segment.
At 38 weeks of gestational age, the patient underwent cesarean section. The rare finding of term interstitial pregnancy was found with placenta increta formation that was evading to the myometrium from the serosa (reversely from outside to the inside of the uterus) that was confirmed by pathology study . A boy weighing 2840 g with an APGAR score of 8 to 9 in the first and 5th min of birth was delivered. Hysterectomy was done. Nothing significant in the post-operation course was noted. These events are summarized in Fig. , using a timeline.