A 68-year-old, right-handed man presented with symptoms starting about 4 years prior to his diagnosis. He recalled having an episode of vertigo associated with nausea while he was deep sea diving. Thereafter, he developed progressive left-sided hearing loss as well as tinnitus associated with imbalance and a sway when he walked and climbed stairs. He was evaluated for these symptoms and imaging revealed an enhancing mass [23 (AP) × 25 (T) × 18 (CC) mm] with central areas of cystic change within the left CP angle extending into the left internal auditory canal. The tumor was consistent with a vestibular schwannoma. It was decided to observe the tumor with repeat scans at timed intervals. He was scanned 2 months later when he had an improvement in his symptoms, with imaging revealing a decrease in the size [15.3 (AP) × 18.7 (T) × 11.7 (CC) mm]. Continued observation was recommended with no intervention planned. Repeat imaging done 6 months later revealed a further reduction in size [13 (AP) × 17.5 (T) × 10.4 (CC) mm] and conservative management was continued.
About a year later, he had magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain done, which revealed a marginal increase in size [15 (AP) × 18.7 (T) × 11.5 (CC) mm] . About 4 months later, re-imaging showed that the schwannoma had substantially enlarged [24.5 (AP) × 25 (T) × 17.5 (CC) mm] . An audiometric evaluation at this time revealed a moderate to severe sensorineural hearing loss in the left side. Speech discrimination scores were very poor at 28% on the left side and 96% on the right. The patient decided not to undergo any treatment and had a repeat scan 5 months later that again showed a decrease in the size of the left acoustic neuroma [15 (AP) × 18 (T) × 12 (CC) mm] with internal acoustic canal (IAC) extension being stable at 5–6 mm. There was neither hydrocephalus nor brain stem compression although the tumor was abutting the cerebral peduncle. He had decreased sensation over the left side of his face and no hearing on the left side, with gait imbalance and a sway to the left. The volume of the tumor was calculated using the formula [Antero-posterior(AP) × transverse(T) × cranio-caudal(CC)/2] and the trend in volume changes over time is depicted in . Although Kameyama et al. classified cystic vestibular schwannomas into three types based on MRI findings, we could not place the patient in a particular subgroup because MRI findings were suggestive of a transition between all three subgroups over a period of time, prior to treatment.
It was at this time that we recommended intervening using stereotactic radiosurgery because we felt a smaller tumor would likely have the best balance between response and risk. We also discussed all the available treatment options including further observation and microsurgery.
He underwent Gamma Knife radiosurgery and received 13 Gy to the 51% isodose line using 29 shots with a conformality index of 1.2. The dimensions on the day of treatment including the intracanalicular component were [15 (AP) × 17 (T) × 13 (CC) mm] . He is on regular follow-up with MR imaging, and at 1 year since Gamma knife radiosurgery(GKRS), his images show a solid tumor without any cystic component, measuring [15 (AP) × 11 (T) × 9 (CC) mm] and he remains clinically stable.