A 6-year-old iranian girl with a history of pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (pre-B-cell ALL) was admitted to the hospital. Her leukemia was identified 8 months prior to her hospitalization with the 46XX blast cell karyotype, positive for terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT), CD10, CD34, CD19, Human Leukocyte Antigen-DR isotype (HLA-DR), and cytoplasmic immunoglobulin M (CyIgM), placing her in the standard-risk group. The patient was at the beginning of the maintenance treatment, which included vincristine injections and examinations every 35 days. Her family resided in a rural area and had a lower-middle-class income. Family medical history had no evidence of any cancerous or hematologic diseases. Patient was not exposed to any dangerous factors (radiation and chemicals) during her life or fetal period. She was the firstborn child and the mother’s first pregnancy. Her weight at birth was 3000 g. Mother’s age at birth was 20 years of age and the father’s was 27 years of age.
Three days before admission, the child experienced a rapid onset of fever with no other symptoms. With the onset of fever, the patient received supportive treatment and acetaminophen syrup 6 cc/kg/8 h, which had no effect on improving the patient’s fever. At the beginning of admission the hospital, vital signs were: temperature (T) 39.8 °C, pulse rate (PR) 86 beats per minute, respiratory rate (RR) 13 breaths per minute, blood pressure (BP) 100/70 mmHg, and O2 saturation 97%. Physical examination revealed pale skin and splenomegaly. Lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, and the presence of a central nervous system (CNS) disorder/leukemia were not observed. The neurological examination, including all cranial and peripheral nerve examinations, was normal. She was admitted for additional examination, and the initiation of antibiotic treatment after a laboratory test revealed that her absolute neutrophil count (ANC) was lower than 500/µl. She was treated empirically with intravenous vancomycin 500 mg and meropenem 500 mg three times daily. The blood culture was negative after 48 h with a normal chest X-ray The patient’s laboratory test results were as follows: red blood cell count (RBC) 4600, white blood cell count (WBC) 1700/µl, ANC 1100/µl, Hemoglobin 9.3 gr/dl, Platelets 47,000/µl, PT 16s, International normalized ratio 1.1, Prothrombin time test 24s, Alanine transaminase 12, Aspartate aminotransferase 14, Alkaline phosphatase 20, Blood Urea Nitrogen 11, Creatinine 0.8, Erythrocyte sedimentation rate 35, C-Reactive Protein 1+; urine analysis: WBC 2–3, RBC 0; epithelial cell: 1–2; crystals: not seen; cast: not seen; bacteria: not seen; and the other test results were normal.
On the third day of hospitalization, which corresponded to the sixth day of the onset of fever, the patient developed sudden-onset tachypnea and lowered oxygen saturation to 88% in ambient air, which increased to 94% when using a reservoir oxygen mask. After partial stabilization, the patient’s oxygen saturation reached 90%, and generalized tonic–clonic seizures commenced concurrently. Despite receiving IV midazolam 5 mg twice, the seizure persisted.
The patient was immediately transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) and was intubated. According to the patient’s symptoms, a cerebrovascular accident (CVA) was suspected; therefore, she underwent a brain computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast, which revealed an ischemic CVA in the right parietal lobe, resulting in edema and midline shift of the brain. Therefore, treatment procedures, including intravenous dexamethasone 4 mg daily and mannitol 12 g, were started for the patient.
The patient’s seizure was controlled by administering intravenous phenytoin 500 mg and levetiracetam 1 g. Owing to the patient’s low platelet count, heparin was administered at a therapeutic dose of 1800 units to prevent thrombosis development, and the infusion was continued at a dose of 700 units per hour for 24 h. In consultation with the neurosurgery service, supportive treatment and the following tests were requested to rule out potential thrombosis causes: C, S protein, antithrombin3, and factor V Leiden, all of which were normal. Owing to the patient’s fever, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test for SARS-COV-2 was requested, and the result was positive. Supportive care with anticonvulsants and heparin administration was continued. Following the patient’s relative stability, a lumbar puncture (LP) was performed, which revealed normal pressure, clear cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and normal culture, analysis, and serology; however, the CSF PCR test was positive for SARS-COV-2.
Remdesivir was added to the patient’s treatments at a dose of 100 mg daily for 5 days, with no dose reductions. Oral vitamin C at a dose of 500 mg every 12 h, a single dose of intramuscular vitamin D at 300,000 units, and intramuscular vitamin A at 50,000 units were also administered according to the national protocol for COVID-19.
After 3 days, the patient was weaned off the ventilator, the seizure was under control, and the CT scan showed no signs of the progression of the thrombotic lesion. However, the patient developed paralysis of the left lower extremities and speech impairment; hence, physiotherapy was initiated for the patient.
After discharge from the PICU, the patient developed recurrent coughs and moderate fever, and a chest CT scan was performed since pneumonia was suspected. Mild bilateral ground glass opacities were detected in the periphery of both lungs on the CT scan image. In addition to supportive therapy for COVID-19, the patient was administered intravenous ceftriaxone 500 mg two times daily and azithromycin syrup 100 mg, 10 ml daily. Owing to the improvement of symptoms and negative blood culture, the patient’s antibiotic treatment was discontinued. The patient was discharged with a prescription for subcutaneous enoxaparin 15 mg twice daily for 2 months and levetiracetam 500 mg twice daily. Two weeks after discharge, the chemotherapy maintenance phase was resumed.
During 3-month post-discharge follow-ups, the patient could walk and speak properly with physiotherapy and speech therapy assistance. After a 10-month follow-up, the patient’s ability to speak and walk had fully recovered, and bone marrow aspiration revealed the complete remission phase.