We present a 31-year-old man with no significant past medical history with left-sided sudden hemiparesis which started 2 hours before admission. On admission, his National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 10. Initial physical examination revealed a body temperature of 37.1°C, pulse rate of 76 bpm, and blood pressure of 125/80 mm Hg. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm. A spiral brain CT scan without contrast was done immediately which was normal. All criteria for intravenous thrombolysis were met. Finding no contraindications, we decided to start thrombolysis. The patient received 0.9 mg/kg rt-PA (a total dose of 58 mg) based on a standard protocol. Door-to-needle time and symptom-to-needle time were 50 and 170 min, respectively after he became stable. Later, brain MRI was performed disclosing hyperintensity of periventricular, centrum semi-oval, and subcortical areas of both sides. Diffusion-weighted MR imaging (DWI) showed restriction of right centrum semi-oval in parietal lobe which confirmed acute infarction . He was admitted to the stroke unit. After 24 hours of thrombolytic therapy, his NIHSS score was 1 due to slight dysarthria. His motor forces however, recovered completely. The control CT scan was obtained revealing an acute infarction over the left Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA) territory with no evidence of hemorrhage. Aspirin 80 mg/d, clopidogrel 75 mg/d, and prevention of deep venous thrombosis with heparin were started. Transthoracic echocardiogram discovered a large, mobile, ovoid, and heterogeneous mass in the left atrium, attached with a long narrow stalk to the interatrial septum protruding to the left ventricle during diastole, with normal size cardiac chambers and normal ejection fraction (55%) . According to cardiothoracic surgery consultation, dual antiplatelet therapy was discontinued and the dose of heparin increased to 900 U/h. On the fourth day of admission, the patient underwent cardiac surgery. The size of the tumor was 5 in 4.5 cm and histologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of myxoma. There were no complications, including bleeding. On the tenth day of admission, the patient was discharged in good general condition while his NIHSS score and Modified Ranking Scale (MRS) score were both zero. After being discharged, he continued using aspirin 80 mg/d. His one and a half year follow-ups until now have revealed no further embolic events or any other complications.