A 72-year-old man visited a hospital with submental tumors without B symptoms. He and his family had no history of hematologic disease. Laboratory tests showed normal blood cell counts. There were no atypical cells in the peripheral blood. Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were within the normal range however, the soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) levels were elevated (1095 U/mL). The computed tomography (CT) scan showed tumorous masses in the nasal cavities (40 × 26 mm) and the paranasal sinuses, submental masses (right 23 × 15 mm, left 19 × 11 mm), and enlarged multiple jugular lymph nodes. Positron emission tomography/CT (PET/CT) showed abnormal uptake of 18F-Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) in each lesion. The maximum standardized uptake values for the bilateral ethmoid sinuses and right submental masses were 13.0 and 4.4, respectively .
The histology of the biopsy from nasal cavity masses showed diffuse infiltration of large lymphoid cells with centroblast-like or immunoblast-like features. In immunohistochemistry the large lymphoid cells were positive for CD20, CD79a, CD5, bcl-2, bcl-6, and MUM-1 and negative for CD3, CD10, cyclinD1, CD56, SOX11, and TIA-1 . The Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 90%. Moderate level of c-myc protein was observed in about 60% of tumor cells. Weak to intermediate expression of cyclin D2 was observed in only 10% of tumor cells. In situ hybridization investigations for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) encoded small RNA did not detect EBV. IGH-BCL2 translocation was not detected by polymerase chain reaction. No break of MYC and BCL6 were detected by fluorescent in situ hybridization. G-banding investigation showed the following karyotype: 46, XY, − 6,add(9)(p22), add(12)(p13), − 19, add(22)(q13), +mar1, and + mar2. G-banding, flow cytometry analysis, and cytological examinations on bone marrow smear specimens did not reveal involvement of lymphoma cells. Thus, a diagnosis of CD5-positive DLBCL (non-germinal center B-cell like type according to Hans algorithm) of the nasal cavity was established. After administration of 8 cycles of R-THPCOP (rituximab, pirarubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisolone) with 3 cycles of intrathecal chemotherapy, consisting of methotrexate and cytarabine, complete remission was achieved. Eight months after the first chemotherapy administration, local recurrences occurred in the left nasal cavity, left submental node, bilateral internal jugular nodes, and epipharynx. The patient was therefore given 4 cycles of the DeVIC regimen (dexamethasone, etoposide, ifosfamide and carboplatin) as salvage therapy.
Although abnormal 18F-FDG uptake on PET/CT disappeared from the nasal cavities and the paranasal sinuses after the second round of therapy, the patient suffered from respiratory disturbance, fever and general fatigue without lymph node swelling. Laboratory tests showed normal white blood cell counts, anemia (hemoglobin 8.2 g/dL), and thrombocytopenia (51 × 103/μL). Serum levels of LDH, sIL-2R, and ferritin were elevated (757 U/L, 5770 U/ml, and 1681 μg/L, respectively). CT images showed splenomegaly, but no tumorous lesion anywhere in the body. No apparent recurrence was observed in imaging studies, but there were elevated levels of serum markers and respiratory disturbance of uncertain cause, which clinically suggested intravascular recurrence of CD5-positive DLBCL. Therefore, a random skin biopsy was performed. The random skin biopsy of the left thigh revealed atypical large lymphoid cells within the lumens of the small blood vessels in the deep dermis and subcutis. Tumor cells were localized in intravascular spaces and did not invade the extravascular stroma. In immunohistochemical analyses, these cells showed positive expression for CD79a, PAX5, CD5, bcl-6, and MUM-1 and negative expression for CD20, CD3, CD4, CD8, and CD10 . The positivity rate of cyclin D2 was less than 1%. Bone marrow smear specimens showed hemophagocytosis (HPC) . According to proposed hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis diagnostic criteria by Filipovich et al , hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis was clinicopathologically diagnosed. Lymphoma cells were not detected in smear and histological specimens from the bone marrow biopsy, but G-banding of bone marrow cells showed complex karyotypes, suggesting a minimal residue of neoplastic cells in the bone marrow. The histological diagnosis was the Asian variant of intravascular lymphoma, which was suspected to be the purely intravascular recurrence of CD5-positive DLBCL primarily arising from nasal cavities. The patient died 3 weeks after the recurrence was diagnosed.