A 66-year-old Caucasian woman complaining of conjunctival hemorrhage and chemosis in both eyes for the last five years had been discontinuously treated with topical antibiotics and corticosteroids without any evident improvement.
At the time of her referral, best-corrected visual acuity was 20/25 in both eyes. Biomicroscopy showed significant bilateral and rather symmetric edema of the inferior bulbar and lower fornix conjunctiva with areas of pink-yellow condensation and hemorrhages associated with follicular reaction . A conjunctival swap was obtained to rule out infection by common antibiotic resistant bacteria or Chlamydia spp. As direct fluorescent antibodies for Chlamydia spp were positive, she was put under treatment with oral doxycycline 200 mg/day and topical azithromycin 3 times/day for 20 days, without any improvement. Conjunctival biopsy was undertaken and optical microscopy revealed amorphous eosinophilic material positive for hematoxyline-eosin stain, with mild mono and polymorphonuclear inflammatory infiltrate and hemorrhagic suffusion . After Congo red staining, the samples showed a red-green birefringence and dichroism under polarized light microscopy consistent with amyloidosis . No evidence of malignancy was observed.
A complete systemic evaluation was carried out. Liver and heart function evaluation was normal. Immunofixation of blood samples revealed polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemy, and no monoclonal bands were observed by immunofixation of urine sample. Mucosal biopsy from esophagus, and rectus confirmed amyloidosis by the Congo red staining (not shown). In order to rule out multiple myeloma or plasma cells dyscrasia, a bone marrow biopsy was obtained showing a positive expression of CD 138+ , a well known marker for identification and quantification of plasma cells in bone marrow and other tissues, as well as an increased population of plasma cells with over-expression of the light chain kappa subunit .
The patient was treated with topical lubrication and the ocular lesions of both eyes remained stable after a follow-up of 3 years. She continues with periodical clinical controls to assess the eventual manifestation and progression of the systemic disease.