A 67-year-old man presented to the emergency room for acute chest pain, dyspnea, and chills. On further questioning, he reported 1 month of nausea, vomiting, and dysphagia and an unintentional 90-lb weight loss over the past year. Social history was notable for tobacco abuse of one pack per day and occasional alcohol use. Family history was significant for unspecified malignancy in both parents and a daughter, as well as gastric cancer in a brother and granddaughter. On exam, he was tachycardic (heart rate 110 beats/min), hypotensive (blood pressure 86/68 mmHg), and tachypneic (respiratory rate 40 breaths/min) and had diffuse left costal chest tenderness. Given his history of hypertension, cardiac workup was performed and was negative. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest was obtained and revealed an esophageal perforation and thickening of the gastric pylorus , for which Thoracic Surgery was consulted. A left pleural 14-French (Fr) pigtail catheter was placed at the bedside to alleviate a large hydropneumothorax with tension component, and the patient was taken to the operating room emergently for endoscopic evaluation, wide drainage, and possible stenting.
Esophagogastroduodenoscopy with fluoroscopy (Video 1 ) showed a large perforation of the distal esophagus just proximal to the gastro-esophageal (GE) junction, a large fluid- and food-filled stomach, and a large ulcerative pre-pyloric mass which was biopsied. The esophageal perforation comprised approximately 30% of the circumference, was over 4 cm in length, and freely communicated with the posterior mediastinum and left pleural cavity . The endoscope was navigated across the perforation and passed alongside the pigtail catheter, using it to exteriorize the guidewire and endoscopic graspers. No 10 Jackson Pratt and 24-Fr Blake drains were then guided endoscopically across the chest wall into posterior mediastinum and sub-pulmonic pleural cavity directly adjacent to the luminal perforation to ensure wide, direct drainage. Bilateral percutaneous postero-apical pleural drainage tubes were then placed. The esophageal perforation was covered with a 23 × 120 mm fully covered stent (Alimaxx-ES, Merit Medical Systems, Utah). A nasogastric tube and 20-Fr percutaneous gastrostomy tube were placed to facilitate decompression in the setting of gastric outlet obstruction. Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit where he was treated for septic shock with intravenous antimicrobial therapy and supportive care.
The biopsy pathology and touch preparation cytology were discordant, so the patient was taken back to the operating room for repeat endoscopic biopsies when he was clinically stable. At this time, a temporary 23 × 100 mm covered stent was placed in a transpyloric position to alleviate the gastric outlet obstruction. Final pathology confirmed adenocarcinoma .
Approximately 2 weeks later, the pyloric stent had started to migrate distally. In the absence of clinical and radiologic evidence of metastatic disease, surgical staging with possible concurrent oncologic resection was discussed with the patient and family, who elected to proceed. A distal gastrectomy with Billroth II reconstruction was performed, along with the removal of the temporizing transpyloric stent. Given the urgent nature of the procedure in a chronically ill patient still recovering from sepsis, extensive lymphadenectomy was not performed. Final pathology was pT2 pN1 (AJCC eighth edition), with a 1.8-cm moderately differentiated gastric adenocarcinoma with negative margins, and two of two lymph nodes evidencing metastatic disease including focal extra-nodal extension.
The patient required hospitalization for nearly 3 months for infection control, nutritional support, and physical rehabilitation. Four serial endoscopies were performed during this time for esophageal evaluation and transluminal drain adjustments. The esophageal stent was noted to be in an appropriate position and was removed prior to discharge to a skilled nursing facility. After his functional status improved, the patient was referred to the Medical Oncology and Radiation Oncology for evaluation for adjuvant therapy for locally advanced disease. He is currently tolerating a regular diet and is fully ambulatory without support.