A 14-year-old girl was admitted with an intermittent headache and nausea for 2 months. Her mother and aunt suffered from migraine. Her grandmother died of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Two months earlier, the patient developed a mild headache that worsened gradually over the next 3 days. The pain was located on the forehead and described as throbbing and swelling, with a visual analogue scale score of 9/10. It was accompanied by nausea, vomiting, and extreme sensitivity to light and sound. No other symptoms emerged, such as fever, hearing loss, dysphagia, hemiplegia, or hemianesthesia. Cranial computed tomography (CT) in the emergency room was normal. An ophthalmologist found a normal intraocular pressure and fundus. Migraine was suspected and oral ibuprofen and acupuncture were prescribed. The headache disappeared completely after 1 week. However, a similar headache and nausea developed 2 months later. The headache was persistent, but relieved for several hours after oral ibuprofen.
In examinations, no cognitive disturbances were noted. Bilateral abducens nerve palsy was noted, but without diplopia. Strength in the upper and lower extremities was 5/5. The finger-to-nose and heel-knee-tibia tests were normal. Romberg sign was negative. Tendon reflexes in the extremities were normal. The plantar responses were down-going bilaterally. The neck was stiff and the chin–sternum straight distance was 3 cm. Both the Kernig and Brudzinski signs were negative.
The laboratory work-up was normal, including routine blood tests, urinalysis, stool analyses, liver, renal, and thyroid function, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein. High-density lipoprotein was 0.83 (normal 0.94–2.5) mmol/L; low-density lipoprotein and triglyceride levels were normal. The prothrombin time was 13.7 s (normal 9.4–12.5) and activated partial thromboplastin time and d-dimer levels were normal. The plasma homocysteine (Hcy) level was 77.2 (normal < 15) µmol/L. Folate concentration was 5.15 (normal 9.53–44.9) nmol/L and vitamin B12 levels were normal. The prolactin level was 670.2 (normal 102–496) mIU/L. There was no serum anti-nuclear, anti-double-stranded DNA, extractable nuclear antigen, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic, or anti-cardiolipin antibodies or rheumatoid factor. Lumbar puncture performed in the supine position after admission revealed an intracranial pressure > 330 mmH2O, normal cerebrospinal fluid cell counts and protein levels, and normal microbiology results. Chest CT, electrocardiogram, and video-electroencephalogram results were normal. Ultrasound showed no disorders of the liver, gallbladder, spleen, pancreas, or kidneys. Peripheral vascular ultrasound indicated that the veins of both upper and lower limbs and the iliac vein were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed abnormal signal lesions in the superior sagittal sinus, which was isointense to gray matter on TW1I, hyperintense to gray matter on TW2I and diffusion-weighted images . Magnetic resonance venography (MRV) strongly suggested superior sagittal sinus stenosis . Susceptibility-weighted imaging showed no abnormal signals.
The patient was treated with 4100 IU nadroparin for 2 weeks, followed by oral rivaroxaban 15 mg bid. Intravenous mannitol was prescribed to lower the intracranial pressure. Supplemental folate and vitamins B12 and B6 were prescribed. After 3 days, the headache was obviously relived. One week later, PT and prolactin levels had returned to normal. In repeat lumber puncture, the intracranial pressure had decreased to 270 mmH2O. Two weeks later, the headache had disappeared completely. One month later, she had no headache and the intracranial pressure had decreased to 215 mmH2O. Hcy levels had decreased to 27.9 µmol/L, while the folic acid level had increased to more than 45.4 nmol/L. MRI showed shrinkage of the thrombosis in the superior sagittal sinus; the degree of stenosis had significantly decreasedon fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) . After 3 months, the oral rivaroxaban was stopped and she remained stable for the following two years.