A 36-year-old male patient presented to the gastroenterology clinic with epigastric and right loin pain, along with decreased urine output, for 3 days. He also reported associated symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite. There was no history of alcohol consumption or chronic medical illnesses. Examination of the vital signs revealed tachycardia (110 bpm), tachypnea (20 cycles/minute), and a blood pressure of 100/60 mmHg. On physical examination, he had central abdominal and right flank tenderness.
Blood investigations were as follows: white blood cells (27.4×109/l), hemoglobin 12.2 gm/l, C-reactive protein 44.3 mg/l, creatinine (22.8 mg/dl), urea (196 mg/dl), amylase (1103 IU/l), lipase (1603 IU/l), alkaline phosphatase 115 IU/l, alanine aminotransferase 38.5 IU/l), random glucose (122 mg/dl), Na+ (140 mmol/l), K+ (5 mmol/l), Cl- (106 mmol/l) and triglycerides (141 mg/dl), calcium (9 mg/dl), parathyroid hormone 55 IU/l, and urinalysis showed microscopic hematuria (25 RBC/HPF) without pyuria and cast cells.
An abdominal ultrasound (U/S) showed mild to moderate ascites, a hyperechoic pancreas, a small (26×77 mm) left kidney with increased echogenicity, right renal hypertrophy with moderate hydronephrosis, and a dilated upper ureter due to a 10 mm obstructing stone with a perirenal fluid collection. While the liver, gall bladder, and common bile duct were normal. The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis with an obstructing right upper ureteric stone was established. Once the gastroenterologist could not find a cause for pancreatitis other than the obstructing stone, he referred him to the urology department.
Because computed tomography (CT) kidneys, ureters and bladder was unavailable at the time of presentation, and the patient’s condition was deteriorating, consent was obtained from the patient to perform either an emergency right percutaneous nephrostomy or a right JJ stent insertion, as well as hemodialysis as needed. Owing to the risk of bleeding, a trial of double J stent insertion was preferred. Under spinal anesthesia, the patient underwent a trial of right JJ stent insertion. However, the guide wire could not pass to the kidney due to stone impaction. A ureteroscopy with laser fragmentation was done to aid JJ stent insertion, and a few stone fragments were pushed back to the kidney, then the right double J stent was inserted.
Following the operation, the patient developed immediate postobstructive diuresis. In the first 24 h, he passed around 24 l of diluted urine, and serum creatinine decreased to 11 mg/dl. The patient received 1–2 l of IV fluids at a rate of 250–500 ml/hour. Oral feeding was resumed cautiously with low-protein meals due to the patient’s elevated creatinine levels. In addition, the patient was administered meropenem (500 mg twice daily), analgesics, and antipyretics (paracetamol 1 g, three times a day).
He was kept on close follow-up with monitoring fluid balance, urine output, and careful monitoring of serum electrolytes. He responded well to the treatment, and on the fifth postoperative day, his blood investigations showed: serum creatinine 1.1 mg/dl, blood urea 25 mg/dl, serum amylase 379 IU/l, and serum lipase 834 IU/l. On the sixth postoperative day, he was discharged home in good general condition. A CT KUB on the 14th postoperative day showed an edematous pancreas, a double stent well-positioned, and a 4 mm lower calyceal stone . However, on presentation, the case denied a history of diabetes, and his blood glucose was within the normal range, he was subsequently diagnosed with diabetes mellitus and put on metformin 500 mg. Six weeks later, the double J stent was removed, and the patient was kept on regular follow-ups for the management of diabetes mellitus. During the patient’s 3-month follow-up after management, his lab results showed normal levels of C-reactive protein (2.86 mg/l), urea (36.3 mg/dl), amylase (81 IU/l), and lipase (42.3 IU/l). The creatinine level decreased significantly from 11 mg/dl to 1.37 mg/dl, and his blood glucose levels were well-controlled with a dose of 500 mg metformin taken twice daily. After 2 years of routine follow-up, the patient had fully recovered.