A 67-year-old woman with unresectable locally advanced PDAC treated with gemcitabine (GEM) plus nab-paclitaxel (nab-P) followed by radiotherapy plus capecitabine.
The patient diagnosed with unresectable locally advanced PDAC received neoadjuvant treatment with GEM plus nab-P that was completed without conversion to resectability, hence she continued with capecitabine-based chemoradiation therapy which ended 10 months after diagnosis, in June 2017.
Approximately nine months earlier, the patient presented with a feeling of heaviness and satiety with regurgitation. The patient had no other medical history of interest.
Her sister was diagnosed with breast cancer at the age of 52 years, two maternal cousins with breast cancer at the ages of 65 and 27 years, and one maternal cousin with colon cancer at the age of 70 years.
At physical examination, she had a depressed mood, she was slim, there was no dyspnea, but there was abdominal pain on deep palpation and residual neurotoxicity, mainly in hands.
Serum tumor marker levels were abnormal: 6.1 ng/mL (normal value 0.00-5.00 ng/mL) for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and 295.50 U/mL (normal value 0.0-39.0 U/mL) for carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9). Other altered determinations were 235 mg/dL for cholesterol and 149 U/L for alkaline phosphatase. No other abnormalities were detected in routine blood or urine analyses.
Enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan performed 18 months after diagnosis (8 months after the end of treatment) revealed a significant growth of a nodule located in the lingula of left lung (17 mm × 17.5 mm and spiculated contours). The scan also visualized a previously known pancreatic mass, approximately 40 mm × 30 mm that included the origin of the celiac trunk, exit of the hepatic artery, origin of the gastro-duodenal artery, and proximal region of the superior mesenteric artery, infiltrating and obliterating the mesenteric portal venous confluence. It was reported as bilateral adrenal hyperplasia of left predominance contacting the pancreatic mass, without ruling out infiltration, observing nonspecific mesenteric lymph nodes. One month later, positron emission tomography (PET)-CT evidenced metabolic progression of the disease, showing the presence of a pancreatic neoplastic lesion, together with an adenopathy in the hepatic hilum and two neoplastic lesions in the left lung and mediastinum. Thus, PET-CT revealed PDAC progression and the appearance of pulmonary lesions suggestive of a second primary tumor in the lung .
In April 2018, 20 months after diagnosis, CT-guided incisional biopsy in the left lung revealed infiltration by lung adenocarcinoma (TTF1+/P40-/CD56-). In May 2018, a second biopsy of adenopathy 4 L was performed. Anatomopathological study confirmed adenocarcinoma and metastasis compatible with bronchogenic origin (TTF1+; CK19+; CEA-). Therefore, both biopsies confirmed the presence of lung cancer with mediastinal metastases (clinically staged as T2N1). Additionally, immunohistochemical study showed 95% programmed death ligand 1 (PD-L1) positive neoplastic cells (antibody clone 22C3) in pulmonary lesions. Unfortunately, it was not possible to determine molecular parameters in the pancreatic tumor due to insufficient tumor tissue sample.