A 33 year old male presented one week after falling from a bike with pain and swelling over the bilateral hand and around the right wrist. There was no history of comorbidities.
His vitals were stable. Tenderness was present over the dorsum of base of the 5th metacarpal in both hands, and tenderness was present around the right wrist. Wrist extension and ulnar deviation strength were reduced on the left side. He was immobilized in a below elbow splint, and radiographs were taken. X-rays showed a left 5th metacarpal shaft with a displaced avulsed base fracture and an undisplaced 5th metacarpal base fracture along with a volar Barton fracture on the right side . A CT right wrist confirmed a fracture involving the volar ulnar corner of the distal radius .
Considering the displaced avulsed fracture and concern for altered wrist mechanics if left untreated, the patient was planned for operative repair.
Left : Through a mini-open approach, under image guidance, fracture is reduced using a clamp. In keeping the fracture in reduction, a 1.5-mm K-wire was inserted to stabilize the avulsed fragment along with the shaft fracture .
Right : Ulnar palmar approach was used to address the volar ulnar corner fracture fragment of the distal radius. Fracture is approached using the interval between the ulnar neurovascular bundle and the flexor tendon’s. Fracture is reduced and buttressed using a L-plate with screws . As the 5th metacarpal base fracture was undisplaced, it was decided to treat it non operatively.
Post-operatively, the patient was placed in a short arm splint with the wrist in slight extension and ulnar deviation in the left hand. Later, it was changed to a cast after suture removal and once the wound healed. At 6 weeks, K-wires were removed and hand therapy protocol exercises were started. At 12 weeks, he had nearly symmetric wrist strength and range of motion, with no functional deficits . He resumed work after 12 weeks. At 7month follow up, though the radiograph showed no-union at the fracture site clinically, he had full range of hand, wrist movements and adequate grip strength .