A 45-year-old woman was referred to Yokohama City University Medical Center with an 18-month history of recurrent nasopharyngitis. She presented with pain in the throat. Nasopharyngitis had been identified on a previous visit to an otolaryngology clinic. It had been temporarily improved by antibacterial treatment and nasopharyngeal abrasive therapy, which involves rubbing the nasopharynx with a nasal swab or pharyngeal cotton thread soaked in zinc chloride solution or compound iodine glycerin [, ]. However, it recurred within a few weeks, and nasopharyngeal abrasive therapy continued for 12 weeks before the first visit. She was then referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment.
At presentation, she had infectious swelling of the adenoid remnant and pus on the lesion . Her physical examination was otherwise unremarkable and she had no other medical history including immunodeficiency.
The first pharyngeal swab culture test, which was gotten from epipharynx to insert the swab through the anterior nasal cavity, showed normal flora at the time of first visit. The same day, histopathological examination of a nasopharyngeal biopsy sample revealed the possibility of mycobacterial infection based on positive results for acid-fast bacillus and Ziehl–Neelsen staining. Three weeks later, the first examination by pharyngeal mycobacteria culture from the sample which gotten by swabbing was positive for smear dyeing of acid-fast bacillus stain, while the culture was negative. Four weeks later from first visit, we got the second mycobacterial culture from the biopsy specimen collected from nasopharynx using the sterile nasal cupped forceps with the visual guide of endoscope. It was wrapped in sterile gauze moistened with raw food to avoid exposure to tap water and transported promptly to the laboratory. It revealed the presence of M. abscessus complex using the MGIT™ System. (Becton and Dickinson Co. Mountain View, CA) All strains were classified as M.
abscessus complex using a DDH Mycobacteria kit (Kyokuto Pharmaceutical Industrial, Tokyo, Japan) or by MALDI-TOF MS (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA, USA). Mycobacterium abscessus subspecies abscessus, M. massiliense and Mycobacterium abscessus subspecies bolletii type strains were obtained from the Japan Collection of Microorganisms of the Riken Bio-Resource Center (BRC-JCM; Ibaraki, Japan). All bacterial strains/isolates were subcultured on 2% Ogawa egg slants or 7H10 agar plates supplemented with 10% OADC. All procedures were performed in a laminar flow cabinet to avoid contamination. PCR assays were done for differentiating Mycobacterium abscessus subspecies abscessus, M. massiliense, and Mycobacterium abscessus subspecies bolletii, as described previously , , and identified this species as M. massiliense . The susceptibility test was not performed this case. This is because there is a difference between the in vitro results and the behaviors under antimicrobial use, and the information is for limited reference only [, ].
The patient underwent surgery to remove the inflamed adenoid tissue in the nasopharynx and washed the wound with saline. At the same time, she was treated with oral clarithromycin at 400 mg/day, intravenous imipenem at 2 g/day divided into four doses, and intravenous amikacin at 15 mg/kg/day three times a week. She received multiple antibacterial therapy for 2 weeks in an inpatient setting. She was then treated with oral clarithromycin at the same dosage, and intravenous amikacin two times a week after discharge. The treatment courses are summarized in Fig. . She received this combination therapy with clarithromycin and amikacin for an additional 4 months. The mycobacterial “tissue” culture was negative 8 weeks after surgery. She is currently being followed up in our hospital, and has had no adverse event and no recurrence during the 56 weeks since the cessation of treatment.