Ms. H., a 31-year-old Caucasian woman with BD1, was voluntarily admitted to the psychiatric ward of the San Martino Hospital of Oristano, Sardinia, Italy for a manic episode with mood-congruent psychotic features according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-5 (DSM-5) criteria.
The family history of Ms. H. was positive for mood disorders: her father was diagnosed with BD1 and her paternal grandmother with mood disorder not otherwise specified (NOS). Her premorbid personality had been characterized by cyclothymic temperament and rejection sensitivity. Her first illness episode presented at 21 years in concomitance with the end of a romantic relationship. Specifically, she developed depressed mood, social withdrawal, and persecutory delusion for which she was treated with unspecified psychopharmacological treatment. At the age of 24, during a euthymic phase, and in the absence of pharmacological treatment, she started presenting somatic symptoms (abdominal pain, change in bowel habits, and bloating) after a surgical operation for ovarian cyst removal. Around the same time, she experienced marked anxiety, ruminations, and social discomfort with subsequent social withdrawal. Treatment with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) was started with clinical remission.
Although in the following years the patient had a good social and work functioning, several residual psychopathological symptoms remained, including mood fluctuations, hypochondriac thoughts and behaviors, marked anxiety, and dietary restraint with weight loss aimed at facilitating control of bowel function. The absence of a complete clinical remission was partially due to the lack of compliance to clinical monitoring and psychopharmacological treatment. The progressive increase in the severity of these psychopathological symptoms led to manifestation of a full-blown psychotic episode in early 2016. This clinical picture motivated a 1-week admission at the end of March 2016 at the acute inpatient psychiatric unit in Pisa, Italy, where she was started on carbamazepine 400 mg q.d., lithium carbonate 450 mg q.d., and risperidone 4 mg q.d., which led to substantial clinical improvement. Laboratory workup, including thyroid function parameters, was normal. After discharge from hospital, she moved to Sardinia and was seen by a private practitioner for follow-up visits. After 12 days from the start of psychopharmacological treatment, she manifested a cutaneous reaction that motivated the stop of carbamazepine treatment, as well as the increase in lithium carbonate dose (750 mg q.d.) (challenge phase). Risperidone dose remained unvaried. Since the skin lesion persisted after 8 days from withdrawal of carbamazepine, the private practitioner stopped also lithium carbonate treatment (de-challenge), maintaining risperidone treatment. The cutaneous reaction resolved spontaneously after 6 days from withdrawal of lithium carbonate. On May 2016 after the manifestation of marked anxiety, flight of ideas, pressured speech, decreased ability to concentrate, insomnia, and persecutory delusions, she came to our attention and was admitted at our unit where lithium carbonate was reintroduced (16 days after its suspension) (re-challenge). On the following day, we observed an itching erythematous maculopapular rash involving the trunk, the four limbs, and the oral mucosa. The dermatologist consultation indicated the presence of: “a drug-induced toxic reaction, characterized morphologically by eruption of a large number of erythematous macules of varying size, mostly with papules, which became confluent and itching. It is observable also a palmoplantar eruption of pale erythematous macular lesions with scarlatiniform characteristics”. Lithium carbonate was immediately stopped with resolution of the skin lesion on the subsequent day. This severe adverse reaction was described and sent to the Sardinian Regional Centre of Pharmacovigilance. Their assessment with the Naranjo algorithm (Naranjo et al. ) classified the relationship between the cutaneous adverse reaction and the use of lithium as “probable.”