We present a 45-year-old female who was admitted to the hospital due to recurrent hematochezia.
She denied abdominal pain, weight loss, fever or night sweats and there was no history of malignancy or inflammatory bowel disease.
Patient history included alcohol misuse, bipolar disorder, arterial hypertension, cholecystolithiasis, pancreatic insufficiency and an episode of severe acute pancreatitis 8 years prior, which required intensive care treatment.
Family history for gastrointestinal disease, tumor or bleeding was negative.
On presentation, abdominal examination was unremarkable and vital signs were stable.
Blood work showed anemia with a hemoglobin of 8 g/dL (12-15.4 g/dL), a mean corpuscular volume of 70 fL (80-99 fL) and a mean corpuscular hemoglobin of 22 pg (27-33.5 pg) while coagulation parameters were within normal range.
Gastroscopy revealed reflux esophagitis of grade A and a mild duodenitis. There was no evidence for varices or ulcers. During colonoscopy, largely dilated and tortuous varices spreading from the right transverse colon to just underneath the right colonic flexure were diagnosed . There was no active bleeding. A CT angiography confirmed an extensive venous convolute at the right colonic flexure and evidenced an aberrant mesenteric collateral coming from the splenic hilum as its feeding vein . The varices’ draining vein could be identified and lead to the superior mesenteric vein. In addition, splenomegaly (15 cm) and thrombotic occlusion of the splenic vein were diagnosed, while the portal vein and superior mesenteric vein were perfused regularly.
Selective angiography of the spleen via the femoral artery observed a long-segment occlusion of the splenic vein up to the confluence of the portal vein. It confirmed the findings of the CT angiography and noted that almost the entire venous drainage of the spleen occurred via mesenteric collaterals . Simultaneously, an arterio-portal fistula was ruled out. There was no evidence of liver cirrhosis or portal hypertension. Laboratory investigations showed transaminases, albumin and coagulation parameters within normal range. Platelets were slightly decreased due to splenomegaly. Transient elastography showed a value of 7.5 kPa and the hepatic venous pressure gradient was normal (3 mmHg).