A 47-year-old woman, gravida 3, para 1, gave birth 26 years ago. She was admitted to our hospital on March 06, 2019, mainly because the blood beta-human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG) rose 9 days after a curettage of hydatidiform mole which was performed 3 months ago. Ordinarily menstruation is regular and the last menstruation period was September 24, 2018. More than 3 months ago, the patient went to the local hospital for 63 days of menopause and 20 days of vaginal bleeding. B-ultrasound suspected hydatidiform mole, blood β-hCG was 272,800 U/L, pelvic Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed cystic and solid mass in the uterine cavity with invasion of the myometrium and considered erosion mole. On November 28, 2018, a sono-guided uterine suction was performed and the pathological examination showed hydatidiform mole. After the curettage, a prophylactic chemotherapy was given using actinomycin-D (Act-D) injection for 5 days and the blood β-hCG decreased gradually. Two days after the suction, the blood β-hCG was 133,531 U/L, 5 days was 45,778 U/L, and 7 days was 29,650 U/L. Half a month later, the ultrasonography of uterine suggested incomplete suction. So on December 18, 2018, the dilatation and curettage (D&C) was conducted again and the pathology was the same as before.
After that, β-hCG titers were obtained regularly. Unfortunately, β-hCG increased from 7341 U/L (February 25, 2019) to 11,333 U/L (March 05, 2019). So she visited our hospital on March 6, 2019, and the blood β-hCG was 41,611 U/L at that time. Transvaginal sonography showed intramural abnormal strong echo area in uterine fundus of 6.26*6.04 cm in size with abundant blood flow and arteriovenous fistula was formulated. Then she was hospitalized due to diagnosis of GTN. The patient had undergone left salpingo-oophorectomy because of benign adnexal mass 7 years before.
It is worth noting that the computed tomography (CT) scan of her thorax before the first D&C indicated a space-occupying lesion in the inferior lobe of right lung, though she had no fever, no cough, no sputum, no hemoptysis or any other symptoms. CT of the head and abdomen showed no abnormalities. The chest CT rechecked during the second D&C still showed the same lesion. Percutaneous lung biopsy was thus undertaken, and the pathological result showed: (the basal segment of the right lower lobe) well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, consistent with primary lung cancer. Immunohistochemical results were CK7 (+), TTF-1 (+), TG (−), WT-1 (−), P53 (weak positive, suggesting wild type) Pax-8 (1). On December 20, 2018, she went to the local tertiary hospital. The thoracic CT also showed the space-occupying lesion in the inferior lobe of the right lung considered malignancy, and multiple small nodules in both lungs considered metastasis. Both the cranial and abdominal CT and bone scan were negative. In order to confirm the diagnosis, a repeated percutaneous needle biopsy was done and the pathological result also showed primary lung adenocarcinoma. Therefore, she received chemotherapy of TP regimen, with Paclitaxel 210 mg (D1) and cisplatin 40 mg (D2-D4) for twice. The third time chemotherapy could not be performed because of myelosuppression. She began to take targeted agent icotinib tablets (125 mg tid) from February 19, 2019, since the genetic testing of the lung biopsy specimen suggested EGFR mutation.
In our hospital, the patient reexamined the pelvic MRI on March 11, 2019, which showed uterine lesion considered GTN, and abnormally increased blood vessels were detected in that lesion . The chest CT images of lung in our hospital were showed in Fig. . Pathological section of both D&C and lung biopsy were read again by two experienced pathologists. The morphology of D&C tissue conformed to hydatidiform mole, and trophoblast cells and edema villus could be seen in degenerative tissues. Puncture biopsy conformed to lung adenocarcinoma with papillary structures in part.
Based on: ① 47-year-old woman (1 point), ② a D&C history with pathologic result of hydatidiform mole (0 point), ③ a β-hCG level of 41,611 U/L (2 points), ④ transvaginal ultrasound and pelvic MRI both suggested an intramural lesion of more than 6 cm in uterine fundus (2 points), ⑤ multiple small nodules in both lungs in thoracic CT but none in chest X-ray (0 point), ⑥ the space-occupying lesion in the inferior lobe of the right lung and the biopsy pathology showed primary lung adenocarcinoma. The preliminary diagnosis were GTN (stage III: 5 points) and lung cancer.
Consider the high level of hCG, firstly, two cycles of chemotherapy including 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and Act-D was given. Before the third cycle of chemotherapy, the blood β-hCG (May 07, 2019) dropped to 694.02 U/L. The patient was 47 years old and had no reproductive desire. In order to reduce the tumor burden, shorten the course and reduce the side effects of chemotherapy, the patient agreed to remove the uterus, and ask for right salpingo-oophorectomy resection concurrently. Laparoscopic total hysterectomy and right salpingo-oophorectomy was performed on May 14, 2019. During the operation, we found the uterus was slightly larger, with abundant blood vessels in its surface , the left adnexa was absent, and the right adnexa was normal in appearance. Moreover, a 3*2 cm nodule was noticed, which was hard and had a complete and smooth capsule, protruded from the serous surface of the sigmoid colon . We called for a general surgeon to remove the nodule. The operation went smoothly and the intraoperative hemorrhage was 50 ml. Postoperative pathological results showed: ① infiltration of hyperplastic trophoblast cells in the fundus endometrium and muscles, accompanied by necrosis, occasional karyokinesis, and conformed to the changes of GTN after chemotherapy . Immunohistochemical results were CKpan (+), HCG (+), Inhibin-a (+), Ki-67 (hot zone + 70%), P63 (very few cells+), PLAP (−); ② the proliferative phase endometrium, uterine myometrial leiomyoma, chronic cervicitis with Nabothian cyst; ③ chronic inflammation of the right fallopian tube, and no abnormal findings on the right ovary; ④ the nodule (2.3 × 2 × 1.5 cm) on the surface of sigmoid colon was mesenchymal tumor, in accord with gastrointestinal stromal tumor , immunohistochemically CD117 (−), CD34 (+), Desmin (−), DOG1 (−), Ki-67 (+ 15%), S-100 (−), SMA (−), SMMS-1 (−), CKpan (−). Chemotherapy was continued on the 3rd day after surgery. Before the 4th chemotherapy, the blood β-hCG dropped to normal, and then she was given 2 cycles of consolidation chemotherapy, and the last chemotherapy course was finished on July 13, 2019. There was no abnormality in the monthly gynecological B-ultrasound, and the serum hCG titer was in the normal range.
During the treatment of GTN, Icotinib tablets were taken orally to control the progression of lung cancer, and the patient regularly recheck the chest CT, the CT showed that the right lung lower lobe shadow slightly reduced, the density slightly lower and the multiple nodules in both lungs gradually disappeared. Three months later, on August 12, 2019, thoracoscopic lower lobe of right lung lobectomy and the mediastinum lymph nodes removal were performed by thoracic doctors. Pathology results revealed the lower lobe adenocarcinoma of right lung (2.5 × 2.0 × 1.0 cm, nipple type 60%, adherent type 30%, acinus type 10%) , no definite cancer embolus in the vessels, and the bronchial stump, pleura, along with the 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12 groups of lymph nodes did not show malignancy. Immunohistochemical results showed CA-125 (−), CK20 (−), CK7 (−), CKpan (−), HCG (−), Ki-67 (about 3%+), NapsinA (+), P63 (−), TTF-1 (−), (AFP-). Elastic fiber staining showed pleural aggression (−). The patient recovered well after surgery.
The patient had gastroscopy and colonoscopy on Jan16, 2020, and the results showed hiatus hernia, gastric ulcerative lesion, chronic non-atrophic gastritis with erosion and tubular adenoma of the descending colon (0.4 * 0.5 cm). Despite the impact of COVID-19, the patient insisted on regular check-ups. The latest follow-up reexamination was at Jun 9, 2022, with normal gynecological B-ultrasound, gastroscopy and colonoscopy results. In addition, the patient's chest and abdominal CT and the cranial CT or MRI scans showed no abnormal nodule. Tumor markers including hCG, Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), Neuron-specific enolase (NSE), and Cytokeratin-19-fragment (CYFRA21-1) were within normal limits.