A 57-year-old man presented with a progressive visual disturbance over a period of 3 weeks. His medical history was unremarkable. At presentation, the patient exhibited depressed visual acuity on the left and defects of the temporal visual field. Ophthalmological examination found intact extraocular movements. Other neurological deficits were not noted. Cranial computed tomography scans revealed an isodense mass at the tip of the left middle fossa, 2 × 2 cm in maximal dimension, extending into the orbital apex, and accompanying bony erosions in the medial sphenoid ridge . On magnetic resonance imaging, the tumor appeared isointense both on T1- and T2-weighted sequences and intensely enhanced on contrast examination [Figure –]. The left optic nerve was considerably compressed by the tumor at the orbital apex . The patient underwent a microsurgical tumor resection. A frontotemporal craniotomy followed by drilling of the sphenoid ridge revealed a dura-based, capsulized tumor . It was elastic, hard, entirely located epidurally, and moderately vascular . A meningo-orbital artery was found to pass through the orbitomeningeal foramina and supply the tumor from the upper surface. With the internal debulking maneuver using cavitron ultrasonic surgical aspirator (CUSA), eventually, a gross total resection was achieved. Part of the dura mater at tumor attachment appeared intact and was only given electrical coagulation. Microscopically, the tumor comprised spindle-shaped cells, lacking findings of atypia or necrosis . Immunohistochemical stains were positive for bcl2, CD34, CD99, and STAT6 [Figure –], whereas negative for S100 and epithelial membrane antigen. The MIB-1 index was 10% . These were consistent with HP of World Health Organization grade II. Postoperatively, the patient's visual disturbance improved. Systemic11 C-methionine positron emission tomography/CT scans did not reveal any abnormal accumulation. Immediate adjuvant radiotherapy was not administered. The patient has been under close observation without local recurrence or distant metastasis for 14 months