A 19-year-old girl presenting with ACV was treated at Sheng Ai Hospital of TCM on October 18, 2020. Upon history evaluation, the patient conveyed that at 15 years of age she had developed a rash on both lower limbs and ankles that was red, itchy, painless on touch, not raised above the skin surface, and non-patchy. She further reported that since the rashes originally looked like mosquito bites, she did not pay much attention to them.
However, after two weeks, her condition began to worsen, with the rashes turning from the initial red to purpuric, while her lower limbs, ankles, and feet began to swell and fester. She was subsequently hospitalized and was advised to undergo hormone therapy. Considering the patient's youthful age, her family refused the hormonal treatment. Therefore, she was administered intravenous injections of Xuesaitong for half a month, but her condition did not show significant improvement. After discharge from the hospital, in order to speed up recovery, she finally agreed to take oral corticosteroid treatment. Corticosteroid therapy led to symptomatic relief, but it was short lived, and the same condition developed in another part of the ankle after one month.
Over the next two years, she received medical treatment at both the Wuhan First People's Hospital and the Dermatology Hospital Affiliated to the Shandong First Medical University. She was treated with prednisolone acetate, cetirizine hydrochloride, and loratadine tablets. After taking the medications prescribed by both institutions, her symptoms neither dissipated nor aggravated, and the patient exhibited no meaningful improvement.
There is no genetic disease in her family.
No special physical examination of heart, lung and abdomen.
The patient went to the dermatology department of Pu'er People's Hospital, where she underwent routine examinations (complete blood count, urinalysis, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and immunology examinations). The laboratory urinalysis revealed a red blood cell count of 95.9/mL, red blood cell (high-power field of vision) count of 17.26/HPF, and a positive result for occult blood in the urine.
The patient did not show any imaging examination.