A 29-year-old Hispanic male was transferred to our tertiary care hospital for worsening rash , high fevers, and tachycardia in the setting of testing positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). Vaccines against SARS-CoV-2 were not yet available at the time of his presentation.
He reported first feeling unwell a few days prior to admission, with the gradual onset of fever, palpitations, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Polymerase chain reaction-based testing for SARS-CoV-2 was positive. He was discharged from the emergency department (ED) after several hours of observation. After discharge, he noticed “a few red dots” on his arms and legs which progressed over the subsequent 12 hours to cover his hands, feet, arms, and legs. The rash was uncomfortable, making it difficult for him to sleep or be touched. Additional symptoms included eye irritation, swelling of the lips, scrotum, hands, and feet, and progressive feedback. He represented to the ED the following day for further evaluation.
The patient had no significant past medical or surgical history. Family history was unremarkable. He was not prescribed any medications and denied smoking, alcohol use, or illicit drugs. He worked full time at a local factory.
Vitals were notable for sinus tachycardia to 170 beats per minute that only mildly improved with a 1 L fluid bolus. Blood pressure was normal. Peripherally measured oxygen saturation was greater than 95% while receiving 2 L/minute supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula.
His exam was notable for a diffuse rash consisting of well-demarcated confluent erythematous patches interspersed with erythematous macules and targetoid lesions . The rash was most prominent on the chest, abdomen, central and lower back, flank, periaxillary regions, bilateral extensor elbow and knees, scrotum, inguinal folds, hands, and feet in a glove-and-stocking distribution. There was bilateral scleral injection without any crust or exudate. The lips, scrotum, hands, and feet were swollen.
Laboratory evaluation was notable for significantly elevated inflammatory markers [for example, C-reactive protein (CRP) of 385 mg/L; see Table ], as well as initial eosinophilia, elevated troponin, and mild transaminitis. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest was notable for the absence of focal consolidations or ground-glass opacities commonly seen in patients with COVID-19, although hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy was present. A transthoracic echocardiogram was unremarkable.
The patient was treated with methylprednisone and empiric antibiotics for community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) prior to transfer to our institution. Upon arrival, we started remdesivir (200 mg loading dose followed by 100 mg daily for 9 days) and transitioned his steroids to dexamethasone 6 mg daily (for a total 10-day course). Dermatology was consulted and felt his rash was consistent with a viral exanthem. Other etiologies were considered given the marked acral erythema, but additional infectious tests returned negative (see Table ). We reviewed potential culprit medications that could cause drug rash and considered drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms, but felt this diagnosis to be unlikely given the rapid time course and atypical appearance. He was treated with supportive measures including antihistamines and topical steroids. Throughout his course, he noted only mild shortness of breath and never required more than 2 L/minute of supplemental oxygen via nasal cannula to maintain a peripheral oxygen saturation greater than 95%.
Within a few days, his rash improved significantly (see Fig. ), as did his diarrhea, vital signs, and inflammatory markers . He was discharged home in good health after a 2-week hospital stay.