On August 18, 2022, a 27-year-old woman, gravida 3, para 1, was referred to our hospital with complaints of vomiting and convulsions. She was unconscious and under the influence of intravenous diazepam when she arrived. Her last menstrual period was unknown; however, her relatives reported an irregular menstrual pattern for 8 months. Her first child died at 27 weeks for unknown reasons, and she gave birth to a live male baby in our hospital a year later. Albuminuria was confirmed in both pregnancies without hypertension. Her family history was unremarkable.
Her blood pressure, respiratory rate, pulse rate, and temperature were all 190/139 mmHg, 25/min, 150/min, and 36.8 °C, respectively, on physical examination. Her skin was covered in ecchymosis, and she had significant edema in the lower part of her shank. A soft mass with a fetus of more than 8 months and no heart tones was discovered during an abdominal examination using Doppler ultrasound. Without dilation, a vaginal examination revealed a long, thick cervix.
Her laboratory parameters were abnormal; alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, lactate dehydrogenase, amylase, and creatinine levels were elevated up to 195 U/L(normal reference value:7–40 U/L), 755 U/L(13–35 U/L), 2355 U/L(120–250 U/L), 227 U/L(0–100 U/L), and 341.6 μmol/L(41–73 μmol/L), respectively. Blood clotting test revealed coagulation dysfunction, with an activated partial thromboplastin time of 24.00 s, fibrin degradation product level of 94.10 mg/L, and D-dimer level of 22.74 mg/L. Her hemoglobin levels were normal, but her platelet count had dropped to 46 × 109/L, and her proteinuria was + 2.
An abdominal ultrasound revealed an empty uterus and an extra-uterine fetus with no heartbeat or movement; the fetus’ estimated gestational age was 34 weeks. Following contrast-enhanced CT, these findings were confirmed . An abdominal pregnancy was thus suspected. A CT scan also revealed mild cerebral edema , hydrocholecystis, and an enlarged pancreas.
An emergency laparotomy was performed based on the findings of abdominal pregnancy and eclampsia. The abdomen was entered without incident while under general anesthesia. A female stillbirth weighing 2.1 kg was delivered from the intact amniotic sac, which was completely enveloped in the right unruptured salpinx. The uterus, left fallopian tube, and ovaries appeared normal . The placenta measured 15 × 10 × 2 cm in size and covered the majority of the ampulla cavity. Due to the dense adhesion, the surgeons were unable to separate it from the tissue. A right salpingectomy was carried out. The total amount of blood lost was 800 mL. Six units of cryoprecipitate and four units of packed fresh frozen plasma were transfused during the procedure. Following the operation, she was transferred to the intensive care unit. To control blood pressure, nitroglycerin and urapidil were administered intravenously via a micropump. Additionally, concentrated platelets were infused to boost counts, and ceftriaxone was given to prevent infection. Fortunately, the patient regained consciousness 2 days later and was released 18 days later. A one-month follow-up visit revealed normal blood pressure and no albuminuria.
The myometrium of the tube was significantly thickened, and the myocytes were hypertrophic, according to histopathogical examination. Furthermore, the placenta had adhered directly to the musculature due to the absence of the decidual plate. There were no trophoblasts invading the inner wall of the poorly remodelled artery, and a large number of villus cells had lost their nuclei, with syncytiotrophoblast nuclei aggregating along the villi, known as syncytial knots; some terminal villi were elongated, less branched, and sparse, and some did not have vessels .