A 38-years-old woman was admitted in the emergency department with severe onset of headache, nausea, and vomiting. On the performed computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) angio- and venography, there was thrombosis of both transverse and the left sigmoid sinuses, thrombosis of sinus rectus and superior sagittal sinus, and associated brain edema [-]. In the neck region, distal to the end of the thrombosis, there was a hyper-vascular mass lesion with the characteristics of left CBT (Shambin Type II lesion) . The patient was hospitalized in the neurosurgery clinic. A lumbar spinal drainage was placed in order to control the symptoms of elevated intracranial pressure. The cerebrospinal fluid opening pressure was measured at 29 cm H2O. The patient was medicated with anticoagulation treatment with 9500 anti-Xa IU/ml 0.6 ml nadroparine calcium b.i.d. and with antiedematous treatment – dexamethasone in tapering dosage, short administration of 250 ml 10% mannitol solution (25 gr), and crystalloid solution infusions. The lumbar spinal drainage was kept for 3 days and, along with the abovementioned therapy, allowed for a significant improvement in the neurological status with decrease of the frequency and severity of headaches and correction of vomiting and nausea. At the first stage of the operative treatment, we decided to place a lumboperitoneal (LP) shunt system to attain permanent control of the symptoms of pseudotumor cerebri and to reduce the risk of visual deterioration. We implanted a Medtronic Strata NSC adjustable LP shunt system set on performance level of 2.5 (135–147 mm H2O opening pressure) to avoid hyperdrainage. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged on the 12th postoperative day with intermittent mild headaches, no visual worsening and primary healing of the surgical wound. Oral anticoagulant was continued (the factor Xa inhibitor Rivaroxaban in a daily dosage of 20 mg). Patient was sent for laboratory and genetic tests for thrombophilia, including analysis for prothrombin mutation G20210A, PAI mutation 4G/5G, Factor Leiden mutation, MTHFR C677T, A1298C mutations, protein C and protein S, antithrombin III, antiphospholipid antibody, and anticardiolipin antibody levels.
A control MRI was done 1 month after the first hospitalization indicating complete resolution of the cerebral venous thrombosis. The patient was scheduled for surgery of the CBT almost 2 months after the initial onset of symptoms. The surgery was planned on CT and MRI angiography [,]. No preoperative tumor embolization was planned; therefore, no preoperative conventional angiography was performed, because it was assumed that this invasive examination would not give any further diagnostic data with significance to the surgical intervention planning.
The surgery was performed under intraoperative electrophysiological monitoring which included somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) and cortico-spinal and cortico-bulbar motor evoked potentials (MEP), direct nerve stimulation for the identification of the IX, X, XI, and XII nerves and bispectral index monitoring. The surgical protocol was as follows: the patient was in prone position on the operative table with head rotated and extended to the right side, fixed on the Mayfield head clamp. A reverse “J” incision was made starting from the middle third of the medial border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM) , reaching the mastoid process and curving posteriorly . The dissection was kept on the medial border of the SCM, following the neck fascial planes. The muscle was detached from the mastoid process, leaving a muscle cuff for later reapproximation and preservation the greater auricular nerve. It was very important to identify the XI nerve which runs in the fat pad below the SCM. The identification of the nerve was achieved using monopolar stimulation probe with 1 mA current intensity. After the nerve was successfully identified, it was covered with a protective piece of fat and retracted laterally. This maneuver provides further space for tumor removal, especially in close proximity to the skull base. The vessel dissection in the carotid triangle was performed from proximal to distal direction, starting with identification of the internal jugular vein and the common carotid artery following them to the carotid bifurcation. The internal carotid artery (ICA) was exposed up to the point of entry into the skull base. The tumor was revealed over the carotid bifurcation, stretching the overlaying internal jugular vein . The IX, XII, and X nerves were anatomically identified and electrophysiologically verified with the help of monopolar probe stimulation. The tumor dissection started from the superior to the inferior tumor borders, employing microsurgical technique for the dissection of the tumor from the ICA and external carotid artery (ECA) . Bleeding was controlled using low power bipolar coagulation. No vessel clamps were necessary during tumor removal. When the dissection was performed respecting interfacial and subadventitial plane, there was no bleeding despite the nature of the tumor and the anticoagulation treatment. No changes in the MEP and SSEP were reported. The tumor was removed completely . The postoperative period was uneventful with no neurological worsening. On the postoperative, CT angiography a complete tumor excision was verified . Postoperative partial thrombosis of the left internal jugular vein without intracranial extension was detected. The patient was discharged on the 4th postoperative day. The anticoagulation treatment was continued, and the patient was followed up with MRI and neck vessels Doppler ultrasound examination. The postoperative jugular vein thrombosis resolved on the 1st postoperative month, through which the patient complained form intermittent headaches. There was no data for hyperdrainage of the LP shunt and the latter was functional upon examination. The pathologic examination of the tumor tissue confirmed the diagnosis of a CBT .
The genetic tests for thrombophilia indicated that the patient is homozygotic for Factor V Leiden and PAI-1 4G/5G wild type allele. However, she was found to be a heterozygotic carrier of the G20210A prothrombin gene mutation, and compound heterozygosity for the C677T and A1298C MTHFR mutations was further identified. Therefore, due to the high risk of future thrombotic events, the oral anticoagulant (rivaroxaban in a daily dosage of 20 mg) treatment was continued, and the patient was followed up with MRI and neck vessels Doppler ultrasound examinations.
After a 1-year follow-up the patient is neurologically intact with functioning LP shunt, without new thrombosis of the cerebral sinuses, without tumor recurrence.