A 22-year-old female Caucasian college-student, who engaged in active energy vaping, presented to the University Medical Center with out-of-hospital cardiac arrest via ambulance. Bystanders initially found her to be unresponsive. Resuscitation was started, and emergency services found an initial rhythm of pulseless ventricular tachycardia. She was shocked and converted to ventricular fibrillation. She was emergently defibrillated, and an ECG revealed atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response in the setting of a prolonged QTc interval .
She was subsequently intubated. Vitals were notable for tachycardia and mild hypertension. Physical exam revealed positive withdrawal to pain, mechanical breath sounds, an irregularly irregular pulse, and no appreciable murmurs, gallops, or rubs. Her BMI was determined to be within normal limits based on her height and weight. Amiodarone, esmolol, and heparin drips were initiated.
The patient’s past medical history was unremarkable with no prior hospitalizations or major surgeries. There was no significant family history of any genetic disorders, channelopathies, or early-onset or sudden cardiac arrest. She never used any illicit or recreational drugs and consumed alcohol only during social occasions. She initially started vaping 1 year before being hospitalized and was always a non-nicotine e-cigarette user. She endorsed vaping several times daily.
Several diagnoses were considered including cardiomyopathies, valvular abnormalities, syncope, pulmonary embolism, congenital heart diseases, myocardial ischemia, and arrhythmias. Urine toxicology screen, ethanol level, and troponin were unremarkable. There were several diagnostic challenges present at the time of evaluation, such as the communication barrier between providers and the patient, as she was intubated, and the lack of truly knowing what had happened before her out-of-hospital cardiac arrest as she was found alone.
Chest computed tomography showed no pulmonary embolism. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed normal biventricular function and no valvular abnormalities. Left heart catheterization, performed by the interventional cardiology team, showed angiographically normal coronary arteries. Cardiac MRI demonstrated no indication of myocardial scarring/fibrosis with no late gadolinium enhancement .
The patient underwent extensive autoimmune workup which was unrevealing. Autoimmune workup consisted of an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 1 mm/h (reference level of 0–20 mm/h), C-reactive protein of 3.22 mg/l (reference level ≤9.00 mg/l), rheumatoid factor of <10 IU/ml (reference level ≤15 IU/ml), negative antinuclear antibodies (ANA), and negative antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA).
She pharmacologically cardioverted into sinus rhythm and was transitioned to metoprolol tartrate twice daily. She was extubated on day four of hospitalization. Given that she underwent extensive but unrevealing workup for sudden cardiac arrest, she was strongly counseled to refrain from vaping and was discharged with an external defibrillation vest along with a tentative plan for outpatient electrophysiology study.
External defibrillation vest interrogation, conducted posthospitalization, revealed no further arrhythmias. She recovered near full cognitive and physical functioning, and endorsed continued abstinence from vaping. Electrophysiology study remains pending. The patient’s perspective of her course of events was that of extreme gratitude, knowing that she survived, and significant apprehensiveness about vaping again. She will continue to be followed as a patient of the University cardiology clinic.