An 83-year-old woman, with a history of arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, permanent atrial fibrillation (AF), and cognitive impairment, was referred to our institution for dyspnoea and palpitations. She showed clinical signs of heart failure (peripheral oedema with ankle swelling, pulmonary crepitations, and breathlessness).
Baseline electrocardiogram registered an AF with rapid ventricular rate (RVR) (150 b.p.m.). The plasma concentration of B-type natriuretic peptide was elevated to 500 ng/L (N < 100 ng/L).
Transthoracic echocardiography showed a mild systolic dysfunction with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 45–50% and an extremely dilated CS .
Initial heart rate (HR) control in the management of this AF with RVR consisted of Atenolol doses up to 100 mg daily and Digoxin (0.125 mg per day) but our patient failed to respond to such pharmacological approach with an RVR at 140 b.p.m. The anticoagulant therapy was Apixaban (non-vitamin K antagonist oral anticoagulant) 5 mg twice daily.
After scanning the patient’s characteristics and comorbidities, the benefits of either pharmacological and/or electrical cardioversion were sought inconsistent with the complexity of AF [permanent AF, dilated left atrium (63 mL/m2), age, cognitive decline, agitation and/or intolerance with trans-oesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) guided cardioversion]. Atrioventricular (AV) node ablation was then considered the best strategy for our elderly patient in whom pharmacologic rate control had been unsuccessful.
Given the dilated CS, a cardiac CT was performed to better depict the vascular anatomy before implanting a single-chamber PM. It revealed a bilateral SVC system with an LSVC draining directly into the dilated CS . The volume of the CS was estimated on cardiac CT ∼50 mL.
A right-sided implantation was therefore preferred with a PM implanted without difficulty from a right subclavian venous access and the lead further positioned on the interventricular septum. The AV node ablation procedure was attempted but was unsuccessful because of difficulty accessing the right atrium (RA). The ablation catheter could not get into the RA and actually entered into the CS at every attempt. Contrast injection confirmed that the IVC directly flowed into the CS .
Given the poor general condition of the patient in our case (reduced autonomy and cognitive decline), an upper extremity venous access was not attempted. Heart rate control was intensified using Nadolol (80 mg per day) instead of Atenolol and this translated into a suboptimal control at rest with HR ∼90/min and during mild exercise (walking). Clinical improvement was rapidly observed with decreasing signs of heart failure, and the patient was discharged home after 2 weeks.
At second look analysis, CT scan confirmed the diagnosis of an abnormal IVC with an agenesia of its supra-hepatic segment and that the IVC drained directly into the CS . There was no azygous continuation in this case.
To conclude, our patient presented an unusual and rare double venous abnormality: both LSVC and IVC directly drained into the CS and were responsible for its massive dilatation (Video 1).