A 61-year-old South Asian female with past medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, diabetes mellitus complicated by neuropathy, and gastroesophageal reflux disease presented to the emergency department for atypical angina associated with palpitations, dizziness, decreased exercise tolerance, and dyspnoea on exertion. On examination she was overweight, breathing comfortably on room air at rest, cardiac exam was normal, and there was no jugular venous distension. Given her risk factors, the patient was considered to have intermediate pretest probability for coronary artery disease. She was admitted as an inpatient and an acute coronary syndrome was excluded by serial negative cardiac enzymes and normal electrocardiogram (ECG). She was therefore referred for dobutamine stress echocardiography.
Rest ECG demonstrated normal sinus rhythm . Baseline heart rate (HR) 65 b.p.m., systolic blood pressure (SBP) 120 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure (DBP) 80 mmHg, asymptomatic . Baseline echocardiogram demonstrated normal cardiac wall motion, normal left ventricular size and systolic function, and an estimated ejection fraction of 65%. Dobutamine infusion was begun at 10 μg/kg/min, with increase in HR to 93 b.p.m. accompanied by SBP 137, DBP 73 without electrocardiographic changes. Dobutamine infusion rate was increased to 20 μg/kg/min with reproduction of chest pain. Shortly after the start of 20 μg/kg/min infusion, ECG demonstrated asystole with a 5.1-s sinus arrest . Examination was terminated. Following resolution of the sinus arrest, the patient developed brief sinus bradycardia followed by resumption of normal sinus rhythm . Throughout the exam, maximal heart rate achieved was 114 b.p.m. (72% of maximal predicted HR). At peak stress, there remained no regional wall motion abnormalities, and there was a reduction in left ventricular rate an augmentation in left ventricular function. The stress echocardiogram was non-diagnostic, though diagnostic sensitivity was limited by suboptimal stress.
Patient was subsequently referred for coronary angiography, which was normal . An electrophysiology study was performed during the patient’s inpatient stay. The result was also normal, with mildly prolonged SnRT and normal atrioventricular nodal function. She then had a loop recorder implanted to record any further arrhythmia events 1 day after the asystole event. Patient was discharged without symptoms or sequelae. There was no follow-up as of 1 year after device placement, and remote monitoring did not reveal any events as of the last transmission 4 months after device placement.