A 42-year-old local male resident presented to Beijing Friendship Hospital on July 27, 2022 and reported fever, chills, and joint pain. He denied any history of medical or psychiatric problems, as well as any significant family history. Seven days before presentation, the patient went fishing at a nearby river. At that time, he noticed an unknown small insect attached to his right foot; he used his fingers to remove the insect and then threw it away. Six days before presentation, he began to experience an intermittent fever (highest body temperature, 39 °C) with occasional chills, and had pain in the bilateral wrists, right hip, left knee, and abdomen. Two before presentation, he started to develop slurred speech. One day before presentation he complained of headache and blurred vision, appeared restless, irritable, and confused, and experienced loss of consciousness.
At admission, the patient had a temperature of 39 °C, blood pressure of 126/84 mmHg, heart rate of 104 beats/min, and respiratory rate of 20 times/min. He appeared confused and disoriented, and had an ecchymosis on the dorsal side of his right foot . His lung sounds were clear, but heart auscultations indicated systolic murmurs at the apex of the heart. Abdominal palpation indicated slight tenderness in the left upper quadrant.
The laboratory blood test results are shown in . A blood smear test was performed by spreading a thin layer of a peripheral blood sample on a slide and staining with the Giemsa solution (Solaribio Science & Technology Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). The results showed the characteristic Babesia rings, in which pale blue cytoplasm surrounded a vacuole with clumps of chromatin, mainly at one end of the cytoplasm . These results support a diagnosis of babesiosis.
However, an abdominal ultrasound examination (Mindray, BC-8, Shenzhen, China) showed a 5.8 × 2.8 cm splenic abscess, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, Siemens 3.0 T, Germany) indicated brain abscesses , although an echocardiogram indicated no obvious vegetation. A blood culture led to the identification of S. aureus (antibiotic sensitivity data in ), and next-generation sequencing of a blood sample indicated S. aureus sequence 1 (with a coverage of 50%, average of 2079 reads, and positive reference coverage range ≥20% (Seq&Treat Medical Technology Co., China) . Finally, we modified the diagnosis as babesiosis with S. aureus splenic and brain abscesses. Considering the presence of heart murmurs, we also suspected infective endocarditis.
We administered azithromycin (0.5 g daily), fosfomycin (8 g every 12 h), and vancomycin (0.4 g every 12 h) after admission, and his body temperature gradually decreased. As these treatments continued, a second peripheral blood smear at day 10 after admission showed no Babesia rings. Subsequent complete blood cell counts showed that the white blood cell count gradually returned to the normal range; the hemoglobin level decreased, reached a nadir (7.3 g/dL) at 3 weeks after hospital admission, and then gradually increased. A second cranial MRI showed decreased sizes of the intracranial lesions and a second abdominal ultrasound showed that the splenic abscess decreased in size to 4.3 × 3.4 cm. On day 30 after admission, the patient had no clinical symptoms. Revaluation of his clinical state and laboratory tests at that time indicated a return to normal. Antibiotics were stopped and the patient was discharged and followed up in the clinic.