An 82-year-old Japanese male patient presented with an incidental right renal tumor at our hospital. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed an exophytic tumor measuring 6.2 cm × 6.3 cm in the lower pole of the right kidney with suspected right iliopsoas muscle invasion and right adrenal gland metastasis . The patient did not show lymph node involvement or distant metastases at this point.
Laparoscopic right radical nephrectomy with right adrenalectomy was performed. Histopathological diagnosis revealed clear cell RCC with a spindle cell carcinoma component (40%) . Immunohistochemistry analysis using anti-programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) antibody (clone 28-8) showed that PD-L1 was expressed 25% in tumor positive score (TPS), 20% in immune cells (IC), and 40 in combined positive score (CPS) .
CT scans 3 months after the surgery revealed multiple bilateral lung metastases and local recurrence. Although we did not perform needle biopsies for metastatic lesions, we considered that multiple metastases most likely developed from the SRCC owing to the patient's clinical course after surgery. The patient was classified as having intermediate risk according to the International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium risk classification and the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center prognostic model because he fulfilled the criteria of the hemoglobin level being below the lower limit of the normal range and less than 1 year from time of diagnosis to systemic therapy., The patient had advanced age and was worried that sunitinib-related adverse events would lower performance status. Therefore, sunitinib was administered at a dose of 25 mg orally once daily for 2 weeks on and 1 week off in each 3-week cycle. It was well-tolerated by the patient, who showed only grade 2 adverse events. At that time, five lung metastases were identified as target lesions. However, the diameter of targeted lung metastases increased from 5.6 to 7.4 cm (32% increase) in 2 months after sunitinib administration. Therefore, treatment was switched to axitinib, which was administered 5 mg twice daily. However, lung metastases continued to gradually increase, and peritonitis carcinomatosis was observed 2 months after the initiation of axitinib. Thus, the patient was then administered nivolumab (240 mg) intravenously once every 2 weeks. After nivolumab administration, lung metastases, local recurrence, and peritonitis carcinomatosis reduced gradually. After 20 months of nivolumab treatment (24 months after the diagnosis of RCC), the patient achieved complete response with multiple metastases on CT, and treatment-related adverse events were not seen during nivolumab administration .