A 7-year-old 4.5 kg male intact indoor/outdoor domestic shorthair cat was presented during winter with non-pruritic facial skin lesions and bilateral ceruminous OE. Over the past year, the cat had repeatedly received intramuscular injections of methylprednisolone acetate to provide relief for the management of stomatitis. Eleven days prior, the cat had been diagnosed with uncomplicated diabetes mellitus (DM) at our clinic. At this time, a complete work-up (complete blood count, biochemistry profile, electrolytes, thyroxine and fructosamine measurements, feline leukemia virus [FeLV] and feline immunodeficiency virus [FIV] serology, urinalysis, urine culture and abdominal radiography plus ultrasound) was obtained. The patient was found to have marked hyperglycaemia (blood glucose concentration 489 mg/dl, reference interval [RI] 66–150), increased fructosamine concentrations (412 µmol/l, RI 190–340) and a mild elevation in alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (139 U/l, RI 15–125). Urinalysis revealed glucose 3+ without ketonuria and urine culture was negative. The cat was also positive for FIV. All other measured parameters were within normal limits and radiography and ultrasonography were also normal.
At the time of presentation to the dermatology service, the cat was clinically well, and the DM was controlled with glargine insulin (0.25 IU/kg q12h SC; Lantus, Sanofi-Aventis Deutschland) and dietary therapy (Feline Diabetic Canned Cat Food; Royal Canin). Dermatological examination revealed erythema, hypotrichosis, crusts and a brownish oily exudate on the dorsal nasal region . Ceruminous otic exudate was present in both ear canals and the haircoat was dry and dull. Initial dermatological differential diagnoses included dermatophytosis, demodicosis and solar (actinic) dermatitis.
A single deep skin scraping and trichograms from the lesional area revealed four live adult D cati mites. No dermatophyte hyphae or arthroconidia were found from the trichograms and on hair shafts obtained from the skin scraping of the lesional area. The parasitological examination of the otic exudate was also positive for D cati. Two adult live mites were seen. Few Malassezia yeasts were retrieved with ear canal cytology. The owner declined further diagnostic tests. The final diagnosis was feline demodicosis due to D cati.
A single dose of 250 mg (55.5 mg/kg) fluralaner spot-on for medium-sized cats (Bravecto; MSD Animal Health) was applied to the base of the cat’s neck. Four weeks later, the ceruminous otitis had resolved completely and the nasal lesions were markedly reduced. One dead adult D cati mite was found in the deep skin scrapings, while adhesive tape strips, trichograms and the parasitological examination of both ear canals were negative for mites. No further treatment was administered.
After 2 further weeks, while the cat was normoglyceamic and DM was well controlled, only a mild nasal hypotrichosis persisted. Deep skin scrapings, trichograms and parasitological examination of both ear canals were negative for mites. Eight weeks after the initial examination, the skin lesions had almost clinically resolved and all parasitological samples were again negative for mites. A second fluralaner spot-on was applied 12 weeks after the first for prevention of relapse. No recurrence was noted at the 6-month follow-up.