A 70-year-old Caucasian female underwent a CT scan of her chest and was incidentally found to have a nodule within the right thyroid lobe. A subsequent ultrasound of her thyroid revealed a 1.35 × 1.94 × 1.32 cm mildly heterogeneous and hyperechoic nodule. Cytopathologic examination of aspirate material from an initial ultrasound guided fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the nodule was classified as atypia of Undetermined Significance (AUS) according to Bethesda criteria. A repeat FNA of the right-sided nodule was subsequently determined to be suspicious for malignancy carrying a 60–75% malignancy rate . She was taken to surgery for hemithyroidectomy and possible total thyroidectomy. Intraoperative frozen section evaluation of the right thyroid lobe revealed papillary thyroid carcinoma and a total thyroidectomy was performed. Gross and microscopic examination of the thyroid tissue with frozen section revealed a right lobe with dimensions of 3.6 × 2.2 × 2.3 cm weighting 7.47 g. Sectioning of the right thyroid lobe identified a 1.3 × 1.1 × 1 cm well- demarcated nodule present within the lobe that was described as a tan with gritty texture. The left thyroid lobe was 2.8 × 2.0 × 1.3 cm weighing 4.57 g, and was described as granular red-purple parenchyma with no defined lesions.
Histologic examination of the lesion revealed a trabecular an organoid architecture composed spindle/elongated neoplastic cells with clumped nuclear chromatin, and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. Extracellular hyalinization and prominent stromal dystrophic calcification could also be appreciated . By immunohistochemical staining, the neoplastic cells were positive for thyroglobulin, vimentin, and weakly reactive for broad-spectrum keratin (AE1/AE3). Chromogranin, calcitonin, cytokeratin 19, and Ki-67 (MIB-1) stains were negative. The cytomorphologic and immunohistochemical features of the neoplasm supported a diagnosis of hyalinizing trabecular tumor (HTT). The diagnosis was made on morphologic and immunohistochemical grounds. Additional ancillary testing in the form of gene mutation or rearrangement studies were not performed.
The patient’s postoperative course was complicated by transient hypoparathyroidism that was addressed with short-term oral calcium and vitamin D supplementation. Additionally, she had postoperative hoarseness. After assessing with video laryngeal stroboscopy, it was determined that she likely had transient right-sided vocal cord paresis due to neuropraxia, as her bilateral recurrent laryngeal nerves were both identified and preserved intraoperatively. Unfortunately, the patient has not followed up in the office since her 1-month post operative visit.