An 81-year-old Japanese man was diagnosed with BD in 1981 on the basis of recurrent oral and genital ulcers, erythema nodosum, and uveitis, meeting the classification criteria for BD established by the Japanese Ministry of Health and Welfare. He lost eyesight in his left eye in 1992, due to recurrent uveitis. He was referred to our hospital in 2007 with recurrent attacks of inflammation affecting the right eye. He had been treated with betamethasone eyedrops, but had never been treated with colchicine or cyclosporine A before the first visit to our hospital. As for initial ophthalmic presentation at our hospital, visual acuity in the right eye was at the level of recognizing hand motion, and keratic precipitate, anterior chamber cells (++), flare (++), and grade 3 vitreous haze were identified. The left eye showed no inflammation, and light perception on electroretinography was unrecordable.
The patient was initially treated with colchicine and betamethasone eyedrops, but attacks of ocular inflammation persisted, occurring six times in 8 months (equivalent to nine times/year). Immunosuppressive agents, such as cyclosporine A, were difficult to use because he had undergone removal of the left kidney due to cancer in 1998. In May 2008, administration of infliximab was started at a dose of 5 mg/kg, followed by a regular treatment schedule (initially in weeks 2 and 6, then every 8 weeks). This treatment reduced the frequency of ocular inflammatory attacks to seven times in 60 months (1.4 times/year). Right visual acuity improved to 1.0. However, the patient experienced exanthema after the ninth infusion of infliximab in May 2009 (54 weeks after starting infliximab treatment). That episode was considered to represent an infusion reaction to infliximab, so 5 mg of D-chlorpheniramine maleate and 20 mg of epinastine hydrochloride were administered before each infusion of infliximab thereafter.
The frequency of ocular attacks increased from December 2011 (3 years and 7 months after starting infliximab treatment), and oral ulcers and abdominal pain occurred in the same period. After 4 years and 8 months, intestinal lesions with bleeding were identified, and infliximab was judged inadequate to control intestinal lesions. Adalimumab was thus considered as an alternative treatment, and started as a substitute for infliximab. Adalimumab was administered at a dose of 80 mg the first time, with 40 mg administered every 2 weeks thereafter. Adalimumab was self-administered subcutaneously by the patient. Visual acuity prior to the initiation of adalimumab was 1.0. After switching to adalimumab, uveitis was well controlled, right visual acuity remained at 1.0, and ocular inflammatory attacks did not occur during 2 years of follow-up .
Vitreous haze in the right eye had disappeared with the use of infliximab, and did not reappear after switching to adalimumab. Fluorescein angiography examination showed leakage from retinal vessels at the first examination, but this leakage was dramatically improved by infliximab, and the improvement was maintained on adalimumab . Intestinal lesions were also well controlled.