A 76-year-old woman visited our hospital for the treatment and further evaluation of diabetes. She had complained of malaise for several months and was diagnosed with diabetes in another hospital. She had a history of hyperlipidemia in addition to diabetes, and was treated with oral medication. Her blood tests were within the normal range except for her hemoglobin A1c levels, which had risen to 11.0%. Her performance status was normal, although she had malaise and anorexia. Her blood pressure was 114/72 mmHg and pulse was 80 beats/min. Her body weight was 54.4 kg. Urinary glucose was not detected. Her electrocardiogram was within normal limit. She had not been treated with adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) and cortisol.
A contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed for the whole-body examinations, and revealed a ring-enhancing tumor (30 × 30 mm) in the middle mediastinum . An endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration (EBUS-TBNA) was also performed; however, it proved non-diagnostic.
Surgical resection was performed using a left-sided video-assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) approach. The tumor was located between the aorta and the left pulmonary artery. The surgery was performed using a vessel-sealing device; however, bleeding was persistent from the surrounding tissue. Total bleeding was 400 g. Blood pressure fluctuations and arrhythmia did not occur during the procedure, and the tumor was completely resected. Systolic blood pressure remained around 120, although it temporarily rose to 160 immediately after the start of the surgery. In addition, intraoperative blood sugar was stable, and it had been around 130 to 160. The postoperative course was generally good; however, the patient had hoarseness that seemed to be a left recurrent nerve palsy. She was discharged 6 days after surgery.
Histopathological examination of the tumor is shown, and it was 3.5 × 3.5 × 1.5 cm in diameter . Hematoxylin–eosin staining revealed that the tumor cells, with clear cytoplasm, were arranged in nests. The tumor was immunoreactive for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56 protein, and was diagnosed as a paraganglioma arising in the middle mediastinum . Ki-67-positive cells were 6–8%. The patient’s HbA1c levels improved to 5.6% in the 6 months after surgery, and all oral medications for diabetes were stopped. In addition, her appetite improved and her body weight recovered by 5 kg. The tumor was considered a functional paraganglioma.