A 68-year-old male patient was referred to our hospital by his primary care physician for further evaluation of a painful subcutaneous nodule on his upper middle abdomen, which was suspected to be abdominal cellulitis. Five days before admission, he had suffered from epigastralgia, nausea, and anorexia. Four days before admission, his epigastralgia had improved. Two days prior to admission, he noticed an erythematous nodule on his abdomen. His chief complaint on admission to our hospital was the painful nodule on his abdomen. He had been under medical treatment with aspirin, atorvastatin, colestimide, nicorandil, and famotidine for past medical histories of coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG), appendectomy, and dyslipidemia. He had no allergies. He had smoked 1 pack per day for 33 years before quitting 15 years earlier. He habitually drank 20 g of ethanol per day, with no history of heavy drinking. On examination, his temperature was 38.8 °C, blood pressure was 144/74 mmHg, and pulse was 98/min with regular rhythms. A painful and tender erythematous nodule was palpable on his epigastrium at the lower edge of a postoperative scar from CABG. The nodule was 2.5 cm in diameter and surrounded by pale erythema . Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count elevation of 15,650/μL along with a C-reactive protein (CRP) abnormality of 24.4 mg/dL, with no amylase or lipase elevation . Abdominal contrast computed tomography (CT) confirmed grade 1 acute pancreatitis and a 20 mm multifocal cystic mass at the pancreatic body along with an 8 mm dilation of the main pancreatic duct, which were compatible with a diagnosis of IPMN . Thereafter, he commenced intravenous fluid infusion and antibiotic therapy. On hospital day 3, he became afebrile and showed improvements in inflammatory clinical parameters. A punched biopsy of the skin lesion on hospital day 4 revealed lobular panniculitis without vasculitis findings. Histological analysis uncovered focal necrosis of adipocytes and “ghost-like” cells with calcification surrounded by neutrophil-rich inflammatory infiltration, which indicated pancreatic panniculitis . Intravenous fluid infusion and antibiotic therapy were continued until discharge on hospital day 12 for nodule pain disappearance along with CRP normalization. The erythematous nodule on his abdomen disappeared 1 week afterwards . The patient has been complaint-free without nodule recurrence or additional nodule appearance since his discharge 2 years prior. His IPMN status is routinely monitored every 3 months by imaging studies.