The patient in the present case was a 19-year-old male. His parents are of Chinese descent and are healthy and not consanguineous. They were not reported in his extended family. He was born via cesarean section at 39 weeks of gestation in March 2001 with a birthweight of 3200 g. Before 10 years of age, the patient’s intelligence and athletic ability were unaffected. He had excellent performance in an English speech contest and in swimming.
In February 2011, at the age of 10 years old, a high fever persisted for 4 days, after which an epileptic seizure occurred several times in one day; one day later, the patient exhibited a persistent loss of consciousness and dyspnea. Following treatment with antiepileptic drugs, glucocorticoid, plasma exchange, and endotracheal intubation, the patient’s symptoms were controlled. However, the patient exhibited the following sequelae: severe cognitive impairment, personality change, and aphasia.
In the following 9 years, the patient experienced frequent recurrent seizures. Moreover, he presented a paroxysmal temperature increase 1–2 times daily during which body temperature suddenly increased from 36℃ to higher than 38℃ without infective symptoms and which self-remitted after a few hours. The walking ability of the patient gradually decreased, and in 2018, he needed wheelchair or walking with assistance from his parents. He had normal digestive function without acid reflux heartburn symptoms; he rarely had pulmonary infection. The patient slept normally at night and had no abnormal breathing during sleep.
Three months before admission, on February 2020, his caregiver forced him to take prescribed medicine because he refused to take the medicine orally; this led to a repeated cough, choking, dysphagia, aspiration pneumonia, and an increase in limb seizures, which occurred about 10 times per day, each lasting 1–10 min. At admission, the patient was in a moderate coma. Pupils were round and reactive to light. The neck was supple with immobility, and there was low muscle tension of the four limbs with positive and symmetric deep-tendon reflexes, which is a negative bilateral pathological sign. Lung auscultation revealed shortness of breath and extensive rales. Cardiac examination revealed normal heart sounds without murmurs and appropriate peripheral perfusion. The abdomen was soft without organomegaly.
Laboratory tests showed no obvious abnormalities in routine blood, urine, and stool tests. Autoantibodies for autoimmune encephalopathy and demyelinating diseases of the central nervous system, such as myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, aquaporin-4, and myelin basic protein, were all negative. Syphilis, AIDS, and hepatitis were all negative. Lumbar puncture showed that cerebrospinal fluid pressure was normal with white blood cells 2 × 106/L, protein 0.65 g/L, and lactate 2.6 mmol/L; all cerebrospinal fluid cultures were negative.
On admission, chest CT showed bilateral pulmonary infection, especially in the inferior lobe . The brain magnetic resonance image (MRI) of the patient after admission is shown in Fig. C. Moreover, compared with MRIs conducted in 2012 and 2016 , the patient had a trend in which the cerebellar sulci significantly widened along with severe cerebellar atrophy, thinning of the corpus callosum, and mild enlargement of lateral ventricle. Moreover, an electromyogram showed that normal nerve conduction velocity, and skin sympathetic reaction suggested autonomic neuropathy. An electroencephalogram after admission showed that during the awake period, a large number of bilateral symmetric 3-4c/s low and medium amplitude irregular slow waves were found, mainly in the anterior head and without obvious epileptiform waves .
Whole-exome sequencing (WES) was employed to obtain a potential genetic diagnosis after admission. WES revealed compound heterozygous variants in the TECPR2 gene. Both variants were missense mutations. The first mutation was c.1729C > T, causing an amino acid change of p.H577Y (NM_014844.3) in the TECPR2 protein. The second missense variant was c.4189G > A, causing the amino acid change p.A1397T (NM_014844.3). Neither mutation has been previously reported in patients with HSP49, and they are not currently in the HGMDpro database . The mutation c.1729C > T (p.H577Y) was inherited from the father, and c.4189G > A (p.A1397T) was inherited from the mother, which ultimately made the patient a compound heterozygote for these variants .
After admission, the patient’s oxygen saturation decreased intermittently, reaching a nadir of 70%. The patient was treated with sputum suction and other airway nursing and cephalosporin antibiotics. After treatment, the infection was gradually controlled, consciousness turned clear, and blood oxygen saturation returned to normal. Eight days after admission, chest CT reexamination showed that bilateral pulmonary infection was controlled and had improved .
During hospitalization, the patient's temperature increased paroxysmally, peaking at 38℃. Routine blood work and procalcitonin levels were normal and the blood culture was negative, yet the patient's temperature still increased intermittently. At this time, the patient had no symptoms of infection and showed similar temperature fluctuations as those over the previous years before admission, which indicated possible autonomic dysregulation. The patient's digestive function was good after mental recovery, and gastroesophageal reflux disease was excluded after gastroenterology consultation. Sleep apnea syndrome was also excluded after sleep monitoring.
Moreover, seizures occurred recurrently after admission. Lamotrigine was provided to control seizures, and the onset frequency decreased until there was no epilepsy occurrence for up to 17 days. The patient was also provided idebenone to protect mitochondria, tizanidine to reduce muscle tension, and other nutritional nerve treatments.
The patient was discharged at 30 days of hospitalization. Discharge diagnosis was HSP49, secondary epilepsy, and pulmonary infection. At the time of discharge, the patient was conscious, aphasic, still had severe cognitive impairment and ataxic gait, and required walking assistance. Both upper limb tendon reflexes were + + , left lower limb tendon reflex was + , right lower limb tendon reflexes were + + + , and bilateral pathological signs were not elicited. Follow-up was conducted 3 months later. The patient was prescribed lamotrigine and levetiracetam to control epilepsy, but he still had intermittent seizures, approximately once weekly.