A 73-year-old female presented to our outpatient department with a complaint of left knee pain and instability while walking, over a duration of 1 year. This patient had undergone primary TKA 5 years before presentation at a different center for primary OA of the knee. She was operated with a PS knee design (Maxx Destiknee, Meril, Vapi, India). This cemented PS prosthesis has an ODEP rating of 5B. The patient had a well-functioning joint for 4 years after the primary surgery and was ambulating without aid or pain and was able to perform all ADLs independently. 12 months before presentation, she started experiencing pain which was insidious in onset and gradually progressive and noticed instability while walking 2–3 months after the onset of pain.
Clinical examination revealed a well-healed midline scar without local signs of infection or inflammation. Clinical examination showed a knee effusion, with diffuse and mild tenderness over the anterior knee. Her knee range of motion was from −20° hyper-extension to 100° of flexion. The valgus stress test was positive (grade 2) and the anterior draw was >5 mm, suggesting instability in both the coronal and sagittal planes. She did not have any neurovascular deficit.
Plain radiographs did not reveal obvious osteolysis or component loosening. The tibial base plate showed mild valgus alignment. The tibial component appeared undersized with bone beyond the lateral edge of the baseplate . Valgus stress radiograph revealed medial extension laxity . Notable laboratories on admission included a white blood count of 10 K/µL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 60 mm/h, and C-reactive protein of 8.3 mg/L. Considering the marginally elevated inflammatory markers and a clinically relevant knee effusion, her knee was aspirated. Synovial fluid analysis showed clear fluid with normal cell counts. The gram and acid–fast staining and routine cultures were all negative. Based on these findings and her clinical picture, the patient was advised aseptic revision surgery.
Revision surgery was carried out using a standard medial parapatellar approach. Before beginning the revision procedure, the knee recurvatum and valgus opening were assessed and demonstrated intraoperatively ( and ). After the completion of the arthrotomy, the polyethylene tibial post was missing and was not located within the knee joint cavity . There were no signs of infection. The polyethylene insert was removed and noted to have evidence of polyethylene wear, with clear evidence of delamination and striping in the location of the tibial post. both the femoral and tibial components were well fixed, and the surgeon tried to address the instability with a thicker insert (17 mm maximum PS insert available). However, the knee was still lax, with an incompetent MCL. Subsequently, the decision was taken to proceed with a complete revision arthroplasty with a rotating hinge prosthesis. The surgeon implanted the DePuy (DePuy Synthes, J and J, Warsaw, USA) Noiles rotating hinge knee. The trial hinge components gave the surgeon good biplanar stability and knee ROM. The components were cemented and tourniquet deflated. The immediate post-operative X-ray is shown in .
The patient was allowed to fully bear weight on the 1st post-operative day, without knee range of motion restrictions. At the most recent follow-up of 12 months, the patient is walking without pain or instability, has no wound-healing complications, and active ROM of 0–100°.