A 72-year-old Japanese man with no remarkable medical or family history presented with painless sublingual swelling identified during a follow-up examination for a myocardial infarction. Clinical examination revealed an elastic mass in the sublingual area covered by normal mucosa. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a well-circumscribed lobulated, multi-cystic solid mass located on the floor of the mouth . There was no connection between the mass and the gingiva or jawbone .
Fine needle aspiration showed folded epithelial clusters with duct-like formations . These clusters consisted of basaloid cells lacking prominent nuclear atypia and admixed orange G-positive, round structures lacking nuclei. Peripheral palisading and some calcified materials were observed . Cytologically, a basaloid tumour such as basal cell adenoma or adenocarcinoma was suspected, and a diagnosis of “atypia of undetermined significance” was considered. Based on the location and cytological features, a sublingual tumour was suspected, and tumour excision and level I lymph node dissection were performed. The intraoperative analysis revealed a circumscribed mass with no connection to the alveolar bone or oral floor mucosa.
The resection margin was tumour-free, and no additional treatment was performed postoperatively. The patient was followed up for 6 months, with no sign of recurrence when assessed using MRI.
The surgical specimen was a tan-white, elastic, lobulated solid mass, with multiple small cystic spaces . Histological examination revealed a multi-cystic, solid mass surrounded by a thin fibrous capsule. The cyst lining of variable thickness was composed of squamous-to-polygonal epithelial cells, which translated to the plexiform and cribriform components . Both the cyst and solid components had prominent large, homogenised eosinophilic cells with or without nuclei . The tumour nest showed basaloid cell proliferation with peripheral palisading and a pale central epithelium, similar to that of the stellate reticulum adjacent to the dentinoid material deposition . Tumour cells showed hyperchromatic nuclei with mild atypia and mitoses (2/10HPF). There was no invasion of the adjacent salivary gland, adipose tissue, lymphovascular, or perineural structures. In the gland-like structure, Alcian blue staining showed focal positivity, whereas d-PAS was negative. Immunohistochemically, CK19, CK5/6, bcl-2, and p63 were diffusely positive in the cyst wall and solid nest . Immunostaining for ductal markers, such as CK7, was focal positive in the solid nest and cyst wall, whereas that for CEA was negative . Myoepithelial cell markers such as S-100, SMA, GCDFP, and WT1 were absent . Nuclear accumulation of β-catenin was detected in the cyst wall and solid nest , and cell nuclei comprising dentinoid material deposition were positive for dentin matrix protein-1 (DMP1), suggesting osteoblastic differentiation in the mineralised bone or dentin [, , ]. The Ki-67 index was 5% . These immunohistochemical results showed that there were no true ducts composed of ductal cells and myoepithelial or basaloid cells to suggest a salivary gland origin. The hyalinised matrix showed characteristic odontogenic calcification. Next-generation sequencing (AmpliSeq Cancer Hotspot Panel V2) revealed a missense point mutation in CTNNB1 (p.Ile35Ser, c.104T>G). A final diagnosis of DGCT on the floor of the mouth was established.