A male patient, 56 years old, Caucasian, referred due to difficulty in pronouncing words, chewing and mild swallowing difficulties is presented. The complaints started 7-8 months before the examination and gradually worsened. Until then, he was treated for hypertension and regularly used prescribed therapy with well-regulated blood pressure values.
A neurological examination revealed paralysis of the right hypoglossal nerve of the peripheral type with hemiatrophy of the right half of the tongue . Mild dysarthria was observed during the conversation with the patient. Findings on the other cranial nerves were normal on both sides. Examining the upper and lower extremities, cerebellar and sensibility tests revealed normal findings on both sides. No pathological reflexes were registered. The gait was unchanged.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the endocranium was performed according to a standard protocol: Extracerebral cerebrospinal fluid spaces are dilated within reductive changes. Chronic microischemic lesions are observed in the periventricular white matter. Mediosagittal structures are neat. Ventricular system is of an orderly size, with adequate content. In the posterior cranial fossa, extraaxial focal lesion is in the right cerebellomedullary cistern, next to the clivus. The change is solid, clearly defined, measuring up to 17x15mm on the axial tomogram (, ). There is a homogeneous, intense post-contrast staining of the described change. There are no signs of descent of the cerebellar tonsils. There are no pathological changes in the orbits. There are no signs of inflammation of the paranasal sinuses and mastoids. Conclusion: Clival meningioma. Bilateral chronic supratentorial microischemic lesions.
Neurosurgical intervention was performed using an endoscopic extended transclival approach. Pathohistological and immunohistochemical studies established the diagnosis of meningothelial meningioma grade I according to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification.
The patient tolerated the neurosurgical intervention well. Immediately after surgery, there was no leakage of cerebrospinal fluid and the clinical findings were unchanged. There is right-sided palsy of the hypoglossal nerve with hemiatrophy of the tongue. No postoperative worsening of dysphagia or occurrence of respiratory complications was noted. Considering that the neurosurgical intervention was performed recently, the patient’s follow-up is ongoing.