A 58-year-old male presented to our emergency department with excruciating chest pain lasting for over 30 min. He had a smoking addiction (over 300 packs of cigarettes per year for more than 20 year) and a history of hypertension that was well-controlled with antihypertensive drugs (including nifedipine, telmisartan and hydrochlorothiazide), with no previous history of atrial fibrillation, valvular diseases or thromboembolic events. On admission, his blood pressure was too low to detect, and the oxygen saturation level in atmospheric air dropped to 90.1%. The initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed persistent ST-segment depression in leads II, III, AVF and V1-V6, indicating ongoing massive myocardial ischemia and acute non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (non-STEMI) . The serum troponin I (TnI) level increased to 2.46 ng/mL. Echocardiography showed left ventricular dyskinesia with an enlarged left atrium and an ejection fraction of 27%, negative for endocarditis, valve abnormalities, or any thrombus in the cardiac chambers (Supplementary File and File ). Based on the latest guideline for the management of ACS , the patient was advised for invasive coronary angiography and emergency percutaneous coronary intervention, which was rejected by the patient’s dependents for the high risk of intraoperative adverse events. Emergency treatments were immediately performed including a loading dose of aspirin and clopidogrel, dopamine boost, norepinephrine and low molecular weight heparin (LMWH).
The patient was transferred to the department of cardiology after the symptoms were palliated. Laboratory data showed a high D-dimer level (2.25 µg/mL). Blood cell count, tumor markers antinuclear antibody and blood lipid profile were normal. The computed tomography angiography (CTA) of coronary artery demonstrated a completely normal coronary artery, with no obstructions or stenosis . Unexpectedly, the CTA identified a lobulated mass in the proximal part of ascending aorta, located above the left coronary ostium, measuring 1.5 × 1.1 × 0.9 cm, suggestive for a mural thrombus in the ascending aorta . The pursued CTA of aorta obtained the consistent result that the coronary artery showed no obvious abnormality, and that no signs of atherosclerotic deposits, aneurysms or aortic dissection were found in the ascending aorta . The patient had received short-term anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy before receiving the aortic CTA, which showed that the original thrombus decreased in size and became indistinct at the edges. His Society of Thoracic Surgery score and European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation (EuroSCORE) II were 59.8% and 20.81% respectively, for isolated coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). Considering the life-threatening risk of interventional therapy and surgery, the patient was determined on conservative treatment. Therefore, dual antiplatelet and anticoagulant therapy (aspirin 100 mg, clopidogrel 75 mg and LMWH) were still administered, which subsequently relieved his chest pain. Echocardiography revealed LVEF of 45%, and left atrial diameter (LAD) 32 mm, left ventricular internal dimension at end-diastole (LVIDd) 50 mm (shown in Supplementary Fig. 1A and Fig. B in the revised manuscript). However, after the 6 days of conservative treatment, the patient was attacked by a recurrence of chest pain and became hemodynamically unstable. Bedside ECG showed ST segment elevation in precordial leads V1 to V5 and limb leads II, III, AVF, indicating extensive anterior and inferior myocardial infarction . Serum troponin I level increased significantly to 36.17ng/mL. CAE originating from the ascending aortic thrombus accounting for the ACS was suspected. In such condition, coronary intervention carries a hazard of catheter-induced thrombus dislodgement resulting in life-threatening thromboembolic events, including but not limited to acute coronary occlusion and cerebral embolism. As the thrombus had been present for several days (over 24 h), it already passed the time window for intravenous thrombolysis. Therefore, intravenous thrombolytic therapy not only has little effect on resolving such a subacute thrombus but also contributes to bleeding tendencies. Even worse, the subsequent dissolution and dislodgement of the thrombus might pose a risk of secondary arterial embolism. In order to properly get rid of the thrombus, the patient was referred to the department of cardiovascular surgery for surgical thrombectomy. However, considering the huge traumatic stress that the surgery brings, as well as the possible risk of the thrombus dislodgement during operation, the patient rejected the surgical thrombectomy in the end. He continued the conservative treatment consisting of Vasodilators, dual antiplatelet and anticoagulant agents for the remaining days of the hospital stay, which fortunately alleviated the chest pain. Afterwards, the serum troponin I turned to normal level and repeat coronary CTA showed complete resolution of the lobulated thrombus without any abnormality in the coronary artery . The patient was discharged with warfarin (2.5 mg) and aspirin(100 mg), followed up biweekly to ensure the international normalized ratio (INR) ranged between 2.0 and 3.0. Repeat echocardiography at 1month indicated his cardiac function was basically recovered (shown in Supplementary Fig. A and Fig. B). Follow-up CTA at 6 months revealed no thrombus in the aortic root or ascending aorta . No thromboembolic events occurred henceforward.