A 74-year-old female complained of right upper quadrant abdominal pain when she presented at our hospital. Computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast demonstrated the local recurrence of RCC in the ipsilateral lymph nodes and multiple liver cysts.
The patient was diagnosed with left renal cancer and liver cysts in the bilateral lobes 4 years prior . There was one large cyst and several small cysts, as demonstrated by a CT scan. The liver cysts appeared as well-demarcated and water-dense sacs without mural nodules. The patient had not received health screening for 20 years. Left nephrectomy with ipsilateral adrenalectomy was performed. Pathology revealed PRCC, G2, INF-α, pT2a, N0, M0, and v (-) . No cysts were found in the excision. Eight months prior to the surgery, the patient complained of right upper quadrant pain secondary to recurrent intracystic hemorrhage and received cyst aspiration and sclerotherapy. Aspiration cytology showed no evidence of malignancy, and the pain recurred soon after the treatment.
The patient had a medical history of hypertension and hyperlipemia.
The patient did not have a family history of PCLD.
The patient’s temperature was 36.2 °C, heart rate was 82 bpm, respiratory rate was 14 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 140/99 mmHg and oxygen saturation in room air was 98%. A surgical scar was located in the left upper abdomen. In the abdominal examination, an abdominal mass was observed in the umbilical region, shifting dullness was present and liver cysts were palpable.
Blood analysis revealed anemia with a hemoglobin level of 7.8 g/dL, white blood cells at 2.3 × 109/L, with a normal hematocrit and platelet count. The prothrombin, partial thromboplastin times and d-dimers were normal. The serum albumin was low, at 3.2 mg/dL. In the blood biochemistry analysis, the lactate dehydrogenase was high, at 262 U/L, with a high alkaline phosphatase level, at 626 U/L, and a γ-glutamyl transpeptidase rate of 101 U/L. The alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase were normal. The urine analysis was normal. The electrocardiogram, chest X-ray and arterial blood gas were also normal.
CT with intravenous contrast demonstrated the local recurrence of RCC in the ipsilateral lymph nodes and multiple liver cysts, which had increased in size and number . The cysts were various in sizes, but the borders were clear, and there was no sign of enhancement in the cystic walls.