A 4-year-old domestic shorthair male neutered cat was referred to the internal medicine service of Centre Hospitalier Vétérinaire Fregis (France) for chronic intermittent haematochezia and faecal incontinence of 7 months’ duration. No weight loss was reported and the cat had a good appetite. Therapeutic trials with fenbendazole (50 mg/kg PO for 5 days), metronidazole (10–15 mg/kg PO q12h for 10 days) and hyperdigestible gastrointestinal diet (Hill’s prescription diet i/d) were unsuccessful.
Physical examination, complete blood cell count and biochemistry panel (including serum folate and cobalamin concentration) were within normal limits.
Faecal sample for parasites by using direct smear evaluation, zinc sulfate centrifugal flotation techniques and PCR for Tritrichomonas and Giardia species were negative. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed a colonic wall thickening (2.5–3.0 mm) with attenuation of wall layering and hypo- to echoic multifocal nodules (2 mm diameter) in the submucosal layer. Colonoscopy showed an irregular and thickened colonic wall with multiple erosions, compatible with ulcerative colitis or infiltrative neoplasia . Colonic endoscopic biopsy samples were collected.
Biopsies were fixed in 4% saline-buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin wax. Sections of 4–5 μm were stained with haematoxylin and eosin, PAS, Toluidine blue and Fite-Faraco, and submitted for routine histopathological examination. Histopathology revealed severe multifocal mucosal ulcerations and infiltration of the mucosal lamina propria by large numbers of macrophages, with scattered small lymphocytes and plasma cells . The macrophages had abundant eosinophilic granular cytoplasm that was strongly PAS+. Toluidine blue and Fite-Faraco stains did not show mast cell infiltration or acid-fast bacteria, respectively. Histological findings were consistent with severe PAS+ GC similar to that documented in Boxers and French Bulldogs.
FISH analysis of colonic biopsies using eubacterial (EUB338-6FAM) and E coli-specific probes (E coli–Cy3) and a previously described technique revealed multi-focal clusters of intracellular E coli . More bacteria were visible with eubacterial vs E coli probes suggesting the possibility of a mixed infection.
Colonic swab culture was positive for E coli and negative for Salmonella species, Yersinia species and Campylobacter species. Antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of E coli isolates showed broad susceptibility to macrophage-penetrating antimicrobials . Treatment with enrofloxacin (5 mg/kg q24h for 6 weeks) led to progressive and complete resolution of clinical signs with remission sustained for 13 months to date.