A 24-year-old healthy male without a previous autoimmune disease history presented with diplopia and eye lid ptosis for 2 weeks. During the subsequent admission, he developed left-sided ptosis and impaired eye movements. The findings of the neurological examination were otherwise normal. The findings of MRI of the brain and orbits as well as a routine CSF analysis were normal. Jolly test results were positive. Test results for MG-associated AChR antibodies, calcium channels, Titin, and MuSK were all negative. However, single-fiber electromyography (EMG) showed jitter and decrement in the m. orbicularis oculi, suggesting seronegative ocular MG. Treatment with pyridostigmine and oral prednisolone improved the symptoms.
Three months later, he complained about a loss of short-term memory, behavioral changes, fatigue, depressed mood, and unsteady gait. At readmission (Day 0), he was awake but disoriented with a loss of short-term memory. He had bilateral ptosis, his gait was unstable, and he had dystonic posture of the feet. MRI of the brain showed leptomeningeal contrast enhancement, compatible with inflammation or vasculitis . CSF examination showed pleocytosis with 63 mononuclear cells, normal protein, signs of intrathecal IgG synthesis (IgG index 0.92; range 0.80–0.91), and the detection of oligoclonal bands . Electroencephalography (EEG) findings were normal. We initiated acute treatment with acyclovir 10 mg/kg i.v. 3 times daily and ceftriaxone 2 g i.v. twice daily, as well as high-dose i.v. methylprednisolone 1 g daily. A repeated CSF examination on Day 4 showed a strong positive reaction for AMPAR in serum and CSF, while the reactions for other autoimmune encephalitis antibodies, including NMDAR antibodies and paraneoplastic antibodies, were negative. Analyses of AE antibodies (CASPR2, GABA-B, GAD65, AMPA, LGI1, NMDA, DPXX, GABA-A, IgLON) and paraneoplastic antibodies (Amphiphysin, CDR2, DRP-5, Hu, PNMA2, NOVA1, GAD65, Recoverin, SOX-1, DNER, Zic 4, Titin) were performed by an accredited laboratory (Dept. of Clinical Immunology, Odense University Hospital, Denmark) using indirect immunofluorescence tests (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany). Positive results were confirmed in a tissue-based assay. Results for neuroinfection screening at that time (i.e., PCR in CSF: Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1), Herpes simplex virus 2 (HSV-2), Varicella zoster virus (VZV), Human herpes virus 6 and 7 (HHV 6, HHV 7), Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Enterovirus, Escherichia coli, Haemophilus influenzae, Listeria monocytogenes, Neisseria meningitis, Streptococcus agalactiae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Cryptococcus neoformans; CSF VDRL (syphilis); Borrelia-specific CSF/serum antibody index; and tick-borne encephalitis virus (TBE), HIV, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and fungal testing) were normal. In addition, vasculitis laboratory test results (CRP, ESR, ANA, ANCA, immunoglobins, complement, hepatitis serology, ACE and interleukin 2 receptor antibodies) were normal. Because CNS infection screening results were negative, acyclovir and ceftriaxone treatment was stopped on Day 4.
A repeated MRI of the brain on Day 7 after readmission showed bilateral signal increases in T2 FLAIR sequences in the limbic system and insula . As limbic encephalitis was suspected, treatment with high-dose i.v. steroid of 1 g methylprednisolone daily for 3 days was resumed, followed by treatment with intravenous immunoglobin 0.4 g/kg/daily (IVIg) (two 5-day treatments) and rituximab (4 courses of 375 mg/m2) once a week. Due to the poor response, an additional fifth dose was given. Further clinical deterioration was noted, with psychomotor agitation and disorientation as well as bulbar symptoms and orofacial dyskinesia. This rapid progression of symptoms led to admission to the intensive care unit, and at this point (Day 43), the patient tested positive for NMDAR antibodies in CSF and serum. He was then sedated and connected to a ventilator for 3 days. After 4 days, his condition became stable, and he was extubated. EEG at that time showed diffusely reduced amplitudes but no sign of status epilepticus and no focal abnormalities. After an initial favorable response to treatment, the patient’s psychiatric symptoms increased, and he was admitted to a psychiatric department in a psychotic state. Due to generalized tonic clonic seizures, anticonvulsive medication with lacosamide and valproic acid was initiated. After this deterioration, third-line immunosuppressive treatment was initiated and continued with pulses of cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2 i.v. once a month for a duration of 6 months .
An extensive diagnostic program could not determine any proof of infection, vasculitis or malignancy. A CT scan of the thorax and abdomen showed some remaining thymus, but there were no signs of malignancy, even though microthymoma could not be ruled out. A PET-CT scan showed unspecific activity in the axillary lymph nodes. Due to the myasthenic component of the illness, endoscopic thymectomy was performed. However, no pathology was noted in the patient’s thymus or lymph nodes.
The patient gradually recovered during several months of hospitalization, after which he was transferred to a neurorehabilitation unit. At the 1-year follow-up, we observed an almost complete recovery (mRS score change from 5 to 1), but a comprehensive neuropsychological assessment showed mild to moderate reduced verbal and nonverbal episodic memory. His executive abilities were slightly impaired (abstraction, reasoning, flexibility). His everyday life had to be very structured, and he needed the support of his girlfriend and his teachers at university. He had amnesia regarding the period of hospitalization. A repeated PET-CT scan showed no signs of malignancy, and EEG findings were normal. His cognitive symptoms were in remission, and he was able to return to his engineering studies.