A 41 years old South Asian female of Indian descent, a homemaker by occupation, presented to the Otorhinolaryngology outpatient department with bilateral hearing loss for one month. The hearing loss was sudden and occurred within two days. The hearing loss was preceded by an episode of upper respiratory tract infection. There was no history of diabetes mellitus, hypertension or tuberculosis. She was taking hormone supplementation for hypothyroidism. There was no relevant family history. On examination of the ear, the tympanic membrane was retracted bilaterally. An audiogram revealed moderate to profound sloping mixed hearing loss on the right and moderate to severe sloping mixed hearing loss on the left with bilateral “B” type tympanogram ).
Her routine blood investigations were unremarkable except for an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 42 mm. Ultra-sonogram of the neck showed bulky thyroid gland with nodules in the right lobe. She was treated with systemic steroids (Prednisolone 1mg/kg body weight) for 10 days, which was tapered over 16 days. At the time of discharge, her hearing had dramatically improved .
Two weeks later, she again presented with decreased hearing in both ears. An audiogram revealed mild to moderately severe mixed hearing loss with bilateral “C” type of tympanogram. On myringotomy, thin serous fluid was present in both middle ears and grommets were inserted bilaterally. Diagnostic nasal endoscopy and blind biopsy of the fossa of Rosenmuller on both sides was also done. Histopathology was reported as normal with no evidence of malignancy.
After 10 days she presented with facial weakness on the right side and difficulties in speech and swallowing in addition to hearing loss, tinnitus and vertigo. Vertigo was mild, rotatory and brought about by sudden changes in posture. It was not associated with vomiting or sweating. Tinnitus was bilateral, continuous and resembled a whistling tone. Audiology revealed moderate to severe mixed hearing loss on the right and mild SNHL on the left. The impedance on the right side was the ‘Cs’ curve and the ‘A’ curve on the left. She was restarted on steroids . On examination, she had right-sided seventh and left-sided tenth and twelfth cranial nerve palsies. The neurologist opined that there was no peripheral neuropathy. On Functional endoscopic assessment of swallowing there was the presence of pooling of secretions in bilateral pyriform fossae with aspiration.
On the advice of the Neurologist, autoimmune and paraneoplastic workup was ordered, in addition to radiology and Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with contrast showed hyperintensity in bilateral mastoid air cells and middle ear, suggestive of otomastoiditis. There was thickening with diffuse homogenous post-contrast enhancement in posterior and bilateral lateral walls of the nasopharynx. Enhancement was also noted in the 7th and 8th nerve complex on the right side. The CSF analysis was normal with no evidence of malignant cells or paraneoplastic neuronal antibodies.P-Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and rheumatoid factor (RF) (31 IU/ml; normal < 18 IU/ml) were reported positive on analysis of blood. Anti-myeloperoxidase (MPO) autoantibodies were reported as highly positive with a value of 10 IU/ml (normal < 5 IU/ml). Anti PR3 autoantibodies were negative. Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) was 50.7 RU/ml (normal < 5 RU/ml). Hence a diagnosis of RA induced mononeuritis multiplex was established. She was given an option of further treatment with cyclophosphamide or rituximab. Due to financial reasons, she opted for treatment with Cyclophosphamide (IV Cyclophosphamide 1g every 3 weeks for 10 doses). The patient tolerated the treatment well and at her last follow up she showed complete recovery from cranial nerve palsies and hearing loss.