A 25 Year old woman had a trivial trauma 1 month back presented with pain and restriction of range of motion of left elbow. Patient also had swelling in left clavicle and left proximal tibia since 6 month. On clinical examination of elbow range of motion was restricted. The swelling was 5” × 5” in size, situated anteromedially just above the elbow joint. It was well-defined and bony hard in consistency. There were no signs of any neurovascular involvement. Regional lymph nodes were not palpable. She did not complain of any neuropsychiatric or gastrointestinal symptoms. She also did not have another past medical history including urinary stones.
Plain digital radiographs of the affected bones (left proximal tibia, left clavicle and left distal humerus) revealed multiple bony osteolytic expansile lesions with cortical thinning, diffuse osteoporosis, and sub periosteal bone resorption compatible with brown tumours .
Initial laboratory tests indicate elevated serum calcium levels of 10.6 mg/dL, ionized calcium levels of 6.06 mg/dL, and low phosphorus levels of 0.9 mg/dL. Serum alkaline phosphatase levels were elevated at 1,802 IU/L, and serum intact PTH levels were markedly increased to 532.4 pg/mL. Twenty-four-hour urinary calcium was also elevated at 335.7 mg/day. Further laboratory tests include serum PTH-related peptide, and creatinine which were within normal limits. A parathyroid imaging work-up with neck ultrasonography and a parathyroid scan (technetium-99m sestamibi) revealed an approximately 2 cm mass in the inferior aspect of the left thyroid gland, suggestive of a solitary parathyroid adenoma. Diffuse uptake noted in region of medial end of left clavicle was suggestive of brown tumour. MRI of left elbow showed osteolytic lesion in distal humerus which was hyperintense on all the sequences. It was a well-defined lesion, and was extending into the soft tissue through a break in the medial cortex. Additional evaluation for hyperparathyroidism associated conditions was also performed.
Plain digital radiograph of the affected left distal humerus and left proximal tibia revealed bony osteolytic expansile lesions with cortical thinning, diffuse osteoporosis and sub periosteal bone resorption with definite evidence of pathological fractures in distal humerus. These findings were thought to be compatible with brown tumors of hyperparathyroidism.
Pathological fracture was approached posteriorly with triceps elevating approach. The tumour was brown in appearance and was soft in consistency. Ulnar nerve was isolated and protected. Reconstruction of medial and lateral epicondyle done with fibula grafting and bicolumnar plating . Anterior transposition of ulnar nerve was done. The biopsy report of the tumour lesion was identified and it showed multiple giant cells and some fibroblasts suggestive of a brown tumour or giant-cell tumour. Following management of fracture, left sided Para-thyroidectomy was performed.
Postoperatively, the patient was immobilized for 4 weeks and calcium carbonate supplementation was given.