The patient is a 46-year-old male nonsmoker with no other medical problems. Two years prior to his current presentation, the patient was evaluated for right lower quadrant pain. Computed tomography (CT) image showed acute epiploic appendicitis of the cecum and a small fat-containing right inguinal hernia. No further treatment was pursued at that time. He had persistent symptoms, and two years later his primary care provider ordered an ultrasound, which showed a 3 × 3.4 × 3.6 cm complex heterogeneous mass superior to the bladder. Repeat CT scan confirmed a fat-containing right inguinal hernia and a solid mass just below the right inguinal canal, concerning for liposarcoma versus inflammatory process . The patient underwent mass excision; given prominence of the mass in the retroperitoneum on imaging, the surgeon used a laparoscopic approach and visualized a 4 × 3 cm retroperitoneal mass tracking along the gonadal vessels . The patient developed severe bradycardia during laparoscopy, and surgery was converted to an open approach. The area of the mass was accessed via a traditional right inguinal hernia incision and by enlarging the internal inguinal ring. The mass lesion was felt to be associated with the intraabdominal portion of the spermatic cord structures and also incorporated a large multilobular cord lipoma. The mass, along with the cord lipoma, was completely excised . Surgical clips were placed along the resection margin of the retroperitoneal dissection. Intraoperative pathology could not confirm a malignant process so no further resection was undertaken at that time, and a standard Lichtenstein hernia repair was then completed, using polyprolene mesh. After outside consultation, final pathology results revealed an abnormal lobular adipose tissue specimen, measuring 23 × 9 × 3 cm. Within the larger fatty tumor was a well circumscribed firm 4 × 4 × 2.8 cm mass, which contained a high-grade spindle cell malignancy with pleomorphic cells and a high mitotic rate, consistent with dedifferentiated liposarcoma. MDM2 and CDK4 were positive in the well differentiated portions. Complete staging scans subsequently showed no evidence of metastatic disease to the intraabdominal organs or lungs. The deep retroperitoneal margin was positive for tumor cells, and the dedifferentiated portion was closely associated with the intraabdominal spermatic cord, necessitating wider resection margins and right orchiectomy. Three weeks from his index surgery the patient underwent repeat excision of two centimeter circumferential margins on the abdominal wall surrounding the internal inguinal ring, removal of additional retroperitoneal tissue overlying external iliac vessels, and finally a right radical orchiectomy . The inguinal floor defect was repaired with biologic mesh. Pathology from the second operation revealed a microscopic focus of residual liposarcoma from the excised external iliac tissue, measuring 0.6 mm, 0.5 mm away from the cauterized edge. The remaining orchiectomy specimen and abdominal wall tissue were negative for malignancy. Once recovered from surgery, the patient underwent adjuvant radiation therapy of 25 fractions delivered at 50 Grays (Gy) in addition to a sequential boost of five fractions at 10 Gy. Six month follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed him to be free from disease recurrence. At that time, the patient remained active with biking and kayaking, denying any symptoms suggestive of hernia recurrence.