A 65-year-old man with paroxysmal AF and a contraindication for long-term anticoagulation was admitted for percutaneous LAA closure. His past medical history included hypertension, transient ischaemic attack with a CHA2DS2VASc score of 4 and bladder cancer treated with radiotherapy. He had recurrent haematuria on Rivaroxaban 20 mg that was stopped. The procedure was performed in March 2020 under general anaesthesia with transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) and fluoroscopy guidance. At the time of the procedure, the patient was in sinus rhythm. TOE measurements showed a small atrial appendage with a maximum diameter at the landing zone of 18 mm width with maximum depth of 13 mm. A TOE-guided transseptal puncture was performed using an 8.5-Fr transseptal sheath (St-Jude Medical) and an RF tip needle (Baylis medical) followed by the introduction of a dual curve sheath (Boston Scientific) in the left atrium over a protrack pigtail wire (Baylis medical). After removing the protrack, a 5-Fr Pigtail catheter was introduced inside the sheath and was moved gently in the LAA. The first angiography with an automatic injector showed an extravasation of contrast outside the LAA. Another injection confirmed the LAA perforation caused by the first Pigtail angiography with leakage of contrast in the pericardial space . By that time, the dual curve sheath had not been in contact yet with the LAA. TEE confirmed a 10 mm circumferential pericardial effusion .
In order to stop the bleeding and to avoid open heart surgery, an emergency closure of the LAA was performed. A Watchman Flex 24 mm (Boston Scientific) device was deployed successfully into the LAA on first attempt (Video 1). The activated clotting time during deployment was 285 s. The device achieved optimal compression of approximately 15–20% for a good stability with no residual leak ( and ). The patient stayed haemodynamically stable throughout the whole procedure. The anticoagulation was reversed with protamine after the Watchman delivery. After LAA occlusion, the 10 mm pericardial effusion stayed stable with cessation of fluid accumulation in the pericardial space and no sign of tamponade on TOE. However, small amount of injectable cardiovascular ultrasound enhancement agent (DEFINITY®) was visualized in the pericardial space suggesting mild active bleeding. To prevent any haemodynamic instability, a needle pericardiocentesis with aspiration of 100 mL of blood was performed, and a pericardial drain was left in place for 24 hours with no further accumulation or drainage and the drain was removed. The patient was discharged 48 h after the procedure on Aspirin and Clopidogrel with no complication at the 6 months of follow-up and a TOE was performed with no leakage or thrombus and no residual pericardial effusion.
All steps of the procedure were reviewed to understand why this perforation occurred.
An unrecognized reset of the automatic injector had happened just before the LAA injection. The first injection was performed at 1000 PSI for 20 mL contrast (10 mL/s), as usual for a left ventricular (LV) angiogram. In our centre, during LAA closure procedures, we used 400 PSI for LAA angiography or we performed a manual injection.