We present the case of a 2-year-old boy who was brought to the emergency department by his parents because of a high-grade fever and rash. The fever started 2 days before his presentation, and its maximum measurement was 39.6°C. The parents reported partial resolution of the fever with paracetamol. The following day, the patient developed numerous painful, pruritic vesiculopustular eruptions and oozing involving the lips, rendering the patient unable to tolerate oral feeding. On the same day, the rash spread sequentially spread to involve the face, neck, and upper trunk. The genitalia was spared. There was no history of upper respiratory tract symptoms, abdominal pain, or change in urinary or bowel habits. The patient had no sick contact and was fully up to date with his vaccination schedule. The patient was previously healthy with unremarkable past medical history.
Upon examination, the child appeared sick with severely cracked oozing lips . Further, disseminated non-blanching maculopapular rash involving the face and trunk was observed . His vital signs were as follows: a pulse rate of 118 bpm, a blood pressure of 124/80 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 24 bpm, and a temperature of 39°C. Head and neck examination showed erythematous congested pharynx with palpable cervical lymph nodes. Cardiorespiratory and abdominal examinations revealed normal findings. Initial laboratory investigation revealed a hemoglobin level of12.1 g/dL, leukocyte count of 8000/μL, a platelet count of 455,000/μL, and C-reactive protein of 37.8 nmol/L. A swab culture of the lesions revealed no bacterial growth. Chest radiograph demonstrated clear lung fields with no airspace opacity.
Given the inability to tolerate oral feeding, the patient was admitted for further evaluation and management. The patient was seen by the dermatology team who diagnosed the child as having eczema herpeticum. The patient was commenced on antiviral and empirical antibiotic therapy in the form of intravenous acyclovir and cephalexin along with topical fusidic acid and panthenol. The patient showed clinical improvement with resolution of the fever and partial involution of the rash 2 days following the administration of the antimicrobial therapy. The patient started to tolerate oral feeding. The patient was discharged after 6 days of admission and was prescribed symptomatic treatment. In the follow-up visit after 2 weeks, the patient had complete resolution of the rash with no active complaints.