We present a case of a 67-year-old man with a past medical history of hypertension, hyperuricemia, and left inguinal hernioplasty, who presented to the Emergency Department with a new onset of asthenia, abdominal pain, hypochromic stools, and hyperchromic urine.
His complete blood count was normal, except for elevated values of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT).
The patient had already undergone contrast enhanced abdomen CT scan with a dedicated and optimized protocol , revealing two mass-like lesions, with diameters of 7 and 9 cm in the right iliac fossa and in the pelvis, respectively. These were characterized by moderate enhancement, rare hypodense areas due to the presence of necrotic- or cystic-changes, with focal spots of hemorrhages, and well-defined margins . The growth pattern was manly exophytic, without any signs of infiltration of organs and structures such as the ileum and vessels, which are closely adjacent. Other multiple similar smaller lesions were found on the left flank, with maximum diameters of 3 cm, and a 1-cm mass was found in the epigastric region. Furthermore, multiple pericentimetric solid nodules altered spleen parenchyma, with a high suspicion of metastatic nature.
The second step of diagnosis was 18F-FDG-PET/CT, in which almost all lesions showed a vivid uptake (SUV Max 7.3), reflecting an intense metabolic activity, with the exception of splenic lesions .
Then, for the final diagnosis, a biopsy of the pelvic mass was performed. Histological data demonstrated a neoplastic proliferation, with fibrous septa, showing a lobulated appearance, formed by cells with an elongated, hyperchromatic nucleus, with a proliferation index of more than 10%, without evidence of atypical mitosis; the cytoplasm was poorly definable and weakly eosinophilic. Neoplastic cells resulted positive for the reactions set up with anti-vimentin, anti-CD117, anti-CD99, anti-BCL2, and focally anti-EMA, while negative data emerged from the tests for antiprotein S100, antipancytokeratin, antismooth muscle actin, antidesmin, anti-CD34, anti-CD31, antipodoplanin, anti-HMB45, anticytokeratin 6/6, and anti-WT1.
At first, the patient underwent surgery with the laparoscopic technique. The exploration of abdominal cavity revealed a 7-cm mass in the right flank, close to the mesentery, a 4-cm mass in the left iliac fossa, and a smaller mass inside the omentum in the epigastric region. The omental mass was removed and analyzed by extemporaneous histological examination that reported a mesenchymal neoplasm. Consequently, complete surgical excision remained the main goal, and a midline laparotomy was carried out. During ileum mobilization, the 9-cm mass shown by CT was detected in the pelvis in tight contact with the ileum. The mass was mobilized with the intestinal loops and removed with segmental ileal loop resection. The 7-cm mass was shown close to the superior mesenteric vessels, so its complete removal required cautious handling. The mass on the left iliac region was also completely removed. All visible masses were completely removed, taking care to avoid tumor rupture . The definitive histological examination established that the diagnosis was multiple GISTs with spindle and epithelioid cells. Neoplastic cells were positive for DOG-1 and c-Kit. The marker of proliferation Ki-67 was 5%–10%.
The patient underwent adjuvant therapy with Imatinib. CT and PET/CT scan after 6 months showed a full resolution of the clinical picture, with no uptake of 18-FDG upon PET/CT scan. The patient is still receiving adjuvant therapy, and a CT scan is scheduled at 12 months’ time (6 months from the last one).