A 70-year-old man presented to our hospital on September 20, 2020, with a right inguinal mass that had been painful for half a month, accompanied by symptoms of difficult defecation.
The bulge was originally found at least 60 years before admission. There was no pain at the time; however, the mass enlarged progressively during the last 3 years.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
There was no pertinent personal or family history of illness.
The right scrotum and groin area were obviously enlarged (~20 × 20 cm) and tender. Inside the scrotum, a circumscribed medium-hard mass (diameter 5 cm) that was palpable, with ill-defined borders and translational mobility was detected. The mass could not be returned to the abdominal cavity in the supine position, and the transillumination test of the scrotum was negative .
The abdominal CT scan showed a right blood vessel-containing strangulated inguinal hernia; the sigmoid colon showed focal wall thickening as it was in proximity to the inguinal hernia . Chest CT shows emphysema in the right lung, nothing else unusual. The enhancement scan showed that the inhomogeneous enhancing mass had an irregular margin and unclear boundaries with surrounding tissues. Colonoscopy showed an annular stricture of the sigmoid colon caused by a tumor located 18–25 cm from the anal verge, indicative of malignancy .
Based on the imaging results, the mass was diagnosed as sigmoid colon wall thickening, consistent with cancer and right inguinal hernia. Based on the biopsy results, a pathologic diagnosis of high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia was made. The preliminary diagnosis was that of sigmoid carcinoma and right incarcerated inguinal hernia.
Emergency laparoscopic exploration, open sigmoid radical resection and right inguinal hernia repair were performed under general anesthesia on October 29, 2020. No obvious metastasis was found on laparoscopic exploration. The sigmoid colon and its mesentery herniated into the right scrotum through the right inguinal ring; the inner ring was thickened, ~4 cm in diameter. The saccular contents could not be returned to the abdominal cavity. Hence, we converted to open surgery. The saccular contents could not be pulled out of the hernia ring through the median abdominal incision. Therefore, an inguinal incision was added. A huge hernia sac was identified upon incision. Upon opening the sac, we observed that a 5 × 5 cm hard mass of the sigmoid colon was tightly adhered to the sac; the incarcerated sigmoid colon was about 35 cm long and the serosa had been invaded; enlarged lymph nodes were visible in the mesentery . After the incision and enlargement of the inner ring, the sigmoid colon was completely returned to the abdominal cavity. Intraoperative colonoscopy showed no proximal bowel lesion. Subsequently, radical resection of the sigmoid colon and end-to-end anastomosis of the descending colon and rectum were performed. Meanwhile, the hernia was repaired by primary closure (Bassini technique) without using a mesh on account of possible contamination of the operative field during surgery.
The patient recovered successfully and was discharged 1 week after the operation. 16 month after surgery, no discomfort and signs of recurrence were found. Findings of the physical examination and related auxiliary examinations were unremarkable.