A 74-year-old man was referred to our department with complains of gastric fullness, frequent episodes of post-prandial nausea, and weight loss over the previous 3 months. Medical history revealed a high-grade mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma of the stomach in 1996. The lymphoma was staged as IE according to the Ann Arbor staging system, and showed complete response after chemotherapy followed by radiation therapy (60 Gy) of the local nodal regions. On physical examination, a large mass was palpated in the epigastrium that filled the entire right upper quadrant of the abdomen. Routine laboratory investigations, including blood glucose levels, and serum levels of tumour markers (alpha-fetoprotein [AFP], carcinoembryonic antigen [CEA], and carbohydrate antigen [Ca19-9]) were within normal limits. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen demonstrated a large, heterogeneous mass in the left hepatic lobe, measuring 24 cm in largest diameter, with necrosis and calcification . There were no signs of recurrence of high grade MALT lymphoma. Liver biopsy showed spindle-cell elements with cellular atypia suggesting a sarcoma. Laparotomy was performed and revealed a large tumour, which only involved segment IV of the liver, and a left lobectomy was performed. Postoperative course was uneventful. After 12 months of follow-up the patient had no signs of local recurrence or distant metastases.
Gross examination showed a large tumour measuring 24 × 21 × 15 cm that weighed 2950 g . Macroscopically, the tumour was located in the liver parenchyma and not in relation to serosal surface. The lesion was well encapsulated, and contained a number of central necrotic and scarred areas with radiating bands of fibrous tissue. Microscopically, the tumour was composed of neoplastic spindle cells, with uniform, elongated nuclei, separated by abundant thick bands of collagen . A few highly cellular areas with high mitotic rate of 10 – 13 mitosis/10 HPF were detected. In the higher cellular areas, cells were close together with limited amounts of collagen . The organization of the tumour cells was different in several areas, varying from small bundles of spindle cells arranged haphazardly, arranged in some groups with nuclear pallisading or in a storiform pattern. Cells were separated by an abundant reticulin network, which appeared in a random pattern. An abundant thin walled vascular network was present with some heamangiopericyoma-like vascular spaces . Immunohistochemistry revealed strong expression of CD34, CD99, BCL2 and vimentin in virtually all tumour cells . No immunoreactivity was shown with pankeratin, keratin 8/18, epithelial membrane antigen, smooth-muscle actin, desmin, S100, Factor VIII, CD 31 and CD117. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) (100%) and progesterone receptor (10%–20%) were positive. Oestrogen receptor (ER) and Her-2 neu were negative.