A 26-year-old woman was hospitalized 1 week after a cesarean delivery under spinal anesthesia, due to high fever and persistent headache. She received at home a treatment with intravenous ceftriaxone for 4 days. With no signs of clinical improvement, the woman was admitted in our Infectious Diseases Clinic at the University Hospital Center with the suspected diagnosis of bacterial meningitis.
The patient was previously healthy, and her immunological status was considered competent. On admission, the HIV serology was negative; and no history of any important medical condition was reported.
A LP performed immediately in the emergency room, which determined the pleocytosis and the diagnosis of an acute bacterial meningitis. Leukocyte cells count was 723 cells/μL with 94% segmented neutrophils, CSF glucose was very low, and protein was 420 mg/dl. P. aeruginosa was isolated from CSF culture and it was sensitive to all antibiotics of standard panel. The cranial and lumbar region computerized tomography scan resulted normal, with no image for intraspinal or epidural abscesses or vertebral osteomyelitis. Blood cultures resulted negative.
We modified the empiric treatment with intravenous ceftriaxone to ceftazidime and gentamycin for 2 weeks. Fever and headache were resolved 5 days after the beginning of treatment, and she left the facility. 3 days after discharge, she reported high fever and strong headache and came back to hospital. The length of hospital staying for this second time was one month. We performed again a lumbar tap on admission and had a count of white blood cells (WBC) of 850 cells/μL (86% were segmented neutrophils), glucose of 18 mg/dl (blood glucose 112 mg/dl) and protein was 450 mg/dl. We restarted treatment with ceftazidime and amikacin, while CSF culture grew once again ceftazidime sensitive P. aeruginosa.
We repeated LP 2 weeks later, due to fever and strong headache and we found out that WBC of CSF were 180 cells/μL, polymorphs were 93%, and glucose was low and protein high again. We stopped amikacin and switched antibiotic treatment to ceftazidime, Imipenem, and levofloxacin. There was no headache improvement, and the fever was fluctuating 38–39°C.
Cranial and lumbar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and cardiac ultrasonography resulted normal, so we repeated LP, and this time, we counted 320 WBC/μL, and P. aeruginosa was isolated from CSF culture. Intravenous colistin replaced levofloxacin and 10 days after her headache worsened and the patient had a generalized seizure. The repeated cranial MRI showed hydrocephaly and IVT empyema in the occipital horn of the left lateral ventricle .
An extra ventricular drainage helped to resolve hydrocephaly, and we applied IVT colistin for 14 days with a dose of 125,000 IU (10 mg). On the 6th day after the initiation of this treatment, the patient’s clinical condition improved and CSF culture resulted negative. One month after discharge, she was in a very good condition and neurosurgeons inserted a ventricular-peritoneal shunt. In the follow-up 6 months later, the patient remained free of the symptoms. A control MRI demonstrated as well the resolution of the ventricular empyema.