In February 2020, a 52-year-old male was admitted to the Affiliated Hospital of Yanbian University presenting with persistent dull pain (10 minutes) in the liver that had lasted for 1 month. He had a history of diabetes for several years, with diet regulation. Physical examination revealed that the site of the pain was the upper abdomen. The carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 366.96 ng/L. Multiple intrahepatic space-occupying lesions, with a maximum diameter of approximately 5.7 cm, were found by MRI . To clarify the primary focus, FDG PET/CT was performed, resulting in the identification of transverse colon-occupying lesions and liver-occupying lesions, which were considered malignant. Further colonoscopy with biopsy showed villous tubular adenomas with high-grade intraepithelial neoplasia in the mucosal glands, suggestive of highly differentiated adenocarcinoma. The clinical diagnosis was “CRLM (cT3N0M1, stage IV)”. After multidisciplinary consultation and discussion, the treatment plan was established as DEBIRI-TACE combined with the CAPOX regimen and bevacizumab. DEBIRI-TACE was performed in February 2020. During the operation, multiple scattered, abnormal vascular shadows were observed in both the right and left lobes of the liver . CalliSpheres irinotecan-loaded (0.1 g) microspheres (Jiangsu Hengrui Jialisheng Biomedical Technology Co., Ltd; blue, 100–300 μm) were used for embolization. After the operation, the patient underwent systemic chemotherapy with the CAPOX regimen combined with 500 mg of bevacizumab (every 3 weeks). One month after embolization, digital subtraction angiography showed significantly smaller abnormal vascular shadows in the liver compared with the pre-treatment condition , and the CEA content had decreased to 64.21 ng/L. Tumor biomarker levels and intrahepatic tumor numbers were significantly reduced compared with before treatment. Considering that this treatment scheme was effective and safe, DEBIRI-TACE was performed again in March 2020. After the operation, systemic chemotherapy and targeted therapy were continued following the original scheme. The patient was discharged after the operation in good general condition and with no obvious discomfort.
In April 2020, FDG PET/CT showed a local thickening of the wall at the hepatic flexure and transverse colon, a narrowing of the lumen, increased FDG uptake (a decrease in the maximum standardized uptake value [SUVmax] from 13.2 to 7.2) in liver flexure and transverse colon lesions, slightly increased FDG uptake (a decrease in the SUVmax from 14.0 to 5.3) in right lobe lesions , and a decrease in hilar lymph node enlargement (a decrease in the SUVmax from 13.8 to 3.6). According to PERCIST classification , the treatment response was evaluated as partial metabolic response (PMR).
From April to June 2020, three cycles of systemic chemotherapy with the CAPOX regimen combined with bevacizumab were administered. In June 2020, contrast-enhanced abdominal MRI revealed multiple massive and abnormal nodular shadows in the liver with slightly enhanced edges. Some nodules and masses were slightly smaller compared with before treatment, and the sum of target lesion diameters was less than 30% of that of the baseline level . According to the RECIST standard, the treatment response was evaluated as stable disease (SD). The patient remains alive, with a PFS of 15 months and an OS of 27 months.