A 72-year-old Caucasian woman underwent a right hemicolectomy for a Dukes A colon cancer in August 2008 (staging: pT2, pN0-0/27nodes, G2). Computed tomography (CT) of her abdomen, pelvis, and chest did not show any distant metastases, so she was not treated further. Follow-up examinations were negative until August 2009 when mammography showed a suspicious lesion of the left breast. In September 2009 a left superior and external quadrantectomy was performed. Histological examination revealed breast intraductal carcinoma (staging: pTis, p N0). For this new pathology, the patient was only treated with radiotherapy. She continued her follow-up examinations for colorectal cancer. She remained asymptomatic until May 2011, with no clinical or radiological signs of recurrence. In June 2011, she presented with a painless swelling, affecting the skin of the left paravertebral dorsal region. Serum tumor markers were not increased and colonoscopy did not show any local disease relapse. A chest X-ray excluded pulmonary metastasis and an abdominal ultrasound did not detect either liver metastases or peritoneal dissemination. Therefore, an ultrasound scan of the dorsal tumefaction was performed, showing a suspected heterogeneous, solid and vascularized lesion. She underwent a radical en-bloc resection of the dorsal swelling. Histological analysis of the excised specimen revealed a metastatic poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma, most likely originating from the large bowel, which infiltrated the skin and the subcutaneous tissue.
Macroscopically, the surgical specimen consisted of a radical en-bloc resection of subcutaneous tissue (soft-tissue) of 4x2.5x2cm which contained a nodular lesion of 3.2cm diameter. The cut surface was white to yellowish white and showed areas of necrosis and hemorrhage. The excised specimen was fixed in 10% buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. Sections of 4μm were prepared and routinely stained with hematoxylin and eosin. Further sections were examined immunohistochemically using a streptavidin-biotin complex technique (DAKO). Prediluted antibodies against the following antigens were used: keratin 20 protein (monoclonal, 1:50; Zymed®), keratin 7 (monoclonal, 1:50; Zymed®), Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) (monoclonal, 1:100; Zymed®), anti-estrogen receptor (monoclonal, 1:50; DAKO), and anti-progesterone receptor (monoclonal, 1:50; DAKO).
Microscopically, the tumor was characterized by nests and islands of epithelial cells with only scattered abortive glands. The cells had atypical nuclei, with evidence of nucleoli, abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm without sharply defined outlines. The inflammatory infiltrate was marked and there were hemorrhagic foci and areas of necrosis. The mitosis was either frequently or sometimes infrequently atypical (sFigure ). The cells were focally positive for keratin 20 . Keratin 7, TTF1, estrogen and progesterone receptors were negative. The morphologic aspects and the immunohistochemical results were considered specific for a colonic origin. In this setting, the neoplasia was also evaluated for K-ras mutation and the molecular analysis showed the absence of mutation on codon 12 and 13 (wild type). The total body CT revealed no evidence of visceral distant metastases but showed suspicious abdominal colliquative lymphadenopathy. The patient is being treated with FOLFIRI ( leucovorin (folinic acid), fluorouracil, irinotecan hydrochloride) + bevacizumab and she remains asymptomatic.