A 19-year-old African female presented to us with severe and progressively debilitating right iliac fossa pain of 1 month duration. The pain was persistent, progressively increasing in intensity, gnawing in character, aggravated by movement and relieved by lying with thighs flexed. There was no radiation or migration of this pain. She had associated polyuria, increased urinary frequency and nocturia but neither dysuria nor hematuria. There was no urinary incontinence, hesitancy, urgency or urethral discharge. She reported recurrent episodes of fever since the onset of the abdominal pain for which she self-medicated with acetaminophen. There was no vomiting, no change in appetite or bowel habits and no reported change in weight. She had no previous history of surgery, was sexually active, nulliparous and her last normal menstrual period was about 2 weeks prior to consultation. On physical examination her blood pressure and other vital signs were normal. She had an asymmetric abdominal distension, tender at the right lumbar and iliac fossa regions with right costovertebral angle tenderness. A palpable mass was felt in the right iliac fossa, it was immobile, tender with ill-defined borders. There was rebound tenderness at the right iliac fossa. A diagnosis of an appendiceal abscess with an associated urinary tract infection was made and corresponding investigations ordered to exclude other differential diagnoses such as pelvic inflammatory disease. Her white cell count was normal but the lymphocytes were a little raised, and the other parameters were unremarkable (white blood count-8300/mm3, granulocytes-44.6%, lymphocytes-47%, monocytes-7%, hemoglobin-11.2 g/dL, hematocrit-39.9%, platelets-327.000/mm3). Urine dipstick was normal and urine microscopy was unremarkable. Renal function tests were normal (urea: 5.0 mg/dL; creatinine: 1.1 mg/dL, glomerular filtration rate using the Cockcroft-Gault Equation: 91 mL/min), human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis C Virus, hepatitis B surface antigen, chlamydia, gonorrhoea and syphilis tests results were all negative. Abdominal ultrasound revealed an enlarged right kidney with multiple large cysts over the entire renal parenchyma that fulfilled the criteria suggested by Ravine and colleagues for diagnosis of cystic kidney disease . No cysts or abnormalities were observed in other intra-abdominal organs . An intravenous urography done showed no contrast material in the right renal collecting ductal or pelvicalyceal systems and ureter, suggestive of a non-functional right kidney. The contrast material was present in the left renal collecting ductal and pelvicalyceal systems and ureter which were otherwise normal . She was programmed for a surgical exploration that found a huge right kidney with multiple cysts for which a right nephrectomy was done. Postoperatively, the patient was placed on anti-inflammatories, analgesics and antibiotics and the evolution was favorable with normal clinical and renal function parameters. The patient was discharged 5 days after surgery and reviewed 1 week later. The histopathology analysis of the resected kidney revealed cystically dilated tubules with some intervening renal parenchyma and no malignant involvement, all in favor of a renal polycystic disease, however, the non-availability of an electronic database for the storage of patient medical records and data in this resource-limited setting hindered the later retrieval of the histopathological slides. The patient was advised about the need for an initial regular follow-up to ascertain adequate renal function and proper functioning of the remaining kidney.