A 4-year old Saudi boy presented to the Hand Clinic for surgical correction of his angulated thumbs. He was an only child of non-consanguineous parents. He was born vaginally at term after an uneventful pregnancy. The birth weight and length were at the 30th centile. Family history was unremarkable. The patient had all the hallmark features of RSTS Type 1 including: intellectual disability, typical facial dysmorphism (highly-arched eyebrows, down-slanted palpebral fissures, a broad nasal bridge, a columella hanging below the alae nasi, low-set posteriorly-rotated ears, a thin upper lip, pouting of the lower lip, a highly-arched palate, and mild micrognathia), broad / flat/ angulated thumbs, broad big toes, and overlapping post-axial toes . The child also had the following distinct features: a midline notch of the upper lip, a bifid tip of the tongue, a midline groove of the lower lip, plump fingers with broad / flat fingertips, and brachydactyly . The child had a history of cardiac surgery (correction of an atrial septal defect and repair of hemi-anomalous pulmonary venous drainage) as well as orchiopexy (for an undescended left testis). Full systemic examination and radiological investigations did not reveal any other defects. Both parents had no abnormalities.
After informed consent was obtained, genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood of the child and both parents. For testing, a combination of Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) and Sanger Sequencing was used to cover the full coding regions of the tested genes plus 20 bases of the non-coding DNA flanking each exon. The most important two syndromes with features overlapping with those of RSTS are the Cornelia de Lang (OMIM12247) and Floating-Harbor (OMIM 136140) syndromes [, ]. Hence, all the genes known to cause RSTS, Cornelia de Lang syndrome, and the Floating-Harbor syndrome (see Table ) were sequenced. The sequences were then aligned and compared with reference sequences. All differences from the reference sequences (sequence variants) were assigned to one of the five interpretation categories as per ACMG guidelines .
The child was found to be heterozygous in the CREBBP gene for a sequence variant designated c.4963del, which is predicted to result in premature protein termination p.Leu1655Cysfs*89. This variant has been reported to be causative of RSTS Type 1 . The variant was not detected in the parents , which indicates that it is a de novo event. According to the criteria of the ACMG, this variant is classified as pathogenic.
The child and his father were also found to be heterozygous in the EP300 gene for a sequence variant designated c.586A > G, which is predicted to result in the amino-acid substitution p.Ile196Val . This variant appears to be rare in large population databases of genetic variations . The amino-acid residue p.Ile196 of the EP300 protein has been highly conserved during evolution. The variant is predicted by SIFT, Polyphen-2, and Mutation Taster to be benign. According to Clinvar, the variant has been designated of uncertain significance by one submitter and likely benign by another submitter . According to the criteria of the ACMG, this variant is classified as likely benign.