A 20-year-old woman with no past medical history was admitted in November 2018 to the department of ophthalmology at Farhat Hached University hospital, (Sousse, Tunisia) for a 5-day-history of reduced vision with scotoma and myodesopsia in the left eye. She had no eye pain, redness or discharge. Two weeks before eye symptoms, she complained from fever, fatigue and arthromyalgia which resolved spontaneously. Physical examination at admission was unremarkable and didn't show lymphadenopathy or skin lesion. Laboratory data showed white blood cells 10,800/mm3, C-reactive protein 12 mg/L and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 41 mm per hour.
Detailed ophthalmic examination including best corrected visual acuity (BCVA), tonometry, fundus photography, fluorescein angiography, optical coherence tomography (OCT) and visual field testing, was normal in the right eye. In the left eye, BCVA was 7/10, intraocular pressure was normal, fundus photography showed optic disc edema with macular exudates arranged in incomplete macular star, fluorescein angiography exhibited optic disc hyperfluorescence and macular OCT showed hyperreflective signals at the level of the outer plexiform layer representing retinal exudates . Visual field testing showed cecocentral scotoma. Based on these findings, namely optic disc edema and macular exudates arranged in macular star, the diagnosis of neuroretinitis of the left eye was made. Chest x-ray was normal and tuberculin skin test was negative. Serologic tests for Rickettsia, Brucella, Toxoplasma, Cytomegalovirus (CMV), Ebstein-Barr virus (EBV), Treponema, Borrelia, and antinuclear antibodies (ANA) were all negative. Serologic test for Bartonella henselae using indirect immunofluorescent assay (IFA) was highly positive (1:2560 UI/L) for immunoglobulin G (Ig G), while immunoglobulin M (Ig M) were not performed. The medical history revealed that the patient had a close contact with cats and kittens and that she had multiple scratches before the onset of symptoms. The diagnosis of cat CSD associated neuroretinitis was made and the patient was treated with doxycycline 200 mg per day and rifampicin 900 mg per day, associated with oral prednisolone initially 60 mg per day, with progressive tapering for a total duration of 6 weeks. At the end of antibiotic and corticosteroid therapy, BCVA was 9/10, fundus photography showed a decrease in optic disc edema and macular exudates , and fluorescein angiography exhibited a decrease in optic disc hyperfluorescence .
Twelve months after the end of therapy, the patient was completely asymptomatic, BCVA was 10/10, fundus photography and macular OCT were normal .
This case report has been reported in line with the SCARE Criteria .