A 79-year-old woman, in good general conditions, presented with a 3-month history of episodic abdominal pain and progressive constipation associated with weight loss. Her past medical history and family history were unremarkable. Physical examination revealed a palpable, tender mass in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. Laboratory tests on admission were within normal values, including tumour markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA 125, CA 19.9 and CA 72.4. As a first approach, an abdominal ultrasonography (US) was performed, showing a hypoechoic ovoid mass in the right mesogastrium (max Ø 10 cm) and another hypoechoic round mass (max Ø 4.5 cm) in lumbo-aortic region. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed multiple intraperitoneal lesions: two solid, homogeneous masses located behind the proximal transverse colon, measuring respectively 9 and 6 cm, showing extensive vascularization following contrast injection; a solid homogeneous mass involving the distal transverse colon and left colic angle walls; multiple hypodense lesions with defined borders located in the hepatic hilum, Morrison's space, omentum and para-aortic region. A colonoscopy was performed, showing an intraluminal, yellowish lesion with clear margins in the transverse colon which didn't allow a further progression of the endoscope . Biopsies showed unspecific inflammation: decreased density and dismorphism of glands, inflammatory infiltrate in corion, necrotic material and granulation tissue.
Laparotomy revealed an intraluminal mass at the right colic angle and a dissemination of the tumour at stomach, omentum, mesentery and mesocolon . Frozen sections from transverse mesocolon and omentum were obtained during surgery, both showing adipose tissue fragments with marked cytologic alterations. There was no evidence of carcinomatous infiltration in the examined material. The patient underwent a right hemicolectomy, partial gastric resection, and excision of the omental and mesocolic masses. Removal of the mesenteric lesions was not attempted due to a massive dissemination of the disease at the origin of blood vessels. The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged nine days after surgery. Gross examination of the colon specimen showed a whitish, elastic-hard, nodular, encapsulated mass 50 × 52 × 47 mm in size, mainly located in the submucosal layer, obliterating the colonic lumen and causing focal ulceration of the mucosal surface . Mucoid slimy areas were alternated with white and bright yellow areas. Focal areas of necrosis with a maximum size of 5 mm were also observed. The tumour was well circumscribed but not encapsulated; tumour borders were well defined with no evidence of infiltration of the mesocolon. Histological examination showed a highly undifferentiated tumour with pleomorphic spindle shaped cells with marked atypia mixed with multinucleated giant cells and atypical and multivacuolated lipoblasts, with bizarre, hypercromatic and scalloped nuclei . These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of pleomorphic liposarcoma of the colon; grade G3 according to FNCLL (French Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer) system . The same findings were observed in all specimens. The mesenterial masses were respectively 32, 30, 25 and 25 mm smaller than the colonic mass. The masses were well circumscribed but not encapsulated, with well defined margins. The patient underwent a total dose of 54 Gy adjuvant radiation therapy 90 days after surgery, which resulted in a partial reduction of the residual lesions at the CT scan control performed six months afterwards. Follow-up protocol included clinical encounters and laboratory testing every three months, an upper abdomen ultrasound every six months, computed tomography every six months for the first year and annually thereafter, and annual endoscopic surveillance.
Twenty eight months after surgery, the patient developed progressive dysphagia with radiological evidence of tumour progression. Thirty months after surgery she died for an acute cardiac event. No autopsy was performed.