A 40 days old male infant was referred to our clinic with discoid-like and annular skin lesions distributed over forehead and neck since one week ago. The parents complained of his irritability and low grade fever. Abnormal findings in physical examination were T=38.2°C, mild tachycardia (PR=140) and annular skin lesions on the face and mucosal lesions on the lips . There was no cardiac arrhythmia or organo-megaly.
In past history, the pregnancy was terminated at 35 weeks, due to preeclampsia. The neonate weighed 1300 gr at birth. According to the birth data and our examinations, his growth velocity was within normal limits.
Abnormal laboratory studies were: Hgb 9.3, ESR 50, CRP 1, Serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) 310 IU/L (normal 25-45 IU/L), Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) 285 IU/L (normal 37-43 IU/L). Other laboratory tests including platelets and neutrophil counts, serum creatinine, complement (C3) determination, urine analysis were normal. FANA and anti Ro (SSA) were negative in infant.
Chext X-ray was normal and electrocardiogram showed tachycardia (140/min). To evaluate tachycardia, 24 hours holter monitoring and echocardiography were performed which had normal results.
The mother was a known case of active rheumatoid arthritis for 12 years, under treatment during pregnancy with prednisolone and methyldopa. She had metacarpal and PIP deformities and ulnar deviation of the hands . Her laboratory data during pregnancy showed FANA 1/640 but there was no clinical or laboratory findings compatible with SLE in 3 evaluations before and during pregnancy. Anti ds-DNA was negative and complements normal. Interestingly anti-SSB/La was positive (38 with normal range <20) during pregnancy but anti-Ro and anti-Sm antibodies were negative.
After delivery, the laboratory tests for lupus were repeated. All the laboratory tests were normal, except for FANA=1/1280 and anti-SSB/La antibody which was higher than normal.
The infant was followed without any treatment. In a period of 3 months, the skin lesions gradually disappeared without leaving any scars. The liver enzymes decreased and reached the normal level. 1 year follow up showed no new findings and normal growth and development of the infant.