A 54-year-old heterosexual married Moroccan man presented with a previous uncomplicated medical history. He did not report any risk factors for human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV). He was seen in our emergency department with a foul smelling, exquisitely tender mass arising in his suprapubic, external genitalia and perianal region that extended laterally to both thighs . This lesion had been present for 10 years and had grown slowly over time. It had been increasing in size over the previous 8 months causing pain and bleeding. His delay was due to a hospital and needle phobia. A clinical examination revealed an extensive erosive, cauliflower-like growth involving a large part of his lower body (42 × 31cm in diameter; Figure ). No inguinal or supraclavicular lymphadenopathy was detected clinically. He was admitted to the emergency room where multiple abscesses were drained and deep biopsies were taken from his tumor. The histological examination revealed a verrucous architecture with papillomatosis, acanthosis and a minimal loss of epithelial cell polarity . This confirmed the diagnosis of VC.
Additional radiological investigations consisted of a thoracic-abdominal-pelvic computed tomography scan which showed the localization of this tumor in the external genitalia, perineal and suprapubic region without any lymph nodes or distant metastases. The results of biochemical and serological investigations including a HIV test were normal. After discussion among the oncologist, radiotherapist, pathologist and surgeon, the patient was advised to undergo chemoradiation initially with the aim to reduce the size of his tumor followed by surgery.
After treatment of a local infection, our patient received two cycles of intravenous chemotherapy given three weekly with cisplatin 80mg/m2 on day one and 5-fluorouracil (5- FU) 600mg/m2 on day one to five given as a continuous infusion. After two cycles of chemotherapy the tumor size was reduced to 30% of initial size. The radiation was planned in two phases, two total doses of 45Gy in 25 fractions over 5 weeks, given at 1.8Gy per fraction. The combined therapy was well tolerated with just diarrhea as a side effect. Six months after completing the treatment, he underwent local excision with extensive abdominoperineal rectum excision and emasculation. In addition, a temporary diverting colostomy and a bilateral ureterostomy were constructed. Pedicled anterolateral thigh flaps and abdominal flap were used to cover the perineal defects. Unfortunately he developed septic shock and died some days later. The final pathology report after surgical resection of the tissue confirmed the diagnosis of VC.