A 50-year-old female presented with a 4-h history of acute retrosternal chest pain radiating to the left arm associated with diaphoresis. The patient had a history of hypertension for 10 years and a smoking history of 15 years. There was no any other significant past history. On examination, patient had a pulse rate of 60 beats/min and a blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg. ECG showed an inferior wall myocardial infarction with ST elevation in inferior leads. Echocardiography showed regional wall motion abnormality in the inferior wall with an ejection fraction of 52%. The patient was loaded with aspirin and clopidogrel (600 mg), and the patient was quickly taken for primary PCI via a femoral route with intravenous unfractionated heparin (@100 U/kg followed by additional doses according to activated clotting time) used as an anticoagulant for the procedure. Left-sided angiography taken using a JL 3.5 diagnostic catheter revealed only non-obstructive disease in the proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD) and distal left circumflex coronary artery (LCX). Distal RCA was filling retrogradely from contra-lateral collaterals as shown in Fig. . Multiple attempts with manipulation were made with the JR 3.5 diagnostic catheter to hook RCA; however, it was unsuccessful. The catheter was changed to the tiger catheter, Amplatz Right 1, Amplatz left 1 diagnostic catheter and EBU, but these could not identify the ostium of RCA. A non-specific angiogram taken in the ascending aorta revealed RCA ostium to be present anteriorly and high above the sinotubular junction on the left side of the ascending aorta.
Judkins left diagnostic and guiding, EBU guiding catheter, and AL-1 could not hook the RCA. Finally, RCA was hooked with difficulty with the AL-2 (Medtronic® USA) diagnostic catheter after careful manipulation. A right-sided angiogram revealed RCA cutoff proximally as shown in Figs. and .
In view of the difficult hooking and considering the patient’s condition, the intervention was continued with this diagnostic catheter. The lesion was crossed with a BMW wire, and the lesion dilated with 2 × 12 mm SC balloon at 16 atmospheres which restored the blood flow. A 3 × 20 mm endeavor resolute was deployed at the lesion site at 14 atmospheres and post dilated with 3 × 8 mm NC balloon at 20 atmospheres with TIMI 3 flow in the vessel post-procedure as shown in Fig. . The procedure was completed in 1 h and 5 min, fluoroscopy time of 20 min, and the total amount of radiation exposure during the procedure was 816 mGy. The amount of dye used in this procedure was 220 ml. The procedure time, fluoroscopic time, radiation exposure, and dye used were higher than those of a routine RCA PCI procedure. This was significantly due to the use of multiple catheters in an attempt to hook the RCA. The patient was discharged on day 3 from the hospital in a stable condition.