Two male fire survivors (Case A, a 33-yr-old and Case B, a 40-yr-old, respectively) were sent to hospital because of smoke exposure in a burning building, complaining of hoarseness, sore throat, and cough. They denied any history of cigarette smoking or medical disease. Case A presented with fever (38.3 °C), mild tachycardia (122 bpm), and elevated SBP/DBP (172/106 mmHg). Case B was afebrile (37.2 °C) with a normal heart rate (HR, 91 bpm) and systolic/diastolic blood pressure (SBP/DBP, 122/62 mmHg). Physical examinations revealed clear consciousness, normal respiratory rate (20 respirations per minute), and clear breathing sounds. No stridor, signs of burn injury, and respiratory distress were noted in either case.
Under supplemental oxygen (O2) via a mask (O2 flow: 10 L/min), arterial blood analysis showed respiratory alkalosis in Case A and Case B (pH: 7.479 and 7.506, the partial pressure of O2: 249.5 mmHg and 389.4 mmHg, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide: 26.7 mmHg and 27.2 mmHg, bicarbonate levels: 19.4 mmol/L and 21.0 mmol/L, peripheral O2 saturation: 99.2% and 99.1%, respectively). Initial serum analysis revealed elevated carboxyhemoglobin (COHb) levels (8.2% in Case A and 14.8% in Case B). Chest radiography revealed increased lung marking, and a resting electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus tachycardia in Case A and sinus rhythm in Case B. Fiberoptic bronchoscopies were arranged for the patients to assess smoke inhalation injury, which revealed smoke-soaked nasal discharge and no upper airway obstruction. They were admitted for further management and observation following smoke inhalation injury with CO intoxication.
They both received bronchodilator and glucocorticoid therapies for airway edema. High-flow O2 therapy via non-rebreathing masks and hyperbaric O2 therapy were administered for CO intoxication. Case A became afebrile, with a reduction in HR and SBP/DBP on the next day. Follow-up COHb levels decreased to 3.9% and 0.8% in cases A and B, respectively. There was no chest discomfort or ischemic evidence in serial ECG during hospitalization in either case. However, in Case B, the cardiac enzyme level was elevated initially and decreased on the next day (high-sensitive cardiac troponin T level decreased from 13.5 ng/L to 4.0 ng/L). The hoarseness, sore throat, and cough improved after 4-day of hospitalization.
Both patients experienced exercise intolerance after discharge while participating in physical activities of the previous level. Early fatigue was noted before reaching the previous exercise intensity. After a general assessment, including physical examination, blood testing, and chest radiography, they were referred to physiatrists by pulmonologists for further investigation to evaluate exercise intolerance. Approximately 2-week after discharge, spirometry tests showed normal pulmonary function. CPX performed on a treadmill using the Bruce protocol , revealed peak oxygen consumption (VO2 peak) of 38.7 mL kg− 1 Min− 1 and 37.6 mL kg− 1 min− 1, respectively; however, there was a slight decrease in the percentage of predicted VO2 peak (90.63% and 94.47%). Peak HR, breathing reserve, and minute ventilation/carbon dioxide production relationship were within normal limits. No chest discomfort was reported during testing. However, at peak exercise, they presented with a significantly downsloping ST-segment depression in lead II, III, and aVF, which indicated exercise-induced myocardial ischemia . CPX also demonstrated the presence of disproportionately increasing HR with elevated BP and O2-pulse failure from stage 3 of exercise to peak exercise (Additional file : Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary Fig. 4). Selective parameters of the spirometry test and abnormalities of CPX are further demonstrated in Table and Additional file : Fig. Supplementary Fig. 2 and Supplementary Fig. 5.
The tests were stopped as the HR peak was attained with progressive ECG signs of myocardial ischemia with a duration of 10 min 14 s and 9 min 58 s, respectively. Finally, transient myocardial ischemic changes on ECG returned to normal within 2 min of recovery. For exercise suggestion, HR method were instructed for guidance the intensity zone, as their myocardial ischemic threshold referred to the HR once the ST-segment depression was 1.5 mm (0.15 mV) in CPX (approximately 160 bpm). They were instructed to exercise with precaution in the community setting with slow progression. No adverse cardiopulmonary events were reported. In addition, exercise intolerance improved subjectively during the 6-month follow-up and returned to baseline.