We report the case of a 31-year-old nulliparous woman diagnosed with stage 1C ovarian cancer in 2019. She initially presented with bilateral complex ovarian cysts and a significantly elevated cancer antigen 125 (CA-125) of 526 U/mL. She underwent bilateral laparoscopic ovarian cystectomies with pathology significant for endometroid ovarian carcinoma arising in bilateral endometrioid borderline tumors. Her medical history was unremarkable except for daily tobacco use (two cigarettes per day). The patient was counseled for bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, lymphadenectomy, and omentectomy followed by three cycles of carboplatin/paclitaxel. Testing for Lynch Syndrome was pending at the time of consultation for fertility preservation, but eventually returned negative.
Evaluation revealed an anti-mullerian hormone (AMH) level of 0.39 ng/mL and an antral follicle count of 3 by ultrasound, along with moderate free fluid due to recent bilateral ovarian cystectomy. Her 34-year-old partner’s semen analysis was poor with a low concentration (4.7 million/mL), low motility (16%), and no morphologically normal sperm (0%). He was referred to urology for further evaluation, which is ongoing.
She then underwent three cycles of controlled ovarian stimulation spanning 42 days. Her first cycle began just 3 weeks after bilateral ovarian cystectomy as a random start in the luteal phase; a gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist (GnRH-antagonist) protocol was utilized with 450 units of gonadotropins per day . Letrozole (aromatase antagonist, 5 mg) was prescribed due to theoretical concern for estrogen receptors in her gynecologic cancer, but was discontinued after five days due to side effects. She was stimulated for eleven days, reached a peak estradiol (E2) of 261 pg/mL, and triggered with human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) once two lead follicles reached a diameter of at least 18 mm. One metaphase II (MII) oocyte was retrieved, fertilized by intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI), and frozen at the two pro-nuclear (2PN) stage.
Her second cycle with the same protocol was initiated six days after retrieval; following nine days of stimulation and a peak E2 of 2072 pg/mL, eight oocytes (6 MII) were retrieved, and three fertilized and were frozen at the 2PN stage. An immature oocyte (MI) underwent in vitro maturation (IVM) overnight, fertilized, and was frozen as a 2PN. Immature oocytes that did not respond to in vitro maturation were not cryopreserved. Her third cycle was initiated six days after her second retrieval. After ten days of stimulation with a peak estradiol of 1543 pg/mL, seven oocytes (6 MII) were retrieved with four fertilized and frozen as 2PNs. The six day interval between stimulations was due to the patient’s schedule, including other medical appointments.
With multiple embryos cryopreserved, she underwent a laparoscopic bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, lymph node dissection, and omentectomy with pathology significant for a small residual focus of endometrioid borderline tumor. The patient declined chemotherapy and is being monitored with frequent laboratory testing and imaging. She has been advised by her gynecologic oncologist to wait at least one year after definitive surgery prior to embryo transfer.