A 28-year-old Tunisian male patient, from a rural area, with alcohol consumption and occasional cannabis smoking habits and with no medical history, presented to our department. The family history was not contributory. He was admitted with complaints of sudden onset of lower limbs weakness and dysuria appearing 7 days prior to admission. Dry cough, night sweat, and anorexia with weight loss preceded the neurological signs by 2 months. These symptoms did not improve after ambulatory care with broad-spectrum antibiotics. No visual complaints were reported by the patient.
The patient was febrile and fully conscious. Pulmonary auscultation revealed bilateral crepitations. He was tachycardic. Neurological examination revealed complete paraplegia and decreased deep tendon reflexes. The Babinski sign was present. He had a T4 sensory level and urinary retention.
Blood tests showed the presence of neutrophilic leukocytosis (total white cell 15 × 109/l, neutrophils 11.8 × 109/l) and elevated C-reactive protein serum levels (62 mg/l). The serological markers of infection with hepatitis viruses B and C, and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), were negative.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine showed an intramedullary tumefactive T2 hyperintensity extending from C5 to T10, which was consistent with the diagnosis of LETM . Hyperintensity mostly involved the gray matter, as seen in the transverse plane. The presence of T2 bright spotty lesions was demonstrated . Administration of a contrast agent revealed a multifocal and heterogeneous enhancement . Brain MRI showed T2 hyperintensity of the optic chiasma and an abnormal enhancement of the right optic nerve as well as the optic chiasma . It also revealed hyperintensity and enhancement of the left wall of the third ventricle, in the hypothalamus . No tuberculomas, leptomeningeal enhancement, or vertebral lesions were observed.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed mild pleocytosis (7 lymphocytes/mm3), hyperproteinorachia (3.23 g/l), and hypoglycorrhachia (1.9 mmol/l). Qualitative assessment of the intrathecal IgG synthesis in the CSF by isoelectric focusing did not show abnormalities. Serum anti-AQP4ab was detected with a cell-based assay using transfected cells. Diagnosis of NMOSD was retained according to the consensus criteria .
Additional investigation using chest-X-ray and CT scan test demonstrated typical radiological signs for PT, consisting of pulmonary excavation with air-fluid level . The tuberculin skin test was positive. To search for MT in the pulmonary system, both acid-fast bacilli test and sputum culture were negative.
As our region is endemic for MT and the radiological findings were typical with a positive tuberculin skin test, diagnosis of smear-negative PT coincident with NMOSD was retained. Investigation for MT by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in the CSF was negative.
Antituberculosis treatment (AT) (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) was initiated. Methylprednisolone intravenous pulses were administered together with AT.
On the fourteenth day of treatment, intravenous immunoglobulins (IVIG) were administered. The patient became apyretic, and his food intake improved, but the lower limbs weakness persisted.
Three months after the first onset of the neurological symptoms, the patient was readmitted for fever, chills, hypotension, and burning urination. At that time, pulmonary symptoms improved. There was some radiological improvement as the follow-up chest radiography demonstrated the disappearance of the air-fluid level . However, a residual paraplegia was noted. Diagnosis of severe sepsis having urinary source was retained. A specific antibiotherapy was introduced in addition to AT with a control of the infectious process. However, 7 days later, the patient presented with a complaint of rapid right blurring of vision. His visual acuity in the right eye was limited to finger counting. A relative afferent pupillary defect and optic disc pallor in the right eye were noted. Fundoscopy of the left eye showed a normal appearance of the optic disc. Diagnosis of right retrobulbar ON was therefore made. The patient was treated with repeated courses of corticosteroids but with no improvement in the visual acuity. One month later, the patient died, suddenly, at home.