A 50-year-old man was a chronic smoker and suffered from a longstanding history of type 2 diabetes mellitus. He was admitted for decompensated heart failure as evidenced by pulmonary rales at bilateral lung bases, an elevated jugular venous pressure and bilateral lower limbs pitting oedema. Echocardiography showed severe left ventricular impairment with markedly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 20% and preserved myocardial thickness and contractility only in territory of left anterior descending artery (LAD). After initial stabilization of heart failure with intravenous diuretics, coronary angiography was performed showing severe left mainstem (LM) disease with collateralizing triple-vessel chronic total occlusion (CTO) (, , and ). The calculated Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) operative risk score was 8.5% and coronary artery bypass graft was declined by cardiothoracic surgeons in view of high perioperative morbidity and mortality. Protected PCI under Impella CP (Abiomed, USA) support was arranged to revascularize the LAD first as it was the likely single viable territory from echocardiographic findings.
A 14 Fr Impella sheath was inserted to right femoral artery, through which an Impella CP was inserted for haemodynamic support. A 7 Fr Launcher (Medtronic, USA) EBU 3.5 guide catheter was inserted via right radial approach. Chronic total occlusion at proximal LAD was crossed with a Gaia Next 1 (Asahi Intecc, Japan) wire loaded on Turnpike microcatheter (Teleflex, USA) and passed to the first diagonal (D1) branch , which was subsequently exchanged to a Runthrough Floppy (Terumo, Japan) wire. Distal part of the LAD was then wired with another Runthrough Floppy guidewire with the support of a Sasuke (Asahi Intecc, Japan) dual-lumen catheter . Balloon angioplasty was performed followed by intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) assessment for lesion interrogation and determination of landing zones along the wire in distal LAD . A 2.25 × 40 mm Orsiro Mission (Biotronik, Germany) drug-eluting stent (DES) was placed from proximal to middle part of LAD, just proximal to the take-off of second diagonal (D2) branch, while the D1 was protected by jailed balloon technique with a 2.0 mm semi-compliant balloon . Another overlapping 3.5 × 28 mm Ultimaster Tansei (Terumo, Japan) DES was placed from ostial LM to proximal LAD segment, with wire protection of the left circumflex artery (LCX) . Wire exchange was performed. The LCX was rewired with the original LAD wire and the jailed LCX wire was removed and advanced across the stented LM and LAD segments to the D2 branch, with a looped distal wire segment. This was followed by post-dilatation of stents with appropriately sized balloons. Subsequent IVUS demonstrated good stent expansion and apposition with satisfactory angiographic results .
Upon removal of the Runthrough Floppy guidewire from D2, the wire tip got entangled with the distal stent edge . Further retraction of the guidewire with a Turnpike microcatheter led to fracture of jailed guidewire and allowed only partial retrieval of its proximal part. The residual distal wire segment was left unravelled within the coronary bed and the struts at distal stent edge were also deformed precluding device passage even with a 1.0 × 5 mm semi-compliant balloon ( and ; , ). A ‘Ping-pong’ guiding system was set up with another Launcher 7 Fr EBU 3.5 guide catheter inserted via the sheath of Impella CP. A Rotawire (Boston Scientific, USA) was delivered to distal LAD with difficulty. Rotational atherectomy (RA) with 1.5 mm burr was performed with an aim to clear the obstructing scaffolds. It successfully crossed the deformed distal stent edge, during which the uncoiled guidewire fragment was also transected with the radio-opaque distal tip embolized to a small septal artery (; , and ).
Subsequent IVUS and ‘ClearStent’ (Siemens Healthineers, Germany) confirmed a residual portion of wire filaments extending from middle LAD to the aorta (; , ). They were then successfully removed with ‘Twist-wire’ technique with two Rinato Prowater (Asahi Intecc, Japan) guidewires ( and ; , ). Further sequential post-dilatation of the deformed stent was done . Final IVUS and angiography confirmed no significant residual stent deformity or wire filaments (; , and ). Follow-up angiography at 4 months showed excellent results with widely patent stents (, , ).