A 65-year-old woman was aware of double vision and left dacryorrhea for 2 months. Her medical history was unremarkable and did not include thyroid disorder, autoimmune disease, amyloidosis, and malignant neoplasms. A local ophthalmologist found a left orbital mass and the patient was referred to our department. At presentation, the patient showed mild restriction on the downward gaze. In addition, a subcutaneous mass was palpated on the left eyelid. The mass was 2 × 1.5 cm in dimension, painless, mobile, and elastic hard. Conjunctival hyperemia and proptosis were not observed. The blood examination showed normal findings. Cranial computed tomography revealed a mass in the anterior part of the left orbit. The mass was isodense relative to the extraocular muscles and located in the inferior, inferolateral, and posterior aspects of the bulb . On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the mass was well-demarcated and separate from the inferior rectus muscle, appeared isointense on both T1- and T2-weighted imaging, and was intensely enhanced after intravenous infusion of gadolinium . Based on these findings, the lesion was thought to represent myositis of the IObM. As the patient was reluctant to have a surgical scar on the lower eyelid, biopsy was performed through lateral orbitotomy. Following retraction of the lateral rectus muscle upward, the posterior part of the bulb and the attaching belly of the IObM were exposed. Next, an oblique direction of the IObM spanning between the orbital floor and posterior bulb was confirmed. The posterolateral part of IObM was biopsied. Microscopically, the resected specimen showed sheet-like proliferation of small round cells, with a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio. No cell atypia was observed. These cells were positively stained not only for CD20 and CD79a, markers specific for B-lymphocytes, but also for CD3 and CD5, markers specific for T-lymphocytes . These findings were consistent with those of orbital myositis. The patient was managed by oral administration of prednisone at an initial dose of 30 mg/day, followed by gradual reduction for 2 weeks, which resulted in a remarkable resolution of her orbital symptoms. MRI performed 3 months after surgery showed remarkable regression of the swollen IObM .