The propositus (II-1), an eight-year old boy of a non-consanguineous parentage with mildly delayed developmental milestones, was referred to the National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, Bangalore, for evaluation of gradually progressive left spastic hemiparesis of three months duration. At the age of 18 months, his eyes manifested retinal telangiectasia and exudates compatible with the diagnosis of the Coats Disease. He had received laser photocoagulation in the right eye, multiple sessions of injection of Avastin (Bevacizumab) and vitreous lavage. On physical examination, his vitals were stable. His neurological examination revealed mild left facial weakness with spasticity in the left upper and lower limb. His deep tendon reflexes were brisk bilaterally (right more than the left). Among extra-neurological features, he had convergent squint of right eye, premature graying of hair, two café-au-lait spots over the forearm (1×2 cm) and bilateral contracture of tendo Achilles (left more than right). Ophthalmologic examination showed absent perception of light on the right side with just perception of hand movements in the left eye along with corneal opacity; leukocoria in the right eye were also noted . A general radiological survey for additional features by X-ray, echocardiogram and ultrasound of the chest showed evidence of dextrocardia with situs-inversus . The X-rays based skeletal survey showed the presence of osteopenia with flaring of the metaphysial region.
Further radiological evaluation of cranial cavity using CT scan of the brain showed calcifications in bilateral thalamus, right parieto-occipital and left parietal regions . Examination of the skull showed the presence of intracranial calcifications . MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) of the brain revealed mixed intensity solid cystic lesion in the bilateral thalami (T1W image) , T2 and flair hyperintensities involving bilateral frontal and parieto-occipital deep white matter, brainstem and bilateral middle cerebral peduncle. Several tiny cystic spaces were seen in the bilateral parieto-occipital regions. The right ocular globe showed evidence of retinal detachment (T2W) . SWI phase image showed hypointense signal intensity in the areas of blooming consisted with the calcification changes . Biochemical investigations: mildly deranged liver function indices with normal renal functions and electrolytes levels were observed. Complete blood cell counts showed mild leukopenia (total count = 3900 cells/cu mm) and thrombocytopenia (74,000 cells/cu mm). He has been receiving anti-spastic medications and physiotherapy for his motor illness. In summary, based on the presence of intracranial calcifications, symmetrical cystic lesions and clinical features of bilateral Coats disease of the eye (retinal telangiectasia and exudates) along with other extra-neurological manifestations, he was diagnosed with Coats plus syndrome.