The patient was a 50-year-old male, who was a smoker. He got injured after falling into a river while staying in Thailand. He was rescued from the river 8 h after injury and was then transported to a hospital in Thailand. X-ray examination revealed left distal tibial diaphyseal and epiphyseal fractures (classified as AO/OTA type 43C3.3) . The patient underwent surgery 2 days after injury. During the surgery, the open wound was cleaned and debrided, and the fracture was fixed through external fixation. After returning to Japan from Thailand, he visited a nearby doctor and the wound was followed up in an open state .
The patient was referred to our hospital 27 days after injury. The bacterial culture of the wound was negative. The patient complained of pain and presented with purulent discharge from the surgical site. Moreover, localized fever and swelling were confirmed. With regard to soft tissues, skin loss (15 × 10 cm) was observed on the outer side of the ankle from the distal one-third part of the lower leg. In the deeper part, tibialis anterior muscle injury was confirmed. There were no nerve and blood vessel injuries (-, ).
The patient experienced a tibial distal epiphyseal fracture accompanied by a skin loss of 15 × 10 cm and infection. He was diagnosed as a case of infected Gustilo–Anderson 3B tibial fracture. We decided to treat it with a multistage management approach involving the three procedures of serial debridement, wound closure flap surgery, and bone reconstruction.
Emergency surgery was performed 27 days after injury. The surgery was performed under general anesthesia with the patient in the prone position. Surgery was performed without using a tourniquet. Serial debridement and wound closure flap surgery were performed. The open wound was extended, and deep cleaning and debridement were performed. Bacterial culture test of the wound was performed; however, no bacterium was detected.
Wound closure flap surgery was performed on the same day as serial debridement. To cover the outer open wound at the distal lower leg, we performed reverse sural artery flap (RSAF) surgery. For the skin loss of 15 × 10 cm, a skin flap that was 1 cm larger in size was designed. Using Doppler echocardiography, peroneal artery perforator was confirmed at two positions - at 5 and 7 cm from the tip of the lateral malleolus. The center of the skin flap was aligned with the line of the medial sural cutaneous nerve and lesser saphenous vein, and the distal skin bridge was aligned with the peroneal artery perforator. Skin incision was made from the proximal side, the medial sural cutaneous nerve and lesser saphenous vein were confirmed, and the median superficial sural artery between deep gastrocnemius muscles was confirmed and included in the skin flap. For the lateral side, the lateral sural nerve was included in the skin flap. To manage venous congestion, a skin bridge of 3 cm was attached . The skin flap was engrafted without congestion or partial necrosis. At 6 weeks after injury, redness in the lower limb and a sensation of heat in the skin of the lower leg appeared. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed abscess accumulation in the tibialis anterior muscle. We suspected OM and planned to perform bone resection of the infected tibia and bone reconstruction using a ring external fixator.
Debridement and bone reconstruction surgeries were performed 7 weeks after the injury. During the surgery, the wound was opened from the skin flap suture. Bone resection was performed from the bone to the site where bleeding was observed (paprika sign) using a bone saw (, ). The tibia was fixed with a ring external fixator. In the resected tibia, pus was observed in the medullary cavity, whereas blood flow was not observed . Aeromonas hydrophila was detected from the medullary cavity. The patient was diagnosed with OM caused by A. hydrophila. Poly(methyl methacrylate) mixed with 10% vancomycin was injected into the bone defect site . Following the surgery, vancomycin and clindamycin were intravenously administered for 2 weeks.
The bone defect site resected owing to OM was reconstructed through the bone transport method using a ring external fixator (, , ). The bone was moved at a rate of 1 mm/day. At 4 months after surgery, the bone was healed and the ring external fixator was removed . External fixation period was 360 days, bone extension amount was 5 cm, and the healing index (day/cm) was 72.2. At the final follow-up examination 7 years after surgery, there was no relapse of infection, and ankle range of motion was 5° of dorsiflexion and 35° of plantar flexion (, , ). The patient could walk without pain and has resumed work. The American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society score was 93 points.