A 70-year-old Moroccan male patient with unremarkable personal and familial medical history consulted a dentist for wisdom tooth pain lasting for 2 months. A wisdom tooth extraction was conducted. After 6 months, the patient reported the recurrence of pain in the wisdom tooth area occurring at rest and while chewing associated with paresthesia along the path of the mandibular nerve. In addition, the patient complained of a swelling on the right side of the mandibular area. The patient was referred to the oral and maxillofacial surgery department of our hospital. Intraoral examination revealed a well-defined nodular mass located at the junction of the mandibular angle and the body of the mandible. The overlying mucosa showed no abnormalities. Extraoral examination showed multiple submandibular lymph nodes.
A panoramic radiograph revealed a mixed radiolucent–opaque lesion involving the mandibular angle and associated with the displacement of tooth 18. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a large osteolytic spontaneously hypointense and multilobulated lesion associated with calcified areas measuring 47 mm in the largest diameter with extension to the masseter muscle and the anterior belly of digastric muscle .
Thereafter, an incisional biopsy was done. On gross examination, the specimens were represented by five whitish tissue fragments firm in consistency, the largest of which measured 1.7 cm. Microscopically, the tumor was composed of sheets and irregular lobules of atypical cells presenting cartilaginous differentiation . Tumor cells were enlarged with partial loss of lacunar arrangement and severe nuclear atypia consisting of nuclear enlargement, hyperchromasia, and focal binucleation . The mitosis count was three mitoses per ten high-power fields (HPF). Tumor lobules were separated by thick fibrous bands and showed in their periphery oval and spindle dedifferentiated cells. The stroma was made of a hyaline chondroid matrix associated with myxoid areas without evidence of malignant osteoid. Some foci of necrosis were noted. The patient’s history, clinical, and imaging features in addition to histopathological findings suggested an osseous malignant tumor process. The presence of extensive areas of chondroid differentiation raised the diagnosis of chondroblastic osteosarcoma and chondrosarcoma. The presence of punctate intraosseous calcifications on CT and the absence of osteoid deposit after careful examination were consistent with the diagnostic of chondrosarcoma. The grading was established according to the Evans Grading system, which is based on the degree of cellularity, cytological atypia, and mitosis. In the present case, histopathological examination demonstrated high cellularity within sheets and tumor lobules, with tumor cells harboring severe atypia, partial loss of lacunar arrangement, and a mitosis count of more than two mitoses per ten HPF in addition to myxoid stromal change. These histopathological findings were suggestive of a grade III chondrosarcoma.
The patient underwent surgery, which consisted of a right segmental mandibulectomy . The tumor was resected from tooth 20 to the coronoid process with reconstruction by titanium osteosynthesis angled plate and submandibular lymph node dissection. Macroscopically, the tumor was localized in the mandibular angle with extension in the mandibular body opposite tooth 19 and extension in the mandibular ramus. The tumor measured 4.5 × 2.8 × 2 cm, and it was whitish, multilobulated, firm in consistency , encapsulated at the internal side, and infiltrating the masticatory muscles at the external side. Osseous and muscular resection margins were macroscopically free of the tumor. Dissection of the submandibular area revealed eight indurated lymph nodes measuring between 0.5 and 1.6 cm. Microscopic examination showed a tumor growth delimited by a thin fibrous capsule displaying sheets and lobules of atypical cells separated by thick fibrous bands . The latter exhibited marked nuclear atypia consisting of nucleomegaly, hyperchromasia, irregular contours, binucleation, abnormal mitosis, and partial loss of lacunar arrangement . Hyaline cartilage matrix was abundant . Tumor cells at the periphery of the lobules were dedifferentiated harboring a spindled morphology. Extensive areas of necrosis were noted . After exhaustive sampling, no osteoid deposit was identified, thus confirming the previous diagnosis of grade III chondrosarcoma. The resection margins were free of the tumor. No submandibular lymph nodes harbored the tumor. The tumor stage was pT1N0Mx according to the AJCC 8th edition. After surgery, a slight limitation of mouth opening was reported by the patient. No aesthetic damage was noted.
Four months later, the patient presented under the incision area a firm swelling. A CT was done and showed a jugulocarotid lymphadenopathy measuring 33 × 15 mm with a necrotic center . A surgical resection was performed. Histopathological examination of the resected specimen revealed a lymph node parenchyma completely involved in a tumor growth similar to the one previously diagnosed, confirming a recurrence . After a multidisciplinary meeting with participation from maxillofacial surgeons, radiologists, oncologists, and radiation therapists, a complementary treatment by radiation therapy was decided for the patient with total irradiated dose of 60 Gy in 30 fractions. No severe radiation-related complications were reported during treatment. No adverse events were recorded. The patient is currently under clinical follow-up without any evidence of recurrence.