A 33-year-old sexually inactive woman was referred for continuous dribbling of urine of 6 years duration.
From her 14th year, she reported cyclical hematuria with severe suprapubic pain. She required no sanitary protection. However, she assumed this to be normal menstruation. She sought medical advice in her 16th year and was advised no active intervention. She had recurrent episodes of urinary tract infection requiring antibiotic therapy since her 8th year but did not experience urinary incontinence.
She developed acute urinary retention at 27 years. Ultrasound imaging showed hematocolpos of 15 × 9.7 cm, with a crossed right renal ectopia. As per records, her vagina was occluded by a thick septum (2.5 cm), which was excised, and approximately 1000 ml of pus was drained. She developed continuous urinary leakage along with normal voiding in the immediate post-operative period. Subsequently, her dysmenorrhea was relieved and menstruation occurred through the vagina.
She was referred to our center 6 years after the onset of continuous urinary leakage and was evaluated further. Physical examination revealed scoliosis. No other anomalies (systemic or somatic) were detected.
Intravenous urogram revealed a solitary crossed renal ectopia with mild hydroureteronephrosis. At examination under anesthesia (EUA), the lower vagina was stenosed. Cystoscopy and methylene blue (MB) test revealed a vesicovaginal fistula (VVF) proximal to the bladder neck on the left. The ureteric orifice was not visualized separately. The initial impression was that of a recurrent stenosis of the vagina with VVF, probably congenital, which explained the cyclical hematuria when there was an obstructing transverse vaginal septum.
Releasing incisions were made in the stenotic lower third of the vagina, which exposed the normal upper vagina and cervix. Vaginal repair of the fistula with Martius flap was carried out in order to improve the local vascularity in view of the vaginal stenosis and scarring that could have possibly compromised local vascularity
Urinary leakage recurred on the 3rd post-operative day onwards. She returned for further evaluation after a year. A computed tomography (CT) urogram and magnetic resonance urogram performed on the same day showed a right solitary kidney, the ureter crossed to the left (retrocavally at L 3 vertebra) and opening into the bladder just above the fornix with contrast (non-ionic iodinated used for CT) leak into the vagina and contrast opacification of the bladder . Associated L 5 hemivertebra with scoliosis was seen.
Repeat EUA showed the fistula in the anterior vaginal wall toward the left. Retrograde cannulation and injection of MB showed efflux through the defect in the bladder base proximal to the bladder neck toward the left, as seen through a cystoscope. Further, the catheter went across this area without resistance and contrast study confirmed it to be retrograde pyelogram revealing the kidney on the right side .
Subsequently, she underwent ureteric reimplantation and transvesical closure of the VVF tract. Bicornuate uterus with a rudimentary right horn and pelvic endometriosis was also seen during surgery. Urinary incontinence recurred from the 20th day following surgery.
A residual VVF was confirmed and repaired vaginally 4 months later, which relieved her of urinary leakage and she remained continent.