A 74-year-old patient was scheduled for HoLEP to treat his prostatic hyperplasia (estimated prostatic volume 80 ml). His weight and height were 85 kg and 166 cm, respectively. He had arterial hypertension, hypothyreosis, hyperlipidaemia and coronary artery disease with confirmed stenosis of one coronary vessel. On the day of surgery, he received his usual medications (candesartan cilexetil 16 mg, metoprolol succinate 95 mg, levothyroxine 75 μg, amlodipine 5 mg, and ciprofloxacine 250 mg) orally. He was premedicated 30 min before the operation with 7.5 mg midazolam (Roche Pharma AG, Grenzach-Whylen, Germany) by mouth. A peripheral venous access catheter was placed, and standard monitoring (ECG, blood pressure, and pulse oximetry) was established. General anaesthesia was induced using 2 mg/kg propofol (Fresenius Kabi, Bad Homburg, Germany) and 300 μg fentanyl (Hameln pharma plus GmbH, Hameln, Germany). Uneventful tracheal intubation was facilitated using 50 mg atracurium (Hameln pharmaceuticals GmbH, Hameln, Germany). Anaesthesia was maintained using repetitive administrations of fentanyl and 0.9-1.0 MAC of desflurane (Baxter, Unterschleissheim, Germany). The patient was ventilated in a volume-controlled mode with the following ventilator settings: tidal volume 440 ml, PEEP 6 cm H2O, respiratory rate 12/min, ratio inspiration:expiration (I:E) 1:1.7. Peak inspiratory pressure (Ppeak) was 24 cm H2O. The patient was placed in the lithotomy position for the surgical procedure.
One hour after the start of the surgery, Ppeak increased to 34 cm H2O. All other cardiovascular and respiratory parameters remained unchanged. The ventilator settings and the position and integrity of the tracheal tube were checked. The I:E was changed to 1:1, and 300 μg fentanyl was administered without affecting the Ppeak. The surgeon noted a deterioration in surgical conditions due to increased tension. The surgery lasted 3.5 hours due to technical problems with the laser. Ppeak increased continuously and was 39 cm H2O at the end of the procedure. During the final morcellation of the prostatic tissue, a very tender abdomen was noted and vesicular perforation with intra-abdominal irrigant fluid extravasation were suspected. Abdominal ultrasound showed free peri-hepatic fluid. The patient was transferred to the x-ray unit to undergo contrast agent imaging studies. An intra-abdominal bladder perforation was excluded ; however, suspicion of a perforation of the prostatic capsule with access to the retroperitoneal space remained. The patient received a single dose of diuretics (40 mg furosemide) intravenously.
The change in the patient’s position from lithotomy to supine induced a drop in blood pressure, which required continuous administration of norepinephrine (0.2-0.4 mg/h). A central venous line and invasive blood pressure monitoring were established. Chest x-ray showed an elevated diaphragm and consolidation of lung tissue, which was indicative of atelectasis . There were no signs of acute pulmonary venous congestion. We decided to transfer the patient to the ICU for prolonged weaning.
The intravesical pressure was 26 mmHg and confirmed the suspected intra-abdominal compartment syndrome. The urine output was stable (100–400 ml/h) after ICU admission and normalised without further treatment with diuretics. The fluid balance was -1500 ml within 24 hours. The bladder pressure dropped to normal values (12 mmHg) 14 hours after ICU admission. The tracheal tube was removed 18 hours after the patient’s transfer to the ICU. The abdomen was still distended but soft. The remainder of the postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged to home on the 7th day after the operation.