A 73-year-old female was transferred to the cardiac intensive care unit of our tertiary care centre for deteriorating CS despite high doses of inotropes, requiring escalation of therapy with pMCS (SCAI-D; no high oxygen requirements). She had no other medical history besides a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (Stage IV), which had been diagnosed six months earlier and necessitating five cycles of oncological therapy with anthracyclines amongst others. She had been hospitalized for six days for an inflammatory syndrome of unknown aetiology and anorexia and had received empiric IV antibiotics, IV fluids and nasogastric tube feeding, when she was transferred to the intensive care unit because of acute respiratory failure with the need for intubation and positive pressure ventilation. Chest X-ray showed new bilateral infiltrates and transthoracic echocardiography revealed a strongly reduced left ventricular output (LVOT-VTI 6 cm (see ); EF 20%) where LVEF prior to the start of the oncological treatment was reported normal (see and S). There were no manifest valvular problems and right ventricular contractility was preserved. n-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide was 27.745 ng/L (reference value <349 ng/L). An additional coronary angiography showed a normal coronary angiogram, but the ventriculography revealed some discrete apical ballooning. Therefore, a differential diagnosis of acute heart failure with reduced ejection fraction based on a toxic (anthracyclines) vs. Takotsubo cardiomyopathy was made. Given the progression into sliding CS on high doses of inotropes (milrinone 0.25 µg/kg/min and norepinephrine 0.4 µg/kg/min), the patient was considered for upgrade to short-term MCS as recommended by the European Society of Cardiology guidelines for acute heart failure, and considered suitable for MCS since her oncological diagnosis was not supposed to alter the short-term prognosis. She was transferred to our centre and an Impella CP™ was surgically inserted via the left subclavian artery, supported with a purge of dextrose 5% in water (D5W). Anticoagulation was provided by UFH via the purge (25 IU/mL) and systemically (calculated to reach a total of 12 IU/kg bodyweight) and monitored as previously described by our group, based on the anti-factor Xa assay (anti-Xa; target 0.3–0.5 IU/mL) with parallel measurements of activated thromboplastin time (APTT). On day 16, a diagnostic thoracentesis was performed to exclude an empyema since ongoing high fever associated with a unilateral right-sided pleural effusion. The result came back as chylous. Anticoagulant parameters at the time of the pleural drainage were normalized after cessation of peripheral UFH . One night after the procedure and after peripheral UFH was restarted, the patient developed a haemothorax with a significant drop in haemoglobin (BARC 3 bleeding) and a prominent expansion of the right-sided pleural effusion on chest X-ray plus escalation of vasopressor doses. A percutaneous thoracic pigtail was inserted. Systemic UFH was immediately ceased and the purge was switched to BBPS (25 mEq sodium bicarbonate in 1L D5W solution, prepared by adding 12.5 mL of sodium bicarbonate 8.4% to a 500 mL solution of glucose 5%). One unit of both platelets and red blood cells as well as protamine sulphate were administered. After evacuation of two liters of haemorrhagic fluid, the bleeding stopped over the next few hours and the chest X-ray could not show any residual pleural effusion after drainage . During the use of the BBPS (48 hours in total), there were no signs of pump thrombosis nor rising purge pressures or signs of haemolysis and pH and natremia stayed within their normal range. Coagulant parameters on day 16 and 17 are presented in . On day 18, the haemodynamic state of the patient was markedly improved and inotropes/vasopressors could be weaned off. In total, UFH was stopped for 48 hours. The next day, the patient could be weaned from the Impella™. After removal, the device showed macroscopically no signs of thrombosis. Unfortunately, the patient developed several infectious problems afterwards and died on day 35.