A 26-year-old female, with a body mass index of 20.2, presented to the Orthopedic Institute with pain in the metatarsophalangeal joint (MTP1) of the right foot, rated at 6/10 on the NPRS (Numeric Pain Rating Scale) for over 5 years. The pain did not occur at night but increased after her activity as a Latin American dancer, and she couldn't find any physical posture that would alleviate the pain. She had taken anti-inflammatories for a short period, but they did not alleviate the pain. She had no history of fever, trauma, or systemic disease. She had previously undergone corticosteroid infiltration a year earlier, which had been beneficial for a few months, and an X-ray had confirmed the initial degeneration of the MTP joint, but she had never tried manual foot physiotherapy or orthopedic insoles to alleviate the pain. The clinicians chose X-rays for the initial diagnosis of hallux rigidus based on their effectiveness in detecting bony alterations and joint changes, offering a less invasive and more accessible approach compared to CT scans. Although CT scans provide more detailed images, X-rays are often sufficient for an accurate diagnosis of hallux rigidus and are preferred for their practicality, lower cost, and reduced radiation exposure. [, , , , ]. On objective examination, the active movement of the MTP joint of the big toe showed modest limitation in the sagittal plane, measured using an analog goniometer (10–15 degrees), but an increased sensation of pain throughout the foot, measured using the NRS scale (6–7). The Jack test was performed to passively test the capsular tissue of the MTP joint, and the Tip Toe Standing test to assess load-bearing capacity, both of which turned out positive. The “Jack test” is a passive stress test used to assess the stability of the capsular tissue of the MTP joint. The “Tip Toe Standing Test” is used to evaluate load-bearing capacity and involves standing on the ball of the foot to see if it causes pain or instability in the joint. Often these two tests are performed one after the other; when one or both are positive, there is a more or less marked difficulty in dorsalizing the first ray, the propulsive phase of walking is affected by compensatory changes in gait. Unfortunately, the validity of these tests has not been calculated. The Jack test has an intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) of 0.997 (0.995–0.999) . On palpation, a palpable mass was found in the dorsal region of the MTP joint of the right foot, which, according to imaging, appeared to be a small osteophyte. When walking barefoot, a clinically apparent evasive limp with avoidance of the propulsive phase was observed. The patient was given a soft compressed cotton (felt) support to aid the MTP joint, aiming to make walking more functional and alleviate pain. This type of support is commonly used in podiatry to temporarily relieve foot overload areas but is seldom used as a trial to evaluate a future orthopedic orthosis. The literature is lacking in this area, and this article is the first to evaluate the use of felt as evidence in this manner. She was assessed using a baropodometric platform (, ), with and without the soft support, to evaluate the foot's pressure parameters. Moreover, thanks to the ‘Health’ application integrated into Apple smartphones, we were able to automatically monitor the spatio-temporal walking parameters, such as speed, step length, and double support, in the days before and after administering the support.