A 2-year-old Japanese boy was hospitalised with a 2-day history of fever and neck swelling. He had visited a nearby hospital the previous day and had been prescribed clarithromycin. However, the neck swelling increased rapidly, and he was referred to our hospital. On admission, his temperature was 37.5°C and blood pressure was 118/80 mmHg. Physical examination revealed bilateral tonsillitis and swelling of the left posterior pharyngeal wall, and a mildly tender soft mass on his left posterior neck. Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 14,840 cells/μL and C-reactive protein level of 1.70 mg/dL. Emergency neck computed tomography (CT) angiography showed an enhanced abscess cavity posterior to the left retropharyngeal space, and a low-density area surrounded by an area without contrast enhancement in the posterior neck . The latter was suspected to be a deep neck infection secondary to the retropharyngeal abscess. Based on these findings, we performed surgical incision and drainage under general anaesthesia. After induction of anaesthesia, we used a gag to hold the mouth open, and examined the patient’s oral cavity to locate the exact site of swelling in the left posterior pharyngeal wall . After aspirating 1 mL of purulent fluid by needle puncture, we made an incision over the abscess and washed the abscess cavity with physiological saline. Culture of the abscess fluid was positive for penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae (PRSP). We also percutaneously punctured the mass on the posterior neck, and drained approximately 10 mL of clear yellowish lymph, but no pus. Rapid cytology showed that this fluid contained mostly protein-like substances and lymphocytes. The mass was no longer palpable after drainage, and no further surgery was performed. The patient was placed under observation with postoperative administration of meropenem (450 mg) and clindamycin (150 mg). On postoperative day 3, his laboratory test results showed improvement, and the antibiotic therapy was changed to ceftriaxone sodium hydrate (700 mg) based on the sensitivities of the cultured organisms. There were signs of improvement in the pharynx, but the mass on the posterior neck had recurred. Repeat neck CT angiography showed a low-density area in the posterior neck, and signs of improvement in the posterior pharyngeal wall. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) angiography showed an area with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images, and an area of low signal intensity surrounded by an area of high signal intensity on post-gadolinium images . The lesion in the posterior neck was diagnosed as a cystic lymphangioma based on the MRI findings and the results of the needle-puncture biopsy culture. Although repeat CT on postoperative day 7 showed slight asymmetry between the left and right retropharyngeal spaces, the patient was discharged as there was no observable asymmetry of the posterior pharyngeal wall, and the posterior neck mass continued to decrease in size. He was followed up at our outpatient clinic for a year, and there was no recurrence of the lymphangioma during that time.