A 13-year-old girl was brought in for evaluation because of the finding of hematuria and proteinuria. The child’s creatinine was 0.7 mg/dL, and urine protein : creatinine ratio was 0.8 g/g. Both her mother and maternal aunt had been clinically diagnosed with AS during young adulthood and hence were presumed to be autosomal dominant.
The proband’s mother was first evaluated by nephrology at the age of 16 years. She was referred for evaluation of hematuria and proteinuria on urinary dipstick dating back to the age of 8 years old. Her blood pressure was 120/88 mmHg, and she had trace bipedal edema. Her creatinine was 1.4 mg/dL and 24-hour urine protein, 10.5 g. She underwent kidney biopsy for which light microscopy revealed 2/17 globally sclerosed glomeruli, 3/17 with segmental sclerosis and variable moderate to moderately severe interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy. Immunofluorescence microscopy was trace-positive for IgM only. Electron microscopy demonstrated segmental thinning and variable wrinkling of the glomerular basement membrane with variable segmental lamination. There were no electron-dense deposits or inclusions. There was variable effacement of epithelial foot processes with focal microvillous transformation . Immunofluorescent staining for collagen IV was not available at the time; however, all findings were consistent with AS. She was begun on an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor, but suffered a rapid deterioration in her renal function and was on hemodialysis after 12 months.
The maternal aunt had also had a history of hematuria and proteinuria since the age of 8 years. At age 10, she was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes after presenting with diabetic ketoacidosis. It is unknown whether she was ever on an ACEI, and she had a rapid progression of renal failure with her creatinine rising from 0.9 mg/dL at age 16 years to 4.4 mg/dL 2 years later. Her 24-hour urine protein was 14 g. She did not have retinopathy. She underwent kidney biopsy at 18 years, with the finding of advanced global glomerulosclerosis; hence an exact etiology could not be ascertained. Given that the biopsy and renal disease progression were atypical for diabetes, her hematuria and proteinuria predated her diabetes, and her sister had proven AS, the primary etiology of her kidney failure was suspected to be autosomal dominant AS. She was started on dialysis less than 2 months later and was transplanted at the age of 21 years.
The proband was hence brought in for genetic testing in an effort to avoid kidney biopsy. Although it had been assumed that the proband’s mother and maternal aunt had autosomal dominant AS, COL4A5 was prioritized for testing given the absence of known disease in the maternal grandparents. COL4A5 genetic analysis was performed using DNA mutation scanning by high resolution melting analysis (HRMA) of the 51 coding exons and flanking intronic regions of the COL4A5 gene followed by sequencing of genomic regions positive by HRMA. A heterozygous splicing mutation in intron 8 was identified: COL4A5 IVS8-1G>A. This novel mutation disrupts a conserved splice acceptor site and is therefore predicted to be deleterious. Although this mutation has not been previously described, splice site mutations typically result in defects in RNA splicing and result in an aberrant protein. Splicing mutations resulting in exon skipping have previously been described in association with AS . Therefore these results are consistent with a diagnosis of X-linked AS.
Subsequent to genetic testing, the maternal grandmother was admitted to the hospital for pneumonia at age 53 years and was found to be in florid kidney failure. She had not sought prior medical care and did not know that she had kidney disease. At this point, the mother, maternal aunt, and maternal grandmother presented for next generation genetic testing of all three AS causing genes: COL4A3, COLA4 COL4A5 and COL4A6. All three women had the same COL4A5 IVS8-1G>A mutation as the proband. No other mutations were found. The parents of the maternal grandmother have both lived into their 70s and have had no known kidney disease. It is assumed that this was a spontaneous mutation in the maternal grandmother. The pedigree for this family is depicted in . None of the women in the current report have opted to undergo hearing or ocular evaluation but have reported no clinically relevant hearing or visual defects.