A 30-year-old female with no relevant past medical history was admitted to the emergency department due to a constitutional syndrome over the last 3 weeks. She complained of persistent fever, myalgias, weight loss, marked asthenia, and anorexia. Initial investigation revealed painful joints during mobilization (wrists, elbows, and knees bilaterally), but without inflammatory signs, bicytopenia (anaemia—10.6 g/dL—and thrombocytopenia—140.000/μL), elevated inflammatory markers (PCR 15 mg/L, normal range <7 mg/L; ESR 57 mm/h, normal range <20 mm/h), proteinuria, inflammatory myopathy, and polyserositis (bilateral pleural effusion, mild circumferential pericardial effusion). Besides mild pericardial effusion, her initial transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was normal. After an exhaustive workup, she was diagnosed with SLE and treated with corticotherapy (CCT). She developed progressive respiratory insufficiency due to pulmonary oedema.
At that point, she was evaluated by the cardiology team. There was a mild increase in troponin I (1.6 ng/mL maximum; normal range <0.05 ng/mL) and a significant rise of NT-proBNP (3970 pg/mL; normal range <150 pg/mL). Electrocardiogram presented sinus rhythm and a slight superior concave elevation in leads V5-6, DI, DII, and aVL. Transthoracic echocardiogram was similar to the initial one, with a small pericardial effusion, normal left ventricular (LV) function, and no wall motion abnormalities (WMA). She had no chest pain. The diagnosis of SLE-associated myocarditis or secondary myocardial injury was assumed. The patient was then admitted to the intensive care unit due to respiratory failure and needed mechanical ventilation for 3 days. After CCT intensification, her clinical status improved.
However, 15 days later she developed new progressive hypoxemic respiratory insufficiency and pulmonary congestion. Patient-related mild dyspnoea at rest with no other complaints. At physical examination, she was slightly tachypnoeic with FiO2 0.32, normotensive and normocardic, with no fever. She had bilateral rales at pulmonary auscultation and no other relevant findings. Transthoracic echocardiogram was repeated and showed a medium-large translucent pericardial effusion, predominantly adjacent to the posterior and lateral LV walls. The basal segments of these walls were thinned and there was evidence of bidirectional flow into pericardial space using Doppler colour flow. The injection of contrast material during TTE further unveiled the presence of a 30 × 30 mm sac with a narrow neck adjacent to the inferolateral wall, with systolic contrast filling, suggesting the diagnosis of a pseudoaneurysm . There were no clinical or echocardiographic signs of cardiac tamponade.
Further evaluation with cardiac computed tomography scan confirmed the presence of a massive pseudoaneurysm originating in the inferolateral basal segment of the LV (42 × 34 × 32 mm) and a loculated large volume haemopericardium adjacent to the lateral wall of the LV (maximum thickness: 36 mm). Cardiac catheterization exhibited angiographically normal coronary arteries.
The patient was then transferred to the referral surgical centre and submitted to cardiac surgery. Intraoperative findings were a large haematic pericardial effusion and myocardial rupture with LV pseudoaneurysm that was successfully repaired with a pericardium patch.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging performed 3 months later showed preserved biventricular systolic function with segmental WMA and late contrast enhancement pattern compatible with previous inferolateral myocardial infarction. Thickening of the pericardium adjacent to those segments with diffuse contrast uptake was also evident. One year later, the patient remains free of cardiac symptoms or events.