A 64-year-old man, with no significant history except lumbar surgery with foot drop and sciatica, noted difficulty in right shoulder elevation, walking, and using chopsticks for a month. Physical examination revealed hyperreflexia and motor weakness in the upper limbs (shoulder elevation 3/5, elbow flexion 4/5, and finger extension 2-/3) and slow stream of urination without sensory disturbance. Bilateral Hoffman sign and Babinski sign were positive. Despite previous lumbar surgery, foot drop progressed bilaterally without numbness or sensory disturbance, implying the presence of motor neuron disease (MND). Imaging studies revealed canal narrowing at multiple locations with ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament and spinal cord compression with T2 signal change at C4–C5 [ and ; and ]. Paralysis progressed to shoulder elevation 2/5- and standing difficulty in a few weeks, which required emergent spinal cord decompression as MND was excluded. He had no sensory disturbance but had a previous history of lumbar surgery for progressive foot drops. Although there were no cranial nerve symptoms, patient was referred to our acquaintance neurologist to exclude spinal-onset ALS. Motor and sensory nerve conduction velocity was examined, and the neurologist diagnosed the patient to be normal and recommended reconsultation if the patient showed dysphagia or dysarthria. We were unaware that at least needle EMG was required to exclude early-stage ALS. Moreover, ALS is reportedly associated with a higher incidence of spondylotic myelopathy compared with normal control. Unfortunately, the patient could not stand at all and required prompt decompression. After the patient was explained in detail, the patient selected surgery to prevent progression of paralysis; informed consent was obtained. He underwent C3– C7 laminoplasty and right C4–C5 foraminotomy [ and ]. Diffuse fasciculation appeared on the upper arms postoperatively with transient deterioration of shoulder elevation 2-/5-. Intravenous administration of methylprednisolone 500 mg on the first day, which was gradually reduced to 125 mg on the third day, improved shoulder elevation to 2/5-. Clumsiness in both hands persisted, but he could walk with a T-cane. The right shoulder showed improvement in elevation to 100° during hospitalization. Based on information on fasciculation and reconsultation even without cranial nerve symptoms, the acquaintance neurologist diagnosed the patient with ALS through needle EMG. The neurologist informed us that the upper limbs’ strength of the patient slowly deteriorated subsequently and he became totally debilitated at postoperative 8 months, with dysphagia being noted at 10 months. However, he refused artificial ventilation and died at 16 months.