A 57-year-old woman was diagnosed with malignant lymphoma in July 2000 after a positive stool occult blood test was identified during a physical examination, and rituximab (RTX), cyclophosphamide (CPA), doxorubicin (DXR), vincristine (VCR), and prednisolone (PSL) (R-CHOP: RTX 510 mg, CPA 1030 mg, DXR 65 mg, VCR 1.9 mg, PSL 65 mg) chemotherapy was administered. This chemotherapy was delivered in cycles of 21 days per cycle. All investigation and therapies were performed at Kawasaki Medical School Hospital.
Blood tests revealed abnormal liver enzyme levels during the two courses of chemotherapy. The patient was asymptomatic, no new medications were administered, and there was no significant medical history. Laboratory tests revealed no signs of chronic hepatitis. The results of liver function tests were as follows: aspartate aminotransferase, 395 (10–42 U/L), alanine aminotransferase, 235 (13–30 U/L), alkaline phosphatase, 169 (38–113 U/L), and total bilirubin, less than 0.2 (0.4–1.5 < mg/dL). Hepatic synthesis function was normal. Ultrasonography of the liver was normal, and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed no organic abnormalities. Before referral to our hospital, the patient had been suffering from anemia due to gastrointestinal bleeding. She received an RBC transfusion at another hospital; therefore, her symptoms may have been caused by a transfusion-transmitted infection. The patient was screened for hepatitis A, B, and C viruses; human immunodeficiency virus; herpes virus; and cytomegalovirus. The results of all screening tests were negative. In addition, although the patient was of an age at which autoimmune diseases are common, the liver autoantibody test results were normal. Therefore, autoimmune diseases, such as primary biliary cirrhosis and autoimmune hepatitis, were ruled out. Since the patient had a history of eating undercooked pork, we considered the possibility of hepatitis E and measured HEV-RNA, which was positive at 1.63 × 102 IU/mL.
An acute-phase histological lesions are characteristics of HEV infection. A liver biopsy in this case revealed that the inflammation was composed mainly of lymphocytes mixed with histiocytes and eosinophils, and its distribution is usually considered to be present in all zones, 1–3, especially zone 3 . Therefore, in this case, although relatively few with zone 3, which is considered typical, inflammatory cell infiltrates were prominent in the portal vein area, whereas some areas in the parenchyma of lobular zone, mainly in zone 1. In some hepatocytes, including those around the central vein, inflammation was relatively mild, and bile pigment deposition was observed, suggesting the possibility of bile stasis. Taken together, we considered this case to be partially consistent with the findings of hepatitis E.
Although there are no pathological findings specific to hepatitis E, some reports suggest that the liver pathology of hepatitis E often presents with acute-phase histological lesions. Hepatitis E is characterized by biliary stasis of the liver, a pseudotubular arrangement of hepatocytes around dilated small vessels, and proliferation of the bile ducts. Hepatic biliary stasis has been reported in 58% of biopsied livers with histological evidence of biliary stasis and has been observed in many HEV-infected patients.
Consistent with the findings of hepatitis E in a previous report, there were inflammatory cell infiltrates, including lymphocytes and histiocytes, mainly in zone 1; bile stagnation, including the portal vein area; and coagulation necrosis, including the appearance of eosinophils.
Several studies have reported the initial dose of ribavirin for hepatitis E, with the dose adjusted based on the estimated glomerular filtration rate or weight-adjusted dose.
The patient was started on 400 mg of ribavirin at a weight-adjusted dose, and blood tests showed no apparent drug-related adverse events. After treatment initiation, HEV RNA became almost undetectable ; therefore, R-CHOP therapy was resumed. Positron emission tomography/computed tomography confirmed complete remission after six courses of chemotherapy .
After completing a series of treatments, she was followed up every 2 weeks at an outpatient clinic in our hospital until hepatobiliary enzyme improved within normal limits. And since then, she has been doing well with no recurrence of her lymphoma and no reactivation of HEV at least 2 years.