A 50-year-old Japanese man presented to the Department of the Gastroenterological Center at Shunjukai Shiroyama Hospital with acute and severe abdominal pain.
An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed that an abscess with free air was formed around the sigmoid colon. Therefore, the patient was admitted to our hospital for operative treatment of the perforated sigmoid colon due to diverticulitis. Hartmann’s procedure was performed under general anesthesia with the patient in the supine position. The total operating time was 188 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 200 ml.
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful for several days. He resumed oral intake at 2 days postoperatively, and his first defecation from colostomy was at 5 days postoperatively. Subsequently, he experienced mild redness, purulent discharge, and swelling around the colostomy at 10 days postoperatively . Routine blood tests showed that his white blood cell count was 20,900/mm3, and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 10.12 mg/dl . The contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen revealed an abscess formation with air around the colostomy .
The patient was diagnosed with an abdominal wall abscess due to perforation of the stoma limb. We immediately performed drainage of the abscess from the left lower quadrant abdominal wall laterally near the colostomy and indwelled an 18-Fr silicon drain tube for 8 days .
After the drainage, his symptoms were ameliorated by oral analgesics, anti-inflammatory drugs, and prophylactic antibiotics. A follow-up CT scan at 29 days postoperatively showed that the abscess had decreased . Four months after the first operation, his vital signs and symptoms were relatively stable. We performed a closedown of the sigmoid colostomy and fistula resection as the second-stage surgery. The specimen was not malignant and a 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm perforation hole was seen in the mesenteric side of the stoma limb . The total operating time was 235 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 110 ml. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged 14 days later.