A 49-year-old male patient hypertensive, smoker with positive family history of premature coronary artery disease who presented with heavy retro-Sternal chest pain.
At admission, the patient had no chest pain. Physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 130/85 mmHg and heart rate of 85/minute. Cardiac and respiratory examination were unremarkable and there was no carotid bruit. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with Q waves and T-wave inversion in lead II, III, and aVF . Echocardiogram showed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60% with no regional wall motion abnormalities, moreover, it showed normal structure and function of the cardiac valves. No intracardiac thrombi were found. Cardiac biomarkers were elevated.
The patient underwent cardiac catheterization and was found to have one vessel disease with 90% stenosis of the right coronary artery. A drug-eluting stent was successfully implanted in the right coronary artery .
One hour after intervention, the patient reported acute painless blurred vision in the left eye associated with a lower visual field defect. History from the patient revealed no prior visual complaints or amaurosis fugax. Ophthalmological examination of the left eye showed visual acuity of 6/60 with normal anterior segment and intraocular pressure. Visual field testing showed complete inferior visual field defect in left eye. Fundoscopic exam showed moderate macular edema and a small yellow arterial embolus at the level of the optic nerve head .
Fundus fluorescein angiography revealed a 7-s filling delay in the superior-temporal retinal artery; findings consistent with hemi-central retinal artery occlusion.
A pars plana vitrectomy eye surgery under local anesthesia was performed. Massaging of the superior retinal artery wall over the embolus using a silicone-tipped aspiration cannula was performed in conjunction with induced ocular hypotony, which resulted in dislodgment of the embolus and migration into the peripheral circulation. The patient noted an immediate marked improvement in his vision. Four weeks later, the patient had a visual acuity of 20/25 and normal visual fields. There was complete resolution of the embolus and the artery occlusion and restoration of retinal blood flow .
The study was approved by the Institute Research Board at King Abdullah University Hospital and Jordan University of Science and Technology. The work has been reported in line with the SCARE 2020 criteria . Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.