A 59-year-old Caucasian woman presented with a breast mass in the upper outer quadrant of her left breast. She noticed the lump on self-examination a few months before presenting to our out-patient clinic. The lesion was mobile, with no evidence of dermal invasion and axillary lymph nodes were not palpable. A 3.5 cm lobulated, circumscribed mass was shown on her recent mammogram, suggestive of a fibroadenoma, with no evidence of malignancy . Ultrasound scanning showed a solid, hypoechoic and well-circumscribed mass, measuring 3.5 cm in diameter. However, elevated Ca 15-3 levels were found in blood tests she already had.
The same lesion, less than half in size, was originally shown on the first mammogram she had at her hometown four years before. It was not clinically palpable that time and it was thought to be a long existing benign fibroadenoma and was left in place.
She had full staging investigations (liver function tests, chest x-ray, computerized tomography scans of the chest and abdomen and bone scanning) which were all negative and the patient underwent an excisional biopsy, which revealed an invasive carcinoma. A left modified radical mastectomy followed.
On macroscopic examination the tumour measured 3.5 cm in diameter, had solid composition and polymorphic appearance, with tan and brown, pale and hemorrhagic areas.
Microscopic examination showed an invasive adenocarcinoma of the breast, characterized by average-sized cells, with well-defined borders and polygonal, rather than rounded contours. The neoplastic cells formed a matrix of solid, lobular, acinar and rarely papillary areas, with a fine vascular network in between . Foci of linear, trabecular and tubular growth patterns were visible. A few ducts with an intraductal (in situ) carcinoma of solid type were also noticed. The cytoplasm was clear and eccentrically placed and hyperchromatic nuclei with a low mitotic number (2 mitoses per 10HPF) were detected. Cells with mildly eosinophilic cytoplasma, nuclear pleomorphism and higher mitotic number were also seen. There was absence of necrosis and no lymphovascular invasion was noticed.
On histochemical examination, many of the above cells were positive for PAS staining erased by diastase pre-treatment, keratins AE1/AE3, EMA and Cytokeratin 7, but negative for c-erb-b2 (score 0), Cytokeratin 20, melanosomes and vimentin. Markers of myoepithelial cells were also negative: smooth muscle actin-SMA and S-100 (only a few isolated positive cells). Staining for Chromogranin was positive in some cells and for Synaptophysin in most cells, indicating a degree of neuroendocrine activity of the tumor. The tumor was strongly positive for estrogen receptors (ER) and negative for progesterone receptors (PgR).
Mastectomy specimen showed no residual neoplastic cells, and all 14 axillary lymph nodes removed were histologically tumor-free.
Hormonal therapy with the aromatase inactivator exemestane was started postoperatively and the patient is disease-free 48 months now.