A 76-year-old man came to the hospital with typical chest pain, suggestive of ischemic heart disease. Coronary angiography showed a triple-vessel coronary artery disease. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) of 50%. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed a normal sinus rhythm . The patient took loading dose of clopidogrel (600 mg) during angiography 10 days earlier and then continued 75 mg daily till 3 days before surgery. He underwent a 4-grafts CABG surgery( left internal mammary artery on left anterior descending and 3 saphenous vein grafts on Diagonal, obtuse marginal and right coronary artery). Myocardial protection was done with repeated doses of tepid hyperkalemic blood cardioplegia ( Buckberg cardioplegia) in total 1700 cc in 4 interrupted doses. Duration of the aortic cross-clamp time and CPB time was 74 and 120 min, respectively. The lowest temperature during CPB was 30 ºC. After the successful weaning of the patient from CPB in normothermia(37 c), hemostasis was done.
His hemostasis and then sternal closure took longer than usual due to the residual antiplatelet effect of clopidogrel.. Subsequently, he was transferred to the ICU with good hemodynamic status and in the sinus rhythm.
After ICU entrance, despite good hemodynamic and diuresis during first 3 h, his ECG suddenly changed an accelerated AIVR , and the patient experienced hypotension unresponsive to volume and inotropic medication. Due to hemodynamic instability, he was emergently transferred to the operating room. CPB was started again, and an intra-aortic balloon pump was inserted. The bypass graft vessels (saphenous vein graft and left internal mammary artery) seemed open (pinkish color of the saphenous grafts and good pulsatility of the internal mammary artery). Transesophageal echocardiography revealed a left ventricular EF of 50%, and the other findings were the same as those before the operation. The patient’s temperature was 31 ºC. When his temperature rose to about 35 °C, AIVR reversed to a normal baseline ECG, as first seen on the anesthesia monitor and immediately confirmed by taking a 12-lead ECG.
With complete rewarming to normothermia(37 ºC), the patient was weaned from CPB uneventfully with a mild dose of an inotropic medication.After hemostasis and chest-wall closure, he was referred to the ICU, where he remained hemodynamically stable without any arrhythmia . After 5 days, he was discharged from the hospital with stable hemodynamic status and good clinical features. At 3 months’ follow-up, he had a stable condition without any conduction disturbances .