We present a case of a 51-year-old male who underwent endoscopic screening for mild iron deficiency anemia. The patient had no upper and lower gastrointestinal (GI) complaints.
The iron-deficiency anemia was diagnosed 2 mo before the admission to the hospital.
He was without other co-morbidities and past history for illness.
From the physical examination, he had pale skin and visible mucous membranes.
The laboratory work-up showed hemoglobin = 107 g/L, serum iron was 10.2 µmol/L (11.6-31.3 µmol/L), ferritin 18.43 ng/mL (30-400 ng/mL), total iron binding capacity 83.2 µmol/L (45-72 µmol/L). Inflammatory serological markers were within the normal limits–CRP was 0.30 ml/L (0-5 mg/L). Other biochemistry test results as well as carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, were within the normal limits.
The colonoscopy was unremarkable. However, upper GI endoscopy revealed diffuse hyperemia, edema and nodularity of the gastric mucosa in the fundus and body, with a clear demarcation line between the body and the antrum. The duodenal mucosa was intact. Due to non-specific endoscopic findings and iron-deficiency anemia our preliminary diagnoses were diffuse gastric carcinoma or gastric lymphoma. Therefore, multiple biopsies were taken from the stomach. We did not obtain duodenal, ileal and colonic biopsies, as there were no endoscopic abnormalities of the mucosa. We performed whole-body computed tomography with contrast enhancement. It showed neither pulmonary and abdominal space-occupying lesions, nor bone lytic lesions and enlarged lymph nodes.
Histologically, in the biopsy of fundic mucosa, we observed inflammatory infiltrate rich in plasma cells with numerous eosinophilic hyaline bodies (RB) and so-called mature plasma cells (Mott cells), consisting entirely of cytoplasmic RB . Several hyperplastic lymphoid follicles were also observed. The plasma cells expressed CD79a , CD138 and they showed polyclonal pattern, both expressed kappa and lambda IgM light immunoglobulin chains . А large number of eosinophils were seen and the neutrophilic leucocytes were rare.
There was no evidence of nuclear atypia and mitosis of the plasma cells, which ruled out lymphoma. Giemsa staining for H. pylori infection was negative, as well as immunohistochemical detection. Negative staining for cytokeratin AE1/AE3 excluded the signet-ring cell carcinoma. This microscopic finding corresponds to the so-called RBG.
We ruled out HIV, HCV and HBV infections, as well as autoimmune diseases, such as autoimmune thyroiditis and rheumatoid arthritis. However we did not check for M protein in the serum, we did not perform Bence-Jones protein urine test, TB-spot, EBER in situ hybridization or trephine biopsy of the bone marrow.