A 78-year old male patient with recent contralateral right below-the-knee amputation initially presented in July 2019 with ischaemic rest pain and dry gangrene involving his left heel and his first and second toes. His comorbidities included type II diabetes, hypertension, previous stroke and hypercholesterolaemia. Duplex ultrasound showed a focal stenotic lesion in the distal SFA and heavily calcific occlusive tibial disease. He was classified as Rutherford category 5 with a Society for Vascular Surgery WIfI “wound, ischemia and foot infection” score of 2–3-0, which meant he was at high risk of major amputation within the year. The patient initially underwent balloon angioplasty of the SFA but angiography revealed poor outflow to the foot with no suitable target for distal angioplasty or bypass . The lower limb multidisciplinary team at our institution reviewed the case and agreed to proceed with pDVA as the only possible treatment apart from major amputation.
The patient underwent vein assessment prior to the procedure and this included duplex scan imaging of the superficial and deep venous system of the foot. Good calibre lateral plantar and posterior tibial veins are necessary for a successful outcome while the presence of DVT contraindicates the procedure. The arterial inflow was assessed in detail on the previous conventional angiograms and the crossing point was determined to be in the proximal posterior tibial artery. The peroneal artery was avoided as a potential ‘crossing’ artery since it supplied the ischemic foot with useful collaterals. Active foot infection, significant cardiac history were excluded and life-expectancy and functional status were also considered before listing the patient for intervention.
The pDVA procedure was performed in August 2019 as the first use of the LimFlow System in the United Kingdom. Under ultrasound guidance, arterial access was performed antegrade in the left CFA and venous access was performed in the lateral plantar vein. Using the LimFlow arterial and venous catheters, an arterial-venous communication was created at the level of the proximal posterior tibial artery into a posterior tibial vein. The target posterior tibial and lateral plantar veins were then treated with the LimFlow antegrade (push) valvulotome to render the valves incompetent which was confirmed with balloon dilatation. Finally, the LimFlow self-expanding PTFE-covered stents were deployed in the posterior tibial vein distally from the ankle level to the crossing location where a conical stentgraft was deployed to secure the fistula and optimise flow transition from the artery into the vein. The completed pDVA circuit successfully established blood-flow to the foot and post-procedure ultrasound demonstrated a satisfactory volume flow of 250 cc/min in the arterialised lateral plantar vein. The case took just under three hours from the time of initial access until final access site closure.
The procedure was technically successful with no perioperative complications. The patient experienced an almost complete resolution of ischaemic rest pain after the procedure and did not experience any adverse events in the first 60 days. He was discharged home at day 18 post-procedure to the care of the community diabetic foot and district nursing teams to oversee his foot wound care. Ten weeks after his index procedure, the patient presented to the emergency department with diabetic foot sepsis most likely due to a combination of superimposed infection of the existing necrotic tissue and ischaemia. He underwent first, second and third toe amputation and foot debridement for sepsis control. During his admission to hospital, the patient also had a duplex ultrasound to monitor flow into the affected area, his third surveillance scan as part of a defined follow up protocol to closely monitor and optimise blood flow as necessary. Consequently, angioplasty was performed at the same sitting as surgical debridement to treat the narrowing of the inflow and outflow tracts of the stent grafts at the level of the origin of the posterior tibial artery as well as in the lateral plantar vein. No signs of in-stent stenosis were observed at the time of inflow and outflow treatment. Further surveillance duplex imaging at 3 months revealed a reduction of flow in the stent due to narrowing in the lateral plantar vein. Although there had been no clinical deterioration, further intervention was performed with the implantation of a Supera stent into the lateral plantar vein distal to the LimFlow stent in order to enhance the flow in the venous arch. This was followed by coil embolisation of collateral veinsin order to focalise blood flow to the distal foot. Stealing branches of the great saphenous vein were embolised in the foot in order to encourage flow in the deep venous system and consequently improve healing. At 4 months, the patient underwent a final maintenance angioplasty where the outflow pedal venous arch was treated with balloon angioplasty to further aid circulation to the area of the toe amputation . The heel ulcer and minor amputation wounds showed continued improvement post-pDVA with tissue granulation after debridement at 2 months and complete epithelialisation by 12 months . Ischaemic rest pain resolved almost completely after the index procedure and the patient did not report any pain by 6 months and onward. Due to bone protrusion from the wound, a completion transmetatarsal amputation was performed at 13 months. Most recent Images of the foot obtained 18 months post index procedure, showing complete wound healing and preservation of the foot.