A 9-year-old vasectomized male lion was kept at the Buin Zoo (Buin, Chile). The animal was surgically vasectomized 5 years prior for birth control at the same institution. Castration was not elected as a form of birth control in this case, because it is associated with loss of the mane . Briefly, vasectomy was performed under general anesthesia through two separate low-groin incisions. The vas deferens was cut off and both ends were ligated, with no complications observed. Due to population management policy changes 5 years later, surgical vasectomy reversal was elected as a method to attempt increasing the lion population. The surgical procedure was approved by the ethical committee of the zoo.
The lion had a 12-hour fasting period, with water deprivation for 2 hours before surgery. After using a dart for sedation with ketamine (3 mg/kg) and medetomidine (0.03 mg/kg), the lion was placed in the operation theater. Once anesthesia was achieved, an endotracheal tube (nº18) was placed, and isoflurane (2%) gas was administered throughout all surgical procedures. Adequate measures were taken to minimize pain or discomfort during the surgery and follow-up. Once anesthesia was achieved, the scrotal area was shaved to prevent the confusion of the hair with the fine sutures and needles used in the vas deferens anastomosis (Nylon 9.0). After washing the genital area and applying an antiseptic solution, the surgical field was prepared. The vasectomy site was accessed through the previous scar, localized in the lower groin under the level of the external inguinal ring . After the cutaneous incision was performed, dartos and tunica vaginalis, the previous vasectomy site was identified; both ends of the vas deferens were scarred, with a gap between them of approximately 2.5 cm . After dissecting both ends, the tension-free microsurgical anastomosis was performed. The proximal end of the vas (abdominal) was sectioned with a scalpel, while its permeability was checked by injecting saline solution through its lumen, using a 24-gauge branula . Once proximal permeability was confirmed, the distal end of the vas (testicular) was dissected and after performing a gentle massage of the epididymis, the outflow of a whitish consistency fluid was observed . This fluid was analyzed in a standard laboratory microscope, revealing the presence of motile sperm. After both ends had proven permeability, the microsurgical phase of the surgery was initiated. Using a vas deferens approximator, both ends were approached, and under magnification of 25× the microsurgical anastomosis was performed . The needle was passed through the vas lumen, securing all the layers of the vas in a one-layer suture . After anastomosis was completed, four separated stitches to the outer fascia of the vas in order to increase resistance and support. Using an electrocoagulator, careful hemostasis was performed and the spermatic cord was placed in the scrotum. The dartos and skin were closed with Vycril 1.0 separated stitches. The surgery of the left side took 80 minutes with minimal bleeding. Due to prolonged surgical and anesthetic time, surgery was discontinued; therefore, only the reversal of the left side was performed. For anesthetic reversal, isoflurane was discontinued and intramuscular atipamezole (75 μg/kg) was administered.
The patient had no surgical complications, and during the follow-up, no problems were detected. After 2 weeks, the lion joined the lionesses (two) and reproductive follow-up was initiated.
In the following months, the only lion with which the lionesses had contact was our patient. Seven months after surgery, one of these lionesses was noted to be pregnant, and after 4 months, two female lion cubs were born with no incidents at the zoo . Both cubs were healthy and are currently living at the zoo.