A 62-year-old woman (body height 150 cm, body weight 87 kg) with a past medical history of hypertension, well controlled by Amlodipine 5mg, was referred to our hospital because of severe bradycardia. The presenting symptoms were lipothymic discomfort, shortness of breath and fatigue evolving for 2 weeks. The resting electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated 2:1 atrioventricular block. A dual chamber pacemaker was implanted via the right cephalic vein. A screw-in ventricular lead was placed at the right ventricular and another screw-in atrial lead was placed at the right atrial appendage. Fixation of both leads was done in the standard fashion by suturing on lead sleeve with silk suture. The pacemaker generator was then connected to both leads and placed into a subcutaneous tissue pocket. The procedure was carried out uneventfully. Her after surgery ECG confirmed that pacemaker function was good. Prior to discharge a chest X-ray was taken and also confirmed that the pacemaker generator and its leads were in proper position.
Three weeks after the procedure, the patient was reported to have experienced a rhythmic twitching of the right arm for the past week without syncope or lipothymic discomfort. The clinical examination did not reveal any abnormality. Laboratory tests were unremarkable. The ECG showed her own rhythm back to 2:1 AV block . She was then referred again to our hospital for further investigation. The pacemaker interrogation revealed an abrupt increase in both atrial and ventricular pacing impedance (up to 1325Ω in the atrial lead, and up to 3000Ω in the ventricular lead). The trends as reported by the device interrogation are shown in . A chest X-ray was urgently performed and showed that the pacing leads were tangling and wrapped repeatedly around the pulse generator .
The diagnosis of lead dislodgment with an association of Twiddler and Reel syndrome was made. The main differential diagnosis for patients who may present with rhythmic neuromuscular contractions includes tremor, myoclonus, tic disorder, chorea, asterixis …
It was discovered that the patient kept rubbing and scratching her shoulder near her pacemaker pocket site due to eczema, probably secondary to a povidone iodine (betadine) allergy, with a spontaneous resolution, but she denied manipulating the device itself.
We performed a second operation to reposition the leads. The patient received antibiotic prophylaxis before the revision procedure. The leads were found twisted and wrapping the pacemaker generator without any signs of insulation leakage and conduction damage . Both pacemaker leads were successfully repositioned, into the right ventricular apex and the right atrial appendage, and meticulously fixed with nonabsorbable suture on its sleeve with surrounding fascia and muscles. Additional sutures were added to secure the pacemaker generator to the pectoral muscle in the surgical pocket.
A chest X-ray (A) and ECG (B) were obtained after the procedure to ensure the absence of pneumothorax and to document the appropriate functioning of the device. The patient was discharged the following day, risk mitigating techniques were provided: Avoiding device manipulation, avoiding excessive shoulder rotation and abduction, wearing a broad arm sling.
After subsequent follow up, the patient was well, the pacemaker function was good, with normal pacing, sensing and threshold parameters, and no complications have been noticed.