We report a 75-year old man with stage IV BRAF V600E mutated malignant melanoma. On his initial 18fluoro-deoxy-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography computed tomography (PET-CT) scan, he presented with multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules, bone and cutaneous lesions, peritoneal metastases and a lesion at the head of the pancreas . A palliative combination therapy with a BRAF- (dabrafenib 2x 150 mg) and MEK inhibitor (trametinib 2 mg) was started. Six weeks later a CT-scan revealed a partial remission of the lung, bone and cutaneous lesions but a progression of the lesion in the pancreas. A fine needle aspiration of the pancreatic lesion confirmed metastasis of the melanoma. This metastasis was irradiated and the combination targeted therapy continued. Eight months later, a progression with several new pulmonary lesions and peritoneal metastasis was observed and a second line therapy with the CTLA4 inhibitor ipilimumab (3 mg/kg) started. After 2 cycles, a disease progression prompted a third line therapy with the PD-1 inhibitor pembrolizumab and radiotherapy of a myocardial metastasis. After the start of pembrolizumab, the condition of the patient rapidly improved and the patient achieved a good partial remission . At 24 months under pembrolizumab a routine CT-scan showed multiple bilateral part solid lung lesions in the upper parts of the lung. At that stage, the patient reported NYHA II dyspnea. Endoscopically the tracheobronchial system was unremarkable. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) demonstrated only a slight lymphocytosis of 13% lymphocytes without signs of pulmonary infection (negative microbiological cultures and PCR for viral pathogens). A transbronchial lung biopsy showed only normal lung morphology. Since it was unclear if the new lesions were metastases, we decided to surgically obtain a histological specimen. Wedge resection of several nodular lesions of the lung was therefore performed. Surprisingly, only one pulmonary lesion represented a melanoma metastasis with almost complete regressive necrosis as a sign of excellent response to treatment. The other lesions distant to the metastasis represented circumscribed areas of OP . We found a strong CD3+ cell infiltration of the inflammatory lesion with predominantly CD4+ cells over CD8+ cells . Also, a several FOXP3+ cells were found . Interestingly, clusters of PD-L1 positive macrophages were seen . A therapy with corticosteroids according to current guidelines for grade I-II pulmonary irAE was initiated with prednisone of 1 mg/kg and stopping of pembrolizumab. After a rapid regression of pulmonary lesions, the corticosteroid dose was tapered to 10 mg daily during a time period of 7 weeks. At this point, the patient presented with dyspnoea NYHA II and mainly thoracic pain. A CT revealed no lung embolism, but a progression of the bilateral part solid lung lesions corresponding to OP . With the OP relapse, a course of antibiotics and corticosteroids 50 mg daily was initiated with a rapid clinical and radiological improvement. A reduction of the corticosteroids by 10 mg every 4 weeks was recommended as performed for OP in routine pneumological practice. However, as soon as the doses of prednisone were lower than 20 mg daily a clinical and radiological worsening was observed. For dose reduction/ steroid sparing we decided to establish a combined immunosuppressive therapy consisting of mycophenolate mofetil (Cellcept) twice daily when the dose of prednisone 20 mg daily was reached again. After 4 weeks, the patients relapsed again with dyspnoea and new pulmonary lesions on the CT-scan . Because of the insufficient response to mycophenolate the TNFα-blocking agent infliximab was started. Initial dosing with 5 mg/kg was given for 3 doses and then a maintenance therapy was installed (100 mg). This led to a significant improvement after 4 months of therapy and corticosteroids could be completely stopped. The patient developed again dyspnoea at exertion, but a CT-scan showed no lung lesions or any direct cause for the dyspnoea . A cardiac stress test demonstrated some myocardial perfusion deficit and a coronary angiogram a high-grade stenosis of the left anterior descending (LAD) artery, which could be dilated and stented with a drug-eluting stent. After 6 months, infliximab was stopped and the patient is currently in an enduring very good partial remission for his melanoma .