A 38-year-old Japanese primiparous woman with a history of myomectomy four years previously complained of lower abdominal pain in her 34th week. This was her second pregnancy with spontaneous conception, with her first pregnancy resulting in spontaneous abortion at six weeks one year earlier. Her past history was unremarkable except for a history of myomectomy, which was performed for infertility (secondary sterility) for approximately three years. Myomectomy was performed under laparotomy, and eight intramural myomas in the uterine body were enucleated. The largest one (40 × 50 mm) existed in the anterior uterine body, which was enucleated with vertical incision. The enucleation sites had been reconstructed using routine two-layered sutures. Her uterine cavity was not entered. Surgery took 100 minutes and the total amount of hemorrhage was 550 mL, requiring no transfusion. She had had an uneventful postsurgery course without fever.
A physical examination revealed tenderness in the middle of her lower abdomen without guarding. She showed no vaginal bleeding. Her blood pressure was 106/64 mmHg, pulse rate 81 beats/min, white blood cell count 9.2 × 109/L, and hemoglobin 9.4 g/dL. She had no postural hypotension. Cardiotocography (CTG) indicated a reassuring pattern with weak uterine contractions once per hour. A vaginal and abdominal ultrasound revealed no fluid retention in Pouch of Douglas and no apparent uterine rupture; although no detailed observation of uterine wall continuity was made. Slight abdominal pain continued with stable vital signs and unremarkable laboratory data.
Six hours later, she complained of upper abdominal pain. Computed tomography (CT) revealed fluid accumulation around her liver. Surgeons diagnosed this condition as probable perforated viscus or at least acute abdomen requiring laparotomy. CTG subsequently indicated recurrent late deceleration, requiring an emergent Cesarean section. Laparotomy revealed that her small intestine tightly covered the anterior uterine wall, with bleeding observed from the edge of the intestinal covering . After separating her small intestine, it became evident that the anterior uterine wall, corresponding to the previous myomectomy site, was ruptured, with her small intestine tightly adhering to the ruptured site and thus nearly completely occluding the rupture . Pouch of Douglas was not entered due to adhesion. A low segmental transverse incision yielded a 2304-g female baby with Apgar scores of 2, 4 and 7 at one, five and ten minutes, respectively. Her small intestine was freed from the rupture site. The 5-cm longitudinal rupture of the anterior uterine wall was reconstructed. Her total blood loss during the surgery was 3750 mL, and she received a transfusion with 2000 mL hemoperitoneum, 1200 mL allogeneic blood and six units of fresh frozen plasma. The mother and baby had an uneventful course without sequelae.