A 44-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with a two-week history of abnormal behaviour, decreased concentration and postural instability. Her parents stated that she was a professionally active woman who was going through a moment of stress due to divorce. She had a past medical history of insomnia and irritable bowel syndrome and was currently being treated with vitamin D3, vitamin K, manganese and activated charcoal. Upon initial questioning, the patient and her parents denied any other medication. The patient was evaluated by her GP before hospital admission and started on lorazepam without improvement.
On presentation, vital signs were normal, and general examination was notable for a greyish discoloration of teeth . On neurologic examination, she was confused with impaired attention and could not express orientation correctly. Muscle tone and strength were normal, and no pyramidal signs were present. Coordination, sensation and cranial nerves were within the norms.
During her stay in the emergency department, the patient became more somnolent and began to experience more frequent myoclonic jerks. Laboratory tests, including complete blood count, renal, hepatic and thyroid functions, C-reactive protein, vitamin B12 and folate levels were within normal limits, and syphilis and HIV were negative. A noncontrast brain CT scan obtained at admission was unremarkable. A lumbar puncture showed mild elevation of protein content (47 mg/dL; reference range: 15-45 mg/dL) and elevation of white blood cell count (10/μL; normal: < 5/μL) in the CSF. Emergent treatment with IV acyclovir (10 mg/Kg IV every 8 h) and ceftriaxone (4 g/d) was started, considering a possible infectious encephalitis.
The patient was admitted to the Neurology Department, where she maintained an altered state of consciousness with a moderate reduction in alertness and exuberant myoclonus. Myoclonus was present both at rest and on action, being more severe on purposeful movements, with a generalized distribution. EEG revealed generalized background slowing indicative of diffuse and nonspecific cerebral dysfunction. Due to the patient’s lack of collaboration and the need for general anesthesia, brain MRI was postponed until the fifth day after admission, but no abnormalities were reported at that time.
Since the patient was clinically worsening under acyclovir and ceftriaxone, the hypothesis of autoimmune encephalitis was considered, and a cycle of IV immunoglobulin (0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days) was empirically started while waiting for specific antibody test results. A trial of Levetiracetam 1000 mg/day failed to improve myoclonic activity.
Considering the clinical picture of unspecific encephalopathy with an exuberant myoclonic state, we considered toxic aetiologies, namely bismuth encephalopathy, and again we questioned the patient’s relatives about the possibility of another medication other than the previously reported. The patient’s father reported chronic and irregular use of bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol®), in tablets of 150 mg, for approximately 20 years, to treat gastroenterological complaints. The patient and her relatives had never considered this drug to be medically relevant, omitting it when initially asked about medication. The patient obtained the drug from the United States of America as it is not available in Portugal.
The bismuth level in the patient’s urine was 375 μg/L (normal < 3.0 μg/L), bismuth serum levels were 260 μg/L (normal < 0.5 μg/L), and bismuth levels in CSF were 21.4 μg/L (normal < 2.0 μg/L). These concentrations were measured eight days after admission, and all the results were highly above the laboratory’s threshold for bismuth toxicity.
Serum and CSF autoimmune encephalitis panel did not reveal the presence of abnormal antibodies. Negative microbiological CSF results (including PCR for HSV and CSF cultures) prompted acyclovir and ceftriaxone discontinuation. Supportive treatment was continued, and after two weeks we verified clinical improvement. She became more alert and aware, the myoclonic jerks became more subtle, and she performed autonomous gait. One month after admission, the level of bismuth in urine had reduced to 33.0 μg/L (normal < 3.0 μg/L), and the serum level reduced to 13.1 μg/L (normal < 0.5 μg/L). At the time of discharge, the patient scored 26/30 points in MoCA, and her mental and functional status continued to improve. On the 3-month follow-up, the patient was in her usual state of health, returning to work, without insomnia or other complaints. No alteration was documented on the neurological examination, and she scored 29/30 in MoCA test. The greyish discoloration of the teeth was less pronounced (a classical gingival bismuth line was never observed). EEG performed at that time was within the norms.