In September 2006, a 23-year-old Chinese female patient was admitted to the Department of Neurology with numbness below the chest, lower limb weakness, constipation, and urinary retention for 1 week after catching a self-reported cold. Prior to this incident, the patient had no history of neurologic or autoimmune diseases. The patient’s family had no history of any genetic disorders. Physical examination revealed hypoalgesia below the T2 level, grade 4 muscular strength of the lower limbs, brisk tendon reflexes in both lower extremities, and bilateral positive pathological reflex. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed abnormal lesions extending from C3 to T9. The patient was initially diagnosed with acute myelitis. RRMS was confirmed after symptom relapse occurred twice in 9 months, along with the development of weakness and numbness of all limbs. These symptoms remitted after high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone pulse therapy. Upon MRI re-examination, abnormally long T1 and T2 signals at levels from C3 to C5 were observed. After discharge, the patient received oral prednisone; the dose was tapered over the course of 6 months. Following treatment, the patient maintained a stable condition for years.
In November 2021, the patient was admitted to our hospital because of recurring numbness of the limbs and fatigue in the right leg after an upper respiratory tract infection. Physical examination revealed normal vision, visual field, ocular fundus, muscle strength and tone, normal superficial and deep sensations, and hyperreflexia of the bilateral knee and right ankle. MRI revealed multiple demyelinating lesions in the brain, thoracic cord, and cervical cord . Aquaporin 4, glial fibrillary acidic protein, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, and myelin basic protein were negative in both plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). CSF pressure was 230 mmH2O, and CSF cytological, biochemical, immunological, microbiological, and virological tests were normal. The patient was diagnosed with MS, and the current symptoms indicated another RRMS attack. The diagnosis was based on the following: the patient was a young adult woman with a history of acute-onset MS and MRI findings showing multiple temporal and spatial attacks; applicable 2017 McDonald’s diagnostic criteria were evident ; exclusion of neuromyelitis optica, intracranial infection, genetic leukoencephalopathies, autoimmune encephalomyelitis, and intracranial space-occupying lesions was confirmed. After methylprednisolone pulse therapy, the patient was discharged from the hospital with symptomatic relief. Neurologists advised that the patient should be given DMT drugs to reduce the risk of relapse.
From January 2022, siponimod was titrated up to 2 mg for 4 days, and this dose was maintained. After 1 month, routine blood analyses showed a mildly reduced lymphocyte count (0.99 × 109/L) and percentage (19.8%). Slight liver dysfunction was observed, alanine aminotransferase [ALT] levels were 52 U/L. The patient continued taking the medication without any discomfort. Following the instructions of an internal medicine physician and based on previous studies , the patient was advised to undergo optical coherence tomography after 4 months to evaluate the fundus oculi and macula, which revealed mild ME in both eyes without vision changes . Blood tests revealed a more extensive decrease in lymphocytes (0.75 × 109/L; 13.4%) and a more severe liver dysfunction (ALT, 66 U/L) than that indicated by previous results. The patient had no history of diabetes or ocular disease. Subsequently, siponimod use was discontinued for 1 months, and ophthalmic inspections showed an improvement in the patient’s ME . The doctors suggested that the patient take siponimod a second time and be examined by an ophthalmologist once a month. After 1 year of administration, no changes in vision were observed. Figure shows the timeline of the patient’s disease course.