A 27-year-old male of Afro-Latino ethnicity with no significant past medical history presented in May 2020 to a community hospital emergency room (ER) with complaints of a dull, lower abdominal pain associated with subjective fever and loss of appetite over 3 days. Review of systems was notable for dysuria and penile discharge, which he self-treated with 3 doses of ampicillin 1 g and which had resolved by the time of presentation.
His vitals in the ER included a temperature of 101.5 F, a pulse of 68/min, a blood pressure (BP) of 114/74 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 20/min, and an oxygen saturation of 97% on room air (RA). He was noted to have tenderness in the inguinal and hypogastric regions bilaterally, but no penile discharge was evident. Blood work was remarkable for mild leukocytosis of 11.3 K/mm3 with left shift. He underwent computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast, which demonstrated mesenteric lymphadenitis and mild cecal wall thickening suggestive of possible early colitis. He denied any exposure to COVID-19 or any sick contacts, but because of the ongoing pandemic and high infection rate in our community, he was tested anyway for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR on a nasopharyngeal swab. The test was negative. He was also tested for gonorrhea and chlamydia (GC) by PCR on a urethral swab, the result of which was pending at the time of discharge from the ER. He was managed conservatively and sent home with a plan for close follow-up at a local clinic.
He returned to the ER two days after his initial visit with worsening abdominal pain, persistent fevers, and new pain in his scrotum and left testes. He denied any urinary symptoms or penile discharge. He also denied diarrhea or respiratory symptoms, including cough, sputum production, shortness of breath, or chest pain. The GC PCR from two days prior was positive for Chlamydia trachomatis and negative for Neisseria gonorrhoeae. His vitals were notable for a temperature of 103.2 F, a pulse of 120 beats/min, a blood pressure of 119/76 mmHg, and an oxygen saturation of 98% on RA. Left-sided epididymal tenderness was noted. Labs were drawn and resulted as shown in . Blood cultures and retesting for SARS-CoV-2 by PCR on a nasopharyngeal swab yielded negative results. CT of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast was again suggestive of cecal colitis with surrounding adenopathy at the level of the cecum and terminal ileum. A scrotal ultrasound demonstrated normal appearance and vascularity of both epididymes, normal echotexture of the testes, and symmetric increased blood flow in both testes. The patient was admitted to the medicine service for acute Chlamydia epididymitis and started on doxycycline.
On the second hospital day, he was noted to be persistently febrile with a temperature >102 F and continued scrotal and testicular pain. His antibiotics were broadened to vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam, and doxycycline was continued. A chest X-ray (CXR) done at 24 hours looking for other sources of infection showed bibasilar atelectasis but no consolidation (see ).
He then began having diarrhea and complained of shortness of breath, with initially normal pulse oximetry. He was started on probiotics and on supplemental oxygen at 2 L/min via nasal cannula for comfort. His breathing continued to deteriorate over the next few hours, and he developed hypoxemia, requiring 6 L O2/min to maintain pulse oximetry >92%. A third RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 (over a span of 4 days) was sent, given high suspicion, and it was again negative.
At about 36 hours after hospitalization, he developed severe respiratory distress requiring high flow O2 at 15 L/min. CXR now showed bilateral lung infiltrates (see ). His N-terminal-prohormone brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was elevated at 18,953 pg/mL with no prior history of heart failure, and he was started on intravenous diuresis with furosemide. He was transferred to the intensive care unit and started empirically on therapeutic anticoagulation with intravenous heparin for an elevated D-dimer and concerns of venous thromboembolism. CT angiography of the chest to rule out pulmonary embolism could not be performed due to worsening renal function. He underwent endotracheal intubation with initiation of mechanical ventilation 48 hours after hospitalization. His temperature was as high as 105.8 F. He became hypotensive shortly after intubation, requiring pressor support with intravenous norepinephrine.
The nephrology service was consulted for oliguric renal failure with creatinine of 3 mg/dL. His cellular urine sediment consisted of hyaline casts, pyuria, and proteinuria. Initially, the renal failure was presumed to be related to contrast nephropathy, as the patient had undergone two CT scans with intravenous contrast over 48 hours (both ER visits), along with some component of prerenal injury related to hypovolemia. Serological work up including ANA, ANCA, antiphospholipid antibodies, and serum complements was normal.
The patient continued to have persistently high fevers on broad spectrum antibiotics with negative blood, sputum, urine, and genital cultures. He received one dose of ceftriaxone to empirically cover for gonorrhea, despite negative testing. Infectious disease service was consulted. Vancomycin was discontinued after 48 hours of treatment, and piperacillin-tazobactam and doxycycline were continued. A fourth-generation antibody/antigen test for HIV and an IgG antibody screen for syphilis were both negative.
He continued to require high pressor support and high FiO2 on the ventilator, and he remained oliguric with elevated creatinine despite volume resuscitation. An echocardiogram for worsening NT-proBNP>35 K was performed and demonstrated a mildly dilated left ventricle with severe global hypokinesis, a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 30%, moderate tricuspid regurgitation, an estimated pulmonary artery systolic pressure of 28–35 mmHg, and a dilated inferior vena cava with an estimated right atrial pressure of 8–15 mmHg. The patient was noted to have pulsus alternans at the time of the echocardiogram suggestive of a low cardiac output state.
The patient's clinical course was not expected for Chlamydia epididymitis and led to an increasing suspicion, given the ongoing pandemic, that the patient had an inflammatory syndrome related to prior unrecognized COVID-19, akin to MIS-C, with multiorgan failure involving renal, respiratory, cardiovascular, and gastrointestinal systems. Given the patient's continued clinical deterioration, and while awaiting the result of the antibody testing for SARS-CoV-2, a consensus was reached to treat the patient empirically with a single dose of intravenous tocilizumab 400 mg on day 4 of hospitalization. Within 24 hours of administration of tocilizumab, the patient started to show improvement in his fever. There was also a notable decrease in his FiO2 and norepinephrine requirement. His urine output and renal function started to improve. He was successfully extubated around 48 hours after the administration of tocilizumab, and pressor support was no longer needed. His SARS-CoV-2 immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody came back positive, confirming prior infection. IgA could not be checked as it was not available locally. He was then started on prednisone 50 mg bid (1 mg/kg/day). Piperacillin-tazobactam was discontinued, and doxycycline was continued for a total of 10 days for treatment of Chlamydia.
He was also found to have an acute venous thrombosis in the right upper extremity cephalic vein, and he was switched to oral rivaroxaban. As his blood pressure improved, metoprolol and low-dose lisinopril were added to support his low cardiac output. Oxygen supplementation was discontinued, and a repeat echocardiogram on hospital day 10 showed improvement in the left ventricular ejection fraction to 45–50%. He was discharged home on hospital day 10 with a plan for an additional 2 weeks of prednisone 50 mg twice daily, followed by a slow taper. Metoprolol, lisinopril, and rivaroxaban were continued. NT-proBNP at discharge was 88 pg/mL. Two weeks after discharge, he reported complete resolution of all his symptoms.