A 62-year-old active (indulged in athletic activities), mobile and independent male presented to the outpatient department with 6 months of progressively worsening right hip pain. 5-years before his reporting, our patient underwent right side cemented bipolar hemiarthroplasty for fracture neck of femur elsewhere; the components included a cemented bipolar (Sony) stainless steel size 12.5 length 150 mm. There had been no post-operative complications. He had been advised to follow-up every 6–12 months but he was lost to follow up until he had agonizing right hip pain. The patient had not experienced any pain or issues with the right hip until about 6 months before the presentation when he began to notice the increase in pain with physical activity. In the ensuing months, he was able to continue his day-to-day activities. However, a month before the presentation, he noted a rapid worsening of the pain of the right hip, which makes ambulation more and more difficult. The pain occurred in the groin, buttock, and while abducting the leg. The examination was note worthy for severe pain with any movement, and there was leg-length discrepancy of 1 cm. Movements were painfully restricted. Standard antero-posterior and lateral radiograph revealed a stable femoral stem with complete wear-through of the femoral head through the inner polyethylene liner and the outer dome into the postero-superior weight-bearing roof of the osseous acetabulum. A piece of metal chip can also be seen at the margin of Bipolar Head (, ). The routine complete blood cell count and basic laboratory markers were within normal range. Given the severe pain and functional impairment, patient was counseled and assured for complete revision THA. After appropriate pre-operative planning, patient underwent right-side THA through the posterior approach. Upon entry into the hip capsule, there was a small amount of dark-colored metallic debris, which was thoroughly debrided and lavaged from the hip . The bipolar head was dissociated and removed . The femoral head component had almost no naked eye visible signs of wear. The cemented femoral stem was removed and cement removed through endo-femoral approach. Three microbiological specimens were taken for culture methods and gram staining. The Gram stain was negative, and all three culture specimens did not grow any organisms. The acetabulum was adequately reamed to bleeding bone. Trial component was checked for stability and finally, a 52 mm acetabular cup was implanted with 2 cancellous screws to augment fixation. A Duraloc cup (Depuy, Warsaw, Indiana) and a highly cross-linked polyethylene liner 28 mm with posterior lip were used. Femoral canal was reamed with solution reamers upto size 15 mm and fully coated solution stem (Depuy, Warsaw, Indiana) of size 13.5 mm was used. The polyethylene liner was impacted and a 28 mm metal femoral head (Depuy, Warsaw, Indiana) was impacted onto the femoral stem. The hip was reduced and stability checked. The closure was done in routine fashion and the patient was transferred to respective ward bed in stable condition. Post-op protocol was strictly followed.
The bipolar monobloc shell was sent to our biomechanics laboratory for critical analysis . Femoral head had penetrated total thickness of polyethylene, and also damaged metallic outer dome leading to fatigue failure. Metallic broken piece was identified and removed. There could be two possibilities of this catastrophic failure, one excessive wear and second thickness of metal case was in-adequate (metal defect).
At 3 months after revision, he was allowed to do full weight-bearing walking and routine activities of daily living. His recovery was good. Few months postoperatively, he was pain free and had returned to his routine activities. During his last follow-up, 5-years post-surgery, Harris Hip score was improved from poor to excellent, radiographs show both components stable, and clinical examination did not reveal any abnormality .