A 67-year-old female patient presented with a history of hypertension for 4 years and exercise limiting claudication of both lower limbs for 18 months. She was taking chlorthalidone 12.5 mg, cilnidipine 20 mg, hydralazine 25 mg-three times, clonidine 0.2 mg-three times, bisoprolol 10 mg, atorvastatin 40 mg, and aspirin 75 mg per day. She has hypothyroidism for 10 years, well-controlled with thyroxine 100 µg/day. Her dyslipidaemia was controlled with atorvastatin and the present low-density lipoprotein was 60 mg/dL. She had no history of diabetes, smoking, adverse family history, previous radiotherapy, or any history suggesting connective tissue disorder.
On physical examination, she was obese (body mass index: 32.8 kg/m2). Femoral pulses were weak bilaterally. Blood pressure in the arm was 160/60 and in the leg was 80/50 mmHg.
There was a systolic bruit at the umbilical region. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
She had a low haemoglobin (10.2 g/dL), a high serum creatinine (1.42 mg/dL), and a low estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) (42 mL/min/1.73 m2). Rest of haematological tests including erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein and biochemistry were normal.
Electrocardiogram and echocardiogram were normal.
Abdominal sonography showed normal kidneys with marked narrowing of both the renal artery origins with the turbulent high-velocity flow at the renal ostia on both sides (peak velocities at the right and the left renal artery origins were 500 cm/s, and 450 cm/s) . The infrarenal aorta had significant calcification with narrowing and flow acceleration on Doppler.
Coronary angiography revealed an insignificant disease. Suprarenal aortogram and selective renal angiography revealed significant calcification of juxtarenal aorta and bilateral 90% ostial stenoses in both renal arteries with severe calcific narrowing of the infrarenal aorta (, Video 1).
Non-contrast computed tomography scan of the abdomen revealed CRA involving the juxtarenal aorta .
The patient was discussed among heart team members. Due to high morbidity and mortality after surgery for CRA in the published literature, and the patient’s preference for the non-surgical treatment, the operator decided to proceed with percutaneous intervention. Apart from bilateral renal artery stenting, options for CRA included balloon angioplasty with or without a bare or covered stent in the aorta with chimney and snorkel grafts for visceral and renal arteries. The latter approach would have increased the complexity and cost. We decided to use IVL-assisted balloon angioplasty using a peripheral IVL System (Shockwave Medical, Fremont, CA, USA) to treat CRA. IVL would create micro-fractures in the calcium which will make balloon angioplasty possible. Diameters of both the renal arteries and the infrarenal aorta were 6 mm and 12 mm, respectively. The largest IVL Shockwave M5 catheter has a 7 mm balloon diameter which was small for the aorta of 12 mm diameter. The basic principle of IVL is to use a 1:1 ratio of the balloon to the artery size to have apposition of the balloon to the arterial wall. We decided to use double (hugging) balloons using the formula for the effective balloon size = 0.82 (D1 + D2) where D1 and D2 were the diameters of the two hugging balloons. We used a 6 × 60 mm shockwave M5 balloon catheter along with a 9 × 30 mm plain balloon catheter for simultaneous hugging balloon inflation to achieve an effective diameter of 12 mm.
Under local anaesthesia, a 6 F JR4 guiding catheter was introduced through the left radial artery and a 7 F renal guide catheter was introduced through the right femoral artery. Supra and infrarenal aortic pressures were 179/69 mmHg and 99/68 mmHg, respectively . A diagnostic aortogram, performed from above through the JR4 guiding catheter and from below through the renal guide, demonstrated severe infrarenal aortic narrowing (, Video 2). To allow better renal perfusion during the rest of the procedure in our patient with already reduced eGFR, left renal stenting was performed as the first intervention using a 6 × 15 mm stent. Next, the aortic lesion was crossed from below with a 0.014 inches BMW 300 cm guidewire (Abbott Vascular, USA). After pre-dilatation with a 3.5 × 20 mm balloon catheter, a 6 × 60 mm Shockwave M5 balloon catheter was positioned at the juxtarenal aorta, inflated at 4-atmosphere pressure, and 2 cycles of 30 pulses each were given (, Video 3). After initial dilatation with 6 mm IVL balloon, suprarenal and infrarenal segments of the aorta were subjected to shockwave lithotripsy with side-by-side hugging balloons: 6 × 60 mm M5 IVL catheter from the femoral route and 9 × 30 mm Mustang balloon catheter (Boston Scientific Corporation, USA) from the radial route. Six cycles of 30 pulses/cycle shockwaves were given in the juxtarenal aorta. There was adequate dilatation of the aorta with the disappearance of dents on both the balloons (, ). During this, the ostial part of the left renal artery stent got deformed and was subsequently re-dilated with a 6 × 20 mm balloon catheter. As a last step, from the left radial approach, the right renal artery was stented using a 6 × 15 mm stent. The gradient across the stenotic aortic segment was reduced from 80 mmHg to 4 mmHg . Check angiogram showed satisfactory dilatation of the abdominal aorta with non-flow limiting intimal flap without any perforation and good flow in both the renal arteries (, ). We could not do any intravascular imaging due to non-availability of this modality at our institute. The patient had an uneventful course and was discharged after 2 days.
At 6-month follow-up, she has remained asymptomatic with well-controlled blood pressure on reduced doses of antihypertensives. Her current medications include Cilnidipine 10 mg, Telmisartan 40 mg, Hydralazine 25 mg-twice, Clonidine 0.1 mg-twice, Bisoprolol 5 mg, Atorvastatin 40 mg, Aspirin 75 mg, and Thyroxine 75 mcg per day. Her present Ankle-Brachial Index is 0.95. Her serum creatinine has reduced to 0.83 mg/dL from initial 1.42 mg/dL pre-procedure and eGFR has improved to 71 mL/min/1.73 m2 from initial 42 mL/min/1.73 m2.