On 2018.01.24, a 19-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency room after taking 80 colchicine tablets (0.5 mg per tablet) 44 h previously. She had an argument with her boyfriend and ingested the colchicine to commit suicide. She was previously healthy and had no history of drug allergies. The clinical symptoms were abdominal pain, watery diarrhea and profuse vomiting. Other symptoms were muscle weakness and palpitations.
On physical examination, the temperature was 38.7 °C, pulse rate was 145, and respiration rate was 39. Her blood pressure was 122/60 mmHg, and she weighed 43 kg. Physical examination indicated upper abdominal pain.
Laboratory test results before treatment indicated the following: a white blood cell (WBC) count of 28.2 × 109/L, and other values such as red blood cell (RBC) count, hemoglobin (HGB) level and platelet (PLT) count were within the normal ranges. The levels of α-L-fructosidase (AFU), adenosine deaminase (ADA), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) were increased to 98, 57, 84, 408, 378 and 3494 respectively from reference values (reference range were 12–40 U/L, 0–50 U/L, 5–40 U/L, 8–40 U/L, 40–150 U/L, 109.0–245.0 U/L, respectively). Biochemical abnormalities also included hypokalemia and hypoglycemia. Plasma prothrombin time (PT) and activate part plasma prothrombin time (APTT) were significantly prolonged at 23.50 s and 52.40 s respectively. The level of N-terminal pronatriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) was 5950 pg/mL, which is abnormal with values higher than 450 pg/mL in the populations under 50-year-old (referrence value). The Electrocardiograms revealed sinus tachycardia.
Hemoperfusion was performed to remove circulating toxins. The patients refused other treatments in Department of Emergency. After 44 h later, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, acute liver injury, acute kidney injury and acute cardiac damage were reported, along with prolonged coagulation. She was then admitted to the intensive care unit. Adequate fluid and electrolyte replacement, oxygenation and other supportive cares was initiated. Anti-inflammatory ceftriaxone sodium was used. Since the unobstructed drainage tube revealed brown fluid, gastric lavage and charcoal were not recommended.
During two days after admission, she presented with high fever, subcutaneous hemorrhage and anuria. Arterial blood gas analysis suggested hyperlactinemia. Uric convention and occult stool were positive for blood. The level of Creatine Kinase-MB had sharply increased to 182 U/L and HGB level and PLT count rapidly plunged to 49 g/L and 11 × 109 /L, respectively. APTT had increased to 72.4 s. At that time, renal function deteriorated and anuria was observed, and the levels of serum creatinine (Cr) and blood urea urea (BUN) were elevated. CRRT was used to remove metabolic wastes and poisons and promoted recovery of renal function. RBC, PLT and plasma were transfused to alleviate anemia and deficient coagulation.
Due to the high dosage of colchicine ingestion, the patient progressed to exhibit shortness of breath, high fever, and subsequent coma. The vital signs at this point were: a heart rate of 87, respiration rate of 21, and the blood pressure was 103/52 mmHg. Blood lactic acid levels were slightly increased. Hyperleukocytosis, low hemoglobin and thrombocytopenia were present. Emergency treatment with tracheal intubation via oral cavity was initiated.
On 2018-02-01, the level of BUN and CK were elevated and anuria was noted. Maintenance therapy with CRRT was initiated to clear metabolic toxins. The arterial blood gas results were generally normal, and she was extubated and provide with supplemental oxygen through a nasal tube. The WBC count returned normal levels, and blood coagulation and liver function were gradually normalized as well.
Following a month of treatment, urine volume increased, but renal function indicators remained abnormal. In addition, HGB levels gradually increased but remained low. Intermittent CRRT and diuretics were administered.
On 2018-03-06, her urine volume reached 3000 ml. Renal ultrasound showed the kidneys were full and diffusely changed . Urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio (reference range of 0–200 mg/g) was also abnormal as displayed in Fig. . Intermittent hemodialysis was performed and renal function improved. Three days later, the levels of Cr and BUN were also normal, and the patient was discharged. (Blood and urine specimens, and blood biochemistry were reviewed one week later. These values and the time of CRRT treatment are shown in Table . Changes of Cr level and BUN level are presented in Figs. and . On 2018.05.28, the renal ultrasound urinary albumin-to-creatinine ratio were normal . The treatment timeline is shown in Additional file : Figure S1.