A 58-year-old female was referred to the allergy and clinical immunology service from medical oncology for evaluation of olaparib allergy. Her history is significant for recurrent high grade serous ovarian cancer with previous cytoreductive surgery, intraperitoneal chemotherapy and intravenous (IV) chemotherapy (paclitaxel and carboplatin). She was started on 300 mg of olaparib and 35 min after her first dose, developed extreme facial flushing and diffuse pruritus. She took diphenhydramine and proceeded with the second dose of olaparib 12 h later. This resulted in immediate lip and facial angioedema, along with pruritus. She administered diphenhydramine and cutaneous symptoms decreased in severity. She continued to take the third dose and within 30 min developed diffuse pruritus, facial urticaria, periorbital and lip angioedema, and nausea. Olaparib was discontinued. There were no symptoms suggestive of a delayed adverse drug reaction. She had no history of chronic spontaneous urticaria and angioedema. She proceeded to take diphenhydramine every 6 h and cutaneous symptoms resolved within 24 h.
Given the patient’s convincing history and reproducible immediate, IgE-mediated symptoms, a Type 1 hypersensitivity reaction to olaparib was diagnosed . As per hospital regulations for the safe handling of cytotoxic medications, epicutaneous testing was not performed at our center. Skin testing was not deemed necessary based on a highly convincing clinical history with objective symptoms witnessed by physicians, non-standardized olaparib skin testing, and the imminent need for olaparib as a first-line therapy.
The patient was admitted as an inpatient and successfully underwent a 9 step, 1-day desensitization protocol we developed . As the standard treatment dose of olaparib is 400 mg twice daily, we aimed for a cumulative dose in our desensitization to reflect that. She was pre-medicated with 20 mg of oral cetirizine, 10 mg of montelukast, 50 mg of IV ranitidine, and 10 mg of IV dexamethasone prior to desensitization. During the desensitization, she developed several isolated erythematous macules, but no urticaria, angioedema, or any systemic involvement at a cumulative dose of 450 mg of olaparib capsules. With close monitoring, the desensitization continued to completion with no interruptions and the macules resolved with no intervention required.
The patient successfully continued on oral olaparib capsules with no further adverse reactions. However, given the pill burden of olaparib capsules, she was seen in follow-up as an outpatient 3 weeks later, where she underwent a supervised ingestion to olaparib tablets , with no immediate or delayed adverse reaction. The patient has since continued on olaparib tablets without issue and has been monitored in follow-up.