An 18-year-old Brazilian man developed dyspnea and fever of one week’s duration and was then diagnosed with right lower lobe pneumonia. Before this incident, he had not experienced any medical complications, lived in full sanitary conditions, denied previous symptoms related to disease, did not have any pets, and denied eating raw meat. He then began hospital inpatient treatment with intravenous antibiotics, and third-generation cephalosporin (Ceftriaxone) and a macrolide (Clarithromycin) were prescribed for 8 days. Laboratory tests from the patient’s admittance showed mild anemia with a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 11.7 g/dL, with normal mean corpuscular volume (MCV) and mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH). Other biochemical results were as follows: creatinine 0.9 mg/dL, urea 32 mg/dL, total bilirubin 0.2 mg/dL, glucose 90 mg/dL, sodium 134 mEq/L, potassium 3.7 mEq/L, and C-reactive protein 138.2 mg/L. Leucocytes levels were a little low, with 2700 cells/μL. Blood and urine cultures were negative for infection and serological tests for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and C, and syphilis were all negative.
On the fourth day of this related treatment, our patient developed abdominal distension and pain in his lower right abdominal quadrant. Acute appendicitis was confirmed by ultrasound examination, and he underwent laparoscopic surgery the same day. Our patient was then taken to our intensive care unit for worsening of his clinical condition. On the fourth postoperative day, our patient developed fever associated with right pleural effusion, which was a lymphocytic exudate with an adenosine deaminase concentration of 17.99 U/L and negative culture . Thus, the attending physicians requested a bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage and transbronchial biopsy. The transbronchial fluid had negative cultures for infection. At that time, the antibiotic spectrum was extended for treatment of the sepsis, including piperacillin/tazobactam for 10 days.
Anatomopathological examination of the transbronchial biopsy specimen showed a small fragment of lung parenchyma with discrete septal thickening and a rounded structure suggestive of a pseudocyst containing Toxoplasma gondii bradyzoites .
Our patient showed progressive improvement after antibiotic therapy with piperacillin/tazobactam, and was discharged on the 14th day after surgery. A chest radiograph showed significant improvement in lung opacification and serological tests for toxoplasmosis were negative for immunoglobulin G and immunoglobulin M.
Our patient was followed up on an outpatient basis for 2 years without any signs of recurrence of lung infections or other comorbidities. Serology for toxoplasmosis were repeated and remained negative.