A 56-year-old woman presented with persistent thyrotoxicosis. She was first diagnosed with thyrotoxicosis 23 years previously and had been periodically treated with antithyroid drugs for several years at a time. On examination, she had bilateral exophthalmos. Her thyroid gland was enlarged with palpable thyroid nodules. Her serum TSHR antibody level was elevated at 3.86 IU/L (reference range, <1.00 IU/L), thus confirming the diagnosis of Graves’ disease with thyroid nodules.
A thyroid scan with Tc99m showed generalized increased uptake in the thyroid gland with visualized activity in the pyramidal lobe. One hyperfunctioning nodule at the upper pole of the right lobe and another hypofunctioning nodule in the middle aspect of the right lobe were demonstrated . The provisional diagnosis at that time was Graves’ disease with thyroid nodules, and ablative treatment was planned. Ultrasound-guided fine-needle aspiration yielded an area of undetermined significance. Total thyroidectomy was performed without perioperative complications. The surgical specimen contained 57.7 g of thyroid tissue. The histological findings supported the clinical diagnosis of Graves’ disease and benign thyroid nodules.
Two weeks after total thyroidectomy, the patient’s symptoms of thyrotoxicosis recurred. The differential diagnosis included inadequate thyroidectomy or a source of extrathyroidal thyrotoxicosis such as functioning struma ovarii. A thyroid function test confirmed the presence of post-thyroidectomy thyrotoxicosis . The radioactive iodine uptake was evaluated to check the adequacy of the thyroid surgery, and very low uptake of 0.2 % was found in the thyroid bed (reference range, 15 %–45 %). A radioactive iodine (I131) whole-body scan demonstrated intense radiotracer uptake with a star artifact in the pelvic region. Single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography of the pelvis confirmed the presence of inhomogeneous increased radiotracer uptake by an 8.5- × 7.2-cm mixed multicystic-solid mass with internal calcification in the right adnexal region . The plasma level of cancer antigen 125 was elevated at 48.55 U/ml (reference range, 0–35 U/ml). Therefore the patient was diagnosed with coexisting Graves’ disease and functioning struma ovarii and surgery is scheduled. Preoperative control of thyrotoxicosis is required to prevent thyroid storm during the surgery. In the present case, therefore, the patient’s methimazole was restarted, and a euthyroid state was achieved before scheduling total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (TAH with BSO).
The patient’s perioperative course was uneventful. An 8.0- × 5.5- × 5.0-cm right ovarian mass with minimal ascites was found, the cut surfaces of the ovary showed solid-cystic appearance. The solid component showed soft red-brown and yellowish semitranslucent tissue resembling thyroid tissue. The cystic spaces contained clear yellow fluid.
The histological diagnosis was struma ovarii of the right ovary, without evidence of malignancy. Immunohistochemical staining for thyroglobulin (clone 2H11 + 6E1; Cell Marque) was positive; this result confirmed the thyroid epithelial nature of the lesion . Moreover, immunohistochemical staining for TSHR (clone 4C1/E1/G8; Abcam) was performed with normal thyroid tissue as a positive control and normal ovarian tissue as a negative control. Immunohistochemical staining was performed by autostainer (Ventana Benchmark XT). The result showed that the struma ovarii tissue in our patient was positive for TSHR, indicating the presence of TSHR expression in the struma ovarii tissue . Two weeks postoperatively, the patient’s thyroid hormone levels were in the hypothyroid range. Replacement therapy with levothyroxine was initiated, and euthyroidism was achieved.