A 65-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for “discovering a nodule adjacent to the stoma in April that had enlarged for 1 wk, and then ruptured 1 d prior”.
Four months ago, the patient accidentally found a small nodule on the right side of the colostomy that was approximately 0.5 cm in size without redness, swelling, or tenderness, and did not go to the doctor. Two months ago, the nodule enlarged, accompanied by redness, swelling, heat, and pain. After oral administration of cefdinir, he improved and did not take antibiotics regularly. One week ago, the patient had an enlarged nodule on the right side of the stoma, accompanied by a mass on the left side of the stoma that was approximately 4 cm × 3 cm in size, with redness, swelling, heat, pain, and a black mass of pus in the middle; intravenous infusion of cefoxitin did not alleviate symptoms. Three days ago, the nodule on the right side of the stoma ruptured, and a fistula of approximately 1.5 cm in size appeared, which caused a large amount of overflowing stool. A day ago, the mass on the left side of the fistula ruptured and released pus, so he went to our hospital.
Thirteen years ago, the patient underwent Hartmann surgery due to a sigmoid colon tumor with acute obstruction. Postoperative pathological diagnosis was stage II sigmoid colon adenocarcinoma (T4N0M0). Due to the patient's own reasons, he did not undergo regular treatment and not reverse the stoma in time. The patient was admitted to our hospital for paraostomy hernia and right inguinal hernia 3 years ago, and underwent tension-free inguinal repair and paraostomy hernia repair via an open operation. The abscess was cut for drainage 1 year ago due to a paraostomy abscess.
There was a 10-cm surgical scar (from the Hartmann surgical incision) on the right abdomen, a 15-cm surgical incision scar (paraostomy hernia repair incision) in the middle abdomen, and a 5-cm surgical scar on the right inguinal area. The colostomy port was located in the left lower abdomen. On the right side of the colostomy port, there was an abscess of approximately 5 cm × 5 cm in size. The skin was red, swollen, and hot. A middle ulcer was also found. The place where the mass overflowed with pus was located at the anterior upper pole of the iliac and was approximately 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm, at a depth of approximately about 2 cm, and there was pus outflow. On the left side of the stoma, there was a fistula of approximately 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm in size, located next to the belly button that had much stool overflow. A mass of approximately 5 cm × 3 cm was palpable in the left groin area, which was obvious when standing, soft in quality, and did not protrude into the scrotum.
Routine blood markers and tumor markers were normal, but Calcitonin original was 0.53.
Enhanced computed tomography: The right sinus of the stoma was formed, which was the same as the intestinal cavity (orange arrow), and the parastomal hernia can be seen . The left side of the stoma had a suspicious sinus formation (yellow arrow), with surrounding soft tissue swelling and left inguinal hernia (white arrow). No tumor recurrence was seen .
Colonoscopy: The proximal bowel was not significantly abnormal; the distal bowel was approximately 25 cm, and showed changes from disuse, with a large number of white mucus masses (The white mucus masses were formed by the absorption of water by intestinal fluid secreted by the colon).
Retrograde transanal digestive tract radiography: Front view and lateral view showed that the distal bowel was approximately 25 cm, with no bowel stenosis and a smooth bowel mucosa.