A 78-year-old male was admitted to our emergency department in September 2019 because of transient loss of consciousness and falls.
The patient reported a transient loss of consciousness and falls while walking in the morning after breakfast. He regained consciousness immediately.
The patient had been receiving treatment for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, diabetes mellitus, and chronic kidney disease at our hospital and at the family physician’s clinic. The patient was receiving direct oral anticoagulants and amiodarone for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor and sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitor for diabetes mellitus.
The patient had been smoking 20 cigarettes daily for 58 years, and his history of asbestos exposure was unknown.
The results of his physical examination were as follows: height, 1.58 m; weight, 51.6 kg; body mass index, 20.59 kg/m2; blood pressure, 91/53 mmHg; pulse rate, 92 beats/min and irregular; oxygen saturation in room air, 97%; body temperature, 37.9 °C; and respiratory rate, 16 breaths/min. At the time of the visit, the patient's level of consciousness was clear, and no obvious neurological abnormalities were observed. Mild anemia was observed in the ocular conjunctiva. Jugular venous distension was marked. On auscultation, the heart sounds were irregular but well audible, and there was no clear heart murmur or pericardial friction rub. In the lung field, normal breath sounds were present with no rales. There were no abnormal findings in the abdomen. Bilateral marked leg edema was noted.
The laboratory findings showed a high inflammatory response (white blood cell count, 17970/μL; C-reactive protein level, 16.58 mg/dL) and anemia (hemoglobin level, 9.8 g/dL). Renal function was reduced, and the brain natriuretic peptide level was slightly elevated at 370 pg/dL. Blood and urine cultures were negative for sepsis. A close examination for collagen disease was negative, as was a quantitative test for tuberculosis. Regarding tumor markers, the carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was slightly elevated (5.6 ng/dL), and the soluble interleukin-2 receptor level was elevated at 1760 U/mL.
Electrocardiography showed the presence of atrial fibrillation. Chest radiography showed an increased cardiothoracic ratio of 68.7% and cardiac shadow enlargement, but no pleural effusion was noted. Plain computed tomography (CT) showed cardiac enlargement, a high density of pericardial effusion, and bilateral pleural effusion . Circular nodular shadows (8 mm in diameter at the largest) were noted in the lungs . Ultrasound cardiography (UCG) on admission also showed pericardial effusion with normal left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF). Regarding pericardial effusion, mild to moderate pericardial effusion was seen in all circumferential areas but seemed slightly more common in the posterior left ventricular (LV). There was no evidence of right ventricular or atrial collapse or septal bounce, which was not supportive of the presence of cardiac tamponade or constrictive pericarditis. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed faint high-signal areas in the pericardium on both T1- and T2-weighted images, and gadolinium contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images showed thick staining inside and outside the pericardium and a small amount of pericardial fluid . The thickening of the pericardium was diffuse and did not present a clear tumor shadow. Gallium scintigraphy showed fluid accumulation in the pericardial cavity .
The transient loss of consciousness may have been caused by diastolic dysfunction due to pericardial disease, dehydration due to fever and inflammation, and decreased cardiac output due to the appearance of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Regarding pericardial disease, which was considered the main pathology, in this case, we considered pericarditis or pericardial invasion or metastasis of the malignant disease. As shown above, CT showed nodular shadows in the lungs, and the possibility of malignancy could not be ruled out. Pericardial infiltration of this lung cancer was not actively suspected. Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopies were performed to exclude malignant disease, but no significant findings were observed. To confirm the final diagnosis, cardiac catheterization, thoracoscopic lung biopsy, chest CT-guided lung biopsy, and pericardial biopsy were recommended, while pericardiocentesis could not be performed because several images did not show pure pericardial effusion. We strongly recommended to the patient and his family that he undergo such examinations, but they refused further examinations and treatment, so these examinations were not performed.
Furthermore, UCG on the 23rd day after admission showed that the LVEF was maintained within normal limits (66%). Pericardial effusions were slightly more observed near the posterior LV, but the degree of effusion was unchanged . At this time, we found mass-like echogenicity at the apex, which was not present at the time of admission . The E/A ratio was increased to 1.55, and the deceleration time was 140 ms on regular sinus rhythm, indicating progression of the restrictive disorder. On the 58th day after admission, because of an increase in pleural effusion, left thoracentesis was performed after obtaining consent; the effusion was exudative with no obvious atypical cells, suggesting some kind of inflammation.