A 29-year-old nulliparous woman achieved pregnancy after the administration of human chorionic gonadotropin to trigger ovulation. She was diagnosed with an MCDA twin pregnancy at 8 weeks of gestation and referred to our hospital for management at 10 weeks of gestation. At 13 weeks of gestation, we confirmed the presence of a dividing membrane between the twins. However, at 15 weeks of gestation, a large portion of the dividing membrane was missing on ultrasonography , leading us to suspect rupture of the dividing membrane between 13 and 15 weeks. After the diagnosis of suspected spontaneous septostomy at 15 weeks, we performed careful weekly follow-up. At 18 weeks of gestation, we performed three-dimensional ultrasonography and noted that baby B had a swollen upper left arm and that a membranous structure originating from the placenta was attached to the swollen upper left arm . We noted that the swollen upper left arm was actually in the same cavity as baby A . Baby A was anatomically normal. Two umbilical cord insertion sites were noted on the placenta—one on either side of the partial dividing membrane. Next, we used magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to reassess the amniotic membranes, umbilical cords, and fetal morphology. MRI confirmed that baby B’s upper left arm was swollen and that baby B’s umbilical cord was encircling the arm . We suspected that the umbilical cord had become entrapped by the amniotic band.
We kept the patient under close follow-up and subsequently noted mild growth restriction in both babies, but there was no sign of TTTS or selective fetal growth restriction. At 25 weeks of gestation, MRI showed a reduction in the swelling of baby B’s upper left arm and there was no visible amniotic band attached to baby B’s arm. Cesarean delivery was scheduled for 34 weeks of gestation.
We performed electronic fetal heart rate monitoring 3 times daily. While the fetal heart rate was nonreassuring at 30 weeks, there was no abnormality in the middle cerebral artery or ductus venosus Doppler studies, nor was there an abnormal amniotic fluid volume. We therefore suspected that the nonreassuring pattern was due to umbilical cord entanglement. Our intraoperative findings confirmed the presence of entangled umbilical cords. Baby A had a birth weight of 1285 g and Apgar scores of 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes, respectively. Baby B weighed 1323 g and had Apgar scores of 7 and 8, respectively. Both twins were small for their gestational age. The left arm of baby B was functionally normal but showed a constrictive ring with a skin defect ; there were no identifiable amniotic bands. Most of the amniotic membrane separating the babies was missing on gross examination of the placenta . The remaining membrane was confirmed to be consistent with an MCDA gestation on microscopic examination .
The maternal postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 1 week after delivery. Both neonates followed an uneventful postnatal course. Baby B’s skin defect epithelialized and formed a scar at around 2 months of age. Both infants were discharged 64 days after delivery.