A 20-year-old woman with no smoking history presented a round-shaped shadow in the right middle lung field on a chest X-ray during her medical checkup on employment , while her chest X-ray 2 years ago had no abnormalities. She exhibited no symptoms and had no comorbidities. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a lobulated solid mass in the hilum of the right lung measuring 3.5 × 3.0 cm in diameter, which was homogenously enhanced in the early phase scan without any intratumoral fat or calcification identified . FDG-PET revealed a high accumulation of FDG in the mass wherein the maximum standard uptake values were 7.1 and 8.4 in the early and delayed phases, respectively . The levels of all serum tumor markers of lung cancer such as carcinoembryonic antigen, cytokeratin 19 fragment, and pro-gastrin-releasing peptide were within normal ranges. Based on the radiological findings, the mass was suspected to be either an invasive lung cancer, a lymphoma, Castleman’s disease, a solitary fibrous tumor, or an inflammatory pseudotumor. A transbronchial lung biopsy was performed, but the specimen was too small for histological diagnosis. It was decided that the most likely diagnosis of the mass was clinical T2aN0M0 stage 1B non-small cell lung cancer as per Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) 8th edition criteria. Accordingly, the patient underwent anterolateral thoracotomy through the fifth intercostal space. Intraprocedurally, it was detected that the mass arose from the S3 of the right upper lobe and that its surface facing the interlobular space was covered with visceral pleura. The mass had not invaded the middle lobe, but it was close to the hilar vessels. Thus, wedge resection with the mass was considered to be difficult, and right S3 segmentectomy was performed. Intraoperative frozen section analysis revealed that the tumor contained branched gland ducts along with columnar epithelial cells with poor nuclear dysplasia arranged in papillary growth patterns. Therefore, the tumor was diagnosed as a benign pulmonary lesion (e.g., papilloma or adenoma), and the operation was completed without deploying any additional procedures.
Macroscopically, the mass was a solitary, white-colored, well-defined, and solid component measuring 2.9 × 2.5 cm in diameter . These findings were seldom found in conjunction with necrotic or hematomatous lesions. Microscopically, it consisted of abundant glands with single or double layers of nonciliated cells and bronchial structures that resembled the tubular epithelium of a fetal lung. Rounded morules of polygonal cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm were frequently observed . Immunohistochemistry showed that nuclei and cytoplasm of the tumor cells were positive for β-catenin and negative for p53, nuclei of the tumor cells were positive for thyroid transcription factor 1, and the cytoplasm was positive for synaptophysin. Based on the abovementioned morphological patterns and immunohistochemical profile, the tumor was finally diagnosed as a WDFA.
At 1 month after the initial operation, the patient underwent completion right upper lobectomy and systematic lymph node dissection. Anterolateral thoracotomy was performed via the fifth intercostal space, same with the incision in the initial operation; further, the lower lobe and chest wall surrounding the wound were widely attached, and both the major and minor fissures were firmly adhered. Although peeling off the adhesions was difficult, the remaining upper lobe was successfully removed without any complications such as vessel injury, lung damage, and massive bleeding. According to the pathological findings, no residual tumor or lymph node metastasis was present, and the final pathological stage was pT1cN0M0 stage 1A3 (UICC, 8th edition). The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 6. She did not wish to receive any adjuvant therapy. At 1-year after the second operation, the patient was well without any evidence of recurrence.