A 46-year-old male presented to the Digestive Department of our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment of a 3.0 cm x 3.5 cm laterally spreading tumour-like elevated lesion observed in the rectum.
The patient was initially evaluated for a screening colonoscopy as part of a routine health examination. He was asymptomatic, with no weight loss, bleeding, fever, abdominal pain, or adenopathy. Colonoscopy showed a rectal 3.0 cm x 3.5 cm lesion, which was 10 cm from the anus. The biopsy specimen had been confirmed histologically as mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma.
The patient had no previous medical history.
The patient had no smoking and drinking history.
Physical examination upon admission showed that the patient had a blood pressure of 112/84 mmHg with a heart rate of 87 beats/min. There were no obvious signs of the cardiopulmonary system or abdomen during physical examination.
Laboratory results of lactate dehydrogenase, hemoglobin, plasmacytic differentiation and soluble interleukin-2 receptor showed no obvious abnormalities. The 13C-urea breath test tested negative for H. pylori.
A 3.0 cm x 3.5 cm laterally spreading tumour-like elevated lesion was observed in the rectum approximately 10 cm away from the anus under white light endoscopy. Its surface was uneven, congested, and oedematous . The lesion margin became clearer and more uneven after indigo carmine staining . To observe the microstructure and capillaries of the lesion, magnifying endoscopy with narrow-band imaging (NBI) was carried out. NBI showed a clear margin with a dark brown background and enlarged branch-like vessels on the surface of the lesion. The lesion was classified as NBI international colorectal endoscopic (NICE) type 3 and Japanese NBI expert team (JNET) type 3.
Magnifying endoscopy showed dendritic and grid-like irregular microvessels scattered in the lesion, which had a clear boundary with normal mucosa . Crystal violet staining magnifying endoscopy showed that the pit pattern structure disappeared on the surface of the lesion, classified as Kudo Pit Patterns type VN . Hypoechoic thickening of the mucosal layer was detected by endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) . On the basis of dendritic and grid-like irregular microvessels and pit pattern structure disappeared on the surface of the lesion in magnifying endoscopy, the rectal lesion was diagnosised as lymphoma. At the same time, biopsy specimen had been taken to pathological examination and confirmed histologically as MALT lymphoma. Other examinations, including enhanced computed tomography, positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT), bone marrow biopsy and gastroscopy, showed no obvious abnormalities.