A 73-year-old Japanese woman was admitted to another hospital for pyrexia, agitation, and mild disturbance of consciousness. She was initially diagnosed with a urinary tract infection, for which antibiotics were administered. However, her neurological condition gradually deteriorated. Brain MRI showed high-intensity lesions in the right temporal and bilateral frontal lobes on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images. CSF examination showed mild pleocytosis (47/mm3, monocyte predominant). She was diagnosed with acute encephalitis and was started intravenous acyclovir and intravenous dexamethasone.
She was transferred to our hospital 6 weeks after the onset of her symptoms due to persistent disease despite treatment. Her medical history included hypertension. She had no family history of neuromuscular diseases. On admission, the patient had a height and weight of 154.0 cm and 56 kg, respectively. On physical examination, her body temperature was 37.4°C. Chest auscultation revealed normal respiratory sounds and a normal heart rate with no murmur. Neurological examination showed mild disturbance of consciousness: Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 13 (E4 V4 M5) with disorientation and agitation. She was able to answer some simple questions but showed a remarkable reduction in speech frequency. She presented with cervical and truncal dystonia causing abnormal posture. She did not experience seizures. Autonomic dysfunction and central hypoventilation were unremarkable. Electroencephalography (EEG) revealed a generalized slowness in activity (5–7 Hz) without epileptiform discharges. A cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) sample included 5 white blood cells/mm3, 18 mg/dl of total protein, and 77 mg/dl of glucose (149 mg/dl of serum glucose). Her IgG index (0.50) was within normal range (cut-off < 0.67). Her CSF sample came back positive for oligoclonal bands. Brain MRI revealed high-intensity lesions in the right temporal and bilateral frontal lobes on FLAIR images, with the right frontal lesion demonstrating gadolinium (Gd) enhancement, which can be considered to indicate CNS inflammation or a high-grade brain tumor. Magnetic resonance spectroscopy of the right frontal lesion revealed an increase in the choline/creatine ratio and a normal N-acetyl aspartate level . Whole-body contrast-enhanced computed tomography showed no associated tumor and swelling of systemic lymph nodes. In addition, 67Ga scintigraphy showed no abnormal uptake in the systemic organs and lymph nodes .
In-house screening for anti-neuronal antibodies (, ) was performed using the patient's CSF and sera samples via indirect immunohistochemistry with frozen sections of rat brain. Patient's CSF immunolabeled neuropil of the rat hippocampus and granular cell layers in the cerebellum , which was consistent with the immunolabeling pattern of anti-NMDAR antibodies. In contrast, the patient's serum did not immunolabel the rat brain section. A cell-based assay with NR1/NR2-transfected HEK293 cells (BIOCHIP, Euroimmun, Labor Berlin) confirmed anti-NMDAR antibodies in the CSF alone (, antibody titers were 1:32). No onconeural antibodies that included amphiphysin, Hu, Yo, CV2, Ri, Ma2/Ta, recoverin, Tr, GAD65, and others measured via line blot (EUROLINE, Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany) were detected (details regarding autoantibody detection using in-house and commercially available assays are described in the ). Furthermore, autoantibodies associated with other AE were not detected, including Bickerstaff's brainstem encephalitis (anti-GQ1b antibody in the serum), Hashimoto's encephalitis (antibodies against thyroid peroxidase and thyroglobulin in the serum), and demyelinating disorders of the CNS (antibodies against anti-myelin oligodendrocyte and aquaporin-4 in both the CSF and serum).
The Gd-enhanced lesion accompanied by swelling of right frontal robe was required to rule out a high-grade brain tumor; thus, craniotomy was performed for tumor resection on day 15 of the hospitalization. Histopathological analyses showed a dense proliferation of atypical cells with large and irregular nuclei on hematoxylin-eosin (H&E) staining. Tumor cells were positive for CD20 (clone L26; Agilent Technologies, CA, US) and CD79a (clone JCB117; Agilent Technologies, CA, US) suggesting B-cell lymphoma with high Ki-67 (clone MIB-1; Agilent Technologies, CA, US) expression (90%). Immunological profiles of the tumor were consistent with primary central nervous system diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (PCNS-DLBCL) . In addition, immunolabeling with biopsied brain sections using anti-NR1 antibodies (clone EPR23397-66; Abcam, Cambridge, UK) revealed that the tumor cells did not express the NR1 subunit of NMDAR .
After tumor removal, the patient underwent whole-brain stereotactic irradiation therapies (a total of 30 Gy). The antibody titers of anti-NMDAR antibodies in the CSF decreased as the volume of brain tumor reduced after surgical and irradiative therapies (, titers were 1:4). Her consciousness and mental condition partially improved; however, she was discharged to another hospital for rehabilitation and long-term care due to limitations in performing activities of daily living. The clinical course of the patient is summarized in . Written informed consent was obtained from the patient and patient's kin for the publication of any potentially identifiable images or data included in this article.