A 20-year-old man sustained a penetrating globe injury in the right eye while cleaning a blank cartridge pistol. His uncorrected visual acuity at presentation was hand motion and he had a flame burn of his right upper and lower lid with multiple missile wounds of lids, conjunctiva and cornea from close range firing of blank ammunition .On slit-lamp examination, there was a 12-mm laceration of conjunctiva along the 9 o'clock position with two pinhole-like penetrating injuries of cornea and sclera. There was also a 3-mm corneal laceration between 9 o'clock and 12 o'clock and the exposed lateral rectus muscle was split . Severe Descemet's membrane folding with stromal edema was observed, and numerous yellow, powder-like foreign bodies were impacted in the cornea . Layered anterior chamber bleeding (hyphema) with traumatic cataract was also noted. The anterior capsule of the lens was ruptured at presentation. The authors could not examine the posterior segment, thus B-scan ultrasonography was performed. Transverse view of ultrasonography showed hyperechoic foreign bodies with mild reduplication echoes and shadowing . However, a computed tomographic scan using thin section did not reveal a radiopaque foreign body within the right globe .
In the operating room, removal of scattered foreign bodies impacted into corneosclera, tenon, lids, and lateral rectus muscle was performed. Corneoscleral laceration was closed using 10/0 and 8/0 nylon sutures. The split lateral rectus was repaired using 6/0 vicryl sutures, followed by lens aspiration and anterior vitrectomy. Multiple foreign bodies were found in the anterior vitreous during vitrectomy. Necrotic tissue of lids was derided and scrubbed with antibacterial soap, and then canthoplasty was performed. Conjunctival laceration was repaired using 8/0 vicryl sutures. At the end of the surgery, intravitreal vancomycin and ceftazidime were injected to prevent endophthalmitis.At postoperative day 1, intraocular pressure was 7 mm Hg measured by noncontact tonometry, and slit-lamp examination showed the deep anterior chamber without severe inflammation under contact lens . There was no limitation of extraocular movement after surgery, and primary position of the globe was nearly orthophoric. The cornea was gradually stabilized two weeks following surgery. Longitudinal B-scan view showed diffuse low to medium reflective opacities in the vitreous cavity, suggesting vitreous hemorrhage at two weeks after surgery . This patient had corrected visual acuity of counting finger in right eye at one month after surgery. At that time, corneal opacity was denser without inflammation . The authors planned penetrating keratoplasty as further treatment.