A 47-year-old woman presented with fever and chronic ulceration on her vulva for one and a half month in January 2017. The patient had no significant past medical or family history. She had been given levofloxacin and topical douche in another hospital, but the vulvar lesions continued to aggravate. Gynecological evaluation revealed two large well-demarcated ulcers on bilateral labia majora without involvement of labia minora and vagina. The patient underwent an incisional biopsy and the cut surface of specimen was grey-white. Microscopically, the dermis was infiltrated with diffuse noncohesive sheets of medium-sized myeloid precursor cells that have large vesicular nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and scarce ill-defined cytoplasm with mild pleomorphism . Abundant neutrophils and sparse plasma cells were observed. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) demonstrated positive reactions with MPO , lysozyme , CD43 , CD68 , CD38 and CD117, and negative reactions with T-cell markers (CD3, CD5, CD56), B-cell markers (CD20, Bcl-2, Bcl-6) and plasma-cell makers (CD138). Ki-67 was expressed in 80% of the neoplastic cells . Therefore, she was diagnosed as MS and admitted to hospital.
On admission, her peripheral blood count showed white blood cells 6.78 × 109/L, hemoglobin 80 g/L, hematocrit 26%, platelets 6.78 × 109/L. Differential blood count was as follows: blasts 71%, unclassifiable cells 16%, neutrophils 24%, lymphocytes 58%, monocytes 2%. Her peripheral blood smear revealed the percentage of leukemic cells was 28%, while the bone marrow (BM) aspirate contained 44.5% leukemic cells. Flowcytometric analysis showed myeloblast count of 74%, which expressed CD13, CD33, CD117 and HLA-DR. Cytogenetic study of the BM discovered a normal 46, XX karyotype. Fluorescence in situ hybridation (FISH) analysis did not detect any common fusion genes in hematologic diseases such as AML, MDS, eosinophilia and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Given the results, a diagnosis of AML (M2 type, FAB classification) was made and MS of the vulva was the earliest symptom in this patient.
She subsequently received induction chemotherapy with idarubicin (10 mg/m2 for 3 days) and cytarabine (100 mg/m2 for 7 days) that achieved complete remission 1 month later with the ratio of minimal residual disease being 0.017%. Meanwhile, the vulvar ulceration healed without other therapy . In this period, the patient developed upper gastrointestinal bleeding and acute inferior myocardial infarction that recovered after conservative treatment. She then received 5 cycles of intensification therapy (high-dose cytarabine 3 g/m2/12 h for 3 days) along with intrathecal injection of methotrexate and cytarabine for 4 times. Neither a family nor unrelated donor for haematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) had been found. Currently, she remained in complete remission 27 months from the time of diagnosis on follow up.