A 49-year-old-female without a history of any cardiovascular disease, presented with complaints of progressive breathlessness of New York Heart Association functional class II and oedema at a local clinic, where she was diagnosed with acute HF and treated with diuretics, after which she was referred to our institution for further examination of the cause of acute HF. Physical examination showed blood pressure of 104/70 mmHg and a regular pulse of 68 beats/min. No cardiac murmur and abnormal lung sound were observed. Slight pitting oedema was observed in both legs. Laboratory findings demonstrated an increase in brain natriuretic peptide level to 368 pg/mL (reference interval ≤18.4 pg/dL). The determination of serum-free light chains (FLCs) found an increased level of kappa at 137.0 mg/L (reference interval 2.42–18.92 mg/dL), a normal level of lambda at 6.9 mg/L (reference interval 4.44–26.18 mg/dL), and an increased kappa-lambda ratio of 19.9. Serum protein electrophoresis detected IgA kappa-type M-protein, and kappa-type Bence-Jones protein was detected with urine immunofixation electrophoresis. An electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm and poor R progression in the precordial leads , and echocardiographic examination revealed normal left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction (LVEF) of 63% and normal LV size of LV end-diastolic volume of 66 mL and LV end-systolic volume of 18 mL . Enlargement of the left atrium was observed with a left atrial volume index (LAVI) of 54 mL/m2, and mild LV hypertrophy (LVH) with an interventricular septum of 12.3 mm and posterior wall thickness of 11.0 mm . Doppler-derived LV diastolic filling showed a restrictive filling pattern with a trans-mitral early filling wave deceleration time of 165 ms and an elevated peak ratio of early to late diastolic mitral flow velocity (E/A) of 2.2. The ratio of E to tissue Doppler-derived early diastolic velocity from the septal mitral annulus (E/e′) was 15.6, indicating elevated LV filling pressure . In addition, global longitudinal strain (GLS) by means of two-dimensional speckle-tracking strain was as low as 14.2%, while an apical sparing pattern was also observed with relative apical longitudinal strain of 1.11 . On the basis of these findings, the patient was diagnosed with HF with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF). Although echocardiographic features of cardiac amyloidosis, such as thickened papillary muscles, thickened valves, better appreciation of the thickened right ventricular (RV) wall, and a characteristic granular sparkling appearance of the thickened cardiac walls, were not observed, cardiac amyloidosis was suspected in this patient because of the speckle-tracking findings. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed mild hypertrophy of the interventricular septum with an LV mass of 88 g without RV hypertrophy. Focal late gadolinium enhancement was observed in the LV subendocardial of the LV basal anterior, antero-lateral, inferior and inferior-lateral walls, leading to a suspicion of cardiac amyloidosis . 99mtechnetium pyrophosphate scintigraphy did not show cardiac uptake, so that transthyretin cardiac amyloidosis was not suspected. Histologic findings obtained with polarization microscopy of the endomyocardial biopsy specimens from the right ventricle showed amyloid deposition stained by Congo red with apple-green birefringence. Furthermore, histological examination of the endomyocardial specimen showed no signs suggesting the presence of other cardiomyopathies or transthyretin deposition. There was no evidence of multiple myeloma from the smear obtained from bone marrow. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with HFpEF because of the presence of primary AL amyloidosis.
The patient received BD treatment with bortezomib of 1.3 mg/m2 and dexamethasone of 20 mg/day on Days 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 9, 11, and 12 for 2 cycles subsequent high-dose melphalan of 200 mg/m2 for 2 days followed by autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (auto-PBSCT) for primary AL amyloidosis. shows the follow-up echocardiogram obtained 8 months after auto-PBSCT. Left ventricular ejection fraction and LV size had remained unchanged with LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 64%, LV end-diastolic volume (LVEDV) of 68 mL, and LVESV of 24 mL. The severity of LVH was also unchanged with an interventricular septum of 12.1 mm and posterior wall thickness of 12.1 mm. Moreover, Doppler-derived LV diastolic filling had markedly improved to attain a normal diastolic filling pattern with a trans-mitral early filling wave deceleration time of 205 ms, an E/A ratio of 1.1, and an E/e′ ratio of 10.6. Left atrial size had also decreased with an LAVI of 31 mL/m2. Moreover, GLS improved to 19.8%, and the apical sparing pattern had disappeared with relative apical longitudinal strain of 0.62 . Brain natriuretic peptide had decreased to 66 pg/mL, and FLCs had also reached normal levels with kappa at 9.7 mg/L, lambda at 9.1 mg/L, and a kappa-lambda ratio of 1.07. The patient has been asymptomatic during a follow-up period of 18 months after auto-PBSCT, and recovered LV diastolic function has been maintained.