In January 2018, a 70-year-old man residing in South Korea was admitted to Chosun University Hospital with reported consistent low back pain. At first, he had been admitted to a local hospital on 24 November 2017, a month before visiting Chosun University Hospital with a history of 5 days of chills and fever. In the local hospital, in view of the possibility of acute pyelonephritis, he was first treated with intravenous ceftriaxone at a dosage of 2 g daily. Two days after admission, back pain started. During antibiotic treatment, blood cultures taken on admission yielded Salmonella enterica. He remained on ceftriaxone (2 g daily) for 18 days including initial treatment to cover S. enterica. Upon follow-up blood culture, no bacteria were detected on the 8th and 25th days after starting treatment, and the patient no longer had fever; he was subsequently discharged from the local hospital on 19 December 2017. However, he consistently suffered from lower back pain, nausea, and vomiting; he was re-admitted to the same local hospital 9 days after his discharge. When he was re-admitted to the local hospital again on 30 December 2017, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and L1 spondylitis was demonstrated. MRI revealed whole bone marrow oedema with endplate lytic changes in the L1 body and focal marrow oedema in the upper endplate of L2 bodies. Additionally, mild destruction of intervertebral disc at L1–2 was shown. These findings were considered to be indicative of pyogenic spondylitis . He was empirically treated with cefazolin (1 g, 3 times a day) for 10 days to cover the possibility of Staphylococcus aureus infection, which is a common cause of pyogenic spondylitis. Then, blood cultures were tested and yielded S. enterica again. Finally, he was transferred to Chosun University Hospital, and bone biopsy of L spine was performed on 3 January 2018. He had no fever, and the initial blood test was generally unremarkable except that his erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) level was 108 mm/h. After 7 days, the biopsy results of bone and blood cultures were positive for Salmonella enterica. Cultures of bone and blood obtained during biopsy at the Chosun University Hospital grew O:2-positive Salmonella. The organism was serotyped to be serovar Paratyphi A ([1],2,12:a:-) by the tube agglutination method combining Salmonella O and H (flagella) antigens according to the Antigenic Formulae of the Salmonella serovars.
After the bacteria were identified, with suspicions of metastatic spondylitis, he was treated with ciprofloxacin for 13 days. Computed tomography (CT) was performed for further evaluation. CT scans revealed L1–2 spondylitis spreading to the left psoas muscle. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) was performed to detect clinically undetected diseases in different sites, and it showed hypermetabolism and bone destruction in L1 and L2 vertebral bodies, as well as mild hypermetabolism in the right facet joint between L4 and L5 vertebral bodies. The antimicrobial susceptibility test using MIC plate by the Chosun University Hospital and Health and Environment Research Institute of Gwangju City found that the identified organism was resistant to ciprofloxacin and nalidixic acid . Since susceptibility tests for macrolides could not be carried out due to unavailability of the disc, the specimen was sent for testing to Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. While waiting for results, the antibiotic used in the treatment of the patient was changed from ciprofloxacin to azithromycin due to the identified resistance to ciprofloxacin and nalidixic acid. While he was treated with azithromycin for 15 days, C-reactive ptrotein (CRP) gradually decreased to the normal value of 0.09 mg/dL; ESR level decreased as well, but not to normal levels (CRP: 0.09 mg/dL, ESR: 44 mm/h on the 20th day of admission). He was discharged and followed up through an outpatient clinic. Seven days later, the Salmonella Paratyphi A isolates were found to have an MIC > 16 mg/L for azithromycin. As he had resistance to both azithromycin and nalidixic acid, the treatment was switched to a combination of ciprofloxacin and cefotaxime. While he was treated with combination therapy for 2 months, his clinical symptoms such as back pain reduced, and the ESR level gradually decreased to normal (ESR: 20 mm/h on the 64th day of combination therapy).
We carried out NGS to determine the cause of failure of the initial treatment for Salmonella Paratyphi A infection and elucidate the mechanism underlying antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella Paratyphi A.
Purified genomic DNA was randomly sheared to yield DNA fragments approximately 350 bp in size using a Covaris S2 Ultrasonicator. Library preparation was performed using the Illumina TruSeq DNA PCR-free Preparation Kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. Adaptor enrichments were performed using PCR according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The final library size and quality were evaluated electrophoretically with an Agilent High Sensitivity DNA Kit. The 100-bp paired-end reads were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform. Further image analysis and base calling were performed with RTA 2.7.3 (Real Time Analysis) and bcl2fastq v2.17.1.14.
The draft genome was assembled using A5 pipeline ver. 20,160,825 with paired-end reads. For annotation of the prokaryotic genome, Prokka v1.1.0 was used. The gene models were predicted through the open reading frame (ORF) finding method using prodigal v2.6.2. Then, tRNA, rRNA, and repetitive sequences were identified using Aragon v1.2.36, barrnap v0.6, and minced v0.2.0, respectively. For functional annotation, genes were searched against the UniProt and NCBI RefSeq databases using BLASTP v2.2.29+ with an E-cutoff value of 1 × 10− 6. Protein domains were also searched against Pfam using HMMER 3.1b1.
Resistance genes were identified using Resistance Gene Identifier (RGI) in the Comprehensive Antibiotic Resistance Database (CARD, ) using predicted peptide sequences. All sequences were run through all databases in CARD with a selected threshold of ID = 98.00%.
The clinical isolates were identified with a VITEK II automated system (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France). Tests for antimicrobial susceptibility including MIC were performed with the VITEK II system. In Chosun University Hospital, we cultured the blood collected on 30 December 2017 in the local hospital and conducted antimicrobial susceptibility tests using Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) guideline .
The antimicrobial susceptibility test performed by the Health and Environment Research Institute of Gwangju City showed that the identified organism from the closed pus taken from bone biopsy when the patient was admitted to Chosun University Hospital on 3 January 2018 exhibited resistance to ciprofloxacin (MIC = 1 mg/L) and nalidixic acid (MIC> 128 mg/L) . The antibiotic resistance test results for the blood samples obtained on December 30, 2017 and the biopsy samples obtained on January 3, 2018 were the same. The isolate also presented resistance to macrolides (MIC> 16 mg/L) in a test performed by the Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. We carried out NGS to determine the cause of failure of the initial treatment for Salmonella Paratyphi A infection and elucidate the mechanism underlying antimicrobial resistance in Salmonella Paratyphi A. The isolate used for NGS was taken in the local hospital when he was readmitted in 30 December 2017.
Next-generation sequencing results for Salmonella Paratyphi A with a selected threshold of ID = 98.00% showed that there are antimicrobial resistance gene families present in the isolate, including resistance-nodulation-cell division (RND) antibiotics efflux pumps such as mdsC, CRP, and sdiA; gyrA associated with fluoroquinolone resistance such as Salmonella enterica gyrA; and MATE transporters such as MdtK and AAC (6′)-ly . Based on the results, the most likely cause of treatment failure was a RND antibiotic efflux pump. Meanwhile azithromycin resistance genes such as mph and mef were not identified . There were also no resistance genes related to ceftriaxone, such as CTX-M, CMY-2, or other extended-spectrum beta-lactamases.