A nine-year-old Bangladeshi boy born in the United Kingdom presented with poor feeding, weight loss, drowsiness due to neonatal liver failure with deranged clotting, transaminitis and cholestasis.
The patient suffered from loose stools from early infancy and was commenced on an amino acid formula from the age of two months with initial improvement. His diarrhea has been much more troublesome since the age of five years old with ten bloody stools a day.
The patient was free from other medical history.
His parents were first cousins. Two older brothers and a sister were well.
On examination, he was microcephalic, with normal weight, height and gross motor development. He was clubbed with mild hepatomegaly.
Serum orosomucoid concentration was persistently raised [1736–2685 mg/L (normal range 300–1200 mg/L)], as was his ESR [28–140 mm/h (normal range 4–10 mm/h)]. C-reactive protein was normal. Since the neonatal period, his liver function tests, including gamma-glutamyl transferase have been normal. Fecal calprotectin is intermittently elevated (peak 393 mcg/g), although the latest level is normal at 50 mcg/g. Plasma zinc concentration was normal at 17.2 mol/L (10–18 mol/L).
Abdominal ultrasound showed no signs of hepatosplenomegaly, but the liver had diffusely increased echogenicity consistent with fatty change, possibly related to weight gain associated with chronic corticosteroid use.
Liver biopsy showed hydropic degeneration of hepatocytes . There was no evidence of mitochondrial DNA depletion and plasma lactate was normal. Repeated endoscopy at 6, 7 and 8 years old showed persistent chronic inflammation in the cecum, and pancolitis with diffuse inflammation, superficial ulceration, distortion of the crypt architecture and crypt abscess formation, in a distribution similar to that found in ulcerative colitis . There were no inflammatory changes in the esophagus, stomach and duodenum, nor were there any granuloma to suggest Crohn’s disease.
In view of the very early-onset of the disease and its poor response to immunosuppres-sive medication, an underlying genetic cause was considered. Whole genome sequencing performed as part of the United Kingdom 100000 Genome Project revealed a homozygous c.290A > G, p.(Asp97Gly) variant in cytosolic IARS (encoded by IARS1, NM_013417). Parents were both heterozygous as were two unaffected siblings with the other unaffected sibling wild type. The variant was absent in the gnomAD database of about 140000 controls and scored by in silico predictors (MutationTaster 0.99; CADD score 32) to be pathogenic. The aspartic acid residue at this position is conserved to Caenorhabditis elegans and the variant lies in the IleRS core domain, where other disease causing variants have been identified. Variants in other genes associated with IBD (ADAM17, EGFR, FOXP3, IL10RA, IL10RB, IL21R, NCF4, STAT3) were screened and no potentially pathogenic variants were found.
Immune phenotyping was determined by flow cytometry. Mucosal-associated invariant T-cells cell and natural killer cell frequencies were reduced, comprising < 0.2 and 1% of lymphocytes, respectively (range: 1%-15%). Greater than 60% of the patient’s CD4+ and CD8+ T cells were of a naïve phenotype, reflecting the young age of the patient. T-cells, total B-cells as well as B-cell subsets (transitional, naïve, memory, class switching) were within normal range. Release of Th1, Th2, Th17 and Treg pathway cytokines (IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-9, IL-10, IL-13, IL-17A, IL-17F, TNFα and IFNβ) that may be deranged in IBD were assayed by cytometric bead array (Becton Dickinson) after 5-d stimulation of purified memory CD4+ T cells with anti-CD2/CD3/CD28 monoclonal antibodies. Secretion of some inflammatory (IL-2, IL-5, IL-13, IL-9) and immune regulatory (IL-10) cytokines by the patient memory CD4+ T-cells was markedly elevated, while IL-17A, IL-17F, IFNβ were lower and TNFα not significantly different compared to healthy donors .