A 32-year-old male presented 2 years after treatment for a Kadish C/AJCC stage IVB (T4a, N3, M0) ENB involving the left nasal cavity, anterior cranial fossa, and retropharyngeal lymph nodes. Initial treatment involved intracranial and intranasal tumor resection, radical left neck dissection, cisplatin therapy, and radiation. Radiation therapy was directed both at the primary tumor bed in the superior sinonasal area as well as the bilateral neck area following the radical neck dissection. He presented to the emergency department (ED) following a 2-month duration of left upper back pain radiating to the scapula. Multiple physicians had attributed this pain to a nerve injury sustained during the initial surgical treatment of his ENB, as it had spread to the cervical lymphatics requiring left neck dissection. In the week before his ED visit, the patient began to develop bilateral lower extremity weakness and loss of balance with the left side worse than the right. Decreased sensation was reported in the left leg including the left lower abdomen to the level of the umbilicus.
Examination revealed diffuse 4/5 strength in all left lower extremity muscle groups and 5/5 strength in all other tested muscle groups. Sensation was decreased in the lower extremities and trunk to approximately the level of T4 with the left side worse than the right. Reflexes were 2+ throughout and plantar response demonstrated down-going toes bilaterally. His gait was unsteady. All cranial nerves were intact. Pulmonary exam revealed no respiratory distress, lungs clear to auscultation bilaterally, and normal breath sounds. He had a regular heart rate and rhythm without evidence of murmur or gallop. No visible masses were observed on the neck or trunk. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed a ring enhancing lesion in the right medial parietal lobe consistent with noncontiguous intracranial ENB recurrence . MRI of the thoracic spine demonstrated significant marrow replacement of the T3 and T5 vertebral bodies. Ventral epidural extension of a soft-tissue mass from the T3 vertebral body was noted resulting in significant central canal stenosis from T3 to T5 and lateral displacement of the spinal cord with mild cord edema. The mass extended from the epidural space via multiple neural foramina, communicating with a large pleural-based mass found in the left hemithorax . An additional lobulated component of the mass was seen in the left dorsal paraspinous soft tissues. MRI of the lumbar spine was unremarkable.
Due to the patient’s declining neurological function from the spinal mass and risk for instability from T3 to T5 vertebral body marrow replacement and adjuvant radiation therapy, a decompression and fusion procedure was recommended. The patient was taken to surgery and placed prone on a Wilson frame. Post-positioning neuromonitoring revealed decline in left-side motor evoked potentials. Incision was made over the upper thoracic area and subcutaneous dissection was taken to the level of the spinous processes. Subperiosteal dissection was performed over the lamina and spinous processes of T1-T7. Neuronavigation was used to place screws bilaterally at the T1-T7 levels. Laminectomy and wide foraminotomies were performed at levels T3-T5. The epidural tumor was identified and debulked. The T3 and T4 nerve roots were identified and ligated to allow for decompression of the tumor in the canal and epidural space. Following decompression, motor potentials had improved on the left and remained stable on the right. Frozen sections taken intraoperatively indicated a diagnosis of ENB, later confirmed with immunohistochemistry.
The patient did well in the early postoperative period. He was discharged to an acute inpatient rehabilitation facility on post-operative day 7, where he had improvement in his lower extremity weakness and was sent home with ongoing outpatient physical and occupational therapy after 14 days. The new intracranial metastasis and the residual spine/ pleural mass were treated with radiation postoperatively. He also participated in a clinical trial investigating the use of immunotherapy including anti PD-1 and anti CTLA-4 agents. Unfortunately, the patient passed away as a result of his disease burden 6 months after surgery.