A 4-year-old male referral case from a district hospital was experiencing fever, decreased level of conscious, and massive bleeding from his gastrointestinal tract and nose. The patient had been born spontaneously, full term, without history of any underlying disease. None of his parents and siblings have coagulation problems.
Eleven days before admission to Dr. Sardjito Hospital, the patient experienced a fever and cough. The patient was taken to a community health center and assessed with an upper respiratory tract infection. He was treated with acetaminophen and antimicrobial agent, but there was no clinical improvement. Five days before admission, he was referred by a community health center to a district hospital with a suspected diagnosis of dengue fever due to fever and thrombocytopenia, platelet level was 90,000 cells/μL.
Patient was hospitalized in the district hospital for five days, while the fever still persisted. During his hospitalization there was diarrhea, melena, and a hypovolemic shock on the fourth day of admission which was successfully treated with fluid resuscitation. Laboratory examination revealed that there was thrombocytopenia (the lowest level of platelet was 67,000 cells/μL), and leukopenia (2,600 cells/μL). Patient was diagnosed with dengue hemorrhagic fever with unspecified secondary infection. He was treated with antimicrobial agent, acetaminophen, omeprazole, fluid therapy, and platelet transfusion. Antimicrobial therapy that was given included ceftriaxone for 3 days, which was switched to ampicillin-sulbactam on the fourth day of hospitalization, and switched again with ceftazidime on fifth day of hospitalization. Patient had been given 10 L of intravenous fluid using ringer lactate for five days which caused edema. Patient was referred to our hospital, Dr. Sardjito Hospital, due to decrease of consciousness, history of shock and no improvement in clinical symptoms.
The patient's body weight was 22.0 kg, and height 101.0 cm. He was obese based on the weight for height ratio. His general condition was apathetic; his temperature was 37.4 °C. Glasgow Coma Scale was E2 M4 V1, isochoric pupil with normal pupillary light reflex. His heart rate was 160 beats/minutes, blood pressure measured 153/108 mmHg (>95th percentile), good peripheral pulse and capillary refill time less than 2 seconds. Respiratory rate was 64 times/minutes, and oxygen saturation was 87% with rebreathing mask 12 L per minute. His breathing sounds were vesicular and rhonchi in both lungs. Physical examination revealed that his abdomen was distended, with decreasing abdominal sound and ascites. Liver was palpated 9 cm below the right hypochondrium, indicating hepatomegaly. No lymphadenopathy was identified. Massive bleeding was indicated from nasal bleeding, nasogastric tube bleeding, and melena.
Initial laboratory examination found thrombocytopenia (75,000 cells/μL), increase of transaminase enzyme (ALT 4,668 U/L, AST 616 U/L), abnormal blood coagulation (PPT 40.3 s, aPTT 83.8 s, Fibrinogen <7 mg/dL, D-dimer 10,400 ng/mL), lactatemia (lactate 5.42 mg/dL), and increased level of procalcitonin (procalcitonin 11.98 ng/ml) . DIC score was 7 from thrombocytopenia. Urinalysis was normal. IgG and IgM anti Dengue were negative. Serology IgM TUBEX®TF test for Salmonella typhi was +8. Pediatric Logistic Organ Dysfunction 2 (PELOD 2) score was 10, and pediatric Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (pSOFA) was 5. Based on clinical and laboratory findings, the patient was diagnosed with typhoid fever, sepsis, and DIC.
The patient was treated with meropenem 40 mg/kgBW/8 hours, dopamine, omeprazole 1 mg/kgBW/12 hours, sucralfate 250 mg/6 hours, furosemide 1 mg/kgBW/8 hours, tranexamic acid 15 mg/kgBW/8 hours, and acetaminophen. DIC management was given (including fresh frozen plasma, platelet concentrate, packed red cells, and antithrombin 3 factors 500 unit). Meropenem was chosen due to history of ceftriaxone and ceftazidime usage in previous hospital.
The patient was hospitalized in a pediatric intensive care unit for 14 days. During hospitalization, temperature instability, hypotension, and massive bleeding were observed. Laboratory examination during hospitalization showed leukocytosis, persistent thrombocytopenia, hypoalbuminemia, coagulation dysfunction, and abnormal liver function . Blood culture was performed four times during hospitalization and the results were negative. Blood culture and fecal culture in the second week of fever using gall culture for typhoid were negative. The patient passed away after 14 days of hospitalization due to multiple organ dysfunction syndrome.