A 75-year-old, right-handed, white woman with a history of migraines presented to a tertiary care neurological centre for rapidly progressing cognitive decline. The previous year, she had sought care at a community clinic after several months of progressive memory changes noted by her family. At that time, she had difficulty finding her parked car, concentrating, and performing calculations. She reported having unformed auditory hallucinations and delusions. Her Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score was 25. Two months after her evaluation at the community clinic, she became increasingly disoriented. She developed intermittent tangential speech and resting and action tremors. Laboratory test results were unremarkable for B12, folate, thyroid-stimulating hormone, anti-thyroperoxidase antibodies, complete blood count, and comprehensive metabolic panel. Apolipoprotein E testing was negative. Imaging reports of T2-weighted fluid-attenuated inversion recovery Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) without contrast was reported as moderate to severe scattered hyper intensities consistent with small-vessel ischemia by the local radiological read. Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) studies revealed a normal basic profile, a negative infectious encephalitis panel, and absent 14-3-3 protein levels. Positron Emission Tomography (PET) has been done 6 months into her disease course revealed hypo metabolism of bilateral posterior temporal and parietal lobes and bilateral frontal lobes, consistent with Alzheimer Dementia (AD). A repeat MRI at 9 months was reportedly unchanged. A routine Electroencephalogram (EEG) showed left temporal slowing, mild diffuse background slowing, and no periodic waves. Over the next month, the patient’s disorientation significantly worsened, preventing further MMSE testing. About 1 year after the onset of symptoms, the patient could only communicate with “yes” and “no.”
The patient’s declining mental function and inability to perform activities of daily living required her to be placed in an assisted living facility. She developed severe cognitive impairment, mild right facial and leg weakness, and pseudobulbar affect unresponsive to dextromethorphan and quinidine. She presented to our facility 13 months after her initial evaluation. Her family history was notable for a brother with an unspecified tremor and a father with Parkinson disease, which he developed at age 80. She did not smoke or use recreational drugs, she consumed alcohol 1–2 times a month, and she consumed 1 cup of coffee daily. She had not traveled before symptom onset.
Our patient had a history of resting tremor and asymmetric Parkinsonism, but no myoclonus or startle myoclonus initially, which placed LBD in the differential diagnosis. Other potential causes, such as stroke or lymphoma, could have explained our patient’s physiological symptoms, but, when all factors are taken into account, such pathologies are improbable. Although MRI and 14-3-3 protein in CSF were was not interpreted as consistent to indicate prion disease at work-up, prion disease remained a possibility. Our patient’s history did not suggest seizures, and CSF studies were normal. However, autoimmune encephalitis has various presentations, including memory loss and behavioral changes, and CSF studies can be unremarkable. Central nervous system vasculitis was also possible but less likely in the absence of inflammatory markers and CSF pleocytosis or protein elevation.
At the time of our evaluation, the patient was primarily nonverbal. She was wheelchair bound and fully dependent on others for all activities of daily living. She frequently choked on food, had visual and auditory hallucinations, and was easily and frequently startled. On occasion, her mental status would wax and wane. Neurological examination demonstrated a paucity of movement, rigidity, and asymmetric cog wheeling. The patient did not follow commands and demonstrated pseudobulbar affect. No startle myoclonus was elicited. The severity of her cognitive deficits precluded administering an MMSE. We considered the differential diagnosis and diagnostic approach next.