A 64-year-old female was referred to our surgical oncology clinic for evaluation of cystic lesions of the pancreas found on CT scan at an outside hospital after she presented with a history of approximately nine months of vague epigastric pain, nausea and vomiting. She had a 50-year history of daily tobacco use (0.5 pack per day) and nightly alcohol use that had reportedly stopped around the same time as the onset of her symptoms, but she was otherwise healthy.
She had also undergone an MRI/MRCP at the outside hospital that revealed multiple cystic loculations of the pancreas that appeared to be possibly in communication with the main pancreatic duct . There were calcifications in the head of the pancreas consistent with chronic pancreatitis. Her Carbohydrate Antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) was <1. A three-phase pancreas protocol CT scan was performed at our institution that showed dilation of the main pancreatic duct with innumerable saccular cystic dilations, thought to be likely dilated side branches arising from the pancreatic duct . The working diagnosis was the presence of pancreatic pseudocysts in relation to chronic pancreatitis. Her local gastroenterologist proposed endoscopic transgastric cystic drainage of her dominant cyst. After evaluation at our institution, the differential diagnosis included pseudocysts secondary to chronic pancreatitis as well as diffuse, multiple intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasms (IPMN).
The patient underwent an endoscopic ultrasound with fine needle aspiration and cyst fluid analysis, demonstrating a Carcinoembryonic Antigen (CEA) level of over 600 ng/mL, an amylase level of over 75,000 U/L, and rare clusters of mucinous epithelium, consistent with a mucinous tumor communicating with the pancreatic ductal system. Her case was discussed at our institution’s Pancreaticobiliary Disease Center Tumor Board and total pancreatectomy was recommended given the extent of these mucinous tumors and high suspicion for multifocal branched duct IPMN.
The patient underwent a total pancreatectomy with duodenectomy, cholecystectomy, and splenectomy, and creation of a choledochojejunostomy and gastrojejunostomy. Intraoperatively, there was extensive scarring in the pancreatic head consistent with a history of pancreatitis, and the patient’s diffuse multicystic disease was immediately apparent upon visualizing the pancreas. The operation proceeded as planned and the patient was admitted to the surgical floor, where she demonstrated an uncomplicated postoperative course. She was discharged home on postoperative day seven with adequate glucose control.
Macroscopically, the pancreatic specimen was opened to reveal multiple cystic structures located throughout the pancreatic head, neck, and tail, involving approximately 80% of the pancreatic parenchyma, and ranging from 0.5 to 7.7 cm in size. The cysts contained a brown-tan, thin liquid as well as multiple yellow-tan to white-tan stones, and were surrounded by areas of fibrosis. Microscopically, they were lined by flat low-grade foveolar-type and focal pancreaticobiliary-type epithelium with focal ovarian-type stroma, consistent with low-grade mucinous cystic neoplasm . Many areas of the cysts were denuded and lined by granulation tissue with fibrinous exudate, cholesterol cleft, and calcifications with extensive surrounding fibrosis, consistent with chronic atrophic pancreatitis and pseudocyst formation. Several of the pseudocysts were in communication with a dilated main pancreatic duct. Ovarian stroma was present in the larger cysts. The duodenal, gastric, and common bile duct margins were negative. Twenty-eight lymph nodes were analyzed that were all negative for malignancy.
The patient is currently seven months out from her total pancreatectomy and is able to maintain her nutrition and hydration orally. She takes 48,000 units of pancrelipase with every meal and 24,000 with every snack. At her last clinic visit, she was on nine units of insulin glargine nightly and one to five units of sliding scale insulin lispro as needed, and she is being followed by an endocrinologist for glucose control optimization.