A 33-year-old male was admitted to hospital due to having a high fever with a lower abdominal pain for 1 day. Before arriving at the hospital, the patient developed chills, and his body temperature rose to 39.6 °C. He was administered cold medicine to be taken orally and advised to rest for several hours; however, his symptoms were not significantly relieved, neither did his body temperature drop .
Laboratory testing was performed. Routine blood testing showed that the white blood cell (WBC) count was 22.69 × 109/L with a proportion of 92.6% being neutrophils. The procalcitonin (PCT) level was elevated to 4.52 ng/mL, C-reactive protein (CRP) reached 170 mg/L, and serum interleukin 6 was 34.74 pg/mL . Liver and kidney function was basically normal. Routine autoimmune diseases-related indicators were negative, including anti-cardiac antibodies, anti-SMA, anti-AMA, anti-MPO antibodies, anti-RNP/Sm antibodies, anti-SS-A antibodies, anti-SS-B antibodies, anti-Scl-70 antibodies, anti-PM-Scl antibodies, anti-Jo-1 antibodies, and anti-dsDNA antibodies. In addition, NK and T cell subpopulations, complements C3 and C4, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody, glucose 6-phosphate isomerase, and thyroid function-related indicators including triiodothyronine, thyroxine, free triiodothyronine, free thyroxine, thyroid stimulating hormone, and parathyroid hormone, were normal. Indicators within routine urine testing were normal, including WBC. An echocardiography also ruled out endocarditis. Based on previous clinical experience, the initial diagnosis was determined as infection of unknown etiology.
An initial treatment of Sulperazone (3 g/8 h iv) and Metronidazole (0.5 g/12 h iv) had been empirically administrated for 3 days. The patient’s chills disappeared, but he still had an intermittent fever with a peak of 38.8 °C. Serological testing was performed, including antibodies to respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, influenza A and B viruses, Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Legionella pneumophila; however, all of them were negative. Following this, both his peripheral blood and urine specimens were examined to investigate possible etiology using traditional culture and mNGS (Dinfectome Inc., Shanghai, China). Both aerobic and anaerobic bacterial cultures in the peripheral blood and urine specimens were negative after 5 days’ culture. However, within 24 h, mNGS revealed a total of 27,831,980 single-end reads in the genomic DNA of the urine specimen, of which 163 reads were E. faecalis . Subsequently, sanger sequencing and PCR electrophoretogram confirmed identification of E. faecalis in the urine specimen . QPCR assay of E. faecalis showed a Ct value of 32, and a positive control Ct value of 26 .
Furthermore, from the patient’s medical history, we learned that he had a mesenteric cyst in 2015. His whole abdominal CT showed a cystic mass in the mesenteric space of the abdominal cavity with a maximum cross-section of 18 × 7 cm and small stones in his right kidney . This suggested that the patient had a UTI, and the E. faecalis may be the cause. We then replaced Sulperazon with Linezolid (0.6 g/12 h po) for his therapy. Consequently, the patient’s temperature dropped and inflammation indicators (WBC, PCT, and CRP) gradually returned to normal . Three days later, the patient was discharged without any complications. In the 11th day of the patient’s follow-up period, a urine sample was taken again for mNGS assay. A total of 15,974,870 reads were obtained, and the number of E. faecalis decreased to 2 unique reads . The relative abundance, the proportion of a detected microbe of total reads, was calculated for comparison. The relative abundance of E. faecalis was decreased from 0.11148856 to 0.00274632, suggesting effective treatment.
The experiment procedure for mNGS detection is as follows: DNA from urine samples and blood samples is extracted using Tiangen Magnetic DNA Kit (Tiangen). The extracted DNA was fragmented ultrasonically to yield 150–300 bp fragments. Libraries were prepared using the KAPA library preparation kit (KAPA Biosystem). After quantitation and qualification, the libraries were 75 bp single-end sequenced on Illumina NextSeq 550Dx (Illumina). An in-house developed bioinformatics pipeline was used for pathogen identification. High-quality sequencing data were generated by removing adapter, low quality bases, duplicated reads, and short (length < 36 bp) reads. Human host sequences were identified by mapping to human reference genome (hs37d5) using bowtie2 software. Reads that could not be mapped to the human genome were retained and aligned with microorganism genome database for pathogen identification. Our microorganism genome database contained genomes or scaffolds of bacteria, fungi, viruses and parasites related to human infectivity (download from ). Reads were verified using blastn in the NT database and species with reads > = 3 were reported. The obtained sequencing data were submitted to the Sequence Read Archive of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) with the accession number SRR11624506, SRR11624507 and SRR11624508.