A 72-year-old Caucasian woman from Southern Italy was admitted with a 15-year history of multi-nodular goiter to our hospital. She did not undergo therapy. The thyroid function test results were in the normal range. There was no family history of thyroid or autoimmune diseases. An ultrasound scan of the neck confirmed a multi-nodular goiter with a right-lobe hypoechoic nodule, which was stone-hard on palpation . The nodule showed a hypovascular pattern at color Doppler sonography and a high resistance at the penetration of a 22-gauge needle. Cytological analysis of FNA samples was not useful for the diagnosis.
Because anaplastic carcinoma was suspected, our patient was submitted to a total thyroidectomy followed by a histological examination . Surgical resection of the thyroid gland was difficult since the right lobe was markedly fibrotic and had dense capsular adhesions. However, it was possible to visualize the recurrent nerve, and a total thyroidectomy was performed even though there was an extension of a fibro-inflammatory infiltrate into the adjacent skeletal muscle and the adipose tissue. After thyroidoctomy, an FNA with a 23-gauge needle was performed on the nodule (5.2 × 4.2 × 2.2 cm) of the right lobe and on a normal portion of the thyroid tissue of the left lobe, as previously described . FNA samples were processed to obtain protein pellets , proteomic analysis was performed by combining two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE), and mass spectrometry and Western blot (WB) analysis was carried out to validate protein expression. The procedures of 2-DE analysis [,], MALDI-TOF-TOF (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight time-of-flight) analysis , protein identification , and WB analysis are reported in the Methods section of Additional file .
In addition to processing the Riedel's thyroiditis and the normal counterpart samples, we processed FNA samples (one man and two women who had a mean age of 65.3 years ± a standard deviation of three and a half years) of anaplastic lesions and the respective normal counterparts. An informed consensus was obtained for diagnostic or clinical purposes, and the study was approved by the local ethics committee.
Figure shows the 2-DE images of Riedel's thyroiditis (A) and the normal counterpart (B). The representative 2-DE images of both anaplastic (C) and normal (D) samples are shown for comparison. From quantitative and qualitative points of view, the Riedel's thyroiditis images are similar to those of normal samples, although significant differences were observed with respect to the images of anaplastic proteome. The main differences had to do with the expression of the three proteins that we had previously found to be upregulated in the thyroid cancer . These proteins were haptoglobin, ferritin light chain, and ferritin heavy chain. Mass spectrometry confirmed the identification of these proteins in our FNA samples , and WB analysis, in which specific antibodies were used, validated the significant change of expression between Riedel's thyroiditis and anaplastic lesions . Very low expressions for haptoglobin, ferritin light chain, and ferritin heavy chain were found in both Riedel's thyroiditis and normal samples compared with those exhibiting anaplastic cancer, in which increases of more than 100, more than 500, and more than 300 were observed . Statistically significant differences in the immunoreactive bands were calculated by Mann-Whitney test: after comparison of protein level expression between Riedel's thyroiditis and anaplastic FNA, the P values were 0.037, 0.035, and 0.047 for haptoglobin, ferritin light chain, and ferritin heavy chain, respectively. No significant differences between Riedel's thyroiditis and normal samples were observed. P values were 0.37, 0.73, and 0.11 for haptoglobin, ferritin light chain, and ferritin heavy chain, respectively.