We present the case of a three-year-old boy with stage IV neuroblastoma admitted for high-dose chemotherapy with treosulfan (12 g/m2 × 3 days) and melphalan (140 mg/m2 × 1 day) with autologous stem cell rescue for consolidation after multimodal treatment consisting of intensive chemotherapy, surgery, and I131-metaiodobenzylguanidine therapy according the recommendations of the German Neuroblastoma Registry 2016 . Antimicrobial prophylaxis included trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (4 mg/m2 BID on 2 days per week until day − 1), acyclovir (5 mg/kg TID) from day − 1 onward and amphotericin B (100 mg TID, oral suspension).
Five days following stem cell infusion (day + 5), the patient presented fever of up to 39.5 °C. Blood pressure, respiration and heart rate were within normal limits and physical examination was negative for an infectious focus. Laboratory parameters revealed an ANC of < 100/μL and CRP of 21.1 mg/dl (normal: < 0.5 mg/dl). Blood cultures were obtained through the indwelling triple-lumen Broviac catheter, and the patient was started on empiric antibacterial therapy with piperacillin plus tazobactam (100 mg/kg TID) and gentamicin (4 mg/kg QD) per institutional standard operating procedure . The next day, Gram-negative coccoid bacteria were found in the blood cultures after overnight incubation at 37 °C. Grey-white colored colonies grew aerobically on blood agar. These were identified by matrix assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) as Moraxella nonliquefaciens. Given the lack of specific breakpoints for this microorganism, the agar diffusion test was interpreted according to the clinical breakpoints of the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing for M. catarrhalis , confirming susceptibility to piperacillin/tazobactam. On day + 7, while still febrile, the patient developed low blood pressure (minimum mean arterial pressure: 51 mmHg), an increased heart rate (maximum: 160 beats/minute) and decreasing oxygen saturation (minimum: 89% at room air). Physical examination revealed an ill-appearing child with prolonged capillary refill but no apparent infectious focus. Appropriate supportive measures were initiated and the indwelling Broviac central venous catheter was surgically removed for source control, resulting in prompt circulatory stabilization.
During the following days the patient had recurrent fever of up to 39.0 °C and intermittent decreases in oxygen saturation during night time under continuous oxygen substitution. Daily follow-up blood cultures remained negative. A computed tomography of the chest revealed no abnormality, and clinical symptoms were attributed to grade 3 mucositis. Due to persistent fever with the possibility of a second invasive infection in the state of profound neutropenia, antibacterial therapy was escalated per institutional standard to meropenem (20 mg/kg TID) plus teicoplanin (10 mg/kg QD; day 1: 10 mg/kg BID), and fluconazole (12 mg/kg QD) was started to prevent mucosal and invasive candidiasis.
Following neutrophil recovery with formal neutrophil engraftment on day + 14, the patient’s general condition markedly improved and definite defervescence was noted on day + 17. Antibacterial therapy with meropenem plus teicoplanin was continued for a total of 11 days of appropriate therapy, and the patient was discharged after resolution of mucositis on day + 22 post stem cell infusion. Five months later the patient showed no signs of infection relapse.