The patient was born at 30 weeks gestation to a 26-year-old G1P0 mother following a pregnancy complicated by polyhydramnios and preterm labor occurring at 24 weeks gestation. At birth the patient’s weight was 1.786 kg (90th centile) and the length was 43 cm (90th centile). After delivery, he was noted to be dysmorphic and have right talipes equinovarus. At infancy, head imaging was completed showing polymicrogyria; however, the clinical team was unsuccessful in obtaining original images from these scans and follow-up imaging in adulthood was not completed. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) testing for chromosome 17p deletion associated with Miller-Dieker syndrome was negative; this test was performed during infancy. An initial chromosome analysis (karyotype) on peripheral blood after birth revealed the presence of 40–45% mosaicism for a SMC with possible ring structure . A second karyotype repeated during infancy identified the SMC in each of the cells analyzed, though its structure was unclear given its size and the decreased resolution of the analysis. These chromosome analyses were performed by different laboratories and interpreted by independent clinical cytogeneticists. Follow-up FISH multi-probe testing revealed that the SMC was composed of chromosome 5 material. Before being discharged, the patient spent 5 weeks in the hospital because of respiratory problems. He was released on an oxygen saturation monitor, caffeine, mini nebulizer treatments, and a feeding tube.
As an infant, the patient had low muscle tone and his developmental milestones were globally delayed. He sat by himself at 10 months, crawled at 12 months, and walked at 18 months. He received occupational, physical, speech, and developmental therapies. Additionally during childhood, the patient’s medical history was significant for dental caries, strabismus, myopia, kyphoscoliosis, and chronic diarrhea. He was also diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder and attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD).
After being lost to follow-up care during childhood and adolescence, the patient was referred for a clinical genetics evaluation at age 18 due to severe scoliosis and concerns by his cardiologist for a connective tissue disorder. The patient’s kyphoscoliosis was at a Risser stage 4 and required spinal fusion at age 18 years. During that same year, a heart murmur was heard and an echocardiogram revealed mild aortic root dilation with a sinus of Valsalva diameter of 3.60 cm (Z-score: + 2.3) and ascending aorta diameter of 3.38 cm (Z-score: + 2.8). He subsequently was prescribed treatment with beta blockers. The patient was then seen by our clinical genetics team, and at this visit the patient had chromosome microarray analysis and molecular genetic testing performed on peripheral blood.
A four-generation family history was significant for a maternal great-grandfather dying from complications of a thoracic or abdominal aortic aneurysm, though details were unclear. The patient’s parents are alive and well without any significant health history. No cardiac imaging has been completed in family members. The remainder of the patient’s family history is unremarkable for birth defects, intellectual disability, or recurrent miscarriages. Consanguinity was denied.
On physical examination the patient had a height of 185 cm (87th centile), weight of 81 kg (80th centile), arm span to height ratio of 1.0, bilateral pre-auricular pits, kyphoscoliosis, pectus excavatum, three vertical skin striae on the back, and dysmorphic head and facial features including head circumference of 61.5 cm (>97th centile), dolichocephaly, a long and thin face, hypotelorism with an inner canthal distance of 2.9 cm (<3rd centile), mild malar hypoplasia, esotropia, and dental crowding. He had a Beighton score of 0 out of 9 and a systemic score of 4 by the revised Ghent criteria based on the presence of positive bilateral wrist signs, pectus excavatum, kyphoscoliosis, and skin striae. He did not meet clinical criteria for a diagnosis of a connective tissue disorder such as Marfan, Loeys-Dietz, or Ehlers-Danlos syndromes.