A 68-year-old man, with no significant comorbidities except for a 20-year history of idiopathic PD, presented with worsening parkinsonism, motor fluctuations, peak-dose dyskinesias. Eight years after the diagnosis, unpredictable motor fluctuations, peak-dose dyskinesia and OFF non-motor symptoms consisting of pain and emotional distress, became increasingly difficult to manage with medical therapy. In 2011 he decided to undergo evaluation for STN-DBS in another center, where he was judged ineligible for his poor education. Disappointed, for many years he no longer wanted to consider the option of a reassessment for STN-DBS eligibility. His parkinsonian condition inevitably worsened, alternating very severe blocks with uncontrollable involuntary movements, and forcing family members to continuous day and night care, mainly due to his severe restlessness and pain during OFF periods, with the constant need to be mobilized. He refused the option of levodopa-carbidopa intestinal gel and in 2017 apomorphine subcutaneous pump was assessed in ambulatory setting, showing good benefit and permitting a reduction of oral drugs. In the following months apomorphine infusion was gradually increased from 3.5 mg/hour to 7 mg/hour, with a discrete, but not complete control of OFF-phases. The STN-DBS option was further discussed and finally accepted. Presurgical diagnostic evaluations did not show any contraindications to brain surgery; particularly, compatibly with the level of education, the patient showed no cognitive impairment. His motor score following a levodopa challenge decreased from 104 to 47 on Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS; 55% improvement). His OFF period was characterized by an almost complete akinetic status (video_). We decided to carry out STN-DBS keeping a slight but continuous apomorphine infusion (1.8 mg/hour). A partial motor MDS-UPDRS of assessable items (MDS-UPDRS items: 3.1, 3.2, 3.3b-e, 3.4a-b, 3.5a-b, 3.6a-b, 3.7a-b, 3.8a-b, 3.14, 3.15a-b, 3.16a-b, 3.17a-e, 3.18) was intraoperatively performed under apomorphine infusion before starting stimulation trials, showing a slight reduction of patient’s preoperative OFF sub-score (71/108 versus 80/108), especially due to a slight amelioration of rigidity. However, the main advantage of low-dose apomorphine infusion in our patient was to ensure a good level of cooperation and to limit his discomfort and pain associated with OFF condition.
The patient underwent bilateral placement of STN-DBS leads (3389, Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minnesota USA). Microelectrode recordings were obtained from both sides. There were no intra or perioperative complications. Four weeks after leads placement, monopolar stimulation of the contacts 2−/11- led to the best clinical response (3.6 V and 3.2 V respectively for left and right STN; frequency 80 Hz; pulse duration 90 usec).
He managed to stop APO in about two months since STN-DBS and to continue his oral and electrical antiparkinsonian therapy with a good motor control. At the 6-months evaluation the patient’s dyskinesias resolved dramatically and his motor MDS-UPDRS (stim ON/drug OFF) was 44.