A 53-year-old African American woman with a past medical history significant for immunoglobulin G (IgG)-kappa MGUS, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection progressive to acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), and recent cerebrovascular accident with residual right-sided weakness presented to our hospital for evaluation of pulmonary nodules detected incidentally by imaging of her lungs. Of note, she had been receiving dolutegravir 50 mg twice-daily treatment for HIV but had not received abacavir-lamivudine for 5 months prior to presentation. Her dual CD4/CD3 count at the time of presentation was 148/mm3.
Initially, concern for infection was high on the differential diagnosis, especially pulmonary tuberculosis (TB). She underwent an extensive infectious workup that included TB testing and later an autoimmune workup, the results of all of which were negative. Imaging studies also revealed multiple lucent bone lesions and osteopenia. She was found to be anemic at the time of evaluation, so there was concern that she had progressed to myeloma, as well. Serum monoclonal protein was elevated at 327.6 mg/dl; her serum protein electrophoresis is detailed in Fig. . Serum free light chain measurements were also elevated at 73.1 mg/L for both serum kappa and serum lambda free light chains with a serum kappa/lambda ratio of 1.0. Urine protein immunofixation was unable to be performed. Additional differential diagnoses at the time included lung cancer, plasmacytoma, and sarcoma.
To further examine the etiology of her lung nodules, she underwent positron emission tomography (PET), which confirmed multiple pulmonary masses and nodules with various degrees of fluorodeoxyglucose activity . No definite focal hypermetabolic osseous lesion or lymphadenopathy was noted. She then underwent biopsies of both bone marrow and the lung nodules to further delineate the pathology of the findings. Bone marrow biopsy revealed 40% normocellular marrow with preserved trilineage hematopoiesis and mildly increased (5–10%) plasma cells that were polyclonal, not consistent with myeloma. Lung biopsy showed finely granular eosinophilic material consistent with LCDD . Staining was negative for Congo red ; thus, pulmonary LCDD was the favored diagnosis over amyloidosis. The patient was discharged on dolutegravir 50 mg twice daily and efavirenz-emtricitabine-tenofovir 600-200-300 mg daily for antiretroviral therapy (ART). At her 6-month follow-up appointment, she reported good medication compliance, and computed tomography (CT) of her chest showed an internal decrease in size of all measurable pulmonary nodules.