A 54-year-old woman was brought to the emergency department complaining of weakness in the left arm and leg for four days and persistent headaches for one month. The headache was getting worse for the past week with nausea without vomiting. The patient also complained there was a lump on the right side of the head since three months ago, which was increasing. Based on the historical anamnesis, the patient has a history of left breast cancer and had a tumor resection one year ago.
Based on physical examination, the patient is fully-conscious (GCS E4-M6-V5), and there was a left hemiparesis. There was a lump in the right frontal; the patient had been examined with head computed tomography (CT) with contrast two months before. Based on the first head CT with distinction, there was a solid mass, extra-axial supratentorial, lobulated edges, measuring 3.8 × 3.1 × 3.2 cm in the convexity of the right frontal bone, and there was substantial heterogeneous contrast enhancement (A–C). The patient evaluated the CT scan with contrast in the emergency department. The result showed that the mass was progressively growing with the size of 5.8 × 5.0 × 5.1 cm and pressing the right frontal lobe to the medial side, causing a midline shift of 0.9 cm (D).
A histopathological examination was not performed on the patient because it was considered possibly benign meningioma. Then the patient planned surgery for tumor excision. Right frontal craniotomy carried out total tumor resection (A). Then the patient was evaluated three days after surgery; based on the physical examination, the patient was fully conscious and without neurological deficit. After five days of evaluation in the hospital, the patient was fully recovered and out of the hospital. The patient did not plan additional treatment (e.g., radiotherapy).
Thirty-eight days after the first surgical resection, the patient came to the outpatient clinic due to a left hemiparesis. The patient was planned to head a CT scan examination. Head CT scan examination showed the mass was re-growing with the size of 3.0 × 4.0 cm in the exact location (E–F). Then the patient was planned for pre-surgical resection of the recurrence tumor. One week after the patient came to the clinic, awaiting the assignment of the surgical schedule, the patient was brought to the emergency department due to loss of consciousness (E1-M4-V1), hemiparesis, and there was anisocoria pupil. Then the head CT evaluation was performed in the emergency department and showed a result size of 3.0 × 4.2 cm, and there was focal brain edema (H). The patient was planned for urgent surgical resection (B). Then the tumor tissue was examined with histopathological examination.
Based on the results of histopathological examination, it was found that spindle cells with moderate to severe atypical oval nuclei formed a whirlpool with abnormal mitoses. The tumor preparations also found bleeding; some tissue had extensive necrosis . Based on the results of this examination, it was concluded that the pathological diagnosis was suspicion of anaplastic meningioma (WHO grade III). The limitation of this case is not being able to determine whether the tumor cells are primary or are metastases from previous cancers due to the lack of availability of immunohistochemistry examination. The patient's outcome was good, the patient was compos mentis on five days post-surgery, but there was still slightly left hemiparesis. There was no recurrence report until three months after surgery, and the patient was planned for radiotherapy.