A 79-year-old Japanese woman with a weight of 72 kg who has been maintained on anti-hypertensive drugs, including hydralazine, for more than 10 years, was advised on acute onset of proteinuria and microscopic hematuria by her family doctor. At this time, her serum creatinine (Cr) level was within normal range (0.8 mg/dl). One month later, however, the Cr level was elevated to 1.6 mg/dl. Therefore, she was referred to our hospital for admission.
On admission, vital signs revealed body temperature of 36.9 °C, blood pressure of 150/70 mmHg, and pulse rate of 80 per minute. The white blood cell count was 8700/μl with 2.0% eosinophils, red blood cell count was 307 × 104/μl, and platelet count was 26.6 × 104/μl. The following values indicated renal dysfunction; blood urea nitrogen: 25.0 mg/dl, Cr: 1.9 mg/dl, urinary protein: 2.5 g/day, and the presence of microscopic hematuria. Dysmorphic red blood cells were noted in the urine sample microscopically. In the serum, MPO-ANCA was 107 IU/ml (normal limit, 3.5 IU/ml), whereas C-reactive protein (CRP) was 0.2 mg/dl. PR3-ANCA and other ANCAs, including anti-elastase and anti-lactoferrin antibodies, were negative. The titer of anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) was less than 1:40. Anti-DNA antibody was negative. Complement values were as follows: C3 162.2 mg/dl (normal range, 71–135 mg/dl) and C4 37.7 mg/dl (normal range, 11–34 mg/dl). Renal biopsy revealed pauci-immune necrotizing crescentic glomerulonephritis .
Hydralazine-induced MPO-AAV was considered regardless of absence of skin involvement, elastase- and lactoferrin-ANCAs, anti-nuclear and anti-DNA antibodies, and hypocomplementemia, which are usually observed in the disease . By discontinuation of the causative drug, the serum Cr level decreased gradually. At 10 months later, the serum Cr and MPO-ANCA levels recovered to 1.1 mg/dl and 13 IU/ml, respectively. Proteinuria and microscopic hematuria also disappeared. Since the clinical course was consistent with hydralazine-induced MPO-AAV and the serum CRP level was not high throughout the clinical course, no additional medication was administered.
After another 6 months of observation, the serum Cr and MPO-ANCA levels were re-elevated (Cr, 2.0 mg/dl; MPO-ANCA, 195 IU/ml) and proteinuria and microscopic hematuria were re-appeared. The titer of ANA was 1:40. Other ANCAs, including PR3-ANCA, and anti-DNA antibody were negative even at this time. Complement values were as follows: C3 149.4 mg/dl and C4 38.5 mg/dl. Renal biopsy was performed again and revealed cellular crescents in some glomeruli . These findings suggested the relapse of MPO-AAV. Since she had fever (38.3 °C), and the serum CRP level was elevated to 10.0 mg/dl at this time, administration of 30 mg prednisone (0.5 mg/kg body weight) was initiated. The illness improved rapidly, and remission was achieved 5 months after the beginning of treatment. The patient has remained in remission thereafter .
This study was approved by the Ethical Committee of Osaka General Medical Center (Permission No. 29-C0313) and the Ethical Committee of Faculty of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University (Permission No. 15–90). After acquisition of written informed consent from the patient, serum samples were obtained at the disease onset (Serum A; MPO-ANCA, 107 IU/ml), at relapse (Serum B; MPO-ANCA, 195 IU/ml), at 3 months after treatment (Serum C; MPO-ANCA, 4.5 IU/ml), and at remission (Serum D; MPO-ANCA, 2.4 IU/ml).
To assess the involvement of NETs in the pathophysiology of this patient, we determined the NET degradation activity in the serum samples at first. In brief, peripheral blood neutrophils from a healthy volunteer were seeded in slide chambers (1 × 106/ml), incubated for 15 min at 37 °C, and then made to react with 100 nM phorbol myristate acetate (PMA; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) for 3 h at 37 °C. We have confirmed that this stimulation induces NETs conspicuously . After washing with PBS, the cells were incubated in 10% Serum A, B, C, or D for 6 h at 37 °C. For positive control, 10% serum of a healthy volunteer (49 years old, male) was employed. This sample exhibited the average value for NET degradation in our previous study . To stop the serum nuclease activity, 2 mM EDTA was added, and then the remaining cells on the slides were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) followed by mounting with the solution containing DAPI. Photomicrographs (magnification, × 200) were taken randomly under a fluorescent microscope (6 fields/well of chamber slides), and then the residual NET area was determined using Image J software. NET degradation rate (%) was calculated as follows; {(residual NET area, incubated with PBS) – (residual NET area, incubated with serum) / (residual NET area, incubated with PBS)} × 100. As a result, the NET degradation activity was entirely low in Sera A, B, C, and D compared with the healthy control . Correspondingly, the DNase I activity as determined using ELISA kit (Orgentec GmbH, Mainz, Germany) was low in Sera A (21.7%), B (28.3%), C (22.8%), and D (33.5%) compared with the healthy controls {mean ± standard deviation (SD), 52.6 ± 12.1%}.
Next, we determined the NET induction activity of IgG, which was isolated from the serum samples, using immunoadsorbent columns (Protein G HP SpinTrap, GE Healthcare, Tokyo, Japan). Contamination of endotoxin in the IgG samples was ruled out using the Limulus test kit (Wako Pure Chemical, Osaka, Japan). Peripheral blood neutrophils from a healthy volunteer were seeded in slide chambers (1 × 106/ml), pre-treated with 5 ng/ml TNF-α for 15 min at 37 °C to express MPOs on the cell surface, and then made to react with 250 μg/ml of the IgG samples. Serum IgG samples from a 65-year-old woman patient with MPO-AAV (MPO-ANCA, 93.2 IU/ml) and the healthy volunteer were employed as positive and negative controls, respectively. These samples exhibited the average values for NET induction in our previous study . After incubation for 3 h at 37 °C, the supernatants were removed and the remaining cells on the slides were fixed with 4% PFA. Finally, the remaining cells were mounted with the DAPI-containing solution. Photomicrographs (magnification, × 200) were taken randomly under a fluorescent microscope (6 fields/well of chamber slides), and then the rates of NET-forming neutrophils were determined using ImageJ software. As a result, the NET induction activity was high in Sera A, B, and C, whereas that in Serum D was equivalent to the healthy control .
Lastly, we conducted immunofluorescent (IF) tests to determine the presence of ANETA in the serum samples. Briefly, peripheral blood neutrophils from a healthy volunteer were seeded in slide chambers (1 × 106/ml), incubated for 15 min at 37 °C, and then made to react with 20 nM PMA for 2 h at 37 °C. After washing with PBS, the cells were fixed with 4% PFA, and then made to react with 250 μg/ml of the IgG samples for 1 h at 37 °C. After washing with PBS, the cells were next allowed to react with 1:5000 dilution of FITC-conjugated anti-human IgG antibodies for 1 h at 37 °C followed by mounting with the solution containing DAPI. As shown in Fig. , ANCA was detected in Sera A and B but not in Sera C or D; thus, these findings were consistent with the ELISA titers of MPO-ANCA. On the other hand, ANETA was detected in Sera B and C but not in Serum A or D.