A 78-year-old male with a background of hypertension, cerebrovascular disease with two transient ischaemic attacks in 2015, and severe symptomatic aortic stenosis was evaluated by a multidisciplinary team in an outpatient setting. He had developed progressively worse dyspnoea on exertion in the 6 months prior to evaluation.
On physical examination, the pulse rate was 65 b.p.m., and the blood pressure 135/76 mmHg. The jugular venous pressure was not raised. An ejection-systolic murmur, 3/6 in intensity and radiating to the carotids, was auscultated in the aortic area. The lungs were resonant to percussion, and clear to auscultation. The abdomen was soft and non-tender to palpation. There was no peripheral oedema. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated normal left and right ventricular size and systolic function, severe aortic stenosis (peak velocity= 4.1 m/s; mean transvalvular gradient= 37 mmHg; estimated valve area= 0.90 cm2) and no other significant valvular abnormality. A 12-lead electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm with no conduction abnormalities.
He was deemed at low risk for surgical aortic valve replacement, with a Society of Thoracic (STS) score of 3%. He agreed to participate in a clinical trial comparing transcatheter to surgical aortic valve replacement in patients at low risk of mortality from aortic surgery, and was randomized to the TAVR arm. A recommendation for transfemoral TAVR with a balloon-expandable bioprosthesis was made, consistent with institutional preference. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT)—derived annular area and perimeter measurements were 580 mm2 and 87 mm, respectively, mandating a 29 mm Edwards Sapien 3 aortic bioprosthesis . Careful analysis of the CT reconstructions revealed adequate coronary ostia heights and adequate sinuses of Valsalva dimensions . Computed tomography revealed bulky leaflet calcification and moderate left ventricular outflow tract calcium on the non-coronary cusp . The latter finding prompted the use transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) during valve deployment. The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia in the hybrid operating room. Balloon aortic valvuloplasty was performed with an Edwards Sapien 25 mm balloon. The 29 mm ES3 bioprosthesis was deployed under rapid pacing in a satisfactory position . Immediately following deployment, the systolic blood pressure failed to rise above 50 mmHg. Transoesophageal echocardiography ruled out pericardial effusion, annular rupture or aortic dissection, and initially at least, the left main stem coronary flow appeared intact. Within less than a minute, however, the left ventricular anterior wall appeared significantly hypokinetic, and on root aortography, the left coronary system failed to opacify. Ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation ensued, requiring cardiopulmonary resuscitation and defibrillation. Peripheral cardiopulmonary bypass was established emergently via the left common femoral artery and vein, respectively. On the first selective contrast injection with a Judkins left 4.0 guide catheter, the left main appeared partially obstructed by a native leaflet . A 7 Fr extra back-up 3.50 coronary guide catheter with a guide extension catheter (Guideliner) was used to engage the left main stem. A Hi-Torque balance middle weight coronary guidewire was manoeuvred into the distal left anterior descending artery. Following balloon angioplasty, a 3.50 mm × 15 mm everolimus-eluting stent was deployed into the left main and expanded at high pressure with a non-compliant balloon. Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) demonstrated stent malapposition and underexpansion . We postulated that aggressive post-dilatation was not sufficient to achieve adequate stent apposition and expansion because of the resistance offered by either the valve stent struts or the calcific native valve cusp. A second 4.0 mm × 15 mm overlapping everolimus-eluting stent was then deployed at high-pressure proximal into the first stent with the aim of achieving improved radial strength of the stent scaffolding. Following repeat high-pressure balloon dilatation, repeat IVUS showed improved and adequate stent expansion . Following angioplasty and stent placement, coronary blood flow in the left coronary system was normal [Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) 3 flow , , Video S3), and left ventricular function had normalized completely. Aspirin and clopidogrel were administered via a nasogastric tube. With haemodynamic stabilization, peripheral cardiopulmonary bypass was discontinued in the operating room. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit with stable vital signs and without inotropic or vasopressor support and he was extubated the following day. He was discharged from hospital on Day 3 post-procedure. He developed a bradyarrhythmia requiring a permanent pacemaker 3 days following discharge. At 4 weeks follow-up, his exertional dyspnoea had improved significantly and he had resumed his usual activities. Follow-up transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated normal aortic valve function and normal left ventricular systolic function.