A 42 year-old woman with a chronic, periodically appearing headache lasting for the last few years treated successfully with analgesics and with short-term memory problems of unknown duration was referred to the emergency department by radiologist after out-of-hospital brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with suspicion of right middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysm and late subacute subarachnoid hemorrhage in the right Sylvian fissure. It is essential to mention that the patient performed this study on her own and no previous clinical examination nor imaging study was conducted. On physical examination, her general condition was surprisingly good in relation to her initial diagnosis and showed moderate severity headache only. The rest of her medical and family history was unremarkable. In the meantime, the radiological consultation of the MRI provided by the patient was carried out. A lesion in the right Sylvian fissure with a dilated right MCA passing across it was visualized. The lesion was non-homogeneously hyperintense in T1W conventional spin echo (T1W CSE), T2W fast spin echo (T2W FSE), and fluid attenuated inversion recovery sequences (FLAIR). Moreover, gradient echo technique susceptibility weighted imaging (SWI) expressed hypointensity and blooming due to susceptibility artifacts. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) did not show diffusion restriction . Based on the MRI study provided, the possibility of differentiating between adipose tissue and late subacute hemorrhage was inconclusive. Emergency head computed tomography (CT) angiography of the cerebral arteries was performed revealing unruptured fusiform aneurysm of the right MCA located at the border of M1 and M2 segments, extending the length of about 6 mm with maximal radius of the vessel up to 4 mm and with the anatomical variation of the right MCA in the form of trifurcation of the M2 branches was discovered . Distal half of M1 segment and proximal part of M2 segment of the right MCA were encased by extremely hypodense mass lesion 10 × 13 × 13 mm (−90 to −100 HU) identified as a fat, arranged in Sylvian fissure . Any signs suggesting blood or macroscopic calcifications were not detected. To definitively confirm the diagnosis of the intracranial lipoma, a control non-contrast MRI was performed with an additional T1W Fat Saturation (T1W FS) sequence, in which there was complete suppression of the fatty tissue . Taking into account the whole diagnostic pathway, perianeurysmal Sylvian fissure lipoma encasing right MCA trifurcation was diagnosed. Due to good headache control with medications, surgical intervention was abandoned. During hospitalization, the headache subsided, and the patient was discharged home on the 3rd day. After 3 months at the follow-up visit, the patient’s condition was uneventful and further follow-up is planned.