A 52-year old Puerto Rican male presented with acute onset nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain 24 days after autologous Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation (HSCT) for recurrent stage advanced follicular lymphoma.
The lymphoma was diagnosed 7 years prior to transplant, and was treated with different chemotherapy agents, including Cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone (CHOP regimen) and rituximab. Following relapse, he underwent autologous HSCT following a conditioning regimen with carmustine (BCNU), etoposide, adriamycin, and melphalan (BEAM). Neutrophil engraftment occurred on day nine. Antimicrobial prophylaxis included valacyclovir, fluconazole, levofloxacin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. The patient was not taking steroids or other immunosuppressive medicines at this time.
Past medical and social history was unremarkable. There was no significant occupational exposure history. Patient was noted to have elevated eosinophil count (17% eosinophils; absolute count 0.970 × 109/L) on several occasions, three months prior to the transplant.
On physical examination, his temperature was 37.7°C, heart rate 85/min, respiratory rate 16/min, blood pressure 110/66 mm Hg, and pulse oximetry 96% on room air. The respiratory, cardiovascular and abdominal examination was normal.
The white blood cell count was 7.2 × 109/L (67% neutrophils, 18% bands, 5% lymphocytes, 7% monocytes, 2% metamyelocytes, and 1% eosinophils), hemoglobin 11.6 g/dL, platelets 25 × 109/L. Serum chemistry was normal.
The patient underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) with duodenal biopsy for persistent nausea and vomiting. The biopsy showed active inflammation, larval forms of Strongyloides stercoralis and stromal cells with rare cytomegalovirus inclusions. Stool microscopy for ova and parasites was negative. Intra venous immune globulin (IVIG), Ganciclovir, Foscarnet, Ivermectin 15 mg daily and thiabendazole 3 gm daily were started with relief of symptoms within three days.
Ten days later, the patient developed dyspnea, fever, and hypoxia. Bilateral crackles were noted on lung auscultation. His clinical status deteriorated rapidly developing hypotension and respiratory failure.
While on mechanical ventilation with 100% oxygen, pH was 7.45; pCO2 33 mm Hg and pO2 120 mm Hg. Thrombocytopenia, anemia, and neutrophilia were noted . The chest x-ray showed diffuse airspace disease . Echocardiogram was normal. Therapy with Meropenem, gentamicin, and vancomycin was initiated. Blood cultures later grew Klebsiella pneumoniae. Vancomycin was discontinued, while meropenem and gentamicin were continued with clinical improvement leading to extubation in four days.
Ten days later, he was reintubated for recurrent respiratory failure and ventilatory support using BiLevel mode was provided. Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was suggestive of diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH). High dose parenteral steroids were initiated.
The BAL fluid showed multiple larval forms of Strongyloides stercoralis , 90% hemosiderin laden macrophages and later grew Klebsiella pneumoniae. The steroids were discontinued and patient was started on intravenous Ivermectin.
His pulmonary status continued to deteriorate. The patient developed pneumothorax and subcutaneous emphysema, and died of progressive respiratory failure and septic shock 14 days later.