The patient was a 30-year-old Asian male with no significant past medical history. The right leg mass, which had been present for more than 1 year, had consciously and progressively enlarged with tenderness. This was surgically removed under the guidance of B-ultrasound. During the surgical procedure, after the subcutaneous tissue was cut, a tough mass of 30 mm × 30 mm × 20 mm with complete capsule, clear boundary, and good mobility was found in the muscle layer .
Pathological examination after the surgery at the referring hospital indicated a metastatic neuroendocrine tumor. On further diagnosis and treatment of the patient at our hospital, positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) examination did not suggest any positive sign in other parts of the body.
Pathological examination revealed that predominantly epithelial-like components presented a cribriform or glandular pattern throughout the neoplasm . The epithelial cells were characterized by large, round or oval, vesicular nuclei and abundant pale-staining cytoplasm with indistinctly outlined cellular borders. They were arranged in solid cords and nests, with glandular and papillary architecture that contained mucus or homogeneous eosinophilic secretions. Focal areas of the neoplasm presented with well-developed spindle cell pattern composed of relatively uniform or slightly atypical surrounding and merging with the glandular structures . Partial areas of gradual transition between the two components were present. The tumor was not necrotic, and mitotic figures were rare (3 mitoses per 50 high power fields). Moderate numbers of mast cells, areas of dense fibrosis, including bands of hyalinized collagen, and metaplastic bone in the stroma, were present. The immunohistochemical workup was notable for EMA ,CK8/18, CD56, CgA , SYN, nestin, CD99, BCL-2, VIM, and H3K27me3 positivity in the epithelial cells. The results of all tests performed with site-specific markers are presented . In addition, detection of SS18 break-apart was performed by fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis, and the tumor was showed SS18 gene rearrangement . The final histological and immunohistochemical results confirmed the diagnosis of predominantly epithelial-type synovial sarcoma with overwhelming neuroendocrine differentiation. The patient recovered well and was recurrence for one year after follow-up observation.