A 53-year-old Caucasian woman was admitted to the intensive care unit for septic shock secondary to hypoxic pneumonia induced by Klebsiella pneumoniae. Medical history included anti-signal recognition particle (SRP) autoimmune myositis, treatment with corticosteroids and methotrexate, and active smoking.
Her ICU stay was initially due to severe septic shock, and she required high-dose vasopressor amines and intravascular volume therapy > 30 ml/kg. Probabilistic antibiotic therapy started with cefotaxime (2 g/8 hours) and rovamycine (3 million IU/8 hours). The condition was then complicated by multiorgan failure, including septic acute kidney injury requiring renal replacement therapy (RRT), hepatic cytolysis for 20 cycles without liver dysfunction, and acute respiratory failure requiring intubation, sedation, paralysis and two sessions of prone positioning. Amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (2 g/250 mg/8 hours) was then initiated and adapted to the antibiogram, achieving improvement. Norepinephrine was withdrawn, and hepatic cytolysis resolved. Sedation was terminated, enabling the patient to awaken under spontaneous ventilation with inspiratory assistance.
On day 14, the patient again showed hemodynamic and respiratory deterioration.
Sedation was reinitiated under controlled ventilation with high-dose noradrenaline (up to 2 µg/kg/minute) to achieve hemodynamic stability. Kidney failure did not resolve, and RRT was continued. Probabilistic antibiotic therapy was initiated with imipenem (1 g/6 hours), amikacin (25 mg/kg/day), vancomycin (2 g/day), and fluconazole (400 mg/day). Compared with the previous scan, thoracic CT revealed significant degradation in the numerous bilateral pulmonary condensation sites. The presentation corresponded to severe acute respiratory distress syndrome. Two days after this further deterioration, the patient presented upper digestive tract hemorrhage requiring emergency gastroscopy, which revealed esophageal ulcerations suggestive of viral esophagitis. More or less concomitantly, there were intraoral, labial, vulvar, perianal vesicles and cutaneous vesicles, mainly on the anterior side of the lower limbs and forearms and, less densely, on the back and trunk. During the following days, episodes of rectorrhagia required rectoscopy, which also found ulcerated and bullous lesions with an aspect similar to a geographic map in the lower rectum. Corneal examination with fluorescein screened for herpetic keratitis and was negative. Contrast-enhanced brain CT was performed to screen for complicated herpetic meningoencephalitis, as clinical neurologic examination was precluded by the sedation ensuring ventilatory compliance; the results were normal, with no signs of cerebral edema, intracranial hypertension, or encephalitis. Lumbar puncture was not performed owing to curative-dose anticoagulation therapy linked to a right jugular thrombosis, and positive findings would not have modified the treatment.
Biologically, there was leukocyte elevation (mainly polymorphonuclear neutrophils) at 32 giga/liter. CRP and procalcitonin were elevated at 131 mg/L and 4.2 µg/L, respectively. There was further hepatic cytolysis; aspartate aminotransferase (AST) was 4412 IU/L with conserved factor V. Lactate was elevated at 3.7 mmol/L. Initial bronchoalveolar lavage prior to antibiotic therapy showed no bacteria or fungi, but PCR was highly positive for herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) and slightly positive for HHV-6 and EBV. PCR in total blood and cutaneous vesicles was also highly positive for HSV-1. Digestive endoscopy was performed in a hemorrhagic context; no biopsies were performed.
Meningeal dose acyclovir (10 mg/kg/day) was initiated for the onset of disseminated vesicles and continued for 21 days. Second, low-dose prophylactic treatment was continued to prevent recurrence in this immunosuppressed context.
Clinical progression became favorable after 72 hours of well-conducted antiviral treatment, with hemodynamic improvement allowing withdrawal of vasopressors, followed by respiratory improvement and rapid regression of hepatic cytolysis. Mucosal and cutaneous vesicles disappeared after 3 weeks. After several episodes of severe rectorrhagia requiring hemostatic rectoscopy, digestive complications regressed within 1 month. Control PCR on total blood was performed at 1 month post-onset (1 week after treatment termination) and was still highly positive, although with greater dilution. The control was therefore repeated at 2 months, with no clinical relapse, and was still positive, although again with greater dilution.
The patient was discharged from the ICU after 2 months of intensive care. Withdrawal and rehabilitation were hindered by muscular impairment, probably due to in-ICU neuromyopathy and decompensation of chronic muscular pathology.