A 35-year-old Japanese woman was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia and was treated with a combination of idarubicin and cytarabine as remission induction therapy. High-dose systemic cytarabine therapy was subsequently scheduled for 3 courses, every 2 months, as consolidation therapy. A single course comprised cytarabine administration at 2 g/m2 10 times every 12 h for 5 days. From the morning of the 7th day following the start of the first course, she presented with eye pain, lacrimation, photophobia, and blurred vision in the left eye, and was referred to our department of ophthalmology the next day. At the first examination, her corrected visual acuity (VA) was 20/25 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left eye. Considering the anterior segment findings, the slit-lamp microscopy revealed bilateral mild conjunctival hyperemia, mild superficial punctate keratopathy, and granular microcysts densely distributed in the central region of the corneal epithelium, which were slightly more in the left eye . There was no inflammation in the anterior chamber, no abnormalities upon corneal endothelium examination, no abnormal findings in the cornea upon anterior segment optical coherence tomography (CASIA2; Tomey Corporation, Nagoya, Japan), and no obvious abnormalities were detected in the optic media and fundus.
To prevent corneal epithelial damage attributed to cytarabine, the patient was administered 0.02% fluorometholone eye drops and artificial tears four times a day by the oncologist at the same time as the start of instillation treatment; however, after the ophthalmology referral, 0.1% fluorometholone eye drops and artificial tears were administered 6 times a day, and ofloxacin eye ointment was applied once before sleep. On the 11th day following the start of the treatment, the patient was isolated in a sterile room owing to cytopenia following severe myelosuppression, which is a side effect of high-dose systemic cytarabine therapy; therefore, we conducted a bedside examination. Thereafter, the microcyst gradually decreased, subjective symptoms disappeared on the 14th day, the microcyst disappeared completely on the 28th day, and the corrected VA finally recovered to 20/20 in both eyes.
At the start of the second course, 0.1% fluorometholone eye drops and artificial tears were prophylactically administered four times a day; however, she reported eye pain, lacrimation, and blurred vision 7 days following the start of treatment, similar to the first course. She underwent reexamination at our department, and densely distributed microcysts in the center of the cornea, were detected in both eyes. The 0.1% fluorometholone instillation was increased to 6 times a day, and the subjective symptoms improved on the 9th day; the microcysts disappeared on the 17th day.
A high possibility of the microcyst recurrence with the start of the third course was considered, and the patient underwent daily ophthalmic examinations from the start date of the treatment. No abnormal findings were detected in the cornea until the 4th day; however, on the morning of the 5th day, the fluorescein-negative microcysts, which were evenly and sparsely distributed over the entire cornea except for the width of approximately 1–2 mm in the corneal limbus, were observed without subjective symptoms . Considering the findings of recurrence, 0.1% fluorometholone instillation, which was administered prophylactically, was changed to 0.1% betamethasone instillation six times a day. On the 6th day, the microcysts accumulated slightly below the center of the cornea, and on the 7th day, the accumulation of microcysts in the center of the cornea peaked; however, the peripheral area of the cornea became transparent and no new microcysts were observed. Similar to the previous two courses, subjective symptoms appeared on the 7th day following the start of treatment; however, they were milder than those at the time of the previous two courses. On the 8th day, the microcysts in the center of the cornea slightly disappeared and only remained in a linear shape . Thereafter, since the patient was isolated in a sterile room owing to cytopenia, it was impossible to record the corneal lesions by taking photographs. Approximately 1 week later, the microcysts completely disappeared, and the final corrected VA was 20/20 in both eyes; no ophthalmologic residual disorders were observed.