A 56-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital due to multiple bilateral pulmonary nodules on chest computed tomography (CT) during a routine medical examination.The patient underwent bilateral partial thyroidectomy for hyperthyroidism more than 20 years prior, and the patient’s thyroid function was normal after the operation. The patient had no previous history of alcoholism, smoking, tuberculosis, gynaecological or obstetric diseases, or malignant tumours, and no significant family history was found. The patient had no symptoms, such as cough, dyspnoea, fever, or weight loss. No obvious abnormalities were found on the patient’s physical examination. The patient’s thyroid function tests were normal, and her serum thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) level was 1.96 μIU/mL (normal range, 0.27–4.20 μIU/mL), free triiodothyronine (FT3) level was 2.69 pg/mL (normal range, 2.00–4.40 pg/mL) and free thyroxine (FT4) level was 1.24 ng/dL (normal range, 0.93–1.70 ng/dL). Chest computed tomography (CT) showed the presence of multiple solid nodules in both lungs; the nodules were round, well-defined and various-sized, and the largest nodule (measured as 15*14 mm) was located in segment 5 of the upper left lung . Considering the patient’s radiological findings, we considered the diagnosis of pulmonary metastases despite a lack of evidence for malignancy. To further clarify the possibility of multiple lung metastases caused by occult malignant tumours, PET-CT was performed. The PET-CT results showed that the patient had multiple bilateral intrapulmonary nodules in her lung lobes, the nodules had slightly increased metabolism (SUVmax 1.7), and a larger nodule was found in the patient’s left lung . No metabolic abnormalities were found elsewhere in her body. Finally, a single-port thoracoscopic wedge resection was performed. Intraoperatively, we found that the largest pulmonary nodule was located in segment 5 (S5) of the left lung, and the nodule was dark red and soft and protruded from the visceral pleura . The pulmonary nodules in segment 5 (S5) and segment 9 (S9) were resected . The pathology results showed thyroid follicular tissue and pulmonary alveolar tissue without malignant cells . Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining indicated that the tissue was positive for thyroglobulin (TG) and thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and that there was a strong reaction in the nucleus of the follicular cells . To exclude malignant neoplasms, IHC staining for Ki-67 was performed, and fewer than 1% of the cells were positive . I-131 scintigraphy suggested that functional thyroid tissue had developed in the patient’s neck and that the patient had multiple nodular radioactive distributions, which were concentrated in both of her lungs , proving that the multiple intrapulmonary nodules had iodine uptake. Due to the lack of evidence of malignant tumours and after communicating with the patient and her family, the patient was discharged 3 days after the operation; to date, the patient has been followed up regularly for 1 year.