A 56-year-old female was referred to our hospital from another orthopedic clinic with a soft-tissue mass on her right knee without cause. She had no particular medical history, family history, or trauma history. She noticed the mass 8 months earlier. The mass gradually grew in size and deep flexion became uncomfortable. She felt no pain and had no limitation of activities. She felt that something like a mass went in and out as the knee moved in her right knee.
On examination, the right knee was found to be swollen, especially at lateral recess. The mass was soft, non-tender, no localized temperature increase, and no joint effusion. Moreover, it was highly mobile and had no adhesions to its surroundings. The range of knee motion was 0–140, although it hurt a little at maximum flexion. There was no evidence of muscular atrophy or instability of the knee joint.
The results of blood tests were essentially normal. X-ray findings of the right knee joint showed no abnormalities. No osteoarthritic change or bone erosion was present. A soft-tissue shadow was not seen .
MRI showed an oval-shaped mass of low to high heterogeneous signal intensity on T1- and T2-weighted images at the lateral joint space. Low signal intensity was observed in the fat suppression image . Therefore, a tumor derived from adipose tissue with fibrous component is suspected.
The mass was 5 cm × 4 cm × 2 cm in size. No contrast agent used.
As a differential diagnosis of adipose-derived soft-tissue tumor, true lipoma, lipoma arborescens, and liposarcoma can be considered. The patient subsequently underwent an operative arthroscopy.
First, the inside of the knee joint was carefully checked with an arthroscope. Mild degeneration of the lateral meniscus was observed. No other abnormalities such as synovial proliferation and cartilage lesion were seen. A large mass was found in the lateral recess.
It was soft, mobile and had no adhesion to its surroundings. It was too large to be removed endoscopically.
An arthrotomy was made by a lateral parapatellar incision of about 4 cm. An ovoid soft-tissue mass wrapped in a white capsule appeared. The mass was not adhesive to its surroundings and was mobile. The mass had a stalk that was connected to the anterolateral joint capsule near the lateral fat pad.
On excision of the stalk, the mass was easily removed . When the mass was cut and opened, the inside looked like adipose tissue.
Histologically, the synovium of the joint capsule shows angiogenesis and mild inflammatory cell infiltration. There was no contradiction as a true lipoma occurred in the knee joint, and no particular malignant findings are observed .
Eight months after the operation, there is no recurrence and no particular abnormality. She is doing well with no symptoms and no range of motion restrictions.