Our patient is a 52-year-old African-American man with no prior abdominal surgeries and a past medical history of MM and venous thromboembolism who presented with a 6-day history of nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. He had not passed flatus for 24 hours prior to presentation. He did not have fever, chills, or malaise. He was seen by his oncologist and an abdominal X-ray was done; the abdominal X-ray was concerning for SBO for which reason he was subsequently admitted and general surgery consulted.
He had been diagnosed as having MM 4 months prior, after sustaining a pathologic left humerus fracture and was on chemotherapy as well as radiation therapy to the affected humerus. He had completed his second cycle of chemotherapy 10 days prior to presenting with signs of SBO. His chemotherapy regimen included bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone.
His MM was diagnosed with a bone marrow biopsy that showed 25% clonal plasma cells and Kappa light chain restricted. Serum K/L was 222 and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) myeloma cytogenetic analysis detected a 17p13 deletion in 30% of cells and a t(14:16) re-arrangement was detected in 5.7% of cells. These cytogenetic changes are both identified as high-risk features in the Mayo Stratification of Myeloma and Risk-Adapted Therapy (mSMART) molecular risk classification system. He had stage II disease by the International Staging System (ISS) of MM, with serum beta-2 microglobulin of 4.7 mg/L and serum albumin of 4.5 g/dl.
His other medical conditions include hypertension, obesity, sleep apnea, vitamin D deficiency, and pulmonary embolism diagnosed 1 month after his diagnosis of MM, for which he was on therapeutic enoxaparin. He had no prior abdominal operation. His family history is significant for breast cancer in his sister.
His vital signs were normal and an abdominal examination revealed tenderness in the right lower quadrant with mild guarding. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen showed a 5.4 cm soft tissue mass involving a loop of distal ileum causing dilation of proximal ileum . There was also a fluid collection with layering contrast and air in the right peritoneum consistent with a bowel perforation.
He was taken to the operating room for exploration and underwent a laparoscopic small bowel resection with primary anastomosis. A small intussusception was noted intraoperatively. He had an uneventful postoperative course and was discharged on postoperative day 6. A small-bowel mass at the intussusception was confirmed as plasmacytomas on pathology.
He was seen in the surgical clinic 2 weeks postoperatively, doing well. His midline surgical scar was healing well, without any signs of infection. He continued to follow up with his oncologist and his chemotherapy regimen was switched to daratumumab, pomalidomide, and dexamethasone because of his progressive disease (intestinal EMP) despite his initial chemotherapy regimen. He was referred to a tertiary facility because of the aggressive nature of his disease. He developed multiple new skin masses and, subsequently, weakness and sensory changes in bilateral lower extremity with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his spine demonstrating spinal cord compression from T4–T6 level secondary to epidural extension of MM. Despite further aggressive chemotherapy regimen at tertiary facility, including bortezomib, dexamethasone, thalidomide, cisplatin, adriamycin, and cyclophosphamide, he developed worsening and widespread disease with metabolically active masses on positron emission tomography/CT involving right orbit, lungs, liver, spleen, bilateral adrenal glands, and multiple lymph nodes including mediastinal nodes. His clinical and functional status progressively declined, and he died 11 months following his initial diagnosis of MM.