In Sep 2007, a 35-year-old male presented with a progressive nasal obstruction associated with left aural fullness, hearing loss and hyponasal speech for the past five months. Later, the patient saw a mass pushing the soft palate downwards and began having difficulty in swallowing solid food. On examination, there was a mass behind and above the soft palate, which appeared to be arising from nasopharynx. Neck examination was found normal. Past history included a pyelolithotomy and gastrojujenostomy for duodenal ulcer.
A fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) of the mass was done intra-orally and microscopic examination revealed a poor smear with scanty cells. The pathologist suggested the possibility of a squamous cell carcinoma and advised a direct biopsy for definitive diagnosis. On 19th Sep 2007, computed tomographic (CT) scan of the neck revealed a large mass of heterogeneous density involving the fossa of Rosenmuller, and extending to the valleculla through parapharyngeal space. The mass had heterogeneous contrast enhancement with central necrosis . Based on these features, radiologist suggested a malignant tumor of the nasopharynx.
A radiation oncologist evaluated the patient and investigations, and began radical chemo-radiation. However, the tumor did not regress despite receiving 20 Gray of radiation, and this led to a suspicion of a benign growth. On 25th March 2008, a fresh CT scan was done and it showed nasopharyngeal tumor with same features as pre radiotherapy but increased considerably as compared to earlier CT scan. Since there was no histopathological evidence of the carcinoma, the intra-oral incisional biopsy was done and was found to be suggestive of a pleomorphic adenoma. A surgical intervention was planned, and tumor was excised by transpalatal approach under general anesthesia. Histological examination of the excised tumor confirmed a pleomorphic adenoma with no evidence of malignancy . The patient recovered well without any complication and had no recurrence in follow up of 1 year.