The patient was a 68-year-old man with hypertension. He was not receiving anticoagulants and had no history of smoking. Chest X-ray in a regular check-up revealed an abnormal chest shadow and he was referred to our department. A 30-mm ground glass nodule in the left upper lobe (S1 + 2) was identified on chest computed tomography (CT) and lung adenocarcinoma was suspected . Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET), brain magnetic resonance imaging and transbronchial biopsy were performed, revealing left upper lung adenocarcinoma classified as cT1bN0M0 Stage IA according to Union for International Cancer Control classification (seventh edition). Preoperative laboratory data revealed no significant abnormalities of blood coagulation and thrombocytopenia. Chronic deep vein thrombosis limited to the right calf was identified on ultrasonographic screening of the veins of the lower extremities and was followed up.
The lesion was not a solid nodule and showed no uptake on FDG-PET. We therefore performed left upper division segmentectomy. Intraoperatively, adhesions and incomplete lobulation were not identified. Lymphadenectomy (ND2a-2) was performed. Inferior pulmonary ligament was not sectioned. Air leakage was observed on postoperative day (POD)2 and continuous low-pressure negative suction (−5 cmH2O) was initiated. On POD4, we changed the drainage suction water seal. Follow-up ultrasonography of the lower extremity revealed new calf-limited deep vein thrombosis on POD7 and the novel oral anticoagulant edoxaban was started. The thoracic drain was clamped on POD10 and removed on POD12. Fever of 38°C appeared the same day, but no other symptoms were identified. A cavity appeared in the left lower lung field on chest X-ray . Chest CT revealed a dead space including air and fluid above the left diaphragm and edoxaban was stopped . CT-guided pleurocentesis was performed on POD13, but the space collapsed and proved impossible to drain. As fever persisted, thoracoscopic surgery was performed. No adhesions were seen on the left lower lobe, but slight pleural effusion and visceral subpleural hematoma of the basal lung were identified. The basal pleura was excised with an electrosurgical knife and the hematoma was removed. The air leak point was sutured, then a polyglycolic acid sheet was fixed to the lung parenchyma and sprayed with fibrin glue. The pleura and parenchyma were then sutured with running sutures .
On POD2 after the second operation, the drainage tube was removed. The patient was discharged on POD8. Cultures of fluid and pleural effusion yielded negative results. Edoxaban was restarted on POD12, but no recurrence of hematoma has been found over one year of follow-up in the outpatient clinic .