In September 2000, a 35-year-old female without any history or clinical stigmata of NF-1 presented to her primary physician with complaints of a dull, localized left upper leg pain of several months' duration. An abdominal mass was palpated during a physical examination. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as well as a computed tomographic (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed a large well-defined, near spherical mass in the left false pelvis which enhanced heterogeneously at a mean Hounsfield value of 44 units . The mass displaced the external iliac vein medially and psoas muscle laterally. It also abutted the upper surface of the left ovary without truly invading any of these or other surrounding structures. However, the mass was believed to be in the course of the left genitofemoral nerve and lumbar plexus. The decision was made to resect the mass. Intraoperatively, the tumor's capsule was found to be densely adhered medially to the external iliac vessels, with at least 10 external venous branches directly supplying the tumor. The tumor was carefully marsupialized out of the retroperitoneal area and the decision was made to leave the residual capsule, since an attempt at its removal would have entailed a highly morbid procedure that was not felt to be justified based on the histopathologic appearance of the tumor on frozen sections. Intraoperatively, a pigmented macular lesion with faintly irregular edges was noted in the left upper thigh, which was biopsied. Pathologic examination showed a malignant melanoma with spitzoid features. The precise circumstances regarding the duration of the lesion and whether there had been any increase in its size was unclear. She subsequently underwent a wide local excision (4 × 12 cm skin ellipse was removed) and sentinel lymph node biopsy, both of which showed no residual melanoma. The patient's postoperative course over the subsequent 2 years was remarkable for a relatively slow but progressive improvements in the neurologic symptoms related to her surgery. However, she showed no evidence of either tumor recurrence at last follow-up, 26 months postoperatively.