A 35-year-old female was admitted to our institution because she had been suffering from progressive headaches for about 10 years – referred as debilitating in the past 6 months – which worsen with emotions like rage or concern, associated with blurred vision and tinnitus. Mini-mental state examination (MMSE) gave a score of 23.
Her clinical history was positive for acute lymphoblastic leukemia, diagnosed in 1990 and treated with AIEOP 8703 protocol (cobalt radiotherapy [RT] in pediatric age and intrathecal chemotherapy with IV vincristine, IV daunorubicin, prednisone, methotrexate intrathecal, and IM L-asparaginase). In 1995, she was declared in complete remission. A right oophorectomy at the age of 9, caused by ovarian torsion, was also reported. In 2000, she underwent brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that did not find pathological alterations. In 2011, she underwent in vitro fertilization, which unfortunately failed.
The patient underwent in-depth investigation that documented cerebral meningiomatosis, characterized by 5 meningiomas, <3 cm each, located at the right cerebral middle fossa, at the border of the right tentorium, at the torcula, at the middle third of the superior sagittal sinus (SSS), and at the left Sylvian fissure; a T2-weighted brain MRI sequence documented a typical bilateral enlargement of optic nerve sheath, related to intracranial hypertension; of notice, ventricles were not enlarged, but they presented slit-like aspect . Considering that the tentorial meningioma was compressing the Sylvian aqueduct, an MRI with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flowmetry was performed revealing an irregular pattern at the level of Sylvian aqueduct ; cerebral MR venography showed normal venous flow at the level of the SSS, due to the fact that the meningiomas were of little size and in T1-weighted gadolinium-enhanced images, there was no invasion of the SSS. Initially, the patient underwent medical therapy based on acetazolamide, without clinical benefit. Then, the patient underwent a 72 h spinal CSF drainage connected to LiquoGuard® system that showed elevated intracranial pressure (ICP) values, ranging between 13 and 21 mmHg/24 h with a mean value of 17 mmHg. Subsequently, she reported a transitory relief of symptoms with a corresponding decrease in ICP equal to a mean value of 13 mmHg. The patient was then addressed to the ophthalmologist, who documented a bilateral papillary stasis. At the beginning, a diagnosis of pseudotumor cerebri was made but it was object of controversies during multidisciplinary oncologic discussions. We repeated brain MRI scan, fundus oculi examination, and we performed PET scan with gallium to confirm the meningiomatosis hypothesis, with the plan to perform Gamma Knife treatment to control at least some of the meningiomas.
In our opinion, the patient was not affected by pseudotumor cerebri due to the normal global brain anatomy with good representation of the cisterns and sulci and the very high ICP values. Our hypothesis was that the absence of hydrocephalus was related to previous RT and intrathecal chemotherapy in pediatric age and that the tentorial meningioma causes compression of the Sylvian aqueduct; we elaborated two options for a multimodal treatment strategy: (a) surgical resection of the tentorial meningioma and Gamma Knife treatment to control the other lesions, with ventriculoperitoneal shunt (VPS) to be considered in a second surgical time after clinical postoperative evaluation and (b) VPS to resolve intracranial hypertension and radiosurgery to control mainly the tentorial meningioma and avoid further growth with associated compression of the brainstem. In agreement with the patient, we decided to perform the latter option. First, she underwent Gamma Knife treatment of the tentorial meningioma because the presence of the ventricular catheter could cause artifacts and negatively affect the accuracy of radiosurgery planning. The following day, with the guidance of the neuronavigation, we introduced the ventricular catheter at the right Kocher’s point and connected the distal catheter with a single route, without the typical skin interruption at the cervical level, to the peritoneum in the epigastric-suprahepatic site. A programmable valve with virtual off option was implanted and set at the 5th setting (145 mmH2O).
The postoperative period was uneventful, a postoperative brain computed tomography scan showed correct catheter positioning and stability of the ventricular diameters. The patient had a fast recovery with resolution of headache, visual disturbance, and tinnitus. A postoperative fundus oculi and optical coherence tomography scan documented an improvement of papillary stasis and a significant improvement in the thickness of the optic nerve fibers.
After a 6-month follow-up, she is doing well, without clinical disturbance. MMSE gave a score of 25. She will continue to be followed for the other meningiomas and the VPS function with brain MRI every year and further Gamma Knife treatment of the lesions.