A 19 year old boy presented with bilateral slow growing and painful swellings of his achilles tendons of 4 year duration. On clinical examination each swelling was of size 5×2 cm, firm, nodular, tender and localized to the distal portion of the tendoachilles just above its insertion point to the calcaneal tuberosity . He was more symptomatic on the right side. He was initially advised rest, analgesics and foot wear modification. However, the symptoms did not subside and the situation worsened resulting in significant disability with limitation of his walking distance.
Initial radiographs of both ankles showed homogenous soft tissue shadow in the lower halves of tendoachilles . Magnetic resonance imaging showed localized homogenous hyper intense signals with fusiform swellings of tendoachilles . Surgical excision was offered and the right sided one was selected first as it was more symptomatic. The swollen tendinous portion measuring 6×3 cm was excised followed by reconstruction using the ipsilateral peroneus brevis tendon. Immediate and early post-operative period was uneventful. Biopsy of the excised specimen revealed it to be a xanthoma characterized by the accumulation of mononuclear cells with foamy cytoplasm and multinucleated giant cells with high concentration of cholestanol. Thus a diagnosis of cerebro-tendinous xanthomatosis was made.
On detailed retrospective inquiry, he had surgery for bilateral juvenile cataracts at the age of 8, along with history of chronic intractable diarrhea. He was coherent and co-operative but slow cerebrated with low intelligence. There were no central nervous system symptoms like convulsions, abnormal gait or incoordination of movements. Family history revealed that he was a child of a consanguineous marriage. Other sibling, a girl was normal. He was short statured measuring 144 cm in height , thin built with a peculiar yellow conjunctiva. Hematological and biochemical investigations including liver function tests, lipid profile, thyroid function tests and ultrasound examination of abdomen were normal.
A special test - serum cholestanol level was elevated to 4.37 mg/dL (normal value: 0.02-0.12 mg/dL). Based on the clinical picture, pathological and serological analysis, the diagnosis of cerebro-tendinous xanthomatosis was confirmed and was kept on medical therapy with chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), a synthetic bile acid.
RESULT: He was kept under regular follow up with neurologic and neuropsychological evaluation, musculoskeletal examination and serum cholestanol estimation. He started to improve after 3 months of continued medication. According to the latest follow up of 23 months, he achieved complete improvement in his mental status and normal values of serum cholestanol. The pain on the left (non-operated) tendoachilles disappeared completely although swelling persisted. His walking distance improved. However, had reappearance of the swelling in the reconstructed tendon on the right side, although was not painful