A 52-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital’s emergency department with a fever for 13 d and no cough, abdominal pain, nausea, or diarrhea.
The patient did not have chronic diseases, such as hypertension, diabetes, or cardiovascular disease.
The patient underwent hysterectomy 2 decades ago.
The patient had no remarkable personal and family history. She does not take drugs in daily life.
The patient’s vital signs were as follows: Blood pressure, 133/74 mmHg; pulse, 78 beats per minute and regular; blood glucose, 6.0 mmol/L; and temperature, 39.2 °C. On physical examination, her abdomen was soft, with no tenderness, rebound pain, or percussion pain in the liver or kidney areas.
Routine blood test results showed the following: White blood cell (WBC) count, 12.24 × 109/L; percentage of neutrophilic granulocytes, 85.6%; hemoglobin concentration, 93 g/L; platelets, 358000/mL; and C-reactive protein, 138 U/mL. The blood chemistry examination, glycosylated hemoglobin, coagulation profile, and extractable nuclear antigens were within normal limits. Urinalysis showed urinary protein 1+, urinary WBC 3+, and nitrite negativity, and bacteria were not found in the urine or blood.
First, we considered the possibility of an infectious disease, but the site of infection was unclear. The patient underwent blood tests, X-ray of the chest, abdominal ultrasound, and urine tests to investigate the infection site. Chest X-ray revealed normal findings.
Around the left kidney, abdominal ultrasound showed a visible, liquid, dark area. To distinguish whether there was a perirenal abscess, hematoma, or tumor, the patient underwent a contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan, which showed atrophy of the left kidney. The left renal capsule had a crescent-shaped, low-density shadow, and the CT value of the contrast-enhanced scan without enhancement was 53 HU, with no enhancement observed on the contrast-enhanced scan (contrast agent, iodohydril; CT value, 100 HU) . The perirenal fat was blurred, and exudation was visible with no sign of calculi, malignancies, instrumentation, or trauma . Inflammation was considered to be secondary to rupture of the left kidney and extravasation of urine.
Under ultrasound guidance, a pigtail catheter was inserted into the hematoma, and 150 mL in total of fluid was drained and used for the bacterial test. The appearance was hemorrhagic, thick, and brown, indicating a Gram-negative bacterial infection, which was then proved to be caused by Klebsiella pneumoniae 3 d later. We considered the source of inflammation to be the hematoma, which had existed for a long time and led to chronic infection according to the normal urine and blood culture results.