A 67-year-old female visited our hospital due to a right renal tumor. Her past medical history is hypertension, dyslipidemia, diabetes, and rectal cancer. Her medication was amlodipine, telmisartan, atorvastatin, glimepiride, and sitagliptin. The CT scan showed a right renal tumor and an enlarged paracaval lymph node. We diagnosed RCC (T1aN1M0) and performed open nephrectomy and lymph node dissection. The pathological diagnosis was clear cell RCC with a sarcomatoid carcinoma component.
A subsequent CT scan 66 days after the operation showed a paracaval lymph node recurrence. We administered sunitinib immediately and then started treatment at a dose of 50 mg/day (4 weeks out of 6) and then 25 mg/day (4 weeks out of 6) for hand-foot syndrome. After 301 days of treatment, the patient visited our hospital reporting nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Her general condition was good, and her vital signs were normal. There was no peritoneal irritation in the physical findings. Laboratory findings indicated no problems. A CT scan showed a diffuse air-filled cystic formation in the intestine but no pneumoperitoneum . We diagnosed PCI linked to sunitinib and admitted her to receive conservative management; we administered an intravenous drip extracellular fluid, and also stopped the sunitinib treatment. After hospitalization, her symptoms showed signs of improvement and 7 days later, a follow-up CT showed lost of intestinal wall gas, so she was discharged .
Forty-two days after PCI treatment, we planned a surgical resection of the recurrent paracaval lymph node. After successful resection of the node, we examined the intestinal tracts and there was no perforation. However, a portion of the intestinal tract exhibited a thin serosa through which we could see the contents of the intestinal tract . We assumed that it was caused by PCI, and we sutured it for reinforcement. The postoperative course was good and the patient was discharged postoperative day 7. After surgery, paracaval lymph nodes appeared again and treatment with nivolumab was started.