The patient was a 40-year-old female. She presented with acute visual loss in both eyes. She noted that her vision was progressively worsening. She had a history of heavy drinking and smoking, and had alcoholic hepatitis and depressive psychosis. She was in early menopause because she underwent a total hysterectomy combined with bilateral ovary removal for uterine cancer 10 years ago. She had an uncle with low vision. At the first neuro-ophthalmic consultation in our clinic, her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.3 in the right eye and 0.2 in the left eye. Relative afferent pupillary defect was negative and light reflex was appropriate. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy revealed normal findings in the anterior segments. Intraocular pressure was 18 mmHg in the right eye and 15 mmHg in the left eye. Funduscopic examination and fluorescein angiography were unremarkable. Goldmann perimetry revealed bilateral central scotomas . Optic nerve swelling was not detected on magnetic resonance imaging. Visual evoked potentials were non-recordable in both eyes. Thinning of the retinal inner layer was detected on SD-OCT . Blood tests revealed impaired liver function (GOT: 46 IU, GPT: 37 IU, γ-GTP: 423). Folic acid and vitamin B12 levels were normal. One month later, her BCVA deteriorated to counting fingers in both eyes, and the thinning area of retinal inner layer spread rapidly. The patient was diagnosed with LHON because of a positive result for the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 11778 mutation. Six months later, the optic disc was observed to be getting paler from the temporal area in both eyes. The visual field continued to deteriorate over a year despite no smoking, reduced alcohol intake, and treatment with vitamin B12, vitamin C and ATP disodium salt hydrate.
We monitored retinal thickness for 24 months by using SD-OCT. We examined the GCC thickness from the onset to 24 months and cpRNFL thickness from 3 months to 24 months after the onset. GCC thickness values were automatically calculated and compared to normative database by the software equipped with SD-OCT (RS-3000 Advance®; Nidek, Gamagori, Japan). The mean GCC thickness was calculated from 8 sectors segmented around the macula (6 mm × 6 mm), which excluded the fovea sector (1 mm × 1 mm). The disc circle scan pattern captures an image of circle with 3.45-mm diameter around the disc and allows cpRNFL thickness analysis compared to the normative database. We studied nasal quadrant (316 – 45-degree unit circle), superior quadrant (46 – 135 degrees), temporal quadrant (136 – 225 degrees), and inferior quadrant (226 – 315 degrees) thicknesses, all of which were automatically calculated by OCT using the built-in software.
Figure a-e shows the long-term, sequential changes in GCC thickness in the right eye at initial visit, 3, 6, 12 and 24 months. Thickness map showed that thinning area spread over the whole macular area. The red color zone depicted an extremely thinning area, which represented an abnormal to normal database percentage of < 1%. The green area depicted a relatively normal area evaluated between 5 to 95% in a population of normal eyes. The red zone on the color-coded normative database map of the GCC continued to expand until 12 months when the most of the macular area turned red. Figure f shows the time course of GCC thickness changes in both eyes. The GCC thickness plunged sharply within 3 months followed by gradual decline until 6 months, thereafter showing a plateau up to 24 months.
Figure a-d shows the combined images of RNFL thickness maps (top) and temporal-superior-nasal-inferior-temporal (TSNIT) graphs (bottom) at 3, 6, 12 and 24 months. Figure e shows the long-term, sequential changes in RNFL thickness of both eyes for each quadrant (temporal, superior, nasal and inferior). The changes in RNFL thickness were equivalent for both eyes in all quadrants throughout the two-year follow-up period. The temporal quadrant exhibited the earliest thinning at 3 months as seen in the macular GCC thickness changes. In the superior, nasal, and inferior quadrants, thickness changes were more evident on the later stage maps even after 12 months. The cpRNFL thickness also revealed that the latent thickening of RNFL continued earlier in these quadrants except the temporal one before we noticed disc atrophy by funduscopic examination at 6 months .