An abnormal shadow was detected in a 42-year-old Japanese woman by medical checkup X-ray and she was admitted to our hospital. She had no symptoms and had no medical, social, environmental, obstetrical, family and employment history. She had never smoked tobacco and she occasionally drank alcohol. Her blood pressure was 112/60 mmHg, pulse was 72 beats per minute, and body temperature was 36.4 degrees Celsius. She had no significant abnormal findings on physical and neurological examination. Blood cell count, liver and renal functions, and urine analysis were within normal limits. Any bacteria or fungi were not cultured by microbiological analysis of sputum. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed multicystic change in the lower lobe of her right lung and an aberrant artery arising from the descending aorta . Because the nonfunctional lung region was covered by normal visceral pleura, she was diagnosed as having Pryce III intralobar sequestration. One and a half months after the first visit, we planned video-assisted thoracoscopic wedge resection of the right sequestration using NIR fluorescence imaging with ICG because of the small volume of the nonfunctional region. The institutional review boards of our hospital approved the protocol (the approval number, M416), and written informed consent was obtained from this patient.
A 3-cm incision was made in the fourth intercostal space, and two additional ports were made in the seventh and ninth intercostal spaces. The aberrant artery was recognized in the pulmonary ligament and cut off using an automatic suture device after ligation. ICG (Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) at 5 mg/body was rapidly injected into the peripheral vein, and her lung was observed using NIR fluorescence thoracoscopy (IMAGE1 S™; KARL STORZ, Endoscope, Tokyo, Japan). Under the NIR light, the boundary of the sequestration was separated into two areas and then marked on the visceral pleura with electrocautery . The sequestration lung was stapled based on the boundary line. The operation time was 1 hour and 26 minutes with 5 ml of intraoperative bleeding. Cefazolin sodium at 2 g/day was administered into the peripheral vein for 2 days after surgery, and laboratory findings were within normal limits. Any bacteria or fungi were not cultured by microbiological analysis of lung tissue. No adverse events or complications were seen, and our patient was discharged on postoperative da y 5. This patient has shown no complications in the 1 year since surgery.