Sudden deterioration of consciousness developed at the 4th hour after surgical clipping of an UIA.
A 59-year-old man who had undergone uneventful coiling for a ruptured anterior communicating artery aneurysm one month ago was readmitted to our hospital for surgical clipping of the left middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysm unfavorable for coiling. He recovered uneventfully from the subarachnoid hemorrhage one month ago and had no neurological abnormalities. All other preoperative evaluations, including hematological tests, were unremarkable. Digital subtraction angiography revealed a 5.4 mm-sized aneurysm at the left MCA bifurcation without any other remarkable findings . Left frontotemporal craniotomy for clipping of the UIA was successfully performed under general anesthesia. General anesthesia and operating times were 4 h 25 min and 3 h 7 min, respectively. No intraoperative aneurysm rupture or venous injury occurred. In the course of three temporary M1 occlusions each lasting 8 min, 6 min, and 5 min, we applied various permanent clips to achieve complete obliteration of the UIA. Immediately after surgery, the patient’s condition and the computed tomography (CT) findings were stable. However, sudden deterioration in the level of consciousness and aphasia developed 4 h later.
He had no specific medical history other than high blood pressure, which was well controlled by amlodipine (5 mg/d).
The patient admitted to smoking ten cigarettes daily for > 20 years. The remaining personal and family histories did not contribute.
The patient’s vital signs were: Blood pressure, 129/84 mmHg; heart rate, 67 beats per min; body temperature, 37.0°C; and respiratory rate, 21 breaths per min. Neurological examination demonstrated stuporous mentality (Glasgow Coma Scale score of 10) and profound global aphasia. The function of cranial nerves was intact. He had normal tone in all limbs and normal power in the left limbs, but slightly reduced power in (4/5) in the right limbs. Sensory examination was normal. The tendon reflexes of the extremities were normal.
There were no abnormalities in routine blood tests, blood biochemistry, blood coagulation, and routine urine tests.
After confirming absence of an abnormal finding on non-contrast brain CT performed immediately, MRI was carried out in succession. It showed widespread high signal intensities especially in the cortex and subcortical region of the ipsilateral fronto-parieto-occipital lobes in fluid attenuation inversion recovery images . The lesions were iso or high signal intensity in diffusion-weighted images and high signal intensity in apparent diffusion coefficient maps without any signs of diffusion restriction, consistent with vasogenic edema. In contrast-enhanced three-dimensional T1-weighted images, lesions showed patchy enhancement . Susceptibility-weighted images did not demonstrate hemorrhage. Since major arteries were still clearly depicted on magnetic resonance angiography besides clip artifacts, vascular problems including reversible cerebral vasoconstriction syndrome could be excluded from the diagnosis. The CT perfusion study was negative.