On 20 April 2022, a 64-year-old woman was referred to the West China Hospital after an abdominal mass was found on ultrasound examination for mild right upper abdominal discomfort. The patient reported no significant symptoms or past medical history, while physical examination indicated a large mass measuring 20 × 15 cm was palpated at the right upper quadrant. On admission, her blood pressure was 127/89 mmHg, and her heart rate was 78 beats per minute. Initial laboratory investigations concerning biochemistry and hematology examinations were within normal limits.
Abdominal enhanced CT revealed obvious compression atrophy of the liver and a 20 cm × 13 cm mixture of cystic and solid lesions between the right lobe of the retroperitoneal liver and the right kidney . Plasma metanephrine and catecholamine measurements were performed, and evidence of pheochromocytoma was increased upon observation of elevated metanephrines and their metabolites in serum . The patient did not have underlying diseases such as hypertension or diabetes. Before the metabolic testing, she did not take blood pressure medications, acetaminophen, beta- and alpha-adreno receptor blocking drugs, psychotropic medications, or any drugs that might interfere with her metabolism.
Based on endocrine consultation, an alpha receptor blocker (phenoxybenzamine) was used for 2 weeks preoperatively. Three days after that, we encouraged the patient to start a salt-rich diet. In addition, an adequate fluid replacement was performed preoperatively. Blood pressure and heart rate of 139/79 mmHg and 77 beats per minute were recorded prior to surgery. The resection of the giant right adrenal pheochromocytoma was completed through a right subcostal incision under general anesthesia . During the operation, the omentum majus widely adhered to the small intestine, abdominal wall, and liver. The right lobe of the liver was squeezed and atrophied by the retroperitoneal tumor, which was located behind the inferior vena cava. Blood pressure fluctuated intraoperatively, between 83 and 157 mmHg for the systolic pressure and between 55 and 92 mmHg for the diastolic pressure. Heart rate was measured between 57 and 87 beats per minute. After surgery, her blood pressure was stable at 112/75 mmHg, and her heart rate was 74 beats per minute. Subsequently, the patient was admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU) for 2 days and then transferred to the ward. Symptomatic supportive treatment was given while the patient was in ICU, including hemodynamic monitoring, oxygen inhalation, analgesia, infection prevention, fluid replacement, and liver function protection. On postoperative day 4, oral feeding was resumed, and the patient was discharged on the eighth day after surgery with no complications. We suggested genetic testing and developed a collaborative, multidisciplinary long-term follow-up plan. With the first outpatient visit 1 month after surgery, an annual follow-up with clinical and biochemical assessment was recommended. The individualized follow-up plan could be flexibly adjusted based on the gene detection and monitoring results.
Pathological examination of the surgical specimen indicated a necrotic change measuring 20 × 15 × 10 cm and weighing 2,240 g located in the retroperitoneum and right adrenal gland . Hematoxylin–eosin (H&E) staining showed a well-circumscribed tumor surrounded by a fibrous capsule . Immunohistochemistry showed marked pleomorphism within a few tumor cells, CD56(+), CgA (+), Syn(+), CK (Pan)(−), MART-1(−), inhibitA(−), S-100(+), INI1(+), Desmin(−), and Myogenin(−) . According to the immunohistochemical results, the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma was made. Based on the staging system introduced in the 8th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system, the tumor was determined as T2M0N0.