An 87-year-old female was referred to our cancer center for management of locally advanced and metastatic papillary thyroid carcinoma. She reported a six-month history of increasing stridor, shortness of breath, and hemoptysis, which prompted investigation with a biopsy of her left thyroid and computed tomography (CT) of the neck and chest. Imaging showed a 4.2 cm left thyroid mass indenting and displacing the cervical trachea, an enlarged left supraclavicular node, a 4.0 cm right adrenal mass, and bilateral pulmonary nodules suspicious for metastases . She was staged as cT4N1aM1, corresponding to stage IVB.
Flexible nasopharyngoscopy visualized a sluggish left vocal cord. Thoracic surgery assessment with flexible bronchoscopy visualized extensive tumor invasion of the left anterior tracheal wall involving the cricoid cartilage, decreasing the tracheal diameter by approximately 50% . It was presumed that without treatment, airway closure and death would follow within 2 months. Given the location of the tumor, surgical management would require total laryngectomy in addition to total thyroidectomy and central neck dissection.
The patient declined surgery due to her desire for voice preservation. She was not a candidate for RAI given her intact thyroid gland and nondebulked primary tumor. There was tepid enthusiasm for EBRT given the size of the treatment field. Lenvatinib was thus offered, with an understanding that it was being used under exceptional circumstances for a non-approved indication, and the patient gave informed consent to proceed with therapy (provided by Eisai Limited, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada). In view of her age and health status, the starting dose was lenvatinib 14 mg p.o. daily with a plan to dose-titrate based on tolerance.
Initially the patient was monitored weekly, and lenvatinib was well-tolerated with gradual disappearance of stridor and dyspnea. After 1 month, treatment was interrupted for 2 weeks due to diverticulitis, then restarted at the same 14 mg dose. CT scan after 3 months of treatment demonstrated decrease in size of the left thyroid mass (2.9 cm), pulmonary nodules, and right adrenal mass (3.9 cm), compared to 2 months prior to treatment initiation . Thyroglobulin rose from 54.6 μg/L to 408.9 ug/L and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) from 1.09 mIU/L to 6.72 mIU/L, and oral levothyroxine replacement 100 μg daily was initiated.
After 5 months of lenvatinib, local therapy was discussed in anticipation of eventual treatment resistance. The patient remained reluctant to pursue voice-sacrificing surgery, and there had been no changes in recommendation regarding RAI, as the remnant normal thyroid remained large. Thus, 1 week after stopping lenvatinib, she received EBRT 50 Gy in 20 fractions to the thyroid, bilateral neck, and superior mediastinal nodes. She experienced moderately severe fatigue and radiation pharyngitis, which resolved over several months. Following EBRT, thyroglobulin was 25.7 μg/L and TSH 0.01 mIU/L, and CT showed stability of the thyroid mass . In this context, lenvatinib was not restarted, and she has since been observed. At her last follow-up 2 years after initiating lenvatinib, she was very satisfied with her quality of life and had resumed her usual activities with only mild residual dysphagia from EBRT.