A 38-year-old woman presented to the ED after a few hours of sudden-onset severe abdominal pain, accompanied by bloating, nausea, vomiting, and diaphoresis. She reported having a bowel movement shortly before her symptoms started and had otherwise been in her normal state of health. Upon the first examination, she appeared cold, clammy, and pale, with a moderately distended abdomen that was diffusely tender to touch without peritoneal signs. Initial vitals showed a blood pressure of 90/65 millimeters mercury, respiratory rate 40 breaths per minute, heart rate 93 beats per minute, temperature 34.1º degree Celsius, and oxygen saturation 100% on room air. The patient recalled dealing with intermittent abdominal pain and bloating for the prior two decades without a clear answer despite multiple evaluations. She was previously diagnosed with abdominal migraines, irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), small intestinal bacterial overgrowth, and gluten sensitivity. Prior workup included upper and lower endoscopies, small bowel follow-through, and magnetic resonance enterography. Her most recent imaging demonstrated numerous, dilated segments of small bowel without prominent inflammation. The patient had been scheduled for a video capsule endoscopy a year prior but could not complete the procedure due to loss of insurance and employment during the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic.
Preliminary laboratory data was remarkable for white blood cell count of 11,000 per cubic milliliter (K/uL) (reference range: 4.2 – 9.1 K/uL); hemoglobin of 17.3 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (13.7 – 17.5 mg/dL); C-reactive protein of <3 mg per liter (mg/L) (0 – 8 mg/L); erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 3 millimeters per hour (mm/hr) (0 – 20 mm/hr); lactate of 8.7 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (0.5 – 2.2 mmol/L); arterial blood gas with pH 7.10 (7.35 – 7.45); and bicarbonate of 16 mmol/L (21 – 26 mmol/L). Given the severity of lactic acidosis and progressive hypotension, aggressive intravenous (IV) crystalloid fluid resuscitation was started, totaling 7 liters. Urgent computed tomography (CT) with IV contrast revealed incomplete small bowel malrotation, mesenteric volvulus at the level of small bowel transition, and a high-grade SBO with two transition points (loops dilated up to 9 centimeters [cm] in diameter) ( and ). In addition, there was engorgement of the superior mesenteric venous vasculature and associated mesenteric edema, suspicious for evolving bowel ischemia.
The patient was pan-cultured, decompressed with a nasogastric tube, and received empiric broad coverage for potential intra-abdominal infection with IV piperacillin-tazobactam. Norepinephrine and phenylephrine IV drips were started for pressor support in light of refractory hypotension. The colorectal surgery team was consulted, and the patient was taken for an emergent exploratory laparotomy. An estimated 75% of her small intestines was resected, followed by abdominal wall closure a few days later. Her postoperative course was uneventful. She was discharged home with close follow-up with colorectal surgery and gastroenterology. Biopsies taken during the resection displayed chronic active enteritis with strictures, transmural inflammation, non-necrotizing granulomas, and pyloric gland metaplasia, all of which are histologically compatible with active Crohn’s disease.