We present the case of a 65-year-old, para 11, Nigerian woman of the Igbo tribe with 10 living children. She was six years post-menopausal and had borne her last child 26 years before presentation to our hospital. She presented with a three-week history of post-menopausal bleeding. The vaginal bleeding was sudden in onset and profuse, with occasional passage of blood clots. She had no history of dizziness or fainting. She had associated intermittent lower abdominal pain that was dull, 4 of 10 in intensity, with no relieving or aggravating factors. She had no history of post-coital or contact bleeding, weight loss, anorexia, urinary symptoms, abdominal mass, vaginal discharge, or dyspareunia. She had no history of the use of hormonal contraceptives or ovulation-inducing drugs. She had no family history of a similar illness. She had attained menarche at the age of 15 years, and her coitarche occurred at age 16 years. She had not had any Papanicolaou smears in the past. She was not known to have diabetes or hypertension, and she neither smoked cigarettes nor drank alcohol.
An endometrial tissue biopsy was done in a private hospital. The histology revealed a well-differentiated endometrial adenocarcinoma. She was subsequently referred to our teaching hospital for further management. Upon presentation to our teaching hospital, her physical examination revealed an elderly woman in no distress who was afebrile (body temperature 37.1°C), not pale, and anicteric. She was not dehydrated. No peripheral lymphadenopathies and no pedal edema were present. Her pulse rate was 90 beats/minute, regular, and with a full volume. Her blood pressure was 170/90 mmHg. S1 and S2 heart sounds were heard, and there were no murmurs, rubs, or gallops. Her jugular venous pressure was not increased. Her respiratory rate was 22 cycles/minute, and her chest was clinically clear with vesicular breath sounds. The findings of the abdominal examination were normal.
The vaginal examination revealed an atrophic, blood-stained vulvovagina. A speculum examination showed an apparently healthy-looking cervix. The cervical os was found to be closed on digital examination. A bimanual examination revealed a bulky uterus that was about 16 weeks' gestational size. It was freely mobile and anteverted. There was no adnexal mass or tenderness, and there was no cervical excitation tenderness.
A clinical diagnosis of post-menopausal bleeding secondary to endometrial carcinoma and essential hypertension was made. She was admitted to the gynecology ward. Her packed red blood cell volume was 33%, and the total white blood cell count was 3.4 × 109/L. The human immunodeficiency virus screening results were negative. The urine analysis, renal function test, liver function test, electrocardiography, and the fasting lipid profile results were all normal. A chest radiograph revealed mild cardiomegaly. Abdominopelvic ultrasonography showed an enlarged uterus with an endometrial thickness of 15 mm. There were no obvious hepatic lesions, and there was no hydronephrosis.
In view of the patient's co-existing essential hypertension, the cardiology team was invited to co-manage the patient. She was prescribed tablet amlodipine (5 mg/day), hydrochlorothiazide (25 mg/day), and tablet aspirin (75 mg/day, including hematinics). She was also counseled regarding total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy that would be performed after her blood pressure had stabilized.
Three weeks after initiation of her anti-hypertension therapy, she underwent a total abdominal hysterectomy and a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy while under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation. The intra-operative findings included a bulky uterus that measured 8 cm × 5 cm with a blood-filled cavity, an enlarged, malignant-looking endometrium, and a massive hemoperitoneum from a ruptured soft but malignant-looking huge friable left ovarian mass that measured 5 cm × 5 cm in diameter. Her fallopian tubes and right ovary appeared to be healthy. The estimated blood loss was 750 mL. The patient received 2 U of blood and 1 g of intravenous ceftriaxone intra-operatively. The patient's immediate post-operative condition was satisfactory. All of the surgical specimens were immersed in containers containing appropriate volumes and concentrations of 10% formalin and sent to the histopathology department for histologic diagnoses. After surgery, the patient received intravenous fluid of 1 L of normal saline alternated with 1 L of 5% dextrose water on a 12-hourly schedule, as well as intravenous ceftriaxone (1 g/day) and metronidazole (500 mg every 8 hours for 48 hours). She also received a 30 mg pentazocine intra-muscular injection every six hours for 48 hours. Forty-eight hours after surgery she was placed on oral medications for the next 5 days. She also received hematinics 48 hours after surgery. The urethral catheter was removed 48 hours after surgery. She was continued on oral anti-hypertensive agents after surgery. The stitches were removed on the seventh day after surgery. She was discharged to home on the 10th post-operative day and was scheduled for a two-week follow-up appointment.
Macroscopically, the pathology report showed a left ovarian mass. This was a huge, soft to firm, nodular mass weighing 1500 g and measuring 8 cm in its largest dimension. A cut section showed predominantly solid, partly grayish white and partly yellow areas as well as cystic areas filled with blood clots. The uterus was bulky and weighed 700 g. It measured 13.5 cm in its largest dimension. A cut into the endometrial cavity showed several fingerlike friable masses filling the whole uterine cavity. No lesions were observed on the right ovary or the right and left fallopian tubes. Histologic sections of the left ovarian mass showed a granulosa cell tumor containing coffee bean cells growing in different characteristic patterns seen in the tumor. Figures and are photomicrographs of the ovarian mass. Histologic sections of the uterine mass showed a well-differentiated grade 1 endometrioid carcinoma minimally invading the adjacent myometrium. Figures and are photomicrographs of the uterine mass.
At the two-week follow-up visit after surgery, the patient no longer had vaginal bleeding. Her vital signs were normal, and her abdominal wound was well healed. She was last seen six weeks after surgery and had no new complaints. She was advised to continue her follow-up care with the gynecology and cardiology teams at our teaching hospital.