A 45-year-old male manual laborer presented to the casualty with complete paraplegia of 1 month duration and loss of bowel and bladder control for the past 7 days. The patient was apparently well 4 months ago when he developed weakness in both the lower limbs. The weakness was progressive in nature and over the past 2 months, it had limited the patient’s activities of daily living making him dependent on family members. He noticed a swelling in the right chest wall which was also progressively increasing for the past 4 months. He also had constitutional symptoms. The patient had been started empirically on antitubercular therapy (ATT) 1 month before presentation by a local practitioner based on X-ray and clinical impressions. Despite 1 month of ATT, the condition of the patient worsened and before higher radiological investigation including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) could have been done by primary treating doctor, the patient presented to our casualty with complete loss of movement of bilateral lower limb with loss of bowel and bladder control.
On examination, the patient was severely dehydrated and cachectic. His weight and weight were 173 cm and 45 kg, respectively. There was a 3 × 3 cm mass over the right chest wall which was, variegated, immobile, and not adherent to the overlying skin. The local temperature around the swelling was also increased. Neurological examination revealed spastic tone in both lower limbs; muscle power was 0/5 as per Medical Research Council grading in all muscle groups of both the lower limb. The patient had altered sensations below D5 dermatome and complete loss of sensations below L1 dermatome. Knee and ankle jerks were exaggerated and ankle clonus was present. There was loss of bowel and bladder control.
On hematological examination, the patient had anemia (Hemoglobin 7.9) with increased Erythrocyte Sedimentation rate (70/h) and C-reactive protein (80 mg/L). He also had hyponatremia (128 mEq/L) and hyperkalemia (6 mEq/L) with some Electrocardiography changes. Serum urea and creatinine levels were also increased (75 mg/dL and 1.3 mg/dL respectively). He was admitted to ward and intravenous fluids started and medical management was initiated to correct the dyselectrolytemia.
Plain radiograph of the dorsolumbar spine revealed a heterogeneous opacity in the right lung field extending from D7 to D9 . Computed tomography (CT) and MRI scans were done to characterize the mass which showed destruction of the rib and vertebra with internal calcifications suggestive of chondrosarcoma (, , ). Mass arising from the rib appeared to encroach the spinal canal damaging the pedicle and lamina of vertebra leading to extradural compression of cord.
CT-guided tissue biopsy was done and histopathological examination confirmed the diagnosis of chondrosarcoma which was of moderate grade. The patient was planned for surgical excision and canal decompression after optimization of parameters. However, on the 16th day of admission, he suffered a sudden cardiorespiratory arrest and he could not be revived. The relatives refused for an autopsy limiting the further investigation of mass lesion.