In this report, we describe the case of an 80-year-old woman of Greek Caucasian origin, gravida 2 para 2, with an undetermined obstetric and gynecologic history. After her second delivery, no data referring to the clinical history of the patient was available because the patient deferred any preventive or diagnostic medical examination until she presented to our hospital. Her last menstrual period had occurred 28 years ago. Her medical history included hypertension and angina pectoris.
The patient was examined in the gynecological oncology outpatient department and was found to have chronic pruritus vulvae and a recent onset palpable inflammatory lesion on the left labium majus. The lesion bled occasionally. During her gynecological examination, a 4 cm × 5 cm warty lesion with ulcerous and hemorrhagic areas was found in the middle of the left labium majus.
Initially, multiple biopsies from the center of the lesion and from the lateral margins were obtained, the histological examination of which revealed the presence of squamous cell carcinoma. At the periphery of the lesion, the squamous stratified epithelium exhibited abnormalities consistent with vulvar intra-epithelial neoplasia (vulvar intra-epithelial neoplasia (VIN) grade I/II). Numerous lesional cells showed koilocytic atypia, which is representative of HPV-related infection. However, initial hybrid capture 2 testing for HPV was negative in all the samples tested, which were obtained from either the center or the periphery of the lesion. A pre-operative computed tomographic scan of the abdomen and inguinal areas showed bilaterally enlarged inguinal lymph nodes with central fusion.
The patient underwent radical vulvectomy extending centrally to the level of the perineal membrane, as well as bilateral inguinal lymphadenectomy. Post-operatively, the woman had no major complications and was discharged 14 days after the procedure.
A histopathological examination of the excised specimen verified the presence of squamous cell carcinoma grade II/III with superficial ulcerations . Carcinoma cells invaded the stroma and the underlying adipose tissue with irregular invasive margins. The full thickness of the lesion from the surface to the deepest point was 1.2 cm. As noted regarding the pre-operative biopsies, the adjacent squamous stratified epithelium exhibited VIN grades I and II lesions . Furthermore, metastases of the squamous cell carcinoma involving two of 11 right inguinal lymph nodes and two of five left inguinal lymph nodes were found. The vulvar lesion was excised within normal tissues.
In the tissue specimen obtained pre-operatively for the performance of liquid-based Cytology (The Thin prep - pap test, Cytyc Corp., Marborough, Massachusetts, USA), we used a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay with CLINICAL ARRAYS Human Papillomavirus Kit (Genomica, Madrid, Spain) and a Hybrid Capture 2 HPV DNA test (Digene, Madrid, Spain). The latter test is an accurate qualitative and quantitative method used to detect five low-risk types of HPV (6, 11, 42, 43 and 44) and 13 high-risk types of HPV (16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59 and 68). It can also determine the viral load. This technology is based on hybrid analysis to identify indentifying a signal enhancement in a microplate using chemiluminescence. Samples containing the target DNA are hybridized with a specific detector HPV RNA. Hybrid-produced RNA-DNA binds to the surface of a microplate coated with specific antibodies for RNA-DNA hybrids. The immobilized hybrids react with alkaline phosphatase (ALK)-conjugated antibodies and are detected with a chemiluminescence substrate. While the binding ALK cleaves the substrate, it attracts light, which is measured by chemiluminescence in relative light units .
For the purpose of this study, we also used the CLINICAL ARRAYS Human Papillomavirus Kit (Genomica, Madrid, Spain), which is a commercially available HPV genotyping microarray test . The kit was used according to the manufacturer's protocol. We used 10 μL of purified DNA for each specimen. The kit employs biotinylated primers to define a sequence of 451 nucleotides within the polymorphic L1 region of the HPV genome. A pool of HPV primers is used to amplify HPV DNA from 35 mucosal genotypes, including 15 high-risk genotypes (16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 68, 73 and 82), three potentially high-risk genotypes (26, 53 and 66), 11 low-risk genotypes (6, 11, 40, 42, 43, 44, 54, 61, 70, 72 and 81) and six genotypes of unknown risk (62, 71, 83, 84, 85 and 89). In addition to the microarray analysis, PCR was performed with the HPV consensus primers MY09 and MY11 (18). PCR was performed consecutively as follows: 95°C for 15 minutes and 40 cycles of 94°C for 15 seconds, 52°C for 30 seconds and 72°C for 45 seconds .
In our case, none of the above-mentioned HPV types was detected with the use of hybrid capture 2 testing. The DNA of HPV-66 was the only one detected using the CLINICAL ARRAYS Human Papillomavirus Kit.
On the basis of these results, a standard PCR assay was also performed. Four histological specimens from four different levels of the lesion, as well as from a lymph node with metastasis, were examined. Extraction of total DNA from formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded sections was performed using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The quality and integrity of extracted DNA were assessed by PCR amplification of an amplicon of the interferon (IFN)-γ gene and by agarose gel (0.6%) electrophoresis, respectively. A nested, multiplex, highly sensitive PCR method (approximately 1 fg/103 viral copies) was used for HPV detection and genotyping. In this assay, consensus primers for first-run amplification of a broad spectrum of mucosal HPV genotypes, including all high-risk HPV genotypes, were combined with nested PCR amplifications of type-specific primers. Despite robust detection of the IFN-γ gene product amplification, no positive signal for HPV presence was found in any of the examined samples, even after substantially increasing the PCR cell cycles. Considering that there were clear indications of HPV infection in the microscopic examination of the specimens, the PCR assay was unable to detect the DNA of the virus, most probably because of low viral load in the specimens examined, which could have been caused and amplified by inadequate superficial lesional tissue. Furthermore, tissue fixation techniques could have a negative impact on the preservation of the viral genome.