A 6-year-old Han Chinese boy had a 5-year history of progressive muscle weakness. His family first noticed he experienced difficulty in walking at approximately 1 year of age. As time progressed, he began to experience difficulties when climbing stairs and lifting heavy objects. He exhibited shortness of breath after activity and relief after rest. However, fever, headache, dizziness, palpitate, cough, sputum and convulsions were not observed. His previous medical history was unremarkable, and there was no family history of neuromuscular disease. His father died of a “work-related injury” five years ago, and his mother is now 40 years old without a significant medical history.
At the age of 4 years, he experienced difficulty in elevating his arms and walking, especially climbing stairs. He was admitted to the hospital with a potential diagnosis of “progressive muscular dystrophy”. The genetic analysis did not detect the 17 common mutation sites of DMD/BMD genes in his samples. Blood biochemical tests revealed increased CK levels of 1000 IU/L (normal range 0–225 IU/L). The doctor recommended he undergo further examinations, but his mother did not consent.
The patient’s condition continued to worsen. At 5 years of age, he visited our department because he would occasionally fall while walking and experienced shortness of breath after activity. CK levels were increased to 1617.00 IU/L (normal range 0–225 IU/L). Shortly after, he received consultation again due to echocardiography and electrocardiogram (ECG) abnormalities in the medical checkup. Medical examinations revealed the following: 1. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 2. A small left ventricular measurement, 3. Lower left ventricular compliance in echocardiography and left ventricular hypertrophy with T wave inversion in ECG. On admission, his constitution indicated short stature without skin disorders, including ichthyosis or skin rash. He did not exhibit any ophthalmopathy or otopathy. He did not exhibit scoliosis or hyperlordosis but had Gower’s sign. His blood pressure was 98/60 mmHg, and his heart rate was 88 beats per minute. Cardiac auscultation revealed a normal rhythm.
Blood biochemical tests revealed increased CK levels of 1832 IU/L (normal range 0–225 IU/L). Routine blood tests revealed increased alanine transaminase (ALT) levels at 144 IU/L (reference range 0–42 IU/L), increased aspartate transaminase (AST) levels at 103 IU/L (reference range 0–42 IU/L), increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels at 1034 IU/L (reference range 114–240 IU/L), increased creatine kinase isoenzyme levels at 148 IU/L (reference range 0–25 IU/L) and normal triglyceride levels at 0.77 mmol/L (reference range 0.4–1.73 mmol/L). No abnormalities were observed in other routine biochemical tests.
The echocardiography revealed a diffuse and thick left ventricular wall. The left ventricular outflow tract was increasing rapidly, and the ejection fraction was 68%. Chest radiography revealed increased double lung texture, and the heart shadow was normal. The X-ray of bone age revealed that the maturity of the left hand bone was approximately 487 scores, which is equivalent to the age of a 4.8-year-old boy. A 24-h Holter-monitor recorded a sinus rhythm and an altered ST-T. Electromyography and evoked potential examination report revealed the following: 1. Normal movement conduction velocity (MCV) of the left median nerve, left ulnar nerve, left total nerve, and left tibial nerve. 2. Normal sensory conduction velocity (SCV) of the left median nerve, left ulnar nerve, left sural nerve, and left sural nerve. 3. F wave of left median nerve was normal. 4. Regarding H reflex, a normal H wave conduction velocity of the left tibial nerve was observed. 5. Electromyography revealed that the left gastrocnemius muscle and the inner muscle of the right femoral muscles were electrostatic. The mean time limit of the motion unit potential and the wave amplitude were in a normal range, and the electromyography of the examined muscle was normal. Abdominal ultrasonography indicated that the liver, biliary, pancreas, spleen, and kidney were normal. To improve our understanding of NLSD-M, reduce the misdiagnosis rate and prevent physical disability and even premature death, we recruited the child into a study and investigated PNPLA2.
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of First Affiliated Hospital to Army Medical University. Written informed consent for gene analysis was obtained from the legal guardian of the patient. We performed whole exome sequence capture on peripheral blood DNA samples from the patient. Sanger sequencing was used to validate the PNPLA2 (NM_020376: c.155C > G; p.Thr52Arg) homozygous variant identified by whole exome sequencing. Gene analysis revealed a novel homozygous mutation c.155C > G (p.Thr52Arg) in PNPLA2 . Screening of the family confirmed that his mother was heterozygous for the PNPLA2 gene mutation .
During hospitalization, his mother refused muscle biopsy for her child. This case was confirmed based on the clinical phenotype, blood test results, imaging examination and gene analysis. The patient was administered treatment with the phosphocreatine to protect the heart, and the symptoms were gradually relieved. He was subsequently discharged from the hospital. The follow-up revealed mild worsening of the condition and the development of muscle weakness of lower limbs. However, his heart function did not deteriorate. The patient remained fully ambulant during the follow-up period. He has exhibited no brain or peripheral nerve symptoms to date, and he has been able to continue attending school.