The patient was a 22-year-old, gravida 2, para 1001 who presented to the emergency department with abdominal pain. Her pain had started the previous day, but she attributed it to food poisoning at that time, so she ignored it. At the start of the abdominal pain, the patient reported having nausea and vomiting, but upon presentation to the emergency department, the nausea and vomiting had resolved. She continued to have mild, intermittent abdominal pain similar to menstrual cramps. She also reported having vaginal bleeding similar to menstrual bleeding, and that she had been on her menstrual cycle for the past week. She was tolerating a regular diet and was able to ambulate without difficulties. She reported no associated fever, chills, shortness of breath, or chest pain.
The patient indicated that she did not have any significant past medical history and was not on any medications. Her gynecological history showed past infections with Trichomonas vaginalis, Chlamydia trachomatis, and Neisseria gonorrhoeae, and she tested positive for all 3 pathogens on this emergency department presentation. Her exam revealed minimal vaginal bleeding and was remarkable for right adnexal tenderness. Bedside ultrasound showed free fluid in the right pelvic region, and the ovaries were not visualized. She had stable vital signs and mild leukocytosis with white blood cell count of 15.8 K/uL and platelets of 458 K/uL. Hemoglobin levels were within reference range at 11.6 g/dL. Her β-hCG was 23,833 mIU/mL. Rh immunoglobulin was not indicated due to the patient's positive Rh status. Given her overall stable clinical status, we awaited official ultrasound before proceeding with treatment. In the meantime, the patient was given 2 g metronidazole, 1 g azithromycin, and 500 mg ceftriaxone for treatment of the sexually transmitted infections. The official ultrasound showed a normal left ovary, no intrauterine pregnancy, a possible right ovary, and complex fluid within the right adnexa with an echogenic structure measuring 1.16 × 1.20 × 1.1 cm with circumferential color Doppler flow imaging, consistent with the “ring of fire” sign . The findings were concerning for a ruptured right ectopic pregnancy. Subsequently, she was prepared for a diagnostic laparoscopy, removal of the ectopic pregnancy, possible salpingectomy, possible oophorectomy, possible laparotomy, and all other indicated procedures.
The procedure was uncomplicated and revealed 100 mL of hemoperitoneum upon entry. A 3 cm right tubal ectopic pregnancy with evidence of rupture was noted. The patient's bowel and right adnexa were densely adherent to posterior cul-de-sac. The right and left ovaries were buried beneath adhesions and not identified. The left tube was normal appearing but with some adhesions to the left pelvic side wall. Resection of the right fallopian tube with the ectopic pregnancy was performed in a standard fashion by using bipolar energy device to cut and coagulate along the antimesenteric edge of the fallopian tube beneath the portion containing the ectopic and transecting at the cornual end, and the sample was sent to pathology for analysis. The pathology results showed histologic features consistent with partial hydatidiform mole . Molecular studies for gestational disease profile subsequently showed chorionic villi tissue genetically identical to maternal tissue in one set alleles and different in two sets of paternal alleles consistent with a partial mole genotype . The patient was contacted multiple times, but she did not respond via telephone and was lost to follow-up until around 2 months after her procedure. She was seen by the gynecologic oncology service team, and she reported having no symptoms at that visit. She had a regular menstrual cycle in the interim. The care team plan was to perform serial β-hCG levels weekly until 3 successive β-hCG levels are negative. The patient had a repeat β-hCG, which was <10 mIU/mL. She was counseled on contraception and on following up with a gynecologist.