A 52-year-old woman presented to her family doctor with a 20-day history of anterior chest pain while coughing. A full-body computed tomography (CT) scan revealed abnormal shadowing in her sternum. After 16 days from her visit to the family doctor, she visited the orthopedic department of the Gifu University Hospital and was diagnosed as having osteolytic bone metastasis and partial sclerosis in the sternum, 11th thoracic vertebra, right 4th lumbar vertebra, right femoral head, and left iliac bone. She was scheduled to undergo combined positron emission tomography and CT imaging at a later date. However, 4 days after her visit to the orthopedic department, she was unable to stand up. When she visited the emergency department of our hospital, a physical examination revealed that she had a respiratory rate of 15 breaths/min, blood pressure of 88/43 mmHg, body temperature of 36.3 °C, and heart rate of 116 beats/min. Furthermore, on room air, she had cyanosis and a percutaneous oxygen saturation level of 90%. She was also found to be in a state of hemodynamic shock without the use of catecholamine agonists. Her heart sounds were regular, and no heart murmurs were detected. In addition, her breath sounds were normal, and no rales were noted. An arterial blood gas test was performed . Laboratory test results revealed elevated levels of hepatobiliary enzymes, fibrin degradation products (37.7 μg/mL; normal level: ≤ 4.0 μg/mL), and D-dimer (4.6 μg/mL; normal level: <1.0 μg/mL) . Electrocardiography revealed only sinus tachycardia. The results of chest radiography and plain chest CT were normal .
She was then admitted to the general ward for examination and follow-up. Soon after her admission, she went into a state of shock (systolic blood pressure of 70 mmHg) and developed respiratory failure; thus, we initiated oxygen administration. Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography revealed findings associated with right heart strain; however, contrast-enhanced CT did not reveal the presence of any obvious thrombus in the pulmonary arteries. Although she was receiving intensive care and was started on treatment for pulmonary hypertension, she died of respiratory failure 45 h after arrival to our hospital . A pathological autopsy revealed that the patient had gastric cancer with lymph node metastasis around the aorta, stomach, and pancreas and bone metastases in the lumbar vertebrae. The autopsy revealed that the patient had no major tumor emboli; however, the presence of tumor microemboli and fibrous intimal thickening in the peripheral pulmonary arteries were detected . In addition, intestinal ischemia and the presence of microbleeds in the liver and cerebellum were noted. Ultimately, through postmortem histopathological diagnosis, the patient was determined to have PTTM.