A 5-year-old boy was referred to the Children’s heart centre at AUBMC after detecting a saturation of 92% while being screened by the anaesthesia team preceding a dental procedure. Patient was asymptomatic, denied any chest discomfort, dyspnoea, episodes of altered mental status, and other symptoms of hyperviscosity. His medical history, reported by the parents, revealed open-heart surgery for ASD closure in another country at the age of 2 years. Parents informed the medical staff that he had a smooth post-operative course and was discharged home after few days; however, no documentation was available. Follow-up after his surgical closure was done routinely showing good results and no abnormalities.
His assessment in our clinic revealed O2 saturation ranging from 90% to 94%, blood pressure 105/68, and respiratory rate 25. The patient had no dysmorphic features. His physical exam revealed minimal central cyanosis, normal apical impulse no right ventricular heaves or thrills, normal first and second heart sounds, and absence clubbing.
The electrocardiogram and chest X-ray were within normal limits. Echocardiogram showed a small fenestration through the ASD patch with a left to right shunt across it. Normal atrioventricular and normal ventriculoarterial concordance, left and right normal ventricular function and dimensions, no secondary signs of pulmonary hypertension. The superior vena cava (SVC) was draining into the right atrium. The pulmonary veins were draining normally into the LA, and the estimated pulmonary systolic and diastolic pressures were normal. However, the IVC flow was not directed into the right atrium , and we suspected that the drainage was directed to LA. Pulmonary to systemic flow ratio was 0.6. A chest computed tomography was requested and the result confirmed our diagnosis . A multidisciplinary meeting was held with the surgeon and a decision was taken to perform a surgical repair.
Transoesophageal echocardiographies are performed routinely at our institution prior and after cardiothoracic surgeries looking for optimal surgical results. A transoesophageal study was done in the operating room immediately before surgery confirming our findings. A bicaval view was also taken showing the above mentioned findings . Our patient had two central venous lines, one in his jugular vein and the second in the femoral vein. Central pressures were taken showing SVC pressure of 7 mmHg as compared to an IVC pressure of 13 mmHg. Saline was injected in the femoral venous line during the transthoracic echocardiography allowing the visualization of micro-bubbles in the LA and subsequently in the other chambers . The intra-operative finding of aberrant IVC drainage to the LA was confirmed, and the IVC was re-implanted into the right atrium. The post-operative course was smooth, and the patient was discharged 5 days later having an SpO2 of 100%. One week later, during a routine follow-up, the patient was recovering well, fully saturated and had good surgical result confirmed by echocardiography.