A 62-year-old man injured his right thigh by falling down from a height of around 10–12 feet on a wooden log. He developed pain and swelling over the right thigh within an hour for which he was taken to the local hospital. He was treated with injectable analgesics and discharged after few hours prescribing some oral analgesics and anti-inflammatory drugs. After reaching home, the severity of the pain gradually increased with associated numbness in the leg which was not responding to analgesic and anti-inflammatory drugs. On the next day, he visited the same hospital, the treating doctor again gave him parenteral analgesic, even then the pain did not subside and hence, they referred him to our hospital. The patient presented to us exactly 24 h after his injury. He complained of severe pain and swelling over the right thigh with loss of sensation and inability to move his affected limb which was gradually progressive and did not subside with any kind of analgesics or anti-inflammatory. In the course of the 24 h of the injury, the patient normally passed stool and urine. The patient had no significant history of illness. The patient had no history of any clotting disorder and neither of his family had suffered from any kind of bleeding diathesis. The patient neither had given any history of anti-coagulant use nor any significant drug intake. On examination, the patient was alert, conscious, and well oriented to time place and person. His blood pressure was recorded to be 148/90 mm of mercury and pulse rate of 100 per minute. On inspection, the affected thigh was grossly swollen and the overlying skin was shiny and the attitude of his hip and knee was mildly flexed. There was an ecchymosis of size around 10 × 6 cm2 over the anterolateral aspect of the thigh. On palpation, the thigh was severely tense and there was severe pain on attempted passive flexion and extension of the knee. There were no abnormal mobility and no bony crepitus in the affected limb, and the patient was able to do active straight leg raising. The affected limb was cold distal to the thigh compared to the opposite normal limb. There was lack of sensation below the knee and there was no motor activity distally. Distal pulse in the affected limb was feeble and distal SpO2 was fluctuating. Plain radiograph of the femur did not show any evidence of bony abnormality or fracture. USG color Doppler of the right lower limb showed gross collection in the anterior compartment of the thigh, subcutaneous edema, and decreased (monophasic) flow in the distal part of the femoral artery till the dorsalis pedis artery.
Therefore, on the basis of the classical signs (six P’s, i.e., pain out of proportion, pain on passive stretch, pallor, paresthesia, pulselessness/feeble distal pulse, and paralysis distal to the injury), a clinical diagnosis of compartment syndrome of the thigh involving the anterior compartment was made. Due to the late presentation, compartmental pressure measurement, further radiological investigations such as CT angiography, magnetic resonance imaging, and CT scan of the thigh were not done to avoid further delay in the definitive procedure, that is, the fasciotomy.
The patient was prepared for emergency fasciotomy with emergency pre-operative work out within 3 h of presentation to the emergency department. The patient was placed in supine position on the operating table under spinal anesthesia. Under all aseptic and antiseptic measures, proper painting with 10% povidone-iodine and proper draping was done on the involved limb. Lateral incision was given over the involved thigh. The fascia lata was incised and split with scissors parallel to the skin incision along its fibers and the muscle fascia over the vastus lateralis was exposed. As the fascia was incised, the contused and swollen vastus lateralis muscle popped out. The vastus lateralis was found to be partially avulsed from the lateral intermuscular septum, while separating the vastus lateralis by blunt dissection from the fascia lata, around one and half of the kidney tray of clotted blood was evacuated which was approximately 1100 ml in amount. The vastus lateralis was retracted anteromedially and a torn thrombosed perforator was identified and ligated. After full evacuation of the clotted blood from the anterior compartment, longitudinal incision over the lateral intermuscular septum was given to relax the posterior compartment. Medial compartment was found to be soft. Multiple small horizontal incisions were given in the divided anterior edge of the tensor fascia lata to decrease the tension in the margin of the wound. Proper irrigation with normal saline was done. Few fibers of the vastus lateralis were stitched back to the lateral intermuscular septum.
The wound was left open without closing the skin and a soft dressing pad was applied. Then, the patient was shifted to the ward after getting clearance from the anesthesiologist. In the course of the hospital stay, the patient regained his normal sensation and motor power (but not up to the mark). He also regained his normal distal pulse in the affected limb on the next day of fasciotomy. In the post-operative stay, he was given broad spectrum I.V. antibiotics, subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin (as advised by the cardiothoracic vascular surgeon), oral analgesic, oral anti-inflammatory, oral indomethacin to prevent heterotopic ossificans, and oral proton-pump inhibitor. After a few days of alternate day antiseptic dressings, vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) was applied to decrease the size of the wound. After 5 days of VAC treatment, the wound was inspected and found to be healthy and smaller than previous. As advised by the physiotherapist, the normal physiotherapy for the affected limb was started and he was given a foot drop splint for his foot drop which actually was gradually improving. The patient was shifted to the plastic surgery department in our hospital for the skin grafting on the surgical wound. Follow-up at 7 months of the injury, the patient has regained his normal muscle power and near-normal range of motion of all the joints in the affected limb.