A 31-year-old man with a history of depression and recent discharge from an inpatient psychiatry service purchased a crossbow at a sporting goods store and subsequently attempted suicide by firing the weapon superiorly through the central submental region. The crossbow projectile entered just at the left side of his chin, coursing superiorly through his floor of mouth, tongue, palate, anterior sphenoid sinus, and subsequently intracranially through the frontal lobe, exiting through the calvarium. This resulted in a compound skull fracture with the tip of the arrow projecting out through the scalp. Paramedics brought him in, and the trauma service was notified urgently. The patient had a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15 on arrival; he was awake, alert, and obeying commands in all four extremities with no obvious neurological deficits on assessment. However, he was not able to speak, given the crossbow arrow traversing his tongue and palate structures. A computed tomography (CT) scan/CT angiogram was obtained, which revealed that there were no major intracranial hemorrhages and no intracranial or extracranial vascular injuries from the penetrating object [-]. The patient was taken to the operating room for removal of the foreign body with otolaryngology/head and neck surgery, initially planning for an awake tracheostomy and repair of aerodigestive injuries. Conscious sedation and local anesthesia were initially administered, and an awake tracheostomy was then performed. Once airway access was secured, the patient was induced under general anesthesia and placed in the Mayfield head holder in a supine position with the neck neutral.
A coronal skin incision (involving the crossbow exit site) was made to expose the compound skull fracture. A bifrontal craniotomy was performed to devise a flap between the fractured bone segments and the projectile exit site. The bone was removed in a piecemeal fashion to liberate the arrow from the frontal bone and to have vascular control of the superior sagittal sinus in the event of injury. Once the dura was exposed from sites surrounding the arrow shaft, a careful dural incision was extended to allow for access around the defect. Coagulation around the arrow shaft was avoided to prevent energy transmission to surrounding neural structures. The sharp arrow tip was previously removed before surgery by the emergency medical service team, as it screwed onto the shaft. Following the dural opening, inspection around the shaft of the arrow demonstrated no active hemorrhage and no tissue entanglement. Following this assessment, the arrow was pulled out gently from the entry site (floor of the oral cavity), as the fins on the tail of the arrow were not removable.
Furthermore, this vector avoided the entrainment of oral/nasal contaminants further into the intracranial space. Vital signs were closely monitored as well as evaluation of entry and exit sites to detect any new hemorrhage, change in vitals, or tissue resistance. The object was completely removed with no ensuing adverse events. The dura was reinforced using a synthetic dural replacement material. The bone fragments were examined, debrided, and realigned with plates, bur hole covers, and screws and then placed back to close the defect. There was no cerebrospinal fluid leak (CSF) or rhinorrhea evident at this time; however, the patient was monitored continually for future CSF leaks. Within the same surgery, the otolaryngology team repaired the floor of the mount, tongue, and palate, taking advantage of a distally located surgical airway. Postoperative CT angiogram of the head demonstrated no evidence of vascular injury. The patient spent an uneventful 24 h course in the intensive care unit and was extubated the next morning after ensuring an adequate airway.
During the same admission, the patient developed clear, watery rhinorrhea and was taken to the operating room to repair a skull base defect through an endoscopic endonasal approach. The skull base team consisting of otolaryngology/rhinology and neurosurgery located the defect in the roof of the right ethmoid cavity. After performing a right-sided anterior and posterior ethmoidectomy and sphenoidotomy, the team then identified the site of the leak using direct visualization and confirmed with the image guidance system. The edges of the CSF fistula were freshened by removing mucosa from the defect circumferentially and then utilizing an infraumbilical fat graft and ipsilateral nasoseptal flap based on the sphenopalatine artery for closure and sealing of the CSF leak. Intraoperative confirmation of watertight seal with a valsalva maneuver was conducted at the end of the procedure.
A total of 24 cases of penetrating head injuries with crossbows have been identified in the literature .[-, -, -] The vast majority (20/22) were male, and most of the cases were suicidal (17/24). In addition, 15 cases survived the injury. Two of them made a full recovery with no disabilities. Involvement of the face and/or oronasal cavity is common (18/24). Six cases required surgical airway secondary to upper airway involvement. Significant intracranial vascular injuries were seen in 7/24 cases. Dedicated vascular imaging was done in 9 cases where data were available. In addition, a CSF leak was noted in 6/24 cases secondary to the injury. Finally, surgical removal of the arrow was done in 11 cases with available data on who made it alive to the hospital.