A 34-year-old right-hand dominant male sustained an isolated left wrist injury after a motorcycle collision. Initial X-ray showed a perilunate fracture dislocation. The patient was splinted and transferred to our hospital (RWJUH) after an unsuccessful reduction attempt. On presentation to our service, patient was noted to have a wrist deformity and repeat X-rays revealed a trans-scaphoid, transcapitate, and perilunate fracture-dislocation with possible distal radius rim fracture. A comprehensive neurovascular examination revealed diminished subjective sensation in the ulnar distribution; examination was otherwise normal including 2-point discrimination to all digits (<6 mm). Closed reduction was attempted with sedation and was unsuccessful.
A computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained and confirmed a trans-scaphoid, transcapitate, and perilunate fracture-dislocation, as shown in . The scan revealed that the proximal pole of the scaphoid was dislocated volarly and ulnarly toward the ulnar canal, likely causing his acute ulnar neuropathy. A distal radius fracture was also confirmed and further characterized, involving the volar marginal rim of the lunate facet with radiocarpal subluxation; the lunate was congruent with the distal radius rim fracture fragment.
The patient was taken to the operating room for urgent decompression of the ulnar nerve at the wrist; carpal tunnel release and reduction was also performed. Intraoperatively, the proximal scaphoid was palpable immediately adjacent to the ulnar neurovascular bundle and was confirmed to be the etiology of his acute ulnar neuropathy through direct compression. On completion, the ulnar neurovascular bundle was completely decompressed.
He returned to the operating room the following day for open reduction internal fixation of his PLFD and distal radius fracture once appropriate hardware was available. The PLFD was accessed through a dorsal approach and the scaphoid and capitate were each fixated with a single 2.4 mm headless compression screw. He was found to have significant improvement in his carpal alignment after fixation of his carpal fractures and the scapholunate intercarpal ligament was found to be intact. 0.045 K-wires were placed across the lunotriquetral and triquetrohamate joints to complete perilunate fixation. Given the small size of the distal radius fracture fragment and associated radiocarpal subluxation, the radiocarpal joint was immobilized with a dorsal spanning plate. The distal radius volar marginal rim fragment was then reduced through a flexor carpi radialis approach, preserving all soft-tissue attachments to prevent avascular necrosis. Cortical cancellous bone chips were placed to support the fragment, which was fixated with a small fragment specific plate utilizing a buttress technique; no screws were placed into the small fragment. The DRUJ was tested and stable. Post-operative imaging was performed, as shown in .
On post-operative day 1, the patient was found to have neuropraxia of the ulnar and median nerves; this was improved at the time of discharge on post-operative day 2. His neuropraxia resolved completely by the time of his 2-week post-operative visit. He healed without complication and returned to the operating room for removal of hardware 3 months later; after CT scan confirmed that the distal radius fracture was healed.