A 55-year-old woman who presented to the emergency department reported right sided hemiparesis, sudden vision loss in her left eye. She had history of hypertension. Neurologic examination revealed muscle weakness of the right upper and lower limbs. She was found with visual acuities of 20/25 OD and light perception OS. Intraocular pressure was 16 mmHg OD and 16 mmHg OS. Fundus examination of the left eye showed whitening and opacification of the retina with a cherry-red spot in the fovea. Her electrocardiogram showed a normal sinus rhythm. Laboratory findings showed no abnormalities.
Diffusion weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated multiple hyperintense areas in the left basal ganglia, parietotemporal lobe, suggestive of acute embolic infarction . Fundus examination of the left eye showed that multiple branches of the retinal arteries were occluded . Transthoracic eocardiography revealed a left atrial mass of the diameter 3 × 3 cm containing a slightly mobile mass and unclear site of attachment . Transthoracic echocardiography exhibited a large mass (3 × 3 cm sized) with wide base, located at right wall of the high left atrium in the vicinity of right upper and lower pulmonary vein.
At first we thought this mass as thrombus causing multiple emboli. So she was treated with the unfractionated heparin and we planned to recheck the size of mass in the left atrium after 7 days. Five days since admitted, she suddenly fell down and complained aggrevated weakness of the right limbs. We rechecked transthoracic echocardiography and coronary computed tomography angiogram . Followed transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated no interval change regarding size of mass, further coronary computed tomography angiogram showed the mass had broad stalk from the atrial septum. Therefore, we diagnosed the patient with multiple, recurrent cerebral embolism and retinal artery occlusion due to a left atrial myxoma.
To prevent recurrence, we decided to resect the mass and immediately transferred her to a tertiary hospital. She underwent the resection of the myxoma in a teritary hospital. Microscopic analysis of surgical specimens confirmed that it was the atrial myxoma attached to the atrial septum. The patient uneventfully recovered from cardiac surgery, but unfortunately her left eyesight did not come back. Followed fundus examination of the left eye demonstrated optic disc atrophy and chronic ischemic signs .
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images (IRB File No. 0749-160120-HR-022-01).