A 64 year old male presented with sudden onset quadriparesis. He had acute onset pain in both lower limbs which was followed by lower limb weakness. Meantime he had also noticed weakness of both upper limbs. There was no history of preceding back or neck pain. He was also unable to pass urine and faeces. There had not been any history of trauma. He has been ambulant and apparently healthy prior to this illness. He gave a history of smoking of sixteen pack years. There was no past or family history of cardiovascular diseases. There was no history of high risk sexual behaviour.
The patient was averagely built with no features of Marfan syndrome. On examination both the lower limbs had reduced tone and the power was of Medical Research Council {MRC} grade 0/5. Both knee and ankle jerks were absent with equivocal plantar response. The pain and temperature sensory examination revealed a sensory level at T1. However the vibration and proprioception were both spared. The examination of upper limbs revealed weak elbow extension MRC power grade being 4/5. Intrinsic hand muscles power was also reduced to grade 3/5 bilaterally. However biceps and brachioradialis power was 5/5. The biceps and brachioradialis reflexes were normal. The triceps reflex was diminished on right side and absent on the left. Thus a lesion at spinal cord level lower cervical/ upper thoracic C7/T1 was clinically suspected especially of the anterior cord region sparing the dorsal columns. There were no areas of spinal tenderness.
The abdominal examination revealed a palpable distended bladder with relaxed anal sphincter tone. Cardiac and respiratory system examination was essentially normal. The mental status and cognition were unaffected. The patient was immediately catheterized and basic investigations carried out.
Magnetic Resonant Imaging (MRI) panspine showed increased T2 signal intensity in the anterior aspect of cervico-dorsal spinal cord extending from C5 to T10 level. High signal areas revealed the characteristic ‘owl eye’ appearance on axial imaging . The involved areas showed diffusion restriction on Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI). Cervical, thoracic and lumbosacral vertebral bodies and discs were of normal alignment with mild degenerative changes without significant thecal indentation or paravertebral abnormalities. Compressive myelopathy was also excluded. The lower thoracic aorta showed aneurysmal dilatation with a mural thrombus.
The chest Xray revealed a widened mediastinum. A CT aortogram done thereafter confirmed an aneurysmal dilalatation of the root, ascending, arch and proximal descending thoracic aorta. The abdominal aorta was normal. The diameters of the ascending aorta and arch were 5.6 cm, 5.8 cm respectively . It can be categorized as Extent 1 according to the Crawford classification of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms. There were marked intimal irregularities and calcified atherosclerotic plaques with a small mural thrombus.
The complete blood count, C reactive protein, renal and liver functions were within normal ranges. The ESR was 32 mm/ first hour and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test was non reactive. HIV 1 and 2 antibodies were negative. Blood and urine cultures were all sterile. The LDL cholesterol was 86 mg/dL and HbA1c was 5.4%. Antinuclear antibody and Antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies were negative. Two Dimentional Echocardiography revealed a mild left ventricular hypertrophy with an ejection fraction of 60% and dilated aortic root of 4 cm in size.
The patient was assessed by both vascular surgical and cardiothoracic teams. However the patient was declining surgical interventions. He was then commenced on rehabilitation and transferred to a dedicated rehabilitation centre.