A 55-year-old woman with a past medical history of hypothyroidism presented via ambulance to the emergency department with retrosternal chest pain radiating to the neck and down her left arm that started while she was walking. Pain was associated with nausea and shortness of breath. She denied having similar symptoms in the past. She also denied any orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, coughing, lower extremity swelling, palpitation, dizziness, or lightheadedness. The patient didn't have cardiac risk factors including hypertension, diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia, smoking, or known CAD. She didn't have any surgical history or family history including cardiac disease. She denied the use of alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs. Vital signs were stable and physical exam was unremarkable. The differential diagnosis included acute coronary syndrome, pericarditis, perimyocarditis, pneumonia, acute pulmonary embolism, and costochondritis.
Chest x-ray was unremarkable and resting ECG revealed sinus bradycardia with nonspecific ST-segment and T-wave changes in the inferolateral leads which was present on prior ECGs. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 60–65% without regional wall motion abnormalities. Laboratory testing demonstrated normal levels of initial cardiac troponin I and troponin trend for 2 consecutive times 6 hours apart (<0.04 ng/mL; reference range [RR]: <0.04 ng/mL). Thyroid-stimulating hormone level was within normal limits. Lipid profile showed normal levels of cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein, low-density lipoprotein, and triglycerides, and hemoglobin A1C was 5.4% (RR: 4%–5.6%). Complete metabolic panel was unremarkable except for potassium of 3.2 mmol/L (RR: 3.5–5 mmol/L). Complete blood count showed normal cell counts.
Patient was classified as intermediate risk for CAD based on clinical decision pathways and thus underwent a nuclear stress test with regadenoson for ischemic evaluation in the outpatient setting on day 2. Rest images were obtained successfully, however upon administration of the regadenoson, the patient had a severe reaction with shortness of breath, dizziness, and chest pain, which resolved after theophylline administration. ECG after regadenoson injection showed sinus tachycardia with 1 mm ST-segment depressions and T wave changes in the inferior leads . Patient was admitted to the hospital after an unsuccessful nuclear stress test for further evaluation. Repeat resting ECG showed T-wave inversions in the inferior leads, but no ST changes. Troponin levels on arrival and 2 consecutive times 6 hours apart thereafter were within normal limits (<0.04 ng/mL, RR: <0.04 ng/mL).
Patient underwent invasive coronary angiography on day 3, performed by an interventional cardiology attending, for coronary artery evaluation which revealed 70% stenosis of the distal portion of the LMCA with normal remaining coronaries . Patient was referred to cardiothoracic surgery for potential CABG surgery on day 4, however given the high suspicion of LMCA spasm in the setting of no CAD risk factors and lack of even mild disease in the other coronaries, the decision was to obtain a CCTA prior to surgery which showed normal LMCA without any stenosis (-A), thus suggesting coronary artery spasm (CAS) as the underlying cause of LMCA stenosis seen during initial coronary angiography. A repeat coronary angiography on day 5 also showed normal LMCA (-B), which further supported the diagnosis of CAS. Patient was diagnosed with LMCA spasm and was managed medically with oral amlodipine 5 mg daily while avoiding unnecessary surgical intervention. She was also advised to avoid known triggers of CAS including smoking. She was adherent with the recommendations and tolerated amlodipine without side effects. The patient was discharged on day 5 with no complications or adverse outcomes and had no more episodes of chest pain at 6-month follow-up in the cardiology clinic.