A 67-year-old Caucasian man, a former heavy cigarette smoker, presented to our hospital with a persistent cough. He had a medical history of ischemic heart disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and arterial hypertension. A whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a solid nodule with speculated margins, measuring approximately 33×33mm, in the apical segment of his left lower lobe and an infiltration of the pleura and of pulmonary vessels. Enlarged ipsilateral peribronchial lymph nodes (24mm) and some small lymph nodes of the aortopulmonary window were also described. A bronchoscope image showed only hyperemic inflamed mucosa and cytology did not provide a cancer diagnosis. Therefore, a CT-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy of his pulmonary nodule was performed. Histology and mutation testing revealed that the tumor was a wild-type EGFR adenocarcinoma (thyroid transcription factor-1 positive). A radical surgery of the lung lesion was excluded because of a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The patient started a first-line cisplatin-gemcitabine chemotherapy obtaining a partial response after six courses: a whole body CT scan revealed a reduction of his lung lesion (12mm versus 33mm) and of peribronchial lymph nodes (18mm versus 24mm). In view of the inoperability, he was subsequently treated with radiation therapy gaining a further reduction of the lung lesion and metastatic lymph nodes. However, 8 months later, a CT scan established disease progression: the lung nodule increased to 19 mm , whereas his lymph nodes appeared stable. The short disease progression-free interval and the clinical history of this patient ruled out the use of a new chemotherapy; a second-line therapy with erlotinib at a dose of 150mg/day was started May 2012. A CT scan performed after 4 months of erlotinib treatment showed a reduction of pulmonary lesion volume and the treatment was continued. Four months later, a new CT scan exhibited a significant reduction of the tumor in the lower lobe of his left lung (7mm; Figure ). Finally, in the last CT scan an area of parenchymal dysventilation in the apical segment of the lower lobe of his left lung was recognized, while the neoplastic mass was no longer visible , confirming a complete remission after 1 year of the erlotinib therapy. In view of the surprising response to TKI treatment, we also performed a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis for EGFR, but this test did not reveal a gene amplification or high polysomy. The treatment with erlotinib was well tolerated; in fact, the only adverse event was a grade 1 skin rash on his face, which occurred early in the treatment and regressed after 4 weeks with a topical therapy. At the time that this article was revised, our patient was still undergoing treatment and he was free of disease.