An 80-year-old man presented with deafness and otorrhea of right ear and was diagnosed as having otitis media with effusion (OME). Myringotomy, the insertion of a ventilation tube, and administration of multiple oral antibiotics (cefditoren pivoxil (CDTR-PI) 300 mg/day for 2 weeks, sitafloxacin (STFX) 100 mg/day for 19 days, and clarithromycin (CAM) 400 mg/day for 2 weeks) were only partially effective; his OME had been recurrent and refractory to these treatments. Although myeloperoxidase and proteinase 3 anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (MPO-ANCA, PR3-ANCA) were negative in the blood examination, otitis media with ANCA-associated vasculitis was suspected, and prednisolone (30 mg/day) was orally administered without antibiotics. However, because the improvement in deafness and otorrhea was transient and insufficient, prednisolone administration was tapered off for a period of 4 weeks.
Six months later, a chronic right-sided headache emerged and gradually worsened. Eight months after the onset of OME, he suffered from nausea and severe headache and was admitted to our hospital.
Post-contrast MRI revealed right mastoiditis, remarkable thickening of the dura mater, and enhanced pia mater extending from the right middle cranial fossa to the temporal lobe . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed an elevated cell count (31/mm3, mononuclear cells 30/mm3) and total protein levels (91 mg/dl). Repeated CSF cultures were negative, and the results of the polymerase chain reaction analyses performed on the CSF for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Epstein–Barr virus, Cytomegalovirus, and Herpes simplex virus were also negative. CSF cytology was normal, and no oligoclonal band was detected. Neither cryptococcal antigen testing nor Indian ink staining of CSF was positive.
Both MPO-ANCA and PR3-ANCA were evaluated again in the serum; however, the results were negative. An additional blood examination showed normal angiotensin-converting enzyme, lysozyme, and immunoglobulin G4 levels. Anti-CCP antibodies, rheumatoid factor, and anti-nuclear antibodies were not detected. Serology test results for syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus, human T-lymphotropic virus type 1, candida, and aspergillus were all negative. Mycobacterium tuberculosis was not present as per the results of the interferon-gamma release assays. βD-glucan was not detected in the blood. C reactive protein levels were slightly elevated (1.19 mg/dl).
HP secondary to bacterial middle ear infection was suspected, and meropenem (MEPM) (6 g/day) and vancomycin (VCM) (2 g/day) were administered. Although the CSF examination showed decreased cell counts (19/mm3) and protein levels (58 mg/dl) on day 13, the patient’s headache gradually worsened, and a post-contrast MRI showed no improvement . A biopsy of the right mastoid was performed, and P. acnes was detected using P. acnes-specific monoclonal antibody (PAB antibody); culture results for P. acnes were also positive .
To control the post-infectious intracranial inflammation, high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) (1000 mg/day) was administered for 5 days followed by oral prednisolone (45 mg/day), and his headache was remarkably alleviated. Because P. acnes is sensitive to ceftriaxone (CTRX), MEPM and VCM were switched to CTRX (4 g/day). Although the patient received predonisolone (PSL), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) was also prescribed for prophylaxis against pneumocystis pneumonia . PSL was stopped after 4 weeks, and CTRX was administered for 7 weeks. The post-contrast MRI showed improved dural thickening, and the patient’s headache disappeared.
However, HP relapsed 4 weeks after the discontinuation of PSL and 1 week after the discontinuation of CTRX . The patient experienced severe headache, gait disturbance, and diplopia. Neurological examination revealed right abducent paralysis and ataxia. We performed a biopsy of the dura mater; P. acnes was detected using PAB antibody; however, it was not detected in the culture of the dura mater . After we performed a biopsy of the dura mater, high-dose IVMP (1000 mg/day) was administered for 5 days, followed by oral prednisolone (45 mg/day). CTRX (4 g/day) was simultaneously administered for 4 weeks and then switched to oral minocycline (MINO). TMP-SMX had been concomitantly administered since high-dose IVMP was initiated. After we restarted the treatment, his symptoms gradually disappeared. PSL was tapered but had been continued with both MINO and TMP-SMX for 1 year. Even after finishing these three medications, the patient has remained free from relapses for more than 1 year.
No granulomas were identified, but inflammatory cell infiltration with concomitant post-inflammatory fibrosis was evident in both samples based on HE staining . No organisms were identified by HE and PAS staining.
Based on reports and the literature, formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues of the right mastoid and dura mater were tested using immunohistochemical methods with PAB antibody and mycobacterial species-specific monoclonal antibody , which were generated according to the protocol previously reported; appropriate controls were also used. Many small round bodies were detected by immunohistochemistry with PAB antibody in the inflammatory macrophages of both tissues . Immunoreactivity for mycobacterial species was not identified within either of the tissues . Immunoreactivity for P. acnes was more evident in the right mastoid than in the dura mater. CD4-, CD8-, or CD20-positive cells had infiltrated around the PAB-positive small round bodies . There were more CD8-positive cells in both tissues than CD4-positive cells. IgG4 cells were scattered, and the IgG4/IgG cell ratio was less than 40% in these inflammatory lesions .