An 81-day-old girl was transferred to the accident and emergency center of Nihon University Itabashi Hospital from her local pediatrician’s clinic because of marked abdominal distention and convulsions with loss of consciousness. The convulsions subsided with intravenous administration of diazepam and midazolam; however, the abdominal distension worsened, and was referred to pediatric surgery for surgical indication due to the intraperitoneal ascitic fluid collection. She was previously healthy, with appropriate growth and development and no history of trauma to her abdomen, after birth by normal vaginal delivery to a 38-year-old secundigravida mother at 37 weeks of gestation. The mother was noted to have a past history of extrahepatic bile duct resection with hepaticojejunostomy due to pancreaticobiliary maljunction along with a congenital choledochal cyst.
On physical examination, the patient was found to be drowsy. Her temperature was 36.7 °C, and oxygen saturation was 98% while breathing oxygen at a flow rate of 10 L/min. Her weight was 4590 g and height was 55 cm. Her abdomen was markedly distended, with tense, shiny skin. Guarding and tenderness over the entire abdomen were also noted on palpation. Her sclerae appeared anicteric.
Blood and serum biochemical evaluations revealed leukocytosis (19,400/μL) and elevated total bilirubin (2.41 mg/dl), direct bilirubin (1.02 mg/dl), aspartate aminotransferase (72 IU/l), alkaline phosphatase (1371 IU/l), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (362 IU/l), and creatine kinase (CK) (371 IU/l) levels. The levels of alanine aminotransferase (17 IU/l) and C-reactive protein (CRP) (0.10 mg/dl) were within normal limits. Venous gas analysis indicated a pH of 7.357, bicarbonates (HCO3−) of 16.3 mmol//l, and base excess (BE) of − 9.5 mmol/l. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed the presence of massive ascites and a cystic lesion at the hepatic hilum measuring 3 cm in diameter, with collected fluid and debris. The cystic lesion appeared to be connected to the intrahepatic bile duct, suggesting a dilated extrahepatic duct . Abdominal CT scan revealed extrahepatic bile duct dilatation with massive ascites .
The patient underwent emergency laparotomy with a diagnosis of biliary peritonitis due to perforation of a congenital choledochal cyst. Laparotomy findings revealed massive biliary ascites in the peritoneum, but no abnormalities of the liver and gallbladder on gross appearance. The common bile duct appeared as a cyst 3 cm in diameter in the hepatoduodenal ligament. We could not find the exact site of biliary perforation despite careful exploration. Then, we performed cholangiography of the entire extrahepatic biliary tract by inserting a small catheter tapping from the gallbladder to the common bile duct via the cystic duct, which also failed to identify the site of biliary perforation. We avoided excessive pressure when injecting the contrast medium during cholangiography. No passage of contrast medium into the duodenum was shown. The final diagnosis of minimal biliary perforation was made at that time. The operative procedure was accomplished by inserting an indwelling drainage catheter into the dilated common bile duct via the cystic duct and by intraperitoneal irrigation. The patient successfully recovered from the critical situation with good drainage of bile from the dilated common bile duct. The daily output of bile was between 50 to 100 ml. After she became in a stable condition, cholangiography via the catheter placed in the common bile duct was performed. It initially showed only the left hepatic duct, and no passage of the contrast medium into the duodenum through the dilated common bile duct . However, digitized video-fluoroscopy cholangiography revealed evidence of biliary patency, demonstrating the flow of contrast into the duodenum . Magnetic resonance choledocopancreatography (MRCP) scan depicted the dilated common bile duct and bilateral hepatic ducts, although the junction of the pancreatic duct and choledochus was obscure . These images failed to identify the pancreaticobiliary maljunction. However, biochemistry of the bile collected during and after the operation revealed that the levels of pancreatic enzymes, such as phospholipase A2, were elevated in bile from the gallbladder and the common bile duct . This evidence was highly suggestive of pancreaticobiliary maljunction. The patient was diagnosed as having a congenital choledochal cyst; hence, surgery including extrahepatic bile duct resection was scheduled at the age of 120 days.
During the second laparotomy, dissection along the dilated choledochal cyst to the intrapancreatic bile duct revealed a narrow portion between the distal part of the bile duct and pancreatic duct—the pancreaticobiliary maljunction— in the pancreatic parenchyma. Intraoperative cholangiography showed no communication between the common bile duct and the pancreatic duct at the operation. The distal end of the dilated biliary cyst was ligated and transected at the narrow portion just above its junction with the main pancreatic duct. Dissecting along to the hepatic hilum, we found that the hilar hepatic ducts had been bilaterally replaced by fibrous tissue and were obstructed, leading to a diagnosis of type III a1, μ biliary atresia. The fibrous tissue was excised, and hepatic portoenterostomy was performed according to the Kasai procedure. Histopathologic examination showed that most of the lining epithelium of the resected biliary cyst was desquamated. Liver biopsy shows a few inflammatory cells infiltrated in the periportal area presenting slight fibrosis, but no significant ductular proliferation noted . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. She has had normal liver function tests with no episodes of cholangitis for 3 years since her discharge from the hospital.