A 55-year-old male with ESRD on hemodialysis secondary to longstanding hypertension, and CAD underwent simultaneous 4v-CABG, surgical bioprosthetic MV replacement (Edwards 27 mm), and left atrial appendage ligation repair in Sept 2020 . Post-operative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) noted a mean MV gradient of 3 mmHg at a normal heart rate under general anesthesia with an ejection fraction (EF) of 40–45%. There was also trace mitral regurgitation within expected limits of the prosthesis without evidence of perivalvular leak. In addition, there was no sign of aortic stenosis or aortic regurgitation with normal aortic pressure and velocity noted postoperatively. The patient then completed a short-term course of warfarin and aspirin for 3 months. He presented 2 years later in January 2022 after a routine preoperative transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) for an elective total hip arthroplasty revealed severe stenosis of the bioprosthetic mitral valve with mean gradient of 11 mmHg, heart rate (HR) 70 beats per minute (bpm), EF 55%, MV pressure half time 115 ms, and effective orifice mitral valve area 1.9 cm2 . He experienced progressive exertional dyspnea and chest tightness with limited ambulation of 10 ft.
At this time an extensive cardiac evaluation including cardiac event monitoring and interim TTE showed an immobile mass on the anterior mitral valve leaflet, which was difficult to discern from a degenerative leaflet. Thus, anticoagulation was initiated empirically to treat valve thrombus. At this time, echocardiographic imaging was not definitively diagnostic of thrombus and leaflet degeneration remained a consideration for which the patient was at risk due to ESRD. The patient continued uninterrupted anticoagulation with warfarin from February 2022 to January 2023 with monitoring of the international normalized ratio (INR) with goal of 2.5 to 3.5 per standard of care. In January of 2023, Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed progressive worsening of severe bioprosthetic valve stenosis with immobilization of two fused leaflets and mean MV gradient that increased to 21 mmHg (HR 80 bpm, EF noted to be moderately decreased, MV pressure half time 454 msec, MV area 0.5 cm2), without evidence of thrombus . However, the left atrium was noted to be severely dilated with evidence of mild spontaneous echo contrast (SEC). The patient was admitted for definitive inpatient management of the degenerative mitral valve. The MV gradient worsened despite adherence to therapeutic anticoagulation for 11 months, so the etiology for progressive MS was more consistent with leaflet degeneration and fusion of the bioprosthetic MV rather than thrombosis. As the most recent valvular heart disease guidelines do not recommend indefinite anticoagulation for bioprosthetic mitral valve prostheses beyond the first 3 months after implant, warfarin was discontinued in anticipation of procedural intervention . Following these guidelines, heparin bridging was not initiated, as there was no history of atrial fibrillation or other indication for therapeutic anticoagulation . Definitive treatment with transcatheter mitral valve-in-valve replacement was planned after multidisciplinary discussions with the patient and structural heart team. On the morning of the procedure, 8 days after cessation of warfarin, the intra-operative TEE revealed a large 18 mm × 0.9 mm, fixed left atrial thrombus adhered to the left atrial septum, and the procedure was aborted . The patient made a joint decision with the surgical and cardiology team to defer acute surgical management. He was bridged to warfarin using a heparin infusion with a therapeutic target aPTT of 60–100 seconds with the plan to repeat TEE in 4 weeks and attempt transcatheter mitral valve-in-valve replacement once the left atrial thrombus resolved .