A 45-year-old male patient visited the emergency room in XXX University Hospital with right facial spasms, tingling and twisting of the right arm, paresthesia, and dysarthria. The patient had no medical history or underlying disease, with the exception of being hospitalized for pneumonia 1 month previously. The patient consumed alcohol occasionally and had smoked 1.5 packs of cigarettes per day for 25 years. When admitted to the ER, the patient was conscious with a blood pressure of 150/88 mmHg, heart rate of 77 beats/min, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and body temperature of 37.0 °C. According to the laboratory tests on a peripheral blood sample, the white blood cell count was 13,900/mm3 (86% neutrophil), hemoglobin concentration was 13.5 g/dl, and platelet count was 248,000/mm3. Biochemical tests showed a blood urea nitrogen concentration of 11 mg/dl, creatinine concentration of 0.6 mg/dl, C-reactive protein concentration of 0.63 mg/dl, blood glucose of 140 mg/dl, and HbA1c of 5.5%. No bacterial growth was observed in cerebrospinal fluid culture, and electroencephalography (EEG) indicated normal patterns. On the day he was admitted to the ER (day 1), brain CT scan revealed three low-density oval lesions (13 mm, 9 mm, and 15 mm) in the right mid-frontal region and in the left and right high-frontal subcortical white matter. According to MRI on the second day (day 2), the oval lesions with diffusion restriction in the same areas appeared swollen, and blood volume and flow in the perilesional areas were decreased. Empirical antibiotic treatment was initiated as metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h, cefotaxime 2 g every 12 h, and dexamethasone 5 mg every 6 h administered through intravenous infusion.
Following a consultation with a representative from the Department of Infectious Disease the following day, cefotaxime 2 g was replaced with ceftriaxone 2 g, dexamethasone 5 mg was continued, and metronidazole 500 mg was discontinued. On day 12 of hospitalization, a follow-up MRI scan showed that the size of the lesions had not changed, and the boundaries of the lesions were more defined with diminished edema . The images from a follow-up CT scan on day 20 confirmed a clear boundary of peripheral edema, and the patient was transferred to the Department of Neurosurgery for surgical drainage. On the following day (day 21), navigation-guided abscess aspiration and drainage was performed in the right mid-frontal lobe under general anesthesia. Abscess fluid was collected during the operation and then incubated in aerobic and anaerobic conditions, followed by Gram staining. After surgery, the patient was transferred to the Department of Neurology, and ceftriaxone 2 g every 12 h and metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h were administered through intravenous infusion. The patient’s symptoms continued to worsen after the operation, even though ceftriaxone 2 g every 12 h and metronidazole 500 mg every 8 h were continued and vancomycin 1 g every 8 h was added. On day 34, the patient was transferred to the Department of Infectious Diseases to continue with this aggressive antibiotic treatment . The patient’s symptoms improved very slowly. It was suspected, therefore, that there was another source of infection, and an intraoral lesion was detected.
The patient was sent to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery in XXX University Hospital on day 41 for consultation. A panoramic X-ray revealed radiolucency around the right maxillary first molar, right maxillary second molar, left maxillary first premolar, and left maxillary third molar. The patient was diagnosed with chronic periodontitis and periapical abscesses . On day 44, the right maxillary first molar, maxillary second molar, left maxillary first premolar, and left maxillary third molar were extracted under local anesthesia in the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery . Abscess fluid from the tooth extraction socket was incubated in aerobic and anaerobic conditions, followed by Gram staining; Streptococcus anginosus was identified. Antibiotic treatment was changed to IV infusion of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 2.4 g every 8 h. The patient’s symptoms started to improve on day 47 . On day 58, brain MRI images confirmed that the three brain abscesses in the frontal lobe were reduced in size, and perilesional edema was confirmed as the interval resolving state . The patient was prescribed amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 625 mg every 8 h by oral administration and discharged from the hospital on day 61.