An HIV-positive 4-year-old boy presented to clinic for evaluation of worsening skin lesions after starting ART. His absolute (percentage) CD4 count at the time of ART initiation was 32 cells/μL (3%) , and he was started on ART with zidovudine-lamivudine-nevirapine. Approximately 3 months after ART initiation, he developed > 30 violaceous papules and plaques, a necrotic edematous circumferential plaque on the distal shaft and glans of the penis, and scattered small subcutaneous nodules in his submandibular and cervical regions . He was clinically diagnosed with Kaposi sarcoma secondary to the immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome due to the classic appearance of his cutaneous lesions. His ART was shifted to abacavir-lamivudine-lopinavir/ritonavir due to anemia (hemoglobin 7.2 g/dL) and potential activity of protease inhibitors against human herpes virus-8 [, ]. He was started on a chemotherapy regimen of bleomcyin (15 U/m2) and vincristine (1.4 mg/m2) every 2 weeks. Biopsy was not obtained initially due to logistical and resource constraints.
After five cycles of this chemotherapeutic regimen, doxorubicin (25–35 mg/m2) was added based on failure to achieve complete clinical remission. The patient completed an additional 10 cycles of bleomycin-vincristine-doxorubicin every 3 weeks without complete remission of the violaceous lesions or penile nodule. During the course of chemotherapy, he achieved full virologic suppression and his CD4 count had increased to 265 cells/μL (13%) after 143 days of antiretroviral therapy . However, his KS lesions continued to persist, and chemotherapy was shifted to monthly paclitaxel. He eventually completed 12 cycles of paclitaxel monotherapy with dexamethasone as a premedication and showed improvement and full resolution of the violaceous skin and penile lesion. However, during this time he developed numerous additional subcutaneous nodules on his trunk, tongue, and extremities that rapidly and progressively increased in size in number .
A biopsy was taken for further investigation. Histopathology of the nodule revealed a cystic structure with a central larval scolex and serrated spiral canal consistent with T. solium, which confirmed the diagnosis of DC . Additional history taking with the caregiver revealed that the patient and his family consumed pork frequently as a regular part of their diet.
Chemotherapy was stopped and he was treated for DC with albendazole 7.5 mg/kg twice daily and praziquantel 25 mg/kg twice daily for 10 days. Prednisone was administered as an adjunctive treatment to limit the possibility of cerebral edema as NCC could not be ruled out (computed tomography scans of the head were unavailable). He had almost complete resolution of all subcutaneous nodules during his 10-day treatment course . All treatment was well-tolerated with minor toxicity (anemia). A small sublingual nodule persisted acutely following treatment, fully resolving several months later. He has not had recurrence of KS or DC after 42 months of follow-up.