In July 2017, a 54-year-old Chinese male with progressive gait disturbance, dysarthria and intermittent diplopia for more than 2 months was admitted. He had a history of cured Hodgkin’s lymphoma 9 years prior. The neurological examination revealed horizontal nystagmus, mild dysarthria, ataxia gait and impaired coordinated movements of limbs. MRI T2-weighted and fluid attenuated inversion recovery sequence images revealed multiple patchy hyperintense lesions bilaterally scattered in the pons, cerebellum, midbrain and middle cerebellar peduncle with nodular gadolinium enhancing . Positron emission tomography-CT had been performed in clinic before admission revealed abnormal accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose in the right cerebellum, which was concerning for a recurred lymphoma. In addition, lumbar puncture was performed in another hospital before admission which only demonstrated a mildly elevated protein concentration (84 mg/dl) and an unremarkable cytology. Cerebellar biopsy was performed and it demonstrated parenchymal and perivascular lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate in the white matter (Supplementary information. Figure S. A). Serum serological tests for syphilis and human immunodeficiency virus were negative. Except for a mildly elevated antinuclear antibodies titer (1:100), the other autoimmune antibody tests were negative. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed a mildly elevated protein concentration (77 mg/dl). Cytology, flow cytometry, immunoglobulin G index and culture of the CSF were unremarkable. Given the lack of evidence for lymphoma, a possible autoinflammatory etiology was considered. A 5-day course of intravenous immunoglobulin (400 mg/day per kilo of weight) was given and the patient was discharged.
One month later, the patient was readmitted with no clinical and radiological improvement. This time, CLIPPERS was considered. Pulse therapy with methylprednisolone at 1 g per day was given for 5 consecutive days, followed by 60 mg of oral prednisolone therapy (1 mg/kg body weight) per day, slowly tapering to 20 mg. The clinical symptoms improved significantly, and MRI showed a decrease in the number and size of punctate and curvilinear gadolinium-enhancing (PCGE) lesions in the cerebellum and pons . Two months later, when the daily dosage of oral prednisolone was reduced to 20 mg, the patient complained of recurring gait disturbance. Brain MRI revealed an increased number of PCGE lesions . The clinical symptoms gradually resolved when the daily dose of oral prednisolone was increased to 50 mg. Azathioprine was added, and there was no recurrence, but the patient had a slight unsteady gait during follow-up.
Seven months later, MRI detected an enhancing nodule in the right masseter muscle . The biopsy demonstrated parotid carcinoma . After resection of the parotid carcinoma and subsequent radiotherapy, with daily dosages of 10 mg oral prednisolone and 50 mg azathioprine, the residual symptoms associated with CLIPPERS disappeared. To date, the patient is free of recrudescence of CLIPPERS, and the PCGE lesions disappeared on follow-up MRI . A serum paraneoplastic autoantibody panel including anti-Hu, anti-Yo, anti-Ri, anti-CV2, anti-Ma1, anti-amphiphysin and anti-Tr was negative.