The patient is a 48-year-old female who presented to our institution following a slip and fall on the ice landing directly onto her low back 1 month before presentation. The patient was evaluated at an outside hospital at the time of initial injury where a computed tomography (CT) scan of the lumbar spine was performed. The CT scan of the lumbar spine demonstrated a non-displaced fracture of the left L5 transverse process and a large subcutaneous fluid collection measuring 15 cm×16 cm×7 cm (-). No additional imaging or laboratory studies were performed and the patient was discharged home.
Upon presentation to our institution, she was complaining of persistent low back swelling that prevented her from sitting or lying on her back comfortably. Physical examination of the patient revealed a large fluctuant mass in the lumbar region, measuring approximately 20 cm×20 cm. No overlying erythema, warmth, or ecchymosis noted. Diffuse tenderness to palpation of the mass was noted. The patient exam was otherwise unremarkable.
The patient was informed of the presence of a persistent fluid collection and given that the patient would likely benefit from operative evacuation, she was offered an open incisional drainage. Treatment options were discussed with the patient and family, and after explaining the risks, benefits, and alternatives to surgery, the patient elected to procedure with surgical irrigation and debridement of the persistent fluid collection. Pre-operative testing was performed with basic laboratory studies; however, no additional imaging studies were obtained.
The patient was taken to the operating room 1 week after the initial clinic visit. She received general anesthesia and was placed on the operating table in the right lateral decubitus position. Pre-operative antibiotics, cefazolin 2 g, were given before incision. The patient was prepped and draped in the typical sterile fashion, and a 2 cm midline incision over the proximal aspect of the fluid collection was made that extended through the subcutaneous tissue, opening the superficial fascia. At this time, a large amount of serosanguinous fluid began exuding from the incision. No purulence noted or obvious necrotic tissue. The fluid obtained was sent for culture and cell count. In total 900 ml of serosanguinous fluid was evacuated. On intraoperative examination of the lesion, it was felt that the fluid collection demonstrated a defined walled-off lesion. The cavity was the irrigated with copious amounts of a normal saline 0.9%/betadine solution. A small wound vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) sponge was placed inside the cavity to aid in absorption of any remaining free fluid and to eliminate the present dead space. Negative pressure therapy was then initiated with machine settings at 175 mmHg continuous. The patient recovered well from anesthesia, no complications were encountered and she was transferred to post-anesthesia care unit (PACU) in stable condition. She was discharged home from the PACU and was instructed to continue the wound VAC therapy until her first follow-up appointment in 4 days, at which a wound VAC change will be completed.
At the first post-operative clinic visit, the wound VAC was removed with good wound healing and dead space closing noted. The incision with then closed with 2-0 Novafil under aseptic conditions. The patient reported improvements in her symptoms and no complications at that time. Intraoperative culture results were finalized on post-operative day 5, demonstrating no anaerobic, aerobic, or fungal growth. The 2-week post-operative visit demonstrated a well healing surgical incision with no evidence of infection or drainage. The patient stated that she was now able to comfortably lay and sit down.