A 41-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with obstructive jaundice and anorexia. For up to 18 years before admission, he worked at a printing company where an outbreak of cholangiocarcinoma occurred, and he was exposed to high concentrations of DCP and DCM over the 6 years of his employment. Six months before his admission, elevated serum gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (γ-GTP) activity was detected during a regular medical examination. The patient had a history of heavy alcohol consumption.
Results of the laboratory tests performed at the first admission revealed an elevated serum total bilirubin concentration (10.7 mg/dL) and elevated activity of aspartate aminotransferase (76 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (226 U/L), and γ-GTP (319 U/L). Though the serum concentration of carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) was within the reference range (2.0 ng/mL), concentrations of the carcinoembryonic antigen and s-pancreas-1 antigen were elevated (17.9 ng/mL and 103.7 U/mL, respectively). A dynamic abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan exhibited dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts with common bile duct obstruction owing to a tumor that was suspected to be an enlarged lymph node (maximum diameter, 45 mm) originating in the hepatoduodenal ligament or peripancreatic region (the bulky lymph node) and invading the common bile duct and pancreatic head as well as enlarged para-aortic lymph nodes . Although the intrahepatic bile ducts were entirely dilated, cystic dilatation of the intraductal tumor suspected as an intraductal papillary neoplasm of the bile duct (IPNB) was identified on CT and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography at the proximal side of the biliary branch in segment 2 (B2) . Adenocarcinoma cells were detected on biliary cytology with endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP). These findings indicated a cholangiocarcinoma as invasive IPNB with extensive lymph node metastases in the hepatoduodenal ligament and in the para-aortic lesion, with curative surgery considered impossible.
After a metallic stent was inserted at the stenosis of the common bile duct during ERCP, he received chemotherapy with a combination of gemcitabine and cisplatin. After 5 cycles of chemotherapy, the size of the intraductal tumor at B2 remained unchanged; however, the bulky lymph node grew up to 120 mm in diameter, evidently invading/obstructing the duodenum . Therefore, we performed laparoscopic gastrojejunostomy with Billroth II reconstruction. Although oral ingestion was achieved after the operation, the patient developed sudden abdominal pain, and an inflammatory response was detected on laboratory test results (white blood cell count of 37,010 cells/μL and C-reactive protein of 30.9 mg/dL) at 19 days after the operation. Abdominal CT revealed ascites and free air around the bulky lymph node . During the emergency laparotomy, the bulky lymph node invading the surrounding organs ruptured with a large amount of purulent ascites. The ruptured orifice was covered with the greater omentum, followed by multiple placements of surgical drains. However, the patient’s general condition gradually worsened, and he died 8 days after the second operation (8 months after admission).
Macroscopic findings during the autopsy examination revealed the bulky lymph node invading the duodenum and transverse colon . An intraductal tumor was also observed in B2 .
Locations of pathological lesions were mapped on the biliary tree, with reference from preoperative radiologic imaging and gross autopsy findings . We histologically defined carcinoma, biliary intraepithelial neoplasia (BilIN), IPNB, and chronic bile duct injury according to the World Health Organization classification for intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma . Pathological examination of the autopsy specimens with H&E staining revealed that the bulky lymph node was diagnosed as a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with partial squamous epithelial differentiation and invasion to the duodenum, common bile duct, pancreas, and liver. BilIN and chronic bile duct injury were identified at various sites in the large bile ducts, and intermediate-grade IPNB without invasion was seen in B2 . In addition, a well-differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, in which the histologic type differed from enlarged lymph node metastasis, was detected at the stromal site of Glisson’s sheath around the proximal side of the bile duct in segment 3 (B3) . Although BilIN was detected in the large bile ducts around this stromal adenocarcinoma lesion , an invasive carcinoma was not obvious in the biliary epithelium of B3, and adenocarcinoma was not detected in any other organs.
Immunological staining using primary antibodies against γH2AX (1:100 Rabbit Monoclonal; Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO, USA), which is a marker for double-strand DNA injuries; S100P (1:100 Rabbit Monoclonal, Epitomics), which is a marker for malignant transformation; and primary antibodies against PD-L1 (clone 28-8, 1:500; Abcam) were performed. Almost all portions of the invasive carcinoma, BilIN, and IPNB had positive expressions of γH2AX and S100P. Although γH2AX expression was also identified within the non-neoplastic biliary epithelium, S100P expression was absent or relatively weak . Neither γH2AX nor S100P expression was detected in hepatocytes. PD-L1 expression was absent in tumor cells at the stromal side of segment 3 of Glisson’s sheath and non-neoplastic epithelium . Although it was < 5%, positive PD-L1 expression was detected in the cells of the bulky lymph node, BilIN, and IPNB .