A 45-year-old male presented with relapsed AML with CNS involvement, complicated by neutropenic fever and sepsis with VRE bacteremia and subsequently developed bilateral subdural hematomas (SDHs) with seeding of VRE into the subdural spaces bilaterally. The patient was initially diagnosed with AML (FLT3/NPM1 wild type, trisomy 7, 7q and 22q deletions, and TET2 and UT2AF1 mutations) approximately 2 months before admission and was started on 7 + 3 therapy (cytarabine and daunorubicin). On outpatient oncology follow-up, he was found to have a right-sided facial droop secondary to Bell’s palsy and admitted to the emergency department, where a head computed tomography (CT) was negative. The patient was subsequently admitted to an outside hospital for nausea and vomiting with a lactate dehydrogenase of 955 and white blood cell count of 78,000 with 35% blasts, for which he was initiated on allopurinol and hydroxyurea and transferred to our institution’s hospital for further medical workup and bone marrow transplant evaluation.
On admission to our institution’s hospital, the patient was afebrile and hemodynamically stable. The patient was alert and oriented though unable to recall the details of previous hospital stays. He endorsed a 20 lbs weight loss over the past 3 months and intermittent 10/10 occipital throbbing headaches. The patient underwent a bone marrow biopsy, which showed relapsed AML, for which he completed high-dose cytarabine and mitoxantrone (HAM) reinduction. Due to new-onset Bell’s palsy, CSF specimens were obtained; pathology and flow cytometry reports were consistent with AML with CNS involvement, . During his hospital course, he developed neutropenic fever to 104 F with 4/4 blood cultures positive for multiple strains of VRE, all of which were susceptible to daptomycin with varying susceptibilities to linezolid. The patient had a negative transthoracic echocardiogram; potential sources of infection included peripherally inserted central catheter line, pulmonary (right lower lobe opacity at the time of infection), or urinary (culture showed rare VRE). The patient was initially treated with daptomycin 12 mg/kg IV every 24 h and linezolid 600 mg IV every 12 h. He was also initiated on voriconazole 4 mg/kg IV titrated to trough goal 2–4 mcg/mL and acyclovir 400 mg IV every 12 h for presumed fungal nodules and viral prophylaxis, respectively. Blood cultures sterilized after 3 days of therapy.
Thirty-one days after admission, the patient was intubated for inability to protect his airway after decompensation with increased emesis and somnolence. He was found to have acute bilateral mixed-density SDHs measuring 8 mm on the left and 5 mm on the right in the setting of profound thrombocytopenia (platelet count = 7 K/µL), . He underwent emergent bilateral frontoparietal and right inferior temporal burr hole craniotomies for evacuation with subdural drain placement bilaterally. Intraoperative tissue sent for cultures was notable for the growth of VRE susceptible to linezolid and daptomycin, 7 days after sterilization of blood cultures. The patient’s regimen was broadened to combination high-dose therapy of daptomycin 12 mg/kg IV every 24 h, linezolid 600 mg IV every 8 h, imipenem/cilastatin 1000 mg IV every 8 h, voriconazole, and acyclovir prophylaxis. Due to the presence of subdural VRE and presumed unsuccessful treatment of recent VRE bacteremia, the inadequate blood–brain barrier penetration of IV daptomycin led to the decision that subdural administration of daptomycin would be required to adequately sterilize the subdural space. Daptomycin 5 mg in sodium chloride 0.9% 2 ml solution was aseptically compounded and administered into the subdural spaces bilaterally (total 10 mg) over 4 min followed by a 1–2 ml sodium chloride 0.9% flush. Following administration, the subdural drain was clamped for as long as tolerated. The right subdural drain was noted to have no additional output after POD #2. Subsequent head CT was confirmed stable on POD #3 with resolution of bilateral SDH. On POD #3, the patient was noted to have acute improvement: he was intermittently responding to commands, making his needs known, and moving all extremities spontaneously with equal strength. His pupils were equal, round at 3 mm, and reactive. The patient localized the right upper extremity and withdrew the left upper extremity and bilateral lower extremities.
Daptomycin 2.5 mg in sodium chloride 0.9% 2 ml solution with 1–2 ml saline flush was administered to the left subdural drain 72 h after the initial bolus dose (POD #5). Subdural daptomycin administration was limited to the left subdural drain in a setting of a nonfunctioning right subdural drain requiring removal. The patient remained on IV daptomycin, linezolid, and imipenem/cilastatin for broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage during this time and after subdural administration of daptomycin. The subdural drains were pulled after the second administration of daptomycin on POD #5 and the patient was transferred out of the ICU with planned bone marrow biopsy and reinduction-HAM chemotherapy.
The patient’s hospital course was complicated by the observation of delta discharges over the left centroparietal and posterior regions consistent with ictal to interictal spectrum with the right upper limb and hand twitching indicating Epilepsia partialis continua on POD #11 through POD #19. The right-sided myoclonic jerk was noted to increase on deliberate movement of the right upper extremity, i.e., holding his arms outstretched in front of him and not noted at rest. Due to the acute onset, focal seizure secondary to cortical irritation from blood products or subdural daptomycin was suspected versus hemispasm secondary to Bell’s palsy. Additional findings included generalized polymorphic theta slowing with prominent left temporal theta slowing. The patient was without clinical improvement after treatment with levetiracetam 1500 mg twice daily and phenytoin therapy. He was transitioned to levetiracetam 1500 mg twice daily and lacosamide 200 mg twice daily on hospital discharge.