A 68 year old man presented with a five month history of progressive dysphagia and weight loss of 5 kg. An adenocarcinoma arising in Barrett's epithelium in the lower third of the esophagus was diagnosed, and staging including CT-PET and endoscopic ultrasound suggested clinical T3N1 M0 staging. He was treated with a standard regimen of neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy prior to esophagectomy . At surgery, extensive fibrosis was evident, and an en-bloc resection was performed including thoracic duct, part of pericardium, and mediastinal lymph node dissection including complete clearance of the sub-carinal nodes, and a cervical hand-sewn anastomosis was fashioned. Pathology revealed a ypT3N1 tumor, with clear margins, and 7 of 30 glands involved by tumor.
On day four postoperatively he had a neutrophil leucocytosis of 15 × 109/L and evidence of left basal consolidation. This persisted despite antibiotics, and a CT of thorax demonstrated no other abnormalities. He was managed on the ward, and his FiO2 varied from 0.4 to 0.6. Aspiration pneumonia was considered possible, and his nasogastric tube was left in situ. His neck wound was dry with no signs of inflammation or leakage. On day 14 the nasogastric drainage bag dramatically filled with air, and this persisted throughout the day and succeeding days, but without deterioration in respiratory function or evidence of progressive sepsis. A fiberoptic bronchoscopy was performed on day 16 which demonstrated bubbling at a gastro-bronchial fistula in the posterior aspect of the left main bronchus . An endoscopy revealed a healthy gastric tube but a tiny area of granulation tissue in the anterior portion of the anastomosis, the assumed site of fistula communication. A CT scan of the thorax demonstrated air in the mediastinum and the gastric conduit He was managed conservatively with antibiotics, enteral nutrition via a jejunostomy, and non-invasive respiratory support in the form of humidified oxygen via face mask and chest physiotherapy. The huge amounts of air in the nastogastric bag persisted for a further 9 days. When it subsided, he was introduced to oral diet and progressed well and was discharged. A follow- up bronchoscopy 60 days after the diagnostic bronchoscopy, confirmed spontaneous closure of the fistula .