A 28-year-old male patient was referred to ophthalmology department of Gulhane Military Medical Academy in Ankara, Turkey, with blurred vision in his left eye in May 2010. His complaint developed 3 month ago. Visual acuity was 20/20 in both of his eyes. Biomicroscopy and fundoscopy findings were normal in the right eye. In his left eye, there was mutton-fat keratic precipitate, + 2 anterior chamber cell and + 2 vitreous cell in biomicroscopy and fundoscopy showed minimal optic disc hyperemia. Intraocular pressures, ocular motilities and pupil reactions of both eyes were normal .
At the right side, there was madarosis of lateral part of upper and lower eyelid . There was an alopecia area at left eyebrow and a linear sclerotic lesion placed at his left forehead. Also, there was hemifacial asymmetry at his right part of face . Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA) (HRA, Heidelberg Retinal Angiogram; Heidelberg Engineering GmBH, Dossenheim, Germany) revealed periferic retinal vasculitis and late phase optic disc hyperfluorescence in his left eye . Foveal thickness and retinal nerve fiber layer analysis in ocular coherence tomography (Stratus III OCT™; Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Jena, Germany) was in normal ranges. Laboratory tests including blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, routine chemistries, antinuclear antibody (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), anti-dsDNA, anticardiolipin and antiphospholipid antibody, fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS), anti-TORCH antibodies, C3, IgG and IgM, romatoid factor, C-reactive protein, serum angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) levels, tuberculosis, Lyme and Brucella screening were normal. Dental consultation revealed no disorder in mouth, tongue and teeth. After physical examination and dental consultation, the patient was diagnosed as PRS with hemifacial atrophy at right facial side and after a detailed questionnaire the patient noted a subcutaneous fat injection under his right cheek. We diagnosed idiopathic granulomatous panuveitis in his left eye and started the topical and systemic steroid therapy. Uveitic reaction had regressed almost entirely after a 3-month steroid treatment.