A 27-year-old male Caucasian professional football player had recurrent pain and swelling of his left knee. Seven years ago at another center, our patient underwent arthroscopic reconstruction of his left anterior cruciate ligament with a bone-patellar tendon autograft and partial lateral meniscectomy. His present complaints began one year after the initial surgery, and a large chondral lesion was detected on his lateral femoral condyle. On two occasions our patient had undergone microfracture procedures, but had been unable to return to the professional sport due to constant pain and swelling of his knee. On examination, our patient had full extension and 130° of flexion, and elicited pain on the lateral side of his knee after 60° of flexion. He had an effusion and loose bodies were palpated in the lateral recess. Anterior drawer, Lachman and McMurray tests were negative. Tegner-Lysholm and Brittberg-Peterson scores were 64 and 58, respectively. Neurologic and vascular examinations were normal.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a grade 4 large chondral lesion at the weight-bearing area of the lateral femoral condyle of his left knee .
Informed consent was obtained from our patient and approval was obtained from the local ethics committee. An arthroscopic examination revealed a large chondral defect with a rough surface measuring 3 cm × 3 cm (Outerbridge grade 4, Noyes grade 3B) on the lateral femoral condyle . Loose bodies were removed, and autologous cartilage biopsies were obtained from the superomedial edge of the femoral trochlea and sent to a commercial cell culturing facility.
Two months later, a MACI procedure was performed. With our patient under general anesthesia, the lesion was approached via a lateral 10 cm parapatellar incision. Osteophytes were excised, the cartilage defect was debrided to the subchondral bone with a 90° angled rougine, and the surface was smoothened with a low-speed burr. The defect size was measured as 3 cm × 3 cm (9 cm2) and MACI implant was resized over a template to match the defect size. A fibrin-containing tissue glue (Tisseel, Baxter Inc., Seoul, Republic of Korea) was used to fix the scaffold containing the cultured autologous chondrocyte within the defect. After five minutes in full extension, flexion and extension movements were performed to check for implant fixation. The wound was then closed layer by layer.
Our patient remained non-weight-bearing for six weeks postoperatively, began partial weight-bearing from the seventh postoperative week, and gradually progressed to full weight-bearing at 12 weeks. Range of motion exercises from 0° to 40° were started on the second day after the procedure, using continuous passive motion for four to six hours daily. After one week, the range of motion was increased by 5° per day. During this period, a quadriceps strengthening exercise and stretching of the hamstrings and calf were continued. Six months after the procedure our patient was allowed to jog and to initiate low velocity running. The physical therapy and fitness program were continued for nine months. Our patient was on the football field with full activity at the end of the first year.
At his last follow-up, two years after the index procedure, our patient had a full range of motion with no lateral knee pain or swelling. Tegner-Lysholm and Brittberg-Peterson scores were 91 and 6, respectively. He was playing in a professional football league and had a good performance within full season matches.
MRI was performed (Philips, Achieva 3 T, Amsterdam, Netherlands) every six months. An MRI evaluation two years after the MACI confirmed that our patient maintained an excellent repair of the defect under the high demands of professional soccer .
Our patient had no complaints, but a second-look arthroscopy was performed to evaluate the outcomes of the MACI procedure at two years. Informed consent was taken. The cartilage defect was totally healed with the same margin to the normal cartilage and as robust as healthy cartilage . Our patient did not give permission for a biopsy.