A 63-year-old Japanese woman had been aware of a lump in her left nipple for more than 30 years. Breast cancer was previously ruled out at another hospital, but she did not receive further follow-up. She underwent computed tomography (CT) for screening congestive heart failure and a mass in the left nipple was detected. She was referred to our department on suspicion of breast cancer .
The left nipple tumor was 40 mm in size without obvious erosion, but the nipple was easily hemorrhagic. CT revealed a heterogeneous internal mass lesion consistent with the nipple area of the left breast. There were no enlarged lymph nodes in the axilla or around the clavicle. Mammography revealed a fine lobulated mass with pleomorphic and conglomerated calcifications consistent in the nipple area, and the lesion was classified as category 4 . Ultrasonography revealed that the left nipple was occupied by a hypoechoic mass of 39 × 31 mm in size with abundant blood flow . Echo-guided needle biopsy with a 14G needle was performed and prolifetating atypical. Pathological findings of biopsy specimen showed a proliferating atypical epithelial cells exhibiting adenoductal, cribriform, and cord-like structures were histologically observed. The proliferating epithelium displayed mosaic expression of cytokeratin (CK) 5/6 and CK14. The diagnosis of sclerosing adenopathy and intraductal papilloma was made on the basis of the findings of hyperplasia . Although needle biopsy was suspicious for sclerosing adenopathy and intraductal papilloma, because of the large size of the tumor, and tendency to bleed easily, breast cancer or Paget’s disease was not completely excluded, thus skin punch biopsy was performed to confirm the diagnosis.
Proliferation of small glandular ducts was observed in the dermis, and sclerotic stroma was observed in the deep dermis. The bilayered structure of the epithelium and myoepithelium was preserved with no obvious atypia and Paget’s cells. Because the sample was taken from the nipple area, nipple adenoma was strongly suspected. Both needle and skin biopsies revealed no evidence of malignancy, but surgery was performed because of persistent bleeding from the tumor. Considering her general condition, we resected the nipple tumor (40 × 38 × 34 mm) under local anesthesia .
Post-operative pathology results showed that it maintains continuity with the epidermis and has a varied histology, with findings that may resemble papillomas or sclerosing adenopathy. Keratin cysts and squamous cellularity were also seen. The proliferating epithelium remained bilayered with epithelium and myoepithelium. No malignant findings were identified, and the lesion was diagnosed as nipple adenoma.
The healing of the postoperative wound was uneventful, and the patient is followed up by imaging tests. The patient has remained free from recurrence 2 years since surgery.