A 66-year-old woman presented with acute back pain after having lunch and she was transported by ambulance. Her body temperature was 35.9 °C, heart rate was 80 bpm, blood pressure was 101/65 mmHg, and consciousness was clear. On abdominal examination, she had upper quadrant spontaneous pain and moderate tenderness, but no guarding or rebound pain. She had a duodenal ulcer several years ago. She was taking 10 mg of steroids per day for rheumatoid arthritis.
The admission laboratory data included the following: white blood cell count, 18.2 × 103/μl, hemoglobin, 10.7 g/dl, hematocrit, 32.4%, platelets, 22.6 × 104/μl, C-reactive protein, 3.32 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase, 25 IU/l, alanine aminotransferase, 49 IU/l, and serum amylase, 43 IU/l. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a retroperitoneal hematoma at the ventral side of the left kidney, extravasation of contrast agent from a branch of the SMA, and ascites in the pelvis . Utilizing detailed three-dimensional CT (3DCT), we confirmed the extravasation of contrast agent from a branch of the SMA .
We diagnosed her with a ruptured artery aneurysm of the TPA originating from the SMA. We conferred with our IVR team on treatment strategy for the ruptured aneurysm. In addition, we finally selected operation since the branch of the SMA to the aneurysm was too thin and complex to conduct IVR. In addition, the patient went into shock in the emergency room. For these reasons, we immediately performed emergency surgery. When we opened the abdomen, we found hematoma in the omental bursa. We opened the omental bursa and removed the transverse mesocolon from the lower edge of the pancreas. There was massive hematoma behind the pancreas. After removing the hematoma, we found that a branch of the SMA was bleeding. This branch was the TPA and it had a hemorrhagic aneurysm of approximately 5 mm . We ligated and resected the aneurysm, and the surgery was finished. The patient was hospitalized in the intensive care unit for 3 days. Although she had pancreatitis, the postoperative course was relatively smooth and she was discharged home 30 days after surgery.