A 64-year-old, BMI 32.7 kg/m2, American Society of Anesesthesiolgists (ASA) physical status III, female was scheduled for right hip replacement because of bone fracture. She received a surgery for bilateral lower extremity varicose veins 8 years ago and recovered well. There is no past medical history of hypertension, diabetes mellitus or cerebrovascular diseases. Patient had no drug or food allergies, never smoked cigarettes or consumed alcohol.
Chest X-ray showed heart shadow enlargement (cardiothoracic ratio: 0.65) and slight pleural effusion left side. Echocardiogram showed bilateral atrial dilatation, atrial fibrillation, slight bicuspid and tricuspid regurgitation, right pulmonary mild hypertension (pulmonary arterial systolic pressure: 51 mmHg) and a decreased systolic function of left ventricular. ECG showed acceleration of ventricular rate, atrial fibrillation and T wave non specific changes. D-dimer was 2.517 μg/ml (normal: 0–0.3 μg/ml). Other laboratory assessments were within normal limits. Despite abnormal findings in pre-procedure tests, no uncomfortable symptoms were reported. She emphasized to be in good condition before the fracture that she could do Dama square dance for 2 h every day after supper. There were no complaints except for the pain due to bone fracture. She denied further examination or treatment and insisted on an operation for the fracture as soon as possible, as it reduced her life quality severely.
Therefore she was scheduled for surgery and transferred to the operating room 3 days after admission. Preoxygen and monitoring were performed, which showed BP 110/80 mmHg, HR 140 bpm and SpO2 98%. Considering her anxiety and tachycardia, 10 mg esmolol and 60 μg dexmedetomidine were given intravenously in 10 min. Soon the heart rate slowed down and stabled at 110 bpm. Arterio radialis puncture was performed for invasive blood pressure monitoring under 1% lidocaine local anesthesia. For anesthesia induction, midazolam (0.03 mg/kg), fentanyl (4 μg/kg), etomidate (0.25 mg/kg) and cisatracurium (0.2 mg/kg) were administered. After intubation, mechanical ventilation started with volume control model (RR:12 breaths per minute, tidal volume:6-8 ml/kg, PETCO2:35-45 mmHg). General anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane (1%), propofol (4-10 mg/kg/h), remifentanil (0.1–0.2 μg/kg/min), cisatracurium (0.1 mg/kg/h) and dexmedetomidine (0.5 μg/kg/h). A central venous catheter was placed in the right internal jugular vein under ultrasonic guidance in case of mass transfusion and vasoactive drugs application intraoperatively. Patient was then placed in left lateral decubitus position and the operation began.
Approximately 1 h later, when the surgery was almost finished and the incision was closing, a sudden pronounced decrease in oxygen saturation (100%–66%) was noticed, along with gradually increased airway pressure(22-33cmH2O) and decrease in blood pressure (lowest to 89/60 mmHg). PETCO2 decreased from 34 mmHg to 22 mmHg. ECG showed rapid atrial fibrillation (heart rate 140-160 bpm). Auscultation revealed bilateral breath sounds. Central venous pressure (CVP) was assessed immediately with a value of 30cmH2O. Instant arterial blood gas analysis showed hypercapnia . The opposite trend of PaCO2 and PETCO2, combined with other signs and medical history, indicated the possibility of APE. Transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was arranged at once, which showed enlargement of the right atrial, abnormal echoic area in pulmonary artery (considering thrombus) and pulmonary hypertension (pulmonary arterial systolic pressure: 77 mmHg) (Additional file 1: Movie S1).
Multidisciplinary consultation started simultaneously. Mechanical and manual ventilation were controlled alternately. Cedilanid (0.2 mg), phenylephrine (0.03–0.06 mg/kg/min), 5% NaHCO3 liquid (100 ml) and methylprednisolone (500 mg) were administered intravenously to maintain hemodynamic stability and improve internal environment. All fluids were limited to reduce the cardiac load. 11 min later, SpO2 increased to 95% and BP rose to 120/80 mmHg. A following systematic ultrasound examination revealed deep venous thrombosis, which was not found before the surgery and might be the source of pulmonary embolism. After discussion with surgical and respiratory consultation team and communication with the patient’s family members, low molecular weight heparin calcium(LMWHC) (6000 IU) was given and inferior vena cava (IVC) filter was implanted in DSA operating room. After surgery, the patient was transferred to ICU intubated. Patient recovered her consciousness 3 h later and extubated the next morning. Further treatment including anticoagulation, alleviation of pulmonary hypertension and atrial fibrillation therapy was continued. IVC filter was removed 20 days later. Her condition was improved and all vital signs maintained stable. The patient was discharged from hospital uneventfully one month later.