A 61-year-old man presented with a 3-month history of increasing pain in his left groin, and numbness and radiating pain in the anterior and medial thigh without any injury. He reported that he was in constant pain and that his pain continued during sleeping hours. The pain and numbness were markedly increased when he was in a sitting position. Although he had opportunities to sit in his job as a factory manager, he was unable to do so due to the increased pain and numbness that he experienced while sitting. At the medical examination, he was unable to sit on the chair in the consultation room. A physical examination revealed tenderness in the femoral triangle and radiating pain and numbness. There was no palpable mass or muscle atrophy. The patient was observed to limp from the time of start of walking. His range of motion was observed to be restricted to 100 of flexion, 10 of extension, and 10 of internal rotation due to an increase in the radiating thigh pain and numbness. Plain radiographs showed no osteoarthritic changes (, ). Computed tomography showed a bump and bone cyst in the anterolateral aspect of the femoral neck (, ). The presence of cam type femoroacetabular impingement was indicated. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a cyst situated at the medial side of iliopsoas muscle and tendon. Its dimensions were 56 mm in the coronal view and 22×24 mm in the axial view. The mass, which was compressing the neurovascular bundle, was continuous with the hip joint (, , ). Based on these findings, a ganglion cyst arising from the hip joint and femoral nerve palsy associated with the ganglion were diagnosed. Initially, the patient was treated conservatively for 2 months with a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. However, his pain and numbness worsened, leading us to perform surgery. Hip arthroscopy was performed under general anesthesia in thesupine position with traction. Three portals (anterior: A-portal, mid-anterior: MA-portal, and anterolateral: AL-portal) were used. A Vulcan and Shaver (smith and Nephew: London, UK) were inserted through the MA-portal, and a 70° arthroscope was inserted from the AL-portal. Capsulotomy was performed to connect the AL-portal to the MA-portal. From the MA-portal, the joint capsule (which was adjacent to the iliopsoas tendon) was dissected, and the iliopsoas tendon was identified. The capsule dissection was continued in the cranial direction to expose the iliopsoas tendon. The arthroscope from the AL-portal was used to partially resect the articular side of the iliopsoas tendon. The A-portal was used to secure visualization and the operation space. The arthroscope was changed from 70° to 30° to observe the more medial side of the iliopsoas tendon and an incision was made on the medial side of the tendon using the Vulcan. The fluid contained in the ganglion was discharged, and the ganglion stalk connecting the ganglion to the joint was cut open (see Additional file 1: Ganglion movie). Synovectomy, labral partial debridement, and osteochondral plasty for cam deformity were also performed in this surgery, The patient’s groin pain and the radiating pain and numbness of his thigh disappeared immediately after surgery. On MRI, the ganglion shrank at 3 months after surgery and had almost disappeared at 6 months (, ). At the final follow-up examination(9months postoperatively), the patient became aware of slight groin pain when he twisted the hip joint. The modified Harris hip score was improved from 58 points preoperatively to 87 points postoperatively.