A 56-year-old man complained of passing proglottids in his stool intermittently over the last two months. No abdominal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea, or constipation were present. He reported frequent consumption of raw beef and fish (both marine and freshwater fish), and had no history of traveling abroad. He had previously obtained 400 mg of albendazole from the pharmacy and taken it once orally without clinical improvement. After that, he was prescribed 600 mg of praziquantel at a local clinic and had taken it once orally as well. He brought his stool sample, which included the passed segments to our hospital . The segments were pressed between two microscope slides and examined macroscopically without staining. We could not observe gravid proglottids, which contain fully developed uteri filled with ova, or branched uterine structures. To identify the tapeworm species, we conducted molecular analysis using the proglottid segments. Genomic DNA was extracted using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) and subsequently used as a template for polymerase chain reaction (PCR). The mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit I (cox1) gene and partial sequences of elongation factor-1 alpha (ef1a) were targeted for PCR amplification. The sequences of the PCR primers used were: T1F (5’-ATATTTACT TTAGATCATAAGCGG-3′) and T1R (5’-ACGAGAAAATATATTAGTCATAAA-3′) for cox1, and Tae_ef1/F4 (5’-TGTGGTGGAATCGATAAAAGG-3′) and Tae_ef1/R4 (5’-TCGATCTCATGTCACGAACG -3′) for ef1a [, ]. PCR was carried out using a 30 μL reaction mixture containing 15 μL Smart 2 × PCR Pre-Mix (SolGent Co., Ltd., Daejeon, Korea), 2 μL template DNA, 10 μM of each primer, and 11 μL distilled water, as described in a previous study . The amplification process comprised 35 cycles of denaturation (94 °C for 30 s), annealing (60 °C for 30 s), and extension (72 °C for 80–90 s). The PCR products were sent to Macrogen (Korea) for direct sequencing using the same PCR primers. The 480-bp cox1 sequence had a 100% match with the T. saginata sequence and a 94.8% match with the T. asiatica sequence. The 1078-bp ef1a sequence also had a 100% match with the sequence of T. saginata, a 99.3% match with the sequence of T. asiatica and a 95.3% match with the sequence of T. solium. The three Taenia species that infect humans had nucleotide differences at 73 and 57 polymorphic sites for the cox1 and ef1a sequences, respectively (Additional file ). Of these polymorphic sites, three sites (nucleotides 294, 336, 405) in cox1 differentiated the three species. DNA sequences were aligned using the CLUSTAL W computer program . Phylogenetic trees were constructed using the neighbor joining method and genetic distances were computed using the Tamura-Nei method using the Geneious computer program . The neighbor joining tree used GenBank sequences derived from samples collected in Asia, and indicated that our specimen was in the same phylogenetic group as T. saginata, but not in the same group as T. asiatica or T. solium. In addition to molecular analysis, we also examined the patient’s stool specimen using the formalin-ether concentration method. However, we could not observe any Taenia species ova on the 10 slides examined. Ova were not observed inside the proglottids either, indicating that these proglottids were immature. Instead, C. sinensis ova were observed on one slide . Conversely, the level of serum IgG specific to C. sinensis measured using Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) was within the normal range. He was treated with praziquantel at the recommended dose of 25 mg/kg three times daily for 3 days . After treatment, no proglottids or ova of C. sinensis were found in his stool.