An 85-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with congestive heart failure due to severe MR and pneumonia. Her medical history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease requiring a steroid inhaler. Her dyspnoea persisted after she recovered from pneumonia with antibiotic therapy. She was then re-admitted twice for exacerbation of her heart failure regardless administration of drugs (loop diuretics, sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitor, and tolvaptan). The chest X-ray showed pulmonary congestion and right pleural effusion and the electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm. The transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed severe degenerative MR due to posterior mitral leaflet prolapse , and the suitable mitral valve characteristics for TEER (mitral valve area: 2.94 cm2; length of posterior leaflet: 7.56 mm; basal mean trans-mitral gradients: 4.5 mmHg; and fossa co-aptation height: 33 mm). Mitral valve intervention was deemed necessary, but she was not considered a candidate for surgical mitral repair due to both obstructive and restrictive lung disease and advanced age. The heart team ultimately concluded she was a candidate for TEER. A pre-TEER computed tomography scan revealed no coronary artery disease but a persistent left superior vena cava (SVC) and double IVC (; , ). She had a small body habitus (height: 131 cm; weight: 41.1 kg; body surface area: 1.17 m2), and the right IVC, with a diameter of 4.6 mm, was considered small for TEER device delivery. Despite these challenges, TEER was pursued since she was deemed a high surgical risk.
Under general anaesthesia, the right femoral vein was punctured, and the guidewire successfully advanced into the SVC. After puncturing the mid-posterior fossa ovalis, the steering guide catheter (SGC) encountered a gradual increase in resistance, which prohibited the advancement of the SGC at the mid-abdominal level. The SGC was retrieved once, and a bougie with a large bore sheath dilator (24Fr, 15 cm) was gently advanced. Venography demonstrated no injury to the venous system. After a careful bougie manoeuvre, the SGC reached the right and left atrium without significant difficulty after very slow and cautious advancement over 10 min . The ‘puncture-to-mitral co-aptation’ height was 41.6 mm. Using three-dimensional TEE guidance, the clip (MitraClip NT; Abbott Vascular, Menlo Park, CA, USA) was navigated into the left ventricle, capturing the A2-P2 segments and achieving an excellent reduction of MR from severe to trivial . The mean trans-mitral gradient was 3 mmHg, which was considered acceptable. The SGC was removed carefully. After the removal, the completion venography again demonstrated no injury (see , ). After TEER, the symptoms and exercise tolerance significantly improved. She was transferred to a rehabilitation facility on post-procedure Day 15 with heart failure medications.