A 61-year-old man presented with unilateral ocular pain and injection for 2 months. His best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 bilaterally and intraocular pressures were normal. Slit lamp examination showed a localized inflamed superonasal bulbar conjunctival swelling in the form of scleritis in his left eye . Normal fundus with no choroidal folds or serous retinal detachment was found. On peripheral blood tests, full blood count, leucocyte count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were normal. Testing for antinuclear antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, rheumatoid factor, anti-dsDNA IgG, angiotensin converting enzyme and HLA-B27 were normal or negative. The patient was diagnosed with anterior scleritis and treated with topical steroid (fluometholone 4 times a day) and oral prednisolone (30 mg once a day). During tapering the steroid, previous lesion subsided , but newly developed lesion was found on the temporal area of the left eye at a dose of 10 mg/d of prednisolone . The relapse and remission was repeated for 6 months in spite of several courses of steroid treatment.
One week after the cessation of steroid, he complained of severe retro-orbital pain and blurred vision in his left eye. His left vision was decreased into count finger. The pupil was mid dilated and a relative afferent pupillary defect was found. Funduscopic examination demonstrated vitritis and disc swelling in the left eye. Orbit magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated enhancing soft tissue encasing the left globe, where medial rectus muscle and optic nerve were enlarged and enhanced with scleral thickening . On systemic evaluation, computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed multiple clustered nodules in right lower lung (RLL) with tubular shadow and multiple small mediastinal lymph nodes. Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) biopsy was performed and immunohistochemical stain against IgG4 demonstrated that the number of IgG4-positive plasma cell were elevated to > 50 cells per high-power field . In addition, an IgG4/IgG plasma cell ratio of 46.5% was observed . Serum IgG4 level was elevated at 210.7 mg/dl.
The patient was diagnosed as IgG4-RD and began intravenous (IV) injection of hydrocortisone 50 mg tid for 1 week, followed by IV methylprednisolone 60 mg for 4 days. He was treated with 25 mg of oral methylprednisolone daily for 2 weeks, the dose was gradually reduced by 5 mg every 2 weeks and maintained methotrexate 10 mg once a week. Long-term treatment with corticosteroids and a steroid-sparing agent (methotrexate) led to significant improvement in signs and symptoms. Visual acuity was improved into 20/40 and no recurrence was observed after 2 years of follow-up.