A fifty-year-old Caucasian male sustained paraplegia at T-5 level in 1987 while driving his car, which skidded and crashed. He had been managing his bladder with long-term indwelling urethral catheter. He developed a false passage in posterior urethra. Therefore, he used undergo flexible cystoscopy and change of catheter over a guide wire. He used to have a size 16 Fr. silicone Foley catheters with 10 ml balloon.
In 2005, this patient underwent above-knee amputation for pressure sore over left knee joint. He was readmitted to Spinal Injuries Centre in February 2008 for revision of the stump. On one night during his stay in spinal unit, the patient felt that there had been a tug on the drainage tube while he was being turned as part of the routine care for relief of pressure. Next morning, a health professional noticed that a long segment of catheter was lying outside penis. There was no bleeding from urethral meatus. Catheter continued to drain urine, which was yellowish in colour. Urine output was satisfactory. This patient did not develop any clinical feature of autonomic dysreflexia nor was he feeling unwell.
In view of positive long catheter sign, radiological studies were performed to check the position of Foley catheter . X-ray of urinary bladder, taken after injecting contrast both through balloon channel and main lumen of Foley catheter showed the Foley balloon to be lying in urethra. This radiological study confirmed the clinical impression of incorrectly positioned Foley catheter. The catheter was removed; flexible cystoscopy was performed. A 16 Fr, 20 ml balloon Foley catheter was inserted over a 0.032" guide wire. Following this procedure, a considerably shorter length of Foley catheter remained outside the penis. Positive long catheter sign could be recognised readily when Figure is compared with Figure . Insertion of a Foley catheter with 20 ml balloon, and securing the drainage tube to thigh with two straps, helped to prevent inadvertent pull of Foley balloon into the urethra.