A 69-year-old right-handed female with a medical history of migraines presented with a persistent left frontal headache for 1 year. She characterized the headache as morning onset, non-radiating, and lasting several minutes with spontaneous resolution. It was not associated with visual changes, nausea, vomiting, altered mental status, or constitutional symptoms. Neurologic examination showed no focal deficits.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an enhancing soft-tissue lesion within the atrium of the left lateral ventricle [-]. The lesion was associated with mild periventricular edema in the periatrial region, extending along the temporal region. Diffusion-weighted imaging showed no diffusion restriction. There was no evidence of hydrocephalus or midline shift. There were two incidental small enhancing lesions in noncontiguous areas of the brain parenchyma, without surrounding edema. One lesion was noted within the left corona radiata [-] while the second was noted along the left parasagittal frontoparietal region [-].
Five months earlier, the patient presented to the hospital with similar complaints. Complete workup, including computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, and lumbar puncture to evaluate for infectious, inflammatory, and neoplastic causes, was negative. MRI showed the same intraventricular lesion coinciding with the choroid plexus, in addition to the two enhancing lesions in the parenchyma. However, at this time, postinfectious inflammation from COVID-19 infection 4 months before the onset of headaches was considered a potential etiology of the lesions and symptoms. Thus, no treatment was initiated, and surgery was not considered, at this time. Follow-up MRI 5 months later [-] demonstrated a mild increase in the size of the intraventricular lesion. Differential diagnosis included meningioma or choroid plexus lesion. The two additional incidental lesions remained stable.
We decided to perform an excisional biopsy of the tumor under general anesthesia, with the intent of using direct vision to control potential intraventricular bleeding. A 3 cm × 3 cm left parietal craniotomy was performed. A tubular retractor was guided to the left atrium of the lateral ventricle using neuronavigation. An operating microscope was used for visualization. Once the ventricle was entered, the lesion was firm and encapsulated, in a distinct plane relative to surrounding structures. It was separated from the choroid plexus and removed en bloc to avoid spilling its contents into the ventricular system. Grossly, the tumor had the appearance of a meningioma.
Postoperatively, systemic steroid therapy was initiated. MRI on postoperative day 9 demonstrated gross total resection (GTR) of the tumor [-]. The two additional incidental lesions remained stable. The patient remained neurologically intact.
Pathology of the tumor was consistent with MZBCL of the MALT type. Histologic examination revealed a dense diffuse infiltrate of small lymphoid cells with dark nuclei and scant to moderate amounts of pale cytoplasm, with occasional aggregates resembling germinal centers. Scattered psammomatous calcification was seen. Most tumor cells were CD20 and PAX5 positive B-cells negative for cyclin D1, CD5, CD10, CD43, and MYC. A subset of B-cells was BCL6 and Ki-67 positive in irregular aggregates, consistent with germinal centers. Kappa light chain restriction was present. Tumor cells were negative for Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNAs by in situ hybridization. The Ki-67 proliferation index outside germinal centers was 20%.
Additional workup was performed to rule out peripheral involvement. Bone marrow biopsy demonstrated involvement by CD10 and CD5 negative B-cell lymphoma in 10–20% of cells by immunostaining, consistent with the patient’s MZBCL. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography scan showed no evidence of pathologic FDG uptake.
She is receiving adjuvant treatment with Rituximab, planned for 9 months, and Ibrutinib maintenance therapy planned for 2 years. At 6 months after surgery, she was neurologically intact and free of disease, demonstrated by lumbar puncture and complete neuraxis MRI.