A 13-year-old girl was brought by her parents to our hospital’s emergency department after allegedly falling from a cliff that was ~13 feet in height. The patient resided in the rural hills of Nepal and reportedly fell while playing with her friend, which aligned with the injury mechanism described by the patient. The initial primary survey yielded unremarkable results. Subsequently, the Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (FAST) scan showed normal findings. Her blood pressure measured 90/60 mmHg, her pulse rate was 95 beats per minute, her respiratory rate was 20 breaths per minute, and her oxygen saturation on room air was 93%. During the secondary survey, notable findings included a 2 cm×2 cm laceration located on the left supraorbital area, multiple abrasions over the periumbilical, suprapubic, right and left iliac fossa of the abdomen, and a 3 cm×2 cm laceration on the left lumbar region. The patient reported pain in these injury sites, as well as generalized abdominal discomfort. The patient denied experiencing headaches, nausea, vomiting, chest pain, shortness of breath, or pain in any of her limbs. She had no difficulty passing urine. The systemic examination yielded normal results. Her abdomen was soft and showed no signs of distension or tenderness. There were no injuries inconsistent with the reported mechanism of injury, and the patient exhibited no abnormal behavior.
The patient was admitted to the emergency department for further evaluation. She was monitored at regular intervals for any new symptoms and any changes in her vital parameters. A complete blood count, renal function test, serum electrolytes and urine for routine examination, and radiography of the chest and abdomen were ordered . The X-rays revealed no abnormalities . After receiving preliminary care for her external injuries she was then admitted to the inpatient ward of the hospital for observation and was administered appropriate analgesics and intravenous fluids. The patient at admission complained of no other symptoms apart from abdominal discomfort and pain over the right lower abdomen. The patient remained stable throughout the night, with no changes in her symptoms or signs. However, the discomfort and pain she experienced persisted. In addition to repeating the complete blood count blood tests, further investigations were conducted; including serum amylase, serum lipase, and C-reactive protein level . Due to the patient’s elevated acute phase reactants and persistent discomfort, a mere observation approach was deemed insufficient, despite the absence of remarkable examination findings. An abdominal ultrasound was conducted one day after admission, which indicated minimal fluid and mild thickening of the bowel in the right iliac fossa, aligning with the patient’s site of pain but not corresponding to her external injuries. The appendix was not visualized during the ultrasound. As the patient remained stable and showed overall positive progress, observation was continued to monitor her symptoms and signs. However, on the third day of hospital admission, her symptoms persisted without improvement. Consequently, a decision was made to perform a contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen, which revealed a thickened wall of the terminal ileum with a suspicious wall defect consistent with ileal perforation. .
Upon identifying the abnormalities in the computed tomography (CT) scan, a diagnosis of ileal perforation secondary to BAT was established. The patient was initiated on intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole for treatment. The diagnosis was communicated to both the patient and her parents, and the prognosis was explained. The urgency of surgical exploration and intervention was emphasized, leading to the patient being taken for surgery.
An exploratory laparotomy was performed, which showed a 2×2 cm2 perforation on the ileum covered by the omentum ~25 cm from the iliocecal junction . A peritoneal lavage was performed, which was followed by resection and anastomosis of the traumatic section. During the postoperative course, the patient developed some abdominal distension and was able to pass flatus but not stool. Conservative management including adjustments in her diet and regular ambulation improved her symptoms and the distension subsided. She was kept in the hospital for 4 days after which she was discharged with proper counseling on wound care, continuation of oral antibiotics, possible warning signs, diet, and follow-up visits. On follow-up after a week, the patient had a healthy wound and a good appetite. She was passing stool normally and had no complaints. The patient and her parents were initially very concerned about the potential injuries as a result of the fall. Although the symptoms were not suggestive of any grievous injury during the initial days of presentation, they were told about the delayed and possible complications of the injury, which led them to accept the diagnosis and proceed with the urgent treatment on the third day of hospital admission. They were thankful for the timely treatment and constant supervision without the need for referral to a higher center.