Our patient, a 63-year-old male with a history of chronic HBV infection for 18 years, presented to the emergency department with severe abdominal pain and flatulence in November 2017. Enhanced abdominal CT showed a heterogeneous irregular mass with the largest measuring up to 5.0 * 3.8 cm in size in segment 3 within the left lobe of liver. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with hemorrhage and peritoneal effusion should be considered first. The CT scan also revealed liver cirrhosis, splenomegaly, portal hypertension with multiple collateral circulations and partial thrombosis of the left portal vein . The laboratory test data revealed serum ɑ-fetoprotein (AFP) was 14,429.3 ng/ml and HBV DNA level of 2.37*10^3 IU/ml. The patient was confirmed with the clinical diagnosis of Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) C and Child-Pugh class B (Score 8) HCC with the background of cirrhosis secondary to viral B infection. The patient first received HAE and then discharged with an HBV DNA level below 30 IU/ml after antiviral treatment with entecavir. He had radiographic progression 2 months later with poor liver function (Child-Pugh class B 7) . For Sorafenib, 400 mg twice daily was only recommended for HCC with liver function of Child-Pugh class A. For lack of an available clinical trial, the patient was prescribed off-label immunotherapy based on the phase I/II data mentioned above (KEYNOTE-224). He was recommended to take Pembrolizumab 100 mg (2 mg/kg, q3w) on Feb. 8th 2018, which was well tolerated. Baseline computed tomography (CT) showed one large liver lesion and extrahepatic hilar lymph node metastasis . After one cycle of Pembrolizumab, his AFP increased to 55,107.82 ng/ml compared to 47,739.14 ng/ml before Pembrolizumab was administered . The patient was recommended to continue on Pembrolizumab due to the stable clinical status of the patient, and the possibility of pseudoprogression. However, the patient was so worried about the potential progression of his cancer that he started to take Lenvatinib in addition to Pembrolizumab from Mar. 10th for 8 mg per day at home. Adverse effects including grade III diarrhea, grade IV thrombocytopenia according to the common terminology criteria for adverse events (CTCAE4.0) occurred after the administration of Lenvatinib and the liver function was Child-Pugh class C 10 . To reduce the adverse effect, Lenvatinib was reduced to 4 mg per day and following this reduction no other treatment-related grade 3 or 4 adverse events were seen. Repeat imaging assessment after 4, 8, 12 cycles of combination treatment showed significant decrease in the size of the liver lesions (2018.06.12), and the subsequent CT scan (2018.08.22) also showed further shrinkage of the tumor and finally a complete response on 12th November 2018, with tumor assessment criteria as mRECIST . AFP was also reduced to a normal range . He remained on treatments with restaging scans every two months which has not shown evidence of recurrence to date. The Progression Free Survival is now 19 months and 22 months have elapsed since the diagnosis of HCC.
ALB albumin, HE hepatic encephalopathy, PT prothrombin time, INR international standard ratio, T-BIL total bilirubin, WBC white blood cell, GR granulocyte, PLT platelet
ORR objective response rate, AE adverse event, DLT dose limited toxicity, LEN Lenvatinib, PEM Pembrolizumab, MTD maximum tolerance dose, DOR duration of response, dMMR mismatch repair deficient, PFS progression-free survival, OS overall survival, CR complete response, PD-L1 programmed cell death ligand 1, TMB tumor mutation burden