A 13-year-old Asian boy presented to our facility with reduced muscular strength of both lower limbs, abnormalities in gait, and paresthesia.
The patient had shown progressive reduced muscular strength of both lower limbs, abnormalities in gait, and paresthesia from 6 years old. He initially presented with radiating pain in the buttocks and thighs after bending over and weakness in both lower limbs when climbing steps. Intermittent symptoms gradually developed into a persistent decline in muscle strength of the lower limbs (particularly in the distal lower extremities) and gait instability.
There was no associated history of trauma.
There was no inherited disorders in the patient’s family history.
The patient’s level of consciousness, neurological physical examination, and upper limb activities were within normal limits. The muscle strength of both lower extremities was grade IV. The patient needed the help of others to walk, and he had a trendelenburg gait. He had numbness after acupuncture below the hip, and hypoalgesia and hypoesthesia were more obvious in the distal extremities. Additional presentation symptoms included bilateral abolished tendon reflexes, extension contracture of the ankles, and restricted toe movement. Other symptoms such as pathological reflexes, incontinence, scoliosis, atrophy of the muscles of the lower extremities, and rashes were not noted.
Examination of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) revealed normal cell numbers. The patient’s CSF protein level was 0.55 g/L (reference range 0.1-0.4 g/L).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the lumbosacral spine was performed 7 years after symptom onset. The patient underwent MRI with T1- and T2-weighted imaging and T1-contrast-enhanced sequences. Findings demonstrated that diffuse thickening of the cauda equina nerve roots filled the entire spinal canal, even extending to the intervertebral foramen and the paravertebral space . The cauda equina nerve roots also showed a low T1 signal and a slightly higher T2 signal, with mild enhancement. Brain MRI findings were within normal limits.
Electrophysiological testing demonstrated that nerve conduction velocity in both lower limbs was decreased. The compound muscle action potential of the femoral nerve, tibial nerve, common peroneal nerve, the sensory nerve action potential, and the F wave were not detected. When multiple lower-limb muscles were lightly contracted, electromyography showed increased motor unit potentials (MUP), long-duration MUP, and increased polyphasic potentials.
Whole-exome sequencing was performed on deoxyribonucleic acid extracted from the patient’s peripheral blood, with no disease-causing variant identified.
Neuropathological examination demonstrated a remarkable reduction in the density of myelinated fibers and hyperplasia of the schwann cells, forming onion bulb wrappings of myelinated fibers and blood vessels, and a small population of perivascular macrophages. In addition, immunohistochemical analysis showed positivity for the S-100 protein antibody and negativity for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) .