A 61-year-old man with lower thoracic esophageal cancer was referred to our clinic to undergo treatment. His medical history included diabetes mellitus and cataracts. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed a type 3 tumor in the lower thoracic esophagus, and endoscopic biopsy specimen revealed an adenocarcinoma. CT imaging revealed wall thickening in the lower esophagus and swelling of multiple lymph nodes in the mediastinum and abdomen . His clinical diagnosis based on TNM staging (TNM classification, eighth edition) was cT3 N2 M0 stage IIIB; thus, we selected neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (NACRT) as preoperative treatment. Two cycles of 5-fluorouracil (1000 mg/m2 from days 1 to 4, and from 29 to 32) and cisplatin (100 mg/m2 on days 1 and 29) were administrated intravenously. A total dose of 41.4 Gy was administered in 23 fractions of 1.8 Gy, 5 fractions per week, starting on the first day of the first cycle of chemotherapy. The irradiation field included the primary tumor and the regional lymph nodes, including the subclavian, paraesophageal, subcarinal, and celiac axis lymph nodes. Surgery was performed 5 weeks after the end of the irradiation. During the preoperative examination, contrast-enhanced CT imaging revealed that the anomalous V2 drained into the RSPV, which ran behind the intermediate bronchus . We reconstructed the CT image using virtual thoracoscopic imaging, and the anomalous V2 was visualized clearly as in the operative view using the Ziostation2 workstation (Ziosoft, Inc., Tokyo, Japan). General anesthesia was administered with single-lumen endotracheal intubation for bilateral lung ventilation. Thoracoscopic esophagectomy with lymph node dissection via the right thoracic approach was performed in the prone position under 6–10 mmHg of artificial pneumothorax. Thoracic esophagectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection were performed using five ports. Subcarinal lymph node dissection started from dissection of the pericardial membrane. Then, the right bronchus was rolled by pulling the right vagus nerve toward the right side and dissecting the subcarinal lymph node from the right bronchus. The anomalous V2 was identified during the lymph node dissection and was preserved without injury . No visible effects of the radiation, such as fibrosis or edema around the bifurcation, were observed. After the thoracoscopic procedure, we performed hernioplasty for the right inguinal hernia and reconstructed the gastric tube via the posterior mediastinal route in the supine position. The total operation time was 815 min, and the total amount of intraoperative bleeding was 52 g. No severe postoperative complications occurred, except for paralysis of the left recurrent laryngeal nerve. The patient started oral intake on postoperative day (POD) 7 and was discharged on POD 17. The pathological diagnosis on TNM staging was pT3 pN3 cM0 pStage IVA. There were no subcarinal lymph node metastases.