A 61-year-old white man was hospitalized with a six-month history of weight loss, listlessness and exertional dyspnea. He had rheumatic fever and had had mitral and aortic insufficiency since the age of 18 years, which had more recently been treated with captopril, furosemide, digoxin and spironolactone. The patient had had Hyde's nodular prurigo since the age of 24 years, which had been treated with thalidomide over the last 3.5 years. He presented a picture of severe depressive disorders and dementia, with memory impairment, together with behavioral changes and suicidal tendencies for which he was receiving chlorpromazine.
Physical examination revealed only moderate arterial hypertension without superficial lymphadenomegaly, while laboratory tests showed leukopenia (2970/mm) and discrete anemia (hemoglobin 11.6 g/dl). The values for C-reactive protein, alpha-1 acid glycoprotein and streptococcal antibody titer, along with the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, were all within normal limits. The level of lactate dehydrogenate was mildly elevated. Chest radiography did not reveal any mediastinal masses. The leukopenia and anemia were attributed to the use of drugs with myelotoxic potential (chlor­promazine, spironolactone and captopril) and folate metabolism inhibition associated with inadequate food intake. Following the suspension of these drugs and administration of folinic and folic acids, the leukocyte count rose to 6440/mm and the hemoglobin rate normalized. Abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) demonstrated an oval mass measuring 5 × 4 × 5 cm of low attenuation, with inner calcification and intense enhancement on intravenous contrast, located in the retroperitoneal region, between the left kidney and the aorta, near the renal hilus. CT of the neck and chest did not reveal any abnormalities. Renal and hepatic functions were normal, while anti-HIV and anti-HTLV-1 and 2 (anti-human T-cell lymphotrophic virus types 1 and 2) tests were negative. A myelogram showed no abnormalities. The concentrations of IgG anti-toxoplasmosis antibody and IgG anti-cytomegalovirus antibody were clinically insignificant. Serum protein electrophoresis demonstrated absence of monoclonal or polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia.
The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy that revealed a non-pulsatile solid oval mass. This was situated in the retroperitoneum, adjacent to the left renal hilus, and did not involve the renal vessels. The liver and spleen were seen to be macroscopically conserved. The remainder of the abdominal cavity presented no abnormalities, and no other masses or enlarged lymph nodes were observed. The retroperitoneal lesion was removed in its entirety, with all elements of the left renal hilus remaining intact. There was no evidence of invasion into the adjacent tissues.
Examination of frozen samples revealed benign lymph node tissue. Histopathological examination of the surgical sample revealed hyaline-vascular Castleman's disease (giant lymph node hyperplasia) ( and ). The patient was discharged on the 12th day, without significant events.
Over the weeks that followed, the patient's mental condition significantly worsened, with severe depressive episodes, confused state and behavioral disturbances. Two months after the operation, the patient was readmitted with severe cardiac insufficiency, acute renal insufficiency and bronchopneumonia. Chest radiography showed pulmonary congestion and condensation in the base of the left lung. No mediastinal masses were observed. The patient progressed with acute respiratory insufficiency and sepsis, and died two days later. Authorization for autopsy was denied.