A 65-year-old man with no history of chronic pleural inflammation, such as tuberculosis, was referred to our hospital due to right pleural effusion with difficulty in breathing. His right lung breath sounds were diminished. He had a medical history of surgery for MALT lymphoma of the left orbit at a previous hospital in 2009. Six years after the surgery, the patient experienced MALT lymphoma recurrence in the right orbit. Thus, he underwent surgical resection for recurrent lymphoma. He was given no other treatment than surgery in 2009 and 2015. Meanwhile, a retroperitoneal mass measuring 32 x 7 mm in size was detected on computed tomography (CT) in 2015. He discontinued his visits to the initial hospital and was not followed up. Eleven years after the initial diagnosis of MALT lymphoma, he visited our hospital because of dyspnea and massive pleural effusion . Laboratory examination showed hyperproteinemia (9.5 g/dl), hypoalbuminemia (2.0 g/dl), and high serum IgM levels (6335 mg/dl; normal range 33–183 mg/dl). In addition, immunoelectrophoretic examination revealed monoclonal IgM with κ light chain restriction in both the serum and right pleural effusion. IgM measurement was not performed at the previous hospital, so its accurate determination was not possible. The histological findings of the right pleural fluid suggested a lymphoma. A chest CT scan showed right pleural thickness, right pleural effusion , and a right retroperitoneal mass, spreading from the muscular layer to the subcutaneous layer . Positron emission tomography imaging demonstrated increased accumulation of 2-deoxy-2-[18F] fluoro-D-glucose in the right pleural thickening and right retroperitoneal mass . There was also evidence of recurrent MALT lymphoma in both orbits . Therefore, a diagnostic surgical biopsy was performed on the thickened right pleural lesion. The final diagnosis was a recurrence of MALT lymphoma. Pathologically, the right pleural mass consisted of lymphoid cells with small to medium mildly constricted nuclei . Lymphoglandular bodies were also observed . The plasma cells were focally scattered and partially aggregated (blue arrows). The lymphoid cells had Dutcher bodies, which indicated that the nucleus was packed with immunoglobulin . Therefore, plasmacytoid differentiation was suggested in the tumor cells. On immunohistochemical analysis, the lymphoid cells were predominantly positive for CD20 , and MUM1 (Multiple Myeloma Oncogene 1), but negative for CD3, CD10, CD5, and cyclin D1. CD138 positive cells were also observed . The morphological and immunohistochemical findings of the right pleural tumor were similar to those of the initial MALT lymphoma in the right and left orbits. There were few plasma cells, that were in small focal clusters or scattered . Pathological and flow cytometric analysis of bone marrow showed bone marrow involvement of lymphoma. The chromosomal abnormalities of the lymphoma cells were unknown because there was cell-culture failure in the G-banding analysis. Therefore, we concluded that the lymphoma of the orbits recurred in the right retroperitoneum. Our final diagnosis was systemic recurrence in the right pleura, right retroperitoneum, and the orbits. The first course was administered as monotherapy with bendamustine alone, without rituximab to avoid the risk of hyperviscosity syndrome. Thereafter, combination therapy of bendamustine and rituximab was administered for the second course. Consequently, the right pleural effusion and patient's symptoms immediately improved. No recurrence has been observed 7 months to date after completion of six courses of treatment with bendamustine and rituximab.