Our patient was a 40-year-old Congolese woman married to a nonconsanguineous 43-year-old man. She was of low socioeconomic status, had an unsupervised pregnancy, and her fetus had an unknown gestational age because her last menstrual period was also unknown (she felt pregnant during the lactational amenorrhea). She came to consult for absence of fetal movements for 2 days. She declared that fetal movements were rare during the whole course of the pregnancy (one low-intensity movement per day). She was gravida 11 (G11P10L9D1) and had a previous history of full-term spontaneous vaginal delivery. She had a deceased infant who was issued from her third pregnancy and died in the sixth month of life with febrile gastroenteritis. She noted that one of her children has polydactyly. Her other children are apparently healthy and present no obvious congenital malformations. The patient declared that she took unknown tablet drugs against malaria, which she received from an open market drugstore, during the first term of her pregnancy. She occasionally drinks traditional alcohol (made with fermented maize). She does not smoke or take traditional drugs. She has no history of diabetes in her family. She had no antenatal ultrasonography report, nor were any blood investigations performed.
On clinical examination, the patient was anxious but hemodynamically stable (arterial pressure 120/60 mmHg), afebrile (temperature 36.5 °C), and had a symphysis-fundal height of 31 cm. Fetal heartbeats were absent, and the fetus was in breech presentation. Ultrasonography was performed and revealed a unique fetus with no heartbeat and no movement. Its skull was not perfectly individualized and gave an impression of skull bones overlapping or anencephaly. The femoral length was 54.4 mm (pregnancy age estimated to be 30 weeks) with the fetus in breech presentation. The placenta and genital organs were not visualized. Oligohydramnios was seen with a viscous aspect, giving the impression of maceration. Hence, a cesarean section was indicated for a breech presentation of a macerated intrauterine dead fetus. Intraoperatively, we observed an intrauterine dead fetus in breech presentation, macerated at second degree with polymalformation. The amniotic fluid was green-blackish, and the placenta was friable and weighed 200 g. The fetus weighed 1200 g, had a length of 35 cm, and had a cranial perimeter of 25 cm.
On the anterior and profile views of the fetus , we observed the following morphological abnormalities: anencephaly, ocular hypertelorism, low-set ears, prominent infraorbital folds, downward-curved nose, and receding chin suggestive of Potter facies; amelia of the left upper limb with the trunk directly attached to the head; agenesia of the anterior abdominal wall with the umbilical cord inserted to something that looked like the omentum; presence of one umbilical artery on the umbilical stump; renal dysgenesis; blind-end colon; undetermined sex (no external genital organs); and absence of urinary meatus. The lower limbs were fused in one single limb from the pelvis, with two feet fused posteriorly, giving two flipper-like feet with five toes on each foot spreading out in a fanlike pattern (ectopode mermaid-like). The external palpation of lower limbs gave the impression of probably two femurs and two tibias. Due to financial constraints, an x-ray was not done. In a posterior view , we observed a fleshy structure with the appearance of a small, 2-cm tail.
We could not get consent for autopsy or additional explorations on a dead baby, owing to respect for traditional and cultural beliefs. No genetic testing was done due to financial constraints and lack of a genetic diagnostic laboratory in the Democratic Republic of Congo. The mother received 2 g of ampicillin intraoperatively and underwent a bilateral tubal ligation. She was maintained in the hospital for observation. She received adequate postpartum counseling and was discharged on day 7 postpartum.