A 45-year-old male patient presented with cough, chest tightness and fatigue that had persisted for 3 consecutive days.
The patient received an allogeneic kidney transplant in the Department of Urology Surgery (Transplantation ward) at the Ruikang Hospital Affiliated to Guangxi University of Chinese Medicine 42 d prior to admission. After surgery, he was treated with oral tacrolimus (alternating 2 mg and 1.5 mg bid), mycophenolate mofetil (1 g qd) and methylprednisolone (8 mg qd) for immunosuppression.
The patient had a 5-year history of uremia and was on regular hemodialysis 3 times a week. Meanwhile, he also had a 5-year history of hypertension, which was treated with valsartan and terazosin irregularly.
The patient denied other specific diseases and family history.
The patient’s vital signs were normal, including body temperature of 36.5 °C, pulse of 90 beats/min, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and blood pressure of 113/84 mmHg. Breathing sound was slightly decreased in the right lung, and neurological examination was normal.
Results of laboratory examinations included increased white blood cell count (13.61 × 109/L; normal range: 3.5-9.5 × 109/L) with elevated neutrophil percentage (92.6%; normal range: 40%-75%), increased C-reactive protein level (97.0 mg/L; normal range: 0.5-3.0 mg/L), normal procalcitonin level (0.11 ng/mL), and normal serum creatinine concentration (120.00 μmol/L). Serum fungal β-(1,3)-D-glucan and galactomannan were within the normal ranges. Peripheral blood was drawn for microbial culture, T cells spot test of tuberculosis infection and antibody detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis, which were all negative.
The chest computed tomography (CT) showed right pleural effusion, nodules and streak shadows in the right cardiophrenic angle region. Nodules surrounded by fibrosis and calcification were observed in the left upper lobe .
On day 3 after admission, the patient experienced recurrent fevers, and an upward trend was seen in his body temperature . Although Mycobacterium tuberculosis was not detected, the patient was presumptively diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis due to recurring low fevers, tuberculosis-like imaging findings and a high prevalence of tuberculosis in the patient’s residential area. Anti-tuberculosis treatment with isoniazid, rifampicin and pyrazinamide was started empirically. On day 9, the patient’s body temperature increased again, reaching a maximum of 40.3 °C. Re-examination CT showed a significant increase in pleural effusion and no reduction in the lung lesions .
Subsequently, ultrasound-guided thoracentesis drainage was performed to investigate the etiology of the pulmonary inflammation. The results of bacterial and fungal culture of the pleural effusion were negative. Antibody detection and PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis were also negative. The biochemical examination revealed that the protein level was elevated (41 g/L; normal range: < 25 g/L). Lactate dehydrogenase was also elevated (1445 U/L; normal range: < 200 U/L), while adenosine deaminase was normal (24 U/L; normal range for non-tuberculous pleuritis: < 40 U/L).
Meanwhile, the pleural effusion and a blood sample were collected for mNGS. The methods of mNGS were described in . The mNGS results on day 10 indicated that N. farcinica was present in both the pleural effusion and blood. There were 464 reads detected for N. farcinica in the pleural effusion with genome coverage of 1.81% and species relative abundance of 96.58%, making up 77.33% of the total DNA reads . Simultaneously, 18 reads for N. farcinica were reported in the blood with genome coverage of 0.07% and species relative abundance of 10.39%, making up 7.44% of the total DNA reads .