A previously healthy 12-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital on February 12, 2016 with complaints of blepharoptosis, voice hoarseness, fever, and the inability to walk and talk.
The patient exhibited persistent blepharoptosis, voice hoarseness, and fever for about 2 mo. He then became severely agitated with the main complaints of sleepiness, dysphagia, limb weakness, and respiratory and circulatory failure. The patient unfortunately died soon thereafter.
The patient was diagnosed with subacute ptosis at 12-years-old.
The patient was delivered vaginally at term with a birth weight of 3250 g and without developmental delay. His height was 156 cm and weight was 50 kg upon admission to the hospital. The patient's mother exhibited no abnormal symptoms after the birth. The family history of the patient regarding a similar condition was negative.
Clinical examination showed that the patient presented with pyramidal signs and very easily elicited reflexes and extensor toe signs on both feet.
The routine blood and urine tests, urinary sediment examination, routine fecal tests, and occult blood test were performed, which all showed normal results. The arterial blood gas was tested and the pH value was 7.32. The oxygen pressure was 11.3 kPa, the carbon dioxide pressure was 4.9 kPa, and the oxygen saturation was 99%. The arterial plasma lactate level was slightly elevated to 3 mg/dL. Ammonia and blood sugar levels were normal. Other blood biochemistry indexes were also normal. The cytological and biochemical examination showed the normal presence of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-positive antibodies to acetylcholine, presynaptic membrane receptor, and thymoma in the blood, and positive oligoclonal bands in the CSF. The antibody tests to Mycoplasma pneumoniae, herpes simplex virus, and Epstein-Barr virus were negative. Gene sequencing analysis revealed a T-to-C transition at nucleotide 9176 of the mitochondrial ATPase 6 gene (Leu to Pro) in the patient and a heteroplasmic mutation in the patient’s mother .
Electroencephalogram analysis revealed slow-waves of background activity. The brain MRI scan showed symmetrical abnormal signals in the basal ganglia, medial thalami, periaqueductal region of the midbrain and pons, and the bilateral white matter around the lateral ventricles .