A 52-year-old Sri Lankan male was admitted to hospital 30 min after ingesting about 150 ml of PD8 (plate developer) solution. He had a history of hypertension and affective disorder with a past history of suicide attempts. However, he was not on treatment for either condition regularly and for the 5 months preceding this admission, had not taken any medication. Poisoning center was contacted immediately for advice. Gastric lavage or activated charcoal was not instituted as the poison was a corrosive substance.
We managed him with fluid resuscitation (using 0.9 % NaCl solution), soon after admission. Within first hour of admission, patient developed stridor and hypoxia and an emergency tracheostomy was done. In next 48 h we managed him with intravenous dexamethasone 4 mg 8 hourly, nebulized adrenalin 4 hourly, salbutamol nebulization 2 hourly, and intravenous omeprazole 40 mg twice daily. Blood pressure was managed with oral nifedipine and prazosin and the systolic pressure remained above 110 mmHg and he did not become hypovolemic or hypotensive. A nasogastric tube was inserted to facilitate removal of gastric material, and 650 ml of altered blood was drained. His baseline serum creatinine value was not known, but it rapidly deteriorated over next 72 h (135.8 µmol/l at 2 h, 241 µmol/l at 24 h and 650 µmol/l at 72 h) and he developed hyperkalemia (7.2 mmol/l). It was initially managed with insulin-dextrose regime and calcium resonium. However serum potassium level remained persistently above 6 mmol/l. He remained oliguric for next 48 h despite adequate hydration and developed peripheral oedema and eventually pulmonary edema necessitating hemodialysis. His liver enzymes remained normal (aspartate transaminase 37 U/L, alanine transaminase 25 U/L) and there was no evidence of ischemic or toxic hepatitis. Urine full report showed no active sediments (pus cells 5/HPF, red cells nil, albumin nil, sugar nil, red cell casts nil). Chest radiography showed pulmonary edema. Haemodialysis was initiated on the 4th day of admission and repeated for the next 2 days. After the 4th haemodialysis serum potassium level became normal (4.7 mmol/l) and urine output improved. Serum creatinine declined steadily during this period and haemodialysis was stopped after the 5th dialysis. After 1 month at the time of discharge his serum creatinine level was near normal (115 µmol/l). During the hospital stay, patient developed intolerance to nasogastric feeding. Upper Gastro-intestinal endoscopy performed on day 20 revealed severe inflammation and narrowing of the lumen of esophagus, ulceration of the stomach and upper duodenum and narrowing of the pyloric opening. A feeding jejunostomy was done for enteral feeding on day 21. Patient also required blood transfusion to correct anaemia. Olanzapine and fluoxetine was started by psychiatrists for severe depression. Three months after discharge the jejunostomy was blocked and total parenteral nutrition was resorted to. He died while waiting for surgery to correct the pyloric stenosis from complications related to malnutrition.