A 39-year-old female presented to the clinic with a 15-month history of pain affecting the left lower teeth, jaw, nose and temporal region. The pain was paroxysmal in onset and described as electric and shooting in nature. On a verbal pain rating scale, in which 0 represents no pain and 10 is defined as the worst pain possible, the intensity of pain episodes was rated as 10 out of 10. The pain episodes were preceded by a non-painful tingling sensation in the lower teeth, which would persist for a few seconds and then be followed by a painful jolt across the left side lower and upper teeth and infraorbital region for up to 15 minutes. Occasionally, the pain may radiate toward the ipsilateral ear and temporal area. The frequency of episodes varied and was dependent on the provoking factors. Nonetheless, it presented at least 10 times a day. The pain was provoked by light touching or washing of the face over the left nostril or if a cold breeze felt against the face. There were no reports of numbness, resting pain or tingling sensation, regional muscle weakness or additional sensory, motor or autonomic symptoms.
At the time of onset of her symptoms, the patient first visited her local dentist. She was diagnosed with reversible pulpitis of the mandibular left second and third molars. The dentist restored the teeth, but this did not resolve the pain. The teeth were subsequently extracted. When the symptoms did not resolve, the patient was referred to a neurologist. The neurologist performed an extensive assessment and ordered magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study of the brain without contrast. The results of the MRI were suggestive of an intracranial lesion on the left cerebellopontine angle. The patient was prescribed carbamazepine 200 mg 3 times a day and referred to a tertiary care cancer centre for further management.
The rest of the medical history of the patient was non-contributory. At the time of her visit to the cancer centre, the patient had discontinued carbamazepine 200 mg because she had developed a generalised rash over her face and arms using the medication.
On physical examination, no gross head-and-neck asymmetry, discolourations, lesions or masses were observed in the head-and-neck region. The mandibular and cervical ranges of motions were within normal limits and without any pain or discomfort. The patient did not report any pain with palpation of masticatory and cervical muscles or temporomandibular joints. The patient reported familiar shock-like pain when the skin overlying the left ala of the nose was lightly touched. The episode of pain persisted for nearly 1 minute. The cranial nerves (II-XII) and the spinal nerves (C2- T1) function were intact. The left side mandibular second and third molars were missing, and the overlying alveolar mucosa was pink and normal in appearance. There was no tenderness or pain provoked on palpation of this area. The rest of the dentition was sound. The rest of the examination was within normal physiological limits.