An 81-year-old Caucasian male presented to our hospital with a 10-day history of fever and non-productive cough. He also complained of abdominal pain, malaise, and weight loss.
His past medical history included hypertensive cardiomyopathy. He was diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome several months previously when a renal biopsy showed changes of membranous nephropathy stage III. Three months after this diagnosis, he was admitted to our hospital due to progressive worsening of renal function and persistent nephrotic syndrome. A laboratory test, chest radiograph, and an abdominal ultrasound scan ruled out secondary causes of membranous nephropathy and treatment with CBL 10mg and methylprednisolone 0.5mg/kg daily was started. Twenty-two days after the initiation of this treatment, he presented to our hospital with fever and non-productive cough and was admitted.
On initial assessment his temperature was 38°C, his blood pressure was 125/75mmHg, and his cardiac frequency was 105 beats per minute. His oxygen saturation level was 93%. There were no oral lesions. An examination of the lungs revealed widespread rhonchi. A cardiac examination demonstrated a regular rhythm and no murmurs. His abdomen was soft, not distended, but painful at the epigastrium.
His laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 2.3×109/L, neutrophils at 82%, a hemoglobin level of 11.8g/dL, platelets at 96×109/L, lactate dehydrogenase at 965U/L, a serum creatinine of 2.8mg/dL, urea at 164mg/dL, total proteins at 4.1g/dL, albumin at 2.6g/dL aspartate transaminase at 74U/L, alanine transaminase at 98U/L, gamma-glutamyltransferase at 255U/L, cholesterol at 219mg/dL, and triglyceride at 416mg/dL. His procalcitonin level was lower than 0.5ng/mL. Coagulation studies revealed no abnormalities. A urinalysis showed 14 to 16 red blood cells/high-powered field and 4g of protein. The urine culture was negative. Serology test results were negative for hepatitis C virus, hepatitis B virus, and human immunodeficiency virus. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay for detecting CMV was positive with 31,400copies/mL.His chest radiograph showed a bilateral consolidation and pleural effusion . His pulmonary angiography, ventilation-perfusion, and abdominal ultrasound scan did not show any abnormalities. A bronchoscopy procedure was rejected due to his respiratory conditions. So that cytology or immunohistochemical tests were not possible.The patient was treated with meropenem, levofloxacin and caspofungin on his admission. Signs of acute respiratory distress and necessity of non-invasive continuous positive airway pressure and hemodialysis marked the initial clinical evolution. Follow-up chest radiographs showed progression of the findings, with irregular, multifocal, patchy consolidation . On the third day, treatment with vancomycin and ganciclovir was started as well. All antibacterial and antifungal drugs were administrated until his cultures were negative and a PCR assay for detecting CMV was positive. An intravenous infusion of 5mg/dl ganciclovir every 12 hours for 21 days was the specified treatment course. Viral load suppression during the first several weeks of antiviral therapy, associated with clinical and renal improvement, which allowed the stopping of hemodialysis, was finally observed. Viral load monitoring with weekly CMV-PCRs was performed for four weeks until the results were negative.
He was finally discharged after thirty days and continues to do well.