A 66-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital presenting with intermittent headaches, dizziness and numbness of the right eyelid which she had been experiencing for 5 years. The patient had a medical history of hypertension, and her blood pressure was well controlled by regular medication. No positive findings were found in physical or neurological examinations. Magnetic resonance angiography performed in a local hospital reported an aneurysm of the posterior communicating artery segment of the left ICA and a left PPHA . Further digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed after admission and showed a PPHA originating from the left cervical segment of the ICA and converging to the proximal part of the basilar artery . An extremely coiling segment of the ICA, such as a ball of string, distally exists close to the beginning of PPHA . In addition, two small aneurysms were found at the coiling segment of the ICA, measuring 1.9 × 1.6 mm and 1.4 × 1.1 mm . The aneurysm of the posterior communicating artery segment of the left ICA was also confirmed by DSA and measured 3.8 × 3.4 mm . Bilateral vertebral arteries are hypoplastic with a small caliber, and the majority of the blood supply to the posterior circulation comes from PPHA . Posterior communicating arteries were not visualized bilaterally . The left occipital artery arises from the cervical segment of the ICA rather than the external carotid artery (ECA) and is close to the beginning of PPHA proximally . Except for the anomalies mentioned above, the right extracranial ICA is a normal tortuosity type . However, the right occipital artery arose from the right ECA . The rupture risk of the aneurysm of the posterior communicating artery segment of the left ICA is considered low because of the volume and regular shape of the aneurysm. The treatment of this aneurysm could not be achieved by endovascular therapy due to the extreme coiling of the ICA. Clipping is the only feasible way to treat aneurysms. Eventually, the patient denied surgery and decided to undergo regular observation of this aneurysm after discharge.