A 63-year-old Taiwanese male patient was presented in October 2006 with progressive extremities edema, puffy face, abdominal distension and dyspnea on exertion for 2 weeks. There was no chest discomfort, orthopnea or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea. He did not have symptoms of cough, fever, foamy urine, or body weight loss. He had diabetes mellitus for years, which was well controlled with insulin. Physical examination revealed generalized pitting edema with elevated jugular venous pressure, positive Kussmaul's sign, and hepatomegaly. Bilateral pleural effusion, patchy infiltration at right middle lung field, and cardiomegaly were noted on chest X-ray . Pneumonia was diagnosed by the chest specialist first in our out-patient department, and the patient was transferred to the emergency department (ED) due to the diagnosis of pneumonia and severe dyspnea. Thoracentesis, done in ED, revealed a transudate as the level of total protein and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) of the pleural fluid were 2.800 mg/dL and 79 mg/dL, respectively, while serum protein was 7.700 mg/dL and serum LDH was 190 mg/dL.
Chest computed tomography scan also revealed thickened pericardium, up to 3 mm in diameter, minimal amount of pericardial effusion, a patchy fibrotic infiltration with bronchiectasis over the right upper lung, irregular thickening of the right intermediate bronchus, and obstruction of the right middle lung bronchus with consolidation and atelectasis of right middle lobe . There were several lymph nodes, up to 2.2 cm in size, in right paratracheal, pretracheal, subcarinal and left prevascular areas.
After treatment with diuretics, the peripheral edema improved significantly, but the patient still complained of severe dyspnea on exertion during the hospitalization. Echocardiograms showed thickened pericardium, especially over the right atrium, and small amount of pericardial effusion. The left ventricular wall motion was normal. However, there were limited right atrial wall motion and distended inferior vena cava with blunted respiratory variation. Under the impression of right heart failure due to constrictive pericarditis, the patient underwent cardiac catheterization. The hemodynamic studies (,, and ) showed right atrium pressure 24/22 mmHg, pulmonary capillary wedge pressure 23 mmHg, prominent x and y descent in right atrial pressure tracings, dip-and-plateau pattern in the right ventricular diastolic pressure tracings. There was equalization of the end-diastolic pressures between right and left ventricles (24 mmHg).
Because of the diagnosis of constrictive pericarditis complicated with right heart failure, surgical operation for pericardial stripping was performed. Operative findings included markedly thickened pericardium and enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes. The postoperative course was uneventful with improvement of heart function. Pathology of the removed pericardium showed obvious granulomatous changes with caseous necrosis.
Only one sample of sputum specimen was collected on the operation day with vigorous humidifier using normal saline for several days, which was positive for acid-fast stain. The sputum culture gave positive result of Mycobacterium tuberculosis four weeks later. The patient was put on quadruple anti-tuberculosis chemotherapy and remains free from symptoms of heart failure.