A 56-year-old Sri Lankan woman presented with pain in her left knee and difficulty in weight bearing following a fall 6 weeks prior. Clinical examination of her knee and lower end of her thigh did not reveal any abnormality. She had no family history or symptoms of neurofibromatosis.
Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of her knee demonstrated an osteolytic lesion involving the femoral cortex, extending from 2.5 cm above the lower end of her femur to 15 cm on the lateral view. On the anteroposterior view, the lesion was in relation to the lateral cortex of her femur measuring approximately 15 cm in length and 5 cm in width. The margins of the lesion were regular with a distinct sclerotic rim, favoring a probably benign bone tumor. The anterior cortex was expanded but there was no radiologically visible extension into the adjacent soft tissue. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan demonstrated a well-defined lobulated lesion in the anterolateral aspect of the metadiaphyseal region of the lower femur under the cortex, with a cortical defect but no appreciable expansion. Intramedullary extension was not seen. Differential diagnoses at this stage included solitary bone cyst, aneurismal bone cyst, and chondromyxoid fibroma . Due to the rarity of intraosseous schwannoma and its nonspecific clinical and radiological findings, it is very rarely diagnosed preoperatively.
At surgery, a large tumor expanding the lower anterior end of her femur was found. The tumor was partly cellular and partly gelatinous. A regular punched out area where the tumor appeared to have extended out of the femur anteriorly was found. Abnormal-looking tissue extending outside her femur was excised. The defect in her femur was expanded and the whole tumor evacuated. The lower end of her femur (supracondylar area) was severely weakened after resection of the tumor. Prophylactic internal fixation was done with a locking distal femoral plate . A bone graft obtained from the iliac crest mixed with bank bone was used to graft the defect.
Hematoxylin and eosin-stained sections revealed a benign spindle cell tumor showing cellular, hyalinized, and hypocellular microcystic areas with areas showing a focally whorled appearance. The spindle cells contained elongated nuclei, characteristic Verocay body-like structures with nuclear palisading , and included occasional hyperchromatic bizarre forms. There was no evidence of necrosis or mitotic activity. Immunostaining for S100 was uniformly positive . The smooth muscle markers desmin and smooth muscle actin (SMA) were negative. Ki67 showed a proliferation index of <5%.
Microscopy of the tissue removed from outside her femur showed fat necrosis and fibrosis, with no evidence of tumor.