A 22-years old male patient came to our outpatient departmentwith chief complaints of 18-month history of slowly increasing the left posterolateral ankle swelling and pain. The pain was insidious in onset, gradually progressive, and deep-seated throbbing in nature which increased with walking and relieved with rest and analgesics. There was no history of recent trauma, chronic fever, or any other joint pain. Examination revealed palpable firm tender swelling with irregular borders and ill-defined margin around the left ankle just posterior to the lateral malleolus. Range of motion and stability of the ankle were normal. Radiographs showed no apparent bony or articular abnormality. Ultrasound (USG) of the swelling was done which showed findings of heterotropic thickening (5.0 * 3.5), posterior to peroneus tendon extending into the ankle joint. Contrast-enhanced MRI showed lobulated outlines altered signal intensity lesion showing blooming foci in susceptibility-weighted angiography, heterogeneous avid contrast enhancement in posterior aspect of the ankle joint with synovial thickening and mild collection in posterior subtalar joint that was reported as PVNS or synovial sarcoma. FNAC of the swelling was done in which cytosmears were moderately cellular and showed predominantly osteoclastic giant cells admixed with many single scattered cells. Also seen were few spindle-shaped fibroblast-like cells and many mononuclear seven binucleated cells exhibiting mild anisonucleosis, inconspicuous nucleoli with mostly round to oval eccentrically placed nucleoli with abundant cytoplasm. Occasional pigment-laden macrophages were also noted. The features were suggestive of giant cell containing tumor. USG guided synovial biopsy was performed to rule out malignancy which revealed a fairly circumscribed tumor with hyperplastic synovial lining & comprised of nodules of pale & bland appearing mononuclear cells, plenty of osteoclastic giant cells, foamy cells & scattered hemosiderin laden macrophages with areas of hemorrhage that was conclusive of PVNS of left ankle . Through posterolateral approach, we thoroughly resected the mass, along with the synovium , with care to avoid peroneal tendon injury. The synovial tissue was hold with an allis forcep and radical synovectomy was ensured by through debridement using electro-cautery. The histopathological findings of the excised tissue were corresponding to those of the biopsy specimen A short leg slab was applied for 2 weeks after surgery, and then the patient was allowed for graded ankle range-of-motion exercises and weight-bearing. During the final follow-up (18 months following surgery), there was no significant pain or any limitation of ankle range of motion and the patient seemed happy with the outcome . The preoperative & 1 month follow up x-rays is shown in & 5 respectively.