A 30-year-old man with a history of a classic seminoma of the right testis (pT2 cN0 cM0 L0 V1 R0) and consecutive orchiectomy in June 2016 was referred to our university hospital from an outside clinic, where he presented with back pain in the lumbar region and paraesthesia in the area of the right knee. The patient was haemodynamically stable and did not exhibit any signs of dyspnoea or pectoral angina. Cardiovascular examination revealed no irregularities regarding blood pressure (130/85 mmHg), heart rate (86 b.p.m.), respiratory rate (17 b.p.m.), oxygen saturation (SpO2 97%), heart sounds, and lung auscultation. There were no signs of peripheral oedema. The electrocardiogram (ECG) at admission showed no abnormalities. Medical history included a mild haemophilia B, factor IX deficiency as well as a history of cocaine and cannabis abuse until recent times. A concise chronological sequence is provided in the timeline. On physical examination, the penis, scrotum, and testes were unremarkable on inspection and palpation. Sonographically his kidneys were normal. Blood tests revealed a slight increase of the inflammatory markers [C-reactive protein 19.3 mg/L (normal range: <5.0 mg/L) and leucocytes 12.31 × 109/L (normal range: 4.40–11.30 × 109/L)] as well as a substantial rise of lactate dehydrogenase (977 U/L, normal range: <250 U/L) were conspicuous. The analysis of tumour markers indicated an elevated human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG)-beta (71.1 U/L, normal range: <10 U/L) whereas levels of alpha-fetoprotein were unobtrusive (2.0 kU/L, normal range: <5.8 kU/L).
Due to the clinical complaints and the history of a seminoma, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax and abdomen was performed. Radiological findings revealed a 5 cm × 5 cm large mass in the area of the left adrenal gland and the suspicion of bone metastases in the lumbar region. Apart from pronounced lymphogenic and pulmonary metastatic spread, an irregular filling defect, measuring 6 cm in diameter, in the right ventricle could be detected . Medical reports from baseline diagnostics in 2016 did not state any evidence of cardiac abnormalities in CT scans in context of the staging diagnostics at that time. Echocardiography showed a large space-occupying mass in the right ventricle (4.0 cm × 4.5 cm × 5.5 cm) adhered to the apex and septum . Both left and right ventricular functions were preserved. No right heart burden could be detected since heart cavities were configured normal and pressure gradient over the tricuspid valve was not elevated. In conjunction to the inconspicuous ECG and the absence of dyspnoea, the presence of a relevant pulmonary embolism could be excluded.
Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging confirmed the finding of a 5.5 cm × 3.5 cm lesion without free-floating appendage or obstruction of the right ventricular outflow tract. Tissue characterization by T1- and T2-weighted black blood imaging revealed a signal behaviour comparable to the pulmonary metastases . Additionally, positron emission tomography (PET) with 250 MBq induced 18-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG) as part of a re-staging showed significant FDG-uptake .
The patient underwent the first cycle of cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (PEB) chemotherapy at reduced dosage in order to avoid tumour lysis syndrome. In addition, he was therapeutically anticoagulated due to the high tumour burden. A repeat trans-thoracic echocardiogram (TTE) performed 2 weeks later already demonstrated a significant reduction of the metastasis with a diameter of 3.3 cm × 3.0 cm . The patient will receive a total of four cycles of PEB chemotherapy according to the current guidelines. Afterwards, a re-staging with 18F-FDG-PET/CT will be performed and—depending on the residual findings—a metastasis resection vs. conservative approach with sustained aftercare and CT diagnostics will be discussed. Anticoagulant treatment can be reduced to a prophylactic approach during the course of chemotherapy. However, due to the prementioned coagulation disorder of the patient, the additional application of Octanine 3.000 IE (Factor IX) biweekly is necessary.