A 75-year-old Afro-Caribbean man presented to the emergency department with a 6-month history of peripheral edema, dyspnea on exertion, and orthopnea. Clinical history included hypertension, gastroesophageal reflux disease, and asthma. A clinical examination revealed hypertension, oxygen saturation of 98% on room air, and hypervolemia with jugular venous distension and peripheral edema. Hematologic and biochemical investigations demonstrated normocytic normochromic anemia (hemoglobin 128 g/L) and renal insufficiency (serum creatinine 126 µmol/L).
A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed mixed systolic and diastolic left ventricular (LV) disease and an ejection fraction of 40%. The LV internal diameter in diastole was 6.0 cm. The right ventricle (RV) was moderately dilated with moderate to severe global systolic dysfunction. There was septal flattening in diastole, suggestive of volume overload with markedly elevated right atrial (RA) pressure (large inferior vena cava [IVC] in Fig. a). Cardiac catheterization demonstrated RA mean pressure of 19 mmHg, pulmonary artery (PA) pressure of 81/37 (mean 52) mmHg, cardiac output of 6.1 L/minute, cardiac index of 4.0 L/minute/m2, and increased left ventricular end-diastolic pressure with a mean capillary wedge pressure of 13 mmHg, without significant V wave. Pulmonary vascular resistance was 4 Wood units (WU) and systemic vascular resistance was 18.17 WU.
Renal ultrasound and abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a large complex AVM within the right renal sinus. Other investigations for alternative etiologies of pulmonary hypertension were explored and were non-contributory, including a ventilation–perfusion (V/Q) scan with low-dose CT showing no evidence of pulmonary embolism. CT angiogram displayed a large, ~ 2-cm-diameter renal AVM , which was thought to be responsible for his high-output cardiac failure. Other etiologies responsible for high-output cardiac failure were ruled out.
The patient underwent transcatheter intervention. As we wished to occlude the renal AVM beyond a branch supplying blood to the lower half of the kidney (atrophic upper half of the kidney), and we wished to avoid occluding the renal artery supplying blood to the functioning kidney, such anatomy was unsuitable for a vascular plug deployment, and hence 21 coils were deployed into the distal renal AVM . Despite partial closure of this 21-mm renal AVM, the flow through the AVM was markedly reduced, resulting in clinical improvement and a marked reduction in the IVC size. The anteroposterior dimension of the infrahepatic vena cava at the level of the superior mesenteric artery origin decreased from 4.6 to 0.5 cm. Follow-up CT angiogram demonstrated persistent but markedly reduced residual flow through the AVM.
Repeat right heart catheterization showed a reduction in RA mean pressure (10 mmHg) and PA pressure (65/33, mean 45 mmHg), with lower cardiac output (5 L/minute) and cardiac index (2.7 L/minute/m2). Pulmonary vascular resistance was 2.54 WU and systemic vascular resistance was 23.61 WU. The patient reported significant improvement from New York Heart Association (NYHA) class 4 to class 2 and expressed gratitude for the clinical care received.