The patient was a 7-year-old female born at 41 weeks of gestation by normal vaginal delivery. A “Double Bubble” sign was observed by fetal ultrasound at 39 weeks of gestation. Her birth weight was 3050 g. Her parents were healthy and unrelated and her mother denied any history of taking teratogenic drugs, heavy drinking or diabetes during pregnancy. The girl was the first child of the family and had no siblings. She had normal meconium but was found to have hypotonia, weak crying, and facial abnormalities after birth. Muscular ventricular septal defect (2.5 mm) and patent ductus arteriosus (1.4 mm) were detected in the patient by cardiac ultrasound. In addition, the patient failed the hearing screening and the brainstem auditory evoked potential (BAEP) test. Chromosome G-banding analysis was carried out in the neonatal period and showed a normal female karyotype. As she grew up, her motor and mental development significantly lagged behind her peers. Cytogenetic analysis and SNP-array analysis were performed when she was two years old. The chromosome analysis of the girl revealed a deletion of the long arm of chromosome 13 , described as 46, XX, del (13)(q33.1). Compared with the Database of Genomic Variants (DGV), a de novo 11.56 Mb deletion ranging from 13q33.1 to 13q34 (Chr13:103542220–115,106,996) was found. This chromosome region contains about 30 OMIM genes, including SLC10A2, DAOA, EFNB2, ARGLU1, LIG4, TNFSF13B, IRS2, COL4A1, COL4A2, CARS2, ING1, ARHGEF7, SOX1, ATP11A, MCF2L, F7, F10, PROZ, PCIDI, CUL4A, LAMPA, ADPRHL1, TFDP1, ATP4B, GRK1, GAS6, RASA3, and UPF3A. As she grew up, microscopic hematuria and urinary tract infections were detected by routine urine tests when she suffered from a fever, with her red blood cell count being 20–50/HP. She suffered her first grand mal epileptic seizure when she was 6 years old and was treated with valproate since then. In October 2019, when she was about 7 years old, she was hospitalized in our department and a thorough physical examination was carried out. Her blood pressure was normal, and her height and weight were 120.0 cm (P25) and 20.0 kg (P25) respectively. She had a flat and leaning head, hypertelorism, malformed ears, flat and broad bridge, micrognathia, and transverse palmar crease on both hands. In addition, the distances between her urethra, vagina and anus were shorter than normal . She had congenital dislocation of the left hip joint and she was incapable of walking independently. Her psychomotor milestones were delayed with mental retardation and she suffered from incontinence. Routine blood, liver function and renal function tests were normal, the tests on complement C3, antinuclear antibody (ANA), antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), and HBV test also showed no abnormalities. The test on urinary microprotein was normal with a urine protein/creatinine ratio of 0.16 and a urinary calcium/creatinine ratio of 0.01. During this time, a cardiac ultrasound was performed again but only found mild tricuspid regurgitation with no VSD or PDA. Uterine and ovarian ultrasound scans were normal and renal vein ultrasound showed no symptom of left renal vein entrapment syndrome. Renal ultrasound scans indicated that the left kidney was small with a size of 4.2 cm × 1.9 cm(less than two standard deviations), while the right kidney was 8.2 cm × 4.5 cm in size. The renal MRI showed left renal hypoplasia and hydronephrosis . Dynamic renal function imaging showed that the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of the left kidney was 19.34 ml/min and the GFR of the right kidney was 85.81 ml/min. To further investigate the cause of renal miniaturization and hematuria, a renal vascular contrast-enhanced ultrasonography and a contrast-enhanced voiding urosonography (ceVUS) were performed. The results suggested that (1) The left kidney was smaller than normal, and the left renal artery was relatively thin (diameter of the left renal artery was 0.10 cm, while that of the right renal artery was 0.30 cm). The enhancement degree of contrast-enhanced ultrasound of the left kidney was weak compared to the right. (2) The left lower ureter was slightly dilated and a mild vesicoureteral reflux (grade I) of the left side was detected. Nitrofurantoin (1 mg/kg/d was given every night to avoid recurrent urinary tract infection and the patient did not suffer from any urinary tract infection in the past few months. However, microscopic hematuria was detected every time during routine urine tests. Because of the unilateral renal hypoplasia, a kidney biopsy was not performed.