Eleven years prior a seventy-year-old woman had undergone transthoracic radical oesophagectomy and cervical lymphadenectomy for OSCC (pathological T1bN0M0 stage I, according to the 7th edition of the Union for International Cancer Control/American Joint Committee on Cancer staging system). Seven years after surgery, computed tomography (CT) revealed lymph node recurrence at the splenic hilum, which was treated with four courses of cisplatin plus 5-fluorouracil. Treatment reduced the size of the lymph node, although 1 year later, lymph node metastasis was detected again at the pancreatic tail and splenic hilum . Chemoradiotherapy (50 Gy in 28 fractions) resulted in a complete response at the lymph nodes. However, 11 years after surgery, a cystic solid tumour was detected at the pancreatic tail using CT and endoscopic ultrasonography . A change in the main pancreatic duct was also detected using endoscopic retrograde pancreatography . No other metastases were seen on evaluation with positron emission tomography/CT , which strongly suggested primary pancreatic tail cancer with lymph node metastasis. Intraductal papillary mucinous carcinoma was one of the differential diagnoses that were considered. Distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy with lymphadenectomy were performed to treat the tumour, which had a diameter of 30 mm and appeared to invade the artery of the gastric tube that had been reconstructed during the oesophagectomy. Thus, the artery was also resected to achieve curative resection. Operative time was 190 min and blood loss was 30 mL. The resected specimen from the pancreatic tail measured 29 × 22 × 30 mm . Pathological examination revealed that the tumour was a squamous cell carcinoma, which was compatible with the detection of the previous OSCC. The final diagnosis was pancreatic metastasis from OSCC . The resected metastatic lymph nodes at the splenic hilum also exhibited squamous cell carcinoma cells. The patient was discharged after an uneventful recovery. She is continuing clinical follow-up without adjuvant therapy and has been disease-free for 24 months after resection of the pancreatic metastasis.