The patient was a 78-year-old woman who presented to her primary care physician with nausea and upper abdominal pain. She was referred to our hospital for further examination and treatment. There was no notable family history. Laboratory data showed mild elevation of a single tumor marker (carcinoembryonic antigen, 1.9 ng/mL; carbohydrate antigen 19-9, 2.0 U/mL; carbohydrate antigen 125, 44.5 U/mL; alpha-fetoprotein, 8.9 ng/mL) and no other significant abnormal findings. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed an advanced infiltrative ulcerative tumor in the lesser curvature extending from the antrum to the middle of the body of the stomach . Endoscopic biopsy of the gastric tumor showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell carcinoma. Colonoscopy showed a 4-mm polyp in the mid-transverse colon . Cold snare polypectomy further revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell carcinoma. Computed tomography displayed enhanced wall thickening in the lesser curvature of the stomach from the antrum to the middle of the body . The regional lymph nodes showed no enlargement. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed no obvious abnormal findings in the gallbladder, cystic duct, or common bile duct (Additional file ). We considered this to be a case of colonic metastasis of gastric cancer. Although further examinations using fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography and computed tomography were not performed, the patient had a gastric obstruction that was considered to be advanced gastric cancer. Because it was feared that bleeding from the tumor would occur, a gastrectomy was planned. Intraoperatively, the diagnostic peritoneal washing cytology examination yielded negative results for malignant cells, and no peritoneal dissemination was observed. We attempted a distal gastrectomy; however, a positive intraoperative rapid pathology diagnosis led to a total gastrectomy, lymph node dissection, and cholecystectomy. Gastric cancer did not directly invade the transverse colon. Because the location of the colonic lesion was difficult to determine, colon resection was not performed. The surgical specimen revealed a type 3 gastric tumor centered in the antrum and pylorus that was 180 mm × 170 mm, with no grossly apparent abnormalities in the gallbladder . The histologic examination showed similar morphologic features of the gastric and colonic tumors . Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell carcinoma. The mucosal surface of the colonic tumor was covered by normal mucosa with partial features of adenoma. In addition, immunohistochemistry showed that these tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK) 7 and negative for CK20. In the gastric tumor, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 was negative, the combined positive score of programmed death ligand-1 was 1–5, and high microsatellite instability was not observed (data not shown). In addition to advanced lymph node metastasis and lymphatic and venous invasion, tumor invasion was seen at the proximal and distal margins or within the wall of the gallbladder neck (microscopic residual tumor). According to the Japanese classification of gastric carcinoma, the final pathological diagnosis was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell carcinoma, pT4a, INFc, Ly1a, V1a, pPM1, pDM1, and pN3a (3: 4/4; 5: 1/1; 6: 4/4; 12a: 1/1; total: 10/31) .
The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 21 without adverse events. Chemotherapy comprising 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin plus nivolumab was initiated.