A 4.2-kg, 2.5-month-old Asian boy was referred to our facility because of severe respiratory failure that was refractory to conventional mechanical ventilation strategies. He was born at 31 weeks of gestation weighing 1620 g and hospitalized at a neonatal intensive care unit for 66 days with the diagnoses of respiratory distress syndrome, bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and sepsis. Four days after discharge, the patient had respiratory failure; he was intubated and transferred to a local intensive care unit. On the third day of hospitalization, he was transferred to our pediatric intensive care unit. On physical examination, he was an intubated patient with a respiratory rate (RR) of 77 breaths/minute, pulse rate 160 beats/minute, blood pressure 90/54 mmHg, and oxygen saturation (SpO2) 85%. His breath sounds were decreased in the left lung. A venous blood gas investigation revealed pH 7.07, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 153 mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen 33 mmHg, and bicarbonate 23 mEq/L. Chest radiography showed minimal atelectasis of the left lung and hyperinflation of the right lung, and a tracheal tube was positioned 1 cm above the carina. The patient was initially ventilated using conventional pressure control ventilation (PCV) mode with positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 8 cmH2O, peak inspiratory pressure (PIP) 20 cmH2O, RR 20 breaths/minute, and inspiratory time (TI) 0.8 second. However, he had progressively worsening hypoxemia and hypercarbia. Therefore, an inhaled surfactant was given, and high-frequency oscillatory ventilation (HFOV) was applied. In the following days, his respiratory status improved. HFOV was stopped, and conventional ventilation using PCV mode was started. Weaning attempts were unsuccessful, and a tracheotomy was performed.
On the 14th day of hospitalization, the patient had a fever and severe hypoxemia with SpO2 40%. A physical examination revealed decreased breath sounds in the left lung. Chest radiography revealed total atelectasis of the left lung and hyperinflation of the right lung . The mode of ventilation was changed from PCV to pressure-regulated volume control (PRVC), and PEEP and PIP values were increased. The patient’s status did not improve, and his SpO2 was 60% with 100% oxygen. A bronchoscopy was performed, and the result was normal. Chest computed tomography revealed hyperinflation and dead spaces in the right lung and total atelectasis of the left lung. Different ventilator strategies were required, so we decided to perform DLV with a lung salvage strategy for the left lung and a lung-protective strategy for the right lung. A 3.0-mm inner-diameter (ID) cuffed tracheal tube and a 2.5-mm ID cuffed tracheal tube were inserted into the left and right bronchi, respectively, via tracheotomy with bronchoscopy in the operating room. These were the largest possible tubes that the main airway diameter would accommodate. The right lung was ventilated with PRVC mode, and ventilator settings were adjusted with PEEP of 5 mmHg, tidal volume 6 ml/kg, RR 15 breaths/minute, and TI 0.6 second. The left lung was ventilated with HFOV, and ventilator settings were adjusted as mean airway pressure of 20 cmH2O, amplitude 47 cmH2O, frequency 7 Hz, and TI 33%. In the following hours, there was marked improvement, and SpO2 was 87% with 75% oxygen. Chest radiography revealed that the atelectasis of the left lung and hyperinflation of the right lung were ameliorated after 12 hours of DLV . DLV was maintained for 5 days, and ventilator support was reduced in stepwise fashion . On the 21st day of hospitalization, the two separate tubing systems were changed to a single-lumen 4.5-mm ID cuffed tracheotomy tube, and conventional ventilation with PRVC mode was started with PEEP of 8 cmH2O, PIP 25 cmH2O, RR 28 breaths/minute, and TI 0.65 second. Because repeated weaning attempts were unsuccessful, the patient was switched to a home ventilator on the 48th day and was discharged on the 64th day.