A 55-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital complaining of asthma after activity, chest tightness, and a persistent dry cough for 2 months. A physical examination of the left side of the chest revealed decreased respiratory motion, decreased breath sounds, and turbid percussion in the left side of the chest. After admission, routine blood tests, lung cancer tumor markers and node antacid staining did not show any significant abnormalities. Pleural fluid cytopathological examination showed a small number of lymphocytes, macrophages, mesothelial cells, and no malignant tumor cells. A chest computed tomography (CT) performed a lobulated pulmonary mass with calcification in the left lower lobe, and adjacent pleural hypertrophy and adhesions. The patient underwent the 18 F-FDG PET/CT examination to clarify the diagnosis. On 18 F-FDG PET imaging , the standardized uptake value (SUV) of the mass increased unevenly, with SUVmax from 4.4 to 8.1. The size of the mass is about 76 mm × 70 mm × 59 mm. And without lesions identified in other locations in his body (including nervous system and spine). The patient’s diagnosis and treatment process showed in the Table . Due to massive calcified lesions and mild high metabolic activity, the nuclear medicine physician considered the mass to be benign. For further diagnosis and treatment, the patient received a surgery. Intraoperative exploration revealed an 8 cm diameter calcified mass between the left lower lung and the diaphragm with adhesions to the surrounding lung tissue and the diaphragm. Subsequently, the patient underwent left thoracic adhesion, mass excision, wedge resection of the left lower lung lobe and intraoperative frozen pathological examination. Gross examination revealed a grayish-white mass measuring 9.5cmx8.4cmx5.3 cm. Microscopic examination showed mainly spindle cells, with mild cell morphology. The tumor involved the pleura with fusiform nests of cells arranged in fascicles or whorls and extensive calcification. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), progesterone receptor (PR), somatostatin receptor 2 (SSTR2), CD34, and S-100, and negativity for Desmin, STAT6, ALK(1A4), and SMA. The Ki-67 index was about 20% positive. These morphological and immunohistochemical features were suggestive of a benign PPM (WHO 1 grade) .