In May 2019, a 23-year-old male was evaluated at our institution for a 1-year history of a painful subcutaneous nodule at the left popliteal fossa. The pain, described as an “electric shock.” was also irradiated to the lateral surface of the leg. He then underwent ultrasonography, with a first diagnosis of subcutaneous cyst; subsequently, he was submitted in another institution, under local anesthesia, to an attempt for surgical removal by a dermatology specialist; however, the procedure was aborted due to the onset of acute pain. A first MRI [ and ] was, therefore, performed in November 2018, depicting a homogeneous lesion of about 12 × 13 mm at the branching point between the left common peroneal and sural nerves. Surprisingly, the patient was not evaluated by a neurosurgeon at that moment. He was instead evaluated by another physician in an outpatient clinic and submitted to 5 mL intra- and perilesional injection of ozone-oxygen mixture. The procedure caused a dramatic, intense, and durable local pain in addition to the previously experienced radiating pain to the lateral leg surface. He was finally referred to our institution, 6 months after the first MRI, for definitive treatment. On admission, the neurological examination showed a slight left foot dorsiflexion deficit, without sensory impairment. An EMG confirmed a mild impairment of motor conduction at the level of the fibula’s head. The subcutaneous swelling was suspected for schwannoma of the common peroneal nerve. A second MRI [ and ] with contrast medium showed an increase of tumor’s dimensions (14 × 16 mm) and, noticeably, also a change in tumor morphology: It had become heterogeneous, with a rim of contrast enhancement and a hypointense central core.
The patient finally underwent surgery under microscopic view, with intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring. Continuous free-running and stimulus-triggered EMG was used to identify functioning nerves and to localize the safest entry point inside the tumor capsule. Sodium fluorescein 1 mg/kg was intravenously injected by the anesthesiologist, on completion of the induction, as previously described.[,]
A slight curvilinear incision at the level of the lateral and inferior part of the popliteal fossa was performed and, after subcutaneous dissection, we identified an encapsulated lesion between the common peroneal and sural nerves. Since the dissection of the pseudocapsule, a fibrous reaction was noticed, which made it slightly more challenging to identify the tumor capsule and a silent, safe zone without positive electrophysiological responses. Several strong adherences were present, and the consistency of the neoplasm was harder than usual. These factors determined the impossibility to remove the tumor en block; it was instead removed through a gentle piecemeal resection . Postremoval IOM showed slight impairment in motor nerve response, while the sensory response (sural nerve) was unchanged.
Histological examination revealed a nerve sheath tumor constituted by well-differentiated Schwann cells, with a thin capsule, loose Antoni B, and compact Antoni A areas, characterized by nuclear palisades consistent with Verocay bodies. Ectatic vessels, cystic-hemorrhagic areas, and foci of acute and chronic inflammatory infiltrates were also identified. The immunohistochemistry showed S100 positivity. The microscopic study highlighted areas of foreign body reaction with hematoxylin and eosin stain (H and E), along with gray-yellowish, uniformly sized microspheres phagocytized by multinucleated giant cells (CD68 immunostained). The final diagnosis was of schwannoma with foreign body reaction.
After surgery, the patient presented worsening of the left foot extension, while local and irradiated pain disappeared. He was then referred to physical therapy: 3-months after surgery, the motor deficit was almost completely regressed. At 12-months follow-up examination, the motor function had completely recovered. The last nerve ultrasonography depicted a discreetly preserved structure, without focal section enlargement.