A 14-year-old previously healthy male was admitted with a 3-week history of daily emesis, constipation, and lethargy. He had a decreased appetite and 3 kg weight loss in the preceding weeks. He described vague periumbilical pain and his family noticed a recent depressive change in his mood, including a fatigued appearance, low mood, and withdrawn behaviour. He had no joint or bone pain and denied fever or night sweats. Past medical history was unremarkable. He was on no medications. The family had recently immigrated from the Philippines one-week prior to the onset of symptoms. On exam, he appeared unwell and cachectic with a weight of 37 kg (-2.1 standard deviation (S.D.)) and a body mass index (BMI) of 14.1 kg/m² (<-3 S.D.). He was alert, oriented and cooperative. Neurological exam was unremarkable with normal deep tendon reflexes, bilateral flexor plantar reflexes, a normal gait and normal strength. A large, irregular, tender, mobile abdominal mass of 10 × 5 cm was palpable in the left lower quadrant.
Initial laboratory testing demonstrated severe hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia, with a corrected total serum calcium of 4.30 mmol/L (N: 2.14–2.65 mmol/L) and a phosphate of 0.58 mmol/L (N: 0.74–1.52 mmol/L). Initial serum intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) was elevated at 51.70 pmol/L (N: 1.30–6.80 pmol/L), later peaking at 70.2 pmol/L. Additional biochemical evaluation on presentation is provided in Table .
Given the palpable mass and reported symptoms of emesis and constipation, a plain film abdominal radiograph was performed on admission to evaluate the abdominal mass and assess for possible obstruction. This identified large fecal loading of the colon and a lytic lesion within the left iliac wing . Subsequent computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) imaging showed the lesion arising within the bone, measuring 13 × 5.1 × 5.8 cm and a scalloped appearance with a T2 intense soft tissue component slightly projecting beyond the anterior table of the iliac bone . Thyroid ultrasound and Nuclear Medicine technetium 99 m Sestamibi scan were consistent with the identification of a solitary left superior parathyroid adenoma .
No further bony lesions were identified with full body skeletal survey radiographs and scintigraphy. Renal ultrasound was unremarkable with no nephrocalcinosis nor nephrolithiasis. Bone mineral densitometry (BMD) demonstrated lumbar spine, whole body and left distal forearm Z-scores of -0.2, -1.1, and − 1.7, respectively.
CT guided core needle biopsy of the iliac bone lesion was performed and underwent histological assessment demonstrating viable bone surrounded by moderately cellular spindle cells with hemosiderin, hemorrhage, and rare osteoclast-like giant cells, consistent with osteitis fibrosa cystica .
Prior to surgical treatment, hypercalcemia was treated with intravenous (IV) normal saline, multiple doses of subcutaneous (SC) calcitonin and a single dose of IV Zoledronic acid (0.025 mg/kg). The patient underwent surgical excision of a left superior parathyroid gland (2.0 × 1.6 × 0.4 cm; 0.9 g) with histology consistent with a parathyroid adenoma . The postoperative course was complicated by prolonged, recurrent hypocalcaemia with a total serum calcium nadir of 1.98 mmol/L, consistent with “hungry bone syndrome”. He required IV and oral replacement of calcium for 6 days. He was later discharged to home with oral supplementation of calcium carbonate and cholecalciferol.
In the subsequent 8 months post-parathyroidectomy, his weight increased 17 kg to 54 kg (-0.4 S.D.) and BMI to 19.8 kg/m² (0.0 S.D.). Serum biochemistry was maintained with gradual weaning and discontinuation of supplementation of calcium and vitamin D; serum total calcium 2.43 mmol/L, phosphate 1.66 mmol/L, and PTH 6.2 pmol/L. Repeat pelvic MRI within 12-months post-parathyroidectomy demonstrated complete resolution of pelvic lesion.