A 4-year-old female donkey from a large-scale farm in Liaocheng, China, had an abortion on the 296th day of pregnancy on May 29, 2021. Anorexia, sadness, unwillingness to move, and a bent head were all symptoms of the female donkey. Except for the lungs, which had a blue/purple tinge, necropsy of the aborted fetus revealed no visible gross abnormalities .
The tissue specimens of the placenta, umbilical cord, lungs, and liver from the aborted fetus were taken for bacteriological testing to identify the etiological agent. As previously described, all tissue specimens were cultivated on Salmonella-Shigella agar and 5% sheep blood agar and incubated at 37 °C for 24 h . There were no bacterial colonies on the culture plates, according to the results. Following that, as stated in earlier publications, potential viruses were identified . An EasyPure® Viral DNA/RNA Kit was used to extract RNA and DNA from the placenta, umbilical cord, lungs, and liver tissues (Beijing TransGen Biotech Co., Ltd., China), according to the manufacturer's instructions. A PrimeScript™ RT-PCR kit was used to perform One-Step reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) amplification using appropriate primers for EAV detection (Takara Bio, Inc., Japan). PCR was used to test for EHV-1, EHV-4, and EHV-8 using specified primers . The PCR cycle was as follows: 94 °C for 5 min, followed by 30 cycles at 94 °C for 30 s, 56 °C for 45 s, 72 °C for 1 min and with a final extension at 72 °C for 10 min. EAV, EHV-1, and EHV-4 were all found to be negative in all of the tissue samples. The umbilical cord, placenta, and lung tissues were all EHV-8-positive with a predicted 316 bp product. However, no detection in the liver tissues and identified using an agarose gel .
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used on the placenta and umbilical cord to confirm EHV-8 infection in vivo, as described before [–]. Briefly, The umbilical cord and placenta tissue were preserved in 10% formalin, embedded in paraffin wax, cut to 5 μm using a microtome (Leica), and mounted on slides. The slides were treated with hydrogen peroxide to inhibit endogenous peroxidase. After overnight immunostaining with EHV-8-positive serum (our lab stocks), slides were rinsed in PBS, treated with horseradish peroxidase-conjugated rabbit anti-donkey IgG for 1 h, stained with diaminobenzidine for 5 min, rinsed in water, counterstained in Gill's hematoxylin for 30 s, dehydrated, cleared, and placed on a coverslip. Negative controls were treated identically to positive controls without the antibody incubation to evaluate non-specific binding effects. Because of the presence of diaminobenzidine, EHV-8-positive cells in the umbilical cord and placenta looked brown, as shown in Fig. , but no EHV-8-positive cells were seen in the control slides.
Following that, the EHV-8 strain was isolated as described previously . The cytopathic effect (CPE) was seen in RK-13 cells (right) and negative cells (left) after two days of inoculation with the supernatant from an EHV-8-positive placenta . In order to evaluate EHV-8 isolate, the immunofluorescence assay (IFA) were performed with anti-EHV-8 mouse serum (made in our lab), the CPE-positve cells and mock cells were fixed with 75% alcohol repectively, a DyLight 594-labelled Goat Anti-Mouse IgG(H + L) served as second antibody. Comparing with mock control RK-13 cells, EHV-8 proteins were observed in the cytoplasm and nucleus in CPE-positive cells .
Further, the EHV-8 isolate was then tested using PCR, the CPE-positive cells were collected, and DNA was extracted for EHV-8 detection using G1-Forward and G1-Reverse primers. In the CPE-positive group, an agarose gel electrophoresis revealed a single band with an anticipated size of 316 bp .
Meanwhile, after a week of antibiotic treatment, the female donkey gradually recovered. The female donkey's nose swabs and blood samples were obtained and utilized to test for EHV-8 infection using PCR as described above. However, the ORF70 gene's incomplete sequence is still detectable in these samples (Additional file : Figure S1). Finally, the donkey was put down by the owner to prevent EHV-8 from spreading.