A 66-year-old man with asymptomatic 40 years-smoking history was admitted to hospital due to multiple lung nodules detected in routine health checkup had roundly doubled in size in two years. Followed computed tomography (CT) imaging showed multiple small cystic translucent shadows with clear borders in both lungs. Besides, multiple small solid nodular shadows with clear borders were found in the upper lobe of both lungs and the lower lobe of the left lung. The largest nodules were found in the apical posterior segment of the upper lobe of the left lung with the size of about 5 mm × 4 mm × 1 mm . Lymph node enlargement in the mediastinum was not detected. Scattered striated foci with clear borders were also seen in both lungs.
The patient underwent lung nodule removal surgery. Postoperative pathological examination suggested the lingual segment of the upper lobe left lung were nodal spindle cell tumor, consistent with low-grade malignancy of mesenchymal origin. The tumor cells exhibited bundled or woven pattern, with clear demarcation between the tumor and the surrounding lung tissue. The tumor cells were uniformly shuttle-shaped and of consistent size. While most areas showed no significant heterogeneity in the morphology of the tumor cells, some areas exhibited active growth with occasional nuclear fission images, indicating certain heterogeneity in the nuclei .
Other nodules shown proliferating spindle cells and collagen fibers, which were consistent with benign lesions. All nodules were close to the pleura but did not break through the pleura, and morphology was mainly characterized by proliferating spindle cells, collagen fibers and carbon deposits .
Immunohistochemical of the upper lobe of the left lung (the largest nodule) results shown that the spindle cells stained positively for vimentin, β-Catenin and P53, negatively for NF and STAT-6. The percentage of Ki-67 positive nuclei was around 10% .
Genome sequencing was conducted using NGS (DNA-based 600 genes panel and RNA-based 86 fusion genes panel, panel lists were shown in Supplementary Tables and ) to make a precise diagnosis of the largest nodule. RNA-based NGS results showed a HIPK2-YAP1 fusion (see detail fusion model in Supplementary Fig. ). DNA-based NGS results shown 33.51% mutation abundance of TP53 and 19.33% mutation abundance of ARID1B, which are considered as tumorigenic alterations.
The patient was finally diagnosed as PF with HIPK2-YAP1 fusion mutations based on a multidisciplinary team discussion, which involved comprehensive consideration of past history, clinical manifestations, radiographic, histopathological, IHC and molecular pathology results. The patient is doing well without any signs of recurrence 14 months after surgery.