The patient was a 50-year-old woman. She had been recognized as having a slightly large head since childhood, but had never been diagnosed with mental retardation. At the age of 39, her doctor detected bilateral breast masses and performed a biopsy, which led to a diagnosis of bilateral invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast. A whole-body examination revealed cerebellar tumors and hydrocephalus, and she was diagnosed with Lhermitte–Duclos disease as a complication of Cowden syndrome . Multiple polyps were found in the stomach and large intestine. She underwent left cerebellar tumor resection at the age of 40 years and the pathological results indicated hamartomas.
She had resigned from her job to focus on her treatment, but subsequently experienced depression because she could not find another job after her surgery. At the age of 41 years, she was referred to a psychiatry department where she was diagnosed with depression and started on medication, with gradual relief of her depressed mood.
At the age of 43, she developed right upper and lower extremity incomplete hemiplegia and close examination revealed a dural arteriovenous fistula . She subsequently underwent transvenous embolization on 3 occasions.
At the age of 45, she changed her residence and was referred to the Departments of Breast Surgery, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry at the Japanese Red Cross Narita Hospital for follow-up. She underwent right lobe resection by otolaryngologists in our hospital at age 46, because of a mass in the thyroid gland. The pathological result was an adenomatous goiter. In October of the same year, she was diagnosed with recurrent breast cancer with left-rib metastasis, and started hormonal therapy. She was referred to our Department of Oncology for continuous surveillance at age 50 years.
Regarding the patient’s family history , her older sister had been clinically diagnosed with Cowden syndrome at another hospital. Her father was undiagnosed, but the obtained information indicated that he had macrocephaly, hydrocephalus, and multifocal oral mucosal papillomatosis, and was therefore considered likely to have Cowden syndrome, as defined by the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) diagnostic criteria.
The patient’s physical and laboratory findings at presentation showed clear consciousness. The right lobe of her thyroid and bilateral breasts had been resected. Her head circumference was 61 cm. She had multifocal oral mucosal papillomatosis. Her blood and urine findings and abdominal ultrasound results were normal.
Neither the patient nor her sister had any children and there was no possibility of further inheritance because both had reached menopause. However, it was necessary to gain a better understanding of the patient’s condition from a genetic specialist and to consider the future course of action. We considered transferring the patient to another hospital that had a genetic specialist, but she preferred to be monitored at our hospital. The attending doctor and the patient therefore consulted a genetic specialist at another hospital and surveillance was carried out at our hospital under his guidance. Analysis of the PTEN gene showed a likely pathogenic c.801 + 2T>A variant, leading to a genetic diagnosis of Cowden syndrome . Surveillance for uterine cancer was requested at the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, and periodic lower gastrointestinal endoscopy, urinalysis, and abdominal ultrasound were planned to detect renal or colorectal cancer.
The c.801 + 2T>A variant is considered as “likely pathogenic” according to the American College of Medical Genetics, because it is located at the splice donor site of intron 7 (PVS1). It a very rare variant that is not registered in The Genome Aggregation Database in the general population, including in Japanese (PM2), but is registered as “pathogenic” in ClinVar. Primers were designed for exons 5 to 8 to cover exon 7, and splicing defects were detected by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and ribonucleic acid (RNA) sequencing. Messenger RNA (mRNAs) lacking exon 7 were detected. mRNAs having a cryptic exon as part of the intron 6 sequence and mRNAs produced by splicing with a new donor site at “GT” 74 nucleotides downstream from the mutation site were also detected. Both of these splicing aberrations cause a frameshift that stops PTEN protein synthesis. These mRNAs were degraded by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. In addition, deletion of exons 6 and 7 results in the synthesis of proteins with deletions from glycine 165 to lysine 267. These results suggested that alleles with these variants were unlikely to produce normal PTENs. Based on the above, the detected variant was considered to cause Cowden syndrome.