The subject of this case report is a 6-month-old boy referred for evaluation of bilateral hallux valgus. He was the result of a full term, uncomplicated pregnancy and weighed nine pounds at birth. No family history of bone or joint problems was reported. No other medical issues were noted other than penile torsion. The parents reported that the deformities have been present since birth and believe that they have progressively worsened. On physical examination, no dysmorphic features were observed. Each great toe deviated laterally and crossed under the lesser toes at the level of the metatarsophalangeal joints. The first metatarsal head was prominent bilaterally with subsequent blistering and callus. The great toes were flexible in the sagittal plane, but not in the coronal plane. He appeared to have mild discomfort associated with passive range of motion of his great toes. Weight-bearing films of the feet demonstrated hallux valgus deformity bilaterally. The right foot had an intermetatarsal angle(IMA) of 18°with a hallux valgus angle(HVA) of 62°. The left foot had an IMA of 13°and an HVA of 50° . Amagnetic resonance imaging (MRI)was subsequently performed to evaluate for additional abnormalities that may be contributing to the foot deformities. A bicondylar metatarsal head reminiscent of a forme fruste of preaxial polydactyly without supernumerary digit was evident on MRI . The apparent duplication of the cartilaginous metatarsal head favored a diagnosis of polydactyly. Treatment was offered consisting of splinting of the feet and lower extremities with close follow-up and, if there was no improvement overtime, excision of the redundant metatarsal head with closing wedge osteotomy of the distal metatarsal. The family declined any treatment including bracing. At 14 months of age, the subject was pulling to stand and cruising. The overall appearance of his foot had improved with a drastic decrease in overlap of the second and first toe. He had no difficulty with shoeing or other clinical problems. Imaging demonstrated an overall improvement in alignment. The right IMA had improved to 16°with an HVA of 40°. The left IMA hadactually worsened radiographically to 17°, but the HVA had improved to 38°. At 26 months of age, the subject remained asymptomatic. Imaging demonstrated improved alignment from the previous visit with a normal IMA bilaterally of 8°. His HVA on the right was 32°and 41° on the left, which was consistent with prior measurements . He was able to keep up with other children without difficulty and had no problems with shoe wear. He continued to have overlap of the first and second toe , but he had full, painless range of motion.