A 49-year-old female was admitted to our hospital with persistent thoracoabdominal effusion for 1 year.
One year ago, there was no obvious inducement of abdominal distension, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, hematemesis, black stool or edema of either lower limb. She had been to other hospitals many times, where the examination showed that there was peritoneal effusion but the cause of ascites was not clear. Abdominal distension worsened before May and the other hospitals considered "tuberculous peritonitis". The symptoms did not improve significantly after regular anti-tuberculosis treatment. Weight loss of 5 kg occurred over the previous 6 mo.
A history of cesarean section performed in Chishui People's Hospital 19 years ago and cervical polypectomy performed in Chishui People's Hospital 2 years ago. Hypothyroidism was diagnosed in Chishui People's Hospital in the same year and levothyroxine sodium tablets were taken regularly.
She denied any family history of malignant tumors.
The physical examination showed enlarged lymph nodes that could be reached in the right armpit, bilateral neck and groin; abdominal bulge; turbid sounds on percussion; positive mobile turbid sounds; and no significant abnormalities in the rest of the examination.
Other hospital biochemical examinations revealed total protein at 29.9-39.7 g/L, albumin at 17.4-25.7 g/L, lactate dehydrogenase at 62-73.1 U/L, and adenosine deaminase at 3.4 U/L, with no acid-fast bacilli. The routine test results of three abdominal punctures and drainage showed that serous mucin was qualitatively positive (+), the li fanka test was weakly positive, and more lymphocytes and proliferative mesothelial cells were observed. Ascites exfoliative cytology revealed no malignant cells. The patient was both negative for acid-fast bacilli in the ascites and free of mycobacterium tuberculosis growth by mycobacterium culture of the ascites. A biopsy of the right lobe of the liver was performed. The results of the pathological biopsy showed that in the liver tissue, a small amount of lymph node infiltration was observed in the hepatic sinus and portal area. A resection biopsy of the left inguinal lymph nodes showed that the 3 left inguinal lymph nodes had reactive hyperplasia. Because the diagnosis was not clear, the right axillary lymph nodes were collected after hospitalization in our hospital and sent to Beijing Boren Hospital for examination. Immunohistochemistry showed the following: Ki-67 [granulosa cell (GC) +, the remaining 5% +], B cell lymphoma (GC -), CD3 (T-region +), CD20 (focal +), CD21 (follicle dendritic cell +), CD10 (granulocyte +, GC weak +), CD138 (small amount +), and HHV8 (-). The in-situ hybridization results showed ebv-eber (-). By pathology, in the right armpit, the following were observed: Benign hyperplasia of the lymph nodes, shrinkage of lymph follicles in the nodes, obvious hyperplasia of the mantle area showing an "onion skin"-like structure and proliferation of blood vessels between and within follicles showing Castleman’s disease-like changes . This was accompanied by reactive hyperplasia of the lymph nodes, and no tumor or tuberculosis was found (in this case, small lymph nodes were sent for examination, lymph follicles were reduced, the mantle area was significantly proliferated, showing an "onion skin"-like structure, and follicles and intrafollicular vascular proliferation were seen) . In the bone marrow examination, 36 megakaryocytes and scattered or small piles of platelets were found in the whole film. The detection of T cells in tuberculosis infection results were positive, and the tuberculin test results were (++). The interleukin 6 level was determined by chemiluminescence to be 5.5 pg/mL. No obvious abnormalities in immunoglobulin quantification, antinuclear antibody, antinuclear antibody spectrum, female tumor-associated antigen, delivered IgG4, or anticardiolipin antibody were found. Analysis of the blood showed a hemoglobin level of 113 g/L, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) level of 29 mm/h, a hypersensitive C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 28.922 mg/L and no obvious abnormalities in liver function or renal function .
In other hospitals, multiple chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) examinations showed a small amount of pleural and pericardial effusion and a large amount of abdominal and pelvic effusion. Multiple lymph nodes in the mediastinum, bilateral hilus, bilateral armpits, right septal angle, abdominal pelvic cavity, and bilateral inguinal area were observed to be increased. The lymph nodes in the hilar region and portal space were enlarged and the spleen was enlarged. The CT of the chest and abdomen again in our hospital still showed a large amount of pleural and peritoneal effusion, hepatosplenomegaly and enlargement of multiple lymph nodes in the chest. Later, to exclude tumor diseases, positron emission tomography (PET)-CT examination was performed. PET-CT examination was added to exclude tumor diseases. The results showed that the lymph nodes with low metabolism on both sides of the neck were 0.3-1.0 cm in size (suvmax2.5); there were multiple mild metabolic lymph nodes in the mediastinum and bilateral armpits, with a size of 0.5-1.5 cm (suvmax3.1); retroperitoneal, superior mesenteric, paraaortic, pelvic and bilateral inguinal multiple mild metabolic lymph nodes, with a size of 0.4-1.6 cm (suvmax1.6); slightly enlarged spleen with slightly increased metabolism (suvmax2.3); and abdominal and pelvic effusion. The results of the color Doppler ultrasound of superficial organs demonstrated that lymph nodes were detected in the bilateral neck, armpit, groin area, and right supraclavicular area that showed some morphological abnormalities. The chest CT results demonstrated a small amount of pleural effusion on both sides and a small amount of pericardial effusion, and the mediastinum, bilateral axillary and clavicles lymph nodes were observed to be increased and partially enlarged. The results of the abdominal CT demonstrated that the number of lymph nodes in the abdominal cavity, retroperitoneum, and bilateral inguinal areas increased and there was abdominal and pelvic effusion . The fiberoptic bronchoscopy tuberculosis gene test was negative.