A 38 year-old Iranian woman with a triplet (three chorionic and three amniotic) pregnancy was hospitalized at 29 weeks and 2 days gestational age due to one-time high blood pressure at 140/90mmHg and elevated liver enzymes. A week before admission, she had been hospitalized in another hospital for about 5 days to evaluate the cause of increased liver enzymes. She had a 2-year history of primary infertility and had become pregnant by ovulation induction, and also had a 5-year history of hypothyroidism, which was euthyroid during pregnancy. She had also been diagnosed with gestational diabetes a month before admission, which was being treated with 16 units of insulin daily (6 units Levemir and 10 units NovoRapid), so her blood glucose levels were maintained in a normal range, and glycated hemoglobin concentration was 5.6 %. She was at risk for preeclampsia due to her advanced age and triplet pregnancy, so aspirin was administered. On the other hand, due to hospitalization for more than 3 days, she was at increased risk of deep vein thrombosis and was treated with enoxaparin. Additionally, given the possibility of iatrogenic preterm delivery, she had received a course of betamethasone for fetal lung maturation.
Two weeks before hospitalization, liver enzymes increased to four times the normal levels: alanine amino transferase (ALT) 218 units per liter (U/L) and aspartate amino transferase (AST) 283 U/L. After a thorough evaluation and ruling out preeclampsia, and due to a probable diagnosis of gestational cholestasis, she was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid (300 mg twice a day) from 1 week before hospitalization. Lab tests at admission included the following: ALT = 94 U/L, AST = 57 U/L, total bilirubin = 0.7, direct bilirubin = 0.1, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) = 276 U/L. Other tests including white blood cell count, hemoglobin, platelet, serum creatinine, and urinalysis were in the normal range. She underwent 24-hour Holter blood pressure monitoring, and among all measurements, only 18.8% of systolic and 15.6% of diastolic blood pressure exceeded the set limit of 140 and 90 mmHg, respectively. Echocardiographic findings were quite normal, and 24-hour urine protein was also reported in the normal range. On the second day of hospitalization, an ultrasound exam was performed, which showed that biophysical scores and amniotic fluid were normal in all three fetuses. One of the fetuses had increased umbilical artery resistance (pulsatility index [PI] > 95%) and estimated weight below 5%, but umbilical cord and middle cerebral artery findings were normal in the other two fetuses. On the fourth day of hospitalization, the patient developed fever and cough. The following day, due to the persistent fever and cough and also an onset of myalgia, real-time reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was conducted on nasopharyngeal swabs for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid. All steps including sample collection, processing and laboratory testing were based on World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines. Chest X-ray and computed tomography scan were not performed due to the patient’s lack of consent.
The result of RT-PCR was positive for the SARS-CoV-2 virus. However, the patient’s clinical symptoms were mild. She had a mild fever, with maximum temperature of 38.3 °C. She had no complaint of shortness of breath, diarrhea, nausea or vomiting, her respiratory rate was 18–20 per minute, and oxygen saturation was above 95% at all times. On the same day that she developed clinical symptoms, an ultrasound exam was performed: the fetus who already had increased umbilical artery resistance showed an exacerbated condition involving absent umbilical artery end-diastolic flow, and another fetus showed umbilical artery resistance (PI > 95%), but umbilical cord and middle cerebral artery findings were normal in the third fetus, and biophysical scores and amniotic fluid were normal in all three fetuses. Based on these findings, the patient underwent serial ultrasound exams, and unfortunately, exacerbated umbilical flow resistance in the second fetus also progressed to absent umbilical artery end-diastolic flow . However, Doppler and biophysical scores were normal in all fetuses. Finally, 6 days after the beginning of clinical symptoms, the biophysical scores declined in the two fetuses with absent umbilical artery end-diastolic flow, so the patient underwent cesarean section due to rapid deterioration of fetal conditions and exacerbated placental insufficiency. The first baby was born weighing 1320 g with umbilical cord pH 7.25, and her 5-minute APGAR [appearance, pulse, grimace, activity, respiration] score was 4; the second baby was born weighing 1600 g with umbilical cord pH 7.23, and his 5-minute APGAR score was 7; the third baby was born weighing 1250 g with umbilical cord pH 7.21, and her 5-minute APGAR score was 6. In order to protect the babies from infection with the virus, delayed cord clamping was not performed, skin-to-skin contact of mother and babies was not practiced, and the babies were separated from the mother immediately after birth. All three babies were intubated and were admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU), where they were kept in separate, isolated rooms. RT-PCR of nasopharyngeal swabs for SARS-CoV-2 nucleic acid was carried out for all three newborns immediately after birth. The mother was discharged 3 days after cesarean section, and 2 weeks later she had recovered completely without any complications.
Two of the babies, weighing 1250 and 1320 g, each received three doses and the other baby received two doses of surfactant. All three newborns developed clinical symptoms of sepsis and pulmonary hemorrhage. The primary results of the COVID-19 test were negative for all three newborns. Because of the poor general conditions of the newborns, and considering the false-negative probability of the initial test, the COVID-19 test was repeated immediately after receiving the first test results, and the result was positive for the baby who weighed 1600 g and also had better umbilical cord and placental circulation before birth. Unfortunately, we did not examine the umbilical cord blood and amniotic fluid samples for the virus, so we cannot conclusively link the COVID-19 RT-PCR positive test in this fetus to vertical transmission, but because the babies were completely isolated and had no suspected exposure during the period between the two tests, the possibility of vertical transmission cannot be ignored.
The baby who weighed 1320 g died 3 days after birth with collapsed white lung and sepsis. The baby who weighed 1250 g also had symptoms of sepsis and died 13 days after birth. The baby who weighed 1600 g and had a positive COVID-19 test eventually recovered and was discharged in good general condition 3 weeks after birth.