A 75-year-old man presented to our hospital complaining of vomiting and abdominal distension. Eleven years ago, he was diagnosed with bladder cancer and had undergone open total cystectomy and ileal conduit urinary diversion. Physical examination findings revealed abdominal distension, a midline incision in the lower abdomen, a widespread abdominal incisional hernia that measured 25 cm × 20 cm in the lower left abdomen, and an ileal conduit urinary diversion in the lower right abdomen. On admission, no abnormalities were found on blood examinations. Computed tomography (CT) confirmed colon dilation with fecal impaction from the ascending colon to the sigmoid colon and wall thickening in the sigmoid colon . The patient was urgently hospitalized with a diagnosis of colorectal ileus and underwent transanal ileus tube insertion. Colonoscopy during the transanal ileus tube insertion revealed a Borrmann type II tumor with circumferential stenosis 10 cm distal to the junction between the descending colon and the sigmoid colon. With the diagnosis of colonic ileus due to obstructive sigmoid colon cancer, decompression with a transanal ileus tube was performed to manage the obstructive enteritis that persisted for 2 weeks, and an elective surgery was planned. Severe intra-abdominal adhesions were expected due to the previous total cystectomy, and the left ureter was near the sigmoid tumor ; therefore, prophylactic retrograde transileal conduit ureteral catheter placement before the surgery was planned.
The procedure was performed under constant fluoroscopic guidance in the supine position.
The contrast medium was injected to provide a road map of the ileal conduit to reflux up the ureters, which helped guide the access . Confirming the imaging of the left ureter, a 10 Fr catheter with multiple side holes (Create Medic Co., Kanagawa, Japan) was inserted into the left ureter using a 0.035-in., 150-cm-long, stiff-angled hydrophilic guidewire (Radifocus, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) . A catheter was fixed to the skin near the ileal conduit using 3-0 nylon to prevent deviation due to ureteral peristalsis .
The elective surgical procedure was scheduled for ICG fluorescence-guided laparoscopic Hartmann's operation considering a wide range of abdominal incisional hernias in the lower abdomen, adhesions from previous surgery, residual obstructive enteritis, and ureteral anatomical change. VISIONSENSE® (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was used to observe ICG fluorescence.
Immediately before the operation, the transanal ileus tube was pulled toward the anus, and the balloon was brought close to the obstructive tumor. Intraperitoneal observation revealed extensive small intestinal adhesions on the lower abdominal wall and mesentery of the sigmoid colon. A 4-trocar technique was used for operation (12 mm, 12 mm, 12 mm, and 5 mm trocars). ICG (Diagnogreen®; Dai-Ichi Sankyo Pharm, Tokyo, Japan) at a dose of 20 mL (5.0 μg/mL) was injected into the transanal ileus tube-tip balloon, and the ICG fluorescence in the balloon was confirmed to identify the tumor position .
The sigmoid colon was mobilized from the retroperitoneum using a lateral approach. Due to severe adhesion of the small intestine, confirming the ICG fluorescence of the ureter was not possible at this time. After mobilization and transection of the sigmoid colon, ICG was administered at a dose of 20 mL (5.0 × 10–2 mg/mL) from the transileal conduit ureteral catheter, and the catheter was clamped. ICG fluorescence of the ureter was observed in the retroperitoneum, confirming the preservation of the ureter . Then, an end-sigmoid colostomy was created in the upper left abdomen, and the operation was completed. The operation time was 231 min, with 5 mL of intraoperative bleeding. The ureteral catheter was removed 3 days after the operation. The patient’s postoperative course was good with no complications, and he was discharged on postoperative day 7. The pathological diagnosis was well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, T3, N0, M0, stage IIa, and postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was planned.