The patient is a 63-year-old female who had no significant medical or family history.
She was admitted to our hospital in Marth 2018 with the diagnosis of right thyroid
carcinoma on multinodular goiter after ultrasonography suggested a malignant lesion
in the right lobe of the thyroid gland, and cytology of a fine-needle aspiration
specimen revealed a follicular neoplasm. Thyroidectomy was then performed. The
post-operative pathological resulted as pT3N0M0 stage I papillary carcinoma. One
month after surgery, a regimen of 50mCI dose of I131 was administered.
After completing this regimen, she was discharged and then followed-up by our
Outpatient Department.
In October 2019, during a regular check-up, even though she had no symptoms of
recurrence or abdominal pain or changing in bowel habit, the abdominal ultrasound
showed uneven thickening in her ascending colon wall. Colonoscopy showed an
ulcer-like neoplasm in the ascending colon, covering half of the lumen. The biopsy
specimen of the neoplasm and abdominal CT-scanner confirmed that she had a second
cancer which was cT4aN0M0 colon cancer. Therefore, right hemicolectomy was
performed, and postoperative pathology revealed the high-grade adenocarcinoma with
serosa, vascular and perineural invasion, with 17/17 inflamed lymph nodes, and high
microsatellite instability (MSI-H). Postoperative diagnosis was pT4aN0M0, stage II
colon cancer. Consequently, the patient started chemotherapy with XELOX regimen for
4 cycles. Each cycle lasted 3 weeks and consisted of oral capecitabine
1000 mg/m2 twice a day during the first 14 days, combined with IV
oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 on the first day.
In May 2020, right after completing the last cycle, she had macroscopic hematuria.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced MRI and further tests detected the third primary cancer
in the left renal pelvis . Nephro-ureterectomy was then performed. Her postoperative pathology
result was papillary non-invasive carcinoma at pTaN0M0. After surgery, she was
discharged and continued to be followed-up.
In April 2022, during a scheduled visit, her abdominal ultrasound revealed a lesion
in her bladder wall without any reported symptoms. An initial diagnostic flexible
cystoscopy showed a 2.5 cm lesion on the right wall of the bladder, without
bleeding. Abdominal CT-scanner showed a 14 × 17 mm solitary tumor on the right wall
of the bladder with no evidence of surrounding infiltration, neither lymph nodes nor
metastases were detected. Histology confirmed that it was the grade 1 urothelial
carcinoma of bladder. Transurethral resection of the bladder tumor was performed
soon after. The postoperative diagnosis was pG1TaN0M0 bladder cancer. Five days
after surgery, she was discharged and has been being followed-up since then. At the
time being (December 2022), her overall status is stable; clinical examination and
imaging tests showed no signs or symptoms of recurrence or metastases. below is the
timeline of her disease progression illustrating when her 4 primary cancers were
detected. The histopathological images of 4 sites were presented in the to .