A 46-year-old female with Cogans's syndrome and a history of arterial hypertension was admitted with severe chest pain. Briefly, physical examination revealed the absence of radial pulses and no measurable blood pressure of the upper extremities. Aortic angiography revealed an aortic arch syndrome with occlusion of both subclavian and vertrebral arteries . Ultrasound showed a fusiform abdominal aortic aneurysm and axial computed tomography demonstrated an aneurysm of the ascending aorta with a dissection membrane located a few centimeters distal from the aortic root . At surgery the ascending aorta showed severe signs of inflammation comprising reddish alterations of the aortic walls and a pattern of thickened as well as thinned wall areas of the aorta and adjacent vessels. The ascending aorta revealed a circumferential dissection distal from the coronary ostia associated with an overload of pastuous material. The patient underwent a replacement of the ascending aorta by a 28 mm Vacscutek® tube graft. After uneventful recovery the patient was discharged on postoperative day 17 with minimal and irrelevant neurological deficits.
Histological examination of the resected tissue specimen demonstrated an occult inflammatory process with massive inflammatory infiltration and loss of smooth muscle cells particularly at the intima-media border. Elastic lamellae and collagenous matrix were degraded . Foci of matrix deterioration in deeper medial areas collocated with clusters of inflammatory cells . MMP1 and MMP9 were strongly expressed at the intima-media border and in deeper areas of the media. Interestingly, MMP2 expression was only very low (not shown). Expression of collagenolytic MMPs was also studied by RT-PCR analyses . Our data show a strong upregulation of the mRNA expression of collagenase (MMP1) and both gelatinases (MMP2 and MMP9) compared with controls. Zymography revealed massive matrixmetalloproteinase activity at the intima-media border (rich in activated 27F10-positive inflammatory cells) and in association with clusters of CD68-positive macrophages in deeper medial areas. mRNA-expression analysis revealed a distinct increase in the expression profiles of the major vascular collagens (collagen type I, III, and VIII), which were expressed about 1.5 - 2-fold higher than in healthy control tissues. Similarly, tropoelastin was found to be 2-fold increased (data not shown).
In areas of exceeding matrix deterioration the level of the granulocyte macrophage colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF), was massively increased. The gross of GM-CSF was collocated with macrophages, but also with neighboring SMC. In comparison with normal controls (aortic specimens taken during ACB surgery, N = 10) overall mRNA expression of GM-CSF and its receptor subunits was distinctively elevated (N = 3) .