A 4-month and 23-day-old Yi-ethnic girl was admitted to our hospital due to recurrent skin lesions with a 2-month history, accompanied by hair loss and intermittent mild diarrhea with 3–5 yellow, loose stools per day. Perioral erythema first appeared two months after her birth, and the rash gradually spread to the ears, occipital area, perianal and perineal regions, and distal extremities. She was treated as ecazema in local hospitals with external medications, such as Fusidic Acid Cream, Naristollae Scutellarin Compositus, but the therapeutic effect was poor. Simultaneously, due to the physician’s concerns that the baby’s diarrhea might be associated with cow’s milk protein allergy or lactose intolerance, breastfeeding was discontinued for a fortnight. However, the administration of specialized formula failed to ameliorate the rash and diarrhea during this period.The girl was born prematurely at 31 weeks (birth weight: 1540 g), hospitalized in the neonatology department for a duration of 33 days, receiving parenteral nutrition (PN) for 16 days, and was exclusively breastfed since discharge. In addition, the parents had a non-consanguineous marriage. This patient had no siblings and no similar manifestations had been observed in any other family members. As her mother did not exhibit any similar symptoms, her blood zinc levels were not tested.
At the time of admission, the patient displayed signs of failure to thrive, with a weight of 5 kg (< 3rd percentile) and a length of 60 cm (< 10rd percentile). The dermatological examination revealed sparse hair and well-defined erythematous erosive plaques with scales and cursts at the periphery, primarily affecting the occipital and anogenital regions .
Laboratory and biochemical studies showed that the infant’s serum zinc levels were dramatically low with a value of 3.2 µmol/L (reference range 11.0–26.0 µmol/L). The serum albumin and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) values were normal. Additional tests includiing routine bloodwork, liver and kidney function assessments, autoimmune antibody profiles, lymphocyte immunophenotyping, and blood culture, all yielded negative results. The skin microscopic examination did not reveal any significant findings, other than the macroscopic skin lesions. Sanger sequencing demonstrated there was no mutation in the SLC39A4 gene. Consequently, based on the clinical characteristics, the patient was diagnosed with TSZD.
The girl was initially administered an oral zinc supplementation of 3 mg/kg/day, which led to a significantly improvement in her skin lesions within three days and a complete resolution after sixdays , without anysigns of diarrhea. Serum zinc levels reached a normal value of 12.9 µmol/L after three days of zinc supplementation. After discharge, zinc supplementation was maintained for eight months at a dose of 1 mg/kg/d, and it was discontinued after weaning when the child turned one year old.To date, the girl had been followed up for 17 months. Although the girl’s growth and development remained poor, with a weight of 10 kg (10-25rd percentile) and a height of 75 cm (< 3rd percentile) due to the uniquedietary habits of her ethnic minority background, such as a two-meal system, a comparatively uniform food category and the tradition of mouth-to-mouth feeding for infants, and her picky eating, the AE-like skin lesions did not recur.