A 39-year-old man, a construction worker, without remarkable medical history, was referred to the Department of Surgery with signs and symptoms of high gastrointestinal obstruction (vomiting during meals) and nonspecific abdominal pain. The general conditions were good. There were no dehydration or peritoneal symptoms, and peristaltic sounds were heard by auscultation. The patient reported that symptoms occurred suddenly without apparent reason. Routine laboratory tests revealed mild leukocytosis (12.2 g/L) and increased serum C-reactive protein level (548 mg/L).
An intravenous fluid therapy was started. Stool was obtained after enema, but an attempt to insert the gastric tube failed. Esophagoscopy performed on the 4th day after admission (due to dissimulation and shortage of qualified staff during weekend), revealed a foreign body with a texture similar to a dried building foam in the esophagus, 20 cm from the incisor line, causing its obstruction. The attempt to collect the material with forceps failed as the material was too hard.
Spiral computed tomography (CT) visualized only a wide, gas-filled esophagus; a large stomach; and possible hiatal hernia of the diaphragm .
The patient with enhancing abdominal pain and symptoms of acute peritonitis was qualified for a laparotomy (5th day after admission). After peritoneal incision, an outflow of stinking fluid from the left epigastrium was observed. There were several microperforations of the stomach wall, caused by sharp bezoar fragments (of the foreign body) of stone consistency that filled the upper one-third of the stomach and lower part of the esophagus. After a longitudinal stomach incision with surgical electric knife BOWA ARC 400 (50 Watts), the foreign body (bezoar) was bluntly dissected from the stomach and esophagus wall and removed . The stomach wall microperforations were closed by wall duplication. A feeding tube was passed into the duodenum before the gastric wall incision was closed with a single-layer suture. The abdominal cavity was rinsed with 1 L saline and drained. Before closing the peritoneal cavity, 250 mL of saline stained with methylene blue was injected through the feeding tube; no leakage was found.
After the operation, the patient confessed to drinking, of his own free will, a two-component building foam used to seal pipes. It was established that the only product used in the patient's workplace was a two-component rigid polyurethane foam with increased density, IZY FOAM 100.
Psychiatric consultation indicated only the patient's prolonged difficult life situation.
During the postoperative care, the patient received omeprazole (40 mg twice a day) and antibiotics. We observed rapid improvement in the patient's clinical condition. The patient started normal feeding on the 4th day and was discharge home on the 7th day with the recommendation of psychotherapy and gastroscopic control after 3 months period.