We report the case of an 8 years-old girl previously diagnosed with gastroesophageal reflux disease, with a medical record of 3 episodes of aspiration pneumonia. Her complaints were retrosternal pain and dysphagia. She also had some hematuria episodes in the past. Her physical examination was unremarkable. Barium radiography evidenced esophageal dilation and impaired esophageal clearance. A presumptive diagnosis of achalasia was made, and a peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM) was performed. An esophageal nodule was biopsied during the procedure, and pathology reported a leiomyoma. The patient's symptoms relapsed one month after POEM. The patient was then referred to a tertiary center. Thoracic magnetic resonance imaging revealed diffuse esophageal leiomyomatosis. Alport's syndrome diagnosis was confirmed after genetic evaluation. There were no ophthalmic or hearing impairments, and a nephrology assessment was initiated. Surgical treatment for esophageal leiomyomatosis was proposed. Due to the patient's young age, we programmed a robotic-assisted conservative procedure to preserve the esophagus. However, we obtained consent for an esophagectomy, if needed.
A senior upper GI surgeon performed the procedure. Initially, we performed an esophagogastric transition dissection with a total exposure of the distal esophagus. Once the distal esophagus was dissected and repaired, we started a myotomy until mucosa/submucosa was clearly visible. Then, we dissected the submucosal plane from the muscle layer containing the leiomyoma and removed a stripe of leiomyoma, leaving the mucosa exposed. Hiatoplasty and a partial posterior fundoplication were performed.
The postoperative period was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day with liquid oral intake. Barium radiography was performed on the 30th postoperative day and revealed a significantly better esophageal clearance than the preoperative exam . The patient now tolerates a full diet without dysphagia or retrosternal pain complaints.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's parents to publish this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal on request.
Ethical approval for this study (Ethical Committee N° CCEP 1688/20) was provided by the Ethical Committee of our institution, on May 13, 2020.