A 79-year-old man with a history of radical prostatectomy for prostate cancer and hypertension presented to the emergency department with periumbilical pain persisting for approximately 6 h. He had also noted recurrent postprandial dull epigastric pain.
On admission, he was afebrile, his blood pressure was 206/179 mmHg, his heart rate was 50 beats/min (regular), and his oxygen saturation was 99 % of room air.
Examination revealed that the abdomen was tender to palpation, with rigidity, guarding, and rebound tenderness. Laboratory tests revealed that D-dimer was 2.6 μg/mL, the white blood cell count was 11.2 × 109/L, and C-reactive protein was <0.3 mg/dL (undetectable). His acid-base balance was preserved, but his venous lactate level was 3.7 mmol/L. The chest X-ray result was normal, whereas plain abdominal X-ray result revealed small bowel distension. The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm without ST elevation or Q waves. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed presence of gas in hepatic portal veins, and the superior mesenteric vein was larger than the SMA (A). CT also identified a defect at the origin of SMA, and enhancement was observed distal to the main trunk of the artery (B). SMA occlusion was revealed by retrospective assessment of CT scans performed 17 months earlier at the hospital. The CT result was not in the patient’s record, so the details were unknown at presentation. AMI with chronic SMA occlusion was diagnosed. CMI might usually have collateral supply, but symptomatic cases can have minimal blood flow. To secure the intestinal blood flow, endovascular treatment was performed before open surgery. Celiac artery angiography showed collateral vessels from the celiac artery to the distal SMA . A 0.035-inch guidewire (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was advanced into the occluded lesion in the SMA. To place a guiding sheath (Destination®, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), the guidewire was exchanged for a 180-cm Amplatz Super Stiff Guidewire (Boston Scientific Corporation, Boston, MA, USA) using a 4-Fr Cobra catheter (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). After this, a self-expandable 6 mm × 80 mm LifeStent Solo (Bard Peripheral Vascular, Tempe, AZ, USA) was deployed without predilation . The time from puncture to recanalization was 59 min.
Subsequent emergency laparotomy revealed about 60 cm of the ischemic small bowel extending from the jejunum (300 cm anal to the ligament of Treitz) to the ileum (30 cm oral to the terminal ileum). The necrotic bowel was resected without anastomosis. Open abdomen management was selected to monitor bowel viability prior to definitive anastomosis and closure. Postoperatively, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit. When a second-look operation was performed two days later, additional resection was not required and small bowel anastomosis was performed. The patient was discharged on dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg qd, clopidogrel 75 mg qd) to prevent in-stent restenosis.