Our patient was a three-month-old Asian girl of English nationality, born through normal vaginal delivery at full term to healthy and unrelated parents after an uneventful pregnancy. Her birth weight was 3.14 kg. She presented with tachypnoea, poor feeding and a cough. Examination showed irritability of the child, with respiratory distress, subcostal retraction and saturations of 80% to 85%, which improved marginally with nasal prong oxygen. She had 4 cm hepatomegaly and auscultation showed a 2/6 early and midsystolic murmur at the lower left sternal edge with a rather loud and single second sound. A chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with bilateral pulmonary plethora.
An echocardiogram showed an atrial septal defect with bidirectional flow and moderate tricuspid regurgitation with a peak gradient in the mid-60 s mmHg . The right pulmonary artery could not be visualized . An aortopulmonary collateral artery was not visualized at this stage, but a diagnosis of disconnected right pulmonary artery was made.
The infant began to sustain severe episodes of cyanosis which were relieved with an epoprostenol infusion. Pulmonary artery pressures also fell as evinced by the tricuspid regurgitation gradient, which fell to the 20 s in mmHg on echocardiographic estimation.
After the transfer of the patient to a tertiary centre, catheterization demonstrated bilateral ductal stumps but had no flow to any vessels. A large leash of vessels was identified, supplying right thoracic, right internal mammary and right subclavian arteries toward the right hilum. No proximal right pulmonary artery segment could be demonstrated, and a distal pulmonary artery was faintly visible at the level of the hilum. During surgery, an aortopulmonary collateral artery supplying the right lung was identified and the infant underwent uneventful pulmonary artery reconstruction using an 8 mm Goretex graft. The baby had been on epoprostenol for a total of nine days. She had been reviewed regularly for six months since her procedure and remained well, off treatment and not in heart failure. The auscultatory findings were completely normal and an echocardiography showed a normal flow pattern into the right pulmonary artery with no turbulence and a velocity of 1.3 m/s. The family have since emigrated from the country.