A 42 year old male presented in July 2004 with 8 months history of diarrhea, progressive weight loss and malaise. Diarrhea was intermittent, watery with a frequency of 3–4 times/day, without fresh or altered blood. It was associated with crampy lower abdominal pain. There was history of weight loss of 5 kg in last 8 months. There was no history of anorexia, fever, or alternating constipation. He had received anti tubercular treatment elsewhere thrice (1979 – 1 year, 1992 – 1 year, 2002 – 1 year) for suspected intestinal tuberculosis without any confirmatory evidence. Patient did not have any details about his past illness or treatment.
General physical examination was normal except for pallor. Per rectal examination including proctoscopy was normal. Hemoglobin was 6 gram per dl. Other laboratory investigations including chest X-ray, were with in normal limits.
Patient underwent Barium enema examination in 2002 that showed multiple strictures in colon. As patient did not have films, this test was repeated and again it showed similar findings . There were three strictures in colon involving sigmoid colon, ascending colon, and proximal transverse colon. Barium meal follow through was done to rule out small intestinal involvement and was normal.
A non passable stricture with ulcerated overlying mucosa at 18 cm of the anal verge was revealed with colonoscopy, whereas the rest of the visualized part of rectum and colon was normal.
Colonoscopic biopsy showed non specific inflammatory changes, AFB stain was negative. With the provisional diagnosis of tubercular stricture of colon or inflammatory bowel disease, patient was taken up for surgery. Per operatively, whole of the colon was thickened with multiple concentric strictures involving transverse colon, descending colon & recto sigmoid junction. Fat wrapping of colon was present and there were multiple small firm lymph nodes in mesentery . A subtotal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis was performed. Patient did well post operatively.
Histopathological examination of resected colon showed plasmacytoid mononuclear cells infiltrating all layers of colon along the whole length of colon especially in the strictures' areas . Although these cells were characterized by mild anisocytosis, their mitotic activity was very low. Overlying mucosa was ulcerated. Small intestine and colonic resected margins showed focal aggregate of plasmacytoid cells. All 3 isolated lymph nodes showed plasmacytoid cells in the sinuses and follicles in addition to a reactive lymphoid hyperplasia. Immunohistochemical staining for most of the markers (CK, S-100, Vimentin, Desmin, LCA, CD 68, CD 3, CD 20 and Chromogranin) were negative. However, immunoperoxidase staining for k chains was positive. It was negative for lambda chains . Based on pathological examination a diagnosis of plasmacytoma of colon was made. To exclude associated multiple myeloma, patient underwent bone marrow biopsy, bone survey and his peripheral smear, urine for Bence Jones protein and serum electrophoresis were examined and were found to be normal.
Post operatively adjuvant chemotherapy (5 cycles of melphalan 12 mg/d D1–4, and prednisolone 90 mg/d, D1–4) was given. Patient has been on regular follow up in last 17 months. He had passage of blood mixed stools 4 months back, sigmoidoscopy showed anastomotic ulceration and biopsy from ulcer showed non specific changes. Patient received conservative treatment which resulted in the resolution of symptoms. A repeat bone marrow biopsy was done 3 months back and was normal.