The patient is a 22 year old African American female with a past medical history of sickle cell trait and asthma who presents to the orthopedic clinic with aching right hip pain. She-like her father- has sickle cell trait. Throughout her life so far, she has not had any acute episode of sickle cell-related symptoms like severe, acute chest pain. However, she states about a year prior, she had the same hip pain. She went to her primary care provider, who gave her hip cortisone injections. These helped for a few weeks. She then went on vacation a month later. Her feet became swollen during this time, prompting her to visit her primary doctor again. At this time, she was referred to the orthopedic clinic. She had severe groin pain with internal and external rotation of her hip. X-rays were done of her hip, which showed an area of necrosis suggestive of stage 1 or 2 AVN in the head of the right femur. An MRI was done and showed stage 2 or 3 AVN. This can be seen in Fig. .
She was then prescribed bisphosphonates, told to walk with no weight bearing on the right leg, and scheduled for a decompression procedure several weeks later. The plan after surgery was to be minimal weight bearing for 6 weeks as well as continuing therapy with Alendronate, a bisphosphonate. After decompression, the patient’s pain subsided. Two weeks after surgery, the patient presented for follow-up and suture removal. She was in high spirits as her pain and overall anxiety had subsided. She had not felt pain free in quite some time. Her hip x rays were normal at this time. Figure shows x- rays at two weeks post op. At six weeks post-op, she was feeling like she could bear weight on the hip. There was no pain provoked on range of motion testing or internal and external rotation. She was then scheduled to begin physical therapy soon thereafter.
However, at eight weeks post op, she presented to the clinic for follow-up stating new onset pain. She had weight-bearing but the pain had started again in her hip and groin. There were also new x-ray findings (AP Pelvis and Frog Hip views), which showed a serpiginous line which was consistent with progression of her AVN with no collapse of the femoral head. Even after bisphosphonates and decompression, the patient’s AVN had now grown to involve the majority of the head of the femur. At 3 months status post- surgery, MRI showed that the head of the femur was beginning to flatten as well as loss of volume and bone marrow edema, which is seen in Fig. . Further progression of her AVN can be seen with follow up x-rays at her later appointment 5 months post decompression in Fig. .
At this point, there were no other conservative options available for this patient. The dilemma is her age. Osteotomy is sometimes a treatment for AVN, but given the area of necrosis of this patient’s femoral head, this procedure is not indicated. The plan for this patient is to continue non- weight- bearing. The only definitive treatment for this patient would be a total hip arthroplasty (THA). Because this patient is so young, the patient was referred to a hip joint revision specialist with plan to follow-up again 6 weeks later. At her age, it would be challenging to do a THA, given that she would most likely have to undergo the same procedure several more times throughout her life. Hip replacements have an average life of 15–20 years, so the prospect of conserving as much of the joint as possible and not undergoing THA at such a young age is paramount. It would be devastating for the patient to have to have 4–6 hip replacements in her lifetime. Time will tell if conservative therapy such as minimal weight-bearing, bisphosphonates, and vitamin D will have any appreciable effects on this patient’s hip. The progression from seemingly successful surgery - clinically and radiographically - to the onset of pain spanned two months. Everything will be done to buy her time and avoid THA.