S. is a 17 year old white male with CF (genotype delta F508 homozygous) associated to pancreatic insufficiency diagnosed at one month of life in therapy with lumacaftor/ivacaftor since he was 14 years. He had his first OGTT screening at 10 years of age. When he was 13-year old, diagnosis of IGT was made according to OGTT, 2-h glucose value was 142 mg/dL (7.9 mmol/L). Laboratory investigations showed that diabetes autoantibodies were negative while there had been an increase of HbA1C plasma value ranged from 5.7 to 6.5% (38 to 47.6 mmol/L). Since the patient in the last year had shown an impairment of the clinical conditions including decrease in percent predicted FEV1 (ppFEV1%) and BMI z-score, and increase in the number of lung infections, we decided to start off label use of insulin. After signing informed consent, basal insulin therapy with glargine at 0.1 units/Kg/day was prescribed and administered. After twelve months of glargine therapy, pulmonary exacerbations requiring intravenous antibiotic therapy were reduced from 4 to 2 exacerbations per year with a stabilization of FEV1% and BMI z-score. At the age of 15 years he started modulators therapy with the association of Lumacaftor/Ivacaftor . For 2 years he had no need for intravenous antibiotic therapy with stable FEV1% and a slight increase of BMI z-score. At the age of 17 years, during COVID-19 pandemic lockdown, S. presented recurrent headache, abdominal pain and weight loss of 1.5 kg (BMI z-score − 2.4), polyuria and polydipsia. He was admitted to our Cystic Fibrosis Center in the suspicion of a pulmonary exacerbation. Physical examination showed dehydration and dystrophy, while chest auscultation showed crepitus and rales in the mid-apical lung fields bilaterally and clubbing, with oxygen saturation 96–97% in ambient air. The sudden loss of his father one month earlier, due to an acute myocardial infarction, was reported by the mother, who also referred a reduced adherence to all care of the patient, an excessive consumption of high-calorie foods associated with physical inactivity due to the lockdown, and a state of agitation. Laboratory investigations revealed glycemia 380 mg/dL (21.1 mmol/L), no chetoacidosis (pH 7.35, bicarbonate 23 mEq/L, beta-hydroxybutyrate 1 mmol/L), C-peptide 0.2 ng/mL, HbA1c 12.1% (108.5 mmol/L). The protein C reactive was 32.9 mg/l (normal range < 5) with blood count within normal range. Type 1 diabetes autoantibodies were retested and resulted negative. Nasopharyngeal swab and serological tests for SARS-CoV-2 were negative. Intravenous antibiotic therapy with amikacin and meropenem was started with normalization of inflammation markers. His insulin dose before lockdown was 5 units/day (0.10 units/kg/day). Insulin lispro was added to meals (with a carbohydrate ratio of 1 unit per 30 g carbohydrates, a sensitivity of 1 unit per 90 mg/dL) in addition to the increasing of insulin glargine for a total insulin requirement of 17 units/day (0.35 units/kg/day). A glucose monitoring system was started using an intermittent scanning sensor. After about 2 weeks, there was an improvement in glycemic control, ultrafast insulin was discontinued and S. returned to a pre-lockdown insulin dose. During hospitalization the main microvascular complications (i.e., microalbuminuria and retinopathy) were screened and resulted negative. At discharge, a new nasopharyngeal swab test for SARS-CoV-2 was repeated and resulted negative. To date, the insulin dose of S. has remained 0.1 units/kg/day (insulin glargine only), his BMI z-score has improved with a slight increase in FEV1%. Patient data before and after glargine and modulators therapy are presented in Table .