Our patient is a 41-year-old lady who presented to our center complaining of swelling in the flexor aspect of the distal part of her right forearm, which she first noticed almost 8 years ago. The swelling gradually increased in size, and now she describes it to be the size of a ping pong ball. She complained of having developed numbness over the right hand and occasional pain over the swelling for 2 years. On further questioning, she gave a history of difficulty gripping and buttoning for 2 years. No history of significant trauma could be recalled, and no history of pain or stiffness in the joints was reported. On clinical examination, there was a single non-painful solid mass 4×4 cm in size over the right wrist. The mass was not adherent to the overlying skin, nonpulsatile, and mobile in the transverse direction but immobile in the vertical direction. The swelling was firm, non-fluctuant, and noncompressible. The surface of the swelling was smooth, with no elevation in the temperature compared to the surrounding skin. The swelling was non-tender, but she complained of hyperesthesia in the lateral aspect of her right palm. On percussion over the swelling, she developed paresthesia over the flexor aspect of her hand. No cutaneous pigmented lesions were found.
On an ultrasound (US) examination, a 4 cm long, well-circumscribed mass was found near the neurovascular bundle of the flexor aspect of the distal forearm. On MRI examination, the lesion had a homogenous low signal intensity underneath the forearm flexor tendon on T2 images . No peritumoral edema was present, and a line of fat surrounded the tumor. Based on the long history of the patient, and the clinical, US, and MRI features, the diagnosis of a nerve sheath tumor arising from the median nerve was supported and the patient was scheduled for an excisional biopsy. Figures and show intraoperative and postoperative images of the mass. After histopathological examination, a diagnosis of median nerve schwannoma was established. At a 1-year follow-up, she is free of symptoms with a well-healed excisional site.