A 10-year-old male presented with complaints of deformity and pain in the back. The preoperative roentogram displayed right idiopathic thoracolumbar scoliosis . The patient was moderately built with no significant neurological disorders. His reports showed haemoglobin 10.3 g/dl, ESR 14 mm/hr, and CRP Q 30 mg/l. PFT values were low suggestive of type II respiratory failure. The patient did not give any history of previous head injury, and his preoperative brainstem magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not show any abnormality .
The patient underwent detethering at the L2 level with pedicular screw fixation from T3 to L2 with bone grafting with right costoplasty from the 3rd to the 6th ribs . General anaesthesia was given using Scoline injection (succinylcholine). The patient went into bronchospasm for which theophylline injection and Asthalin injection (salbutamol) were given. An arterial line was put to monitor blood pressure during surgery. He was operated in prone position. Total surgical time was 5 hours with intraoperative blood loss around 1.5 liters. The detethering was performed at the lumbar L2 level, and the dura was repaired. Intraoperatively, there was an arterial bleeder, which led to the fall of BP to 40/20 mmHg because of the rupture of the segmental vessels at T7-T8 of the left side intraoperatively. Hypotension lasted for 5 minutes, which was immediately brought back to normal limits by giving whole blood and colloids. The total CSF loss during the surgery was about 100 ml. Postoperatively, the drain output was 300 ml over 3 days. The patient received 2 units of whole blood and 2 units of packed red cells from the intraoperative period to post-op day 4. Postoperatively, the patient was on a ventilator up to day 7. On post-op day 5, the patient developed convulsions, and CT brain was performed that showed subdural hemorrhage . The neurosurgeon advised conservative management with phenytoin for convulsion. By post-op day 7, the patient recovered completely with no neurological deficit. The patient was discharged 2 weeks after neurosurgery and orthopaedic fitness. The patient was followed up regularly for one year with no other postoperative complications.