We detail the case of a 48-year-old man, never-smoker and non-drinker, who was referred to the Clinic of Oral and Craniomaxillofacial Surgery at the University Hospital Basel, Switzerland, by his dentist, for further evaluation of a solitary ulcer on the lower left retromolar buccal plane. The patient reported swelling of the left cheek since 5 days, mild pain while chewing, and a swelling on the buccal mucosa related to the left lower jaw since about 1 year. Fever, night sweat, and weight loss were denied. Due to his obsessive-compulsive disorder, the patient has been under psychiatric medication treatment in the past (Deroxat®, paroxetine, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)), but at the point of consultation, he did not take any medication. The patient reported on his allergy to penicillin, with erythematous rash episodes in the past. The data set includes the medical record of our TUGSE case including the corresponding photo material. No risk for third parties existed. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for case description and photo material.
Extraoral examination showed a slight swelling of the cheek on the left side without redness. Palpation of the cervical lymph nodes revealed a slightly enlarged submandibular lymph node at level Ib on the left side, with a 2 × 1.5 cm diameter. Palpation of the immovable lymph node was painful. The nuchal, the axillary, the cubital, and the inguinal lymph nodes were not swollen. The diameter of the intraoral lesion on the lower left retromolar buccal plane was approximately 4 × 3 cm; the lesion presented as indurated base with a central superficial ulceration of 2 × 1 cm . The rapid growth of the ulcer over the last 5 days was potentially indicative for a malignant process, wherefore we performed an incisional biopsy to obtain histopathological diagnosis after we had obtained informed consent from the patient. Tests for EBV, lues, HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatits C turned out to be negative. Nine days after the biopsy, the lesion showed a tendency towards regression.
Histologically, the ulceration showed an expanding, infiltrative, and vaguely granulomatous morphology, involving the superficial mucosa and the fatty tissue, and extended between the deep striated muscle fibers. The lesion was rich in lymphocytes, histiocytes, and eosionophils intermingled with activated T-blasts without phenotypic abnormalities (co-expressing CD2, CD3, CD5, and CD7, and lacking CD30) . Although TUGSE was already presumed at that point, further molecular analyses were performed due to the large size of the lesion, its destructive and deep-penetrating nature, and the presence of large lymphoid forms with eosinophilic nucleoli. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was extracted from the mucosal biopsy. Using multiplex polymerase chain reaction and high-resolution fragment length analysis of the DNA, B-, and T-cell clonality as well as chromosomal translocations t(11;14) and t(14;18) were assessed . A biclonal T-cell receptor rearrangement of type V-I and V-III was detected, but there was neither evidence of clonal B-cells nor of the translocations t(11;14) and t(14;18). TUGSE was then diagnosed on the basis of the phenotype (especially the lacking expression of CD30, the retained T-cell phenotype and the absence of EBV), the clinical presentation, and the morphology.
Nine days after biopsy, the patient was pain-free and the ulceration showed significant regression . We performed a standard orthopanthomography , which revealed no other pathological finding than the clinical evident buccal angulation of tooth 38 which might have caused the microtrauma of the ulceration. We therefore recommended the prophylactic extraction of the respective tooth. However, the patient decided against it. We saw the patient in a regular follow-up program, quarterly within the first half year, every 6 months within the first year, and annually for 2 years. Twenty-six months after diagnosis, no recurrence of the ulceration was seen, even though the mucosa still showed signs of microtrauma with punctate hemorrhage .