A 43-year-old woman was referred to our Tertiary Care Center for a submucosal ulcerated lesion of the upper third of the stomach. Her past medical history was unremarkable, with the exception of a 1-year history of epigastric pain and dyspepsia which failed to improve on standard PPI treatment. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGDS) showed atrophic gastritis with multiple amartomatous polyps and a 10-mm submucosal round-shaped lesion with central ulceration located in the upper third of the stomach in proximity of the esophagogastric junction . Multiple biopsies with immunohistochemical analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization showed a rearrangement of SS18 gene, indicative for synovial sarcoma.
Preoperative staging work-up was completed via chest-abdomen computed tomography (CT) which failed to identify the lesion and a fluorine-18-labeled fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (18F-FDG PET/TC) which demonstrated the presence of a single metabolically active mass in the upper third of the stomach .
Given size and location of the tumor near the cardial region, a laparoscopic intragastric approach was used. This approach was employed also based on the fact that no formal lymphadenectomy was deemed necessary. The day before surgery, a further endoscopic evaluation with clip tumor marking was carried out to facilitate intraoperative tumor identification .
The patient was placed on the operating table in the supine position with parted legs, 20° reverse Trendelenburg, and slight left-side tilt. A 5-mm camera was used. A 5-mm trocar was placed at the umbilicus, and further, two 5-mm balloon trocars and one 12 balloon trocar were placed in the mid-left upper quadrants of the abdomen considering the position of gastric body in relation to the abdominal wall . This multiport approach allowed us to perform a full abdominal cavity exploration, an accurate intragastric port placement, the use of an endoscopic linear stapler for a complete full thickness tumor resection, and an easy and safe closure of gastrotomies (Video).
Postoperative course was uneventful. Soft diet was resumed on postoperative day 1, and patient was discharge on postoperative day 3.
Histopathology examination confirmed the presence of a monophasic spindle cell neoplasm. Four out of ten mitoses on high magnification field was shown, no necrosis was present, and lympho-vascular invasion was seen. The tumor involved the submucosa. Circumferential and deep margins were tumor free. Fluorescence in situ hybridization established the rearrangement of SS18 gene confirming the diagnosis of SS .
No adjuvant treatment was offered, and 18 months after surgery, the patient is alive and disease free.