A 70-year-old woman, diagnosed with unruptured mediumsized, 10 mm/6 mm, wide neck (7 mm diameter) basilar tip aneurysm was admitted in our department . On the radiological examinations another small aneurysm on the right internal carotid artery-A1 bifurcation was diagnosed . The patient had recent increased incidence of headaches, arterial hypertension reaching 180/100 mmHg. On calculation of the PHASES score, a 17.8% cumulative risk of rupture of the aneurysm was projected for a 5-year period. Therefore, given the clinical characteristics, the age of the patient, and the location of the aneurysm in the posterior circulation, the patient was elected for endovascular obliteration of the lesion instead of microsurgical clipping. As the aneurysm was medium sized with wide neck, the patient was prepared for stent-assisted coiling with dual antiplatelet therapy with prasugrel 10 mg once in the morning and acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg in the evening for 5 days before the procedure.
The endovascular obliteration was performed under general anesthesia. The contrast agent was iso-osmolar, nonionic, water soluble. Bilateral femoral artery access was attained with 6F vascular access device on the right side and 5F vascular access device on the left side. A 6F Envoy DA (Codman Neuro®) catheter was introduced in the right vertebral artery and 5F Envoy (Codman Neuro®) catheter was introduced in the left vertebral artery. Using microwire Asahi Chikai® and microcatheter Phenom 27 (Medtronic®), the left posterior cerebral artery (PCA) was catheterized in the preparation of placement of Solitaire (Medtronic®). Another microcatheter Echelon 10 (Medtronic®) was jailed in the fundus of the aneurysm as the Solitaire AB 3 mm/20 mm (Medtronic®) was deployed. The aneurysm was filled with Axium framing coil 12 mm/30 cm (Medtronic®) followed by 7 mm/30 cm and 6 mm/20 cm helical coils achieving sufficient aneurysmal packing. No signs of vasospasm were observed during the procedure [ and ]. A total of 200 ml contrast medium were administered for a period of 2½ h. The patient was extubated uneventfully. Shortly after the intervention, the patient reported completed visual loss. Ophthalmological examination was normal with no signs of optic nerve edema. As we suspected endovascular device problem or parent vessel compromise, the patient was brought back to the angiographic suite. On the posterior circulation angiography, there were no signs of parent vessel compromise from the endovascular implants. The distal branches of both posterior cerebral arteries were presented in normal fashion without any signs of thrombosis or vasospasm . Despite the lack of pathological findings, 2 mg of papaverine was injected intra arterially. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain followed the catheter angiography not showing any signs of brain ischemia . The only abnormal findings were just mild brain edema in both occipital lobes . Abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed no signs of retroperitoneal hematoma. Given the results of the radiological studies and the clinical data, the diagnosis of contrast-induced neurotoxicity was suggested. The patient continued to receive dual antiplatelet therapy as well as anticoagulation treatment with 9500 anti-Xa IU/ml 0.6 ml nadroparine calcium b.i.d.; intravenous saline hydration and anti-edematous treatment – dexamethasone in tapering dosage, were administered. In the evening of the 2nd day after the intervention the patient reported some visual improvement distinguishing only light. Forty-eight hours after the intervention the patient was able to perceive colors and silhouettes, and, at 72 h, the patient had fully restored visual functions. Several days later she was discharged at home with no additional neurological worsening.