A 32 year old woman attended the Accident and Emergency department with severe right sided abdominal pain. She had mild fatigue, but no urinary symptoms, weight loss, loss of appetite or fever. She had well-controlled type 1 diabetes, but no other significant past medical history. Her performance status was 0. She was normotensive, with no clinical features of Cushing's syndrome, hyperaldosteronism or high testosterone levels.
Her blood results were within normal limits apart from a slightly raised CRP (10mg/L, reference range: < 5 mg/L), alkaline phosphatase (138 U/L, reference range: 30 – 130 U/L) and glucose (12.9 mmol/L, reference range: 3.0 – 7.7 mmol/L). Her cortisol was normal but no other hormone profile was checked.
An ultrasound scan showed a 14 x 11 cm heterogeneously echogenic solid-appearing mass suspected to arise from the upper to mid-pole of the right kidney. A CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis in the portal venous phase showed a large heterogeneously enhancing mass, again suspected to arise from the upper pole of the right kidney, with possible invasion into the right hepatic lobe both superiorly and inferiorly . The right adrenal gland and right renal vein could not be appreciated separate to this large mass. There were no distant metastases. An upper abdominal MRI scan showed a lobulated mass, again suspected to arise from the upper pole of the right kidney, with broad contact to the under surface of the liver, and with suspected liver parenchymal invasion .
A core biopsy showed a malignant tumour composed of cells with clear cytoplasm and marked nuclear atypia, with large hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei and high mitotic count. Immunohistochemistry showed tumour cell positivity for Vimentin and AE1/AE3. It was negative for PAX8, CD10, CK7, CK20, CDX2, GATA3, OCT3/4, S100 and TTF-1. In the context of the clinical history, this was considered by the local histopathologist to be compatible with a primary clear cell renal cell carcinoma (RCC), provisionally grade 4.
Her case was discussed at the local Urology multidisciplinary team meeting (MDT) and it was felt that the tumour would be difficult to remove surgically due to the liver involvement, and there was also concern that there might be a separate liver metastasis. The MDT recommended systemic therapy and reconsideration of surgery at a later date depending on her response. Her International Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma Database Consortium (IMDC) score was 1 (intermediate risk) as her time from diagnosis to systemic therapy was less than 1 year. At the time, the treatment options funded by the United Kingdom’s National Health Service (NHS) for RCC were ipilimumab plus nivolumab, axitinib plus avelumab or single agent tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Following discussions with the patient, it was decided to proceed with ipilimumab and nivolumab as it was felt that this was the treatment option that was most likely to result in sufficient tumour shrinkage to permit future surgery.
After informed consent, she commenced treatment with ipilimumab 1mg/kg and nivolumab 3mg/kg every three weeks. She developed immunotherapy-related hypothyroidism, which was treated with levothyroxine, but otherwise tolerated treatment well.
A CT scan after four cycles of ipilimumab and nivolumab showed a partial response to treatment . She was re-discussed at the local Urology MDT and the surgical team felt that surgery was likely to be challenging as the renal mass was adherent to the liver. She was discussed at the regional Hepatobiliary MDT and a joint procedure involving both the urology and liver surgeons was planned. Whilst the MDT discussions and surgical work-up was ongoing, the patient completed two cycles of single agent nivolumab (480mg every 4 weeks) ( and ).
As part of the pre-operative process, her biopsy was reviewed by the tertiary centre. It was felt that other features of a clear cell RCC, such as a fine vascular network, were not present. Therefore, a further panel of immunohistochemistry was performed, which showed tumour cell positivity for Synaptophysin, Calretinin, Melan-A and Inhibin. EMA and Chromogranin were negative. PAX-8 was repeated which was negative. This immunophenotype was considered to be more typical of an adrenal cortical tumour, rather than a clear cell RCC . SF-1 was not tested as this was not available. The combined morphology and immunophenotype were favoured to represent a malignant adrenal cortical tumour (adrenal cortical carcinoma).
Routine clinical urine steroid profile showed a relative increase of androsterone and aetiocolanolone, as well as DHA metabolites. There was also an increase of cortisol (11-hydroxy) versus cortisone (11-oxo) metabolites and of 5b- versus. 5a-reduced metabolites, and a small relative increase of the 11-deoxycortisol metabolite tetrahydro-11-deoxycortisol (73ug/L) and of 16-epiandrosterone (56 ug/L). There were no accompanying increases of other specific ACC markers seen.
The patient had a right hepatectomy and right adrenalectomy, and resection of her right kidney was not required. Dissection around the inferior vena cava was challenging, with poor tumour planes and desmoplastic reaction but the tumour was completely excised. The excision specimen revealed an encapsulated tumour which was adherent to the liver .
On microscopic assessment, the tumour showed features similar to those seen in the pre-operative biopsy and consistent with an ACC . The tumour showed multiple nodules of atypical cells with clear and eosinophilic cytoplasm, marked nuclear atypia and frequent mitoses. Areas of confluent necrosis, oedema, hyalinisation, haemorrhage and patchy lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate were also present. Modified Weiss score was 5 (≥3 indicates aggressive/malignant behaviour) . The final staging was pT3 Nx. Mismatch repair (MMR) protein immunohistochemistry showed retained staining for MLH1, PMS2, MSH2 and MSH6 within the tumour cell nuclei and therefore there was no immunohistochemical evidence of MMR deficiency.
Following discussion at the Urology MDT, the options of adjuvant mitotane, continuing nivolumab for one year or close surveillance were discussed with the patient. The patient decided to restart nivolumab, and this was restarted 10 weeks post-operatively. The patient has now completed a year of nivolumab and the most recent CT scan (12 months from surgery) shows no evidence of recurrence.