In October 2013, a 65-year-old woman presented to our infectious disease center for a Q fever involving a hip arthroplasty. Her medical history revealed a hypothyroidism and a rheumatoid arthritis known since 1990, in remission since numerous years with a combination of methotrexate (15 mg/week) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α blocker (adalimumab one infusion at 40 mg/month) therapy. Previously, she underwent hip arthroplasties, first in 2002 for the left side and then in 2003 for the right one.
Three months ago, she was first admitted into her referential rheumatology center with a 1-month history of night fever and with a 2-week history of inflammatory pain of left hip. The fever appeared two days after a tooth extraction despite an oral antibiotic prophylaxis combining metronidazole and spiramycine. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were elevated (76 mm/h and 55 mg/l, respectively). X-ray revealed loosening of the acetabular part of the prosthesis, and attachment of the greater trochanter . Ultrasonography of the left hip revealed an intra-articular effusion and a large periprosthetic collection extending into the left iliac fossa. A first joint aspiration of the left hip revealed purulent synovial fluid, with 560 leukocytes/ml (52 % of monocytes, 39 % of lymphocytes and 9 % of neutrophils). Conventional blood and joint aspirate cultures including those of mycobacteria remained negative. Culture-negative PJI was suspected, adalimumab was discontinued (last injection in July 2013), and a resection hip arthroplasty was performed on the 6th, August 2013. All components were resected and a gentamicin-loaded spacer was implanted . Operative findings showed abundant periprosthetic turbid fluid. Because of suspected dental origin, antimicrobial treatment combining ceftriaxone (1.5 g/12 h) and clindamycin (600 mg/8 h) was given in postoperative frame. Prolonged bacterial cultures (over a 14-day period) of five periprosthetic tissue samples remained sterile and histological findings revealed aspecific inflammation (irregular bone trabeculae with an inflammatory infiltrate composed by mononuclear and lymphohistiocytic cells, and also with few polymorphonuclear cells). For this culture-negative PJI, serological analysis was conducted in the bacteriology laboratory of Lyon Hospital (Immunofluorescence assay, Focus diagnostics, Cypress, USA) for Q fever and revealed significant titers (phase I; IgG 1:2048 [cut-off limit of positivity, 256] without IgM or IgA; phase II: IgG 1:512 without IgM or IgA) . Also, both universal PCR (routinely performed for culture-negative PJI in our institution) and specific PCR for Coxiella burnetii (real-time PCR targeting the IS1111a insertion element [Progenie molecular provided by Orgentec SAS, Trappes France, ]) were performed from the first operative synovial sample (collected on the 6th of August 2013) and the result turned out to be positive. In early September, the first transthoracic echocardiogram was negative for endocarditis, and antimicrobial therapy was modified (oral doxycycline 200 mg/day and hydroxychloroquine 600 mg/day). In late September, because doxycycline trough plasma concentrations was low (1.8 mg/l), doxycycline was increased to 300 mg/day and concentrations in October was > 5 mg/l (9.7 mg/L). Hydroxychloroquine trough concentration (measured in October by high performance liquid chromatography-DAD) was 0.67 mg/L, which was considered as slightly low (the targeted level for trough concentration is 0.8–1.2 mg/L).
At admission, in our regional reference center Centre de Référence des Infections Ostéo-Articulaires complexes (CRIOAc) Lyon , she had no fever, no inflammatory scar nor left hip pain. Physical examination found a grade 3/6 mitral systolic murmur without sign of left ventricular insufficiency nor splenomegaly. Laboratory tests showed a normal leukocyte count, a mildly elevated CRP (22 mg/l) normal renal function and liver enzymes. Retrospectively, we learned that in the last days of April, she made a cruise in Mediterranean with one stopover in Morocco where she stayed near a cattle market. A transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed mitral grade 2 regurgitation on a thickened valve without vegetation. A positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) allowed the detection of a large ilio-psoas muscle collection (47 × 56 mm) communicating with numerous periprosthetic collections of the left hip . Since the patient had received anti-TNF-α therapy, a mycobacterial infection needed to be ruled out and a second surgical procedure was performed, especially as the outcome seemed not to be favorable on combination use of doxycycline-hydroxychloroquine. A new debridement with flattening of three abscesses was realized and the spacer was removed . As C. burnetti is not susceptible to gentamicin and, as a spacer is a foreign body facilitating the persistence of particular pathogens, we decided not to use another spacer. All the bacterial and mycobacterial specimens, realized during this second surgical time, remained negative, excluding the diagnosis of superinfection. Unfortunately, it was not feasible to try to culture C. burnetii, as fresh samples were needed to be sent to a reference lab, given thattime for surgery and time for sampling and for the shipment were not compatible. The specific PCR for C. burnetii from intra-articular sample was still positive. The diagnosis of persistent C. burnetti PJI was confirmed, despite explantation and adequate antimicrobial therapy. As a new debridement was performed with drainage of abscesses and removal of the spacer, and as the positive effect of doxycycline-hydroxychloroquine could take time, we maintained the doxycycline-hydroxychloroquine combination therapy.
Unfortunately, in mid-December, a CT scan showed the recurrence of large peri-articular abscesses as the same time as an elevation of inflammatory markers (CRP = 174 mg/l). Anti-phase I C. burnetti IgG titers remained high . On January the 15th 2014, a third surgical debridement and irrigation was performed with new debridement of abscesses and resection of the proximal femur and the greater trochanter . Again, C burnetii PCR was positive, both from the greater trochanter and muscle specimens, but without other bacterial or mycobacterial identification. Q fever serology remained positive with persistence of high level of anti-phase I IgG titer at 1:4096 . Then, the doxycycline/hydrochloroquine combination was stopped, as it was considered as inefficient, and ofloxacin (400 mg/day) plus rifampin (900 mg/day) were introduced.
In February 2014, a second TEE ruled out endocarditis and a CT scan excluded aortic aneurysm. However, a peri-articular and two muscular collection(s) were still lasting, and were treated by a radiologic drainage with washing with mild efficacy. At the same time, with this particular chronic course, methotrexate given for rheumatoid arthritis was interrupted.
Three months after, she seemed better with no fever and all peri-articular hip collections slowly disappeared in CT scan imaging. However, in late April, an inflammatory flare of rheumatoid arthritis has led to again introduce methotrexate at 15 mg every week. In June 2014, a second PET-CT was performed , showing no persistent inflammatory process of the left hip and thigh although anti-phase I IgG titer was flattening at 1:4096.
On September the 5th 2014, a left hip reimplantation was performed by using megaprosthesis. Both universal and specific PCR for C. burnetii were performed from bone tissue and remained negative. In January 2015, for better control of rheumatoid arthritis, methotrexate needed to be increased to 20 mg/week but without anti-TNF therapy because she had shingles one month earlier. Antimicrobial therapy with rifampin and ofloxacin was prolonged during 18 months after the last debridement and discontinued on the 1th, July 2015. At that time, Q fever serology titer dropped to 1:512 (that took time, > 18 months, since the last curative surgery and the switch to rifampin-ofloxacin antimicrobial treatment) and was unchanged at the last evaluation in February 2016 . In July 2020, 7 years after the admission, the patient had no pain and no sign of PJI, had no prosthesis loosening detectable on X-ray , and was still treated with 20 mg of methotrexate every week for rheumatoid arthritis.
To conclude, numerous surgical procedures (including explantation, “second look”, femoral resection), withdrawal of the TNF-α blocker and, then, of methotrexate, all being probably involved in the chronicity of the infection, switch from doxycycline-hydroxycholoquine to prolonged ofloxacine-rifampin combination therapy and finally reimplantation of a megaprosthesis after control of the infection were needed to achieve the cure of this relapsing chronic Q fever infection.