This case report follows CARE (CAse REport) guidelines . We explained the purpose of the study to the patient and obtained written informed consent to publish our findings.
A 66-year-old woman (63 kg; height, 152 cm) with VP was scheduled to undergo distal pancreatectomy for pancreatic cancer. She had been hospitalized for 3 years at the age of 28 years with abdominal pain, ileus, mental disorder, and quadriplegia. During that time, she was diagnosed with VP based on the results of several types of examination. Although she had undergone a tracheostomy due to quadriplegia during hospitalization, her neurologic symptoms disappeared after hospital discharge. Her only daughter presented with abdominal pain during her twenties, at which time she had been diagnosed with VP. She had suspected that her mother’s abdominal pain was also due to VP, although her mother had not been diagnosed with VP definitively. At the present admission, she had a history of abdominal pain that occurred every few months, which she had self-treated with sugar intake and body warming. She was also on medications for hypertension and chronic kidney disease. The creatinine level in serum was increased slightly to 2.12 mg/dL, but there were no abnormalities in other laboratory parameters, such as urinary levels of porphobilinogen and delta-aminolevulinic acid.
We selected total intravenous anesthesia (TIVA) with target-controlled infusion (TCI) as a suitable method of anesthesia . In the operating theater, the upper body was covered by a forced air blanket to prevent hypothermia. General anesthesia was induced with TCI of propofol (3 μg/mL) with remifentanil (0.4 μg/kg/min) followed by rocuronium (40 mg) and tracheal intubation. An indwelling catheter was inserted into the radial artery for regular measurement of levels of glucose and electrolytes in the blood. Anesthesia was maintained with TCI of propofol and remifentanil with monitoring of the bispectral index. Rocuronium was administered intermittently to maintain a train-of-four count of 1. A total of 0.4 mg of fentanyl was administered intraoperatively, with 50 μg/h of fentanyl administered continuously for postoperative analgesia.
Blood-gas tests were undertaken via the arterial catheter every 60 min, and we checked for electrolyte abnormalities and measured blood glucose levels. All electrolytes were within the normal range intraoperatively. The blood glucose level before as well as 1, 2, 3, and 4 h after starting surgery was 102, 120, 121, 106, and 97 mg/dL, respectively. The glucose level decreased 3 h after starting surgery despite the administration of an extracellular fluid containing 5% glucose, so we administered glucose (10 g, i.v.). Body temperature decreased from 36.0 °C preoperatively to 35.5 °C 1 h after starting surgery, so we started the amino acid infusion to increase body temperature . Body temperature 2, 3, and 4 h after starting the surgery was 35.4, 35.7, and 35.9 °C, respectively. The total volume of the amino acid infusion was 550 mL. Distal pancreatectomy was completed in 224 min. After confirming a train-of four count of 2, sugammadex (140 mg) was administered and the tracheal tube removed, followed by administration of oxygen (3 L/min) via a nasal cannula. She was admitted to the high dependency unit. Our patient had no neurologic abnormalities or VP symptoms. She was moved to the general ward on postoperative day 5 and was discharged from the hospital with good progress on postoperative day 15.