A 21-year-old female with a palpable painless mass in her lower abdomen which was gradually increasing in size was admitted to our institution. Physical examination demonstrated a firm, non-tender and non-movable mass measuring 8 × 9 cm in size protruding through the anterior pelvic wall. The index of hemotology and biochemistry were all in the normal scope. The patient has no history of injury or surgery, and no family history was identified.
The nosocomial MRI revealed a well-defined, 12 × 10 × 9 cm-sized, lobulated mass within the mid-pelvis. The mass exhibited isointensity relative to muscle in fat-supressed T1-weighted MR image and heterogeneous relatively hyperintensity with a little stip and patchy hypointensity inside on fat-suppression T2-weighted MR image . Meanwhile, circinate low signal intensity can be found around the tumor, indicating that there was a capsule or pseudocapsule. Sagittal T2WI showed that the rectus abdominis was open with umbrella shape . The tumor showed restricted diffusion on diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map , which presented as heterogeneous hyperintensity and hypointensity, respectively. It also showed heterogeneous enhancement on fat-suppression T1WI after the contrast agent injected . The area of higher signal intensity exhibited more obvious enhancement compared with lower signal intensity area on T2WI. At surgery, the mass was located at the symphysis ossium pubis, invading the lower right rectus abdominis and the bottom of the bladder. It was well circumscribed, firm and lobulated appearance. The cut surface of the lesion was pale white and glistening with neither necrosis nor hemorrhage. Microscopic examination identified alternating fibrous and myxoid stroma areas inside the tumor, the tumor cells arranging in a whorled growth pattern with curvilinear capillaries . Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA) . MRI findings combined with histopathological analysis made a final diagnosis of LGFMS. The patient was discharged from hospital 10 days after the operation. During one year of follow-up, the patient was in a good status without evidence of recurrence.