A 64-year-old woman presented with epigastric discomfort and erratic reflux since 2 months. Upper endoscopy revealed a 2.5 × 3.0 cm mass at the junction of the lesser curvature and gastric antrum . Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated an irregular soft-tissue masses projecting into the gastric lumen . Hematological examination showed elevated monocyte count, normal platelet count and globulin level.
Endoscopic biopsy at low magnification showed the tumor cells poorly differentiated, atypical, large-cell lamellar and striated infiltrates. Under high magnification, tumor cells showed slightly basophilic cytoplasm, and some cells showed obvious nucleoli and nuclear fission. Some tumor cells had large nuclei, and some nuclei were deviated, resembling plasma cells . Some tumor cells were vacuolated and resembled signet-ring cells. This morphology was considered malignant and likely attributed to a poorly differentiated carcinoma or lymphoma. Most first-line markers were not expressed, such as AE1/3 , EMA, CK7, CAM5.2, and other epithelial-cell markers; CD34 and CD56 were expressed, which excluded poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Among the lymphocytic, B-cell, and T/NK-cell markers, CD19, CD20 , CD79α, PAX-5, CD2, CD3 , CD5, and CD7 were negative, while CD56 was positive, which excluded diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and T/NK-cell lymphoma. The tumor cells were negative for CD38 , CD138, CD79α, MUM-1, BOB-1, and OCT-2, and showed no abnormality in the expression or ratio of kappa and lambda. The serum globulin count was normal, ruling out extramedullary plasmacytoma. MPO was negative, excluding myeloid sarcoma with neutrophilic differentiation. Vimentin , CD117 , DOG-1, CD31, and ERG were negative, excluding epithelioid gastrointestinal stromal tumors and angiosarcomas. S-100, HMB45, and SOX-11 negativity excluded malignant melanoma and neurogenic tumors. The tumor cells were weakly positive for CD68 and lysozyme, negative for CD163 , and positive for CD4 , which excluded rare tissue cell-derived tumors. No histocyte engulfment or skin lesions were observed. The platelet count was normal. CD1α, S-100, and CD123 negativity excluded blastic plasmacytoid dendritic-cell neoplasm, histiocytosarcoma, and Langerhans cell sarcoma. CD21 and CD35 were negative, excluding dendritic-cell sarcoma. Considering their CD34 expression, we speculated that the tumor cells originated from primitive or naive hematopoietic cells. CD43, a sensitive lymphatic marker, was positive . Further testing showed that the tumor cells were negative for TdT (excluding lymphoblastic lymphoma) and positive for NSE. Owing to the positive expression of NSE, CD4, CD56, and lysozyme, we considered a diagnosis of myeloid sarcoma with monocytic differentiation. Bone-marrow cytology and bone-marrow histology showed good hematopoiesis and no metastatic tumor cells . And the fusion genes commonly found in leukemia in bone-marrow tissue were all negative. So, we diagnosed the patient with primary extramedullary gastric myeloid Sarcoma with monocytic differentiation.
The patient began treatment with the DA regimen. After 2 months of treatment, repeat gastroscopy showed that the tumor mass was unchanged . The treatment was changed to decitabine combined with half-dose CAG. After 4 months of treatment, the tumor size remained unchanged on gastroscopy. Therefore, the patient underwent radical resection (distal major gastrectomy + Roux-en-Y anastomosis). The tumor surface was slightly cauliflower-shaped, the cut surface was grayish-white. Microscopy showed that the tumor had invaded the superficial muscular layer, and the gastric submucosa showed a nested and sheet-like distribution of tumor cells. The tumor-cell morphology was consistent with the preoperative biopsy findings, with abundant, slightly basophilic cytoplasm, oval or slightly horseshoe-shaped nuclei, large red nucleoli, and visible nuclear fission . Interestingly, immunohistochemical assays revealed a shift from negative to positive for AE1/3 and from weakly positive to strongly positive for CD68 and lysozyme. CD4, CD43, CD34, and CD56 positivity was greatly diminished . Combined with the preoperative morphology and immunohistochemical results, we established a diagnosis of myeloid sarcoma with monocytic differentiation. The tumor cells showed mononuclear histiocytic differentiation, and this altered immunophenotype may be attributable to chemotherapy-induced tumor cell differentiation.
To determine the molecular genetic alterations in the tumor, we extracted DNA from the patient’s normal tissue and paraffin-embedded tumor tissue, performed exon sequencing, and analyzed germline mutations (SNPs and INDELs) using SAMtools . In total, missense mutations SNPs and synonymous mutations SNPs were detected in the tumor tissue. Then screened for possible tumor-susceptibility genes: MED23, PTPRB, ERG, PDE4DIP, FAT1, GRIN2A, CNOT1, WNK1, SH2B3, TJP2, MET, ANK3, and NKX3–1. Annotation of the screening results revealed that the PTPRB gene (associated with angiosarcoma) had a missense mutation. Among genes with missense mutations, 96 differential genes were screened out. These genes were involved in 30 significant pathways according to KEGG pathway-enrichment analysis . The tumor-associated pathway accounted for 33.3% genes . The metabolism and other pathways accounted for 26.7 and 40% genes, respectively.
We detected frameshift deletions and frameshift insertions of INDELs in the tumor tissue. CNVs were detected on chromosomes 1, 7, 8, 11, 16, 17, and 19 (Additional file : Table 1). The MYC gene, which is associated with cancer pathways, was located on chromosome 8. The oncogene TP53 was located in the affected segment on chromosome 17. Finally, we compared somatic mutations with known driver genes in the database, and screened out the following possible driver genes in the tumor sample: TP53, WHSC1, and SMARCA4 . Further analysis of the sequencing results revealed missense mutations in the FLT3 and PTPRB genes, which are associated with myeloid sarcoma. Moreover, missense mutations were detected in CD44 and CD19 (associated with acute myeloid leukemogenesis), LTK (associated with poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma), NOTCH2 (associated with diffuse large B-cell tumorigenesis), and CNTN2 (associated with T-cell lymphoma; Table ).
Whole-transcriptome sequencing of RNA extracted was performed to test for rearrangements in 555 genes related to tumorigenesis. The results were all negative.