A 48-year-old female came to our observation due to a limitation in mouth opening range. She also reported crepitus sounds at the left TMJ as well as pain, exacerbated by function (e.g., chewing) and increasing in intensity over the past three months. Clinical assessment showed a limited mouth opening (i.e., 22 mm) and pain with palpation at the left joint and all the main masticatory muscles, more severe on the left side. At the first appointment (T0), mandible manipulation was performed to achieve a forced opening of about 40 mm. A magnetic resonance (MRI) was prescribed to assess the disc-condyle relationship as the possible source of limitation in mouth opening and to gather some pictorial evaluation of the presence of joint effusion . Despite the clinical suspicion of TMJ arthritis, computerized tomography was not prescribed at this stage due to the expected low impact on treatment planning decisions.
MRI showed a regularly shaped condyle, with an anteriorized disc at closed mouth. At the maximum mouth opening, the condylar translation is reduced and the disc is not recaptured. Joint effusion of severe entity is also present. A conservative approach to provide pain relief and to manage muscle tension was provided, based on counseling, a home program of self-exercise and a stabilization appliance to wear at night. After three months, symptoms improved only partially, with a reduction of pain with muscle palpation but a steady pain at the left joint.
Based on that, a cycle of five arthrocentesis plus viscosupplementation with hyaluronic acid (Sinovial, IBSA) has been performed weekly. Clinical data has been recorded at each time point before each injection and 15 days after the last one .
After one month from the last arthrocentesis plus viscosupplementation, the patient still showed some pain and, more important, still felt a limitation in the unassisted mouth opening and right laterotrusion. A diagnosis of TMJ intermittent locking on the left side was thus performed, and given the difficulties to stabilize clinical symptoms and mouth opening with the usual conservative approaches, the patient was planned for a surgical removal of the TMJ disc with concurrent HAM positioning .
TMJ surgery provided condyle remodelling and discectomy , after which a HAM patch is positioned within the intra-articular space , and stratified stitching is performed to avoid postoperatory scars .
Three months after the intervention, the patient showed no negative exitus or postsurgical side effects. Jaw range of motion was increasing, both as for unassisted mouth opening (38 mm) and right laterotrusion (8 mm). The patient reported an overall improvement in chewing efficiency as well as the absence of pain .
Five months after surgery, a new MRI was performed . The images showed the physiological excursion of the TMJ condyle during mouth opening .