A 33-year-old female from the country of Georgia presented to a tuberculosis dispensary on July 10, 2020, with a temperature of 38° C and symptoms of malaise, productive cough, and night sweats. The patient had no known medical problems. She reported smoking ~ 10 cigarettes daily and denied alcohol or illicit drug use. She had 3 children and her husband was a prisoner being treated for pulmonary tuberculosis. Upon physical examination there were decreased breath sounds in the upper lobes of the lungs with dullness to percussion. The patient had a body mass index (BMI) of 16.3 kg/m2. A complete blood count revealed a moderate leukocytosis of 10.2 × 109/L and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 42 mm/h. Biochemical blood parameters were normal. Sputum testing found a negative acid-fast bacilli (AFB) microscopy, positive Xpert MTB/RIF test (no RIF resistance), and positive culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). Additionally, drug susceptibility testing (DST) revealed sensitivity to rifampin, isoniazid, and ethambutol. Chest radiography revealed multiple small foci in the upper lobes of both lungs and a cavity in the right lung . The patient was initiated on daily outpatient treatment with three pills of a fixed dosed combination pill containing isoniazid 75 mg, rifampin 150 mg, ethambutol 275 mg and pyrazinamide 400 mg. Treatment was given through directly observed therapy (DOT). She converted her sputum cultures to negative at 2 months and continued rifampin and isoniazid to finish 6 months of treatment. An end of treatment chest x-ray revealed fibrosis and honeycombing in the right upper lung, and fibrosis and dense focal shadows in the 1st and 2nd intercostal spaces of the left lung . The complete treatment timeline is summarized in Fig. .
A follow up chest computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a cavity in the right upper lobe measuring 12 × 10 mm in size with a thick and heterogeneous wall and nodules and bronchiectasis in the left lung . Based on CT findings and in accordance with National tuberculosis guidelines, the patient was offered surgical resection of the affected portion of the lung. It should be noted that the patient reported no symptoms, complaints, or functional disability before the surgery. Preoperative workup including pulmonary function testing, an echocardiogram, bronchoscopy, and blood chemistries were normal. The patient consented to surgery and underwent a surgical resection of the S1 and S2 segments of the right lung 2 weeks later. Intraoperatively, moderate adhesions were visualized in the S1 and S2 area with a palpable dense formation ~ 3.0 cm in diameter, in addition to a dense nodule. Gross pathology of the resected lesion showed a thick-walled fibrous cavity filled with caseous necrosis corresponding to the right preoperative CT lesion seen on Fig. A, C.
Microbiological analysis on the resected tissue revealed acid-fast bacilli on microscopy, and positive Xpert MTB/RIF and culture results. Mtb grew from the caseous center, inner and outer walls of the cavity and a resected foci located ~ 3 cm from the cavity. DST revealed sensitivity to isoniazid, rifampin, and ethambutol.
Pathological examination of the resected lesion showed findings consistent with fibrocavernous tuberculosis. No postoperative complications were experienced, and the patient reinitiated first-line therapy via DOT on the 2nd postoperative day and was discharged on postoperative day 11.
A follow up CT scan performed after 3 months showed postoperative changes in the right upper lobe, and an unchanged left lung . Based on the persistent conglomerate of tuberculomas and multiple small tuberculous foci, growth of Mtb from the previous surgical specimen, and the patient’s social situation (mother of three young children) a second surgery to optimize the chance of cure was recommended. The patient reported no symptoms, complaints, or functional disability before the surgery. Preoperative sputum testing found negative AFB smear microscopy and culture. The patient underwent the second operation on May 18, 2021, in which the S1, S2 and part of the S6 segment of the left lung were resected. Intraoperatively, moderate adhesions seen along with a dense palpable ~ 3 cm mass in the S1 and S2 region and a dense focus in S6.
Microbiological examinations performed on resected tissue revealed positive AFB smear microscopy and Xpert MTB/RIF results and a negative AFB culture. The pathological examination of the surgical samples indicated a variety of destructive changes in addition to ongoing inflammation. The gross specimen of S1 and S2 segments of the left lung showed fibrocavernous tuberculosis shown in Fig. B, which corresponds to the left lung lesion seen on the first preoperative CT in Figs. B and A in the second preoperative CT; the gross specimen of the S6 segment showed progressive tuberculoma seen in Fig. C, which corresponds to the left lung lesion seen on the first preoperative CT in Figs. D and C in the second preoperative CT.
There were no postoperative complications, and tuberculosis (TB) treatment was reinitiated. The patient successfully completed treatment with normalization of clinical and laboratory parameters and a clinical outcome of cure in September 2021, ~ 14 months after beginning treatment. The patient had reported near complete resolution of her symptoms, having a much better ability to perform her daily activities. The patient appreciated the effects surgery had on her recovery and was happy to have gone through that treatment route. A post treatment CT scan demonstrated postoperative changes in the upper segments of both lungs . Results from post treatment lung function testing were all within normal range.