A 24-year-old female patient with a two-month history of cough resistant to antibiotic treatment was further examined at the Department of Pneumology at another medical facility after the appearance of haemoptysis. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a giant tumour in the right hemithorax. Based on the presence of spindle cells and immunohistochemical positivity for S-100 and SOX 10 with negativity for MelanA and HMB-45, a suspicion on diagnosis of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumour was made at another medical facility. The differential diagnoses comprised synovial sarcoma and malignant solitary fibrous tumour.
Her past medical history included excision of AST localised under right breast at another medical facility four years prior. The tissue sample was described as melanocytic affection displaying patterns of intradermal proliferation of large melanocytes with abundant amphophilic cytoplasm, epitheloid and vesicular nuclei, focally containing prominent nucleoli. A certain proportion of cells was arranged in small nests and isolated mitoses, together with the maturation disorders were seen. A dense lymphoid infiltrate was observed in the stroma. The expression of p21 and p16 was demonstrated, as well as positive staining for Melan A and S-100 protein. By fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) method, the evaluation of numerical aberrations in the region of CCND1 (11q13), RREB1 (6p25), MYB (6q23) and centromeric CEP 6 genes was performed and stated negative for all of the above-mentioned regions. According to the evaluating department of pathology, the initial lesion was classified as AST. Therefore, reexcision with margin of 1 cm was performed and involvement of the sentinel lymphatic node was ruled out by an SLNB executed at the same facility. However, the patient did not obtain any information regarding the possible overlap of an AST with another malignant skin lesions at that time, and no follow-up was scheduled.
At the Department of Pneumology, distant metastases were excluded by brain CT with intravenous contrast agent and positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) of the trunk. Bronchoscopy displayed extramural compression of airways distal to the tracheal carina. Significant elevation of neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and CA 125 was present.
Because of the airway compression and a rapid worsening of clinical symptoms, the patient was immediately transferred to our surgical department with a request for radical surgery. During the examination, the patient exhibited a very low physical performance, dyspnoea at rest, cough, mild haemoptysis with secondary anaemia, borderline respiratory sufficiency, fever, sinus tachycardia, lack of appetite and a history of 10 kg weight loss during the past two months. Operability was promptly evaluated by cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR), which verified intimate contact of the tumour to the right atrium and superior vena cava and excluded infiltration of the heart and great vessels .
Radical en bloc resection of the tumour with right pneumonectomy and resection of the pericardium with reconstruction of the pericardium using mesh was performed . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged eleven days after the surgery in a very good clinical condition.
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen showed tumour localised between upper and middle lobe measuring 190 × 120 × 110 mm. The lesion was surrounded by a thin fibrous capsule and was yellowish in colour, lobulated, with pseudocystic transformation, necrosis and hemorrhage on cut surface.
Definitive histology revealed that the lesion was composed of elongated spindle cells that were arranged in a fascicular or storiform pattern. Also, frequent necroses and haemorrhages were observed. In a minor portion of the lesion, a round cell component was found. The lesional cells had round to oval nuclei of various sizes with clear chromatin, visible nucleoli and a clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm . Angioinvasion was also present, nevertheless, the visceral pleura and pericardium were not affected.
Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumour cells were positive for Vimentin, CD99, S100, SOX10, MITF, MelanA, INI-1 and Ki-67 . The tumour cells were negative for desmin, myogenin, myoD1, CK-AE1/3, HMB45, CD57 and GFAP.
Molecular characterization revealed the tumour as negative for the fusion of EWSR1 (22q12) and testing for BRAF exon 15 was negative for the V600E mutation. The DNA isolated from the formalin-fixed/paraffin-embedded (FFPE) sample was analysed by next-generation sequencing (NGS) and an NRAS p.(Q61K) mutation was detected. Mutations in KRAS, HRAS, SMARCA4 and SMARCB1 were not found (Roche NimbleGen Inc., Madison, WI, USA). Fusions involving BRAF, ALK, NTRK1, RET or ROS1 were assessed as negative (ArcherDX, Boulder, CO, USA).
Based on the morphological, immunohistochemical (mainly MelanA and MITF positivity) and molecular features, the diagnosis of metastatic NRAS-mutant melanoma was established. Based on the medical history of a previously excised AST, an original biopsy of the primary cutaneous lesion was requested and reviewed at our Department of Pathology. The second-look histopathological examination verified spindle and epitheloid nevomelanocytes arranged in junctional and intradermal nests. Cytologic atypia and numerous mitotic activities were present . The lesion was pervaded with lymphoid infiltrate, and pagetoid spread was not demonstrated. The Breslow thickness was approximately 2.7 mm. Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for HMB45, p16, p21, and S100, and the MIB1 proliferation index was 20%. Based on the patient’s clinical course and the appearance of melanoma metastasis, the initial cutaneous lesion was thought to require reclassification as a Spitzoid melanoma with subsequent lung metastasis. However, the molecular examination of the initial lesion revealed a BRAF mutation without the mutation of NRAS gene.
After the establishment of a definitive diagnosis of a metastatic NRAS-mutant melanoma of occult primary site, the patient was planned to be referred to the Department of Oncology. However, the further postoperative course became complicated, and right-sided tonsillitis with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus appeared. Moreover, eight weeks after the surgery, a follow-up PET/CT was performed and revealed multiple new metastases located in the right-sided pleura, left suprarenal gland, thoracic and retroperitoneal lymph nodes, sternal bone and eighth rib on the right. PET/CT also highlighted right palatal tonsillitis, which was presumed to be of staphylococcal origin. The suspected brain metastases were confirmed by immediate brain magnetic resonance, which also showed two small lesions with cerebral oedema.
Corticosteroid antioedematous treatment was given immediately, and the brain metastases were stereotactically irradiated. However, the patient´s condition at that moment did not allow immunotherapy or chemotherapy. Furthermore, dysphagia occurred, and a tumour in the area of the right palatal tonsil was identified.
An otorhinolaryngological examination and biopsy proved a malignant melanoma. The patient underwent tonsillectomy; however, the postoperative course was complicated by left-sided hemiparesis, and further brain CT showed multiple new metastases. Palliative irradiation of brain metastases was performed. Nevertheless, despite complex specialised medical care, the patient’s clinical condition rapidly deteriorated. By that time, no active oncological treatment was possible. The patient was delegated to local hospice for palliative care six months after pneumonectomy and died three weeks later.