We present a case of an 80-year-old woman who was struck by lightning. The past medical history included a diagnosis of arterial hypertension, coronary artery disease, anterolateral myocardial infarction 5 years earlier treated by primary coronary angioplasty of left anterior descending coronary artery with stent placement (bare metal stent), implantation of a DDD pacemaker 4 years earlier due to sick sinus syndrome (Talos DR, Biotronik; Selox JT53 endocardial lead in RAA and Selox ST 60 in RVA with passive fixation). She was struck by a lightning bolt while she was standing by a bike, with one hand resting on the handlebar and the other holding up an umbrella with a metal frame and a mobile phone (the patient does not remember in which hand she was holding the phone). As a result she experienced a transient loss of consciousness. The undamaged phone was found by a witness 10 m away from her and her wristwatch had stopped at the moment of strike. The patient in grave general condition with the symptoms of shock was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) of a district hospital. First- and second-degree burns were visible on a line going from the left shoulder along the entire torso to the lower right extremity . The ECG on admission depicted pacemaker spikes and native sinus rhythm at 50–60 b.p.m. . Vasopressors (dopamine and dobutamine) were used in the treatment of shock. Laboratory investigation revealed an increased level of hsTn to 640 pg/ml and NT-pro-BNP to 1557 pg/ml. Levels of electrolytes, creatinine, urea, and aminotransferases were within normal limits. Bedside echocardiogram examination in the ICU with the diagnostic conclusion of ‘very poor contractility’. Pacemaker interrogation showed high pacing thresholds (failure to pace in the atrial channel) even if impulse energy was increased. On the 3rd day after admission the patient developed recurrent pacing-induced tachycardia at rates of 140–160 b.p.m. . The pacing mode was then changed to VVI. The symptoms of shock disappeared and the patient gradually improved. When the patient’s condition stabilized [ejection fraction (EF) was over 40%] she was transferred to the tertiary hospital for transcutaneous lead extraction (TLE). At 10 days after the index event she was in good general state, with burn wounds still not healed, especially in the region of the right nipple and the right thigh. Pacemaker interrogation revealed slightly elevated pacing thresholds of both leads (∼3.5 V with 1.0 ms impulse duration). Pacemaker memory data had been entirely erased upon lightning strike and during the consecutive programming changes. TLE was performed at 19 days after the strike. In the hybrid operating room with on-site cardiac surgery standby, the pacing system was removed from the patient under general anaesthesia using Cook mechanical telescoping sheaths under the guidance of transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE).
Pre-procedural ECHO examination showed an EF of 55% without significant abnormalities in the heart. TOE imaging during the procedure did not show any pathologic structures on pacemaker leads. The extracted pacing system was sent to Biotronik (Germany) for thorough evaluation. At the same time the patient received a new DDD unit . Deep vein thrombosis of the left upper extremity developed after the procedure. The patient was treated with low molecular weight heparin and arm elevation and a few days later the symptoms of thrombosis resolved. The further post-operative course was uneventful and at 24 days after the index event she was discharged home in good general condition. Pre-discharge ECHO examination showed an EF of 60% and no morphological abnormalities in the heart. A follow-up phone call revealed that the patient was still doing well until the day of preparation of the manuscript for publication (exactly 2 years ago).
The manufacturer’s (Biotronik) evaluation of the device did not show any significant damage either to the pacemaker or the extracted leads. Pacemaker battery status was as expected. Evaluation of the pacemaker memory did not show any abnormalities. The ability of the device to pace was checked. Antibradycardia pacing capabilities were in accordance with the programmed criteria, there were no changes with respect both to amplitude and rate. Pacemaker function was found to be normal. A long-term test to check for pacing ability was additionally performed. Every pacing impulse was recorded during the test. An in-depth analysis of the recorded pacing impulses confirmed normal pacemaker function. No temporary or permanent loss of capacity of the battery was noted. The pacemaker appeared to function properly. There were no deviations from technical standard. The extracted leads also conformed to the technical specification. By signing the consent form the patient agreed to use her anonymous medical data for research purposes and publication.