A 76-year-old female had experienced unstable gait for 3 months. Because her disability was gradually progressing, she consulted a local hospital. When she came to our hospital for further examination 1 week later, she could not move without a wheel chair. Neurological examination revealed cerebellar truncal ataxia without Romberg's sign. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head showed a cystic lesion in the foramen of Magendie, which was compressing the inferior part of the vermis and the medial part of the cerebellar hemisphere without causing hydrocephalus .
She had previously consulted her local hospital with a complaint of headache 3 years ago. MRI performed at that time revealed the same cystic lesion to be present. The intensity of the cyst was similar to that of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and the cyst was divided into two portions, suggesting the presence of a multilobular cyst. Because the patient's symptoms were believed to attribute to the presence of this cystic lesion, surgical decompression was planned.
Median suboccipital craniectomy was performed such that after the dural incision, the cyst was exposed. The retromedullary cistern was open, but the cyst had not shrunk, and the cyst was found not to communicate with the surrounding cistern . Most of the cyst wall was successfully removed. A small part of the cyst that was still attached to the choroid plexus at the foramen of the Magendie was allowed to remain , and the fourth ventricle was not opened via the obex.
Pathohistological examination demonstrated that the cyst wall was composed of a collagenous membrane lined by multiple layers of arachnoid cells . Chronic inflammation and hemosiderin pigmentation were absent on the wall. This result confirmed the diagnosis of the cyst as an AC.
The patient's postoperative clinical course was excellent and her neurological recovery was remarkable. She regained her mobility and could walk without a cane. MRI performed 2 weeks after the operation revealed that the cyst had diminished and clearly demonstrated a flow artifact entering into the foramen of Magendie . Recurrence of the cyst has not been detected on follow-up MRI for 4 years.