A 58-year-old woman without a previous medical and traumatic history presented with gradually worsening pulsatile proptosis and chemosis in her left eye. The initial examination revealed eye movement disturbance (abduction and elevation) and diplopia. Although ophthalmologic examination showed no visual acuity reduction or defect of visual field, it showed dilation of the retinal vein. The three-dimensional time-of-flight magnetic resonance (MR) angiography identified a high-intensity signal in the left SOV and the inferior ophthalmic vein (IOV) . The digital subtraction angiography (DSA) after 1 week revealed a dAVF with a shunting point in the left orbital fissure; the inferolateral trunk (ILT) of the left internal carotid artery and the left middle cerebral artery (MMA) were involved as feeding arteries and shunted blood flow drained into the left angular vein and facial vein through the SOV. The ophthalmic artery was not involved in the shunt. We determined no drainage into the left cavernous sinus and no cortical venous reflux and deep venous reflux, and grade IIa of the Cognard classification. The left cavernous sinus was used as the antegrade intracranial venous return pathway in the venous phase of the DSA .
We planned transvenous coil embolization in the SOV at the left superior orbital fissure. Accordingly, we placed a 6-Fr guiding catheter (ENVOY, Codman Neurovascular) in the left internal jugular vein under local anesthesia and by the right femoral vein approach. We tried to precede a microcatheter using an approach route from the inferior petrosal sinus and the cavernous sinus to the SOV. However, as the connection between the cavernous sinus and the SOV could not be opened, any guidewire could not pass through it. Hence, we shifted to the anterior approach, placed a 4-Fr intermediate catheter (Cerulean G; Medikit) in the left facial vein, and preceded a microcatheter (Renegade; Stryker) to the shunting point in the SOV. We embolized the SOV using nine detachable coils (Orbit Galaxy 3–8 mm, Codman; Target nano 2–3 mm, Stryker) . After the embolization, the fistula from the ILT and the MMA was completely occluded. In the venous phase of the angiography, the left cavernous sinus was maintained as the antegrade pathway of the cerebral venous return . After embolization, ocular symptoms, such as chemosis and proptosis, promptly improved in few days, and the patient did not report any recurrence until 1 year of follow-up.