A 44-year-old Caucasian man was admitted in June 2014 to the hospital with recent (5 months) onset of ankle oedema, high blood glucose and low potassium levels (1.9 mmol/L). Physical examination showed centripetal distribution of the fat tissue with 10 kg (15 %) weight loss (BMI 25 kg/m2) over 5 months, moon face, buffalo hump, facial rash, dispersed small bruises on the trunk, generalized muscle weakness and muscle hypotrophy of the lower limbs. The remaining physical examination was normal, including blood pressure levels.
Increased ACTH and cortisol levels, high blood glucose, low potassium and metabolic alkalosis pointed to an ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome.
The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test (2 mg of dexamethasone every 6 h during 48 h starting at 8 a.m.) showed no cortisol suppression confirming the CS-EAS diagnosis . Tumour markers determination showed increased levels of CgA, neuronal specific enolase (NSE), serotonin and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) , all reinforcing an EAS.
Pituitary MRI revealed a pituitary 4 mm adenoma. Thorax, abdomen and pelvis CT did not reveal any tumour, (data not shown) while adrenal glands were hyperplastic. In this context, a whole body scintigraphy using 99mTc-HYNIC-Tyr3-Octreotide (Tektrotyd), previously described as a useful method for diagnosis, staging and follow up of the patients with NETs , was performed and revealed increased focal ileum uptake in the right iliac fossa .
The osteodensitometry showed vertebral osteoporosis with a T-score of −2.9 and Z-score of −2.6, consistent with secondary osteoporosis.
After the EAS diagnosis, both ketoconazole (400 mg/d) and sandostatin (100 μgx3/d) treatment alleviated hypercortisolism within a month . For the secondary diabetes mellitus, metformin (850 mgx2/d) was prescribed and a good glycaemic control was achieved. Secondary osteoporosis was treated with calcium and vitamin D (900 mg of calcium citrate with 600 IU of choleclaciferol daily).
Laparoscopic abdominal exploration revealed a 12 cm long Meckel’s diverticulum with an irregular shape and a 1.8 cm nodular tumor mass . Diverticulectomy with regional lymph node resection was elected, while intraoperative small bowel inspection revealed no luminal damage. Pathological analysis of the resected submucosal 1.8 cm tumour of the Meckel diverticulum confirmed a well differentiated neuro-endocrine tumour (grade I), whereas immunohistochemistry was positive for ACTH, chromogranin A and synaptophysin; Ki-67 score was < 1 % . There was one local metastatic lymph node.
One month as well as 6 months post-operatively, plasmatic cortisol, ACTH and tumoral markers (CgA, 5HIAA) were within normal limits .