We first diagnosed a 21-year-old Caucasian male suffering from CRC in January of 2009. The patient complained of having recurrent rectal bleeding for three months. He was otherwise a healthy non-smoker and in good condition appropriate for his age. His medical history was uneventful. Evaluation of family history revealed five relatives afflicted with malignant tumors at a young age. Among them were his mother, who died at the age of thirty-five from endometrial cancer, and the mother's brother, who passed away at the age of forty from CRC. The patient did not report significant weight loss, fever or night sweats. Physical examination was unremarkable. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) were within normal range. Clinical staging diagnostics revealed a partially stenosing rectal adenocarcinoma (uT4, uN+) but no potentially metastatic lesions in the liver or lung at that time. There was no clinical evidence of FAP or Gardner syndrome. Li-Fraumeni syndrome was subsequently ruled out by sequencing of multiple TP53-exons (3-9) after PCR amplification of genomic DNA.
With respect to locally advanced tumor growth, the patient underwent neoadjuvant 5-fluorouracil-based chemoradiotherapy (5-fluorouracil/folinic-acid, 50.4 Gy) followed by low anterior resection including total mesorectal excision in the spring of 2009. Intraoperative sonography of the liver showed a small lesion in segment VII, but, due to the locally advanced tumor stage (pT4, pN2 (6/9), uM1 (hep), V1, L1, G2, R0), we decided in favor of non-simultaneous resection of the hepatic lesion . According to revised Bethesda guidelines , microsatellite instability (MSI) testing was performed by DNA isolation and subsequent PCR amplification from tissue of the primary rectal carcinoma resulting in detection of significant instability in microsatellites BAT25, BAT26, D17S250 and D2S123. This finding shaped up as high level of MSI (MSI-H). Moreover, sequencing of the protooncogenes KRAS and BRAF showed no mutation (wildtype). This raised the strong suspicion of a Lynch syndrome particularly with regard to the patient's family history, his age and the fulfillment of the Amsterdam criteria [,]. MSI in CRC of patients under the age of forty are estimated to be due to an underlying germline mutation in 85.7% of the cases, a probability, which is elevated by the presence of a BRAF-wildtype. The latter can be used to distinguish sporadic MSI CRC from MSI tumors that arise in the setting of Lynch syndrome . Consecutively, the patient underwent human genetic counseling followed by testing for germline mutations in mismatch repair (MMR) genes by sequencing of their cDNA emanating from PAX-RNA and total RNA isolated from short-term lymphocyte culture. Thereby a mutation was detected in MMR-gene PMS2 (exon 11). Altogether, the diagnosis of Lynch syndrome was made.
Early restaging was performed during intermittent FOLFOX chemotherapy and the patient was found to have hepatic and pulmonary lesions suspicious for metastases. Thoracic computed tomography showed a well-circumscribed 6 mm lesion in the left lower lobe of the lung with homogenous contrast media enhancement as well as two smaller lesions in the right upper lobe. There were neither signs of infiltration of the adjacent tissue nor signs of pathologically enlarged lymph nodes. We decided to first perform a partial hepatectomy (segment VII), which confirmed hepatic spread of the tumor. In the light of the patient's young age, his early recovery and his good general state of health, we proceeded to remove the left-sided pulmonary lesion four weeks later. Therefore, he underwent atypical resection of the left lower lobe through a left anterolateral thoracotomy followed by a systematic mediastinal and hilar lymphadenectomy . The patient's postoperative course remained uncomplicated and he again recovered well. Gross examination of the specimen, however, showed a well-circumscribed solid pulmonary tumor, 7 mm in diameter. Histological evaluation revealed a mixed papillary, hemorrhagic and sclerotic growth pattern of cuboidal surface cells and polygonal stromal cells. Cuboidal surface cells were immunopositive for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) and pan-cytokeratin, whereas polygonal stromal cells were immunopositive for neuron-specific enolase (NSE) and S-100 protein as well as EMA. These findings are consistent with a sclerosing hemangioma of the lung . Ki-67 index was less than 5%. Both significant MSI evaluated by PCR amplification and loss of expression of MMR-proteins MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 determined by immunohistochemistry could not be detected in the pulmonary SH. Moreover, all lymph nodes sampled were free of metastases.
By thoracic computed tomography, the pulmonary lesions in the right upper lobe remained unchanged after 3 months. According to interdisciplinary tumor board recommendations and oncological guidelines [-] we decided not to suggest further chemotherapy or restorative proctocolectomy but to perform careful aftercare with monitoring of the pulmonary lesions at close intervals as well as attentive follow-up via abdominal ultrasound and colonoscopy.
Furthermore, the patient's family members were referred to cancer genetics specialists for counseling interviews and recommended germline mutation analysis. During regular follow up visits CEA and CA 19-9 were within normal range. Accurate colonoscopy and diagnostic imaging of liver and lungs were unremarkable, in particular pulmonary lesions of the right upper lobe both were not identifiable any more.