A19-year-old woman, gravida 2 para 1 with no living children was referred to our institution, a regional referral hospital from a nearby health centre. She presented with loss of foetal movement that began approximately one week prior to admission. Believing this to be a transient state that would return to normal, she did not seek medical care for several days. One day prior to admission, she was attended to at a nearby health centre where an ultrasound was performed. The ultrasound report indicated an intra-uterine pregnancy at gestation age of 17 weeks, with no foetal movements or cardiac activity.
However, an image of the ultrasound was not provided. As the patient was uncertain of her last normal menstrual period, the gestation age determined by ultrasound was adopted. She was subsequently diagnosed to have a missed abortion and referred to our institution for further management.
The cessation of foetal movements was not associated with any other significant symptoms such as abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding. She had not yet booked at antenatal clinic for this pregnancy. Two years ago, she underwent a caesarean section at term. The patient had an intrauterine foetal death but the indication for the caesarean section could not be determined. The underlying cause of the intrauterine foetal death could also not be elucidated. The past medical, surgical, and gynaecological histories were otherwise unremarkable.
General examination findings on admission were essentially normal save for a slightly elevated blood pressure of 130/85mmHg. Per abdominal examination revealed a moderately distended abdomen which was non-uniform, with distension more marked in the suprapubic region. She had a well-healed sub-umbilical midline incision (SUMI) scar. Palpation revealed no tenderness and what was assumed to be a fundal height of 18cm, corresponded with the gestational age by ultrasound. Auscultation by foetoscope did not detect any foetal heart sounds. On sterile per vaginal examination, the cervix was found to be medially positioned, firm, thick and closed.
The patient was provisionally diagnosed to have a missed abortion based on clinical findings and referral ultrasound report. Routine laboratory investigations were ordered. Full blood picture revealed microcytic hypochromic anaemia with haemoglobin level of 7.5g/dL . Her blood group was B Rh- (negative). Initial management included oral ferrous sulphate (200mg 12-hourly) to correct anaemia as per national guidelines and 400 μg misoprostol every 6 hours to manage the missed abortion as per World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines. Intravenous ceftriaxone (1g 12-hourly for 24hours) and intravenous metronidazole (500mg 8-hourly for 24hours) were given for prophylaxis as per departmental protocols. On day two of admission, the patient reported to experience per vaginal bleeding. Her cervix was 3cm dilated and 60% effaced on sterile per vaginal examination. Oxytocin infusion (5IU in 500ml of Ringer's Lactate at 15 drops per minute) was added to her treatment plan as per departmental protocol.
Upon evaluation on the third day post admission, the patient still had minimal vaginal bleeding and was experiencing lower abdominal pain. There were no changes on vaginal examination, with the cervix still 3cm dilated and 60% effaced. Treatment with antibiotics, misoprostol and oxytocin was continued. Additional investigations were ordered on the fifth day post admission. A repeat haemoglobin level was 6.0g/dL; serum creatinine (2.08mmol/L) and Blood Urea Nitrogen (19.06μmol/L) were within normal limits. An ultrasound was done and reported a non-gravid and bulky uterus having thickened endometrium, free fluid in peritoneal cavity with a non-viable foetus having gestation age of 22 weeks and 5 days. Consequently, the diagnosis was one unit of blood transfusion and was scheduled for a laparotomy which was performed on the seventh day post admission.
Intra-operative findings of the laparotomy included adhesions from the previous Caesarean section for which adhesiolysis was done. The placenta was found to be implanted on the omentum which was located on the anterior abdomen and a macerated foetus was found enclosed in its membranes. The foetus was extracted and weighed 320 grams . The placenta and membranes were left in situ. The abdomen was closed in layers and estimated blood loss was 150 milliliters. The instituted post-operative management included intravenous ceftriaxone (1g 12-hourly), intravenous gentamicin (80mg 24-hourly) and intravenous metronidazole (500mg 8-hourly) for five days for prophylaxis. Intramuscular tramadol (100mg 8-hourly) was prescribed as analgesia for 24 hours and there after she continued with oral analgesics. Oral ferrous sulphate 200mg 8-hourly was administered to correct anaemia. Additionally, she received intravenous 1L Ringer's Lactate interchangeable with Normal Saline for 24 hours, methotrexate (MTX) (50mg/m2 intramuscular once daily for three days and then continued with oral methotrexate on day 5, 7, 14, 21 and 28 to reduce vascularity and promote absorption of the retained placenta. She was also transfused with an additional unit of blood.
On the second post-operative day, the patient developed a slight fever of 38.5°C. The surgical site did not have abnormal discharge, and further examination revealed nothing significant except for mild tenderness at the incision site. A repeat full blood picture on the third day post-operation showed normocytic, hypochromic anaemia with haemoglobin level of 9.0g/dL, leucocytosis of 12.33 × 10∧3/uL (normal laboratory range 3.5-9.5 x 10∧3/uL) with neutrophilia of 82% (normal laboratory range 40-75%) . Her abdomen was slightly distended and tender at the incision site, with no abnormal discharge from the incision site.
On the fifth post-operative day the patient developed pus-like discharge from the incision site. By this time, she received only a single dose of methotrexate and no additional blood transfusion due to shortages at the facility. The wound was opened up to the subcutaneous layer, and a copious amount of pus was drained, and the wound was cleaned. Pus swab for culture and sensitivity could not be taken due to the patient's financial constraints. An additional diagnosis of septic gapped wound was made. She was prescribed intravenous ciprofloxacin (400mg 12-hourly), metronidazole (500mg 8-hourly) and gentamicin (160mg 24-hourly). She also received one unit of blood transfusion and continued with daily wound dressing. Her condition improved and fourteen days after the initial laparotomy she was scheduled for secondary closure of the wound. On the fifteenth post-operative day, the patient was stable and discharged with oral antibiotics and ferrous sulphate and advised to return for follow-up after two weeks.