A 63-year-old woman presented with recurrent microhematuria. She had no history of flank pain, macrohematuria, hypertension, renal trauma or percutaneous instrumentation. Physical examination was normal and specifically, there was no abdominal bruit on auscultation. She had a blood pressure of RR 130/80 mmHg. Routine laboratory tests were within normal limits. Urinalysis showed no evidence of infection but was positive for erythrocytes. An initial renal ultrasound revealed a discrete hypoechogeneity of the left upper renal pole. An intravenous pyelogram was performed demonstrating an irregular configuration of the upper pole collecting system, which was also seen in a retrograde ureteropyelography . Cystoscopy as well as ureterorenoscopy (URS) revealed no suspicious formation within the bladder or along the left ureter or in the renal pelvis. Tissue around blood clots in the upper calyceal group was biopsied. Cytology and histology did not identify malignant cells. The patient was discharged with a ureteral stent. Four days after the intervention, emergency admission was necessary due to a hemodynamic effective macrohematuria (hemoglobin 70 g/liter) causing a bladder coagulum, which made transurethral evacuation necessary.
Duplex-sonography and computed tomography angiography (CTA) were then carried out and revealed multiple arteriovenous fistulas (AVFs) and erosions into the calyceal system. Intra-arterial digital subtraction angiography (i.a. DSA, Figure ) in the early arterial phase showed arteriovenous fistulas between a subsegmental branch of the renal artery and the renal vein and these were superselectively embolized by 8 Platin-coils with cotton filaments. Angiographically, no significant differences in parenchymal perfusion were noted before and after intervention. Pathologic neoplastic vessels were ruled out radiomorphologically. Five months after intervention, a control computed tomogram showed no recurrent AVF or malignancy. The patient had no further episodes of bleeding or microhematuria.