A 47-year-old man of Swedish origin was referred to a retinal clinic with the suspicion of retinitis pigmentosa and epiretinal membrane (ERM) in both eyes. The patient reported decreased night vision and visual field narrowing starting from 45 years of age, but no metamorphopsias or visual impairment. His father had ERM. There was no other heredity for eye disease or skeletal diseases in first- or second-degree relatives.
The best corrected visual acuity was 0.63 in both eyes (Snellen chart) and the Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study visual acuity was 78 and 75 for the right and the left eye. Examination of the anterior segment was normal with clear lens and no corneal opacity. The vitreous was clear except for a Weiss ring in both eyes. There was blunting of the foveal contour and scattered pigmentary changes were seen in the middle periphery in the form of discrete bone-spicules and pigment clumping . Fundus autofluorescence showed patchy hypoautofluorescence in the middle periphery and more homogenous hyperautofluorescence peripherally in both eyes . Macula cross section on optical coherence tomography showed light ERM with a slightly flattened foveal profile. Changes were more pronounced in the left eye, but without clinically significant cystoid macular edema . Full field electroretinogram on an Espion apparat with Dawson, Trick, and Litzkow electrodes showed moderate to significant amplitude reduction with both scotopic and photopic stimulation. The rod-system was more affected than the cones. Threshold perimetry 24:2 showed peripheric restriction nasally up to 20 degrees and Goldmann kinetic perimetry, which was performed later, confirmed the peripheral narrowing of the visual field . A clinical diagnosis of a mild form of retinitis pigmentosa was made and the patient was referred for genetic testing.
Whole genome sequencing was performed and analyzed as previously described [, ]. Data was analyzed using a panel of 325 genes associated with retinal disease. Two variants previously reported as pathogenic were identified in GNPTG, c.347_349del and c.607dup . Segregation analysis confirmed the presence of one variant in each parent, consistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. The finding was unexpected, since retinitis pigmentosa is not commonly reported as part of the phenotypic spectrum of MLIII gamma.
However, scrutiny of the medical history revealed additional findings compatible with MLIII gamma . The patient had suffered from joint pains and gait abnormality from two years of age. Radiological images were not available but medical records note a hypoplastic L1 vertebra and pronounced lordosis at age 20. The patient underwent bilateral hip replacement surgery at age 30 and bilateral osteoarthritis surgery of several metatarsophalangeal joints at age 40. A mild nonprogressive aortic insufficiency was discovered at age 23. Echocardiography at age 43 showed a structurally normal heart with a tricuspid aortic valve. The left ventricle had normal dimensions and normal systolic function with an estimated ejection fraction of 60%. At age 35 years the patient was diagnosed with hypertension, treated with an ACE-inhibitor. The patient had no intellectual disability. Physical measurements included a weight of 50.4 kg and height of 169.5 cm. The arm span was 184 cm and the symphysis pubis to floor distance was 89.5 cm. The upper/lower segment ratio was 0.89 (reference value for reduced ratio < 0.85) and the arm span/height ratio was 1.09 (reference value for increased ratio > 1.05) .
Biochemical analyses to confirm the diagnosis were performed. The activities of the lysosomal enzymes hexosaminidase A and B, alfa-fucosidase, beta-galactosidase and beta-glucuronidase in plasma and leukocytes were determined by methods using the hydrolysis of synthetic substrates based on 4-methylumbelliferyl. The amount of 4-methylumbelliferon (4-MU) was measured using fluorometry [–].
The activities of certain lysosomal enzymes were highly increased in plasma, compared to the average activity of three healthy age matched controls . Activities in leukocytes for the same enzymes were slightly decreased or within lower normal range when compared to locally established reference intervals based on 20 healthy adults (data not shown). The biochemical pattern is consistent with a mucolipidosis.
Although the patient’s subjective symptomatology remained stable one year after clinical diagnosis, the ophthalmological examination indicated a progressive deterioration of the visual field; threshold perimetry showed a reduction in the Visual Field Index, 90–70% (right eye) and 89–69% (left eye), whereas fundus autofluorescence and optical coherence tomography remained stable. The patient is followed-up by a multidisciplinary team and has received genetic counseling. The patient has given informed consent for publication.