A 31-year-old Asian woman who complained of 'loss of right side vision', headache, dizziness, nausea, paroxysmal eye pain, and blurred vision was seen in our clinic. Humphrey visual field testing with a 4-mm2 Goldmann size III stimulus (0.43°diameter) on a dim background (31.5apostilb) revealed a right homonymous inferior quadrantanopsia . Her medical history was significant with dilatation and curettage for menolipsis and irregular vaginal bleeding two years ago. Pathological examination of her curettage specimen showed hydatidiform mole. Microscopic examination demonstrated that molar vesicles had penetrated deeply into the myometrium giving rise to extensive coagulation necrosis and residual degenerative chorionic villus . On eye examination, the best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 OU. Pupillary responses were normal with no relative afferent pupillary defect. Extraocular eye movements were normal and she did not have any history of ocular diseases. A funduscopic examination showed no papilledema or retinal hemorrhage. Other cranial nerve functions were within normal limits. The remainder of the ophthalmologic examination was all negative.
On medical examination, an ultrasonic test of her pelvis showed 1.0 × 2.0 cm2 echogenic dots in the anterior wall of the lower uterine segment. An MRI of her brain revealed a low signal lesion at the left occipital lobe on a T1-weighted image and high signal mass on a T2-weighted image . An MRI of her chest and abdomen demonstrated no evidence of systemic metastasis. Laboratory tests showed that her serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) level was elevated to 78,187.5 mIU/mL. General gynecologic examination was negative. After hospitalization, this patient was treated with ten cycles of chemotherapy including intrathecal chemotherapy with methotrexate (MTX) and intravenous injection of vincristine, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), cyclophosphamide and etoposide. After the first cycle of chemotherapy, her symptoms related to the increased intracranial pressure disappeared. Her vision field improved slightly after the second cycle of chemotherapy , but showed no further improvement until the completion of ten cycles of the chemotherapy program. A repeat MRI of the brain demonstrated a reduction in the left occipital lobe metastasis and the associated edema. The patient was left with a permanent lesion .