An 18 month-old, latin, male, diagnosed with Rickets and Crouzon syndrome, received pharmacological treatment for rickets during three months. He was referred to neurosurgery due to occipital protrusions and skull deformity. A cranial remodeling was performed, the surgery concluded successfully without complications, a surgical drain was placed and antimicrobial prophylaxis (cephalothin) was given. On the first postoperative day, the patient presented fever (38.6 °C) tachycardia, tachypnea and dyspnea. Laboratory results, showed a white cell count of 3.9 × 103/mm3 and platelets of 82 × 103/mm3. Over the next 48 h, antibiotic therapy was changed to third generation cephalosporin (ceftriaxone) due to the persistence of fever and the presence of diarrhea.
Over the next hours, tissue edema was observed in the cephalic region at the surgical wound. A Computed Tomography scan of the head was performed, an infiltrative soft tissue edema with a probable hemorrhagic component was observed. Antibiotic therapy was adjusted to ceftriaxone and clindamycin due to probable infection of the surgical wound. Two days later, bilateral areas of ecchymosis developed in the cervico-maxillary region. A blister in the right cheek spontaneously ruptured and drained thick yellowish material. Indurated skin and violaceous and well delimited lesions were noticed in some areas with scab formation (A). The antibiotic therapy was changed to meropenem and vancomycin. Despite of the use of broad spectrum intravenous antibiotics his clinical condition worsened. A new clinical examination showed weak pulses, poor skin perfusion and respiratory failure. The patient was placed in mechanical ventilatory support and he was diagnosed with septic shock.
Over the next 48 h, necrotic areas developed in the occipital, frontal, parietal, cervical and upper back regions (B), a new head computed tomography scan of the head showed soft tissue edema and a subgaleal fluid collection with defined borders. The gram stain of the cervical wound revealed gram positive short bacilli suggestive of anaerobes. Surgical lavage and debridation of necrotic tissue up to the muscular plane and some areas of the head were required for the next days, the clinical condition improved, an increase of the platelet count was observed up to 214 × 103/mm3 allowing the decrease of ventilatory parameters.
Regardless of the clinical improvement, the patient persisted with fever and hemodynamic instability. An angioresonance showed an inflammatory process in the bilateral frontotemporal occipital areas with epidural, right parietal and periorbital fluid collections, a subdural empyema in the left parietal area, and a suggestive image of temporal artery thrombosis. Candida albicans was isolated from a neck tissue sample, Staphylococcus epidermidis was isolated from a central venous catheter culture and Acinetobacter baumannii was isolated from a head tissue sample in different times. Antibiotic therapy with meropenem and vamcomycin was continued and fluconazole was added to the treatment.
After multiple surgical lavages and debridement of necrotic tissue and skin grafting of the neck and cheeks, the patient showed clinical improvement and was able to extubate.
In order to cover the skull and because of a very large uncovered area, an artificial skin graft was placed in the temporoparietal area, where after few days an infection developed presenting a green secretion under the graft where Pseudomonas aeruginosa was isolated, ciprofloxacin was added to the treatment according to the sensitivity pattern (C). The patient presented acute osteomyelitis of the frontoparietal area and surgical lavages and bone debridement was required, the green secretion persisted despite of the treatment. VAC (vacuum assisted closure) therapy and hyperbaric oxygen therapy was added to the management.
The antibiotics, surgical lavages, VAC and hyperbaric oxygen continued until the cranial area was clean and autologous skin grafts from the leg were placed in the skull until the whole skull was covered with tissue and skin (D). After 2 months of intensive care, the patient was discharged from the hospital with oral ciprofloxacin to complete the treatment for cranial osteomyelitis in good general conditions (E).
The patient continued with ambulatory lavages of the head, one month later the patient presented a fistula with yellowish and sometimes green secretion on the right temporal area, a bone scintigraphy with Indium111 and Technetium99 was performed; the bone scan images showed an abnormal increased uptake of the Indium111 in the right temporal region of the skull, confirming chronic osteomyelitis (F). The patient was admitted to the hospital for surgical resection of the affected bone, surgical lavage and skin graft; 2 strains of multi-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa with different patterns of sensitivity were isolated from the lesion; one was only sensitive to tobramycin which was not available in México and the other one was sensitive to piperacillin/tazobactam. A synergic testing method (the checkerboard) was used to measure in vitro efficacies of various antimicrobial combinations with intermediate sensitivity against the multi-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Ceftazidime and gentamycin were synergistic and together with piperacillin/tazobactam were used to treat the patient during hospitalization. A subclavian catheter was placed and the patient was discharged from the hospital and received ambulatory antibiotic treatment for 6 weeks. One week later after the discharge tobramycin was imported from United States of America and gentamicin was exchanged for tobramycin. The patient fully recovered and is in good condition, there is bone growth in the frontoparietal area.