An 18-year-old single Middle Eastern Caucasian woman presented to our emergency department with a history of central abdominal pain, colicky in nature, associated with vomiting and constipation for five days. No other complaints were reported. She was, however, admitted to hospital 18 months previously for the same complaint, and treated conservatively as a case of sub-acute intestinal obstruction. She lived with her parents, had no evident psychiatric illness, drug history or known allergy, and had no prior surgical history.
A clinical examination revealed that our patient was fully conscious, mildly dehydrated and neither pale nor jaundiced. Her body weight, heart rate, blood pressure and respiratory rate were all within normal ranges. She had an obvious asymmetrical abdominal distension with a centrally inverted umbilicus, and no scar was observed. Her abdomen was soft on palpation, with a left hypochondrial intra-abdominal immobile mass, extending to her epigastric region, measuring about 16cm × 10cm. Another mobile oval mass was also seen in her left iliac fossa, measuring about 8cm × 5cm. Both masses had well-defined round edges and smooth surfaces, and were not tender, compressible or pulsatile. Her bowel sounds were exaggerated and high pitched, and both her rectum (by digital examination) and hernia orifices were empty. Laboratory results showed the following: packed cell volume, 36%; white blood cells, 8×109 cells/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 16mm/hour; blood urea, 6.2mmol/L; serum creatinine, 110μmol/L; serum potassium, 4.2mmol/L; serum sodium, 138mmol/L.
An abdominal X-ray showed a well-defined, rounded soft tissue density mass in her central abdominal region, with calcification . An abdominal ultrasound showed a central abdominal oval lesion, with peripheral calcification and gaseous bowel distension; the lesion was not related to her liver or spleen. A computed tomography scan was not performed as it was not available in our emergency department.
Conservative treatment was initiated by stopping oral feeding, placing a nasogastric tube, and starting intravenous fluids. Our patient received antibiotic treatment (cefotaxime 1g and metronidazole 500mg) and was put under observation. Her condition deteriorated, with her temperature reaching 37.8°C 12 hours after admission, and her pulse rate increasing to 120 beats/minute, although her blood pressure remained within normal range (110/70mmHg). A physical examination of her abdomen showed mild tenderness in her lower abdomen, and ‘tinkling’ bowel sounds. The nasogastric tube collected 300cm3 of watery fluid over 12 hours. Explorative laparotomy identified two masses, one in her stomach and another in her ileum. We used a combination of gastrotomy and enterotomy to remove the trichobezoars from both her stomach and the ileum . The closure was performed by double layers (inner absorbable 2/0 vicryl and outer 2/0 silk).