A 20-year-old Asian man was admitted with a three day history of central abdominal pain and decreased appetite but no history of vomiting or constipation. Examination of his abdomen revealed mild tenderness to the right of the umbilicus and bowel sounds were normal. All blood results including inflammatory markers were normal and an abdominal X-ray did not show anything unusual. He was started on conservative management.
The next day, the patient’s abdominal pain increased. He was tender in both the iliac fossae on clinical examination with no rebound tenderness or guarding. He however settled down by evening and was well the next day. The following day (4th day since admission), the pain recurred and he started vomiting. He was passing flatus but no faeces. On examination, he had a slightly distended abdomen and was tender on the right side of his abdomen. There was no guarding or rigidity. Blood tests showed rising inflammatory markers (neutrophil leucocytosis) (White cell count - 12.2 and C - reactive protein 22). An abdominal X-ray showed dilated small bowel loops. He proceeded to have a CT scan of his abdomen which showed evidence of small bowel obstruction with a cut off at the mid ileum .
In view of his clinical picture, a decision was taken to perform a diagnostic laparoscopy. This however had to be converted to a laparotomy due to significant dilatation of small bowel loops. Operative findings included dilated small bowel loops till the mid-ileum where an ischaemic stricture with perforation of the small bowel had resulted as a consequence of an omental band. This omental band had encircled the small bowel and was adherent to a nodule arising from one of the appendices epiploicae. The appendix was slightly congested. The band was divided and a wedge resection of the small bowel was carried out. The nodule to which the omental band had stuck to was excised and sent for histology. The appendix was removed.
The patient developed a small pelvic collection post -operatively which was managed conservatively with antibiotics. He was discharged from hospital 12 days after surgery and did not have any further complications.
The histology of the excised nodule showed an infarcted appendix epiploicae. Small bowel showed acute ischaemic ulceration with focal infarction extending through the bowel wall and the appendix was normal.