A 72 year-old Iranian woman with Persian ethnicity presented with a one-month history of non-bloody diarrhea, abdominal pain, and low grade fever. She also complained of anal pain in sitting position and weight loss of about 10 kg over the last 6 months. The patient was a known case of end stage renal disease (ESRD) since three years ago which was on hemodialysis. Since last year, she is consuming 15 mg/day prednisolone with the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis.
On her first visit, one month before, she admitted with the same clinical presentation and was treated with intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole. Following the initial treatment, frequency of the diarrhea subsided and she was discharged with partial improvement. During follow up, three weeks later, non-bloody diarrhea, abdominal pain mostly in lower quadrants, nausea, vomiting, and low grade fever recurred. On physical examination, she was fully conscious with a blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg, pulse rate of 120 beats/min and temperature of 38°Centigrade. On abdominal examination, no abdominal distension was evident. Frequency of bowel sounds was increased in auscultation. Except for a slight tenderness just in left lower quadrant of abdomen, other related exams during palpation were normal. On digital rectal examination findings were mild perianal erythema in addition to skin tags. Changes in the joints due to rheumatoid arthritis were also notable.
On further evaluation, laboratory tests revealed an anemia, raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine. Blood cultures were negative. Hematologic laboratory tests of the patient have been summarized in Table . Tumor marker levels were also measured: CEA = 5.4 ng/ml (NL = up to 4.3), CA125 = 99 U/ml (NL = up to 37), CA19-9 = 42 ng/ml (NL = up to 37).
Urine and Stool specimens were also sent for analysis which showed PH = 5, Blood = trace, red blood cells (RBC) = 2-3 hpf, white blood cells (WBC) = 2-3 hpf, Bacteria = rare, Yeast = rare, Amorph crystals = moderate in urine analysis. Stool examination showed WBC = 2-3 hpf, no blood and RBC. Urine and stool cultures both were negative.
Abdominal and pelvic ultrasonogrpahy reported a large cyst (170 × 91 mm) within pelvis with pressure effect and forward displacement of uterus and bladder; the cyst consisted of liquid pattern with internal echo and gas patterns. Moreover, both kidneys had a decreased parenchymal thickness and increased parenchymal echo with moderate bilateral hydronephrosis.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of abdomen and pelvis with oral contrast (with a technique of Spiral multislice thin section scan) revealed a large local air-fluid level within the culdesac area . Multiple pulmonary subpleural nodules and multiple small left para-aortic adenopathy at the renal or infra-renal level were found. Both kidneys were atrophic and hydronephrotic.
Colonoscopy showed multiple diverticulae in colon. Pathologic examination of the obtained specimens from rectum and transverse colon mucosa revealed a mild edema and inflammatory cell infiltration in the lamina propria without any evidence of malignancy.
Laparoscopy was performed with the possible diagnosis of pelvis abscess due to perforation and fistulization of colonic diverticulae. The operation revealed a large pelvic abscess which was located between rectosigmoid colon and uterus. In addition to the abscess drainage, rectosigmoid resection (Hartman operation) and hysterectomy was performed as a result of severe tissue necrosis. Histopathologic evaluation of the resected tissue revealed chronic inflammation without malignancy in favor of diverticulitis and abscess formation.
The patient was followed for the next 6 months by monthly visits during which the patient remained symptom free. Afterwards, the patient was advised to attend the follow up visits every 6 months.