A 21 year old female patient, newly diagnosed with Graves’ disease was referred from a peripheral hospital with a two week history of progressive yellowing of the eyes associated with generalised abdominal distension, marked right hypochondrial pain and mild generalised pruritis. Ten days prior to her admission, she developed worsening exertional dyspnea, easy fatigability, bilateral lower limb swelling , palpitations, orthopnea , profound weight loss and generalised muscular weakness and heat intolerance. She had been amenorrheic for 4 months and was not taking any medications. She had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption.
Clinical examination on admission revealed a thin, diaphoretic and mildly agitated lady. Her axillary temperature was 39.2°C. She had jaundice with bilateral pitting lower limb oedema, a fine resting tremor, exophthalmos and eyelid lag. The thyroid gland was palpable, diffusely enlarged and non tender with a bruit. Cardiovascular examination revealed a rapid, large volume and regular pulse of 140 beats/min with an isolated systolic hypertension of 150/70 mmHg. The jugular venous pressure was raised and neck veins engorged. She had a heaving apex beat displaced to the 6th intercostal space anterior axillary line with a gallop and a soft apical systolic murmur. Abdominal and respiratory examinations revealed a tender hepatomegaly with ascites and reduced breathe sounds on the right infra axillary and scapular areas respectively.
A chest radiograph done revealed a cardiomegaly with a right sided pleural effusion. An abdominal Ultra sound scan done showed an enlarged liver with a normal echo texture, ascites, normal biliary ducts and gall bladder. A thyroid ultra sound scan was not done. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia, with a rate of 142 beats/min and left ventricular hypertrophy by voltage criteria. The Echocardiography showed globally dilated cardiac chambers with moderate mitral and tricuspid regurgitation, an elevated ejection fraction of 82% (40-70%) and moderate pulmonary hypertension.
The laboratory investigations done are summarised in Table below.
Thyroid function tests revealed a suppressed thyroid stimulating hormone level (TSH) of <0.005 uIUml (0.27–4.2), raised free thyroxine levels of 267.5 nmol/L (normal range: 66–181) and free triiodothyronine of 10 nmol/L (normal range: 1.3-3.1).
A thyroid nuclear scan showed a diffuse homogenous increased uptake of radioactive iodine with no background uptake. Thyroid stimulating hormone receptor antibody, Antithyroglobulin and antithyroid peroxidase antibodies were not done due to financial constraints.
An impression of thyroid storm due to untreated Graves’ disease with cholestatic liver injury, high output congestive heart failure due to thyrotoxic heart disease and acute kidney injury was made. The patient’s Burch-Wartofsky score for thyroid storm was 90 .
She was started on oral carbimazole, Prednisolone, Propranolol, Lugol’s iodine, intra venous fluid replacement, oral anti histamines for the pruritis, oral frusemide and Captopril for the heart failure.
The patient was discharged 10 days later with great improvement and on a follow-up assessment 10 weeks later; she was feeling generally well with resolution of the jaundice and clinically euthyroid. A repeat electrocardiography, echocardiography, renal and liver function tests were all normal.