We encountered a 5-year-old boy who had two severe episodes of anaphylaxis (at the age of 2 and 3 years) after he had ingested small amounts of CM products. Both times, he experienced facial erythema, dyspnea, hypotension, and loss of consciousness, and recovered after two epinephrine injections. He also received a glucocorticoid inhaler and leukotriene receptor antagonist for mild asthma.
The patient was initially tested for sIgE against CM, casein, and β-lactoglobulin using the ImmunoCAP assay system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Uppsala, Sweden), and also underwent a skin prick test (SPT) and oral food challenge (OFC) for CM. Before the rush OIT, the total IgE level was 654 IU/mL, and the sIgE levels for CM, casein, and β-lactoglobulin were 77.0, 86.2, and 12.0 kUA/L, respectively. The SPT showed a wheal (diameter, 20 mm) and erythema (diameter, 50 mm). During the OFC, he reacted to 0.2 mL of CM and presented with dyspnea and laryngospasms. Thereafter, after we received ethical clearance from the ethics committee of Kansai Medical University (No. 502) for treatment of OMB, the patient was given 150 mg (10 mg/kg) of OMB every 2 weeks for 8 weeks, according to the procedure of a previous study for asthma . At the 9th week, he was admitted to hospital for the rush phase of the OIT according to our previously described procedure . In the OFC, he presented laryngospasms and cough in reaction to 5 mL CM. Then, the initial CM dose was set as 0.5 mL. After 14 days, he was able to ingest 200 mL of CM with only one adverse reaction, focal flush, during this phase.
The patient continued to ingest a daily dose of 200 mL CM until there was no adverse reaction to this dose, after which the patient was discharged, but allowed to continue the daily dose of 200 mL CM. During this maintenance phase of rush OIT, 150 mg OMB was continued every 2 weeks. Subsequently, the sIgE levels increased, whereas the end-point titration values from the SPT decreased gradually. The SPT was negative when the patient was tested 1 year later . At this point, the OMB administration was discontinued. Ingestion of CM was continued during the next 5 months, and then stopped for another 2 weeks. The patient underwent the OFC after this period, and the results were negative. Throughout the rush OIT, including the period after the discontinuation of OMB, the patient only experienced five adverse reactions with daily CM ingestion, each with a grade of < 2 according to Sampson's criteria of anaphylaxis . His quality of life dramatically improved after the combined treatment with OMB and rush OIT; he can now consume cheese and other milk products (e.g., cheesecake, and ice cream), and is able to exercise after ingesting these food products.