A 72-year-old Chinese woman with homocystinuria presented with a bilateral painless blurring of vision for several decades. She said that the problem had occurred since childhood; however, it had remained untreated. The patient did not complain of metamorphopsia or recent vision deterioration. The patient did not also complain of any other systemic symptoms, such as chest tightness, palpitation, dizziness, or headache. The patient had no history of trauma or surgery, high blood pressure, diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, coronary atherosclerotic heart disease, Marfan syndrome, or Marchesani syndrome. The patient’s parents were close relatives.
On examination, her height and weight were 165 cm and 66.2 kg, respectively. The best-corrected visual acuity was 20/300 OD and 20/250 OS, with a refractive status of +5.25/−2.75 × 25 OD and +5.75/−3.25 × 154 OS. The anterior segment showed the absence of lenses in both eyes. Fundus examination revealed optic atrophy, staphyloma, and chorioretinal atrophy. The initial intraocular pressure was 16 mm Hg OD and 17 mm Hg OS, and the axial length was 31.11 mm OD and 29.33 mm OS. B-ultrasound showed that the lenses were located in the vitreous cavity in both eyes (red arrows, ). Orbital computed tomography (CT) demonstrated free-floating lenses in the posterior poles (yellow arrows, ), and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed a lamellar macular hole and retinoschisis in the right eye .
The plasma total homocysteine concentration was 49.1 μmol/L (normal 0–15). The X-ray bone density test showed osteoporosis (−2.9 g/cm2), and a slender appearance with arachnodactyly was not observed. All other investigations were normal.
The patient was diagnosed with homocystinuria, osteoporosis, ectopia lentis, lamellar macular hole, and retinoschisis. The patient was treated with vitamin B6 and folic acid. She chose to defer surgery and was advised to undergo physical and ophthalmic examinations every 6 months. During the 3-year follow period, her condition remained stable. The patient did not provide any other chief complaints. Her intraocular pressure was normal, and SD-OCT images remained unchanged.