A 37-year-old Caucasian woman, gravida 2 para 0, with a history of a previous miscarriage due to an unknown cause, was referred to our second-level center at 22 gestational weeks for a suspicious fetal intrathoracic mass and left CDH at a second-trimester ultrasound (US) screening. Her previous medical and family histories were unremarkable; she was a nonsmoker, had not consumed any alcohol during the pregnancy, and had never been exposed to drugs or toxins. The measurements of the dating examination in the first trimester were consistent with the dates of the last menstrual period, the nuchal translucency was normal, and toxoplasmosis, other agents, rubella, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex (TORCH) screening was negative. Our US examination was performed via the use of a Voluson E10 scanner (GE Healthcare Ultrasound, Milwaukee, WI, USA) equipped with a curved linear array transabdominal transducer (2–5 MHz). The fetal heart rate was within the normal range, fetal movements were visualized, the placenta was identified on the anterior portion of the uterus and showed a normal insertion, and the amniotic fluid, as well as the Doppler indices, were within normal limits. The fetal biometry was consistent with the gestational age (GA). An intrathoracic left hypoechoic mass with a maximum diameter of 26.8 mm was seen .
The heart was displaced to the right (mediastinal shift), in normal levocardia. Furthermore, the left renal fossa was empty. In the left parasagittal view, the left kidney appeared lifted up toward the thorax .
Power Doppler showed the abnormal course of the left renal artery, which started from the abdominal aorta and ended in the thoracic kidney .
The scan did not show a clear herniation of the stomach, bowel, or liver. The lung-to-head circumference ratio (LHR) was greater than 1.4, and the observed-to-expected (o/e) LHR was 52.1%. The left lung parenchyma beside the mass was hyperechoic . The left renal biometry and echogenicity were normal, and no pyelectasia was found . The right kidney was normal, and no other anomalies were identified. Fetal echocardiography verified normal conotruncal anatomy, normal left and right ventricular cavity size as well as systolic function, and sinus rhythm with 1:1 atrioventricular conduction. Our clinical suspicion was of a left CDH and ITK. Furthermore, we suspected an association with a congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation. The patient underwent amniocentesis, and the traditional karyotype as well as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) array showed a normal female karyotype (46, XX). Subsequently, prenatal management included serial US examinations, including biophysical profile scoring, to monitor fetal growth and assess the fetal heart. On subsequent scans, no changes in the US characteristics of the ectopic kidney were found, and the fetal growth, amniotic fluid, and Doppler indices remained within the normal range for GA. The fetus did not develop hydrothorax. The pregnant woman was referred for fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 30 gestational weeks, which confirmed the US suspicion of left CDH in association with bowel and left kidney herniation. After 34 weeks of gestation, cardiotocography was performed weekly to monitor fetal wellbeing, which remained good. The patient was referred to a third-level center for delivery. A female infant weighing 3100 g was delivered via a spontaneous vaginal delivery at 37 weeks of gestation; her Apgar scores at 1 and 5 min were 8 and 9, respectively. The neonate cried immediately after birth, and she was pink and well-perfused. Nevertheless, she developed respiratory distress in the delivery room and required intubation. Chest radiography confirmed the prenatal suspicion of CDH, including bowel loops and the left kidney, with a mediastinal shift of the heart. Echocardiography showed normal heart function and morphology, with no pulmonary hypertension. Due to the hemodynamic stability, the newborn underwent non-urgent surgery on her second day of life through a transverse laparotomy. Surgical exploration confirmed the left kidney with the hernia sac. The organs herniated in the thoracic cavity included small bowel loops, the colon, and the left kidney. The intrathoracic ectopic right kidney was covered with retroperitoneum. After the hernia sac was excised, the small intestine, colon, and ITK were reduced with no difficulties into the abdominal cavity, in a near-to-normal site, without complication or hemodynamic changes. The defect of the diaphragm was primarily repaired using interrupted non-absorbable sutures. A chest tube was placed in the left hemithorax and removed on day four. The corrected kidney showed regular function, with a slight biometric reduction. The postoperative course was uneventful; the baby was extubated on day two and discharged from the hospital after about two months in good condition. She has remained asymptomatic at subsequent follow-ups 1 year after discharge, with normal physical as well as mental development and without any long-term complications, not requiring further monitoring.