A 24-year old male elite triathlete presented at a sports medicine clinic five days after an Ironman triathlon race, complaining of lethargy, localised pleuritic chest pain, loss of appetite and race underperformance. On examination he was tachycardic and exhibited decreased lower left lung air entry accompanied by crackling. A chest x-ray was ordered and this revealed a left sided basal pneumonia associated with a para-pneumonic effusion . His blood investigations were unremarkable with a white cell count of 7.7, neutrophils of 4.18, eosinophils of 0.82, lymphocytes of 2.09, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 21 and a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 9. Besides, his pneumonia severity index was <51[ (lowest risk group). Hence, he was treated on an outpatient basis and was prescribed oral cefuroxime 500mg BD for one week, to which he responded well.
This triathlete's medical episode started eight weeks prior to his Ironman race (3.8km of swimming, 180km of biking and 42.2km of running), when during intense training runs he started complaining of recurrent interscapular pain in deep inspiration. Two weeks later, after completing training sessions that lasted more than five hours, he developed a fever of up to 40°C. The fever subsided within an hour following administration of self-prescribed oral paracetamol 1g.
Two to three weeks prior to the event he developed a persistent dry cough and decreased appetite, associated with an unremitting fever of 39°C, unresponsive to paracetamol. The symptoms were accompanied by shortness of breath on exertion, lethargy and left sided pleuritic chest pain. There was no relevant previous medical history, including no previous respiratory conditions. His family physician prescribed oral co-amoxiclav 1g BD for one week. He responded well to this antibiotic.
On race day, the triathlete had an uneventful swim and the initial bike segment went smoothly, adhering to his pre-planned race schedule. However, after 120km on the bike segment he felt unusually lethargic and by the 13th km of the running segment he developed bouts of loose watery diarrhoea, causing him to stop at approximately every 3km.
He reported having chills and rigors, despite an ambient temperature of around 22°C and he resorted to walking the route in order to complete the race. His diarrhoea settled spontaneously on completion of the race, and no medications were ingested. Following the chest X-ray findings and the cefuroxime regime, blood investigations were repeated after two weeks, showing a white cell count of 6.0 (neutrophils 2.8, eosinophils 0.4), ESR 4, CRP <6.
After 8 weeks of recovery, the triathlete started training gradually at intensities that were initially less than 60% of his maximum heart rate. These training sessions were incrementally increased in duration and frequency following a set training programme agreed with the treating sports physician. A chest CT scan was taken 3 months after full resolution of the symptoms as the athlete developed a one week history of similar pleuritic chest pain on exertion. The scan showed residual thickening of the lower part of the left oblique fissure and focal thickening of the left diaphragmatic pleura. The pain was attributed to an increased stretching of scarred lung tissues and this resolved over time.
He has since this episode completed a further three ironman races with no similar episodes or adverse effects.