A 21-year-old woman who presented with dyspnea, tachycardia, and hypotension was transferred to our emergency department.
She was admitted to the local hospital for 2 d for upper abdominal discomfort and constipation.
She had a history of cesarean delivery a year before.
She had no history of family history of any heart disease.
Her initial vital signs were as follows: Blood pressure of 137/67 mmHg, pulse rate of 184 beats per min, respiration of 40 breaths per minute, and a body temperature of 36.7 ℃. Other general examinations were not remarkable. Atrial fibrillation was detected, and the rate still increased even after the administration of digitalis. Her systolic blood pressure suddenly dropped, so she received electric defibrillation at 100 J, and her hemodynamic status was stabilized with a sinus heart rhythm.
Remarkable laboratory findings were highly elevated levels of liver enzymes, i.e., aspartate aminotransferase of 3381 U/L (reference, < 37 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase of 1197 U/L (reference, < 41 U/L); extremely increased B-type natriuretic peptide level of 2233 pg/mL (reference range, 0-100 pg/mL); mild hypokalemia, with serum potassium concentration of 3.2 mmol/L (reference range, 3.3-5.1 mmol/L); white blood cell count of 11710 × 103/mm3; and C-reactive protein of 10.7 mg/L. Other than that, no abnormal findings, including cardiac enzymes, were found.
Her initial chest X-ray imaging showed remarkable cardiomegaly and bilateral pulmonary edema . The initial transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated dilated left atrium and LV and severe LV systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction (EF) of 24% . Mild mitral regurgitation and a small amount of pericardial effusion were found. On day 7 of hospitalization, cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging revealed endocardial edematous change and delayed gadolinium enhancement from the interventricular septum to the inferior wall of the LV . The myocardial perfusion of contrast was normal on CMR. Liver ultrasonography to rule out severe hepatic illness revealed only mild-to-moderate fatty liver.