A 16-year-old obese male, with no medical history, presented in emergency room with a closed trauma of the left knee secondary to a traffic accident. He was hit by a car while biking. The mechanism of the injury was a hyperextension and a valgus stress of the left knee. General examination revealed no other significant injury. On physical examination, the patient was totally unable to step on or move his left lower limb. There was a significant swelling around his left knee with no skin defect. The pulses of the A. poplitea, the Arteria tibialis posterior, and the Arteria dorsalis pedis were well palpable. The capillary filling of the toes was present. No motor or sensitive defect was found. Plain radiographs of the left knee showed a Salter and Harris Type 1 physeal fracture of the distal femur with an important displacement of the metaphyseal fragment . At that time, in front of the spectacular femoral injury, the diagnosis of a Type 3 slightly displaced physeal fracture of the proximal tibia was missed. The patient was operated in the same day. Under general anesthesia, the patient was placed in supine position with the left lower limb pulled in its axis using a fracture table. After a gentle continuous traction, a downward pressure was applied on the distal epiphysis of the femur with the tight been locked. The reduction was found good when checked using the fluoroscopy. Fixation was done using two crossing 24 mm K-wires. A long leg cast was made. Post-operative radiographs showed a good reduction of the distal femur . At this time, the tibial injury was diagnosed. The slight displacement of the epiphyseal fragment of distal tibia was accepted. Close physical observation in the first post-operative 24 h found no secondary vascular thrombosis. The cast was kept for 6 weeks. After the same period, healing of the fracture was obtained , hardware was removed, and full weight bearing was allowed. 2 years later, the patient was pain free, with a complete range of motion of the left knee. No angular deformity or shortening of the left lower limb were noted .