A previously healthy, 48-year-old man with an unremarkable drug history and family history was brought to the accident and emergency department following falling from a height of about 15 ft, during which he landed on his back. He complained of severe backache with bilateral lower limb numbness. Neurological examination revealed paraplegia with lower limb muscle power 0/5. The sensory level was detected at T12 Abdominal examination revealed moderate epigastric and central abdominal tenderness with loss of liver dullness. His blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg, his Pulse rate was 80 beats per minute and his Respiratory rate was normal. The Focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) scan was positive for a moderate amount of free fluid, but solid organ injuries were not detected. Noncontrast computer tomography of the spine showed multiple vertebral fractures involving T12, L2, and L3. T12 body and right lamina fracture complicated with retropulsion of a fractured segment causing canal narrowing. L2 and L3 body fractures were undisplaced fractures . Magnetic resonance imaging study of pan-spine showed a compression fracture of T12 leading to compression myelopathy with cord edema .
Emergency laparotomy was done immediately after admission by the Casualty surgeon of the accident and emergency department.2 cm long proximal jejunal perforation at 12 cm from the duodenojejunal junction in the antimesenteric border has been identified with moderate peritoneal contamination . The solid-organ injury was not detected. The stomach, Jejunum, and large intestine were normal. Primary repair of the perforation was done with an interrupted Sero-submucosal technique using 3.0 polyglycolic acid sutures.
The patient was admitted to the ICU following laparotomy. Standard spinal trauma care was provided with strict bed rest, compressive stockings, and nutritional support. Spinal fixation was performed ten days after laparotomy. Exploration of the thoracolumbar spine was done by an Orthopedic Surgeon of the orthopedic and trauma department using a posterior approach. T12 vertebral body and right lamina fracture identified. Spinal decompression and short segment single-level pedicle screw fixation was done . But Lumbar fractures were not fixed due to extensive dissection and the absence of cord compression.
Rehabilitation was started immediately after spinal fixation. Initially, limb and chest exercises followed by spinal rehabilitation protocol were carried out. Postoperative neurological recovery was not detected below the level of the spinal cord compression and the patient is satisfied with his recovery and mobile in a wheelchair.