A 48 year old male with a long history of smoking presented with weight loss, anorexia and pelvic pain. He had a significant past history of a radical cystectomy ten years prior for a large multi-focal non-invasive, low-grade papillary (Ta) transitional cell carcinoma. The stated indications for cystectomy were large size of the mass and the anticipated inability to perform a complete resection. The pathological specimen which was reviewed at our institution was described as a low-grade non invasive papillary multifocal transitional cell carcinoma (TCC). The margins were clear and fourteen uninvolved lymph nodes were submitted. Postoperatively the patient recovered well and was under surveillance without any disease till above mentioned complaint. The patient's past history was also significant for a straddle injury requiring open surgical repair that occurred approximately 2 years prior to the diagnosis of bladder cancer.
Physical examination revealed a thin uncomfortable male with no other abnormal findings. Basic laboratory investigations were within normal limits. Imaging studies with CT scan of abdomen and pelvis revealed a right sided large heterogeneous pelvic mass with an area of central necrosis and evidence of bone destruction (right acetabular invasion) and distal rectal involvement . There was no evidence of disease spread beyond this destructive pelvic mass.
A CT guided biopsy of this mass revealed a low-grade urothelial carcinoma. Cisplatin based chemotherapy along with growth factor support was administered [dose dense methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin and cisplatin (MVAC)]. After 3 uncomplicated cycles no tumor response was achieved. It was then decided that a curative intent en bloc resection represented the best option for patient.
The patient underwent surgical resection of the mass requiring a right hemipelvectomy, end colostomy and a myocutaneous flap closure with penile and scrotal reconstruction. The final pathology revealed an urothelial cell tumor with predominantly low-grade morphologic features, with focal areas of high grade tumor seen . The tumor invaded bone and soft tissue in a broad-based pushing fashion. The tumor formed nests with infiltration in the cortical bone, dissecting the pelvic soft tissue. There was no lymphovascular invasion and surgical margins were not involved. The patient is free from disease recurrence after more than one year following surgery.