An 81-year-old woman presented to our hospital with ST-elevation acute myocardial infarction (STEMI) and medical history of hypertension. Her vital signs were stable, and physical examination showed no specific abnormality. The patient had no family history of cardiovascular disease. Emergent coronary angiography (CAG) showed 99% and 90% stenosis in the left circumflex artery (LCx) and left anterior descending artery (LAD), respectively . Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was performed for lesions in the LCx and LAD, and a permanent polymer everolimus-eluting stent (PP-EES, Xience Alpine, Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA) and BP-SES were implanted respectively, using intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS) . IVUS demonstrated well-expanded (minimal stent areas: 4.5 mm2 in the LCx and 6.1 mm2 in the LAD) and well-apposed struts without any edge dissection. Optimal medical therapy, including antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel (75 mg/day) and aspirin (100 mg/day), was initiated, and she was discharged without any complication.
Eight months after the procedure, the patient developed non-STEMI (NSTEMI). Emergent CAG showed total occlusion of the PP-EES in the LCx and diffuse ISR in the BP-SES in the LAD, and IVUS demonstrated a heterogeneous low-echoic area localized within the BP-SES . We successfully treated the ISR in the BP-SES with a paclitaxel-coated balloon. Staged PCI for the ISR in the PP-EES was performed but ended in failure because of the inability to cross the lesion via several techniques. The patient was compliant with the medications, and her risk factors for coronary artery disease were well controlled. Blood test results showed no sign of systemic inflammation or infection, and the patch test for any metal allergy showed no significant finding. In order to explore the cause of the ISR, we performed fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) with positron emission tomography (PET), and increased FDG uptake (maximum standardized uptake value = 3.3) was observed around the BP-SES . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) revealed high signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) around the BP-SES and a late gadolinium-enhanced area around the BP-SES and PP-EES, i.e. ‘peri-stent late gadolinium enhancement (LGE)’ ( and ).
Twelve months after the first admission, the patient was admitted again because of NSTEMI with re-ISR in the BP-SES . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) demonstrated diffuse-layered neointimal hyperplasia with microvascularization, macrophage accumulation, and peri-strut low-intensity area (PLIA) . The patient was repeatedly admitted for NSTEMI with ISR in the BP-SES and was eventually treated with coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). Subsequently, her cardiac function was preserved, and no additional coronary events were observed after a 1-year follow-up.