A two-day old preterm boy (29 weeks GA),weighing 1.240 kg, Apgar score 5/6, was referred from the maternity ward to the intensive care unit for breathing difficulties and low birthweight. Antenatal ultrasonography of abdomen in 27th week GA revealed several hypoechoic formationscorresponding to dilated stomach and small bowel. The quantity of amniotic fluid was normal with minor hyperechoic changes that may have corresponded to the presence of blood in amniotic fluid . Cytogenetic analysis of amniotic fluid established the presence of a normal chromosome set for male sex. Upon admission, the male infantshowed tachydyspnea, his breathing was irregular, he was cyanotic with livid acrama, displayed reduced spontaneous activity and provoked reactivity, feeble cry, discontent, occasional groaning. The abdomen was below the level of the thorax, soft, mobile on respiration. External genitalia was typical for male gender and anal opening was normally situated. There were no deformities of extremities. The tonus was lower, the activity slowed, reflexes were displayed. Due to respiratory instability upon admission, he was intubated and kept on ventilator support. Nasogastric tube was placed and drained bilious aspirate. Plain radiograph of the abdomen showed the classic dilatation of the proximal duodenum and stomach with total absence of distal bowel gas . Echocardiographic and clinical findings of the heart were within the physiological limits. Following the initial stabilisation, the right transversal supraumbilical laparotomy was used to access the abdominal cavity. A verification was made of an extremely dilated atretic part of the second portion of duodenum with the absence of the third and fourth portion of duodenum and superior mesenteric artery, as well as the apple–peelconfiguration of the remaining small bowel that isvascularised by arteriaileocecalis . Continuity apple-peel and jejunum after incision was checked with orogastrictubesize 4 withthe attempt of passage of saline solution. Elimination of the solution was slowed with the absence ofintestinesdilatation, hence the frozen section biopsy of full thickness of extremely thin wall of the intestine was suggested. This was the material for histopathology analysisfollowed by absence of ganglion cells.
Resection of the jejunum and initial portion of the ileum was done up to the vascularisation level of arteria ileocecalis, while preserving cca 10 cm of terminal ileum and ileocecal valve that indicated microscopically normal bowel morphology. Transversal incision on the dilated duodenum was used to access the lumen and to identify by the back wall hyperemic Papilla Vateri, from which bilious aspirate was drained by the manual stimulation of thenormally positioned gallbladder. The continuity of digestive tube was established by the end-to-end duodeno- ileal anastomosis by using polyglactin absorbable suture 6. 0 as sewing material. A size 6 transanastomotic silicone orogastric tube was placed. Postoperatively, the baby was kept on ventilator support. He succumbed on the third postoperative day due to cardiorespiratory failure. The autopsy confirmed the clinical cause of death through the presence of hyaline membranes in alveoli, as well as preserved continuity of bowel anastomosis and absence intestinal contents leakage.