The patient was a 17-year-old boy who had been referred to an orthodontic office. His chief complaint was that the canine teeth were protruding. His medical and family history did not indicate anything noteworthy. The person was healthy (although obese (height: 178 cm, weight: 135 kg, BMI = 42.6)) and had no complaints other than the said need for orthodontic treatment. No abnormalities were observed in his oral examination . No supernumerary teeth or any other anomalies were found on oral examination. For the sake of orthodontic diagnosis and treatment planning, first, a routine panoramic radiograph was prescribed. The examination of the panoramic radiograph showed evidence of supernumerary teeth .
To assess the condition of the supernumerary teeth more accurately, a cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) was taken from all bimaxillary quadrants (NewTom VGI (Quantitative Radiology, Verona, Italy), FOV = 8 × 11 cm, high resolution), which indicated the presence of 10 supernumerary teeth in different areas . The patient was also referred to a physician for the assessment of any syndromes. The physician ruled out any syndrome in the patient.
CBCT imaging was conducted. Cross-sectional, axial, coronal, and 3D images were reconstructed . The patient had all 32 normal permanent teeth. The locations of the found supernumerary teeth were as follows: In the maxilla, the bilateral canine-premolar areas were involved, each having 2 supernumerary teeth palatal to the permanent teeth. In the mandible, the right premolar area included 2 supernumerary teeth. The left premolar-molar area contained 3 supernumerary teeth lingual to the permanent teeth. And in the right mandibular molar area, there was a distomolar tooth distal to the third molar. The impaction type of all extra teeth was vertical. Anatomical features are as follows: All teeth show uncompleted roots; maxillary mesial ones had more developed roots. No bony ankylosis was detected (i.e., the periodontal ligament (PDL) space was visible around all the supernumerary teeth). Effects of supernumerary teeth on the normal teeth are as follows: No resorption and no fusion were detected at any sites. Effects of supernumerary teeth on the bone are as follows: Thinning of the palatal and lingual cortical bones were observed. Effects of supernumerary teeth on vital structures are as follows: Bilateral contacts of the roots of the supernumerary teeth with the inferior alveolar canals were observed. The supernumerary teeth had short roots, indicating that they had been developed lately. All of them were impacted, and none was erupted. All of them resembled normal teeth and hence were supplementary supernumerary teeth (there was no rudimentary hyperdontia).
The patient, his parents, and his grandparents (who all were also patients attending the same dental clinic) were asked about any known cases of supernumerary teeth in any of their close or distant relatives. According to them, there was no person known for having any extra teeth among the close or distant relatives of them.
The orthodontic assessments revealed that on the right side, the relationship was full-cusp molar and canine class II. On the left side, it was molar and canine class I. The lower midline was shifted to the right. Maxillary teeth were retruded.
Fortunately, none of the supernumerary teeth had caused damage or root resorption to adjacent teeth, and there was no evidence of cystic or pathological changes in the extra teeth. Before starting orthodontic treatment, in order to prevent the supernumerary teeth from interfering with orthodontic movements of the teeth, all the supernumerary teeth (except the distomolar one) were extracted with the utmost care by an oral and maxillofacial surgeon under local anesthesia . The mandibular distomolar was not extracted because it did not interfere with orthodontic treatment or occlusion and also because its extraction might damage the surrounding tissues. After the extraction of supernumerary teeth, there were no complications on the adjacent bones and teeth.
The orthodontic treatment was successful. No complication was seen after orthodontic treatment. The patient was followed up until two years (the present day), and he showed no problems.