A 28-year-old male presented with a painless swelling in the volar aspect of right mid forearm of 10 years duration with complaints of increase in size of the swelling associated with pain for the past two years. He complained of pain and paresthesia in the median nerve distribution of the right hand. The swelling measured 6 cms in length and 5 cms in width. The swelling was mobile on the transverse axis and not on the longitudinal axis. There was no motor weakness. There was normal protective sensation present in the hand. Percussion over the nerve produced positive Tinel’s sign. There was no family history of neurofibromatosis and no associated clinical features. The ultrasound showed that the mass was subcutaneous although limited and homogeneous measuring 6 cm in diameter. The patient refused to undergo MRI examination due to financial constraints. A surgical workup and a preoperative anaesthetist assessment were obtained. With a clinical diagnosis of median nerve tumor the patient was planned for excision of the tumor. The patient was explained regarding the neurological deficit following surgery and that she may need a sural nerve graft. The patient was taken up for surgery in supraclavicular block with bupivacaine and Xylocaine under tourniquet control.
Adequate exposure of the nerve was done both proximal and distal to the tumour . On exploration the tumour was found to be arising from the median nerve in the right mid forearm. It was a well encapsulated greyish tumour placed in an eccentric position to the axis of the nerve . The vascular pedicle in the proximal part of the tumour is identified first and the remaining tumour was gently resected using microsurgical techniques. The specimen was sent for histopathological examination. Histopathological examination of the masses revealed typical features of schwannoma with presence of spindle cells forming Verocay bodies and clearly identified Antony A and B areas . At two months follow-up the patient was symptom free with mild paresthesia in his index and middle fingers. There was no motor deficit or pain and no recurrence of the lumps .