A 28-year-old Moroccan boy was referred by his urologist to our department of medical genetics at the National Institute of Health in Rabat for genetic diagnosis of Wolfram syndrome (Individual III.5; Fig. a). He was the last child of five siblings. The parents were first cousins and both are healthy. The patient was diagnosed at 7 years of life as having insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and bilateral sensorineural deafness. Systematic eye examination showed optic atrophy.
During follow-up, growth hormone deficiency and recurrent urinary infections developed when he was 13 years old, a careful assessment for urinary tract showed bilateral hydronephrosis.
At the age of the genetic consultation, the patient presented neurological alterations with ataxia and cognitive impairment. The patient has also been diagnosed with severe anxiety and depression. His twin brother had a similar picture and died by suicide at the age of seventeen years (Individual III.4; Fig. a).
The patient’s 21-year-old sister; diagnosed type 1 diabetes mellitus and optic atrophy at the age of 10 years, died at the age of 21 years by a severe episode of hypoglycemia (Individual III.2; Fig. a).
The informed consent of patient was obtained prior to undergoing blood sample and carrying out molecular analysis. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood using commercial Invitrogen Thermo Fisher Scientific Kit (Pure LinkTM Genomic DNA Mini Kit-USA). DNA concentration and quality were determined. A customized panel was designed online using On Demand in Ion AmpliSeq Designer 6.1.3 . We included in this panel 18 genes involved in different diseases from our consultation, among them the WFS1 (NM_006005.3) gene responsible of Wolfram syndrome. The final customized panel was composed of average 532 amplicons divided into two primer pools and in silico covered 100% of regions of interest (ROI). This strategy is better adapted to our diversified requests of molecular tests, it remains a good strategy in public health system that facilitate the recruitment of candidates for the NGS by panel with a good cost-to-benefit ratio and reduced turnaround time and cost for multiple diagnostic tests. Libraries were prepared using Ion AmpliSeq Library Kit v2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. One of 16 barcodes of the Ion Xpress Barcode Adapters1-16 Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added to each sample. Libraries were quantified with Qubit dsDNA HS Assay Kit on Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer (Molecular Probes). Equimolar amounts of each library were used to prepare template for clonal amplification and emulsion PCR was carried out on OneTouch2 Systems (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Ion PGM HI-Q™ view OT2 Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Templates were enriched using Ion OneTouch ES (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and prepared for 316v2 chip loading (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Finally, sequencing runs were performed on Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM, Life Technologies) using Ion PGM HI-Q Sequencing, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Generated raw sequence data in FASTQ format were aligned to the hg19 human reference genome using the Torrent Mapping Alignment Program aligner implemented in v5.10.0 of the Torrent Suite software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For SNV calling, we used plug-in Torrent Variant Caller v5.2.0.34 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate a variant call format file. For Torrent Variant Caller analysis, default setting of germline low-stringency parameters (minimal variant frequency of 0.1, minimum variant quality of 10, minimum coverage of 5X, maximum strand bias of 0.98, and minimum variant score of 10) was used and candidate variants were obtained only when variant frequency at a given position of ≥ 20% and variant coverage of ≥ 20X.
Reported variants were confirmed in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD, ), Clinvar and previous publications. Amino acid predictions were performed using the SIFT algorithm, mutation Taster and PolyPhen2 software tools.
Upon NGS, we detected a compound heterozygous mutation c.1113G > A (p.Trp371Ter) and c.1223_1224insGGAACCACCTGGAGCCCTATGCCCATTT (p.Phe408fs) in exon 8 of the WFS1 gene. Findings from NGS were confirmed by Sanger sequencing.
To confirm the mutation detected by NGS and to perform segregation analysis, Sanger sequencing was performed. Standard polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was carried on index case’s and parents’ DNA by using the forward 5′- AGG GTG GTC AGA GGG AGG -3′ and reverse 5′- GTA GGG CTC TGC ATG GGT G -3′ primer pair in the exon 8 of WFS1 gene. PCR products were purified using ExoSAP and analyzed by standard Sanger dideoxy nucleotide sequencing using 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Sanger sequencing confirmed the heterozygous mutation c.1113G > A and the heterozygous mutation c.1223_1224insGGAACCACCTGGAGCCCTATGCCCATTT in the affected children .