Our patient was a four-year-old girl who came to the hospital with autism-like manifestations and psychiatric symptoms for 2 months. She exhibited severely decreased verbal expression, eye contact and social interaction. She spent most of her time watching cartoons, and she had visual hallucinations in which she could see the leopard from the cartoon. She also talked to herself and had the stereotyped behavior of rubbing her hands and feet. She cried and screamed when her requests were not met. She rarely communicated with family members or friends, and her response to painful stimuli was significantly reduced. During the course, there were no fevers, seizures, disturbances of consciousness, or movement disorders. The patient was delivered by cesarean section at 38 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 3500 g. The perinatal period was uneventful. There was no history of hypoxic asphyxia or postnatal resuscitation. Her growth, language, motor abilities, and social interaction were considered normal before. She could speak at one year old and could walk without support at the age of one year and four months old. She could also sing and recite English rhymes before. Her mother denied hereditary diseases in the family and other special medical histories. According to the DSM-5 criteria, she met the diagnosis of ASD, and the severity assessments in both domains of social communication/interaction and repetitive/restricted behavior were grade 3.
Denver Developmental Screening Test (DDST) results indicated that she was abnormal in all four (fine motor, gross motor, personal-social, and language) areas, and her language development was equivalent to that of a child aged 19 months. The autism behavior checklist (ABC) showed a positive result. Video electroencephalogram (VEEG) results showed that the background rhythm of the child was normal and no epileptic discharges were detected. The patient’s VEEG results showed medium-amplitude slow waves in the central, parietal, occipital, and posterior temporal regions or all leads in the awake state. VEEG results in the sleep state were normal. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) , routine blood examination, liver function, kidney function, electrolyte levels, blood ammonia levels, lactic acid levels, and pyruvic acid levels were normal. Serum anti-N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antibody IgG + 1:10, and other autoimmune encephalitis-related antibody levels were normal. The blood paraneoplastic syndrome-related antibody, aquaporin-4, and myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein levels were normal. Cerebrospinal fluid autoimmune encephalitis related antibodies, paraneoplastic syndrome-related antibodies, and oligoclonal bands were normal.
Considering the possibility of autoimmune encephalitis, she was treated with gamma globulin and methylprednisolone pulse therapy successively, but her condition did not improve significantly. After discharge, with the improvement of family relationships, enhanced parent–child companionship, and treatment with risperidone, she had a more stable mood than before. She played, watched fewer cartoons, and had some verbal communication with her family. However, she still had repetitive stereotyped behaviors, such as hand-wringing.
To further investigate the cause of the disease, a trio-WES was performed using peripheral blood samples from the patient and her parents. A de novo variant (NM_001083619.3: c.2308G > A) in GRIA2 was predicted to change the 770th amino acid from alanine to threonine (p.Ala770Thr). This heterozygous variant was not inherited from her parents and was confirmed by Sanger sequencing .
This novel c.2308G > A in GRIA2 was predicted to cause disease by bioinformatic tools , and it was also absent from the genome aggregation database (gnomAD), the Exome aggregation consortium (ExAC), and the 1000 genome databases, which explains the rarity of this variant. According to the ACMG guidelines, it was rated as a variant of uncertain significance (VUS) through PS2_Moderate + PM2_Supporting + PP3. There are 84 variants in GRIA2 contained in the ClinVar dataset, and only 46 are single nucleotide variations (SNVs). The variant in our patient was also not found in ClinVar.
In the gnomAD v2.1.1 database (https:// gnomad. broadinstitute. org/gene/ENSG00000120251? dataset = gnomad_r2_1), GRIA2 was highly constrained for missense variations (z-score: 4.56) and was intolerant to the loss of function (LoF, intolerance score: 1.00). Furthermore, the altered amino acid alanine, located in the ligand-gated ion channel domain, was highly conserved in multiple species and may be crucial for protein stability and function. The SNV schematic in the reported GRIA2 variant is shown in Fig. D, and the clinical characteristics of patients with developmental regression who carry the de novo GRIA2 variant are summarized in our study .
The structure of GluA2 was built to compare the mobility of mutated 770th amino acid. The wild-type tetramer for the AMPA receptor was visualized by UCSF Chimera . The wild-type 770th alanine and mutated 770th threonine are highlighted. Minor variations in their backbones are shown. The distance between the wild-type and mutated amino acids in chains B and C was longer from 25.642 Å to 26.217 Å . In contrast, the distance between chains B and D was shorter, from 39.055 Å to 37.451 Å . Variant p.Ala770Thr was located in the ligand-gated ion channel domain, and these minor variations in protein structure may affect the transport of calcium ions. The stability of the GRIA2 protein structure was predicted by the mutation cutoff scanning matrix (mCSM), SDM, and DUET server. The scores (△△G) were -1.614, -2.62, and -1.824 kcal/mol, respectively, and all showed the destabilization of the p.Ala770Thr variant.