A 78 year-old man visited the emergency room due to decreased consciousness on the day of visit. He was in a stupor consciousness with left hemiparesis. His right pupil was dilated to 8 mm, and no light reflex was observed. He had no remarkable medical histories except hypertension.
One week before admission, he visited our outpatient clinic with a history of headache and visual disturbance. Brain computed tomography (CT) and visual field test at that time revealed bitemporal hemianopsia due to direct compression by pituitary macroadenoma, and he was scheduled for tumor mass removal through transsphenoidal approach.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on admission showed about 38 mm × 28 mm sized large pituitary macroadenoma with hemorrhagic component inside the tumor . Moreover, severe diffusion-perfusion mismatch was also noted in the right ICA territories. Brain CT angiography showed right ICA total occlusion .
Emergency trans-femoral cerebral angiography was performed because very severe diffusion-perfusion mismatches and right internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusion were confirmed with associated acute ischemic symptoms. Right ICA angiogram showed severe stenosis in the paraclinoid segment with the minimal flow to the MCA. Left ICA angiogram also showed narrowed left ICA at the same segment .
Emergency mechanical thrombectomy with balloon angioplasty was done. Microcatheter was gently passed through the right ICA stenotic lesion and stent was deployed and retrieved. However, there was no thrombus in the retrieved stent or aspirated blood, and follow-up angiography showed only temporary improving of ICA flow. Balloon angioplasty was performed in consideration of direct compression by large parasellar mass, or in situ thrombosis due to right ICA stenosis. However, even after balloon angioplasty, only temporary improving of blood flow was noted. The procedure was terminated because the external direct compression lesion was considered the main cause rather than the intravascular lesion.
Microscopic transsphenoidal approach tumor removal was done. When the dural base was opened, mass was bulging out with a large amount of hematoma. Intra-capsular removal was performed on a grey colored suckable mass, and subtotal mass removal was achieved. After removal of tumor, Doppler ultrasonography was used for confirmed that the bilateral ICA flow was intact. During the operation, blood pressure was strictly maintained over mean arterial pressure 80 mmHg to prevent hypoperfusion. Final diagnosis was pituitary adenoma with apoplexy. The patient’s consciousness was completely restored immediately after surgery, and the left hemiparesis and pupil dilatation also improved.
Follow-up image study showed full recovery of right ICA territory perfusion with no significant infarction except for some scattered asymptomatic embolic infarction with subtotal removal of tumor.
Follow-up conventional angiography was performed before discharge, and bilateral ICA maintained patency without stenosis . The patient was discharged without any obvious neurologic abnormalities.