A 62-year-old man, born in Turkey, presented to the Orthopaedics Clinic with a painful, erythematous and swollen left knee that had appeared seven days prior to examination. There was no history of fever or chills, no prior history of dental care or any invasive procedure. Past medical history revealed an occlusion of the left central retinal vein (2003), atrial fibrillation, a history of hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia. Current medications included amiodarone, amlodipin and simvastatin. Physical examination revealed poor dental status, cardio-respiratory examination was normal (BP of 130/70 mmHg, HR of 60 bpm), as well as the abdominal examination. Body temperature was checked at 37.5°C. Examination of the left knee confirmed tenderness and erythema associated with a joint effusion. Lab studies disclosed a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 28.8 mg/dL, elevated white blood cell count (WBC) (neutrophil count of 10550 cells/mm3). Standard X-Ray of the left knee showed osteoarthritis. Aspiration of the knee revealed purulent fluid with a WBC count of 28800 cells/mm3 (90% of neutrophils) and absence of urate crystals. No microorganism was observed on Gram-stain of the synovial fluid. Culture of this liquid yielded alpha-haemolytic streptococci. The organism was identified by mass-spectometry (MALDITOF) and Phoenix system (Becton Dickinson, USA) as Streptococcus gordonii. Identification was confirmed by (16S)rRNA gene sequencing. Blood cultures remained negative after 5 days of incubation. Tranoesophageal ultrasound of the heart was normal.
Treatment for septic arthritis was undertaken, and arthroscopic lavage of the joint performed. Microbiology of the synovial biopsy and fluid collected during the procedure also revealed Streptococcus gordonii. All isolates showed susceptibility to penicillin, ampicillin, cefotaxime, erythromycin, clindamycin and vancomycin. Antibiotics (ampicillin 2 g 4 hourly) were given intravenously for 2 weeks, and then switched to oral moxifloxacin 400 mg od + rifampicin 600 mg/day for 2 weeks, for total treatment duration of 4 weeks. Follow-up was satisfactory, with a complete clinical and functional recovery.
A 78-year-old female presented to the Orthopaedics Clinic with painful swelling of the left knee that had appeared 4 months prior to examination, with marked worsening 4 weeks before admission. She described general malaise and chills as well as a body temperature of 37.7°C. She denied any recent dental care or invasive procedure. Her medical history was marked by degenerative arthritis of the left knee, treated with total knee arthroplasty 9 months prior to presentation. She had a quick and complete recovery after surgery. Her past medical history consisted of Parkinson’s disease treated with levodopa, depression treated with escitalopram, past history of alcohol abuse, and compressive cervical myelopathy which had been treated with surgery. Upon examination, BP was 120/60 mmHg, HR 80 bpm, and temperature 37,7°C. Cardiac examination revealed a systolic murmur (2/6). Examination of the extremities confirmed a warm and tender left knee with moderate effusion. Lab tests disclosed a CRP of 10.25 mg/dL, WBC-count was normal. CT-Scan of the knee reaveled a suspicion of loosening of the prosthesis and enabled a synovial-fluid aspiration. Investigation of the aspirate showed WBC at 16300 cells/mm3 (92% of neutrophils). Microscopic examination of Gram-stained synovial fluid was negative for microorganisms. Pure culture of alpha-hemolytic streptococci was recovered after 24 h of incubation of synovial fluid inoculated into aerobic BACTEC system. Organism was identified as viridans group streptococci and later confirmed as Streptococcus gordonii by (16S)rRNA gene sequencing (99,9% of identitity). This orgainsm was recovered from other synovial fluid samples by using the same technique, but multiple blood cultures (Bacted system, Becton Dickinson, USA) remained sterile after 15 days of incubation. Transoesophageal echocardiography showed a vegetation on the aortic valve with major aortic regurgitation. Diagnosis of aortic endocarditis was thus confirmed. Gentamycin (5 mg/kg/day) and oral rifampicin (900 mg/day) were thus added to the treatment that had been started after synovial aspiration (iv ampicillin 2 g 4-hourly).
Treatment for chronic post-operative prosthetic joint infection was undertaken, i.e. removal of prosthesis, soft tissue debridement and spacer. Culture of synovial biopsy obtained during surgery yielded pure culture of S. gordonii. The patient underwent aortic valve replacement and then, a revision knee arthroplasty was performed in a second operative time. Both surgeries had an uncomplicated follow-up. The total duration of antibiotic (shifted to amoxicilline 3 g/day + rifampicin 900 mg/day) was 12 weeks.