A 24-year-old female presented to the ED from a local nursing home with right-sided Epistaxis. The patient had a spontaneous episode of large volume hemorrhage prior to transport. When the Emergency Medical Transport (EMT) team arrived to transport her to the hospital, they described her sitting in a pool of blood with an estimated 2 liters of blood loss. Her vitals were reportedly stable at the time. By the time the patient arrived to the hospital, the Epistaxis had stopped without any intervention. The patient had 2 prior episodes of Epistaxis, within the preceding 30 days which were not as severe, and therefore medical evaluation was not sought at the time.
Her past medical and surgical history was significant for traumatic brain injury due to a gunshot wound to the head six months prior, with complete right-sided paralysis associated with left cerebral hemisphere injury. She was noted to have left-sided extracranial cerebral herniation in the area of impact , and a subarachnoid hemorrhage in addition to a subdural hematoma on initial CT imaging. Given the severe impact, she also developed multiple skull base fractures on the right side including the sphenoid wall laterally (: axial view) (: sagittal view) and anteriorly , the medial wall of the maxillary sinus and the medial sphenoid septum . She subsequently underwent emergent decompression with left-sided craniectomy and subdural hematoma evacuation. Bullet fragments were left in their place in the left skull base and left frontal lobe and not extracted to the complexity of the injury. Prior to the gunshot wound, the patient had no medical-related history. A Ventriculo-peritoneal (VP) shunt placement a week later due to right-to-left cerebral herniation with a 13mm midline shift secondary to elevated intracranial pressures with dilated ventricles and no new hemorrhage .
On arrival to the ED, the patient was found to be in shock with a heart rate of 135 and a blood pressure of 74/48. Her temperature was 37 °C, she was tachypneic on her ventilator with a respiratory rate of 48 breaths per minute, saturating 100% on pulse oximetry, was pale and ill-appearing. She was unable to provide history due to tracheostomy-dependent status. The patient’s clothes and bed sheets from transport were soaked in blood. She had physical evidence of a prior left-sided craniectomy on exam and had obvious neurologic deficits including paralysis of the right body, and left-sided eye misalignment. Upon inspection of both nares, no active hemorrhage was noted, and no potential source of bleed was found either. When evaluating the patient’s oropharynx using a tongue depressor, the patient gagged and expelled about 300 mL of blood from her oral cavity. Her blood pressure was remeasured and was found to be 51/28, and the patient’s heart rate had increased to 145 beats per minute.
A Cordis sheath introducer was inserted in the right femoral vein, and 2 units of uncrossed matched blood were administered. With the administration of blood products, the patient’s hemodynamics began to stabilize, and the patient ceased to expel anymore blood. Within 10 minutes of stabilization, a computed tomography (CT) image of the head was completed, which revealed a progressive, expansile heterogeneous density mass in the posterior right ethmoidal sinus measuring 4.4 cm in diameter ( and ). Due to lack of specialist coverage at the hospital providing initial care, Otolaryngology (ENT) and Emergency Medicine physicians were consulted at a nearby hospital, which the patient was transferred to for further management.
Initial lab work revealed a hemoglobin of 9.4 (g/dL) prior to administration of blood products (previously 10.4), Leukocyte count of 17.7 (k/uL), and a platelet count of 529 (k/uL). Her Prothrombin time was 15.3 (seconds), and international normalized ratio (INR) was 1.4.
The patient arrived to the receiving ED tachycardic with a heart rate of 122, but otherwise stable with a blood pressure of 106/69, respiratory rate of 20, saturating 100% on her standard ventilator settings. She remained afebrile. Otolaryngology was consulted immediately and performed nasal endoscopy at the bedside, which revealed a worrisome pulsating mass projecting into the nasal cavity posteriorly without active hemorrhage. Absorbable Sinufoam was placed in the right nares to prevent adhesion formation. A CTA of the head was obtained which illustrated the pseudoaneurysm of the cavernous portion of the internal carotid artery without evidence of contrast extravasation.
The new set of blood work at the receiving hospital revealed a hemoglobin of 11.7, increased from the initial 9.4 after blood product administration. Neurosurgery and endovascular neurology were emergently consulted and upon reviewing historical images when the trauma took place, the pseudoaneurysm was seen penetrating from the previously fractured right lateral sphenoid wall and area of other bony fractures. It was evident that the mobilization of the internal carotid artery due to skull fractures near the cavernous sinus after penetrating trauma led to the pseudoaneurysm growth. Due to the severity of her illness, the decision was made to proceed with formal angiography and possible endovascular intervention.
The patient was taken to the operating room on the same day. Cerebral angiogram revealed the large pseudoaneurysm and confirmed its origin from the cavernous portion of the carotid artery . Given that the left cerebrum had severe dysfunction along with vascular compromise from the initial trauma, balloon occlusion testing of the right carotid artery was not performed as salvage therapy of the functional cerebral hemisphere was the main priority. The patient’s aneurysmal sac was accessed using an SL10 microcatheter along with 014 Synchro soft wire. ONYX embolization was performed, followed by endovascular coiling with Raymond-Roy Occlusion Classification (RROC) grade I in case the Onyx was unsuccessful . During the procedure, there was a daughter sac measuring 6.5 mm that was found and felt to be the point of rupture causing hemorrhage. The patient returned to baseline after reversal of anesthesia, and no operative complications were noted. The patient had neurologic examinations performed every 1 hour which did not reveal any new positive findings and was discharged the next day back to nursing home. At her 1 month follow-up, repeat CT angiography revealed patency of the internal carotid artery and persistent occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm .