A 20-year-old female presented to the emergency department with chest pain, dyspnea, fever, and chills for 3 weeks. She was an active intravenous heroin abuser at the time and had been attempting to wean herself off heroin. During her evaluation, her blood cultures were notable for Streptococcus mitis. The diagnosis of bacterial endocarditis with severe aortic valve vegetation was made after a transthoracic echocardiography was performed. The patient was started on intravenous antibiotics on the day of admission and a cardiothoracic surgery consultation was made. On hospital day number 2, the patient was taken to the operating room for a bovine pericardial patch repair of a fistula and aortic valve replacement with a 21 mm bioprosthetic valve. The patient remained hospitalized for 36 days and was discharged to a drug rehabilitation program once she was medically cleared.
When the patient presented to cardiology for follow-up 1.5 years after her aortic valve replacement, the patient was 22 years old and 20 weeks pregnant with a recorded body mass index of 29 kg/m2. The patient had been enrolled in a methadone maintenance program and had not used intravenous heroin for 6 months. She was promptly referred to our maternal-fetal medicine and cardiology joint program, a multidisciplinary collaboration created to manage pregnant women with preexisting or acquired cardiac conditions. An echocardiogram was performed during her first prenatal care visit showing a heart rate of 61 bpm, peak velocity of 360.5 m/s, peak gradient across valve of 52 mmHg, mean gradient across valve of 28.9 mmHg, and dimensionless index 0.36.
Joint prenatal care and cardiology clinic visits were scheduled, during which routine prenatal care and cardiology evaluations were performed. The patient was placed on 81 mg of aspirin for the duration of her pregnancy to decrease her risk of thrombosis. Echocardiogram was repeated at 32 weeks and 37 weeks of gestation. At 32-week gestation, the echocardiogram showed a heart rate of 69 bpm, peak velocity of 386.9 m/s, peak gradient across valve 59.9 mmHg, mean gradient across valve 36.1 mmHg, and dimensionless index 0.43. At 37-week gestation, heart rate was 76, peak velocity of 339.3 m/s, peak gradient across valve 46.1 mmHg, mean gradient across valve 22.6 mmHg, and dimensionless index 0.45. The patient was asymptomatic and denied any cardiac symptoms.
A multidisciplinary meeting included subspecialists of cardiology, maternal-fetal medicine, anesthesiology, critical-care, and labor and delivery nursing to create a delivery plan. A consensus was reached that a vaginal delivery would be safe for this patient without an assisted second stage, unless obstetrically indicated. A plan was made for telemetry monitoring immediately postpartum given higher risk of arrhythmia at that time.
The patient presented to the labor and delivery triage unit at 40-week 0-day gestation complaining of contractions and was found to be in spontaneous labor. As discussed during our multidisciplinary meeting, the patient received endocarditis prophylaxis and underwent expectant management of her labor. The patient did not require an assisted second stage of delivery and proceeded to have a spontaneous vaginal delivery. Within 10 hours of admission, she delivered a healthy male infant with Apgar scores of 9 at 1 min and 9 at 5 min, weighing 3770 grams with estimated blood loss of 350 ml. Her postpartum care was uneventful. Her echocardiography on postpartum day 1 showed a heart rate of 63 bpm, peak velocity of 325.8 m/s, peak gradient across valve 42.5 mmHg, mean gradient across valve 25.3 mmHg, and dimensionless index 0.36. The patient was discharged on postpartum day 3 without any complications. At her 6-week postpartum visit, the patient received an intrauterine device (IUD) for contraception.