A 41-year-old woman (G1) turned to our second-level prenatal ultrasound diagnostic center to undergo the second-trimester screening exam at 21w + 3d of gestation. Besides maternal age > 35 years, in vitro fertilization (IVF) was the only relevant risk factor. Gestational age errors were excluded since this pregnancy was obtained by IVF. Fetal growth was overall ten days smaller than the one attended based on gestational age, with a fetal growth corresponding to 19w + 6d of gestation. In particular, growth’s delay was mostly due to fetal bones: femur was under the third centile, humerus corresponded to the fifth centile and mesomelic bones were all > the 5° centile, with the only exception of the tibia (1.7°centile) . Fetal anatomy was regular, except for a slight prominence of the forehead with a low nasal bridge and mild nasal hypoplasia, with nasal bone at 17° centile . No other skeletal anomaly and in particular no polydactyly or bone fractures were detected. The uterine, umbilical, and middle cerebral artery pulsed-wave Doppler measurements were all normal, making less probable placental factor as the cause of growth’s delay. The amniotic fluid was regular. Infective diseases were ruled out based on laboratory tests. Considering the ultrasound findings, a skeletal dysplasia with prevalent involvement of the proximal limbs was suspected.
Amniocentesis was performed to exclude chromosomal, genomic, and genetic anomalies, with particular regard to some genes associated with skeletal dysplasias. Array-based Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH-array) and Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) were conducted in parallel. The following databases were used to select the genes that needed to be analyzed: Human Phenotype Ontology, OMIM and/o GeneReviews. CGH-array was performed at the Centro Polidiagnostico s.r.l., Naples, Italy, on a CGH Array platform SurePrint G3 ISCA V2 CGH 8X60K, resolution: 250 kb, Software: Agilent Cytogenomics 5.0.2.5. NGS was performed at Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, Rome, Italy, on a NovaSeq6000 Illumina platform; Genes analyzed: NM_000142.4 (FGFR3) and NM_001135.3 (ACAN). The NGS revealed a heterozygous c.2677delG variant in the ACAN gene, which determines the p.Gly893AspfsTer52 protein variation. The mutation is located in exon 12 of the gene and in the first chondroitin sulfate (CS1) attachment domain of the protein. The mutation arose de novo (it wasn’t present in both parent’s DNA). Based on the clinical features associated with ACAN mutations a diagnosis of osteochondrodysplasia with short limbs and a possible future involvement of the spine and joints were done. The couple opted for voluntary interruption of pregnancy at 25 weeks of gestational age. No autopsy was performed.