A 73-year-old female visited a local dental clinic complaining of a mass on the left side of the maxillary gingiva and was referred to our hospital in August 2020. Although the patient reported an unremarkable medical history, a blood test revealed an HbA1c of 6.9%, suggesting a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus. Extraorally, slightly enlarged lymph nodes were palpable bilaterally in the neck. Intraorally, an exophytic tumor, 50 × 25 mm in size, was found on the gingiva of the left maxillary posterior . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a mass with irregular bony destruction and contrast effects in the left side of the maxilla, extending to the base of the pterygoid muscle and the pterygoid process. Lymph nodes with internal defects were found in the left level IB and IIA area, suggesting multiple lymph node metastasis. However, there were no evidence of extranodal extension due to the defined marginal morphology. . Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a mass in the left maxillary gingiva extending beyond the maxillary nodule to the base of the pterygoid process and the masticatory muscle space . Emission tomography/ computed tomography with 18 Fluorodeoxyglucose-Positron (18 FDG-PET/CT) showed increased accumulation in the left maxilla (SUVmax 32.5) and the level IB (SUVmax 18.5) and level IIA (SUVmax 4.2) left cervical lymph nodes. In addition, there was an increased accumulation in the head of the pancreas (SUVmax 6.2) and the body of the pancreas (SUVmax 7.4), accompanied by a dilatation of the main pancreatic duct (MPD) . No metastasis to the paratracheal lymph nodes or other organs was detected. The patient was referred to the Department of Gastroenterology for a detailed examination of the pancreatic tumor, and contrast-enhanced abdominal CT and MRI examinations were performed. A neoplastic lesion with a maximum diameter of 82 mm was observed in the pancreatic head. The tumor was in contact with the Vater papilla and the descending leg of the duodenum; it was suspected that the tumor had invaded the duodenum . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed that the tumor had indeed invaded the descending duodenum and perforated the intestinal wall ; a specimen was collected from the same area. Histopathologically, the diagnosis was mucinous carcinoma . In combination with the imaging findings, the final diagnosis was cT3N0M0, StageIII MD-IPMC. On the other hand, cytodiagnosis of the tumor in the maxillary gingiva revealed SCC , with a final diagnosis of cT4bN2bM0, Stage IVB SCC, based on the staging described by the 8th edition of Unio Internationalis Contra Cancrum.
We explained the necessity of histopathological examination for treatment planning and proposed resection of the left maxilla and radical neck dissection followed by resection of the pancreatic tumor, but the patient refused this treatment plan; thus, we pursued a supportive care strategy. The patient underwent palliative irradiation of 30 Gy/10Fr in the oral cavity and was subsequently followed up at another hospital. She died 11 months after her initial diagnosis due to respiratory failure caused by multiple lung metastases.