A 12-year-old male patient was referred to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at Ewha Womans University Mokdong Hospital for evaluation and treatment of left TMJ ankylosis. He had been diagnosed with bony ankylosis of the left TMJ due to trauma at the age of 1. At 8 years of age, the patient had received TMJ gap arthroplasty with condylectomy at a different hospital. However, he had a difficulty in opening his mouth since ankylosis of the left TMJ recurred. On the initial clinical examination, maximum mouth opening (MMO; maximum interincisal distance) was less than 2 mm . The panoramic radiograph revealed bone mass of the left mandibular condylar process . There were irregular expanded bony contour, cortical thickening, and diffused sclerosis around the left TMJ on three-dimensional computed tomography images . Increased uptake in the left TMJ were observed in bone scan . These diagnostic images confirmed a true bony ankylosis of the left TMJ, which was assessed as type IV TMJ ankylosis according to Sawhney’s classification .
Removal of ankylotic mass and TMJ reconstruction with costochondral graft were planned. The left TMJ was approached through a preauricular incision, and excision of ankylotic mass was done. The costochondral graft, harvested from the fifth rib of the right side, was adjusted to the condyle area. It was carefully done so the cartilaginous part of the graft is not separated from the bone. A temporalis muscle fascia flap was rotated over the arch into the joint and was lined in the TMJ space in order to reconstruct the roof of the new glenoid fossa. The deep temporalis fascia and the superficial muscle layer were transferred to construct a barrier, to support the function of the reconstructed ramus/condyle unit and to maintain flap vascularity. Five bicortical screws were secured on the left mandibular ramus for rigid internal fixation of grafted bone .
A postoperative MMO measured up to 20 mm, and it was increased to 26 mm after 5 weeks postoperatively. However, newly growing bone encapsulated the grafted costochondral head resulting in a limited mouth opening of less than 12 mm within a year postoperatively. Radiographic and clinical evidences confirmed re-ankylosis of the left TMJ. Computed tomography revealed bony ankylosis on the left TMJ . Increased uptake lesion in the mid-ascending ramus area of the left mandible was also observed in the bone scan.
Removal of costochondral graft and gap arthroplasty using interpositional silicone block was carried out when the patient was 13 years of age. A 12-mm-thick silicone block with full coverage of the glenoid fossa was placed and fixed in the cranium . A postoperative MMO measured up to 26 mm in the 3 weeks postoperative follow-up. However, MMO was decreased to 18 mm after 1 year postoperatively. There was also gradual reduction of mouth opening, and MMO was noted to be 12 mm after 1 year and 4 months postoperatively. Radiographic finding also revealed the re-ankylosis of the left TMJ. Therefore, alloplastic temporomandibular joint reconstruction combined with partial mandibulectomy was planned.
Partial mandibulectomy and placement of metallic condylar head prostheses were performed . After 1 year postoperative follow-up, bone scan revealed the absence of abnormal bone uptake in the reconstructed TMJ area. Mouth opening was consistently measured up to 40 mm without any signs or symptoms of re-ankylosis.
Reconstruction of the mandibular ramus with cortico-cancellous iliac bone graft was performed to compensate additional growth of the mandible after confirming the facial growth completion through a serial cephalometric analysis at 17 years of age . During clinical examination at 6 months postoperatively, the patient showed a good range of motion with MMO of 35 mm. The patient had a long-term follow-up of orthodontic treatment for occlusal stabilization consistently, and MMO was being maintained at 35 mm during the first 3 years of follow-up . Mandibular asymmetry and the evidence of re-ankylosis on radiographic evaluation were not observed.