This 57-year-old woman was referred to our hospital with a growing pulsatile mass in the left preauricular region. She had first noticed the gradually growing mass 5 years earlier. Her medical history included hypertension (HT), dyslipidemia (DL), and angina pectoris. She was treated with oral calcium- and angiotensin II receptor blockers. She had no recollection of head injury or minor head trauma.
Physical examination disclosed no neurological deficits. There was a 13 mm × 10 mm pulsatile mass in the left preauricular region; it was painless but annoying. Three-dimensional computed tomography angiography showed a well-enhancing saccular aneurysm on the main trunk of the STA .
We were instructed her to manually compress the pseudoaneurysm (press a finger on the skin over the pulsatile area) for 30 min 3 times a day. However, it did not thrombosed. To prevent aneurysmal rupture we performed the surgical removal.
With the patient under general anesthesia, we made a skin incision about 4 cm above the main trunk of the left STA. The aneurysm was saccular and located lateral to the zygomatic arch. There was a small distance between the feeding and draining vessels . The distal and proximal regions of the aneurysm were ligated, and it was removed without any complications.
Several histologic sections were prepared from the surgically resected specimen. A cross-section of the aneurysm showed marked dilation of the artery. At the site of the aneurysm, the normal arterial wall structure was replaced by fibroblast proliferation and loose connective tissue ; in the vicinity of the aneurysm, we observed atherosclerosis with intimal thickening and calcification in the media . No significant inflammation suggestive of arteritis was identified. The diagnosis was pseudoaneurysm with atherosclerosis.
The patient was discharged home on the 2nd postoperative day. Her condition continues to be good and at the last follow-up 12 months after the operation, there was no evidence of recurrence.