The patient is a 41-year-old male who was sucker punched in the face, fell, and struck his occiput on a curb. A bystander initiated cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Glasgow Coma Score was reported to be 3 when emergency medical service arrived. He was intubated in the field. Blood pressure was 67/47 mm Hg. 0.4 mg of Atropine was given, which increased the blood pressure to 123/94 mm Hg. Upon arrival to the emergency department, the patient was found to be awake, alert, and attentive. Neurological examination showed a C4 sensory level with an upper extremity diplegia. The right lower extremity showed 3/5 strength in all muscle groups. The left lower extremity showed 1–2/5 strength in the plantar and dorsiflexors and absent strength proximally. Computerized axial tomography of the head showed left frontal traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage. On admission, all other radiographic studies were normal. Sagittal MRI demonstrated 7 mm of tonsillar descent below the foramen magnum, consistent with CMI . Axial MRI showed significant medullary compression, with the right tonsil causing more compression than the left . No evidence of acute pathology was present. On post injury day 1, the patient acquired minimal intrinsic right-hand function and improved to 2/5 strength. On post injury day 2, right hand function was absent. Due to deterioration in neurologic status, a suboccipital craniectomy and partial C1 laminectomy with duraplasty were performed.
A second preoperative MRI study of the brain was performed the morning of surgery. A cine cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow study showed qualitatively decreased flow at the level of the foramen magnum. T2-weighted MRI demonstrated hyperintense signal in the pyramids at and below the foramen magnum and in the dorsal columns of the spinal cord [Figures and ]. At surgery, the tonsils were found to be herniated to the level of the arch of C1 and adherent to the obex. The arachnoid was not opacified. Arachnoid adhesions were lysed. The right tonsil descended 4 mm more than the left. No tonsillar or cerebellar contusion was identified grossly. Subarachnoid hemorrhage was not present. The tonsils were not coagulated.
On postoperative day 2, right intrinsic hand strength improved to 1/5. Antigravity strength was present in all muscle groups of the right lower extremity. The left lower extremity remained plegic. The C4 sensory level was unchanged. A tracheostomy was performed on postoperative day 7 for persistent apnea. Postoperative cine MRI showed restoration of CSF flow at the level of the foramen magnum. Three weeks post injury, T2-weighted hemorrhagic gradient echo sequence MRI (TR 867, TE 35, and FA 20) showed low-intensity signal in the ventral medulla, bilaterally along the midline and in the dorsal columns. A postoperative pseudomeningocele was identified and aspirated percutaneously without recurrence. Neurological examination remained unchanged by the time of discharge 3 weeks later. Nineteen weeks post injury, the patient showed significant improvement. Antigravity strength was present in all muscle groups. Sensation to pinprick returned to normal in all extremities. The patient ambulated with assistance and was being actively weaned from the ventilator but remained in a rehabilitation institute.