In November 2019, a 49-year-old female with no smoking history was referred to the cardiovascular division for shortness of breath. Coronary computed tomographic angiography (CTA) showed no atherosclerosis or narrowing of coronary arteries. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed pulmonary nodules and a small pleural effusion on the left side. CT pulmonary angiography revealed pulmonary embolism with complete small arterial occlusions. Blood coagulation studies showed extended activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT, 27.4 s; normal: 25.4–38.4 s) and prothrombin time (PT, 13.5 s; normal: 9.4–12.5 s) and significantly increased levels of fibrin degradation products (FDP, 98.35 mg/L; normal: 0–5 mg/L) and D-dimer (2.99 µg/ml; normal: 0 ~ 0.24 µg/ml). Therefore, anticoagulation therapy with oral dabigatran was initiated. However, no further auxiliary examination was performed to identify the potential causes of pulmonary embolism.
One month later, she was admitted to our neurology department because of non-fluent speech and blurry vision. Neurological examination on admission showed neurologic defects, including motility aphasia and homonymous hemianopsia. No conventional cerebrovascular risk factors were identified. Brain CT scan, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) depicted multiregional acute and subacute cerebral infarcts in bilateral middle cerebral artery territories and bilateral posterior artery territories . Neither atherosclerotic plaque in the aortic arch nor stenosis or occlusion in major extracranial and intracranial arteries was observed on her upper chest, cervical and brain CTAs. The examination results of carotid duplex ultrasonography were unremarkable. No cardio thrombi or vegetation was seen in transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), and no arrhythmia was detected by Holter monitoring. The bubble study, in conjunction with echocardiogram findings, was indicative of a grade III right-to-left cardiac shunt (RLS), suggesting a risk of paradoxical embolism.
The results of the laboratory examination were almost within the normal range, including serum white blood cell count, red blood cell count, platelet count, hemoglobin, creatinine, cardiac enzymes, alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase. The coagulation system showed activation, with an elevated FDP level of 17.7 mg/L, a D-dimer level of 2.59 µg/ml, a PT of 13.5 s, and an APTT of 29.3 s. Because the patient had multiple infarctions involving the bilateral anterior and posterior circulation without obvious risk factors for stroke, we investigated all vasculitic and infection markers. Except for elevated C-reactive protein (CRP, 45.5 mg/L; normal: 0–8 mg/L), the other blood biochemical test results were not abnormal (including immunoglobulins, anti-cardiolipin antibody, antinuclear antibody, anti-SSA antibody, P-ANCA and C-ANCA). The results of subsequent hematologic tests, including protein S, protein C, anti-thrombin III, von Willebrand factor, lupus anticoagulant and anti-β2-glycoprotein antibody, were all within the normal range.
Multiple cerebral infarctions and pulmonary embolisms made us think of the possibility of CAH status. Interestingly, laboratory studies found high serum levels of tumor markers, including carcinoma antigen (CA) 125 (209.2 U/ml, normal range < 35 U/ml), CA199 (459.3 U/ml, normal range < 37 U/ml), CA 153 (35.95 U/ml, normal range < 25 U/ml), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, 48 ng/ml, normal range < 10 U/ml) and neuron-specific enolase (36.8 ng/ml, normal range < 16.3 U/ml). A contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan revealed infarcts in the spleen and kidney, indicating massive thromboembolic events in multiple visceral organs . Then, a chest CT scan was performed for the second time and showed increased pleural effusion on the left side compared to one month prior . Cytological examinations of pleural effusions collected via thoracentesis indicated cancer cells with positive staining of CK7, EMA, Napsin A and TIF-1. As a result of a detailed examination, she was diagnosed with stage IV lung adenocarcinoma expressing L858R-mutant epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR). 18 F-FDG PET imaging revealed multiple metastatic patterns in intrathoracic metastases, including malignant effusion and simultaneous pleural and pericardial metastases.
Then, an EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor (EGFR-TKI), gefitinib, was administered at a dosage of 250 mg/day. Considering the identification of lung cancer, she was diagnosed with Trousseau syndrome with massive infarction in multiple organs. Then, she was treated with low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH) while in the hospital. After 2 months of treatment with gefitinib, the pleural effusion content was decreased on the thoracic CT scan. Laboratory data showed a decline in the serum levels of FDP (from 17.7 mg/l to 1.01 mg/l) and D-dimer (from 2.59 mg/l to 0.18 mg/l). She transitioned to take dabigatran for secondary prevention of ischemic stroke after discharge because of its convenient purchase and easy oral administration. After treatment with gefitinib for 4 months, the patient showed disease progression with regard to increased pleural effusion. Then, she received systemic chemotherapy comprising intravenous injection of pemetrexed (500 mg/m2 body surface area) and cisplatin (75 mg/m2 body surface area) at 21-day intervals for up to 4 cycles, followed by monotherapy with pemetrexed for 5 cycles in another oncology hospital. Radiotherapy was not performed on the patient. At the end of follow-up on February 2, 2021, the patient was in good condition with moderate adverse events, including nausea, mild anemia and leukopenia. Laboratory tests on February 2, 2021, revealed a slight decrease in hemoglobin content (90 g/L), normal white blood cells (6,410 per ml), and moderately elevated levels of FDP (4.33 mg/l) and D-dimer (0.278 µg/ml). The CT scan of Chest showed decrease in pleural effusion and indicated the tumor was stable without new metastatic lesions. However, after 6 months of anticoagulant therapy, the patient stopped taking dabigatran for unknown reasons. During the 1-year follow-up, no recurrence of stroke was observed.