A 43-year-old Chinese man suffered from yellowing of the skin and mucous membranes of the eyes for 21 d.
A 43-year-old male patient was admitted on July 3, 2023, without any obvious cause. He had yellow coloring of the body and eyes, yellow urine, yellow stool, no itching of the skin, no anorexia, no nausea and vomiting, no chills, no fever, and no abdominal pain. On July 22, 2023, the patient went to the outpatient clinic of the Shunde Hospital of the Guangzhou University of Traditional Chinese Medicine in Guangzhou for diagnosis and treatment. His liver function was checked at the emergency clinic: Alanine aminotransferase 324.0 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 660.39 U/L, γ-glutamyl transferase 1173.96 U/L, total bilirubin 129.60 μmol/L, conjugated bilirubin 50.0 μmol/L, unconjugated bilirubin 27.10 μmol/L, and δ-bilirubin 52.50 μmol/L. White blood cell count was 13.61 × 109/L, absolute neutrophil count was 8.14 × 109/L. Hepatitis A antibody IgM, and five hepatitis B indicators were normal. Ultrasound showed a suspected solid focal lesion in the head of the pancreas (the nature of which was to be determined), dilatation of the upper portion of the common bile duct and intraductal bile ducts, and enlargement of the pancreas. Polyene phosphatidylcholine was given to protect the liver after symptomatic treatment, but without symptom relief. On July 24, 2023, the patient was hospitalized for further diagnosis and treatment.
The patient denied past medical history.
The patient reported no significant abnormalities in his personal or family history.
Vital signs were stable, the whole body of the skin and mucous membranes showed moderate yellow stain, and the sclera showed mild yellow stain. The whole abdomen was flat, no gastrointestinal type and peristaltic wave, no epigastric pulsation, no varicose veins in the abdominal wall, soft abdomen, no abdominal pressure, no rebound pain, and no palpable mass.
There were no significant abnormalities in carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), α-fetoprotein, hepatitis C immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody, autoimmune liver disease quantitative test, autoimmune liver disease antibody spectrum, and hepatitis E test.
Computed tomography (CT) plain scan, CT enhanced scan and reconstruction of the whole abdomen showed: pancreatic swelling and peripancreatic oozing (inflammatory changes suggestive of AIP); and dilated intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts. Cholecystitis and prostate calcification were considered.
At the time of admission, CT plain scan and enhanced scan of the whole abdomen showed swollen pancreas, and pericardium-like low density shadow at the edge with sheath-like changes. CT enhanced scan showed that the pancreatic ducts were not dilated, and peripancreatic oozing. There was no dilatation of the pancreatic ducts and some peripancreatic exudation. The intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts were dilated and the gallbladder was slightly enlarged .
The patient was positive for hepatic schistosomiasis IgG antibody. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed widespread dilatation of intrahepatic bile ducts, and proximal middle dilatation of the common bile duct. IG4 level was elevated to 14.7 g/L (normal range: 0.03–2.01 g/L). After admission, he received hepatoprotective, choleretic, anti-inflammatory, anti-infective and supportive symptomatic treatment. Antibodies to hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C and hepatitis E viruses and autoimmune liver disease were normal.