An 18-year-old Chinese girl presented at our hospital with eye pain, photophobia, and blurred vision. Ocular preliminary examinations in our department revealed best-corrected visual acuity of 20/20 in the patient’s both eyes. Anterior segment findings only included mild conjunctival hyperemia, mutton-fat keratic precipitates, and slight aqueous flare in the anterior chamber in her both eyes , while fundus examinations revealed only optic disc hyperemia in both eyes and focal punctate retinal infiltrations in the inferior peripheral retina of the left eye . After a detailed medical history inquiry, we knew that she had been suffering from recurrent ankle and wrists swelling since she was 3 years old without any family history. Skin manifestations were not apparent except only roughness located on the trunk and forearms. Her past blood examinations showed only an elevated C-reactive protein level of more than 20 mg/dL (normal: less than 0.2 mg/dL). Between the ages of 3 and 6, the patient just had two fevers, each accompanied by joints swelling and pain involving wrists, right ankle, and proximal interphalangeal joints of feet. Methotrexate and prednisolone had been tried from 6 to 12 years old. Considering that the systemic symptoms were not very serious, the doctor asked her to stop methotrexate and continue prednisolone at a dose of 5 mg daily till now.
A synovial biopsy of her right ankle showed chronic synovitis with noncaseating granulomas at her age of 6. Until then, pediatric rheumatologists had been unable to give her a definitive diagnosis. Since then, she has never had fevers, and the only joint swelling left is on her right ankle and right wrist . Genetic analysis revealed Met491Leu variant in the NOD2 gene in her 14 years old, but how it caused the disease is unclear.
The appearance of ocular symptoms this time accompanied by arthritis and skin lesions led to a preliminary diagnosis of BS for her. Since she was older and could cooperate well with the examination, we conducted a further fluorescein fundus angiography and indocyanine green angiography for her, which showed retinal vascular leakage in the nasal, inferior, and temporal retina of her right eye and inferior of the left, as well as hyperfluorescence in both optic discs . No obvious abnormality was found in optical coherence tomography of macula . Topical dexamethasone and compound tropicamide eye drops were used and controlled the inflammation. In the 2 years we observed, no serious ocular complications such as cataract or retina detachment occurred.