A 23-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with sudden onset of non-pleuritic chest pain that radiated to her arms. She was diaphoretic. The patient had no family history of heart disease. She did not smoke or use alcohol or illicit drugs. She had been shopping in a local store when the pain suddenly started. The patient was haemodynamically stable, and there were no pertinent cardiovascular findings on physical examination.
In the emergency department, her electrocardiogram showed sinus bradycardia (, ) with no significant changes concerning for ischaemia. Initial serum troponin I was 1.2 ng/mL (reference range 0–0.04 ng/mL). The patient was admitted, and serial troponins were performed. Her troponin peaked at 16 ng/mL. She was started on a heparin drip. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed apical dyskinesia (Video 1) with hyperdynamic motion of the spared myocardium resulting in a preserved ejection fraction of 65% and reduced apical strain . Coronary angiography revealed triple vessel coronary ectasia with significant thrombus burden in the occluded left anterior descending artery (LAD) ( and Video 2).
Aspiration thrombectomy or intracoronary thrombolysis was contemplated, but, because she was haemodynamically stable and there were no signs of worsening ischaemia, conservative management was recommended. The patient was bridged to warfarin, in addition to dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and ticagrelor. Low-dose metoprolol was started. The patient had low blood pressures throughout the admission so we deferred initiation of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor; she was intolerant to statin therapy due to myalgias. She was discharged on the above regimen. Prior to discharge, the patient was able to return to her baseline activities of daily living with no chest pain or dyspnoea on exertion. It was decided to monitor her closely and follow-up in an outpatient setting to pursue further imaging. Given her age, Kawasaki disease was thought to be the likely aetiology of her CAE.
One month after discharge, the patient underwent computed tomography (CT) angiography of the coronary arteries, which confirmed prior findings of multiple coronary artery ectatic changes. The largest diameters noted were 10 mm in the mid-LAD , 9 mm in the proximal LAD, 6.5 mm in the left marginal branch , and 7.5 mm in the right coronary artery . Previously identified coronary thrombi resolved as well. Three-dimensional reconstruction of the coronary vessels was done . Repeat TTE continued to show a preserved ejection fraction of 65%, as well as resolved apical dyskinesia and improved apical strain ( and Video 3).
Soon after, she reported that, contrary to medical advice, she was pregnant. Warfarin was stopped owing to the teratogenicity of the drug, and she was continued on aspirin, metoprolol, and ticagrelor. As there are no standard guidelines, we decided to de-escalate to dual antiplatelet therapy rather than reintroduce triple therapy with a new agent. Throughout her 37-week pregnancy, the patient did not have any reoccurrence of chest pain, dyspnoea, or palpitations. At 21 weeks of gestation, the patient had a TTE that continued to show a stable ejection fraction and strain pattern. The patient stayed on dual antiplatelet therapy until 5 days before delivery. She delivered a healthy child at 37 weeks via vaginal delivery under epidural anaesthesia with no complications. Two days post-delivery the patient had an echocardiogram that continued to show resolved strain pattern (, ) and left ventricular function. Further coronary imaging will be pursued in the future.