An 18-year-old female patient presented with repeated episodes of gum bleeding since childhood. She also had a history of prolonged bleeding on minor trauma. There was no history of bone pain. She was given blood transfusion many times in the past, the details of which were not known. She was born out of a consanguineous marriage. On examination, she had pallor and gum bleeding. Vital signs were stable. Cardiovascular, respiratory, and other system examination were unremarkable. Her investigations revealed hemoglobin - 7 g/dl, total leukocyte count - 4200, differential count polymorphs - 74, lymphocytes - 23, eosinophils - 3, platelets - 2.1 lakhs, red blood cell (RBC) count - 2.82 lakhs, hematocrit - 19.3, mean corpuscular volume - 68.4, mean corpuscular hemoglobin - 18.4, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration - 26.9, erythrocyte sedimentation rate - 15/32, peripheral smear-microcytic hypochromic RBCs, white blood cell count normal, no immature cells seen, platelets count adequate, normal size, and morphology. Bleeding time - >15 min, activated partial thromboplastin Time - 27 s (control - 27 s), and prothrombin time/INR - 1. Serum fibrinogen was 200 mg/dL. Hence, the patient was found to have gum bleeding with a normal platelet count, normal platelet morphology, and a prolonged bleeding time. Clot retraction test was done, in which blood is allowed to clot in a test tube, and clot retraction noted after 24 h. It was absent, i.e., no clot retraction was seen after 24 h. It was suggestive of GT. The next step in the evaluation of the patient was to assess Von Willebrand factor, the level of which could not be assessed because of nonavailability of the test. With this background, the next step in the analysis was platelet aggregation studies. Platelet aggregation was induced with ristocetin, ADP, and collagen. Absent platelet aggregation was seen with ADP ; however, it was seen with ristocetin and collagen. This led to the final diagnosis of GT.
She was given oral tranexamic acid 500 mg thrice daily and platelet transfusion to control the current bleeding episode. Since her hemoglobin was low, she was given packed cell transfusion and followed by oral iron for maintenance. She was given advise about the maintenance of dental hygiene to prevent episodes of gingivitis which tend to precipitate gum bleed. During the course of follow-up, she came with gum bleed for which she was given platelet transfusion. She even attained menarche during the same period. She had episodes of menorrhagia which were treated with platelet transfusion. She was counseled regarding the use of oral contraceptive pills to prevent future episodes. Since she was in need of repeated transfusions. She was immunized with Hepatitis B vaccine to prevent transfusion associated hepatitis.