A 29-year-old female patient was referred to our hospital due to abdominal crush injury by a reverse vehicle. She complained of dyspnea and abdominal pain. On admission, she was conscious. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure of 102/60 mmHg, heart rate of 135 beats/min, respiration rate of 20 breaths/min, and temperature of 38 °C. Focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) was positive in the abdomen and left thorax. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed pneumomediastinum, left lower lobe atelectasis, left hydrothorax and fluid collection in posterior mediastinum, surrounding mid to distal esophagus, and descending thoracic aorta without abnormality in bony thorax . Abdomen and pelvic CT revealed liver laceration (segment 2–4, Gr III) and both superior and inferior pelvic rami fractures. A 24 French chest tube was inserted onto the left thorax by a trauma surgeon. Initially, her condition was considered as chylothorax because the drained pleural fluid was milky and there was no definitive chest trauma. She underwent emergency transcatheter arterial embolization for liver laceration. She was admitted to trauma intensive care unit by the Department of Trauma Surgery.
She was referred to the Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery on the 5th day of hospitalization for worsening of left lung field haziness and her condition . Thoracic esophageal injury was suspected. Esophagography revealed mid to distal thoracic esophageal rupture . Emergency operation was performed by posterolateral thoracotomy through the left 6th intercostal space. On operative findings, multiple loculated effusion and longitudinal tear of mid to lower thoracic esophagus of about 8 cm in length were identified. After debridement of infected tissue and massive saline irrigation, primary repair was performed with interrupted sutures using 3–0 Vicryl. The chest was closed with a 24 French chest tube drainage. Esophagography at 8 days after operation revealed postoperative esophageal leak , and esophageal stent placement was performed . Postoperative esophageal leak was no longer observed on follow-up esophagography. The esophageal stent was removed 6 weeks after the placement. She was discharged two months after surgery. She was closely followed up without complications.