A 75-year-old male patient with a complex medical history, including atrial fibrillation, pacemaker implantation for bradycardia, severe coronary artery disease with prior stent placement, and severe mitral regurgitation (MR), had been treated with a Carillon 12/18/80 mm Mitral Contour System (Cardiac Dimensions, Kirkland, WA) in December 2022. He presented with recurrent hospitalizations due to acute heart failure [New York Heart Association (NYHA) IV].
The patient’s regular medication regimen included oral anticoagulation, angiotensin-2 receptor blockers, phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors, diuretics, a sodium/glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitor, sodium bicarbonate, a proton pump inhibitor, and statins. Baseline functional assessment revealed pronounced peripheral oedema, reliance on a walker for ambulation, dyspnoea at rest, and left thoracic pain with minimal physical exertion. Additionally, the patient presented with chronic kidney disease [Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) stage IV], severe secondary pulmonary artery hypertension (right ventricle systolic pressure of 91 mmHg), and severe obesity [body mass index (BMI) 44.1 kg/m²].
Upon admission, vital signs were recorded as follows: blood pressure (106/52 mmHg), heart rate (80 b.p.m.), respiratory rate (24 breaths per minute), and temperature (36°C).
Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 65% and severe mixed-genesis MR (vena contracta, 0.8 cm; EROA, 0.53 cm2; R-Vol 89 mL), resulting from severe mitral annulus dilatation (42 mm) and marked left atrial enlargement (left atrial volume index, 93.3 mL/m2) ( and ). After multidisciplinary heart team assessment, repeated treatment of the severe MR was indicated, but the patient was considered at prohibitive risk for open-heart surgery [European System for Cardiac Operative Risk Evaluation (EuroSCORE) II] 8.27%). Since transcatheter edge-to-edge MV repair was not considered feasible, due to the unfavourable anatomy of the MV leaflets (short, <5 mm, and degenerated posterior mitral leaflet), the decision was made to proceed with implanting a tether-based Tendyne TMVR system.
Following standardized computer tomographic (CT) segmentation and virtual device implantation, the patient was considered eligible to receive a standard profile (SP) 33M transcatheter heart valve. However, due to the anticipated risk of LVOT-O with a cross-sectional neo-LVOT area of 399.6 mm2 in end-systole and an elongated, poorly supported AML (27 mm) nearly striking the septum at the simulated neo-LVOT , the decision was made to perform a dedicated beating heart transapical scissor-mediated splitting of the AML (MitraCut technique), just before TMVR (Summary figure and ).
Under general anaesthesia, standard beating heart transapical access was obtained. A shortened 24-F Gore DrySeal Flex sheath (W.L. Gore & Associates, Inc.) was employed for improved handling and inserted over a standard-length dilator at the transapical access site (Summary figure A). Endoscopic scissor (Ceramo HCR, MRT-2; Fehling Surgical Instrument, Inc.) insertion was guided by three-dimensional TEE and fluoroscopic evaluation, ensuring accurate alignment of the scissor tips for the AML splitting in the A2 scallop region . Subsequently, the sheath was exchanged for the Tendyne delivery system, and the prosthesis was successfully implanted . The final TEE evaluation did not show any paravalvular leakage (PVL) or any LVOT-O. Notably, the prior indirect annuloplasty with Carillon device did not impact the deployment or seating of the Tendyne valve .
After the procedure, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit, where he initially required inotropic support and nitric oxide (20 ppm) ventilation for concomitant pulmonary artery hypertension. The patient was extubated 25 h after the procedure and was transferred to the normal station and discharged from the hospital 14 days after the procedure, respectively, without any cardiac complication. The post-operative TTE showed a well-functioning transcatheter heart valve (mean gradient, 2 mmHg) without PVL, prosthesis thrombosis, and LVOT-O.
At the 6-month follow-up, the patient is alive and maintains stable clinical conditions.