A 19-year-old woman (G2P1), married as a non-consanguineous marriage, with no past medical or surgical history, came to the outpatient prenatal clinic for routine visits.
Prenatal ultrasound scans of several visits revealed:
Hyperechoic lungs, ascites, unremarkable kidney (right), normal sucking reflux and a three-vessels umbilical cord in the 20th-week visit . Relative shortness in upper and lower limbs, nuchal edema, bilateral syndactyly on both hands and feet, hydrops fetalis, the abdominal circumference was 420 mm, enlargement of the lungs, and cardiac compression. The ultrasound estimated weight was 4000 g in the 25th-week visit .
After 39 weeks of gestation, the mother underwent a cesarean section for cephalopelvic disproportion. The fetus was stillborn due to respiratory insufficiency, weighing 3600 g. Gross examination showed multiple abnormalities including:
Bilateral anophthalmia, pseudo-hypertelorism, low-set ears, flat nasal bridge, bilateral syndactyly on hands and feet, cutaneous and subcutaneous edema, large-volume ascites, and ambiguous genitalia .
Autopsy revealed: normal airways, lung enlargement, no significant cardiac abnormalities, unilateral renal agenesis (right), a gonad and Mullerian structure were found on the left posterior pelvic wall, and the most outstanding find was the congested liver capsule which led us to do pathophysiologic study to find out the reason .
Microscopic examination of multiple sections of the lung, spleen, liver, ovary, and kidneys showed:
Dilated pleural lymphatic vessels , interstitial fibroblast hypertrophy and vascular wall thickening in the lung . Congestion of red pulp with hemosiderin accumulation and immature white pulp of the spleen .
Cholestasis with biliary atresia and biliary plugs , portal spaces fibrosis with diffused congestion and diffused chronic inflammatory infiltrations with lymphocytes in the liver .
While kidney sections revealed increased subcapsular nephrogenic structures and glomerular changes, such as decreasing subcapsular spaces and changing in the simple squamous epithelium of the outer parietal layer of the glomerular capsule into cuboidal epithelium .
As for the gonads, there were clusters of crowded immature primordial follicles and the Mullerian duct derivative was made up of epithelium resembling that of the Fallopian tube .
Subsequently, based on microscopic examination of the lung and the presence of congenital malformations such as anophthalmia, bilateral syndactyly and renal agenesis, we suspected: plexiform pulmonary arteriopathy, Fraser Syndrome and Lenz microphthalmia syndrome as differential diagnosis for our case, but Fraser Syndrome was the most suitable one depending on Thomas et al. criteria.
The parents refused the genetic tests for the stillborn due to familial reasons.