A 58-year old man was hospitalized to the Federal Center for Cardiovascular Surgery of the Russian Ministry of Health (Chelyabinsk) complaining of dyspnea, general weakness, dizziness during physical exertion, and fatigue.
Over the past five years, the patient experienced rare heart palpitations that have occurred and stopped on their own after a few minutes. Six months before hospitalization, shortness of breath, weakness, and post-exertion dizziness appeared. Heart rate increased to 120 per minute. The electrocardiogram taken in an outpatient clinic revealed an irregular form of atypical atrial flutter. Based on the results of echocardiography, an aneurysm of the left atrium was suspected. Warfarin was prescribed. The maintenance dose was 2.5 mg daily.
The patient had a free previous medical history.
On the patient’s visit to the Center for Cardiovascular Surgery, his vital signs were within normal limits.
The Quick prothrombin activity was 27.9% (reference values were 70%-120%), INR was 2.52, and the prothrombin time was 45.6 s due to warfarin treatment. Other laboratory parameters of blood and urine analyses, blood biochemistry, and arterial blood gas were within normal limits.
A free-breathing real-time cine magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with electrocardiograph synchronization did not reveal any defects in the leaves of the pericardium and extrapericardial protrusions of the heart cavities. A giant aneurysm of the left atrial appendage (123 mm × 90 mm × 70 mm in size) had uneven and clear contours, thin walls, and turbulent blood flow in the cavity. The aneurysm had a wide communication with the cavity of the left atrium. The neck of the aneurysm was 51 mm × 55 mm in size. The cavity of the aneurysm had no pathological formations, there were no blood clots. The aneurysmically dilated left atrial appendage was adjacent to the trunk and left branch of the pulmonary artery, to the upper and lower left pulmonary veins, and to the left atrioventricular sulcus. The lower contour of the aneurysm reached the diaphragmatic surface of the pericardium. The left atrium was of normal size . Preoperative coronary angiography showed the absence of coronary artery stenosis.