In January 2015, a 52-year old woman with obesity and hypertension was admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit of a hospital in Northern Italy for acute dyspnea and chest pain. Computed tomography angiography revealed filling defects affecting the right and left branches of the pulmonary artery suggestive of pulmonary embolism (PE). She was initially treated with intravenous heparin sodium and bridged to warfarin as a long-term anticoagulant. Before the hospital discharge she was prescribed a vitamin K free diet reported in Table . Although the general recommendation is to maintain a stable and consistent intake of Vitamin K, in the clinical practice patients are suggested to avoid food high in vitamin K and they are given general dietetic guidelines.
During her first month as an outpatient it was very difficult to get her INR into the therapeutic range. Her family doctor recognized that poor nutrition is an important factor in establishing therapeutic levels and she was referred to our Nutritional Unit outpatient service (NU) for a nutritional assessment and specific medical nutrition therapy. Figure shows the timeline of present illness, intervention and follow-up.
She reported a long-term history of obesity and hypertension. She denied allergies and cigarette smoking and reported a sedentary lifestyle with no physical activity. The patient was nulliparous and had been on oral contraceptive therapy since the age of 25. The therapy was discontinued by her physicians after her PE. At the time of the examination she was on nebivolol, alprazolam and warfarin adjusted for INR, as well as vitamin B12 and folate supplementation (400 μg). Her family history was negative for thrombosis and cardiovascular diseases.
The patient reported that she began struggling with obesity during her childhood. She began adulthood at a weight of 90 kg (BMI 35.0 kg/m2). Maximum and minimum weight reported by the patient were 117.5 kg (BMI 45.9 kg/m2) and 69 kg (BMI 27.0 kg/m2) respectively at 51 and 26 years of age. Soon after reaching her peak weight she started a hypocaloric diet as suggested by her family doctor, Table .
Anthropometrical, bioelectrical and clinical findings at physical examination are showed in Table with biochemical analyses. The patient’s BMI was greater than 34.99 Kg/m2, class II obesity according to WHO classification . Fat mass was estimated by bioelectrical impedance analysis (BIA) using a BIA 101 Akern s.r.l. (Italy). The exam, performed under standardized conditions revealed an important increase in fat mass although a normal state of hydration. The waist-to-hip ratio indicates an android fat distribution. Evidence of increased visceral fat depot is shown by waist circumference measurement.
Resting energy expenditure (REE) has been estimated by means of Mifflin predictive equations , which is more likely than the other known equations to estimate REE to within 10 % .
Before the PE, the patient was following the diet reported in Table , which was prescribed by her family doctor. Total energy and nutrient intakes were analyzed by trained dietitians using dedicated software developed by our Nutrition Unit incorporating “Food Composition Database for Epidemiological Studies in Italy” by Gnagnarella P, Salvini S, Parpinel M. (Version 1.2015 Website ).
The diet followed by the patient before the PE was a low-calorie diet that did not satisfy the dietary recommendations for protein and micronutrient intake (LARN 2014) .
The nutrient composition of the diet prescribed to the patient after the PE upon hospital discharge is reported in Table .
Vitamin K free diets typically are lacking in vegetables, with a consequent insufficient dietary fiber and folate intake. Protein intake prescribed to the patient was far lower than any standard recommendation (less than 0.33 g/ kg of body weight) while the total fat and in particular the saturated ones were higher than the standard recommendations (LARN 2014 and ESC 2012 ).
The patient’s laboratory values at the time of her first examination in our NU are shown in Table . She had high levels of homocysteine and low prealbumin. She also was vitamin D deficient as can be seen in patients with obesity .
Both folate and vitamin B12 concentrations levels were within the accepted normal ranges, likely due to her supplementation and not her dietary intake.
After the nutritional assessment, a balanced, low-calorie diet was prescribed, with particular attention to sodium and soluble carbohydrates intake. The protein intake prescribed was equivalent to 0.8 g/Kg of actual body weight. The nutritional composition of the diet prescribed at our NU is shown in Table .
In order to avoid a sharp change in vitamin K intake the starting vitamin K intake prescribed was low (57.88 μg per day). Gradually her vitamin K intake was increased to 150 μg per day. Folate supplementation was prescribed (400 μg per day) as well as vitamin D supplementation (300,000 IU every 3 months for 9 months) .
The benefit of having her seen in the NU was that our staff was able to take the appropriate amount of time to counsel the patient and to ensure she understood the dietary guidelines and risk of complications in order to transform the acquired knowledge into behavior change and to achieve greater adherence.
The patient’s INR values were tested on a regular base. As shown in Table , the INR values were therapeutic and remained constant immediately following initiation of the prescribed diet.