A 30-year-old female (weight 65 kg and height 158 cm) came to our emergency department with injury to the left foot, due to fall from the stool of height approximately 2 feet. She lost her balance while arranging things in overhead cupboards when she was standing on a stool with heels elevated and landed on the floor with plantar flexion at ankle joint and abduction at midfoot. She presented to us immediately after trauma with pain and swelling over the midfoot region without any external wounds. On clinical examination, there was severe tenderness over mid-foot, and abnormal bony prominence was present over the dorsomedial aspect of the left foot, without any distal neurovascular deficit. Midfoot joint movements were severely restricted, making the patient unable to walk. The radiographs of the left foot were done in the form of anteroposterior, lateral, and obliques views. Radiographs revealed naviculocuneiform joint dislocation and fracture of anterior process of the calcaneus with calcaneocuboid joint dislocation .
Closed reduction under anesthesia was attempted by traction and manipulation of midfoot, but it was not successful. Hence, open reduction and internal fixation with K-wire was planned. Calcaneocuboid and naviculocuneiform joints were approached with the help of two mini-open incisions 3 cm (dorsolateral) and 4 cm (dorsomedial), respectively, over midfoot. There was a disruption of interosseous ligament and medial naviculocuneiform joint capsule. The soft tissues entrapped between calcaneocuboid and naviculocuneiform joints were removed. Using axial traction in line with 1st metatarsal and adduction of midfoot, navicular was reduced. After confirming congruent reduction with the help of an image intensifier, two parallel, 2 mm K-wires were passed through medial cuneiform and navicular into the talus. A transverse Kwire was passed through medial cuneiform into middle cuneiform to give complete stability to the medial column. For the lateral column, a 2 mm K-wire was passed from cuboid to calcaneal head. Postoperatively, ankle and foot were immobilized in the below-knee slab posteriorly .
Sutures were removed after 2 weeks and below knee cast applied with strict non-weight-bearing. K-wires and below-knee cast were removed after 8 weeks and gradual weight-bearing as per tolerance started. At the end of 5 months, there was only a mild restriction of midfoot range of movements (adduction 5° and abduction 5°) with American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) midfoot score of 85. At 24-month follow-up, she had a full range of midfoot movements and complained of mild pain only after fast walking and running with AOFAS midfoot score of 95 .