The patient is a 36-year-old female gravida 4, para 1 who had undergone cesarean section in 2010. She had undergone ultrasound-guided D&C due to CSP (gestational age: 6 weeks) 53 days prior (day 0) in a local hospital. There was a small amount of vaginal bleeding after the operation. On day 13, the serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) level (16,846 mIU/mL) was higher than that before (day 4: 3103 mIU/mL), but no obvious abnormality was found by ultrasound in the local hospital. After taking mifepristone orally for 6 days, the serum hCG level continued to decrease. On day 39, the patient was reexamined and her serum hCG level was 892.9 mIU/mL. Doppler ultrasound showed a heterogeneous echo at the scar of the cesarean section, measuring 2.9 cm × 3.0 cm in size, which suggested a high possibility of residual pregnancy lesions. On day 48, the patient visited the outpatient department of our hospital. Color Doppler ultrasound showed a 4.5 cm × 3.8 cm mass in the cervical isthmus of the right anterior wall of the uterus, with a fuzzy boundary and abundant blood flow signal inside under color Doppler flow imaging (CDFI) scanning, protruding outside the uterus. Serum hCG level was 463.16 mIU/mL. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the mass, approximately 4.8 cm × 4.1 cm × 3.7 cm, with an abundant blood supply, in the isthmus of the cervix . The hemoglobin level was 137 g/L. On day 53, the patient was admitted to the ward. After admission, ultrasonography showed that the mass increased to 5.3 cm × 5.3 cm × 4.2 cm . On day 55, transabdominal resection of the scar pregnancy lesion was performed. Intraoperative exploration showed extensive adhesion between the anterior wall of the uterus and bladder. After separation of the adhesion, an ultraviolet blue convex mass was seen on the right side of the cesarean scar, approximately 4 cm × 3 cm, with large blood vessels on the surface. The lesion was completely removed. Absorbable suture was used to repair the uterus. Intraoperative blood loss was about 1000 mL, and two units of red blood cell (RBC) suspension were transfused. The hemoglobin values of the patient were 110 g/L, 83 g/L and 86 g/L respectively on the first, fourth and sixth day after operation. Nine days after the operation (day 64), the patient recovered well with a small amount of vaginal bleeding; her hemoglobin level was 88 g/L, and serum hCG level decreased to 7.19 mIU/mL. Paraffin pathology showed degenerative villi in the hemorrhagic and necrotic tissues . The patient was discharged on day 64. Menstruation resumed 26 days after the operation (day 81).
Fifty-three days after the operation (day 108), the patient was readmitted to the local hospital due to massive vaginal bleeding, up to 10 times more than the amount of normal menstruation. She underwent emergent UAE to stop bleeding. Sixty-one days after the operation (day 116), massive vaginal bleeding occurred again, which was 5 times more than the amount of normal menstruation, so she revisited our hospital. Ultrasound showed a cystic mass measuring 2.7 cm × 1.2 cm × 1.7 cm on the right side of the isthmus of the cervix, with a clear boundary and irregular shape, and the mass had good perfusion. The local blood flow velocity was approximately 100 cm/s. A low echo area with uneven thickness was seen around the liquid area, which was about 0.8 cm in the thicker area (as shown in Fig. ). A diagnosis of pseudoaneurysm with local thrombosis was made through ultrasound. Her hemoglobin level was 78 g/L. A repeat of the UAE was suggested. The patient initially refused; however, she agreed after several days of consideration. On day 123, uterine arteriography was performed under local anesthesia. After the catheter was inserted into the right internal iliac artery, an abnormal concentration of the contrast medium was found . A plan to precisely select the responsible vessel for vascular embolization was made. However, the approach failed because the target vessel was curved and slender. Next, transvaginal UGTI was performed on day 126. The surgery was successful, and there was a small amount of vaginal bleeding after the operation. On day 131, the lesion reduced to 1.2 cm × 1.2 cm in size. On day 133, transvaginal UGTI was performed again. On day 135, the patient had massive vaginal bleeding again, which was about 4 times more than the amount of normal menstruation. The patient then underwent intrauterine balloon compression. On day 136, the vaginal bleeding increased. A speculum examination showed a large number of clots and fresh blood flowing out of the vagina. Transabdominal hysterectomy was recommended because of the repeated failure of conservative treatment. The patient and her family agreed with the treatment regimen. On day 136, transabdominal hysterectomy was performed under general anesthesia. Intraoperative exploration showed a soft convex mass approximately 2 cm × 1 cm in size on the right side of the cesarean scar. The removed uterus was sent for pathological examination. The blood loss was approximately 200 mL, and two units of RBC suspension were infused. The patient recovered well after the operation and was discharged on day 141. The patient was followed up at 1 and 6 months postoperatively and there was no abnormality discovered. The entire treatment process is shown in Fig. .