A 54 year old woman (with a background of hypertension and asthma) presented to the ophthalmology department with an abrupt onset of left visual field loss. This was characterised as an inferior quadrantinopia. She also had an enlarged blind spot on the right and at this time fundoscopy revealed a markedly swollen right optic disc suggestive of papillitis. This visual defect persisted for several weeks but eventually disappeared. She was left with the right optic nerve lesion.
Eight months later she was referred to the stroke services. She had developed a balance disturbance. For four months she had also been experiencing progressive numbness of her feet along with weakness of her legs, worse on the right. She had noted poorer motor control of her right hand. She was becoming increasingly fatigued and breathless on exertion. Examination revealed obesity. She had no new cranial nerve signs. Peripheral nervous system examination showed absent ankle jerks and pin-prick sensation was impaired on the feet.
Given her non-specific presentation, the diagnosis was uncertain. Routine biochemistry, pituitary function tests, CT brain and MRI pituitary fossa were all normal. She was noted to have an elevated IgG at 21.6 and a raised SMA titre (IgG class >800). Type 2 diabetes mellitus was confirmed with an oral glucose tolerance test.
On routine review three months later her mobility had continued to decline and the impaired pin-prick sensation was now to the level of the upper tibiae. She had developed palpable lymph nodes in her supraclavicular fossa. Smooth muscle antibody (SMA) remained elevated; creatinine kinase (CK) was checked and was elevated at 360. IgG remained greater than 20.
A CT scan was therefore performed demonstrating cervical and axillary lymphadenopathy. There was no visceral disease. Biopsy of the axillary lymph node confirmed the diagnosis of an oestrogen receptor (ER) positive invasive carcinoma of mammary type. Mammography and ultrasound of the breasts were unremarkable.
She was therefore commenced on anastrozole. On review after 3 months of treatment she reported improved walking balance and improved numbness in her legs but no improvement in her right hand. Repeat CT confirmed reduction in the size of the lymph nodes. CK was still elevated at 453 but IgG was improved at 18.1. At 8 months of treatment with anastrozole, the CK has started to fall . Symptomatically her balance has improved. Her walking is still impaired but she has had no further deterioration.