An 87-year old gentleman presented to the geriatric medical team in June 2016 with a three-day history of worsening confusion, lethargy, ataxia, and fever (up to 38 °C) following a two-week trip to southern Spain.
By the time of admission, he had a GCS of 12 (M = 5, V = 4, E = 3), was hallucinating, and was incontinent of urine and faeces, though blood pressure and heart rate were normal. He also appeared hyperaesthetic, and seemed to find even capillary blood sugar testing extremely painful. He had no history of cognitive defect or other neurological conditions. He had been previously independently active, with frequent trips to Spain where he maintained a holiday home. He had cleaned out a shed during his last trip and we hypothesise he was likely to have sustained a sandfly bite during this.
His initial investigations showed a normal C-reactive protein (<5 mg/L) and white cell count (5.1 × 109/L), with normal neutrophil (3.73 × 109/L) and lymphocyte (1.07 × 109/L) counts, but a mild thrombocytopenia (134 × 109/L). A lumbar puncture was attempted but was unsuccessful, so no CSF examination was possible. However, an EEG showed no abnormal focal or epileptiform activity. A brain MRI showed age-related changes only. Malaria screen, urine and blood cultures, meningococcal and pneumococcal polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test results were all negative, as was a screen for human immunodeficiency virus.
He was treated with intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g, 12-hourly), amoxicillin (2 g, 4-hourly) and acyclovir (800 mg, 8-hourly) for 2 weeks and made a rapid improvement and returned to his normal state over a week, after which he was discharged home.
Acute and convalescent sera, taken 2 weeks apart, were sent to the Rare and Imported Pathogens Laboratory (Porton Down, Wiltshire, UK) for serological testing. IgG antibodies to Toscana and Naples virus were detected at titres of ≥1:10,000 (positive cut-off is 1:100 for this assay) by immunofluorescence assay on both samples (Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany). No other vectorborne pathogen was found in the routine serological panel testing.
We were unable to demonstrate the presence of IgM as, at the time of writing, there are no reliable assays for this. Toscana virus RNA, tested by an in-house Toscana-specific PCR, was undetectable on the initial sample. However this was taken 5 days into illness when the viral RNA is often no longer detectable.
We acknowledge we were unable to demonstrate a rise in IgG or the presence of viral RNA to confirm the diagnosis, and we recognise there is serological cross-reactivity between Toscana and Naples viruses, including some local strains such as Grenada virus . However, as only Toscana virus causes a neuroinvasive syndrome, and the IgG titre on the acute sample was extremely high (at least 100 times higher than the positive cut-off) it is highly unlikely that this was a non-specific reaction and very probable that this was an acute infection.