The patient was a 26-year-old White male with no known medical history who started to complain of headaches six months before presentation. The headache worsened over time and became more severe in the last month. No abnormal findings on physical examination were noted. No nausea, vomiting, unsteadiness, or any other associated signs or symptoms. An MRI of the brain showed a 4.5 × 4.3 × 3.9 cm mixed solid and cystic tumor along the surface of the vermis of the cerebellum. It contained multiple cystic areas with blood and a solid, strongly enhancing component. There was no surrounding vasogenic edema. It caused a mass effect on the fourth ventricle with secondary supratentorial hydrocephalus and CSF seepage. There was cerebellar tonsillar herniation and upward herniation of the cerebellum, with effacement of the quadrigeminal cistern. The radiological findings were suggestive of an ependymoma. An MRI of the spine was performed to complete the workup and revealed no abnormalities.
After case discussion and imaging review in a multidisciplinary meeting at our institution involving oncology, neurosurgery, pathology, radiation oncology, and radiology, the patient underwent surgery and gross total resection of the tumor after one week of presentation. Surprisingly, the pathology showed a high-grade neoplasm with immunophenotypic and molecular features of alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. Histologic examination revealed a densely cellular neoplasm comprising round cells arranged in sheets. The tumor cells had round-to-oval nuclei and prominent nucleoli . The mitotic figures were elevated, and scattered foci of necrosis were identified. Entrapped islands of the neuropil were noted focally. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the tumor cells were negative for the glial markers GFAP and OLIG2. Desmin and myogenin were strongly expressed in a subset of tumor cells . The cells showed variable expression levels of BCOR, BCL2, BCL6, p53, INSM1, and synaptophysin. They were negative for BRAF V600E mutant protein, CAM5.2, EMA, H3K27M mutant protein, mutant IDH1, NeuN, S100, and SOX-10. H3K27 trimethylation was preserved. In addition, the nuclear expression of INI-1 and ATRX was retained. The Ki-67 proliferative index was elevated. A molecular oncogenic gene fusion panel detected a PAX3-INO80D fusion. Two PTEN mutations (p.V290fs and p.T319*) were identified using Next Generation sequencing (NGS). There were no mutations in IDH1, IDH2, BRAF, TP53, histone H3, NF1, NF2, DICER1, RB1, CDKN2A, ATRX, or TERT promoters. There were no reportable copy numbers. The overall findings were those of a high-grade neoplasm with immunophenotypic and molecular findings consistent with alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma. The staging workup, which included total-body CT scans and a testicular ultrasound, was negative for the primary disease. Therefore, we are dealing with a rare entity among adults called primary alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma of the brain. Our patient was scheduled to start radiation therapy in his home country, followed by systemic therapy (VDC-IE protocol). The patient was then lost to follow-up.