A 29-year-old Chinese woman presented to the orthopedics clinic with the inability to walk for 11 years due to talipes equinovarus.
Symptoms started 11 years before presentation with talipes equinovarus walk after intramuscular hemangioma surgery.
The patient was admitted with a high arch deformity of her right foot. At the age of 11 years, a right lower leg tumor was detected, which was not given special attention. The patient was found to have an increased mass in the right leg at the age of 27 years and attended hospital for magnetic resonance imaging, which indicated abnormal signals in the right thigh. Hemangioma was considered and confirmed as intramuscular hemangioma . After surgery, the patient gradually developed a high arch deformity of the right foot, and could not walk normally. She sought treatment in many hospitals, and most of them suggested amputation of stump and installation of a prosthetic limb, which was rejected by the patient.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
A marked 15-cm surgical scar was noted on the right lower leg, which was markedly thin and reduced by 6 cm compared with the contralateral circumference, a high arched right equinus foot, broken skin on the right foot, flexor plantar deformity of the right ankle, limited dorsiflexor activity, regular movement of the right knee, and normal sensation .
Hemangioma was considered and confirmed as intramuscular hemangioma.
Preoperative X-ray showed corrected foot drop deformity, and no signs of fracture, and other bone abnormalities in the ankle joints. Preoperative tibial tuberosity advancement (TTA) was 164° . The TTA reflects the degree of talus inclination in the sagittal plane and is an indicator of the correction of pronation deformity, which is important for the stability of the entire hindfoot. TTA was measured between the tibial anatomical axis and the axis of the talus. Postoperative X-ray re-examination showed that the right ankle was in a functional position, and an external fixator was in position . A 1-mo review by postoperative X-ray showed that the right ankle was in a functional position, the ankle joint space was narrowed, and an external fixator was in position . A 4-mo postoperative review (removal of the external fixator) showed that the right ankle joint had a normal relationship; there were no signs of fracture or other bony abnormalities in the constituted bones . The patient's postoperative changes were consistent with the preoperative assessment and the expected surgical outcome. The surrounding soft tissues were slightly swollen (TTA 113°).