A 57-year-old female patient with no relevant past medical history was admitted to our institution on 21 July 2021, following the incidental discovery of a peripheral blastosis two days earlier. Bone marrow biopsy was compatible with AML. The laboratory work-up revealed a leucocytosis of 31.9 × 109/L (normal range 4–10 × 109/L), with eosinophilia of 7.66 × 109/L (normal range: 0.05–0.03 × 109/L) and normocytic normochromic anaemia of 115 g/L (normal range: 120–165 g/L) without thrombocytopenia. Cardiovascular status showed no peripheral oedema or signs of hypoperfusion. An echocardiogram on arrival revealed preserved bi-ventricular function in the absence of valvular pathologies.
Intra-thecal chemotherapy was administered (hydrocortisone, cytarabine, methotrexate) followed by systemic chemotherapy with cytarabine and daunorubicin starting on 23 July 2021. Two days later, the patient developed chest pain without signs of volume overload. An ECG showed anterior and inferior segment depression. T troponin was elevated to 690 ng/L (normal: <14 ng/L) and eosinophilia of 33.32 × 109/L was present. The patient was known for cardiovascular risk factors (arterial hypertension and smoking). We opted to perform a CMR study first, in the absence of ST elevated myocardial infarction (STEMI), because the patient had a thrombocytopenia of 45 G/L which was considered as a relative contra-indication for catheterization. A CMR examination (Sola 1.5 T, Siemens Germany) on 26 July 2021 demonstrated a new severe left ventricular (LV) dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 32% due to global hypokinesia. First-pass perfusion CMR during adenosine stress revealed extensive sub-endocardial hypoperfusion compatible with a generalized atherosclerotic triple-vessel coronary artery disease (CAD) or extensive triple-vessel vasospasm which can occur under cytarabine treatment. Due to severe dyspnoea requiring 3 L/min oxygen (adenosine effect, pulmonary infiltrates, and severe LV dysfunction), the CMR examination was stopped prematurely, thus preventing tissue characterization by late gadolinium enhancement (LGE). Pre-contrast myocardial T2-mapping showed high normal values not in favour of myocarditis. This incomplete CMR examination which yielded information on perfusion, but not on scar/necrosis (no LGE) did not allow us to establish a definitive diagnosis. Given the cardiovascular risk factors, CAD was considered as the most likely diagnosis at that time. A coronary angiogram, however, did not confirm atherosclerotic CAD. Since both, severe LV dysfunction and elevated troponin (between 600 and 1000 ng/L) persisted, the presence of generalized vasospasm was also deemed rather unlikely as being the underlying disease process. Due to signs of global cardiac decompensation, heart failure treatment was introduced with diuretics, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and aldosterone receptor antagonists.
On 11 August 2021, the patient suffered a cardiorespiratory arrest due to ventricular fibrillation treated by an external electric shock (return of spontaneous circulation at 7 min, no flow 3 min, low flow 4 min). Due to this evolution and in light of the persisting hyper-eosinophilia, EM was the most likely diagnosis. We started high dose of corticosteroid treatment (methylprednisolone 250 mg for three days followed by prednisone 1 mg/kg). After a multidisciplinary evaluation, the risk of endomyocardial biopsy was considered too high in this clinical setting. After achieving haemodynamic stability and cessation of inotropic support, we performed a CMR examination under good haemodynamic condition (blood pressure 108/66 mmHg, heart rate 100/min, temperature 36.5°, 1 L/min of supplemental oxygen). On free-breathing high-resolution LGE-CMR images, extensive diffuse sub-endocardial fibrosis was detected involving the entire LV, a hallmark of EM . In addition, two mural thrombi lining the inferior and anterior wall at the middle and apical levels were demonstrated (, arrows), also a typical finding of EM. Corticosteroid treatment was continued and we observed reduced congestion on clinical examination but with persistent cardiac dysfunction [Low ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) 31%]. The eosinophil count was observed to decrease to an undetectable level (0 × 109/L), which is believed to be attributed to the administration of glucocorticoids. A biological work-up [Antinuclear Antibodies (ANA), Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies (ANCA), rheumatoid factor] was negative and reasonably excluded an immunological cause. Apart from mild pleural effusion, a CT scan showed no evidence of pulmonary eosinophilic infiltration or infiltration of other organs and no tumour masses were found. Therefore, the hyper-eosinophilia was attributed to the AML treatment without an argument for another secondary reason such as drug hypersensitivity. Unfortunately, the evolution was fatal because of a massive haematemesis. A peptic ulcer in connection with recent steroid intake accentuated by anticoagulation was considered as potential cause, but the aetiology remained unknown. We performed no autopsy due to family wishes.