A 35-year old heterosexual man consulted for fatigue and speech disturbances on the 17th January 2009 at the Yaounde University Hospital Center. One week before, he started complaining of head dullness and slurred speech. His weight had dropped by 22%, from 72 to 56 kg over the past few months during which he also had persisting fever.
On neurological examination, he was confused and had cerebellar dysarthria. His pupils were symmetric with neither ophtalmoplegia nor ptosis. Facial sensation, swallowing and gag reflexes were normal. There was a left-sided hemiparesis with reduced sensation to pain and touch. There was a left Babinski sign. Reflexes were brisk on both sides, and no abnormal movement was present. A brain scan showed a ring-enhanced lesion in the right thalamus with edema extending downward to the upper midbrain . Human Immunodeficiency Virus 1 (HIV-1) serology was positive with a CD4 count of 14 cells/mm3. Viral load was not available. Full blood count showed moderate anemia (Hemoglobin 10.4 g/dl) and lymphopenia (1075 cells/mm3). Serum glutamate pyruvate transaminase and serum glutamate oxalate transaminase were respectively 61 and 62 IU/l. Hepatitis C and Hepatitis B viruses' serologies were negative. Immunoglobulin G anti-toxoplasmic antibodies were positive (1/1012). Sulfadiazine 4 g/pyrimethamine 25 mg daily and Methyl-prednisone 80 mg daily were started 3 days after admission. He was prescribed Lamivudine 30 mg/Zidovudine 300 mg 12 hourly, Efavirenz 600 mg daily and Fluconazole 200 mg daily for cryptococcal meningitis prophylaxis. On day-8 of admission, the patient was less confused, but developed a low frequency tremor of the upper and lower left limbs with jerky-like patterns. It was a postural and intention tremor with a more discreet resting component. No dystonic posture was noted (Additional file ). No tremor was observed in the paretic limbs. Electroencephalography was normal. Clonazepam 1 mg 12 hourly and trihexyphenidyl 5 mg 12 hourly were added to his treatment, with a reduction in the tremor 24 hours after and a complete resolution 8 days later (Additional file ). On discharge, 3 weeks after admission, his speech was fluent and motor power was normal on all limbs.