A 60-year-old woman was diagnosed with stage IIIB multiple myeloma (MM) in 2005. She was treated with chemotherapy, 6 cycles of VAD (vincristine + doxorubicin + dexamethasone) in 2006, then cyclophosphamide in 2007. This treatment was followed by an autologous bone marrow transplant in 2008. The disease relapsed in October 2010. She underwent decompressing lumbar spine surgery in 2010 and received various courses of treatment with zoledronic acid throughout her follow-up. The patient had also radiotherapy in 2009 (spine) and 2011 (spleen), followed by salvage chemotherapy throughout 2011 (cyclophosphamide + thalidomide + dexamethasone-CTD, then velcade + thalidomide + dexamethasone-VTD, and finally cyclophosphamide + prednisone). At this point she was considered to present a very good partial response (VGPR). In October 2012, during a routine medical consultation, she complained of palpitation and dyspnea starting 10 days before. The patient presented with hypercalcemia and had to be admitted for the treatment of this condition. During the admission, a second BMT was proposed to treat the refractory MM; therefore, myelosuppressive chemotherapy was initiated. After one week the neutrophil count fell to zero and painful vasculitis lesions arose in lower abdominal region and in the left thigh. Blood cultures were withdrawn and skin biopsy was performed. Antimicrobial therapy was started with cefepime and amphotericin B deoxycholate. Blood culture resulted positive for Pseudomonas aeruginosa and cefepime was switched to imipenem. After one week of this regimen, patient was still neutropenic, febrile and worsening clinical conditions. A new set of blood cultures was positive for Fusarium sp. The skin biopsy showed a large number of hyphae using direct microscopic exam, morphologically compatible with fusariosis. The patient died in November due to refractory septic shock.
Four clinical isolates of Fusarium sp. from clinical specimens were identified as: LIF 2008, 2009 and 2010 recovered from blood cultures (BacT/ALERT® 3D, bioMérieux AS, France), LIF 1994 from skin biopsy and F111 from the air of the patient’s hospital room.