We report the case of a 7-year-old girl with metastatic medulloblastoma (T3b M1 according to the Chang staging system) diagnosed as a result of an epileptic seizure after 3 months of headache. Brain MRI in July 2000 revealed a mass in the posterior fossa, in the midline cerebellum next to the fourth ventricle and vermis, causing hydrocephalus and an initial herniation of the cerebellar tonsils. At the end of July, she underwent a macroscopically complete resection of a 3 × 3 cm nodule filling the fourth ventricle and attached to its lateral recesses. The final histologic diagnosis was classic medulloblastoma.
A postoperative cerebral and spinal MRI in August 2000 revealed an ambiguous neoplastic residue close to the surgical cavity, jutting out into the fourth ventricle, and malignant neoplastic cells were found in the cerebrospinal fluid.
From August 2000 to March 2001, the girl was treated according to our institutional protocol for metastatic medulloblastoma/PNET in children over 3 years of age, which included sequential high-dose chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and myeloblative-dose chemotherapy with autologous hemopoietic stem cell rescue . The protocol was partially modified omitting two scheduled vincristine administrations due to intestinal toxicity after the first course.
Hyperfractionated accelerated radiotherapy was administered from November to December 2000, scheduled in two daily 1.3 Gy fractions 6 hours apart, 5 days a week for a total dose of 31.2 Gy to the craniospinal axis plus a boost to the posterior fossa using a 1.5 Gy fractionation twice a day to give a total dose of 59.7 Gy.
Diagnostic lumbar puncture before radiotherapy still documented malignant neoplastic cells, while lumbar puncture and MRI after radiotherapy and between the two myeloablative courses were both negative, with the latter showing only surgical sequelae.
In June 2001, our patient started the follow-up program with routine MRI and outpatient visits. In September 2001, MRI showed multiple focal contrast-enhanced areas in the right thalamus, brainstem, and cerebellum, interpreted as iatrogenic alterations. A spectrum MRI confirmed their necrotic and treatment-related nature. These lesions had increased in number in the MRI of December 2001, and they appeared more strongly gadolinium-enhanced in subsequent images in February and April 2002. Cortisone therapy was administered from January 2002, starting with 6 mg/day. It was then progressively tapered off, but the neurological signs became worse, with cervical pain and frontal headache, so it was re-introduced from March to July 2002.
In March 2002, a year after ending the oncological treatment, an endocrinologist assessed the girl. At 8 years and 4 months old, her growth characteristics were: height 119 cm (3rd percentile), growth target 160 cm (25th percentile), growth rate 0 cm per year, and basal IGF-1 below the 3rd percentile. Since her growth had not recovered, GH replacement therapy was started after an arginine challenge in February 2004, administering somatotropin at a dosage of 5 mg per week (15 UI, 0.16 mg/Kg per week).
In May 2004 (3 months after starting somatotropin), MRI showed a clear progression of the enhanced lesions distributed along the occipital horn of the right lateral ventricle and the peritrigonal region. The main finding was perifocal edema, already seen at previous follow-up scans but now extending further, to the posterior half of the right hemisphere and in contact with the basal nuclei and the thalamus. There was no evidence of recurrent disease in the posterior fossa. The girl also reported headache and visual impairment.
Cortisone therapy was administered again, with no improvement in the visual impairment or MRI findings. Due to the latter, and the possible proinflammatory activity of GH, somatotropin was discontinued in June 2004. Subsequent MRIs in September 2004 (3 months after suspending somatotropin) and January 2005 (after 7 months without somatotropin) showed a remarkable reduction of the inflammatory areas both in the supratentorial region and in the posterior fossa; the visual impairment had also improved after suspending GH. In March 2005, we introduced somatotropin again at lower doses (3 mg a week) with no evidence of further edema in the post-therapy alterations at subsequent MRIs in November 2005, June 2006, December 2006, July 2007, and March 2008 . No recurrent disease was documented by these MRI studies, and the girl is currently in continuous complete response.