A 70-year-old man with a past medical history of pulmonary valve stenosis for which he underwent surgical valvulotomy when he was 20-year-old. He came into the clinic complaining of worsening exertional dyspnoea in the last 6 months. There was no fever. We were unaware of any co-existing cardiac conditions at that time. The previous surgery took place in another hospital, and we did not have access to surgical data or any previous echocardiograms. We could look into a report showing an 82 mmHg mean pressure gradient through the pulmonary valve, before the valvulotomy. Other cardiac conditions were unknown at that moment. Physical exam revealed blood pressure 130/70 mmHg, irregular heartbeats, a systolic murmur on the right upper sternal border, and both diastolic murmurs at the lower left sternal border and systolic murmur at the apex. The respiratory examination revealed diffuse bilateral crackles. Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation and complete left bundle branch block. The chest X-ray showed pulmonary congestion. Blood tests were normal, only pro-blood natriuretic peptide (BNP) was increased (3420 ng/dL) (normal range 0–900).
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed a non-dilated left ventricle with normal ejection fraction at 65%. The ventricular walls thickness was normal, and there were no regional wall motion abnormalities apart from paradoxical septal motion, probably related to the left bundle branch block. The right cardiac cavities were slightly dilated and the right ventricle contractility was good (TAPSE 18 mm). Mitral valve prolapse (P2 and P3 segments of the posterior leaflet) and severe mitral regurgitation (PISA diameter 10 mm, vena contracta 8 mm, regurgitant volume 62 cc) were also noted on the echocardiogram. The aortic valve was trileaflet in terms of its structure with severe regurgitation (vena contracta (VC) 8.5 mm, regurgitant volume 70 cc) but no vegetation or mass was found. The regurgitation was central and its jet broad. The right coronary leaflet was thickened and hypoplasic. The aortic size was normal (sinus aorta 34 mm, ascending aorta 35 mm, descending aorta 26 mm). We also found a 60 mm diameter pulmonary artery aneurysm and severe pulmonary regurgitation (regurgitation jet area /RAA 53% and vena contracta 7.2 mm) ( and ). The pulmonary transvalvular gradient was 20 mmHg. The pulmonary valve was dysplastic. Finally, we found mild to moderate tricuspid regurgitation and a 40 mmHg systolic gradient between the right ventricle and right atrium was calculated. We explored the interatrial septum in standard parasternal and subcostal views, finding a thickened interatrial septum but without any anatomical or haemodynamic abnormality.
We continued the patient’s workup with transoesophageal echocardiogram that confirmed the presence of severe regurgitation of multiple valves and the pulmonary artery aneurysm. Moreover, we found a double atrial septum with a midline chamber between both atria We did not calculate the pulmonic to systemic shunt ratio because the presence of severe pulmonary and aortic regurgitations could artefact the measure. Moreover, we did not perform a contrast study because we considered that Colour Doppler clearly defined the interatrial walls or double septum, the cavity between them and the small interatrial communication. A cardiovascular magnetic resonance scan confirmed the presence of a double atrial septum and interatrial communication. It showed a non-dilated left ventricle with slightly depressed contractility (58 cc/m2 and ejection fraction 56%). The administration of gadolinium did not show any global or segmental enhancements. The right ventricle and right atrium were slightly dilated, and the right ventricular ejection fraction was 40%. It also showed a 60 mm artery pulmonary aneurysm and a shunt QP/QS ratio = 1.3. The severity of the regurgitations was not analysed and the drainage of the four pulmonary veins was normal. The right heart catheterization found a severe second group pulmonary artery hypertension [PAP 72/21 mmHg (medium 38 mmHg), pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) 25 mmHg, and pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) 8 WU]. The coronariography showed normal coronary arteries.
Finally, a comprehensive aetiologic workup was performed and syphilis, endocarditis, carcinoid syndrome, and collagen vascular diseases were ruled out. It was considered that the most likely aetiology was congenital.
The pharmacological therapy was lisinopril 20 mg o.d. and furosemide b.i.d. The latter was needed because of fluid overload. Taking into account both clinical and cardiac image findings, it was considered that the patient eligible to surgical repair. The decision was made by the multidisciplinary team (cardiologists and cardiac surgeons). It was decided triple valve replacement because of the patient’s heart failure and pulmonary hypertension, as well as the closure of the interatrial communication due to the thrombo-embolic risk, as it is considered below. Finally, it was also decided that the patient needed resection of the pulmonary aneurysm because of its size (60 mm) and the presence of pulmonary hypertension. The patient has successfully undergone surgery last month (triple valve replacement, tricuspid annuloplasty, pulmonary aneurysm resection, and double septum closure). The patient currently remains asymptomatic and a post-surgical TTE showed left ventricular normal function (left ejection fraction 65%) and normal prosthesis function.