A 2-year-old boy was admitted to the Pediatric Emergency Room in an extremely poor general condition, with apnea, asystole, immeasurable oxygen saturation and the signs of severe brain injury (Glasgow Coma Scale 3). Based on the information from his father, the boy had a fever and adipsia for several hours and vomited twice. The symptoms appeared in the afternoon a day before the hospital admission; based on this presentation, a non-specific upper respiratory infection had been diagnosed by a family physician in an outpatient setting.
The patient passed away 30 min post-admission despite a resuscitation attempt undertaken at the Emergency Room. Examination of blood samples obtained at admission revealed normal leukocyte count with a decrease in neutrophil fraction and an increase in lymphocyte, monocyte and basophile percentages, elevated concentrations of urea, creatinine and C-reactive protein, considerable hypoglycemia, increased activity of aspartate aminotransferase with normal activity of alanine aminotransferase, a significant rise in lactate dehydrogenase, and procalcitonin above the upper detection limit.
Based on medical history, clinical and laboratory findings, patient’s death was attributed to septic shock. However, a medicolegal autopsy was requested by the prosecutor to establish the cause of death ultimately and to evaluate the correctness of outpatient medical treatment.
The autopsy was performed seven days after the patient’s death. External examination of the body revealed purpuric rash, more pronounced on the face, arms and chest, along with the signs of early decomposition . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood samples were obtained aseptically before opening the body cavities. CSF was collected by means of suboccipital puncture, and blood by transthoracic puncture of the heart. Moreover, brain, lung, liver, spleen, heart and kidney samples were obtained, as aseptically as possible. Internal examination revealed massive hemorrhages in both adrenal glands , and petechiae in esophageal mucosa, thymus, subepicardial and subpleural tissue . No evidence of meningitis was found on macroscopic examination.
The macroscopic findings were confirmed on microscopic examination. The evidence of unspecific passive congestion was found in the brain, thymus, lungs, liver and spleen, along with fiber waviness in the heart. Moreover, massive hemorrhages at the corticomedullary junction were identified in both adrenal glands .
Since the autopsy was carried out seven days after the patient’s death, no microbiological studies were performed. However, the genetic material of group W N. meningitidis was detected in CSF samples using PCR. Due to the positive result of the test, other samples (skin, brain, lungs, liver, spleen, heart and kidneys) were not subjected to PCR examination.