A 50-year-old post-menopausal woman presented to the out-patient department with a bony hard swelling on the extensor aspect of her right forearm. The swelling was gradually increasing in size, over the past 2-years. She had sustained a fracture of the ulna 11-years ago treated by 4 weeks splintage.
On local examination there was a small non-tender prominence of 2 × 3 cm located in the middle one-third of the right ulna. Both anteroposterior and lateral radiographs revealed an expansile lytic destructive lesion involving the mid one-third of diaphysis of the right ulna, with an ill-defined zone of transition . No matrix calcification or periosteal reaction is seen. Surrounding soft tissues were normal. The patient had already been undergoing treatment for primary hypothyroidism, and benign positional vertigo. Other systemic examination was normal.
Serological examination revealed an elevated alkaline phosphatase of 338 IU/L (normal: 100–280 IU/L), other serum biochemistry including liver and renal function tests were normal. A general radiographic skeletal survey ruled out the presence of similar lesions at other sites. Serum parathormone estimation was within normal range and an ultrasound scan of the neck failed to reveal any thyroid or parathyroid abnormality. A clinical suspicion of primary bone tumor was entertained. The involved bone segment was curetted out and cancellous iliac crest graft interposed. A bridge-plating was performed and the forearm splinted for two weeks after which she was started on physiotherapy.
On gross examination the tissue was soft in consistency, yellowish in color with few bony particles. Histologically the lesion showed a diffuse infiltrate, composed of numerous foamy histiocytes admixed with inflammatory infiltrate . Focally nodular aggregates of mature lymphocytes were noted along with presence of plasma cells and neutrophils. Transversing capillaries and occasional multinucleated giant cells were also seen. No pigment was seen in the cytoplasm of macrophages. The tissue cultures failed to reveal any organisms. Ultrastructure examination confirmed the cells to be of fibrohistiocytic in origin. No Birbeck granules were demonstrated, thereby ruling out Langerhans cell histiocytosis. The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was lost in the follow-up.