The patient was a 59-year-old man from the town of Jeli in Malaysia. Jeli lies on the edge of the Belum-Temengor rainforest, one of Malaysia’s national reserves bordering Thailand. Gradual urbanization over the past few decades has made this town an outbreak area of dengue and leptospirosis.
The patient was admitted with fever, headache, myalgia, arthralgia, and poor oral intake over the 6 days prior to admission. He was given antipyretic and amoxicillin by his general practitioner, but his condition had worsened. No blood investigation was done. On the day of presentation, he had difficulty in breathing and was referred to hospital.
At the emergency department, the patient was conscious but lethargic. He was mildly dehydrated, blood pressure (BP) was 102/78 mmHg and heart rate was 104 bpm. Capillary refill time was less than 2 s with a high, spiking temperature of 40 °C. He was mildly jaundiced and abdomen was soft with no organomegaly. There were no signs of haemorrhagic manifestation. Respiratory rate was 35 breaths/min and oxygen saturation (SPO2) was 93% on ambient air. Lungs were clear and breath sounds were equal bilaterally. He had type I respiratory failure, with arterial blood gas (ABG) pH of 7.36, PaCO2 at 25.6 mm Hg, PaO2 at 77.4 mm Hg, bicarbonate at 21.2 mmol/L, and lactate at 1.8 mmol/L on face mask oxygen of 5 L/min. Non-invasive ventilatory (NIV) support was required to improve oxygenation. Bedside abdominal ultrasonography performed showed no hepatosplenomegaly with a normal biliary tract. Inferior vena cava (IVC) was collapsed at 0.88 cm, with a collapsibility index of more than 50%. Fluid challenge with normal saline was initiated and titrated up to 10 mL/kg/h.
Investigations done in the emergency department revealed a platelet count of 33 × 109/L and a haematocrit (HCT) level of 39.4%. A rapid test using immunochromatic technique (ICT) was positive for dengue non-structural protein1 (NS1) antigen; similarly, the serologic Anti-DENV Immunoglobulin M (IgM) testing. International normalized ratio (INR) was 1.23 and aPTT was 44.3 s. Other laboratory investigation results included: haemoglobin (14.3 g/dL), red blood cell (RBC) count (4.55 × 1012/L) and white blood cell (WBC) count (6.91 × 109/L). Hyponatraemia (131 mmol/L) was present and liver function test was deranged with a total bilirubin of 46 mmol/L, alanine transferase of 77 mmol/L and alkaline phosphatase of 151 mmol/L . A blood film for malaria parasites was not carried out.
The patient was diagnosed as a severe dengue case and admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for closer observation. Bedside echocardiography revealed a normal cardiac function and IVC had picked up to 1.9 cm with the collapsibility index reduced to less than 50%, which corresponded to an improved volume status. However, the serum lactate level was still increasing, acidosis worsening and urine output decreasing. Further fluid challenge was administered carefully up to 50 mL/kg over 8 h with regular IVC assessment. Intravenous ceftriaxone, 2 g daily, was initiated by the physician to cover the possibility of concomitant leptospirosis because the patient was from an outbreak area.
On the following day, the patient’s oxygenation deteriorated and NIV support had to be increased gradually. Under an FiO2 of 60%, ABG showed: pH 7.247, pCO2 30.4 mmHg, pO2 100 mmHg, HCO3 16.1 mmol/L and lactate 3.5 mmol/L. A chest radiograph repeated the following day showed the presence of perihilar haziness and increased pulmonary vascular markings . The patient’s platelet counts dropped further to 17 × 109/L but there was no sign of spontaneous bleeding. He also went through a few hypotensive episodes where the BP dropped to 85/50 mmHg and mean arterial pressure down to 60 mmHg. Vasopressor had to be initiated to maintain a mean arterial pressure of above 65 mmHg. Meanwhile, he suffered acute kidney injury with a urine output of 5–10 mL/h, requiring haemodialysis. Although it was the seventh day of illness (second day from admission), the patient had a spiking temperature of 38.7 °C. The fever was preceded by severe shivering which lasted for nearly an hour. This shivering led clinicians to perform a blood film for malaria parasite (BFMP). The result showed the presence of the malaria parasite resembling Plasmodium knowlesi with parasitaemia of 520,000/µL of blood. Intravenous artesunate 2.4 mg/kg daily and doxycycline 100 mg twice a day were started. Subsequently, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test confirmed the parasite to be P. knowlesi. Soon after starting anti-malarial treatment, the malaria parasite count dropped to 460,000/μL after 24 h and 320/μL after 48 h, respectively. The patient’s platelet count started to improve as well .
On the sixth day from admission, the patient’s respiratory symptoms worsened again with coarse crackles heard over both lungs on auscultation. He required NIV support to maintain an SPO2 of more than 92%. From ABG, PaO2 was 80 mmHg with FiO2 of 60%. Chest radiography showed increased air-space opacity in both lungs and parapneumonic effusion . His WBC count raised to 17.4 × 109/L with predominant neutrophilia, and C-reactive protein was more than 200 mg/L. He was then treated for hospital-acquired pneumonia with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS). Intravenous meropenam was initiated.
With close monitoring and vigilant treatment, the patient’s condition improved. His oxygenation, renal function, liver function, and platelet count returned to normal. He was successfully weaned off NIV support on the eighth day from admission. Blood and urine cultures all yielded negative results. Serology for leptospirosis, syphilis, hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV screenings were negative. Parasites were cleared from his blood on the eighth day after starting artesunate and doxycycline. He was finally able to be transferred to the general ward, and was discharged on the 15th day of hospitalization (refer Fig. for event timeline). On subsequent follow-up the following month, he was discharged from the medical clinic without serious complications.