A 65-year-old lady presented with weight loss and repeated attacks of vomiting for the last year. The vomiting was occurring after the meals and was non projectile and non-bilious with no blood. The patient reported history of loss of 15 kg within this period. The patient had negative surgical history, she had hypertension controlled with diet and medications. The family history was negative for malignancies.
During examination she was pale with no jaundice, the vital signs were normal and the abdominal examination showed a non-tender mass in the left hypochonrdium. The mass was arising from below the left costal margin and extended to 15 cm toward the left iliac fossa. It was firm in consistency with smooth surface. The mass showed no mobility.
The blood tests showed low hemoglobin level (9 g/dl), with normal white blood cell count, and platelets. The renal function was normal.
Ultrasound and CT-scan examinations of the abdomen showed a huge mass about 45 cm × 21 cm arising from the area between the spleen and the left kidney and displacing the kidney toward the midline. The mass has areas of cystic and solid components. The possible origin was from the gastric wall and they advised biopsy for confirmation .
Gastroscopy and biopsy showed a huge mass that compressing the gastric cavity with no areas of ulceration, biopsy taken.
The results of the biopsy showed gastrointestinal stromal tumor.
Neoadjuvant imatinib, a TKI tyrosine kinase inhibitor, started in the hope of decreasing the tumor size with no any response.
Surgery done through midline incision, an enormous mass found arising from the gastric wall and attached to the spleen. The tumor caused displacement of the left kidney to the region of the duodeno-jejunal flexure .
Total gastrectomy en-block with splenectomy and reconstruction done through roux-en-y esophago-jejunostomy and jejunojejunostomy. The histopathological examination confirms the diagnosis GIST tumor with 5 mitotic counts per HPF.
The patient discharged home after one week with no postoperative complications. The patient is categorized in the very high risk group for recurrence we are planning to treat the patient with the adjuvant TKI 400 mg daily for the next 3 years with follow up Ct scans for the detection of early recurrence or metastatic disease.