A previously healthy 3-month-old boy was referred to our Hospital with a 15-day history of a blistering eruption on his hands and feet. He received a first dose of combined vaccination against diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, poliomyelitis, hepatitis B and Haemophilus influenzae B 2 days before the onset of the bullous rash. He had been previously treated at home with topical gentamicin and oral co-amoxiclavulante, without resolution of the skin eruption. There was no relevant family history for autoimmune or blistering disorders and no risk factors during pregnancy or delivery had been identified. Infant was breast-fed and growing normally. Clinically he presented with blistering lesions with a prevailing acral distribution: large vesicles and tense bullae with surrounding erythema were seen on the palms and soles, whereas widespread smaller blisters on erythematous skin could be noticed on the trunk and abdomen . Mucous membranes were not involved and other systems’ examination was unremarkable. Observations were within normal limits and the patient was afebrile. Results of laboratory investigations showed that the patient had a mild eosinophilia (1.47 × 109/L, 12% of WBC count); inflammatory markers and complement components were normal. Bacteriology analysis of the fluid inside blisters revealed no infections and blood virological tests were negative. A first biopsy for histologic study was taken from a recent vesicular lesion and showed subepidermal blister with a mixed superficial perivascular inflammatory infiltrate with abundant eosinophils. A second biopsy for direct immunofluorescence (DIF) was taken from uninvolved perilesional skin: the results of DIF showed linear deposition of immunoglobulin G (IgG, faint deposits) and complement component 3 (C3, intense deposits) along the basement membrane zone leading to the diagnosis of bullous pemphigoid . The immunoblot assay was positive for BP antigen 180. Oral steroids have been started with prednisone at 1.5 mg/kg/day for ten days. Once the development of blisters was stopped and erythema had subsided, a careful tapering of prednisone was started, following an alternate day scheme. Considering the severity of the disease and the young age of infants, we started with a higher dose than suggested in guidelines . For the whole duration of steroid treatment, the patient was subjected to a strict follow-up: therapy was well tolerated, with no adverse effects, as hypertension, weight gain, hyperglycemia or other blood test alterations. Prednisone was carefully tapered off over a 2-month period with no evidence of disease relapse and currently the patient is still in remission. Resumption of the vaccination schedule did not induce any recurrence of the disease.
A 17-month-old girl with a history of eczema and autoimmune enteropathy developed a blistering eruption on her hands and feet a few days after the second dose of hexavalent vaccination. Considering the autoimmune disorder affecting her gut, on the recommendation of gastroenterologists, she was treated with an immunosuppressive agent (tacrolimus) and corticosteroid; during a suspension of therapy for remission of gastrointestinal symptoms, she received the first dose of hexavalent vaccination at the age of 15 months with appearance of a single blister on the back of one hand 5 days later. At the age of 17 months 7 days after the second dose of vaccination, she developed a bullous rash on the limbs which subsequently spread to the whole body. Two punch biopsies were taken, one for the histologic examination and the other for DIF, and they led to the diagnosis of bullous pemphigoid. The girl was treated with oral prednisone 1 mg/kg/day; as the lesions did not improve the dose was increased to 2 mg/kg/day but still without benefit. Subsequently she received intravenous Ig and finally plasmapheresis (5 sessions) with full recovery within 6 months. The patient developed over the years an IPEX-like syndrome caused by deficiency of CD25 (IL2-RA), characterized by immunodeficiency and autoimmunity, which was genetically confirmed. She recently underwent a bone marrow transplant with success.
A 2-month-old girl with unremarkable family history for bullous diseases, developed an eruption of bullous lesions, on an erythematous base, confluent, located in both hands and feet, with palm and sole involvement, together with multiple ovaloid erythematous plaques, some with vesicles, on the abdomen. Ten days before she had been diagnosed with acute gingivostomatitis subsequently confirmed by PCR detection of HSV-1 DNA as herpetic stomatitis. At the beginning, to avoid bullous impetigo, the infant was managed with intravenous co-amoxiclavulanate. IgM antibody titer against HSV-1 was positive and suggestive of recent infection. A skin biopsy subsequently confirmed BP, showing sub-epidermal blisters. A second biopsy for direct immunofluorescence DIF showed linear deposits of IgG and C3 at the epidermal BMZ, confirming the diagnosis of bullous pemphigoid. Immunoblot assay was positive for BP antigen 180. The infant was managed with oral prednisone 1 mg/kg/day with rapid improvement, and she became free of blisters after 3 weeks of treatment. Follow-up to 6 months was good.
All parents of the three reported cases provided written informed consent to the inclusion of data concerning their infants in the manuscript in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration.