A 67-year-old Japanese male never-smoker was diagnosed with stage IA3 lung adenocarcinoma of the left upper lobe . He had no relevant family history. He underwent thoracoscopic left lower lobectomy. However, ascites accumulated 33 months after the operation , paratracheal lymph node metastasis and pleural dissemination emerged , and positron emission tomography-computed tomography (CT) showed accumulation in the bronchial and axillary lymph nodes . Immunohistochemical examination of the peritoneal ascites was positive for napsin A and thyroid transcription factor-1, and he was accordingly diagnosed with postoperative recurrence of lung adenocarcinoma.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutation and anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) rearrangement analyses of resected lung tissue were both negative. Immunohistochemistry also revealed programmed death-ligand 1 expression of 20% (tumor-proportion score) and the patient was therefore started on carboplatin (5 area under the curve, day 1, every 3 weeks), pemetrexed (500 mg/m² day 1, every 3 weeks), and pembrolizumab (200 mg/body, day1, every 3 weeks). However, he developed a rash 2 weeks after the initiation of chemotherapy, which was considered to be an adverse event of the chemotherapy, and the treatment was therefore stopped. Two months after the discontinuation of chemotherapy, stomach bloating because of ascites appeared. The cytology from the ascites showed that the cause of the ascites is peritoneal carcinomatosis from lung cancer. The patient’s ascites increased despite internal use of furosemide, and drainage of 3.0 L of ascites was carried out every 2 weeks to relieve the bloating.
An Oncomine Dx target test of the resected specimen was positive for the BRAF V600E mutation. The patient was thus started on dabrafenib 150 mg twice per day and trametinib 2 mg once per day. Two days later, he developed a fever of 38°C, with no sign of infection, which disappeared the day after a withdrawal of the drugs. We considered that the fever was due to dabrafenib and trametinib therapy.
The drugs were restarted without dose reduction and the patient had a good clinical response to dabrafenib and trametinib therapy. His abdominal distention resolved, and drainage of peritoneal ascites was no longer required . Chest CT after the initiation of dabrafenib and trametinib therapy revealed reduced paratracheal and axillary lymph nodes and decreased peritoneal ascites .
Dabrafenib and trametinib treatment were continued for 7 months with no disease progression or severe adverse events and even now continued oral administration. Institutional approval is not required for this case report.