Our patient is a 5-year-old female who presented to Children's Hospital of Michigan with abdominal pain and constipation. Initial laboratory tests were unremarkable except for anemia of chronic disease without hematuria. Ultrasound of the abdomen showed 10.9 × 9.6 × 10.5 cm left abdominal mass, likely renal in origin with compression of the left renal pelvis with mild obstructive left hydronephrosis. Magnet resonance image (MRI) of the abdomen showed 8.8 × 8.4 × 9.8 cm left renal mass, with rupture of the tumor capsule and extensive left perinephric tumor infiltration with moderate to large ascites. The mass appears to arise in the region of the renal hilum and splays the kidney around its margins resulting in obstructive hydronephrosis and delayed excretion by the left kidney. Due to the extent of the tumor, already ruptured capsule, and close proximity to the vessels, she underwent a biopsy instead of total resection. Pathology revealed WT with favorable histology. She was finally diagnosed with stage III WT. She was initiated on treatment per AREN0532 protocol arm DD4A chemotherapy (VCR 1.5–2 mg/m2/dose IV, Dactinomycin 0.045 mg/kg/dose IV, Doxorubicin 30–45 mg/m2/dose IV).
She repeatedly developed fever within 24 h (12–24 h) after receiving chemotherapy from week 1 to 4 of treatment. Interestingly, the fever was noted to persistently occur in the same pattern and time range whenever VCR was administered as a single agent or in combination with other agents. As per institutional guidelines, the patient was hospitalized for evaluation of underlying sepsis with each fever the first 4 weeks consecutively. Fevers were high grade and lasted up to 48 h. During fever episodes, her absolute neutrophil count nadir in only one encounter was 700 cells/mm3 (otherwise the absolute neutrophil count was ranging between 1200 and 5000 cells/mm3), and there were no other associated clinical symptoms, and laboratory tests remained stable with normal total and differential white blood cell count, and negative infectious work up, including imaging, viral testing, and urine and blood cultures.
Anticipating an underlying allergic reaction leading to drug-induced fever as a probable adverse event of VCR we subsequently prophylactically administered dexamethasone 3 mg/m2/dose PO along with acetaminophen 15 mg/kg/dose PO one dose each prior and 12 h after each VCR administration till end of therapy (total of two doses of each medication given weekly from week 5 to week 25). Thereafter, the chemotherapy course including weekly VCR was uneventful and there were no reported recurring fevers. Moreover, the patient had no noted or reported toxicity from the prophylactic regimen. Of note, we elected not to use ibuprofen given the nephrotoxic risk as the patient has one kidney following her disease surgical control.
Besides receiving chemotherapy, the patient underwent tumor resection and left nephrectomy with a good response to chemotherapy with <10% viability. She also received total abdominal radiation of 10.5 Gy. Currently, the patient is 2 years off therapy in remission, growing and developing up to age with good quality of life.