A 27-year-old woman (gravida 2, para 1) was transferred from her local county hospital to the regional university hospital at gestational week (GW) 32 + 1 due to a positive throat swab for SARS-CoV-2 (quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction), increasing oxygen demand and a lack of intensive-care beds for COVID-19.
The patient, a pre-school teacher of Middle Eastern descent, had a seven-day history of fever, lower abdominal pain, malaise, headache, cough, dyspnoea and polyuria . The patient suffered from extreme obesity (BMI 57 kg/m2), poorly regulated type-1 diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism. She had been prescribed acetylsalicylic acid (160 mg daily) due to preeclampsia in her previous pregnancy; delivery had been via Caesarean section at GW 36. During the current pregnancy, an obstetric ultrasound showed a foetal weight deviation of +32% (LGA: large for gestational age) at GW 29 + 6. Thromboprophylaxis (8000 IE tinzaparin), with an initial dose of betamethasone (12 mg intra-muscular) for foetal lung maturation, was given at the local hospital. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan revealed bilateral diffuse ground-glass opacities with no signs of pulmonary embolism .
At the university hospital, a multidisciplinary team of obstetricians, anaesthesiologists and neonatologists started to prepare for Caesarean delivery. The tinzaparin dose was doubled to 16,000 IE divided in two doses daily and a normal cardiotocograph (CTG) was registered. The respiratory condition of the patient deteriorated during the night and despite oxygen at 100% (high flow nasal cannula, HFNC) and gas flow at 60–80 L/min, the oxygen saturation fell below 90% and critical respiratory failure with metabolic acidosis ensued . The patient was subsequently intubated and put on mechanical ventilation at the COVID intensive-care unit (ICU). The second 12 mg dose of betamethasone for foetal lung maturation was administered, with the plan to perform an emergency Caesarean section. After stabilisation, the CTG showed reduced variability and recurring episodes of foetal bradycardia associated with the patient's positioning. An emergency Caesarean was performed at GW 32 + 2, 8 days after the onset of the respiratory symptoms and 4 h after intubation. The operation was technically challenging due to extreme obesity and intraabdominal adhesions. Piperacillin/tazobactam was administered preoperatively and the total blood loss was 200 ml.
Oxygenation was critically impaired during the first two days in the ICU. During days 1–9 of the intensive-care period, the patient required prone positioning and intermittent muscle relaxation to optimise respiration and to provide lung-protective ventilation . To treat muco-purulent secretions interfering with ventilation, aerosolized dornase-alfa was used. No antiviral treatment was administered. In addition to the respiratory failure, the patient developed acute renal injury. Due to persistent high fever, continuous renal replacement therapy was used for invasive cooling in order to maintain adequate temperature control. A nosocomial superinfection with Klebsiella aerogenes was detected in tracheal secretions, urine cultures and later on in blood . Treatment with meropenem (1 g × 3 daily) was initiated. Due to a prolonged ICU course and palpable stress, cough, high fever, and a lack of contact during wake-up tests, a tracheostomy was performed on day 19, to facilitate weaning from mechanical ventilation. Rhabdomyolysis ensued on days 21–23, which further complicated the recovery period . Tracheal swabs for SARS-CoV-2 returned repeatedly negative and the patient was transferred to the non-COVID ICU. The patient was successfully taken off mechanical ventilation 30 days after her first day of admission.
The neonate, a boy weighing 3100 g (99th percentile), had absent tone and lack of spontaneous breathing . Manual ventilation was initiated, after which the heart rate and oxygen saturation stabilised promptly. After 6 min, spontaneous breathing was established. Nasal continuous positive airway pressure (nCPAP) with positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) at 5 cmH2O and 30% oxygen was applied. Upon arrival at the neonatal ICU, umbilical artery and vein catheters were inserted. Arterial cord blood gas analysis showed mild respiratory acidosis (pH 7.21, pCO2 8.9 kPa) at birth. During the catheterisation procedure, the need for oxygen increased from fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 0.3 to 0.6, presenting with deep intercostal retractions. A chest X-ray showed atelectasis of the inferior right lung lobe. Nasal intubation was performed, and volume-targeted conventional mechanical ventilation was initiated. Surfactant (Poractant alfa®) 200 mg/kg was given intratracheally. The FiO2 decreased incrementally over the following 12 h and the neonate was extubated after 24 h. No further breathing support was needed. Nasal swabs for SARS-CoV-2 were negative at 48 and 96 h postpartum.