An Asian male patient in his 60s with autoimmune encephalitis was admitted to the neurology department. The patient had a history of hypertension and no history of diabetes. There was no family history. He did not have a smoking history. He was treated with steroid pulse therapy, acyclovir, levetiracetam, phenytoin, tazobactam/piperacillin, ampicillin/sulbactam, and vancomycin (VCM) for aspiration pneumonia and urinary tract infections that subsequently occurred. Although his consciousness disorder and general condition improved on the 37th day of admission (day 1), he developed a fever (≥ 38 °C) and scattered miliary-sized erythema on the extremities and trunk, with some showing fusion . There was no erythema on the face; additionally, there were no abnormalities in the ocular or oral mucosa.
Since drug eruptions, including DIHS and SJS, were suspected, levetiracetam and phenytoin were discontinued, and topical steroids were started. On day 3, the suspected drug VCM was changed to linezolid. However, on day 5, his skin rash showed expansion , and he was started on steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone [mPSL] 1000 mg/day for 3 days). Moreover, his respiratory condition rapidly worsened, and he was started on noninvasive-positive pressure ventilation (NPPV). Drug-induced lymphocyte stimulation tests (DLST) were performed on levetiracetam and phenytoin on day 5.
On day 6, the NPPV could no longer keep the patient oxygenated. Upon admission to the intensive care unit (ICU), his Glasgow Coma Scale score was 14 (eye, 4; verbal, 4; motor, 6). Physical examination revealed a body temperature of 38.5 °C, tachypnea (respiratory rate: 20 breaths/min), a heart rate of 103 bpm, and a blood pressure of 129/57 mmHg. On auscultation, there was a decrease in breath sounds and fine crackles in all lung fields; however, there was no heart murmur.
Laboratory tests upon admission to the ICU revealed an elevated inflammatory response (C-reactive protein: 16.7 mg/dL), increased levels of liver enzymes (aspartate transaminase, 48 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 86 IU/L), and decreased renal function (blood urea nitrogen, 30.6 mg/dL; creatinine, 1.17 mg/dL) . Arterial blood gas analysis using NPPV revealed a decrease in the PaO2/FIO2 ratio (62.9 at FIO2 1.0). Chest radiography showed decreased permeability in both lung fields ; furthermore, chest computed tomography revealed frosted shadows in all lung fields and extensive pleural effusion . He was placed on a ventilator due to multi-organ failure caused by severe drug eruption. At this point, the patient did not meet the diagnostic criteria for DIHS or SJS/TEN ; therefore, treatment was initiated for multi-organ failure due to severe drug eruption.
After admission to the ICU, the patient underwent 3-day treatment using intravenous immunoglobulin 5.0 g/day, meropenem, and sivelestat for severe drug eruption, severe pneumonia, or acute respiratory distress syndrome . However, on day 7, his urine output rapidly declined; furthermore, he was diagnosed with KDIGO stage 3 acute kidney injury and was started on hemodiafiltration (HDF) using a polysulfone high-performance membrane (FDZ-21, Nikkiso, Tokyo, Japan) for 6 h daily. The blood, dialysate, and filtrate flow rates were maintained at 150–180 ml/min, 500 ml/min, and 25 ml/kg/daily, respectively. Sublood-BS (Fuso Pharmaceutical, Osaka, Japan) was used as dialysate. On day 8, plasma exchange (PE) was performed for 3 days to ensure an effect on DIHS given the suspected multi-organ failure and SJS. PE was performed using a membrane plasma separator (OP-08, Asahi Kasei Medical, Tokyo, Japan) for 3 h daily with HDF. On the same day, steroid pulse therapy was terminated; accordingly, the mPSL dose was reduced to 125 mg/day and then tapered off. On day 8, the patient tested negative for human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6), which was a diagnostic criterion; however, the patient tested positive for Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and was started on ganciclovir. However, by day 11, he had an acute disseminated intravascular coagulation score of 4; therefore, recombinant human thrombomodulin was administered for 5 days, and recombinant antithrombin III formulation was administered for 3 days. On day 14, the patient met the diagnostic criteria for atypical DIHS . Subsequently, the patient’s general condition improved, with HDF being terminated on day 18. A tracheostomy was performed on the same day. The ventilator was removed on day 24, and the patient was discharged from the ICU on day 28 and was then transferred to the hospital on day 68 after symptom improvement.