A 48-year-old man suffered a complete rectus femoris mid-substance rupture at work. The patient slipped and fell with his right knee flexed and hip extended leading to sudden pain in his right quadriceps region. The injured leg was his dominant leg. After the injury, a gap was noted and tenderness to palpation was detected on the superior part of the distal third of the thigh. Furthermore, muscle weakness was reported. The patient reported difficulties especially when walking downhill and he was unable to stand up from the squatting position. Total rectus femoris mid-substance rupture was diagnosed in MRI 4 weeks after the injury . The ruptured muscle head was retracted 5 cm proximally from the anatomical position. The surgery was performed 7 weeks after the injury. Quadriceps muscle strength measurements were done 2 weeks before the surgery and repeated 3 and 6 months postoperatively.
During surgery, the patient was in a supine position. A vertical incision was made and the rectus femoris fascia was opened. Cutaneous nerve was identified and spared medially. The ruptured rectus femoris stump was explored and liberation and mobilization were done . After that, Kessler-loop lock suture technique was used to pull the retracted rectus femoris stump toward the knee . The ruptured muscle was repaired using absorbable PDS suture material to avoid possible long-term side effects relating to the use of non-absorbable sutures.
Reinforcements were made with thin non-absorbable sutures. As a result, good connection was achieved, and normal tonus of the ruptured muscle was reached .
After surgery, the patient was advised to avoid deep knee flexion and active stretching. Full weight-bearing on straight knee was allowed as well as isometric exercises. Electric activation of the muscle (TENS/EMS) was started early as well. Three months after the operation, the patient was able to go back to work part-time. At 6 months control visit, the muscle strength was clearly improved and the normal range of motion of the knee was achieved. At this point, the patient reported no symptoms in daily activities.
At 12 months control visit, there was no side-to-side difference observed manually examined. Flexibility was good and he had no problems in squatting. A small asymmetry was noted, while the muscle was contracted, but no tenderness was observed. He was satisfied with the end-result and would choose this operative treatment again, if needed.
The muscle strength of both right and left quadriceps femoris was tested 2 weeks before the surgery and repeated 3 and 6 months after surgery. An isokinetic dynamometer (D-com 900 isokinetic muscle strength testing system, Diter Oy) was used to measure the torque during knee extension. The patient was positioned on the dynamometer in sitting position and the hip was flexed 90°. To avoid secondary joint movement, the thigh and waist were fixed with straps. After a good warm-up, five repetitive knee extensions were done.
The first testing was done 5 weeks after the injury. The highest peak torque value observed from the right knee extension was 117.8 Nm. Three months after surgery, the value had improved to 184.3 Nm (56% improvement), and at 6 months testing, the value was 206 Nm which was 88.2 Nm (75%) improvement compared to the pre-operative state. It is good to note that in this measurement also the value for the left knee extension had improved 3.2% compared to the first measurement, from which can be concluded that the rehabilitation exercises had been effective. The peak torque values are presented in .