A 45-year-old female presented to surgical oncology outpatient with a chief complaint of abdominal mass and per vaginal bleed for 4 months. As stated by the patient, she had undergone an abdominal surgical exploration before 7 months to remove pelvic mass. The patient also gave history of total abdominal hysterectomy before 3 years in view of abnormal uterine bleeding. However, the patient did not have any documentation regarding the abovementioned surgeries. The patient did not have any significant personal and family history. Clinical examination general condition was fair; vitals were stable; pallor was present; on per abdominal examination, a large, soft abdominopelvic mass of 15 x 15 cm in size was found, which was fixed, non-tender, not moving with respiration and was more deviated towards the left side. On per speculum examination, the vault was found replaced by a big smooth growth occupying upper 2/3rd of the vagina, but no vaginal invasion was present. On per vaginum, a smooth lobular abdominopelvic mass of around 15 x 15 cm was felt arising from vault. Routine biochemical investigations were within normal limit, except for hemoglobin level, which was 9gm%. An MRI was done which showed ill-defined heterogeneously enhancing mass lesion noted involving the uterus and cervix, measuring 9.3 x 9.2 x 16 cm (AP X TR X CC). The lesion was invading adjacent myometrium, reaching up to serosa in the fundal region. It was also infiltrating the bilateral adnexa, but bilateral ovaries were not separately visualized. Inferiorly involvement extended till the upper 1/3 of the vagina. Anteriorly, the lesion was closely abutting the urinary bladder with suspicious loss of fat planes at places. Enlarged and necrotic common iliac lymph nodes were noted, largest measuring 1.1 cm. Multiple omental and peritoneal deposits were noted, largest measuring 4.2 x 2.9 cm. There was no ascites and blood inside the peritoneal cavity. MRI suggested a probable diagnosis of endometrial carcinoma with extensions . An USG-guided biopsy was taken from the pelvic mass, which on histopathological examination, showed cores of fibrous tissue along with the presence of cells in sheets, micro-papillae, perivascularly arranged, and were polygonal with well-defined cytoplasmic borders, granular eosinophilic cytoplasm, central to eccentric round nuclei . Few cells showed nuclear inclusion, occasional psammomatous calcification which suggest of neoplastic etiology. An immunohistochemistry (IHC) panel was requested which revealed TFE-3 score 3+, H Caldesmon score 1+, GATA-3 score 1+, Melan A-score 4+, and HMB-45, score 4 +. Ki 67-positivity was seen in 30–35% of tumor cells . On the basis of histopathological and IHC analysis, the diagnosis of perivascular tumor with melanocytic differentiation was made and the possibility of TFE 3 mutation associated with PEComa was favoured. In view of advanced nature of disease, and due to rarity of cases with no standard guidelines for the management of uterine pecoma, decision for chemotherapy was taken and the patient was started on mTOR inhibitor, everolimus 10 mg OD. She was kept on monthly follow-up, in every visit, she was symptomatically improved. After 3 months of therapy, she was again examined, and there was no mass/lump palpable, on per abdomen and per vaginum examination. Repeat MRI pelvis was done which showed nearly resolution of pre-existing mass with decreased signal intensity showing nonviable remnants . As per RECIST (Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors) criteria, tumor shows partial response with mTOR inhibitors within 3 months of therapy. She was again followed after 6 months of therapy, there was again no mass/lump palpable on examination, MRI was repeated again showing no evidence of any solid mass lesion or altered enhancement noted, and urinary bladder (straight long arrow) and rectum (straight short arrow) can now be clearly seen without compression in the pelvis , suggesting a complete response as per RECIST criteria. Multiple ROI (region of interest) values were acquired at anatomically distinct areas of the tumor before and after CT on MRI. The correlation of ROI over serial scans was done by an approximate visual assessment. It was noted that there was elevation of ADC (apparent diffusion coefficient) in pre- and post-chemotherapies MRI (819.2mm2/s-951 mm2/s), indicating towards good response (viz. facilitation due to apoptosis and increased vasogenic edema; however, the last scan showed reduction in mean ADC values (789mm2/s), most probably due to overall tumor volume on ROI becomes negligible and probably due to post CT fibrosis. Till now date patient is following with us, and she is continuing her everolimus, with no recurrence of lesion after 1 year of therapy.