A 29-year-old Han Chinese man had a 3-year history of azoospermia. Routine semen analysis demonstrated scant, acidic seminal fluid (1.0 mL) with no spermatozoa; however, sperm cells were found by percutaneous epididymal aspiration. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and vaso-seminal vesiculography revealed dilation at one end of his left vas deferens and ipsilateral seminal vesicle aplasia; a large cyst was found in the ejaculatory duct adjacent to his prostate on the right . His bladder filled with contrast agent during vaso-seminal vesiculography. A postejaculate urine sample showed the presence of semen. Therefore, he was diagnosed as having RE. For further identification of the cause of his RE, seminal vesicle endoscopy was performed. The results demonstrated that the verumontanum was replaced by a deep groove adjacent and inferior to the neck of his urinary bladder. The bilateral ejaculatory duct openings were found in the deep groove and his ducts exhibited cystic dilation, accompanied by dilation of the right seminal vesicle. Moreover, seminal fluid was found in the intra-cavity. No parenchymal obstruction was found in his ejaculatory ducts, seminal vesicles, or vas deferens openings.
RE resulting from a congenital malformation was suspected owing to the following reasons: (1) the contrast agent was visible in the bladder during vaso-seminal vesiculography, (2) the groove that replaced the verumontanum was adjacent to the bladder neck and could affect normal contraction of the bladder neck, (3) cysts in the ejaculatory duct could obstruct the anterior outlet of the prostatic urethra and guide the seminal fluid in a retrograde direction. As a result, we suspected that his RE mainly resulted from the congenital malformation of his prostatic urethra. Moreover, sperm cells were found by percutaneous epididymal aspiration. Because the evaluation was performed to diagnose the cause of infertility, he and his wife were referred to a reproductive clinic for in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment. The treatment was successful, and the couple achieved pregnancy.