A 52-year-old Japanese woman was referred to our hospital for the assessment of dilation of the bile duct detected at medical checkup detected by abdominal ultrasonography at a medical checkup. The patient was asymptomatic, and laboratory test results were as follows: serum total bilirubin, 0.61 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 16 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 15 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 164 IU/L; amylase (AMY), 72 IU/L; and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, 30 IU/mL (normal, ≤ 37 IU/mL). Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a well enhanced polypoid mass in the gallbladder . Dilation of the bile duct extended from the right and left hepatic duct to the level of the intrapancreatic bile duct. The confluence of the main pancreatic duct (MPD) and extrahepatic bile duct (EHBD) seemed to be located outside the duodenal wall, and the presence of PBM was suspected . Endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography (ERCP) confirmed that the PBM with a 10-mm-long common duct was above the ampulla . Cytology of the bile juice was negative for cancer. The AMY level of the bile juice sampled from the EHBD was 182,849 IU/L. Under the preoperative diagnosis of T1 gallbladder cancer with PBM of type IV-A according to Todani’s classification , surgical exploration was scheduled. On laparotomy, the tumor was identified by palpation at the peritoneal side of the gallbladder fundus. Macroscopically, there was no evidence of thickening or deformation of the gallbladder wall . Intraoperative ultrasonography revealed a papillary exophytic tumor at the peritoneal side of the gallbladder and confluence of the cystic duct (CD), and the EHBD was close to that of the MPD . From these findings, we confirmed that there was no tumor invasion to the gallbladder serosa or liver bed. Therefore, cholecystectomy with full-thickness dissection, EHBD resection, lymph node dissection, and hepaticojejunostomy was performed . Frozen section of the bile duct cut ends of hepatic and duodenal side showed negative for neoplasia.
Gross examination of the resected specimens showed a polypoid tumor of 20 mm in size in the gallbladder fundus surrounded by the hyperplastic mucosa. The CD and the EHBD were dilated . There were no stones in the gallbladder, and no tumorous lesions in the CD or in the EHBD. Microscopic examination with the hematoxylin and eosin stain showed that the gallbladder tumor demonstrated a tubulopapillary growth consisting of the tumor cells with gastric-type features including intracytoplasmic mucus, round nuclei, and clear cytoplasm. The tumor was located in the mucosa and had no invasive component. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was performed using the following monoclonal antibodies: MUC1, MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC6 (Muc-1, Muc-2, Muc-5AC, Muc-6 glycoprotein, Novocastra), p53 (p53 Protein, DAKO), and β-catenin (beta-catenin, Novocastra). On immunostaining, the cells were diffusely positive for MUC5AC and MUC6 , focally positive for MUC2, and negative for MUC1. On the basis of the histologic findings and the 2010 World Health Organization (WHO) classification , the diagnosis of gastric-type ICPN was made. The surrounding hyperplastic epithelium of the gallbladder was also positive for MUC5AC and MUC6. The CD and EHBD were covered by epithelium with low-grade atypia. By referring to previous studies concerning the gene expression on the biliary tract epithelium exposed to the pancreatobiliary reflux as was summarized in Table [, –], KRAS gene mutation and the expressions of p53 protein as well as β-catenin were assessed in the tissues from three sites as the follows: tumor cells of ICPN, background mucosa of the gallbladder surrounding the ICPN, and the epitheliums of EHBD. Analyses for gene mutations in codons 12/13, 59/51, 117, and 146 of the KRAS gene were performed by SRL, Inc. (Shinjuku, Japan), and IHC was performed to evaluate the expression of p53 protein and β-catenin . Neither KRAS gene mutation nor expression of β-catenin was detected in any of the three portions. On the other hand, p53 protein overexpression was detected in the epithelium of background gallbladder and EHBD but not in the ICPN . The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient has been followed up without tumor recurrence for 5 months.