The 76-year-old male patient presented with pain in the upper right quadrant one month before being admitted to our center. He has medical history of chronic hepatitis B and hypertension. The CT-Scan revealed an 8-cm-tumor on the right liver with characteristics of HCC. His Alpha Fetoprotein level was 5000 UI/l, others laboratory tests are within normal limit. Due to his age and tumor size and not enough remnant liver volume, we indicated and performed TACE for the patient. He underwent the first TACE uneventfully and was discharged after three days .
The follow-up CT-Scan after 01 month showed there was residual tumor, so the 2nd TACE was indicated. The laboratory test before the 2nd TACE is summarized in . On angiography, the right hepatic artery and right inferior phrenic artery supplied a portion of the tumor. We successfully used doxorubicin, mitomycin, and cisplatin to chemo-embolize both the right hepatic artery and the inferior phrenic artery .
Right after the intervention, the patient complained of acute paraplegia, a loss of somatic sensation in both lower extremities, the trunk below the sternum level, difficult urination, and dyschezia. Upon neurological evaluation, his lower extremity strength was 2/5 on the right and 3/5 on the left. With urinary retention was accompanied by tingling in the left anterior thigh and scrotum. There was no decrease in rectal tone, and the reflexes were bilaterally 2+. Both nerve conduction tests and electromyography were within normal ranges. The chemotherapy-induced localized vasculitis of the anterior spinal artery branches was identified as the patient's condition. Twenty-four hours following the TACE treatment, spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was conducted, and T2-weighted scans showed increased intramedullary signal strength at the T1-T12 level . Given the neurologic symptoms and indications, we hypothesized that TACE produced an ischemia lesion to the spinal cord. The patient was indicated high-dose steroids, which gradually lowered over one month. A rehabilitation program was also started while maintaining urine and feces using an enema and a Foley catheter. The motor strength remained the same, but the sensory deficiencies almost improved.