A 56-year-old Korean woman was admitted for deterioration of renal function. She had suffered from general weakness and nausea for the past month and visited a local clinic. She was recommended to visit the tertiary hospital because of poor renal function. She was a farmer, but she strongly denied any recent exposure to pesticides. She had intermittently taken medicines for arthralgia in both knees. She had been diagnosed with hypertension 3 years previously and was taking 5 mg lercanidipine without change. She had a routine check-up 1 year ago and did not show any abnormalities of renal function at that time. She also denied various infections and other systemic or auto-immune diseases that cause acute TIN by a thorough history taking. However, she complained of a 5-kg weight loss in the last 3 months. She did not complain of fever, oliguria, skin rash, or a urine color change at admission. She had not taken NSAIDs, toxins, or Chinese herbal medicines, but had ingested the extract of A. japonica for control of knee pain beginning 4 months ago.
Her initial vital signs were as follow: blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg, heart rate of 68 beats/min, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and body temperature of 36.1 °C. No remarkable findings were observed in the physical examinations. Her complete blood count (CBC), biochemical findings, and arterial blood gas analysis was shown Table . Briefly, her blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were elevated whereas potassium level decreased. There was no eosinophilia on her CBC. A arterial blood gas analysis was compatible with metabolic acidosis and anion gap was normal. C3 and C4 levels were 102 mg/dL (normal, 90–180 mg/dL) and 26.9 mg/dL (normal, 10–40 mg/dL), respectively. Immunoglobulin G (IgG), IgA, and IgM levels were 2530 mg/dL (normal, 700–1600 mg/dL), 689 mg/dL (normal, 70–400 mg/dL), and 171 mg/dL (normal, 40–230 mg/dL. Anti-nuclear antibody, anti-neutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody, and anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody were all negative. A urinalysis revealed 1+ protein, 2+ blood, and 3+ glucose by dipstick. Microscopy revealed 10–29 red blood cells/high power field (HPF) and many WBCs/HPF. No bacteria grew on a urine culture. No eosinophils existed on Hansel staining of the urine.
Protein (1406 mg) was detected in the 24-h urine sample. There was no evidence of monoclonal gammopathy in the serum or urine protein on the immunoelectrophoresis assay.
Kidney size was normal on ultrasonography (USG) (10.5 cm right and 11.0 cm left) with normal echogenicity, and a Doppler study was unremarkable. USG-guided renal biopsy revealed moderate and diffuse interstitial lymphocyte infiltration with mild tubular atrophy, and lymphocytic tubulitis was also frequently found on higher magnification . The glomeruli were normally sized and cellularity and capillary walls were not thickened. The blood vessels were unremarkable. Imminofluorescence microscopy was negative. As she had not taken any medicines except for anti-hypertensive drugs for the past 3 years without changes, A. japonica was considered the causative agent of the tubulointerstitial nephritis (TIN) and was immediately withdrawn. Conservative management, including appropriate blood pressure control, a low salt diet, and oral potassium and bicarbonate replacement was started. Her initial symptoms and signs improved and blood pressure was well controlled without further medication.
She was discharged on day 10 after admission and followed up in the outpatient department. The abnormal urinalysis findings resolved completely, and oral potassium and bicarbonate administration was withdrawn 13-months after discharge. Serum creatinine was 1.05 mg/dL and the estimated glomerular filtration rate was 57 ml/min/1.73 m2 24-months after discharge . She is currently being followed up in our outpatient department with the maintenance of renal function.