A 66-year-old Caucasian male was referred for colonoscopy having had a positive faecal occult blood test (FOBT) as part of the national bowel cancer screening programme performed in the UK. At screening the patient was asymptomatic and denied rectal bleeding. He was not anaemic.
The endoscopist noted a past medical history of ischaemic heart disease, systemic lupus erythematosus, atrial fibrillation and hypercholesterolaemia, for which his medication included Dabigatran. The patient was a retired labourer, normally fit and well with a performance status of 1.
Colonoscopy was carried out using Olympus standard colonoscope with CO2 insufflation and pump irrigation containing simethicone, under Entonox gas. At intubation an unusual vascular pattern encompassing the entire rectum up to the rectosigmoid junction was noted. At this point a decision was taken with the patient to proceed with full colonoscopy. The lesion was characterised by confluent circumferential purple discolouration indicating venous blood supply, with heaping up of the mucosa involving the entire rectum (see Figs. & ) and rectosigmoid junction. There was a well demarcated border with normal mucosa in the distal sigmoid colon (see Fig. ). No mucosal ulceration or active bleeding was seen.
Macroscopically, the pattern within the rectum resembled extensive rectal varices, although the patient did not have liver disease or venothromboembolic disease and was not known to have any cutaneous or visceral vascular malformation.
The patient proceeded to axial imaging with computed tomography (CT) to further evaluate this abnormality. The CT demonstrated a considerably thickened rectosigmoid wall with multiple small rounded punctate calcifications seen within it (see Fig. ). There was no evidence of other visceral involvement or cutaneous lesions.
To further characterise the CT findings a magnetic resonance (MR) scan of the pelvis was performed which demonstrated extensive diffuse thickening of the rectum and lower sigmoid with intermediate to high T2 signal, and an internal architecture of multiple ‘grapelike’ lobulations. The outer margin was well-defined, largely with a low signal wall indicating that the pathology was confined by the muscularis propria. Incidentally, the abnormality extended inferiorly, into the right side of the anal canal posteriorly, between the internal and external sphincter. Following enhancement, there was initially some nodular mucosal enhancement followed by progressive enhancement of the multiple discrete lobulations with infilling (see Figs. and ). Incidentally there was also a patchy intermediate signal in the prostate with avid peripheral zone enhancement. His prostate specific antigen was normal.