A 69-year-old female patient diagnosed with acral lentiginous melanoma of the left foot, pT3a pN2a cM0 R0, stage IIIA, was treated by amputation of the first toe with complete resection. Four years later, she developed histologically confirmed multiple in-transit metastases requiring recurrent excisions. The disease continued to progress, with cutaneous and lymph node metastases. She was enrolled in a clinical trial combining pembrolizumab and T-VEC (talimogene laherparepvec, a GM-CSF-expressing oncolytic HSV-1 virus) administered by seven intralesional injections . The patient had no known prior autoimmune disorders and had no neurologic manifestations prior to the CPI treatment.
Four months after the first dose of pembrolizumab, the patient developed several vitiligo lesions, followed by abnormal sensation with tingling and numbness of fingers and hands suggestive of bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome 1 month later. Symptomatic treatment was proposed, but neurological manifestation worsened progressively. At this time, the patient was considered in complete remission and denied having any sicca syndrome, leading to the discontinuation of pembrolizumab after having received eleven administrations.
Between eight and 10 months after the first dose of pembrolizumab, she developed painful tingling sensations in the hands and feet with pseudoathetoid (waver) movements in the arms and hands and a progressive unsteady gait. She was admitted to the hospital for worsening neurologic symptoms and was first seen by the neurologist.
On examination, she had a loss of sensation of the right face, generalized absence of deep reflexes, and loss of vibration and positional senses in the index and big toes. Nerve conduction studies revealed the absence of sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) in the upper and lower limbs and reduced compound muscle action potentials for the median and ulnar nerves but not for the peroneal and tibial nerves. The brain MRI revealed enhancement of the right trigeminal Gasser’s ganglia and its mandibular branch . The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed a high level of protein (1317 mg/l, normal: < 460) and pleocytosis (92 leukocytes/μl, normal: < 5), with negative cultures, suggestive of aseptic meningitis as CSF PCR testing was negative for herpes-simplex types 1 and 2, varicella-zoster, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, HHV-6 and polyoma JC-virus. Extensive work-up excluded infection with HIV, Borrelia burgdorferi, syphilis and hepatitis viruses. A diagnosis of sensory neuronopathy (SNN) was considered probable based on the pattern of her neuropathy with a Camdessanche’s score of 11 (normal: < 6.5) . The patient was at this time restricted to a wheelchair, unable to stand and walk, and the overall neuropathy limitations scale (ONLS) was 9 out of 12 (disability in both arms preventing all function, requires wheelchair to travel 10 m, but able to stand up and walk 1 m) . The patient received intravenous pulses of methylprednisolone (1 g/d) for 5 days and improved progressively over 2 weeks, with an ONLS score passing from 9 to 5 (moderate disability in the upper limbs; walks with unilateral aid for 10 m). She was discharged to a rehabilitation center.
One month later, the patient was readmitted to the hospital for severe ataxic relapse, with an ONLS score of 11, and was restricted to her bed. Investigations were completed by an 18FDG-PET-CT that found no signs of melanoma recurrence. Blood testing revealed an important inflammatory syndrome with CRP levels at 18 mg/l (normal: < 10); erythrocyte sedimentation rate > 110 mm/h (normal: < 20); hemolytic anemia hemoglobin at 98 g/l (normal: 117 to 157), with haptoglobin at 0.1 g/l (normal: 0.3 to 2.0), LDH at 286 U/l (normal: 135 to 214), total bilirubin at 67 μmol/l (normal: 0 to 21), lymphopenia at 0.8 G/l, an elevation of the total IgG levels to 29.9 g/l, (normal: 7.00 to 14.50) and presence of autoantibodies such as antinuclear antibodies (ANAs): anti-SSA (52 kd at 48 CU, normal level: < 20, and 60 kd at 108 CU, normal level: < 20). A panel of 45 antibodies involved in neurologic paraneoplastic syndromes was negative, including antineuronal (anti-HU and anti-Yo) and antiganglioside antibodies (such as GQ1b). The following analyses were negative or normal: antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs): c-ANCA proteinase (PR3), p-ANCA myeloperoxidase (MPO) and atypical ANCA (x or a-ANCA); rheumatoid factor; blood complement C3/C4; creatine kinase; urine spot with proteinuria and creatininuria; creatinemia and serum electrolytes. Of note, ANAs were negative in the serum sample that had been collected prior to the initiation of pembrolizumab. A biopsy of the accessory salivary glands (ASGB) showed abnormal interstitial sclerosis with a focus of > 50 lymphocytes/4 mm2 (Chisholm and Mason’s score of 3 out of 4) . The findings above led to a diagnosis of an induced Sjögren’s syndrome (6 points according to the 2016 ACR/EULAR classification criteria for Sjögren’s syndrome) associated with peripheral nervous system impairment.
After this relapse, an empirical “upfront” treatment with pulses of intravenous methylprednisolone at 1 g/d and immunoglobulins at 0.4 g/kg (both for 5 days) were introduced in combination with acyclovir (which was stopped after negative HSV PCR results in the CSF). In the absence of clinical improvement, a second-line treatment was initiated with cyclophosphamide at 15 mg/kg (one dose) in association with oral prednisone at 60 mg/d. Once the neuro-Sjögren diagnosis was established, cyclophosphamide was replaced with rituximab administered at 375 mg/m2 per dose once a month (for 4 administrations at weeks 0, 2, 6 and 10). The decision to change the therapy was made based on the similar efficacy of rituximab and cyclophosphamide for the treatment of the neurologic manifestations of Sjögren’s syndrome and to minimize the risk of T cell suppression and melanoma recurrence.
The clinical improvement was then rapid, with a progressive amelioration of the ONLS score from 11 to 5. The biological parameters improved in parallel, such as normalization of the levels of hemoglobin, total bilirubin, IgG and erythrocyte sedimentation rate . The brain MRI showed a marked regression of the enhancement of the trigeminal nerve .
After six monthly rituximab infusions, we observed the total disappearance of B-cells in a second salivary gland biopsy and normalization of the biological markers, but the patient had persistent neurological deficits, with the absence of deep reflexes, loss of sensation in the distal part of the extremities, and imbalance when walking with bilateral aid for 10 m.