A 70-year-old man with hypertension and diabetes mellitus was in October 2021 admitted to Kobe Asahi Hospital for evaluation of a 1 cm iso-hyperechoic nodule in segment (S) 5.
The patient had overcome hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection 16 years earlier with Pegylated interferon (PEG-IFN) α2b + Ribavirin for 24 wk, and a 1 cm hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in S2 was completely resected in 2017.
A 4 cm HCC between S7 and S8 was removed by microwave ablation in April 2020; however, due to local recurrence, the HCC was re-ablated in February 2021, and subsequent imaging studies including gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (EOB-MRI) signaled disappearance of the HCC. Follow-up imaging studies with EOB-MRI in June 2021 also signaled disappearance of any recurrent tumor. Thereafter, the first, and after a three-week interval, the second mRNA vaccination were administered to the patient in June, without any particular side effects such as anaphylaxis, fever, fatigue, general malaise or muscle pain . From 2020 to 2021, except for the mRNA vaccine, no other particular drugs, injections, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), IFNs, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α antagonists, BRAF inhibitors, methotrexate or Bacille de Calmette et Guérin (BCG) were administered.
He suffered a cerebral hemorrhage in 2008, myocardial infarction in 2010, and from prostatic cancer, bladder cancer and lower right ureter cancer in 2019. At surgery for bladder cancer, BCG was not administered.
Nothing particular.
On admission, the patient weighed 59.0 kg, was 157.5 cm tall and had a BMI of 23.8; a physical examination showed no remarkable abnormalities.
Laboratory values and tumor markers at admission are shown in Table .
MRI findings: Follow-up imaging studies with EOB-MRI in October, 2021 revealed a 1 cm defect in S5 at the hepatobiliary phase .
EOB-MRI revealed hyperintensity on diffusion weighted image (DWI) (b value = 800 s/mm3) and hypointensity on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map, respectively ; however, imaging at the early phase was unattainable because of artifacts attributed to the patient’s restlessness.
Computed tomography findings: Plain computed tomography (CT) revealed no nodule in S5 . Contrast-enhanced CT (CECT) revealed a hypervascular nodule at the early phase and delayed contrast enhancement at the late phase in S5 in October, 2021.
Ultrasound findings: Plain ultrasound (US) revealed a 1cm iso-hyperechoic nodule in S5 . Contrast-enhanced US (CEUS) revealed incomplete defect at the late vascular phase in S5 in October, 2021.
From all the above imaging findings inflammatory liver tumor, lymphoproliferative disease, intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (iCCA, small duct type) and bile duct adenoma (BDA) were suspected.
US guided biopsy revealed a noncaseating HSEG with spindle shaped epithelioid cells harboring Langhans-type multinucleated giant cells, as determined by histopathological studies in October, 2021 .