A 26-year-old female with no remarkable past medical and family history came to the outpatient department of the Department of Ophthalmology, Longhua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine complaining for blurred vision in her left eye. Upon examination, her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/50 in the right eye and finger-counting in the left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 15 mmHg in the right eye and 16 mmHg in the left eye. Anterior segment examination of both eyes was unremarkable, and a mild posterior subcapsular opacification of crystalline lens was observed with a left relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD). Color fundus photography showed the arteriolar narrowing, CME and mid-peripheral hyperpigmentary spots in form of bone-spiculesand in both eyes , and the tortuous and dilated superior temporal vein in the left eye. Spectral Domain Optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) (Spectralis OCT, Heidelberg Engineering, Germany), fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA; Heidelberg Retina Angiograph, Heidelberg Engineering, Germany) and visual field tests with Octopus 900 (TOP strategy) were also performed, as shown in –.
SD-OCT scan showed that central macular thickness (CMT) was 554 μm in the right eye and 831 μm in the left eye . FFA showed the normal arm-retinal arteria filling time (15.8 s) and a significant filling delay of the main veins (23.7 s) in the left eye, and CME in both eyes . Moreover, the perimetry showed a noticeable tunnel vision in both eyes, especially in the left eye .
In addition, a panel of medical examinations were also performed including a chest X-ray, arterial blood pressure (BP), complete blood cell count (CBC), blood sugar level, hemoglobin A1c level (HbA1c), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), homocysteinemia level, and the detection of parameter of inflammatory and infectious diseases. No systemic diseases including systemic vasculitis were found.
Based on above inspections, the patient was clinically diagnosed with CME secondary to RP in the right eye, and CME in RP with impending or mild CRVO in her left eye, although genetic testing and electroretinogram (ERG) were not performed. It should be emphasized that she was informed about the off-label use of aflibercept and signed informed consent before treatment.
One week after one dose of intravitreal aflibercept (2 mg/0.05 ml Eylea
; Bayer AG, Leverkusen, Germany) in the left eye, OCT scan showed a significant decrease in CMT (247 μm) and BCVA elevated to 20/400. One month after treatment, BCVA in the left eye elevated to 20/200, macular edema (ME) completely disappeared and the visual field (VF) also improved accordingly (, ). Interestingly, BCVA in the right eye also had an improvement (20/40) and intraretinal fluid decreased significantly. However, 3 months after injection, BCVA and CMT of both eyes were not maintained.