A 70-year-old woman presented with a 3-year history of visual deterioration and headache. Physical examination revealed binocular severe visual disturbance. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was requested, yielding a space-occupying lesion in the sellar region with right parasellar and suprasellar extension . The mass was irregular in shape displaying isointensity on T1-weighted imaging and heterogenous signals on T2-weighted imaging, and contrast enhancement was notable after the administration of gadolinium diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-DTPA). Surgical resection of the lesion via a subfrontal approach was recommended, but the patient refused it considering the advanced age and mild symptoms.
During the following years, the visual field defect was progressively aggravated. The latest brain MRI after a 7-year conservative observation demonstrated the lesion significantly progressed , and the patient was readmitted. Ophthalmologic examination showed bilateral visual field defects and pathologic myopia with posterior staphyloma and tigroid fundus . Other cranial nerves were normal, and there were no sensorimotor dysfunctions. Laboratory examinations showed endocrine hormone levels (including prolactin [PRL], growth hormone [GH], follicle stimulating hormone [FSH], luteinizing hormone [LH], adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH], and thyroid hormones) were all within normal limits. Cranial computed tomography (CT) and MRI demonstrated a giant lobulated sellar mass with parasellar and suprasellar extension, and the optic chiasm was remarkably displaced; the lesion was isointense on T1-weighted imaging and heterogeneously hyperintense on T2-weighted imaging, with remarkable enhancement after administration of contrast medium . CT angiography did not identify any significant vascular aberrance .
Preoperatively, a diagnosis of nonfunctional pituitary adenoma was suspected. As the main body of the lesion extended to the suprasellar and parasellar areas, the transnasal-sphenoidal approach may be difficult to achieve complete tumor resection. The patient underwent a surgical decompression via a subfrontal approach. Intraoperatively, the tumor was found to be rubbery with an abundant blood supply. The tumor tissue was closely attached to the internal carotid artery and cavernous sinus, and subtotal resection was eventually achieved.
Histopathological sections revealed a tumor with a lobulated pattern and cellular nests surrounded by vascular fibrous septa . The irregular and lobulated clusters of cuboidal cells were consistent with the morphological characteristics of paraganglioma (Zellballen pattern). Immunohistochemical stains showed the tumor cells were strongly positive for synaptophysin (SYN), chromogranin A (CgA), and microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP-2), but negative for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), S100 protein, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), cytokeratin (CK), CD68, and neuronal nuclear antigen (NeuN). Additionally, the tumor cells showed no immunoreactivity against pituitary cell-lineage transcription factors (T-PIT, PIT-1, SF-1), thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), or endocrine markers (PRL, GH, thyroid stimulating hormone [TSH], ACTH, FSH, LH). The Ki-67 proliferation index was <5%. A diagnosis of paraganglioma was made.
Postoperative CT confirmed the tumor was subtotally removed, and the tumor cavity was filled with hemostatic material . The patient’s visual function showed no significant improvement. One month after the operation, she developed gait disturbance and urinary incontinence. Repeated cranial CT showed ventricle dilation with interstitial edema . A secondary hydrocephalus was diagnosed and a ventriculoperitoneal shunting was performed . A week postoperatively, the neurological deficiencies were partially improved, and CT showed the ventricles shrank . Eight months postoperatively, cranial CT showed no recurrence of the residual tumor, and the hydrocephalus had been relieved . However, she got pneumonia two months later and succumbed to respiratory failure.
We conducted a literature review to identify articles on sellar paragangliomas published up to November 1, 2022. We performed a systematic search of the PubMed and Embase databases using the terms “paraganglioma” and “sellar”. A total of 30 publications were retrieved, and all of them are case reports.
There were 13 females and 22 males (including our current case), with a female-to-male ratio of 1:1.69. The average age was 46.9 ± 22.5 (range, 13~84 years). The most common onset symptoms were visual deficits (68.6%) and headache (65.7%). All the patients underwent surgical treatment, and no complete resection was described. Postoperative adjuvant radiation was administered for controlling the tumor residue in 45.7% of all cases (16 of 35 cases), with a dosage of 40~50 Gy (20~28 fractions). Follow-up data were available in 23 cases; after an average follow-up period of 21.5 ± 28.8 months, two patients experienced in-situ recurrence, and metastasis was noted in two other cases. Demographic and clinical profiles were summarized in . Radiological characteristics were presented in .