A 63-year-old male with no history of trauma or prior neurological disease presented with 3 days of intermittent dizziness and vomiting. On the second day, the patient was examined by a head computed tomography (CT) scan, and no abnormal changes were found. Five days later, the patient had a sudden onset of weakness in his right limbs, followed by an episode of focal seizure without impaired awareness. The patient had symptomatic deep venous thrombosis (DVT) in the left lower limb 4 years ago, which was treated with warfarin for 3 months. No secondary prophylaxis was subsequently applied, and as a result he experienced multiple recurrences of lower limb DVT. The patient also had a 5-year history of hypertension without antihypertensive therapy. He also had a 2-year history of Raynaud’s phenomenon in his hands, as well as a 30-year history of smoking (10 cigarettes per day) and alcohol intake (50 g per day). The patient’s parents had died of ICH. Additionally, the patient’s three sisters were diagnosed with hypertension, and one brother had a history of occlusion of the distal artery in the right leg at the age of 55 years. The patient’s son had their first symptomatic lower limb DVT at the age of 25 years, for which he underwent inferior vena caval filter placement.
Upon examination after admission, the patient had a blood pressure of 164/92 mmHg. Skin color, temperature, and peripheral pulses were normal. No varicose veins or swelling of the limbs were found, and the lung and heart examinations were normal. The patient was fully alert and oriented, with no signs of cognitive impairment, thus neurocognitive tests were not performed. Results of the cranial nerve and sensory examinations were normal. Motor examination revealed spastic tone and moderate pyramidal weakness in the right arm and leg (4/5), with a total NIHSS score of 2. Repeated head CT plain scans and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) plain scans showed acute hematomas in the bilateral parietal lobes, and a cerebral infarction with hemorrhagic transformation in the left frontal lobe. Except for the hemorrhages visible on the head CT, brain susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) showed neither venous malformations nor CMBs . Brain diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI; Fig. d, first two images) and contrast-enhanced MRI confirmed the cerebral infarction with hemorrhagic transformation in the left frontal lobe. The degree of white matter hyperintensity (WMH) on fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging was moderate (Grade II on the Fazekas scale). The results of brain magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) without contrast were normal. On the second day after admission, cerebral digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed, with results showing no abnormalities in the arterial phase, venous phase, or venous sinus phase.
Routine laboratory tests showed normal results except for elevated levels of serum creatinine (152.18 μmol/L), homocysteine (52.33 μmol/L), total cholesterol (5.71 mmol/L), low density lipoprotein cholesterol (3.77 mmol/L), and plasma D-Dimer (3.52 μg/ml). Serum tumor markers were negative. The results of hereditary thrombophilia screening revealed an obviously decreased activity of plasma protein S (41.2%). The patient’s son and daughter also underwent tests for plasma protein S activity, and both showed decreased activity (15.2 and 10.0%, respectively). Cardiac workup including color Doppler echocardiography and Holter monitoring revealed no abnormalities. Chest CT plain scans showed no lung abnormalities. The results of cerebrospinal fluid analysis were within normal limits, with no evidence of viral, bacterial, or fungal infections. Doppler ultrasonography revealed residual venous thrombosis in the right popliteal and posterior tibial veins. Affected leptomeningeal and cortical biopsies were further performed after an informed consent form was obtained from the patient. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed no inflammatory changes in the blood vessels. When stained with Congo red and viewed under a polarizing microscope, no amyloid deposition in the vessel walls was found.
Finally, the patient was diagnosed with MCVD, hypertension, hereditary protein S deficiency (PSD), hyperhomocysteinemia, and hypercholesterolemia. Following treatment with antihypertensive drugs, folic acid, vitamin B12 and statins, the patient’s blood pressure and levels of serum homocysteine and cholesterol were controlled to within the normal range. Their modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score was 2 at discharge. Warfarin was administered as a secondary prophylaxis for venous thromboembolism 2 months after the onset of stroke; however, the patient did not adhere to the monitoring scheme of blood coagulation function. Therefore, antiplatelet therapy with clopidogrel was given as an alternative, due to the patient’s refusal of other oral anticoagulants. Consequently, he occasionally had symptomatic recurrence of lower limb DVT during the 5-year follow-up period, yet with no recurrence of ICH nor CMBs visible on the follow-up head SWI. The degree of WMH was steady at Grade II on the Fazekas scale, and the mRS score was maintained at 2 during the follow-up, with no clinically apparent cognitive impairment. The patient also suffered hoarseness starting at the age of 66 years; a laryngoscope was performed at that time with no abnormalities found. About 1 year later, the patient had dry cough and received a chest CT exam due to an episode of hemoptysis, and a mass in the upper lobe of the left lung was discovered. He was subsequently diagnosed with lung cancer, and the patient died of the disease at 68 years of age.