A 78-year-old Caucasian woman, previously fit and with diet-controlled diabetes, complained of weight loss, progressive malaise, jaw claudication and scalp tenderness for 1 month. One day before assessment, she had had transient complete loss of vision in her right eye and partial loss of vision in her left eye. Her visual acuity was 6/9 in both eyes; colour vision, as tested with Ishihara pseudochromatic plates, was markedly reduced in the right eye (06/17) and normal in the left (17/17). A right afferent pupillary defect was present and dilated fundal examination revealed a right swollen optic nerve. On examination, she had a right tender, nodular, non-pulsatile temporal artery. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 74 mm/hour (normal for women ≥50 years old: ≤30 mm/hour) and C-reactive protein (C-RP) was >52 mg/litre (normal C-RP <5 mg/litre).
She had emergency treatment with high-dose pulsed intravenous methylprednisolone 250 mg BD and oral prednisolone 80 mg OD to prevent visual loss. She was also started on oral alendronic acid 70 mg once weekly and oral ranitidine 150 mg BD. Her symptoms resolved and her inflammatory markers improved over the next 3 days (ESR 60 mm/hour, C-RP 42 mg/litre), intravenous steroids were stopped and she continued on 80 mg of oral prednisolone OD. However, her glycaemic control worsened (blood glucose 22.8 mmol/litre) and she was managed initially with oral hypoglycaemics (metformin 850 mg OD from day 2); glibenclamide 160 mg BD was added by day 4; and subcutaneous insulin (24 units OM and 6 units nocte) at day 6 finally stabilised the hyperglycaemia (blood glucose 11.6 mmol/litre). At day 8 she became unwell with epigastric pain and vomiting. An abdominal X-ray excluded bowel perforation and clinical chemistry revealed normal liver function tests and an abnormally high serum amylase of 459 U/litre (normal range 0 to 99 U/litre). She was managed conservatively with intravenous fluids and analgesia. Her serum amylase normalised over 48 hours and her symptoms resolved and she was discharged with resolving right disc oedema (ESR 14 mm/hour).
She has remained under care with regular blood monitoring and after 8 months is currently maintained on 12.5 mg of prednisolone OD. No symptoms of pancreatitis or GCA have returned. On examination, she has temporal pallor of the right optic nerve and a normal left optic nerve .