A 72-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with complaints of fever and dyspnoea. Her medical history reported paroxysmal atrial fibrillation without underlying structural or functional cardiac abnormalities, for which she used flecainide as pill in the pocket. At presentation, she was tachypnoeic (respiratory rate 25/min), her oxygen saturation was 92% and auscultation of the lungs revealed bilateral inspiratory crackles and expiratory rhonchi. Her pulse was 70/min with a blood pressure of 150/70 mmHg. Auscultation of the heart was normal. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm with normal repolarization and a normal QTc interval (440 ms).
She was suspected of COVID-19 viral pneumonia because of bilateral consolidations on chest X-ray and computed tomography . She was admitted to the pulmonology department and treatment with oxygen, chloroquine (300 mg once daily) and cefuroxime (1500 mg three times daily) were started. Initially, two COVID-19 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays on material obtained via oro- and nasopharyngeal swabs were negative. Five days after admission, she developed respiratory insufficiency and was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU) where mechanical ventilation was initiated. COVID-19 was confirmed by PCR assay on material obtained via bronchoalveolar lavage. The patient developed hypotension secondary to deep sedation, which was successfully treated with low doses of norepinephrine (19–115 nanogram/kg/min). There was no need for inotropic support during ICU admission.
Seven days after ICU admission, negative T-waves were observed at the monitor and a 12-lead ECG was obtained which showed sinus rhythm with diffuse, new, deeply negative T-waves and a prolonged QTc interval of 505 ms . Cardiac biomarkers were only slightly elevated at that time, without a typical rise or fall in troponin levels (maximum high sensitive troponin-I: 454 ng/L, reference value 0–45 ng/L). Echocardiography showed a poor left ventricular systolic function [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) approximately 30%] with circumferential akinesia of the apex in the mid-ventricular and apical segments and circumferential hyperdynamic contractions of the basal segments consistent with the diagnosis Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (, Videos 1–3). The InterTAK Diagnostic Score was 80 supporting the diagnosis Takotsubo cardiomyopathy (97.3% probability). Episodes of heavy anxiety and hypertension during nursing care were reported as possible trigger. Given the poor left ventricular systolic function and prior atrial fibrillation with a CHA2DS2-VASc score of 4, therapeutic low-molecular weight heparin was started (dalteparin, 7500 IU twice daily s.c.). Because the patient was still treated with low doses of norepinephrine, treatment with beta-adrenergic receptor blockers or angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors to treat left ventricular dysfunction was postponed. Treatment with chloroquine was stopped because the prolonged QTc interval.
Initially, we chose to not perform a coronary angiography because of the typical echocardiographic pattern, the only slightly elevated cardiac biomarkers, the absence of ST-segment elevations and given the risk of transportation of an intubated patient with also a risk of further contamination of COVID-19 in the hospital. Cardiac MR was considered to exclude myocarditis as a cause of left ventricular dysfunction, however, this was considered to be unlikely given the only mildly elevated cardiac biomarkers, the high InterTAK Diagnostic Score and the typical echocardiographic pattern consistent with Takotsubo cardiomyopathy.
After 10 days of mechanical ventilation, the patient was successfully extubated and transferred to the ward were further recovery took place. Remarkably, there was a second rise in C-reactive protein to 150 mg/L (reference value 0–10 mg/L) the days after the diagnosis of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy was established. Treatment with ceftriaxone was started because of a possible pulmonary bacterial superinfection, however, blood- and sputum culture identified no micro-organisms. The troponin levels were normalized 7 days after the diagnosis of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. At that time, the ECG showed sinus rhythm and normalization of the T-waves. Treatment with an ACE inhibitor (perindopril 2 mg once daily) was initiated however discontinued shortly afterwards because of symptomatic hypotension. Follow-up echocardiography showed important improvement of left ventricular systolic function to an LVEF of 45%, however with persistent hypokinesia of the apical segments. For that reason, an additional coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) was obtained which showed a low calcium score and a non-significant stenosis (<50%) in the proximal left anterior descending artery (CAD-RADS score of 1) excluding coronary artery disease as the cause of this clinical picture .
After 22 days, the patient was discharged home on direct anticoagulation and statin therapy. Three months after the diagnosis Takotsubo cardiomyopathy, the patient visited our outpatient clinic. Echocardiography at that time showed normal contractility of the apical myocardial segments, with normalization of the left ventricular systolic function (LVEF 55%), as expected in Takotsubo cardiomyopathy.