A 20-year-old male was admitted to the Emergency Unit of a tertiary referral center following a car accident. The car crashed into a gutter on the local road. The exact mechanism of the injury was unknown; the patient was found unconscious sitting in the car, but hemodynamically stable and normopneic with 100% SpO2. Clinical examination showed bruises and upper abdomen tenderness. Acute alcohol poisoning and drug intoxication with cocaine and amphetamine were confirmed. Laboratory levels of hemoglobin (132 g/L) and hematocrit (0.38) were normal. Ultrasound (US) revealed the presence of free fluid diffusely in the abdominal cavity estimated to 700 ml. Intravenous contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a large (9 × 5 cm) liver parenchyma disruption dividing segments 2 and 3 from 4a and 4b at the level of falciform ligament. No source of active bleeding was revealed, and a diagnosis of isolated grade 3 BLT (laceration with parenchymal depth more than 3 cm) was confirmed. Liver injury was graded according to the organ injury scale drawn up by the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma . The patient was transferred to intensive care unit (ICU) and remained stable; thus, NOM was indicated.
After 1 day in the ICU, the patient continued to be hemodynamically stable with normal levels of hemoglobin (124 g/L) and hematocrit (0.37). A control abdominal US revealed no significant changes.
On day 2, the patient started to complain of weakness, nausea, and abdominal pain and deteriorated. He developed fever, leucocytosis, and highly elevated C-reactive protein (177 mg/L), but remained hemodynamically stable with only slightly decrease in hemoglobin (112 g/L) and hematocrit (0.33) levels. A repeated CT scan demonstrated localized liver injury, and significant increase of free fluid in the abdominal cavity, again, no extravasation of contrast was seen . The condition was diagnosed as peritoneal inflammatory reaction, and minimally invasive intervention was considered. US guided percutaneous drainage revealed presence of 2.5 L of bile mixed with some blood in the abdomen. A drain was placed into the recto-vesical pouch.
On days 3 and 4, the patient recovered well; however, the drain output was rather high: 700 mL of bile/day with extremely elevated level of bilirubin in drain content (1262 μmol/L). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with hepatocyte-specific contrast agent Gd-EOB-DTPA (Primovist®, Bayer Schering) showed a biliary leak originating from terminal branches of the left liver, with high signal of contrast collection under the left diaphragm .
Elective surgical intervention has been considered. Laparoscopic anatomical LR was planned; according to the MRI, a left lateral sectionectomy (LLS) was indicated. Patient was positioned in standard supine position with the operating surgeon standing on the patient’s right and one assistant on the opposite side. A four-trocar configuration was used (three 12-mm trocars and one 5-mm trocar), positioned in a rhomboid configuration in the upper abdomen. A continuous carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum was induced to a pressure of approximately 12 mmHg. Laparoscopic exploration revealed an intense biliary peritonitis. The bile was aspirated from the entire abdomen, and lavage was performed.
The liver was examined by direct vision and laparoscopic US. It was confirmed, that the intended resection line was already outlined by traumatic rupture on the left side of the falciform ligament . There were no signs of active bleeding. After aspirating the bile and blood clots and completing the transection plane by vessel-sealing device LigaSure® (Covidien, Mansfield, MA), the portobiliary pedicles for segments 2 and 3 were easily defined . The source of bile leak was clearly seen under direct vision: the biliary pedicles for the left lateral section of the liver were transected by trauma . The portobiliary pedicles were dissected free and then transected under direct vision with an articulated linear stapler. Two cartridges were needed for completion of glissonian plane transection and gaining an inflow control . After further parenchymal transection by vessel-sealing device, the hepatic resection was completed by transection of the left hepatic vein by third stapler. Left triangular and coronary ligaments were finally divided. The estimated blood loss was < 50 ml. A Pringle tap was positioned at the beginning of the procedure, but it was not required.
The resection margin was examined carefully for bleeding and bile leaks, and for this purpose, the pneumoperitoneum pressure was lowered. A bile leak was identified in the segment 4b and controlled by laparoscopic suturing with prolene 4/0 stitches. Repeated examination under irrigation and by gently pressing a small gauze swab against resected surface revealed no further bile leak. TachoSil® (Takeda Austria, GmbH, Linz, Austria) fibrin sealant patch was applied to the cut liver surface. The resected specimen was placed in the retrieval bag and removed without fragmentation through a separate 4–5-cm suprapubic Pfannenstiel incision. The rectus muscles were separated by lateral retraction and were not transected.
Postoperative outcome was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the day 9 after injury and day 4 after surgery. Two weeks after injury, he returned to his normal activity.