In October 2015, in the course of a routine mammography and sonography, a 72-year-old woman was diagnosed with a centrally located carcinoma of the right breast with enlarged axillary lymph nodes. The pretherapeutic staging tests and anamnesis were unremarkable apart from hypertension, obesity and smoking and there was no history of allergy. In particular, there were no signs of an autoimmune disease.
Based on the clinically positive axilla of a cT1 tumor (invasive carcinoma of no special type, G1, hormone receptor positive, Her2/neu negative, Ki67 10%), the patient was given a 4-month neoadjuvant systemic therapy with the nonsteroidal aromatase inhibitor anastrozole (Arimidex®) and the CDK 4/6 inhibitor abemaciclib (Verzenio®), from November 2015 to March 2016, as part of a clinical trial (NeoMONARCH).
The histopathological work-up of the surgical specimen revealed stage ypT1b ypN0 R0 disease. Following segmentectomy and sentinel node dissection, adjuvant radiotherapy (RTX) of the right breast and the supraclavicular region was done in three-dimensional (3D) conformal technique up to a total dose of 50 Gy (6MV) in 25 fractions with an electron boost dosage to the tumor bed of 10 Gy (16 MeV) in 5 fractions while continuing therapy with anastrozole. Prior to radiotherapy the measured volume of the irradiated right breast revealed no difference compared with the left side (1455 vs. 1500 ccm; Fig. ). Towards the end of the course of radiation, the patient developed a moderate acute radiodermatitis with small circumscribed moist epitheliolysis in the submammary fold, which were classified as CTCAE grade 2 and treated symptomatically for the remaining period of radiotherapy.
Three months after completion of RTX, all acute skin changes had completely healed, but a new, 2 cm wide, circumscribed cutis edema was observed at 1 o’clock within the irradiated breast and was documented. Six months after RTX, this developed into an increasing local redness and induration of the skin. A cutis edema was visible in sonography, which showed that the changes were limited to the irradiation field. Nine months after RTX, the cutis edema had grown to cover the whole former irradiation field, the skin exhibited a continuous inflammatory infiltrate, hyperpigmentation and induration. A loss of breast volume was also clearly evident. To rule out a lymphangiosis carcinomatosa cutis (inflammatory carcinoma) recurrence, a targeted punch biopsy was performed. The histology showed no signs of malignant tumor cells but a pronounced dermal fibrosis with thickened dermis and fibrosis extending into the underlying fatty tissue, with corresponding panniculitis and pronounced chronic perivascular inflammation .
Based on the pronounced clinical picture and the distressing situation for the patient, the histological findings from February 2017 were re-examined. Taking account of the radiation history and the clinical progression, a postradiogenic circumscribed scleroderma (morphea) was diagnosed in December 2017, 20 months after RTX.
After the diagnosis had been established all suggested treatments which included systemic immune suppression with steroids and methotrexate (MTX) were declined by our patient. She has been applying topical steroids and has undergone several weeks of lymph drainage at a specialized center. The clinical picture has remained unchanged since December 2017.