A 75-year-old Chinese man was referred to our local for surgical treatment of a right atrial mass. The mass was incidentally found on echocardiography when the patient was being treated for acute ischemic stroke 1 month ago. His past medical history was insignificant except for hypertension.
On admission, a physical examination did not reveal any significant abnormalities. Electrocardiography revealed normal sinus rhythm and all laboratory blood results were unremarkable. Carotid ultrasound was performed and did not show obvious carotid artery stenosis or atherosclerotic plaques. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated a normal left ventricular ejection fraction and a slight aortic valve regurgitation. The other heart valves appeared unremarkable. However, a small mobile nodular tumor mass at the right atrium was seen . Subsequent coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed mild to moderate stenosis and multiple calcified plaques of all main coronary arteries (left main, left anterior descending, left circumflex, and right coronary artery) .
Perioperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) at the time of surgery demonstrated a small spherical, pedunculated mass (1.8 cm × 1.7 cm) near the tricuspid annulus in the right atrium. The right atrium was not enlarged and the tricuspid valve appeared complete and functional. The patient underwent surgery through a median sternotomy under cardiopulmonary bypass established via aorto-bicaval cannulation. The heart was not arrested. When the right atrium was opened, the tumor was found close to the interatrial septum. The short stalk of the tumor arose from the septal portion of the tricuspid annulus. Complete tumor excision on beating heart was then performed. Then, a Kay's tricuspid valvuloplasty on the beating heart was performed by placing a double pledget-supported mattress suture of 2-0 Ethibond from the anteroposterior commissure to the posteroseptal commissure along the posterior annulus and obliterated the posterior leaflet. Repeated intraoperative TEE showed no residual mass, no septal defect, and no tricuspid regurgitation. The patient was weaned from bypass without difficulty and the recovery was uneventful. The patient was extubated within 12 hours after surgery and discharged home on postoperative day 7. A 6-month follow-up after surgery with echocardiogram showed no recurrence of the tumor and no tricuspid regurgitation.
On gross examination, the tumor was ∼2 cm × 1.5 cm large, and the stalk was nodular. When viewed under physiologic saline, it has a frond-like appearance and resembled a sea anemone . Histopathological examination of the tumor showed a stalk with multiple radiating papillary fronds. These villous fronds consisted of a central core of acellular collagen covered by a layer of endocardial cells . Thus, the definite diagnosis of cardiac papillary fibroelastoma was made.