A previously healthy 53-year-old woman presented with an 8-month history of right torticollis and left laterocollis responsive to treatment with botulinum toxin injections. Her sensory trick consisted of alleviation of her symptoms upon yawning. MEG data were acquired in 10 min scans with eyes open, using a 148-channel whole-head magnetometer system (4D Neuroimaging, San Diego, CA, USA) inside a magnetically shielded room. A total of 4 resting-state MEG scans were collected, two right before the injection of botulinum toxin and another two 2 weeks after the injection of botulinum toxin. Pre-botulinum toxin injection scans were taken before and after yawning, and similarly after the injection of botulinum toxin.
The data were sampled at a rate of 508.6 Hz (DC to 100 Hz) and were then forward and backward bandpass filtered 3–50 Hz. An artifact filter, utilizing ICA, was used to remove heart signals observed in the MEG recordings. Then MEG Coherence Source Imaging (CSI) was performed to assess neuronal synchrony within different brain regions . A Standard MRI was segmented, and the brain surface was represented by a cortical model of approximately 4000 dipoles, each having an x, y, and z orientation at each site. Sites were distributed to represent the same volume of cortical gray matter. This model was then morphed to fit the digitized head shape collected during the MEG acquisition.
Post-acquisition data processing was performed using MEG Tools, an open-source Matlab (The Mathworks Inc., Natick, MA, USA)-based software module for MEG brain imaging. MEG-CSI was quantified by applying a time frequency decomposition technique, the short-time Fourier transformation (sFFT). After transformation to a time frequency representation, the strengths of network interactions were estimated by calculation of coherence, a measure of synchrony between signals from different brain regions for each FFT frequency component. The 10 min of rest-state MEG data were prepared for source imaging by division into 80 segments, each containing 7.5 s of data of relatively uniform brain behavior . For each of these data segments, signals from neuronal sources were isolated using an independent component analysis (ICA) spatiotemporal decomposition technique designed to extract signals from distinct compact sources that exhibit burst behavior and minimal temporal overlap with other active sources. These ICA signal components have MEG spatial magnetic field patterns corresponding to one or a few spatially distinct compact sources that are much easier to image accurately using a current-distribution source imaging technique (MR-FOCUSS) . MR-FOCUSS only images amplitudes above 20% of the maximum amplituded threshold. Separate from the imaging algorithm, the cross-spectrum between ICA signals was calculated. In these cross-spectrum calculations, a sequence of FFT spectra were calculated using 0.5 s windows and 25% overlap with FFT amplitudes for 24 frequency bins 2 Hz in width between 3 and 50 Hz. The imaging results and the signal cross-spectrum were used to calculate the coherence between all pairings (~1400 locations in the brain) of active cortical locations within each of the 24 frequency bins. Finally, for each active source, the average coherence across frequencies and sources was calculated. In these MEG-CSI results, the localization of imaged brain activity is strongly dependent on the frequency bands with greatest power. Coherence analysis results were encoded as a color spectrum for values between 1 (entirely coherent) and 0 (no coherence) and overlaid on the patient’s MRI with the solutions restricted to to the gray matter.
MEG-CSI is currently used in our hospital to identify hyperactive epileptogenic brain areas prior to surgery [,]. The variance between coherence from the patients pre- and post-sensory trick (yawn) and pre- and post-botulinum injections was assessed for statistical significance.
Pre-sensory trick, areas of high coherence (0.47) peaking at 12 Hz were identified in the right and left inferior frontal lobe and left temporal region . Post-sensory trick, areas of high coherence (0.5) peaking at 36 Hz were present in multiple regions in both the right and left temporal lobes . Prior to the sensory trick, areas in the inferior frontal, left cerebellum and left parietal lobe were active (green in ). After the sensory trick areas, areas in the occipital and left temporal region were more active (red in ). Prior to the sensory trick, the coherence level at 36 Hz was 0.42, and at 12 Hz, it was 0.475. With sensory trick, the coherence level at 36 Hz increased to 0.5, and at 12 Hz, it decreased to 0.44. This indicates that the sensory trick increased Gamma (>25 Hz) activity while decreasing Alpha (8–12 Hz) activity.
Areas of high coherence included the left temporal and parietal areas, as well as the right and left cerebellum . Post-botulinum toxin injection, areas of high coherence were noted in the left temporal region and in the right cerebellum . Prior to botulinum injection, areas in the superior partial and left parietal were active (green ). After botulinum injection, areas in the occipital, right cerebellum and right temporal were more active (red in ). Prior to botulinum toxin injection, the coherence level at 36 Hz was 0.39, and at 12 Hz, it was 0.37. With botulinum toxin, the coherence level at 36 Hz remained at 0.39, and at 12 Hz, it increased to 0.385. This indicates that the botulinum injection increased Alpha activity while maintaintng a constant Gamma activity.