A 9-year-old boy presented to us with a 2-year-long history of episodic epileptic seizures. His growth and development milestones were delayed compared to his peers. He started walking at the age of 14 months and had poor speech and mathematical ability. However, the boy was able to walk and run normally. At the age of seven years, he experienced his first epileptic seizure which lasted for about 1 minute. The seizure manifested as convulsions with sudden loss of consciousness, turning of eyes and head tilt to the left side, and limb rigidity (left-arm extension; right-arm flexion mimicking an archery posture; lower-extremity flexion). There was no history of odaxesmus or urinary incontinence. Seizure episodes recurred at an irregular frequency. His past medical history and family history were unremarkable.
On examination, he showed poor ability for mathematical calculations (93–7 = ?), dysarthria and bilateral enlargement of gastrocnemius muscles. Muscle strength in the proximal muscles was 5-/5. No cranial nerve dysfunction, sensory disturbances, or ataxia was noted. All nerve reflexes were normal.
Laboratory examination at one week after onset showed an elevated serum creatine kinase level (3665 U/L; normal range 25–200 U/L). Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was normal . Wechsler intelligence tests revealed a low intelligence quotient (IQ): total IQ 65 (normal range, 90–109); manual IQ 63; and language IQ 72. Electromyogram showed slight myogenic changes.
Electroencephalography showed abundant interparoxysmal multifocal spike-slow complex waves and sharp-slow complex waves in bilateral central-parietal areas and frontal midline area, which is consistent with partial seizures. Skeletal muscle biopsy (biceps muscle) was performed after obtaining written consent of his parents. After precooling with isopentane, the muscle specimens were frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen sections (8 μm) were prepared and histopathological and immunohistochemical staining performed using hematoxylin-eosin (HE), modified Gomori trichrome (MGT), NADH-tetrazolium reductase (NADH-TR), succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), cytochrome c oxidase (COX), acid phosphatase, periodic acid-schiff (PAS), oil red O, dystrophin-N/C/R, sarcoglycan-α/β/γ/δ, dysferlin, and major histocompatibility complex 1 (MHC-1).
Histopathological examination showed a few degenerative, necrotic and regenerative muscle fibers and moderate connective tissue hyperplasia; staining for glycogen and lipids was negative. All enzymatic examinations were normal. On immunohistochemical staining, sarcolemma showed partly positivity for dystrophin-N when compared with normal control .
Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) showed a duplication mutation in exons 37–44 in the Dystrophin gene. Additionally, we searched the gene bank (HGMD Pro, PubMed, 1000Genomes, and dbSNP databases), and confirmed that this mutation was novel. Genetic testing of his parents revealed that this gene variant was inherited from his mother . Based on the clinical and genetic evidence, a definitive diagnosis of BMD was made. In addition to the prescribed [0.3 g (a.m.) and 0.6 g (p.m.)] twice daily oxcarbazepine, the patient was administered 10 mg per day coenzyme Q10 for approximately 2 years. Two years later his symptoms relieved and an EEG showed less spikes and slow waves than it had previous shown. He had no adverse events and his motor function remained stable.