An 82-year-old woman visited the emergency room of Himeji St. Mary’s Hospital complaining of dizziness. She had a gastric ulcer and had undergone distal gastrectomy 40 years previously. There were no abnormal findings on head computed tomography (CT) scanning and otorhinological examination, excluding blood examination showing an increase in hepatobiliary enzymes level, CA 19–9, and DUPAN-II . After admission, the sIL-2 receptor was revealed to be high at 1710 U/mL.
Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT showed a large homogeneous low-density lesion, 13 × 9 × 5 cm in size, widely spreading from the peri-pancreatic head to the hepatic hilus, the hepatoduodenal ligament, the duodenum, and root of the mesenteric vessels. Intrahepatic duct and common hepatic duct were dilated, but the lower bile duct was obstructed by the lesion’s central part. The main pancreatic duct of the pancreatic head was also obstructed by the lesion’s central part. The portal vein and superior mesenteric vein went through the lesion’s peripheral part but were neither involved nor narrowed. The duodenal wall was thickened, but the duodenum lumen was not narrowed. The peripheral part had a slightly low density in the early phase and homogeneous isodensity in the late phase. However, the central part revealed a lower density in the early phase and a heterogeneous high density in the late phase .
Contrast-enhanced MRI showed that the peripheral part had a low signal in the early phase and a slightly low signal in the late phase. In contrast, the central part revealed a low signal in the early phase and a heterogeneous high signal in the late phase .
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI, b = 800 s/mm2) showed a very high signal in the peripheral part and a relatively lower signal in the central part . The peripheral part revealed high-cell density and was considered as malignant lymphoma due to the markedly low diffusion. However, the central part seemed to be a different kind of tumor from the peripheral part. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed a strong accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) on the central part, suggesting a high-grade malignant tumor .
The peripheral part was certainly malignant lymphoma, and the central part seemed to be a malignant tumor originating from the epithelium, such as pancreatic carcinoma. Therefore, we considered that two histologically different tumors collided in the pancreas head. For a definite diagnosis, percutaneous ultrasound-guided needle biopsies were performed at the hyperechoic central lesion and hypoechoic peripheral lesion .
Histopathological findings revealed that the central lesion was diagnosed as an adenocarcinoma positive for CK7, negative for CK 20 and CDX2, and with a very high Ki-67 labeling index . In contrast, the peripheral lesion was diagnosed as a low-grade B cell lymphoma as CD20-positive, CD3-negative, CD10-negative, CD5-negative, CyclinD1-negative, BCL2-positive, BCL6-negative, cytokeratin-negative, and with a low-labeling index by Ki-67 .
We preoperatively presumed that this lesion was a collision tumor composed of pancreatic head carcinoma, T2N0M0, Stage IB (UICC ver.8), and low-grade B cell lymphoma, StageIIE (the Lugano classification).
Since it was clear that the pancreatic carcinoma would determine the prognosis of this patient, we decided to give priority to treating the carcinoma. The preoperative diagnosis indicated that the pancreatic carcinoma was T2N0M0, stage IB (UICC), which prompted us to decide that neoadjuvant chemotherapy was not a mandatory choice. We devised a strategy in which pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) would be performed first, and once the patient was ready for chemotherapy after post-operative recovery, the malignant lymphoma would be treated with chemotherapy. Further, if the pancreatic carcinoma relapsed, it would be treated with chemotherapy. However, due to the advanced age of the patient, any chemotherapy carried a high risk. It was thus decided that careful consideration must be given as to whether or not to conduct chemotherapy. As for the operation, we determined the patient to be operable even with advanced age and low weight and decided to perform PD.
Previously, the patient underwent distal gastrectomy and Billroth II gastro-jejunostomy; therefore, we cut the afferent loop near the anastomotic part. After Kocher maneuver, we palpated a fist-sized tumor on the pancreas head. When detaching the pancreatic head from the transverse mesocolon, we found thickening of the transverse mesocolon along the right branch of the middle colic artery, and it was indicative of progressive lymphoma. The lymphoma tissue around the middle colic artery was incompletely removed because it appeared impossible to resect diffusely spread lymphoma fully and because the residual lymphoma could be treated with chemotherapy. Intraoperative echography demonstrated hypoechoic to isoechoic lymphoma in the pancreatic head, with an unclear border between the lymphoma in the pancreatic head and the non-lymphoma area in the pancreatic body and tail. However, the central part of the lesion, which seemed to be adenocarcinoma, was hyperechoic and had a clear border; therefore, the pancreas was resected once directly above the portal vein. Since intraoperative rapid pathological examination revealed that lymphoma tissue was present in at least half of the area of the resected pancreatic stump cut surface, an additional 3 cm of the pancreas was resected, and a negative stump was confirmed. The nerve plexus around the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) was not resected because there was sufficient distance between the pancreatic cancer area and the SMA.
The resected specimen showed an elastic hard tumor, 90 × 75 mm in size, located in the pancreatic head . The lower bile duct was involved with the tumor, showing a narrow part of 40 mm in length . The second part of the duodenum had a diffusely elevated mass with irregular thickness on the mucosal layer .
The cut surface of the formalin-fixed specimen showed a whitish hard central lesion, including the necrotic part inside, with an irregular border, involving the bile duct, was considered the pancreatic carcinoma, while the whitish-yellow peripheral lesion was considered malignant lymphoma .
Microscopic examination showed that the central lesion, 31 × 30 × 28 mm in size, invading the common bile duct in the pancreatic head, comprised an intermix of well-to-moderately differentiated glands and poorly differentiated solid cell sheets . The glands contained luminal and intracellular mucins. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the tumor cells were diffusely positive for CK7 and negative for CK20 .
The central lesion was finally diagnosed as a pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, R0, pT2pN0M0, pStageIB (staged by UICC ver.8). On the other hand, the peripheral lesion showed diffuse proliferation of small lymphoid cells , replacing the entire duodenal wall, involving the mucosa, submucosa, and muscular propria, extending interminably into the pancreatic glands and stroma, and further infiltrating into the adjacent peritoneum and retroperitoneum. Some cells showed Dutscher bodies or plasma cell differentiation, but monocytoid cells were not present. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that infiltrating lymphoid cells were diffusely positive for CD20 and BCL2, while the number of CD3-positive cells was very low . These CD20-positive cells were negative for CD5, cyclin D1, SOX11, CD10, and BCL6, with a low level of Ki67-labeling index .
Lymphoepithelial lesions were focally seen in the duodenal mucosa, while a few were observed in the pancreas. Thus, the origin of the lymphoma remains unclear. The peripheral lesion was diagnosed as an extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, the Lugano classification StageIIE. In conclusion, we diagnosed a collision tumor composed of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and MALT lymphoma, mainly involving the peripheral pancreatic head and duodenum .
A pancreatic fistula occurred after the surgery. Several weeks after the management of the pancreatic fistula, she was discharged from the hospital. Five months after the surgery, she was admitted to the hospital due to a compression fracture of the lumbar vertebra and malnutrition. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a metastatic lesion on the abdominal wall and pleural effusion. After a 1-month stay, she was transferred to another hospital for further rehabilitation. Several days later, she suddenly developed respiratory failure and died approximately 6 months after the surgery.