The patient was a 57-year-old male with a height of 165 cm, a weight of 66 kg and a BMI of 24.2 kg/m2. In September 2016, the patient underwent laparoscopic irregular hepatectomy (V and VI liver segments) for primary HCC in our hospital. In July 2018, contrast-enhanced CT scan imaging revealed a neoplasm that showed enhancement in segment VII of the liver . The laboratory tumour marker AFP was 157.40 ng/ml. Recurrent HCC was diagnosed, and retroperitoneal laparoscopic hepatectomy was performed with the patient’s full knowledge and consent. Seventy-two hours before the operation, indocyanine green was injected through the peripheral vein at 0.25 mg/kg body weight (ICG-r15 = 13.4%).
Patient position: Left recumbent position with a high waist cushion. Port site: A 2.0 cm incision was made under the costal margin of the right posterior axillary line, and a finger was inserted into the retroperitoneal cavity for blunt separation. A 1.0 cm incision was made on the iliac crest of the right midaxillary line, and a 0.5 cm incision was made under the front ribs on the right axillary line. Intraoperative procedure: Under fluorescent laparoscopic surveillance, an ultrasound scalpel was used to separate the retroperitoneal space to avoid incision of the peritoneum and to locate the right posterior lobe of the liver. Intraoperative ultrasound (IOUS) was used for localization, and ICG fluorescence was used for navigation. Ultimately, the tumour was completely removed. The margin of incision was more than 1 cm away from the tumour . During the operation, part of the retroperitoneum was cut into the peritoneal cavity to explore the liver and prevent overlooking other tumours. Operative time: 120 min. Intraoperative blood loss: 20 ml.
Light microscopy demonstrated that the tumour cells grew in irregular cords or plates separated by dilated sinusoidal vessels (trabecular pattern) or in focal acinar or pseudoglandular structures. The tumour cells showed cytologic atypia and had abundant pale cytoplasm, large hyperchromatic nuclei, and identifiable nucleoli. Mitotic figures were frequently observed. Dilated bile canaliculi with condensed bile in the lumina were present.
Immunohistochemical stains: GPC-3 (+), Arginase-1 (−), CEA (−), CK18 (+), CK19 (+), Hepatocyte (+), CK10 (+), CD34 (+), CK7 (−), Ki67 index(60%).
Pathological diagnosis: Moderately differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma.
The patient was discharged on the third day after the operation, and the AFP level decreased to 8.81 ng/ml on the 28th postoperative day. Another contrast-enhanced CT scan was performed, and there was no evidence of tumour recurrence or metastasis. The patient was fully informed, agreed to the treatment plan and was very satisfied with the treatment effect.