A 56-year-old man presented with diplopia due to the right oculomotor nerve palsy. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results revealed a large sphenoidal tumor . The patient underwent tumor resection, and the pathological diagnosis revealed an atypical meningioma. Diplopia improved after tumor resection and only a slight adduction disturbance of the right eye persisted. During the next 7 years, he underwent local radiation therapy at a total dose of 50 Gy, second tumor resection, and Gamma Knife (GK) radiosurgery to control the tumor’s repetitive recurrence around the right anterior clinoid process. After the GK radiosurgery, residual tumor was controlled for the next 3 years .
Three months after his last visit, he started to suffer from intermittent diplopia. MRI revealed a rapid growth of the posterior part of the residual tumor , and heavily T2-weighted imaging showed the involvement of the right oculomotor nerve within the tumor . His symptom was intermittent involuntary diplopia, an involuntary inward deviation of his right eye, which resolved within 1 min [, ]. The symptom was mostly triggered by tight eye closing, which frequently occurred every day. The ophthalmological examination of the right eye showed restricted eye movement during upward and medial gaze . The ophthalmologist diagnosed this intermittent involuntary symptom as ONM. The results of the ophthalmological examination also revealed worsening of the right vision and nasal hemianopia .
The third tumor resection was performed through the right pterional approach to prevent further visual disturbance aggravation. After the removal of the tumor occupying the right retrocarotid space, the oculomotor nerve was found within the tumor and was preserved . The oculomotor nerve was tightened by the surrounding tumor. We found no neurovascular contact between the oculomotor nerve and vascular structures. Most of the tumor was removed, except for the part that was tightly adhered to the right optic nerve and optic chiasm, achieving a sufficient neural decompression . The tumor was pathologically diagnosed as an atypical meningioma with a MIB-1 labeling index of 12.4%.
ONM disappeared immediately after surgery. A transient worsening of the right oculomotor nerve palsy occurred, which gradually recovered in the preoperative level [, ]. The right visual disturbance and nasal hemianopia continued after surgery. The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was discharged 15 days after surgery and he remained free from ONM until the last follow-up visit (9 months after surgery).