A five-month-old healthy girl was referred to an oral medicine clinic for evaluation of oral and perioral lesions.
The patient had a three-day-history of oral and perioral lesions accompanied by fever (38.6 °C), irritability, poor breastfeeding, and poor sleep.
The patient’s mother denied the presence of previous surgical procedures, pathologic medical diagnoses, or genetic conditions for the patient.
The patient was born via cesarean delivery to a 37-year-old primigravid. She has been exclusively breastfed by her mother since birth with no intake of bottled milk. The mother has a history of recurrent intraoral HSV infections, and her last infection reportedly occurred seven weeks before the patient presented with primary perioral and oral HSV type 1infection. The mother’s anti-HSV-1 immunoglobulin (Ig) G level was 0.6 (seronegative) and her anti-HSV-2 IgG level was 0.4 (seronegative).
Physical and systemic examination: The patient was born in good health and has not taken any medications since birth.
Extraoral examination: Extraoral examination showed multiple perioral vesicular eruptions with crusted surfaces and erythematous halos . Excessive drooling and submandibular lymphadenopathy were also observed.
Intraoral examination: Intraoral examination revealed a swollen, red gingiva with multiple ulcers at the upper anterior alveolar ridge with a yellow-gray coating . In addition, the examination revealed swollen palatine tonsils and halitosis.
Blood tests revealed normal results: a red blood cell count of 4.2 × 106/μL, a hemoglobin count of 12.4 g/dL, a platelet count of 432 × 103/μL, and a white blood cell count of 15.6 × 103/μL with 41% segmented neutrophils and 62% lymphocytes.
Not applicable.
The main differential diagnoses in this case included HSV type 1, HSV type 2, herpangina, and varicella zoster virus infection.
As part of the HSV infection workup, diagnostic procedures were carried out to arrive at a definitive diagnosis. Tzanck smear, which was taken from an oral sore and a perioral vesicle, showed multinucleated giant cells with inclusion bodies. Additionally, HSV-1 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and IgM testing for HSV-1 yielded positive findings. All results were consistent with HSV type 1 infection.