A 71-year-old gentleman with history of stage IIC left postauricular melanoma treated surgically in August 2013 developed a new left-sided preauricular mass in September 2016. Excision and sentinel node biopsy confirmed recurrent melanoma with positive nodal involvement. He subsequently underwent a modified radical neck dissection, and 1 of 29 lymph nodes was positive for metastatic disease. He was restaged with stage IIIB disease and was initially treated with adjuvant external beam radiation (48 Gy in 20 fractions) between December 2016 and January 2017. He was then enrolled in the SWOG 1404 trial and randomized to the ipilimumab arm; first treatment under protocol was in March 2017. Cycles occurred every 3 weeks; cycles 1 and 2 were tolerated well. Less than 1 week after completing cycle 3, he developed severe, progressive, symmetric ascending weakness without sensory loss. Over the course of several days, the paralysis progressed to inability to stand and arm weakness. There was no dysphagia, ptosis, neck weakness, or respiratory involvement. Neurological examination showed profound, symmetrical, proximal greater than distal upper and lower extremity weakness and unobtainable deep tendon reflexes. The patient eventually developed mild dysphagia and shortness of breath but never required intubation.
The patient was admitted for workup and treatment. Complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine was not possible due to the presence of a spinal cord stimulator for chronic low back and radicular pain. Computed tomography (CT) of the total spine and brain showed no abnormalities. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was normal 11 days after the 3rd dose of ipilimumab (6 days after the onset of weakness). Creatine phosphokinase, aldolase, lactate dehydrogenase, and serum protein electrophoresis were unremarkable. Thyroid function tests and cortisol were within normal limits. C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were elevated to 0.71 mg/dL and 121 mm/hr, respectively.
Given his clinical and laboratory findings, the patient was diagnosed with atypical GBS secondary to ipilimumab therapy. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was started day 11 post ipilimumab (day 6 of weakness), and a 2 g/kg total dose was completed over 5 days. Prednisone was started at 30 mg daily in divided doses at the same time. He improved rapidly. Upon admission, he was bedbound; upon discharge from the rehabilitation hospital 3 weeks later, he was ambulatory with a walker; and 6 weeks post onset of paralysis, he was ambulatory with a cane. Electromyography and nerve conduction studies were performed 6 weeks after the onset of paralysis and confirmed sequela of an acute sensorimotor polyradiculoneuropathy with mixed axonal/demyelinating features consistent with GBS. There was significant active denervation and reinnervation in distal upper and lower limb muscles. Sensory and motor nerve velocities were mildly reduced, with a length-dependent loss of amplitudes. There was no temporal dispersion, and no conduction blocks were found. Repetitive nerve stimulation was normal. Steroids were continued for a few months and tapered. His strength returned close to baseline after several months, with his last neurological exam documenting mild proximal muscle weakness, areflexia, and slightly unsteady but unassisted gait 3 months after onset of GBS. The patient was not restarted on ipilimumab and opted for surveillance, as scans showed no evidence of disease.
The patient was followed with serial CT scans of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis. A 2 cm right lower lung nodule was noted in February 2018; the biopsy showed recurrent melanoma. He then underwent right lower lobectomy with complete lymphadenectomy in May 2018. Bronchovascular margins were negative, but 3 lymph nodes had melanoma involvement. Molecular profiling showed that the patient did not have a BRAF V600 domain mutation, and the tumor had a high PD-L1 expression (50%) and mutational burden. Restaging with positron emission tomography (PET)/CT within a few months revealed additional left paratracheal lymph node invasion. The patient was then started on anti-PD-1 therapy with pembrolizumab in June 2018, with special attention given toward close monitoring for any neurologic complications. The patient tolerated this regimen remarkably well, and repeat PET/CT in September 2018 (after cycle 4) demonstrated complete response to treatment, with no evidence of disease. Today, the patient continues on maintenance pembrolizumab and recently completed his 15th cycle. There has been no evidence of recurrent neurologic symptoms over the course of his treatment, and his most recent PET/CT in March 2019 showed continued complete response to therapy.