This case was a 3-year-and-11-month-old male child, with no obvious abnormality at birth. However, the milk coffee spot was noted at the right face at 2 month old, which was not treated. At the age of 1 year, the right frontal bulge was observed , which was gradually increased. After admission to the hospital, the head CT scan showed that, the local diploic space on the right side of the frontal bone was thickened, showing a glass-like density. Based on these detection results, the child was diagnosed as abnormal skull proliferation, and the skull replacement surgery after adulthood was recommended. At the age of 2 years, the length of lower extremities was found to be unequal. The X-ray showed that the right lower extremity was longer than the left lower extremity , and the correction with appropriate insole was recommended then. During 2016–2019, the head CT examination showed that the thickening range of the local diploic space on the right side of the frontal bone was enlarged, and the X-ray showed that the unequal length of the lower extremities increased from 2.9 cm to 3.7 cm. On January 4, 2019, in another hospital, the child received the osteophyte blocking at the distal right femur and proximal right tibia. Thereafter, the child was admitted to our hospital for the suspected McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS). Physical examination findings were as follows: height, 95.0 cm; and weight, 14.1 kg. Moreover, the right frontal bone bulging, milk coffee spot on the right face, local bulging at the midline of the right rib, and flaky nodules on the right hand and right thigh were observed . Furthermore, the right lower extremity was about 3.5 cm longer than the left lower extremity.
According to the auxiliary examinations, normal findings were obtained from the blood and urine routine tests, the liver and kidney function assessments, and the blood electrolyte and bone metabolism detections. The growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) were within the normal range. The sex hormone levels were as follows: estradiol (E2), < 5.00 pg/ml; luteinizing hormone (LH), 0.16 mIU/ml; follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), 0.58 mIU/ml; prolactin (PRL), 11.33 ng/ml; testosterone (Testo), < 0.03 ng/ml; 8 am cortisol, 472.00 nmol/L (133–537 nmol/L); and 8 am adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), 5.15 pmol/L (1.6–13.9 pmol/L). The case was with normal thyroid function, negative for thyrotrophin receptor antibody (TRAb), thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb), and thyroglobulin antibody (TgAb). The head CT detection showed local diploic space thickening on the right side of the frontal bone, with frosted glass-like density shadow. Superior orbital fissure and inferior orbital fissure were observed, while the optic nerve canal was not widened. Moreover, the accessory structures such as optic nerve and extraocular muscle were normal. Based on these findings, the bone fiber abnormal proliferation syndrome and osteofibroma had been considered . The X-ray showed that, the lower extremities were unequal in length, and the right lower extremity was obviously longer than the left one. There were no obvious abnormalities in the morphology, structure and density of the bilateral femur and tibia. Moreover, no abnormalities were found in the surrounding soft tissues. Ultrasound detection indicated that, the right rectus abdominis (8 mm in thickness) was significantly thicker than the left side (about 5 mm). For the analysis of the bone age, the head and hook bones were enlarged, and the fifth metacarpal ossification center was visible. The dermatoscopy indicated mild papillary hyperplasia. The skin CT detection showed hyperplasia at the lesion, with thickened epidermis, and papillary hyperplasia. Biopsy was performed based on the samples of the milk coffee spots, and the thickened nodular skin from the hands and feet, which were subjected to the DNA extraction and detection of disease-causing genes. The results showed that, there was a heterozygous point mutation 49G > A (p.Glu17Lys) in the exon region of the AKT1 gene . In silico algorithms including SIFT (/), PolyPhen-2 , and Mutation Taster were performed to predict this variation, and the predictive values were 0.01, 1.00 and 0.999 respectively, suggesting the pathogenicity of this mutation. Genetic testing results confirmed the diagnosis of PS.