The patient, 67 years old, had a past 5-year history of increasing urinary obstructive symptoms and clinical diagnosis of benign prostatic enlargement for which he had been treated with an alpha(1A)/alpha(1D)-adrenoceptor antagonist. There was no history of other medications or hormonally-active supplements. No comorbidities, including diabetes, were present.
His most recent preoperative total serum PSA was 7.2 ng/ml, with a free-to-total ratio of 0.12. Transrectal ultrasound revealed a hypoechoic area in the left mid part of the prostate. Induration of the same prostate zone was detected by digital rectal examination. Twelve random ultrasound guided prostatic needle cores were taken. Histological diagnosis of Gleason score 3 + 3 = 6 acinar adenocarcinoma occupying 40% of one of the 12 cores, from the left part of the prostate and corresponding to the location of the hypoechoic area, was made. The tumor was classified in the low risk category. Even though the patient was considered a potential candidate for active surveillance, open radical prostatectomy (monolateral nerve sparing in the right side) was performed. Pelvic lymph node dissection was not carried out.
The prostate specimen was received fresh from the operating room. Its weight without the seminal vesicles (33 grams) and all three dimensions were recorded, the latter used for prostate volume calculation (24.12 cc). The specimen was then covered with India ink and fixed for 48 hours in 4% neutral buffered formalin. After fixation, the apex and base (3 mm thick slices) were removed from each specimen and examined by the cone method. The prostate body was step-sectioned at 3 mm intervals perpendicular to the long axis of the gland. The seminal vesicles were cut into two halves and processed in toto. The cut specimen was post-fixed and then dehydrated in graded alcohols, cleared in xylene, embedded in paraffin and examined histologically as 5 μm-thick whole-mount hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained sections. The Gleason grading was based on the 2010 modification of the “2005 ISUP Modified Gleason System” . Staging was done according to the 2009 TNM revision .
The histological examination of the prostate showed a dominant nodule located in the peripheral zone, postero-lateraly in the left mid portion of the prostate body . The nodule, 1.3 cm in greatest diameter (volume 0.7 cc), showed the following features: acinar adenocarcinoma , Gleason score 3 + 3 = 6, WHO nuclear grade 3, negative surgical margin, no extraprostatic extension, even though the tumor reached the so-called prostate capsule, and lymphovascular invasion in the parenchyma adjacent to the tumor . The left posterolateral periprostatic adipose tissue, adjacent to the prostate dominant cancer nodule, contained a lymph node, 0.5 cm in greatest diameter, with a secondary deposit of Gleason 6 adenocarcinoma (diameter 0.3 cm) . An additional tumor focus was present in the right lateral horn with the features of an insignificant: Gleason score 3 + 3 = 6 acinar adenocarcinoma, 3 mm in diameter (volume 0.1 cc), with negative surgical margin and no extraprostatic extension (Stage pT2c) (See the Paragraph).