An 18-year old male from Myanmar was brought to the emergency department because of difficulty in swallowing and alteration of consciousness. He had been in good health and had arrived Bangkok 6 days earlier. Three days prior to admission, he developed fever and difficulty in swallowing. He also had pruritus of his right leg and buttock which resulted in extensive excoriation. He had became intermittently confused and refused to eat or drink. There were episodes of agitation and he was reported to have complained of shortness of breath incited by fanning.
One day prior to entry, he was unable to swallow his saliva. His mental status alternated between normal periods and confusion. He gave a history of dog bite 10 years previously but no post exposure vaccination was administered and he denied any recent animal bites or contact with bats.
On admission, he was conscious and well co-operative. He complained of a severely sore throat. He insisted on sitting and continuously spitting out saliva. His body temperature was 39.1°C, blood pressure 130/70 mmHg, heart rate 120 and respiration 30 per minute. There was crepitus on the left side of his neck without signs of inflammation. There were no focal neurological signs. His palatopharyngeal muscle functions were intact but the gag reflex was hyperactive. Aero- and hydrophobic spasms could not be induced. Indirect laryngoscopic examination showed no abnormality. Laboratory studies revealed a leucocytosis of 28,400 with 89.6% of neutrophils. His serum amylase level was slightly elevated (443 U/L, normal range 28–100 U/L). The computerized tomography (CT) scan of the brain was unremarkable. Lumbar puncture revealed an acellular cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and normal protein and sugar levels. Lateral neck radiographs showed air in retropharyngeal space and a chest x-ray performed at the same time showed evidence of pneumomediastinum . A liquid barium esophagogram failed to show any point of leakage. Surgical consultation was obtained for exploration. Between admission and operation, his mental state was clear and he showed no signs of aggression and the differential diagnosis of possible rabies was disregarded.
Operative findings were unremarkable. There was no evidence of perforation in upper esophagus and oropharynx. Retropharyngeal area was normal without any accumulation of fluid or purulent discharge.
He required assisted ventilation postoperatively but was able to move limbs voluntarily. He remained rational and cooperative. His hypernatremia (Na 157 mOsm/L) was rapidly corrected to140 mOsm/L within the following 11 hours. On the second postoperative day, he developed brief generalized tonic- clonic seizures. Intravenous phenytoin was initiated. Serial seizures developed on day 6. Repeated lumbar puncture and CT scan were unremarkable. He was conscious but failed to communicate. Paralysis of all limbs with absence of deep tendon reflexes was noted on the same day. He became comatose on day 9. Paralytic rabies was then suspected and rabies virus RNA was demonstrable in saliva but not in the urine by nucleic acid sequence based amplification technique (3). The patient died after 12 days of hospitalization (15 days after first clinical onset). Autopsy findings showed wide spread Negri bodies through out the whole neural axis.