A 68-year-old female was admitted to the centre of hepatology, gastroenterology and dietetics complaining of progressive fatigue for the past 3 weeks. She was consulted by her family doctor several times due to iron deficiency anemia, and 80 mg of ferrous sulfate was prescribed. However, the patient’s condition continued to deteriorate: the weakness progressed, and she reported melena a day before hospitalization. The initial blood test revealed severe anemia with hemoglobin (HgB) of 71 g/L. The patient was referred to the emergency department in suspicion of upper gastrointestinal bleeding. However, esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGDS) indicated erosive gastropathy with no signs of bleeding. The patient was then admitted to the department of hepatology and gastroenterology for further investigation and treatment.
The patient had a medical history of type 2 insulin-dependent diabetes, hypothyroidism, hypertension, uterine myomatosis and peptic ulcer in the stomach 10 years ago. There was no history of surgical treatment. She denied any harmful habits and claimed to have no allergies to food or medicines.
On admission, the patient was pale, afebrile (body temperature 36,8º C), with stable hemodynamic function (blood pressure 140/70 mmHg, pulse 90 bpm). Physical examination revealed no signs of cachexia (height 164 cm, weight 68 kg, body mass index 25.28 kg/m2) and palpable abdomen pain. Her liver, spleen, and superficial lymph nodes were not enlarged. The patients’ ECOG (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group) performance status was evaluated as 1 point.
The primary laboratory tests performed on admission revealed hemolytic anemia (low hemoglobin, reticulocytosis, elevated lactate dehydrogenase, low haptoglobin), thrombocytopenia, elevated liver enzymes, stage 3A chronic kidney disease, and signs of inflammation. No signs of ferritin, folate, or vitamin B12 deficiency were observed .
The abdominal ultrasound revealed hepatomegaly (right lobe ~171 mm) and multiple variable echogenicity liver metastases (part of which was degrading) throughout all liver segments (the biggest ~25 mm in diameter) . A nonhomogenous increased uterus with several calcified myomas was also observed.
Metastatic foci were confirmed by performing a full-body computed tomography (CT) scan, which showed hepatomegaly (right lobe ~184 mm), multiple hypodense solid diffusely distributed masses in the liver (to 3 cm in diameter), spleen (to 3.7 cm in diameter), and kidneys (to 12 mm in diameter), moderate interstitial, para-aortic, paratracheal, and aortocaval lymphadenopathy, and disc atelectasis in the lungs .
The primary tumor localization after the CT scan remained unknown. The lesions were differentiated between lymphoma, metastatic disease, granuloma, or infection. Firstly, lymphoma was suspected due to thrombocytopenia, masses in the liver and spleen. The patient was consulted by a hematologist: transfusions of irradiated blood components were intended, and bone marrow biopsy and aspiration were recommended and performed. Trepanobiopsy showed reactive bone marrow changes – bone marrow hyperplasia with massive megacaryopoetic hyperplasia. No metastases were detected. The diagnosis of lymphoma was denied. There were also no visible tumors or other pathological changes found during the colonoscopy.
Consequently, a percutaneous focal core needle liver biopsy was performed. The pathological findings confirmed the diagnosis of poorly differentiated (G3) liver angiosarcoma, and the patient was diagnosed with stage IV (cT4N0M1) poorly differentiated (G3) HA with multiple metastases in the spleen and kidneys, severe anemia, and thrombocytopenia. On immunohistochemical examination, the tumor cells showed strong CD31 expression and were negative for CD34, pan Cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) (PANCK) and smooth muscle a-actin (SMA) reactions. Microscopically, the tumor was described as formed by solid, sinusoidal structures of medium caliber cells, featuring eosinophilic cytoplasm (in places with hemosiderin granules) and polymorphic, hyperchromatic nuclei with up to 3 mitoses in the high power field .
The patient was further referred to the department of oncology and chemotherapy for systemic treatment. By that time, the patient’s platelet count was stabilized from 8 to 344 × 109/L. However, within 4 days, the patient developed multiple hemorrhages on the skin, and her blood tests revealed severe thrombocytopenia – platelet count dropped to 5 × 109/L). Therefore, the chemotherapy was contraindicated. She was treated with platelet transfusions and was also prescribed 20 mg peroral dexamethasone (reduced dose due to insulin-dependent diabetes) for 4 days in suspicion of immune thrombocytopenia. However, this treatment was not effective, and thrombocytopenia (platelet count 6 × 109/L) along with anemia (HgB 73 g/L) remained. Additional laboratory testing revealed hypofi-brinogenemia (fibrinogen 1.22 g/L; normal range 2–4 g/L), normal international normalized ratio, prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin ratio levels, high D-dimers (41970 µg/L; normal range < 250 µg/L) and slightly worsened liver function. These changes were compatible with overt DIC. (ISTH criteria 5 points), which might be a paraneoplastic syndrome related to angiosarcoma.
During the chemotherapy experts’ consultation, it was decided to start systemic first-line treatment with doxorubicin monotherapy urgently, despite remaining thrombocytopenia and anemia (paraneoplastic syndrome). The decision on this particular regimen was made according to the literature review on first-line chemotherapeutic treatment for noncutaneous angiosarcomas. Six cycles of treatment were planned. The patient tolerated the first cycle well, and her platelet level started to rise. However, 11 days after the second treatment cycle with doxorubicin, the patient’s condition worsened tremendously, and she died 2 months after HA diagnosis due to hypovolemic-hemorrhagic shock and DIC despite our best efforts.