A 25-year-old female presented with complaints of pain over the left groin for 3 months and swelling over the left hip and proximal thigh for 2 months. She was unable to bear weight on the affected limb due to pain and deformity for a month. There were no constitutional symptoms. On examination, bulk of the swelling was in the medial and posterior aspects of the thigh, extending posterosuperiorly toward the ischial tuberosity. It was firm in consistency, had a multilobulated surface, and measured about 16x12 cm in dimensions. The left hip was fixed in 40° of flexion and 20° of adduction with no further movements possible.
Pre-operative radiographs showed a lytic lesion involving the left inferior pubic ramus, ischiopubic ramus, posterior wall, and column of the acetabulum. There was soft-tissue involvement in the medial and posterior aspects of the proximal thigh .
It had a permeative pattern of destruction. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a large multilobulated, solid lesion in the muscle plane of adductor muscles and obturator externus, measuring 9.8 × 10 × 11.8 cm in size. It was T1W isointense and T2W hyperintense .
The lesion extended into ischium, posteroinferior acetabulum, and inferior pubic ramus. The bone scan showed no other lesion in the body. The sciatic nerve and femoral neurovascular bundle were free of disease. The femur was spared from any infiltration. Pre-operative computed tomography with 3D reconstruction was also performed to plan surgical excision .
Core biopsy from the lesion revealed spindle cells highly immunoreactive to TLE-1 suggesting the diagnosis of synovial sarcoma .
The diagnosis was further confirmed by a positive SYT translocation. Bone marrow biopsy revealed no infiltration by atypical cells. Pre-operative planning was done for wide local resection of the tumor (internal hemipelvectomy) and reconstruction of the acetabulum with allograft. The anterior wall and column of acetabulum were free of tumor extension. The weight-bearing dome was also free of tumor. Tumor only involved the ischium and posterior wall. Hence, a decision was made to take a 2 cm margin of tumor in the region of acetabulum and do a partial resection of acetabulum removing the inferior pubic rami, ischium, posterior wall, and column up to lateral wall of the greater sciatic notch along with inferior half of cotyloid fossa .
Exposure was achieved by a combined standard posterior approach and medial paralabial approach. The plane was developed between tumor and gluteus maximus posteriorly and adductor longus medially. Sciatic nerve was identified and protected while the obturator nerve and vessels entering the tumor mass were ligated. The short external rotators and posterior part of hip capsule were excised from femoral attachment for removal with the tumor. The hip joint was dislocated posteriorly to expose the acetabulum and complete acetabular resection. Adductor brevis and magnus muscles were detached distally and removed en bloc with the tumor. Hamstring muscles were also separated from the tumor mass proximally. The paralabial approach was used to separate inferior pubic ramus from superior pubic ramus, complete dissection of the adductor compartment and mobilize the tumor for removal after anterior and posterior cuts were complete. Intraoperative images are shown in .
There was no breach found in the tumor capsule during excision. Intraoperative margins sent from five different medial and posterior sites for frozen section were free from tumor cells. Acetabular reconstruction was done with femoral head allograft, which was cut and reamed according to match the contour of remaining acetabulum. Femoral head was reduced and the allograft was fixed with three lag screws and a 5-hole recon plate used as a buttress plate. Blood loss was about 1600 ml and the duration of surgery was 130 min.
Postoperatively, the histopathology report confirmed the diagnosis to be synovial sarcoma. The patient was allowed non-weight-bearing mobilization from the 1st day. The immediate post-operative period was uncomplicated except for seroma formation in the perineal region on the operated side, which was managed conservatively. The patient was allowed full weight-bearing mobilization after 6 weeks. At 3 months’ follow-up, the patient was able to walk without support and was able to do active straight leg raising .
Post-operative radiographs and computed tomography revealed an optimum position of the graft with uptake of the graft with host bone . The patient received 12 cycles of chemotherapy (VAC IE) and 60 Gy cumulative radiotherapy postoperatively.