A 68-year-old Caucasian man was admitted to our emergency surgery with a 5-day history of abdominal pain located to his upper quadrants along with vomiting. Our patient’s history included hypertension, a previous open appendectomy, and open repair of a perforated gastric ulcer. He described the pain as a worsening continuous ache lasting several hours, relieved by taking prokinetic agents and anti-emetics. A physical examination revealed a slightly distended abdomen. Deep palpation caused pain in his left quadrants but there were no signs of peritoneal or gallbladder inflammation; both Murphy and Blumberg signs were negative. Auscultation revealed active peristalsis. His laboratory test results were significant for neutrophilic leukocytosis (21,900/mm3; normal, 19,900/mm3) with signs of hemoconcentration (hemoglobin 15.5 g/dL; hematocrit 45%). His liver and renal function were normal, with a creatinine concentration of 0.99 mg/dL. An abdominal X-ray revealed signs of bowel obstruction with jejunal air-fluid levels. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast medium showed massive distension of his stomach, duodenum, and jejunum with an abrupt stop at that point: the remaining loops of his intestine appeared to have collapsed. Particularly, his stomach and the lower third of his esophagus were distended by abundant fluid material and there was no evidence of free air in his abdomen and no peritoneal fluid .
Taking into account his clinical symptoms, laboratory test results, and the instrumental evaluation, urgent explorative laparotomy was performed. This revealed abnormal distension of his stomach and jejunum, with two foreign bodies of diameter 4 cm, one in the gastric body and one in the distal part of his jejunum. After gastrostomy and jejunostomy, the foreign bodies were extracted and the incisions were sutured . Time to bowel movement and time to bowel activity were particularly slow in the postoperative days. An abdominal X-ray was performed on the sixth postoperative day after an iodinated contrast medium was administered through a nasogastric probe. This demonstrated complete opacification of his colon. Our patient was discharged 11 days after surgery in a good clinical condition. A pathologic examination of the intraluminal lesion revealed the presence of a double phytobezoar made of different types of fibers. Our patient attended a follow-up visit after 6 months, and a physical examination evidenced that he was in a good clinical condition.