A 37-year-old South Asian woman on bi-weekly 162 mg/ml tocilizumab injections for RA was enrolled in a Neuro-PASC research study at Northwestern University in Chicago (demographics in ; study design in ). She was acutely symptomatic with new onset severe fatigue, occipital headache, and loss of appetite. She tested SARS-CoV-2+ by nasopharyngeal rapid antigen test in December, 2021. She experienced persistent headache and fatigue for >6 weeks after infection. The patient tested RT-PCR– for SARS-CoV-2 at 14 days post-infection and multiple times thereafter but continued to test intermittently antigen+ for 14 weeks post-infection despite no overt exposure to SARS-CoV-2 infected individuals. The patient lived alone, did not leave her residence without a surgical-grade N95 mask, and never removed the mask in public. She was subsequently prescribed a 5-day course of nirmeltravir/ritonavir 300/100 mg twice daily, a SARS-CoV-2-specific antiviral, on the basis of her continued positive antigen tests. Patient was in compliance with all prescribed treatment courses. Initially, all PASC symptoms resolved, and the patient tested antigen– 3 weeks after completion of nirmeltravir/ritonavir, but PASC symptoms and antigen positivity subsequently reappeared at 4 weeks . The patient halted tocilizumab therapy for RA upon her rheumatologist’s recommendation for 10 days in an attempt to fully clear the virus, during which time she developed more severe PASC symptoms and the appearance of new-onset cognitive impairment (brain fog). She resumed tocilizumab and within 3 weeks, her fatigue and brain fog had resolved while the occipital headache decreased in severity .
Analysis of antiviral T cell responses by IFN-γ ELISPOT showed that Spike-specific T cell activation was induced by vaccination and infection, as expected after receiving Spike protein-based vaccines. However, the patient’s non-Spike responses (to Nucleocapsid) were enhanced as well after receiving the Moderna vaccine booster dose. Nirmatrelvir/ritonavir treatment resulted in the retention of Spike- but not Nucleocapsid-specific T cell responses, while halting tocilizumab correlated with elevated T cell responses against both proteins. Resumption of tocilizumab subsequently decreased T cell responses to both viral antigens . Antibody titers against Spike receptor-binding domain (RBD) followed similar kinetics (, top), while the patient never mounted an antibody response against Nucleocapsid (, bottom).
Flow cytometric analysis of (antibodies used in ) CD4+ T follicular helper cells (Tfh; involved in T cell help for antibody production) showed that antiviral T cell activation was highest at V3 (post-infection, post-boost) and V5 (post-infection, -boost, -nirmatrelvir/ritonavir, and halting tocilizumab treatment). Tfh activation determined by the activation-induced marker assay (AIM) was lowest 3 weeks after nirmatrelvir/ritonavir treatment and resumption of tocilizumab . Similarly, total CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, CD4+ and CD8+ T effector memory (TEM) cells, and CD8+ TEM cells re-expressing CD45RA (CD8+ TEMRA; terminally differentiated and highly cytotoxic T cells) exhibited maximal SARS-CoV-2-specific activation to Spike, Nucleocapsid, Orf1ab, and Orf7 antigens at V3 and V5, with limited activation at V4 and V6 .
Antiviral and autoreactive T cell responses demonstrated a parallel oscillation over time. Comparison of IFN-γ production from T cells in response to Spike and Orf1ab vs. the RA-associated cartilage antigen YKL-40 showed the highest activation at V3 and V5, and the lowest activation at V4 after nirmatrelvir/ritonavir and V6 after resuming tocilizumab treatment . Flow cytometry revealed similar activation patterns in T cell memory and Tfh cell subsets . No other clinical diagnostic testing was performed on the patient.