The patient, a 68-year-old retired male, presented with continuous dyspnoea, shivering, dizziness, weakness and diarrhoea for the preceding 2 days at a community hospital in Germany. The patient arrived in the emergency room fully awake and oriented. Respiratory rate was at 14 bpm and peripheral oxygen saturation was 92% while oxygen was administered via nasal cannula at a rate of 2 L/min. Blood pressure (BP) was measured at 60/40 mmHg and heart rate was 76 bpm on beta blockers. His BP was corrected with crystalloid intravascular replacement. Bilateral lung crackles were noted during the physical examination.
Laboratory results suggested lymphocytopenia and acute kidney injury. Body temperature was 35.9 °C. The patient was complaining about pain and paraesthesia in the right foot with a history of peripheral arterial occlusive disease. Duplex ultrasound examination was performed for the diagnosis of suspected acute peripheral arterial occlusion. The patient’s past medical history included chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, arterial hypertension, gastroesophageal reflux and myocardial infarction. No history of immunosuppression or substance abuse was reported. Anamnestically, he reported to have travelled to Switzerland a few weeks earlier, where the incidence rate of SARS-CoV-2-infections was 122 per 100,000 inhabitants at the time . The diagnosis of COVID-19 was considered likely, given the respiratory impairment and positive test for SARS-CoV-2 antigens by an Ag-RDT (NADAL®, Nal von Minden GmbH, Moers, Germany). Given the patient was admitted prior to the roll-out of vaccines in Germany, he was not vaccinated against SARS-CoV-2. Consequently, he was sent to the specialized COVID-19 intensive care unit (ICU) of the University Medical Centre in Goettingen for further treatment of suspected COVID-19-pneumonia and acute peripheral arterial occlusion only a few hours after first hospital admission. The ICU is specialized in ARDS treatment and a member of the ARDS network Germany as well as the extracorporeal life support organization (ELSO). It is staffed with ICU specialized nurses and doctors with appropriate training and expertise.
On ICU admission, the patient presented with acute respiratory failure (index for lung function: paO2/FiO2- P/F ratio 155, tachypnoea 32 breaths per minute), severe hypotension, and metabolic acidosis. Non-invasive ventilation was used to support breathing, and bronchodilatory therapy was initiated due to severe bronchial spasm. A chest X-Ray showed moderate opacities on both lower lobes. The patient was started on appropriate vasopressor therapy (norepinephrine) as well as empirical antibiotics (piperacillin/tazobactam plus clarithromycin) to cover for the possible diagnosis of community acquired pneumonia. High serum concentrations of interleukin-6 (> 50,000 pg/ml) and high C-reactive protein (up to 278.8 mg/l) levels were consistent with hyperinflammation and a severe cytokine storm. Suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection led to combined drug therapy with camostat mesilate, remdesivir and dexamethasone, which was the standard treatment of the ICU at the time. Further analyses of the blood sample showed lactic acidosis (lactate: 6.7 mmol/l) and confirmed progressive acute kidney injury. As buffering with trometamol and therapy with crystalloid solutions did not improve the overall kidney function, we escalated continuous renal replacement therapy with citrate anticoagulation and continuous cytokine hemadsorption. Both of the patient’s lower limbs were examined via computer tomography angiography, showing no evidence for an acute peripheral occlusion. Upon visual examination, the right leg showed two small abrasions (1 to 2 cm) with dry scab covering the wound, but without signs of local inflammation. A nasal swab test was taken for a NAAT.
The health condition of the patient deteriorated rapidly due to severe progressive septic shock. Consequently, increasing doses of continuous norepinephrine therapy were complemented by argipressin and dobutamine. In addition, empiric antibiotic therapy was escalated to meropenem and vancomycin. Physical examination now showed acrocyanosis and cold extremities. In the NAAT conducted on the nasopharyngeal swab sample collected on the day of ICU admission (day 0), no SARS-CoV-2-RNA was detected. As respiratory failure and hemodynamic instability proceeded, the patient was intubated and doses of catecholamines had to be further increased (norepinephrine increased to 3 μg/kg/min, dobutamine increased to 10 μg/kg/min, argipressin increased to 0.03 IE/min). Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed hyperdynamic left ventricular ejection fraction without regional wall motion abnormalities. Further, there were no signs of abnormal valve function and no evidence for acute endocarditis. Laboratory results (D-dimer level and thrombocytopenia) and massive mucous bleeding indicated the onset of disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Fibrinogen, fresh frozen plasma, prothrombin complex and antithrombin III were replaced according to the results of rotational thromboelastometry (ROTEM®, Tem Innovations GmbH, Munich, Germany). The patient had progressive respiratory failure with no significant new findings on chest X-ray. Microbiological testing detected gram-negative bacteria in all three blood samples taken upon ICU admission. At this point, further anamnestic questioning of the patient’s relatives revealed that he was a dog owner and was recently lightly injured by a dog leash, which could - as well as contact between the patient’s face and his dog in general - form the hypothetical entry point for the gram-negative bacteria. Moreover, the patient had called emergency services 2 days before admission to the hospital complaining about dyspnoea, shivering, dizziness, weakness, diarrhoea as well as a near syncope. An influenza-like infection was suspected by the emergency physician and bed rest was recommended instead of hospital admission.
On day two after hospital admission, the patient developed acute liver failure with progressive shock state. Transpulmonary thermodilution measurement technology (PiCCO, Getinge, Solna, Sweden) suggested low cardiac output syndrome, likely related to septic cardiomyopathy. Although renal replacement therapy was continued, potassium levels and lactic acid levels dramatically increased . The patient died 48 h after his first admission to hospital as a result of severe septic shock with multiple organ failure.
Blood samples collected upon admission to the ICU showed C. canimorsus in three of three different tests. Results of a further NAAT taken on day 2 were negative for SARS-CoV-2-RNA. This was also true for the NAAT taken at the community hospital the patient was first admitted to. C. canimorsus is a gram-negative bacterium from the family of Flavobacteriacae and oral commensal in dogs’ saliva . C. canimorsus infections are rare and present with sepsis including DIC, fever, abdominal complaints and peripheral gangrene [, ]. Associated mortality rate is reported to be high, up to 30% .