A 52-year-old man with hypertension, insulin-treated type 2 diabetes and dyslipidemia, was admitted to the emergency room with prolonged chest pain, nausea and general distress. Physical examination showed normothermia (36.8 °C), a blood pressure of 110/75 mmHg, oxygen saturation of 96% on room air, normal lung sounds and adequate peripheral perfusion. A 12-lead electrocardiogram (EKG) showed sinus tachycardia at 110 beats per minute and ST-segment elevation on the inferior leads (II, III and aVF). After being given a loading dose of antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 300 mg and ticagrelor 180 mg) and a bolus dose of 70 U/Kg of unfractionated heparin, the patient was immediately transferred to the cardiac catheterization laboratory. The coronary angiography through transradial access, performed nine hours after pain onset, revealed significant three-vessel disease with a critical lesion of the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) .
Primary percutaneous coronary intervention with a drug-eluting stent was performed resulting in Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) grade III flow and resolution of the symptoms. Mandatory by institutional protocol at admission, screening for SARS-CoV-2 infection with real-time polymerase-chain reaction nasal swab was positive. He was transferred to an isolation room in the cardiac intensive care unit (CICU) for further management.
Over the first 6–8 h after admission, the patient developed worsening dyspnea with severe hypoxemia, with a PO2/FiO2 ratio < 100 mmHg, requiring oxygen supplementation with a non-rebreathing face mask (FiO2 ~ 100%) to maintain SpO2 90–92%. The pulmonary auscultation remained unremarkable and chest radiography displayed mild cardiomegaly and no signs of pulmonary congestion, consolidation or diffuse parenchymal infiltrate . Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed preserved left ventricular ejection fraction, inferior wall hypokinesia, a dilated right ventricle (RV) with severely reduced systolic function (TAPSE 10 mm, RV peak systolic velocity 6 cm/s) and no valvular abnormalities . The inferior vena cava was plethoric and without collapse during inspiration. To investigate the cause of the hypoxemia, a computed tomography pulmonary angiogram was performed, excluding pulmonary embolism and showing a mild bilateral crazy-paving pattern, consistent with mild pulmonary parenchymal involvement .
Despite no significant radiological evidence of SARS-CoV-2 pulmonary involvement or signs of acute left heart failure, the patient persisted with tachypnea and severe hypoxemia requiring escalation to a high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC). Given the disproportionate severity of hypoxemia, alternative causes were considered. TTE with agitated saline injection revealed a significant right-to-left interatrial shunt during spontaneous breathing (Additional file : Movie 1), suggestive of a patent foramen ovale (PFO).
PFO closure in the acute phase was considered, but after diuretic escalation with intravenous furosemide, serial echocardiographic evaluations showed progressive improvement of RV function, allowing weaning from supplementary oxygen support over the first 5 days after admission. The patient was discharged after three weeks, with a scheduled cardiac surgery consultation to consider coronary artery bypass graft surgery plus surgical closure of the PFO. A TTE and transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) performed 3 months after the initial event revealed a PFO with tunneled morphology and bidirectional shunt (Additional file : Movie 2) as well as improvement of the RV function (TAPSE 16 mm; 3D Ejection Fraction 42%, peak systolic longitudinal strain of RV free wall − 19.1%) with a non-dilated cavity. After a 4-month follow-up, the patient remains asymptomatic.