A 74-year-old Japanese woman noticed a tender lump in her right breast. She immediately went to a breast clinic to get a breast cancer screening. She had no family history of breast and ovarian cancer. After a month, she was referred to our institution with suspicion of metaplastic breast carcinoma with a core needle biopsy at the breast clinic. Physical examination revealed a hard, tender, and 25-mm mass in the upper outer quadrant of her right breast and a palpable lymph node in her right axilla. Mammography indicated an indistinct mass on the mediolateral oblique view and the craniocaudal view. Ultrasound (US) showed an 18 × 16-mm, irregular-shaped, and hypoechoic mass with a suspicion of a spread to the nipple inside the duct and several swollen lymph nodes in levels I to II . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) detected enhancement of a 17 × 17-mm indistinct mass surrounded with a non-mass enhanced segmental lesion toward the nipple side spreading a maximum of 74-mm range, which had no interaction with the chest bone, muscles, and breast skin, in the right breast tissue . Invasive carcinoma with multiple axillary lymph node metastases was strongly suspected on clinical examination and imaging. Histological evaluation of the biopsy for the mass revealed a tumor with the growth of oval and spindle-shaped cells and multinucleated giant cells, the infiltrating lymphocyte into the breast tissue, and hyalinization in the stroma. The multinucleated giant cells stained positively for CD68. A part of the oval and spindle mononuclear cells stained weakly positive for CD68. These tumor cells stained negatively for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PgR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). There was a focal hemorrhage without necrosis. Few non-epithelial atypical cells were observed in the breast duct, but no atypical epithelial cells consistent with breast cancer were detected. GCT of the breast, breast cancer with OGCs, and giant cell-rich sarcomas should have to be considered as differential diagnoses, and the pathological findings suggested most GCT. Fine needle aspiration biopsy for the swollen lymph node revealed only normal lymphocyte, even though metastatic lymph node was strongly suspected on US. However, we could not rule out the possibility that the biopsy tissue showed a part of malignant tumor with OGCs and biopsy for the lymph node was false negative, because there was a gap between the clinical presentation, such as a tender mass suggesting rapid growth and multiple lymphadenopathies, and the pathological presentation of biopsy tissue. To obtain further evidence of malignancy, the tumor was sampled using a vacuum-assisted US-guided biopsy again. The result was the same as the prior biopsy. After discussing the treatment plan with the patient, we performed mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy according to a surgical procedure for node-negative breast cancer with a wide ductal spread. The resection tissue histologically revealed similar findings to the biopsy specimen. The tumor was composed mainly of oval and spindle mononuclear histiocyte-like cells and multinucleated giant cells . The mitotic figure of these cells did not stand out. There was no evidence of malignancy, and only intraductal epithelial hyperplasia around the tumor, which did not fill the criteria of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). No sentinel lymph nodes contained malignant cells, and we concluded the lymphadenopathies were a response to the inflammation around the tumor. Immunohistochemically, a high proportion of the multinucleated giant cells stained positively for CD68 . A part of the oval and spindle mononuclear cells stained weakly positive for CD68. These cells were negative for CK OSCAR, GATA-3, and MGB1 . These findings were consistent with the GCT of the breast. The patient received no adjuvant therapy because GCT-ST is usually considered as a benign tumor. She is being followed up with regular clinical examinations without any symptoms of recurrence after 1 year past from surgery.