A 26-year-old primigravid woman with 33–34 weeks of gestation came to the obstetrics emergency room with complaints of intermittent back pain that radiates to the placenta. During pregnancy, the patient had been treated for hyperemesis gravidarum (HEG). The patient also consumed multivitamins, ferrous sulphate, and folic acid tablet given by an obstetrician during the nine months of pregnancy, and the patient did not show any allergic and/or adverse reactions. There were no history of smoking, alcohol, and recreational drug use. There were no complaints of spotting or bleeding during pregnancy. There were no history of surgery before. Antenatal care (ANC) with an obstetrician in the early third trimester revealed a suspected abdominal wall defect in the form of an omphalocele. The patient denied having family history of congenital malformation. The patient was then referred to our facility.
Physical examination revealed normal vital signs. The patient was diagnosed with G1P0A0 with preterm contractions and suspected congenital abnormalities (omphalocele) of the fetus. The patient was anemic with Hb level of 9,0 g/dL. The cardiotocography was reassuring. Five days before admission to our facility, the patient underwent a detailed ultrasound with the following findings: single intrauterine fetus, 33–34 weeks of gestation (based on biometry), estimated foetal weight (EFW) 2100 g, foetal heart rate (+), and normal thorax 4 chamber view (4CV). There was an abdominal defect about 5.31 cm in diameter , seen below the umbilicus and on the midline with part of the liver extruding outside the abdominal cavity. The defect was covered by a membrane. It was difficult to identify the left kidney, the bladder, the genital, and the anal dimple. Placenta was found on the posterior uterine corpus with adequate amniotic fluid volume based on single deepest pocket measurement (7.13 cm). Doppler velocimetry was within normal limits.
The patient entered labor on the third day of treatment and the baby was born with a birth weight of 2560 g, body length of 45 cm, ballad score in accordance with 35–36 weeks of gestational age, and multiple congenital abnormalities i.e. omphalocele, an open bladder in the lower abdomen with the mucosa visible through a triangular fascia defect, prominent ileum, genital malformations, and a shortened distance between umbilicus and anus . The patient's postpartum hemoglobin level decreased to 7.7 g/dL. She received a blood transfusion. The hemoglobin level increases to 9.6 g/dL and she had a good recovery. She was discharged 5 days after the delivery. The baby was given intravenous fluid drip of 3 cc/hour D10%, intravenous antibiotic consisting of 125 mg of ampicillin every 12 hours and gentamicin 10 mg every 24 hours, as well as 1 mg of vitamin K injection intramuscularly. The baby was then consulted to the senior pediatric surgeons for cloacal repair elective surgery consisting of ileostomy, caecal plate tubularization, and bladder closure.