A 70-year-old African American gentleman with a history of CKD, pseudogout, and metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (to bone, nodes, and lung) was admitted to the hospital due to left knee swelling. He was incidentally found to be severely hypocalcemic to 2.7 mg/dl with EKG showing a prolonged QTC interval to 525 ms. Physical examination was negative for Chvostek and Trousseau's sign. Home medications included acetaminophen, amlodipine, bicalutamide, docusate-senna, lidocaine patches, ondansetron, and polyethylene glycol. Twenty-eight days prior, he had received his first dose of denosumab (together with leuprolide) when his calcium level was 8.8 mg/dl. He was prescribed vitamin D and calcium supplementation, but never took it. He finished a five-day course of prednisone 10 mg daily thirteen days prior for a pseudogout flare of the right foot. Other labs on admission were significant for phosphorus 5.5 mg/dl, total vitamin D3 31 IU, iPTH 93, and Mg 1.1 mg/dl. He was admitted to the intensive care unit for continuous, high-dose IV calcium gluconate and frequent electrolyte monitoring. During his ICU course, he received a total of 21 grams of IV calcium gluconate. He was also given 1 μg of oral calcitriol BID, 1000 mg of oral calcium carbonate TID, and aggressive magnesium supplementation. Unfortunately, the patient's creatinine worsened to 7.5 mg and he developed severe metabolic acidosis and hyponatremia in the setting of Clostridium difficile colitis. The decision was made to initiate hemodialysis given the poor recovery in kidney function from obstructive uropathy. For one week, he received intermittent hemodialysis with high calcium baths. Calcium, magnesium, and phosphate levels were monitored daily and supplemented as needed. Calcium levels improved to 8.5 mg/dl and magnesium levels improved to 2.0 mg/dl. He was discharged on 0.5 μg oral calcitriol daily, calcium carbonate 1000 mg BID, and continued intermittent hemodialysis.
The patient was originally diagnosed with de novo metastatic prostate cancer two years prior. He had not been on ADT or chemotherapy for approximately one year until he presented to our hospital two months prior with evidence of prostate cancer progression. His PSA was elevated to 1472 and he was found to have acute kidney injury with a Cr 12.8 mg/dl and a BUN of 131 mg/dl due to obstructive uropathy. CT of the abdomen/pelvis showed marked bilateral hydronephrosis due to a 6.3 cm pelvic mass and a 3.8 cm mass in the left ureteropelvic junction. Extensive pelvic and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy was evident in addition to innumerable metastatic lytic skeletal lesions. Bilateral percutaneous nephrostomy tubes were placed by interventional radiology and the patient's creatinine improved to 7.3 mg/dl with a BUN of 120 mg/dl. Combined androgen deprivation was resumed and he was discharged with plans for close monitoring of renal functions with the ultimate plan to place ureteral stents depending upon renal recovery.