On 24 June 2002, a 67-year-old Japanese woman presented to our department with the chief complaint of a swollen left nasal alar base. She had restrictive lung impairment and was treated for gastric cancer at 60 years. There was no history of any intranasal or intraoral discharge or of oral and maxillofacial trauma, nor were there any signs of perinasal inflammation. There were no noteworthy matters in her social, environmental, and family history.
An extraoral examination revealed a diffuse swelling of her left nasal alar base without tenderness . Her left nasolabial fold was less distinct than the right nasolabial fold, and her left ala was deformed because of the markedly elevated alar base.
An intraoral examination revealed a swollen left upper gingivolabial sulcus . The mucosal surface was normal, and the swelling fluctuated upon palpation but was not tender. No swelling was observed at the right upper gingivolabial sulcus.
A panoramic radiograph showed no abnormal findings ; however, apical periodontitis of her left upper central incisor was observed. Computed tomography (CT) findings revealed a well-circumscribed oval lesion, approximately 19×14×12 mm in size, inferior to her left nasal alar base . The lesion was relatively homogeneous and showed a lower density than the muscle. Absorption of the maxilla and nasal septum was not clearly identifiable on the CT images. Although an area of high density was observed adjacent to the right piriform aperture, it was difficult to confirm the presence of a lesion.
Because she declined further evaluation and treatment, a wait-and-see approach was adopted. Although an increase in the swelling was noted in 2005, it remained untreated. Because of the recurrence and further aggravation of the swelling, she finally requested surgical removal of the lesion on 19 January 2010. On 7 May 2010, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a cyst-like lesion, measuring approximately 25 mm in maximum diameter, at her left nasal alar base and another cyst-like lesion, measuring approximately 12 mm in maximum diameter, at her right nasal alar base. Both lesions showed high signal intensity on T1-weighted images and low signal intensity on T2-weighted short inversion time inversion recovery images . On the basis of a clinical diagnosis of bilateral nasoalveolar cysts, the cysts were extirpated under general anesthesia on 19 May 2010. The cysts adhered relatively strongly to the mucosa of her nasal cavity floor and the levator labii superioris alaeque nasi muscle. No maxillary reabsorption was observed on either side. Her postoperative course was uneventful, and no recurrence was observed 1 year after surgery.
A histopathological examination showed that both cysts were lined with single-layered or multi-layered non-keratinized squamous epithelia, which comprised several goblet cells. The cyst walls were composed of a fibrous connective tissue with mild inflammatory cell infiltration and contained seromucous glands in the deeper layers . The histopathological diagnosis was bilateral nasoalveolar cysts.