An 86-year-old man was referred by his primary care to the emergency department (ED) who presented with speech problems, several-minute facial drop and right arm weakness that did not resolve completely. In the ED, the patient had another episode with the same symptoms. Stroke code was activated, and the patient was examined by the on-call neurologist.
Findings of examination included the presence of petechiae in the limbs and chest, conjunctival jaundice and mild neurologic symptoms (3 points on the National Health Institute Scale).
Laboratory analysis revealed significant bicytopenia (hemoglobin 81 g/L [120–180 g/L] and a platelet count of 6 × 103/μL [150–400 × 103/μL]) confirmed by peripheral blood smear (PBS), with schistocytes not visualized. It showed altered biochemistry (creatinine 1.54 mg/dL [0.7–1.2 mg/dL], total bilirubin 2.53 mg/dL [0.10–1.20 mg/dL] at the expense of indirect bilirubin, LDH 1110 UI/L [135–250 UI/L]) and negative direct Coombs test results, and absence of ionic alterations or hepatic dysfunction.
CT scan of the brain did not demonstrate early signs of ischemia and hemorrhage. CT angiography did not show extracranial or intracranial occlusion, and no alterations were observed on cerebral perfusion maps. However, fluctuating symptoms of the left hemispheral stroke persisted. In view of the analytical findings, the start of antiplatelet therapy was postponed, and the patient was left in observation in the stroke service. In this clinical setting, TAM was suggested as first diagnosis after cross-consultation with the unit of hematology.
A repeated laboratory analysis demonstrated severe anemia (hemoglobin 74 g/L), persistent severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count 13000/μL; without citrate alterations) and intense hemoglobinuria on the urine reactive strip test. This time, PBS revealed the presence of anisopoikilocytosis and schistocytes .
Clinical and analytical data are consistent with a TTP TAM after exclusion of other secondary causes of TAM.
Intensive corticosteroid therapy is started at a dose of 2 mg/kg/day, and a daily therapeutic plasma exchange (TPE) regimen was initiated after a blood sample was drawn for ADAMTS13 testing. ADAMTS13 activity was 0% (ADAMTS13 activity <5% is indicative of TTP) with the presence of ADAMTS13 inhibitor .
TPE was performed daily using fresh frozen plasma as a solution until day 6, with a progressive increase in platelet count that reached >150 × 103/μL in 2 consecutive days. Then, TPE was performed at 48 h intervals, without the patient showing a decrease in platelet count.
The patient showed good tolerance to TPE and only developed paresthesias around the mouth and in the tips of the fingers and toes. These symptoms are secondary to consumption hypocalcemia induced by the use of citrate in TPE. After close analytical monitoring and calcium gluconate supplementation, symptoms disappeared.
The clinical course of the patient was favorable, with normalization of platelet count and anemia . Hemolysis was resolved, and the patient remained asymptomatic after eight sessions of TPE. Finally, the patient was discharged with follow-up in the outpatient unit. Corticosteroid therapy at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day was maintained and progressively reduced until suspension.