A 38-year-old man with a past medical history of hypertension, chronic sinusitis, and diabetes mellitus presented with altered mental status. The patient reported fatigue during the past week; he denied having had fevers, chills, cough, shortness of breath, chest pain, and nausea or vomiting. On the initial evaluation, he was noted to have increased somnolence, with a Glasgow Coma Scale score of 11. Physical examination on admission was without significant findings. His vital signs were a temperature of 96.5°F, a pulse of 76/min, a respiratory rate of 16/min, and blood pressure of 120/66 mm Hg. His pupils were equally round and reactive to light, his mucus membranes were moist, and a small laceration on the nose was noted. Both lungs were clear on auscultation, his heart sounds had a regular rhythm, and the heart rate showed normal S1 and S2 sounds and no murmurs, clicks, rubs or S3 or S4 heart sounds. He had 2+ pulses bilaterally and warm, dry skin. The abdomen was soft with an obese habitus, positive bowel sounds and no hepatosplenomegaly.
He was intubated for airway protection and given vancomycin 1 g i.v. every 12 h, ceftriaxone 2 g i.v. every 12 h, and acyclovir 700 mg i.v. every 8 h. The noncontrast head CT performed on the day of admission revealed no intracranial mass, shift or bleed, but displayed a high density within the left frontal sinus. Lumbar puncture revealed eosinophilic pleocytosis (white blood cell count 400 × 109/l), mildly elevated total protein (63 mg/dl), and borderline low glucose levels (117 mg/dl). Additional lumbar puncture results and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) values are presented in table . Urine examination gave the following results: protein 300 mg/dl, glucose 500 mg/dl, and negative ketones, bilirubin, blood, nitrite, and leukocytes. Laboratory values revealed a high blood glucose level of 218 mg/dl and an HbA1c level of 7.2%. His wife reported that he had been taking glipizide and metformin for his diabetes, but could not recall any further information regarding his medications. According to the clinical examination and biochemical results, suspicion was highest for fungal and mycobacterial meningoencephalitis. West Nile virus (WNV) infection was also considered. Fluconazole 400 mg i.v. was initiated to cover for possible fungal infection.
Neurologists were consulted and the neurological examination was remarkable with a National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score of 12. The patient appeared stuporous, opened his eyes to verbal stimuli, and followed commands on the left side, but was mute and inattentive. Cranial nerve examination demonstrated a right gaze preference, and visual fields did not react to threat. Extraocular eye movements were intact. On the right side, there was decreased tone in the right arm, more so than in the right leg, and he did not move the upper or lower extremities, but withdrew in response to pain. The patient showed left-side antigravity without drift in either his arm or leg. Deep tendon reflexes were hyperactive without clonus throughout, with the right toe upgoing.
Two days after admission, antibiotics were discontinued after the Gram stain of the CSF was found to be negative and the cultures were negative after 24 h. Acyclovir was also discontinued following a negative herpes simplex virus polymerase chain reaction. Coccidiomycoses antibodies for CSF and serum were both negative, WNV ELISA IgM and IgG tests were negative, and cultures and stains for acid-fast bacilli were negative, decreasing the likelihood of mycobacterial meningoencephalitis, WNV infection, or a coccidiomycosis infection. Parasitic infections such as strongyloidiasis or neurocysticercosis may give a similar clinical picture with eosinophilic CSF pleocytosis. However, he had always lived in Los Angeles and Arizona without traveling further afield and without a history of consuming raw snails or exotic foods. Therefore, parasitic infection was unlikely given his social history, negative travel history, and lack of risk factors.
MRI diffusion-weighted imaging demonstrated stroke in the basilar artery perforator and left posterior inferior cerebellar artery territory, including the left hemi-midbrain, upper pons, and left cerebellum . Diffuse marrow signal abnormality within the clivus and surrounding central skull base with contiguous sinus disease was seen in addition to abnormal, peripheral meningeal enhancement and thickening surrounding the clivus. These findings suggested invasive fungal sinusitis. A head CT the following day also revealed evolution of the large infarct of the left cerebellum, pons, and midbrain, now involving the left red nucleus with destruction of the clivus . High-density material was noted within the high sinuses. The diffuse marrow signal abnormality within the clivus and surrounding central skull base, with contiguous sinus disease, was also seen on the axial and coronal orientations of CT angiography (CTA), demonstrating sinusitis, likely of fungal etiology, invading through and destroying the clivus. The left superior cerebellar artery was not visualized on CTA.
Upon transfer to the neurology service 3 days after admission, the patient was awake, alert and oriented, able to say his name and respond to simple commands. Confrontation showed no visual field loss. His pupils were of equal size, round and reactive to light. He continued to have a right gaze preference. There was normal muscle bulk and tone with no tremor. 5/5 strength was found for his left upper and lower extremities and 0/5 strength for his right upper and lower extremities. He responded to noxious stimuli throughout. Deep tendon reflexes were 3+ throughout and brisker on the left with no clonus. Due to the concern for fungal infection, ambisome 500 mg i.v. was started with discontinuation of fluconazole therapy. Otolaryngology was consulted to evaluate the need for surgical drainage.
An endoscopic sinus surgery and left maxillary antrostomy, ethnoidectomy, sphenoidectomy, and biopsy revealed extensive polypoid change of the left maxillary, ethmoid, and sphenoid sinuses. Multiple biopsies were sent for pathologic evaluation, which revealed focally necrotic tissue with tissue-invasive fungal hyphae forms morphologically consistent with mucormycosis of the Rhizopus species on culture. The left clivus also showed focally necrotic fibrous tissue with fungal hyphae forms. A maxillofacial CT revealed findings most consistent with extensive fungal rhinosinusitis with skull base involvement. Liposomal amphotericin was continued as the principal antifungal drug with the addition of posaconazole (400 mg p.o. twice daily). Progressive neurological decline was noted as the mucormycosis progressed, and the patient no longer attempted to speak and did not follow commands.
A family meeting was held and a decision was made to focus care on comfort measures in a hospice facility. At discharge, all medications were discontinued and the patient remained comfortable and was not in any pain. A meeting with home hospice care was scheduled for that afternoon, and the patient was accepted to a hospice care facility. He passed away following the transfer to the hospice.