A 76-year-old woman previously diagnosed with tuberculous arthritis in the right hip visited our spine care center for the progression of scoliosis and a right-sided abdominal pain, which was caused by an impingement between a rib and the iliac crest. The patient had undergone a total hip arthroplasty (THA) for the right hip pain, right hip abduction contracture, and right leg shortening 6 years prior. After THA, the patient had been pain free; however, the right lower limb shortening and right hip abduction contracture persisted (, ). At the time of the initial examination for spinal deformity, she could walk and stand up with a single cane. The spinal alignment parameters indicated a severe coronal imbalance with 35° lumbar left convexity Cobb angle and 35 mmrightward shifted C7 central sacral vertical line (CSVL) . In contrast, sagittal balance parameters were relatively preserved on the standing whole-spine radiographs with no significant mismatch in the SRS-Schwab classification; lumbar lordosis (LL) angle was 43°, and pelvic incidence (PI) minus LL angle was 5° [, ]. The ROM of the right hip showed a markedly limited flexion to 50° as well as an adduction contracture. For the spinal deformity, a combined anterior and posterior corrective fusion from T9 to the iliac bone was performed. Postoperatively, the coronal imbalance improved to a Cobb angle of 12°; however, post-operative C7CSVL was shifted 48 mm to the left . The sagittal alignment was unchanged . These coronal parameter changes resulted in an improvement in the right-sided abdominal pain due to rib iliac impingement. However, it similarly proved difficult to keep sitting as well as stand up (Video 1) and walk due to a leftward overshift of the trunk (, , ). In addition, 1 month postoperatively, T9 appeared to have collapsed and required a revision spinal surgery with an upward extension of fusion to T5 (, and ). Since walking and standing difficulties persisted, muscle release around the hip was additionally performed to improve the ROM of the right hip. The iliopsoas, gluteus maximus, and adductor muscle tendons were dissected. The right hip ROM improved to 75° of flexion after muscle release. The patient returned home after a 3-month rehabilitation with an improvement in walking and standing movements with no pain; however, she has not attained her pre-operative level of function.