A 32-year-old female was diagnosed with pT3bN0M0, stage IIB, melanoma of the left anterior distal thigh in 2001. She was managed with wide excision, and sentinel lymph node evaluation was negative. The patient was observed and remained free of disease until 2015 when she presented to her dermatologist with subcutaneous lesions in the left groin and upper back. Punch biopsy of a left inguinal nodule demonstrated BRAF wild-type malignant melanoma. Diagnostic imaging with PET/CT and brain MRI demonstrated brain metastases, pulmonary nodules, left hilar and subcarinal lymphadenopathy, liver metastases, and several bone and soft tissue lesions . Brain lesions were managed with Gamma Knife radiosurgery with good tolerance.
She commenced combination immunotherapy treatment with ipilimumab 3 mg/kg and nivolumab 1 mg/kg every 3 weeks. After the four combination doses, imaging demonstrated improvement in soft tissue disease, pulmonary and liver lesions, as well as brain metastases. The baseline subcarinal and left hilar adenopathy did not change in size. Treatment was well tolerated with grade 1 diarrhea, nausea, and rash, as well as the development of hypothyroidism requiring supplementation. She was transitioned to maintenance nivolumab 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks.
Prior to cycle 1 of maintenance nivolumab, she developed a scaly lesion of left pretibial skin and underlying subcutis, which grew after her first treatment. Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the lesion revealed non-caseating granulomatous inflammation without evidence of malignancy. Given the proximity to her primary lesion and history of subcutaneous melanoma metastases, a PET-CT scan was performed. The left pretibial lesion was FDG-avid, and the scans also revealed new supraclavicular, mediastinal, right hilar and left iliac adenopathy, as well as subcutaneous left pretibial and right calf nodules . The baseline subcarinal and left hilar lymphadenopathy had increased in size, but the hepatic, soft tissue, and brain lesions had resolved .
Given the mixed clinical and radiographic results, excisional biopsy of the left pretibial lesion was performed and revealed non-necrotizing granulomatous inflammation consistent with tumefactive sarcoidal granulomas . In addition, endobronchial ultrasound with FNA of 11R hilar and station 7 subcarinal lymph nodes both demonstrated granulomatous inflammation without evidence of malignancy. AFB, bacterial, and fungal cultures showed no growth. In further support of a diagnosis of sarcoidosis, angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) level was elevated to 73 U/L (normal 8–52 U/L). To obtain preliminary information on the mechanism for growth of sarcoid lesions in the setting of PD-1 blockade, the skin biopsy tissue was stained for PD-L1 expression, and demonstrated strong PD-L1 staining of the histiocytes and lymphocytes within the granulomas .
Throughout this evaluation, she remained asymptomatic with normal electrocardiogram and pulmonary function testing. Initially, the decision was made to hold immunotherapy without instituting steroids. After 6 weeks, no new clinical lesions or symptoms appeared and there were no changes in size or extent of the lymphadenopathy. With discussion of the risks and benefits of further treatment, she preferred to resume therapy with single agent nivolumab. At the time of this report, she remains on nivolumab monotherapy with good tolerance and melanoma control. The thoracic lymphadenopathy is stable and no new lesions or clinical symptoms have developed.