A 57 year old previously healthy man was admitted to the Department of Infectious Diseases, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, Sweden in January 2000. He presented with a three month history of increasing apathy, gait difficulties and memory dysfunction. On examination he showed normal vital signs. Neurological examination revealed ataxic gait, memory impairment, reduced attention and slow verbal response. A HIV-1 antibody test was positive and his CD4-cell count was 50 ×10e6 cells/l. A brain MRI scan revealed no intracranial pathology except for areas of increased signal changes in T2 MRI sequences in periventricular white matter. Following MRI scan a lumbar puncture and additional blood tests were performed. Routine laboratory tests were normal except for an elevated sedimentation rate (76 mm/h). Tests and cultures in CSF and blood for bacterial, mycobacterial, fungal and protozoal infections, including PCR tests for JC-virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus, Epstein-Barr virus, and toxoplasmosis in CSF, antigen test for cryptococci in CSF, and antibody test for syphilis in CSF and blood, were negative. CSF PCR tests for diagnostic purposes were run as soon as possible after sampling. CSF cytology was normal. Thus, brain MRI scan and CSF assessment showed no evidence of other infections or malignancies. CSF and plasma HIV-1 RNA levels, CSF cell counts, and CD4 cell counts are presented in figure . After additional neurological and psychiatric tests, performed by an experienced neurologist, a diagnosis of HIV dementia (MSK stage 3)[,] was made. The patient was introduced on zidovudine 300 mg BID, lamivudine 150 mg BID, indinavir 800 mg BID and ritonavir 100 mg BID p.o. in January 2000 and was then followed with physical and neurological examination and CSF assessment after 2 and 15 months. He showed a gradual neurocognitive improvement that was paralleled by a decline in plasma and CSF HIV-1 RNA levels as well as levels of CSF NFL, Tau, GFAP, neopterin, TAU, albumin ratio, and IgG index . CSF levels of S-100 protein and NSE were below the upper limit of normal before treatment initiation. Neurological examination after 15 months of HAART showed no remaining neurocognitive impairment and the patient had resumed all activities of daily living, as well as full time work.