A 41-year-old Asian man was referred to our hospital due to macroscopic hematuria. His past history included middle ear cholesteatoma and he had no smoking history. Cystoscopy detected a non-papillary tumor, and a transurethral resection of the bladder tumor (TUR-Bt) and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan revealed cT3N0M0 bladder cancer.
The hematological and biochemical data showed no abnormal findings. A urinary analysis resulted in the following: pH 6.5, red blood cell count 10–19/high-power field (HPF), white blood cell count 1–4/HPF, protein negative, and glucose negative. The urinary cytology was class III.
An MRI scan showed that the tumor extended over the bladder, as seen in Fig. . No obvious distal and local lymphadenopathy was observed on a non-contrast computed tomography (CT) scan.
Our patient underwent a TUR-Bt, and a pathological examination revealed urothelial carcinoma (high-grade, pT1, G2) and signet ring cell carcinoma was found in a portion of the bladder tumor. Two months after the TUR-Bt, a radical cystectomy was performed according to the tumor grade of malignancy and the imaging findings .
Grossly, the infiltrating neoplasm, measuring 25 × 20 mm in size, was located in the bladder trigone. The pathological stage was pT2bN0M0. Histologically, the neoplasm was composed of isolated atypical cells that had relatively abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm with eccentric nuclei, showing moderate pleomorphism. Perinuclear pale regions were occasionally seen. These features partly resembled plasma cells . The immunohistochemical profile of the tumor cells was positive for keratin CAM5.2 and CK20, but negative for CK7, CD56, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, CD20, CD79a, kappa and lambda. Thus, the diagnosis of infiltrating high-grade urothelial carcinoma, plasmacytoid variant, was made. Plasma cells have a similar form to signet ring cells, thus it is difficult to distinguish these cells. However, plasma cells frequently show CD138 positivity, which may be useful for discriminating between the two types of cells.
An immunohistochemical analysis was performed on 5-μm-thick sections. The slides were dewaxed with xylene and hydrated with gradient ethanol, and microwaved at the high level for 2 minutes and then at the medium-low level for 30 minutes for heat antigen retrieval (Target Retrieval Solution pH 9, Dako, Carpinteria, CA, USA). After 3 % hydrogen peroxidase blocking, the samples were incubated overnight at 4 °C with a primary antibody to PD-1 (dilution 1:50, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) or PD-L1 (dilution 1:50, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The slides were then treated with a broad-spectrum secondary antibody (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, USA) and washed (Envision FLEX Wash Buffer, Dako). After diaminobenzidine staining, the slides were counterstained with hematoxylin, dehydrated with gradient ethanol and xylene, and then sealed. There were no positive finding .
Two months after the total cystectomy, adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin was administered (G: 2,000 mg/m2, C: 63 mg/m2). We used the following dosing schedule: day 1 G: 1,000 mg/m2, day 2 C: 63 mg/m2, and day 8 G: 1,000 mg/m2 that was administered in two cycles. No adverse event was observed. We followed up our patient with cytology and a CT scan every 3 months. Our patient has not experienced any recurrence of bladder cancer for 2 years following the radical cystectomy.