We report a case of a 42-year-old Sri Lankan Sinhalese man who presented with fever of 3 weeks’ duration. He did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol; he was an executive officer in a company. He had daily fever spikes with generalized malaise. He complained of severe loss of appetite and weight loss of 5 kg over the 3 weeks. He denied having cough, alteration of bowel habits, or urinary symptoms. He did not have past history or contact history of tuberculosis.
On examination he was febrile. He had mild pallor, but not icteric. He had bilateral tender cervical lymphadenopathy the largest measuring 1 cm with mild tenderness over the anterior neck without an obvious swelling suggestive of goiter. His pulse rate was 72 beats per minute with a blood pressure of 120/80 mmHg and the rest of the cardiovascular system examination was normal. Respiratory and abdominal examinations were unremarkable with normal neurological findings.
A complete blood count showed hemoglobin of 10.7 g/dL, white count of 9.1 × 106/microL and platelet count of 350 × 103/microL. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 80 mm in the first hour and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 112 mg/L. Blood film showed normochromic normocytic cells with moderate rouleaux formation. His serum albumin was 46 g/L with normal levels of transaminases and bilirubin. Renal functions were within the normal limit. Three sets of blood cultures were sterile. In two-dimensional echocardiogram, the valves and the endocardium were free of vegetations. An ultrasound scan of his neck revealed diffusely enlarged thyroid gland with increased vascularity. There were multiple lymph nodes with preserved architecture; the largest measuring 1 cm. Thyroid profile showed thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 0.012 MIU/mL (normal range 0.27 to 4.7 MIU/mL), free thyroxine of 42.08 pmol/L (normal range 10.5 to 19.4 pmol/L), and free triiodothyronine 8.71 pmol/L (normal range 4.0 to 8.3 pmol/L). Fine-needle aspiration cytology of the thyroid showed evidence of thyroiditis with clustered epithelioid cells, scattered lymphocytes, and a few multinucleated giant cells. Facilities for radio-iodine imaging were not available during the time of investigations. Thyroid peroxidase antibodies were negative. A diagnosis of subacute thyroiditis was made. He was clinically completely euthyroid with no clinical features of hyperthyroidism such as palpitations, heat intolerance, and frequency of stools or tremors. An electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with a rate of 72 beats per minute. So our patient had subclinical thyrotoxicosis without overt clinical symptoms and signs.
He was started on a low-dose steroid: prednisolone 10 mg daily. He was feeling well and fever free on third day after starting steroids and was discharged. Low-dose prednisolone was continued for 1 week and stopped. As he was asymptomatic, he was not started on NSAIDs. He was reviewed in 1 month. He was asymptomatic and his thyroid profile was normal with TSH of 2.5 MIU/mL and free thyroxine and free triiodothyronine in the lower normal range. A follow-up was arranged to review his thyroid profile in 6 months.