In January 2020, a 24-year-old Chinese woman presented to the Department of Endocrinology with complaints of persistent polydipsia as well as polyuria for nearly 6 months. Six months ago, she was admitted to the neurosurgery department because of headache, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) determined pituitary apoplexy, with weakened signal in the posterior pituitary . Later, she was treated with transnasal transsphenoidal resection for the pituitary mass, and the pathology findings suggested pituitary adenoma . She was then prescribed with methylprednisolone 40 mg once after pituitary surgery, and her cortisol level (8 am-4 pm-12 pm): 143.13μg/L-47.12μg/L-5.93μg/L, adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level (8 am-4 pm-12 pm): 33 pg/mL-18.8 pg/mL- < 5 pg/mL, 24-h urine cortisol level was 388μg, as well as gonadotrophins and thyroid hormones were all in the normal range at that period. Later, she developed severe polydipsia as well as polyuria, generally urinating every 2 h with 10 L per day in total. There was no backache, hand tremors, blurred vision, lower limb puffiness or weight loss. The laboratory examination revealed that the plasma osmolality was 301.00 mOsm/L, urine gravity was 1.002, potassium was 4.17 mmol/L, and serum sodium was 138.5 mmol/L. Then, she was diagnosed with pituitary surgery-derived central diabetes insipidus (CDI). However, therapeutic strategies with oral desmopressin (gradually increased from 0.2 mg three times a day to 0.3 mg four times a day), pituitrin and potassium chloride were of little efficacy, making the diagnosis undetermined. Later, she was speculated to have NDI and was started with extra HCTZ, along with DDAVP gradually reduced to stop. Surprisingly, her polyuria symptom was alleviated and was then given HCTZ twice a day out of the hospital. However, she stopped the treatment on her own and was admitted for polyuria a second time .
The physical examination this time revealed that her blood pressure was 108/71 mmHg, with a pulse rate of 121/min. Her skin was dry, and the rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. The laboratory examination revealed the following results: urine specific gravity, 1.002; serum sodium, 134.3 mmol/L; plasma osmolality, and 338.00 mOsm/(kg·H2O). Urinary ultrasonography scans showed normal results. A water deprivation test was performed later with an initial urine gravity of 1.006, plasma osmolality of 281 mOsm/L, and blood pressure of 124/72 mmHg. Two hours after AVP injection, the plasma osmolality was 299.00 mOsm/(kg·H2O), with urine gravity unchanged (more details are shown in Table ). In consideration of NDI, she was given a genetic test, and the results suggested a heterozygous mutation in arginine vasopressin receptor type 2 (AVPR2) genes c.914dupC (p.Pro306fs)
. Further investigation revealed that she had slight polydipsia as well as polyuria for over 20 years. She primarily drank 5 L of water daily along with urine output every 3 h, totaling 4 L per day; however, she did not attach importance to it at that time. As a result of unfavorable therapeutic efficiency with HCTZ during previous discharge, the history of pituitary surgery as well as the slight remission after DDAVP taken during the water depression test, the diagnosis of CNDI and acquired CDI secondary to pituitary surgery should not be excluded, thereby, DDAVP was primarily utilized for 3 days alone for diagnosis therapy, and the treatment was subsequently changed to 25 mg HCTZ twice a day and 0.1 mg DDAVP three times a day. Currently, no recurrence of polyuria or polydipsia has been detected for more than 6 months, indicating the effectiveness of our therapeutic strategies.