A 39-year-old female patient with a menstrual history of 13 years (8 d/29 d) had persistent dull pain in the lower abdomen for more than 1 mo, and she was diagnosed with pelvic inflammatory disease at a local hospital. She used condom for contraception.
Specialized physical examination showed that a solid-cystic mass can be touched in the left posterior upper part of the uterus, about 10 cm in diameter, which was hard and inactive, and had a clear boundary.
The level of CA125 was 82.2 U/mL, with the rest tumor markers within the normal range.
B-ultrasonography found that the solid-cystic mass in left adnexa area was 11 cm × 7.4 cm × 9.8 cm in size, and it was rich in blood flow signals. Abdominal pain was relieved after anti-inflammatory treatment.
Gross examination showed that the mass was dark brown, with a size of 11 cm × 6 cm × 6 cm and a smooth surface; the cut surface was solid, thick-nodular, tender in texture, and grayish and gray-yellow in color, and there were small cysts of different sizes (0.5-1.5 cm in diameter) scattered inside it, without capsule fluid . Microscopic examination revealed that most of the tumors consisted of solid cell nests, micro-adenoids, and trabeculae, and there were granulosa cell tumor-like structures , and small tubular structures that resembled Sertoli cell tumor . Small areas had an adenoid structure, and some glandular cavities contained mucus. Tumor cells were round or oval, of medium size, with less cytoplasm; the nucleus was ovoid, the nucleolus were small, and the mitotic figure was four per ten high-power fields. Typical glands and squamous metaplasia of endometrioid carcinoma appeared in local areas . There was spindle cell proliferation in part of mesenchyme that was similar to ovarian fibroma. Bleeding and necrosis were seen in some areas of the tumor tissue, and endometriotic cysts were seen next to the tumor . Tumor cells diffusely expressed VIM, PCK, CK7 , WT1, ER, PR, CD10, CD56, and β-catenin, and partially expressed EMA, P16, and P53. The Ki67 proliferation index was approximately 10%, and all tumor tissues did not express α-inhibin , calretinin, CD99, sall4, CgA, syn, ck20, muc-2, muc-5, ck10/13, desmin, myogenin, myoD1, or SMA. Then, a diagnosis of ECSCSs of the left ovary was made, with no tumor involving the remaining tissue and no lymph node metastasis.