A 32-year-old male, without any relevant medical history, felt general fatigue and had a high fever of 38.9 degrees Celsius. The following day, he was diagnosed with influenza type A by nasal swab test at a clinic, and prescribed oseltamivir. His symptoms were ameliorated sufficiently that he was able to return to work from day 5 and go winter climbing on days 6–7. On day 9, however, he experienced whole body pain, urinary retention, and weakness of the bilateral lower extremities; these symptoms then became exacerbated. Eventually, he was unable to walk by himself, and came to our hospital on day 10. His body temperature was 39.4 degrees Celsius and there was marked bilateral lower extremity weakness. Deep tendon reflexes were normal in both the upper and lower limbs. He had paraesthesia and dysesthesia in the entire area below level C2. Both superficial and deep sensory systems were disturbed in the same area, especially in the lateral sides of the femur (50% decrease) and crus (40% decrease). Meningial signs, such as neck stiffness and Kernig’s sign, were positive. He had no visual field deficits.
His laboratory data showed a white blood cell count of 13800/μl (Neutrophil 83%) and a c-reactive protein level of 0.4 mg/dl. An anti-nuclear antibody test revealed a titer of 1:320 with a nucleolar pattern, but collagen diseases associated with nucleolar antibodies, such as systemic lupus erythematosus and scleroderma, were negative according to additional tests of other antibodies. The cerebrospinal fluid exhibited a cell count of 247 cells/μl (monocyte 77.1%, lymphocyte 54.5%), an elevated protein level (92 mg/dl), and a myelin basic protein concentration over 2000 pg/ml (IL-6 9490 pg/ml), suggesting strong inflammation of the central nervous system. The oligoclonal band was negative. Established cell-based immunoassays revealed that he was positive for anti-MOG antibodies and negative for anti-AQP4 antibodies. His MOG antibody titer was as high as 65,536, which was extremely high compared to past report in the patients with demyelinated diseases included with NMOSD, which median (range) MOG antibody titers was 4,096 (128–32,768) in single attack patients . T2 imaging MRI showed a long hyperintense lesion in the spinal cord extending from C2 to the medullary conus, mainly lying in thoracic spinal cord. The lesion occupied grey matter, making “H” shape, partly spreading to white matter. The lesion was not enhanced by gadolinium-DTPA . Nerve conduction velocity was normal. We diagnosed him with anti-MOG antibody-positive longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis, and started immunosuppression therapy with intravenous methylprednisolone (1000 mg/day) for three consecutive days, followed by oral prednisolone (60 mg per day). The patient was able to use a wheelchair without any help on day 5 after admission, and he recovered the full strength of his lower extremities by day 6. Paraesthesia and sensory loss gradually improved and resolved by day 10; dysesthesia in the bilateral lower limbs and thermoanesthesia below the Th4 level also improved, and resolved completely one month later. After two weeks of 60 mg per day prednisolone, we reduced it 10 mg a week and finally finished it after 6 weeks. After one week of therapy, the MOG antibody titer declined to 16,384, one fourth of the first laboratory data. After one month, the MOG antibody titer decreased to 4,096.