The subject was a 75-year-old woman who had suffered from postherpetic neuralgia for 8 years. In December 2016, she underwent a Gasserian ganglion nerve block at the Department of Anesthesiology of our hospital. Gasserian ganglion nerve block was performed to treat the first branch neuralgia of the trigeminal nerve in the right at the point which is 2.5 cm lateral to the right angle of the mouth, following a straight line directed toward the pupil. A needle was inserted under guidance of X-ray imaging on the monitor display. When the tip of the guiding needle reached the foramen ovale, the location of the needle tip was confirmed to be slightly inside from the median in the frontal view. Next, after confirming dysesthesia, 2% xylocaine was injected. And then loss of sensation was confirmed in the V1 and V2 regions. After injecting 99.5% ethanol (0.2 mL), radiofrequency thermocoagulation was added continuously for 180 seconds at 90°C.
On the following day, the patient noticed a sudden visual acuity (VA) decline and hyperemia in the right eye. She visited a neighborhood ophthalmologist and was diagnosed with conjunctival hyperemia, corneal epithelial defect, and Descemet's folds in the right eye. Because no improvement was achieved, she visited our hospital two days later. The initial VA was 0.03 (n.c.) in the right eye. A slit-lamp examination revealed severe conjunctival hyperemia all around the periphery, remarkable corneal superficial neovascularization, especially, at 11 to 5 o'clock, corneal epithelial defects of the size approximately 3 × 4 mm, Descemet's membrane folds, and mild stromal edema were observed; however, no signs of inflammation were seen in the anterior chamber. The patient did not experience any eye pain and corneal sensitivity measured with Cochet-Bonnet esthesiometer was <10 mm in the right eye and 60 mm in the left, showing remarkable decline of corneal sensitivity in the right. She was diagnosed with NK stage 2 .
Treatment was started with 0.3% ofloxacin ophthalmic ointment (Tarivid® ophthalmic ointment 0.3%; Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan) twice daily and rebamipide ophthalmic suspension (Mucosta® ophthalmic suspension unit dose 2%; Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) 4 times daily. The corneal epithelial defects were gradually alleviated at 1 week after ganglion nerve block .
Because severe conjunctival hyperemia persisted, we added fluorometholone ophthalmic suspension (fluorometholone® ophthalmic suspension unit dose 0.1%; Santen Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd.) 3 times daily. At 1 month after ganglion nerve block severe conjunctival hyperemia, very severe corneal superficial neovascularization at 11 to 5 o'clock, persistent corneal defects with smooth and rolled edges, and stromal swelling in the central cornea occurred. At 2 months , superficial punctate keratopathy (SPK), conjunctival hyperemia, corneal superficial neovascularization at 11 to 5 o'clock, irregularity of corneal epithelium, stromal scarring in the central cornea, and the right corneal sensation of 10 mm remained. Evaluation with the HRT II RCM was made in April 2017 and no corneal subbasal nerve fibers were observed in the right eye . Five months after the trigeminal nerve block, slight irregularity of corneal epithelium and stromal scarring in the central cornea were observed; however, conjunctival hyperemia and corneal superficial neovascularization were overall improving and the corneal sensation in the right eye also recovered to about 50 mm although SPK remained . At this point, corneal epithelial defect was overall improving; therefore, ofloxacin eye ointment was stopped. Rebamipide and fluorometholone eye drops were continued and the patient was followed up. According to the patient, she had regained the sense of touch on the cheek. Corneal erosion sometimes recurred but it recovered in about a week. Six months after the trigeminal nerve block, the corneal sensation in the right eye was 60 mm. SPK and conjunctival hyperemia, corneal superficial neovascularization, and corneal stromal edema were all ameliorated . Therefore, fluorometholone eye drops were tapered off and only rebamipide eye drops were continued. In addition, at this point, regenerated corneal subbasal nerve fibers in the right eye were detected by the HRT II RCM although they appeared to be smaller and thinner than those in the fellow eye .