A 63-year-old Mediterranean Caucasian woman presented with mild dyspnea on exertion and a progressive worsening of a dry cough of nine months’ duration. Born in Turkey, she had a history of exposure to asbestos via building materials commonly used in eastern Turkey. She immigrated to the United States at the age of 37. Shortly after arrival in New York she was diagnosed with and treated for pulmonary tuberculosis. (The diagnosis and treatment records were confirmed by the New York City Department of Health.) She had no fever, night sweats, hemoptysis or weight loss. She had no history of allergies; she had never smoked or used illicit drugs. Other than her birth in Turkey and immigration to the US she had no other travel history.
Initial examination included a chest X-ray, which showed fibrocalcific changes at the upper lung fields bilaterally as well as a right lower lobe mass density. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed multifocal pleural scarring, appearing metastatic in nature, throughout both lung fields with early mediastinal invasion in the right infrahilar region . Positron emission tomography (PET) scan revealed FDG (fluorodeoxyglucose (18 F))-PET positive multiple lung masses. A computed tomography (CT)-guided core biopsy of a dominant right lower lobe lung mass was obtained. The histopathological specimen findings included chronic granulomatous inflammation (multi-nucleated cells with central necrosis) with numerous budding yeast forms that were positive for Grocott's methenamine silver stain (GMS), Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and mucin stain, consistent with cryptococcosis. Ferruginous bodies were also present, consistent with asbestos bodies . Cultures of the specimen examined for acid fast bacilli and fungi were negative, as were bacterial cultures. Serum cryptococcal antigen and HIV enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) were negative. A summary of the significant clinical data is illustrated in the table.
She was treated with fluconazole (400mg (6mg/kg) per day orally) for four months. She reported a marked improvement in her symptoms and improvement in her general condition. At her four-month follow up, a chest radiograph showed a significant reduction of the basilar infiltrates bilaterally.