A 39-year-old woman came to our hospital for the gastric and pelvic masses incidentally found during a routine body examination in the local hospital for two weeks in October 2021. The enhanced Computed Tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis revealed two masses located in the fundus of stomach and the right side of the pelvis, respectively, which were considered to be GIST originating in the stomach with solitary pelvic metastases by the local hospital.
The patient then came to our hospital for treatment. Her physical examination was normal, no mass was palpated in her abdomen, and her blood pressure and heart rate in a calm state were 109/70 mmHg and 72 bpm, respectively. The re-examination of enhanced CT of the abdomen and pelvis showed a soft tissue mass of approximately 33 mm×54 mm in the gastric wall on the greater curvature of the gastric body with clear boundaries and a smooth surface. A nodule of 26 mm × 29 mm was seen on the right anterior side of the pelvic wall, which was unclearly demarcated from the bladder wall. And there were no obvious abnormal signs in the rest of the body . Combined with imaging findings, these two lesions were more likely to be considered as primary tumors from different sources other than gastric GIST with peritoneal metastasis.
After the MDT discussion, the patient underwent laparoscopic surgery on October 9 in 2021, During the operation, a mass of approximately 55 mm × 35 mm in the posterior wall of the gastric body was found, and wedge resection of stomach was performed . At the same time, several nodules suspected of enlarged lymph nodes on the greater omentum adjacent to the mass were excised together and sent for frozen-section. The pathology revealed fibrous connective tissue. When dividing the mass from the bladder, the patient’s blood pressure rapidly rose to 180/120 mmHg. The anesthesiologist resolutely suggested that the operation be interrupt, and the arterial continuous blood pressure monitoring was performed before resuming the operation. According to the above situation, an ectopic PHEO was suspected, the urologist was invited for intraoperative consultation, and confirmed that the mass came from the right side of the bladder apex . Complete excision of the mass and bladder repair were performed.
Postoperative pathology confirmed that the gastric mass was an SDH-deficient GIST, which was composed of epithelioid cells and spindle cells under HE staining, with moderate atypia. The mitotic count was 2 per 5 mm2. The immunohistochemical (IHC) result showed tumor cells were CD117(+), DOG-1(+), SDHB(-), and Ki-67 5% . The rest of the specimens also included 15 lymph nodes, and no tumor cell metastasis was found. The bladder mass was a PGL. Under HE staining, it was composed of tumor cells of uniform size with abundant cytoplasm arranged in nests, with IHC CgA (+), Syn (+), SDHB(-), and Ki-67 2% . The results of next-generation gene sequencing revealed that the patient had a SDHB c.137G>A germline mutation. According to the above results, she was diagnosed with Carney-Stratakis syndrome of bladder PGL and gastric GIST, caused by SDHB germline mutation.
The patient recovered well after surgery and was discharged on the 6th postoperative day. During the follow-up, the patient told us that the symptoms including dizziness, palpitations, and sweating which happened during urinating disappeared completely after removal of the tumors. Because of the germline mutation of the SDHB gene, we advised her first-class family members to undergo next-generation gene sequencing, but they refused. The patient was receiving regular clinical, and imaging follow-ups. The patient remained recurrence-free up to this report being prepared at 10 months after surgery.