A 25 year old G1P0 was transferred to our center in the 225/7 week of pregnancy. The patient was admitted with blood pressure 200/100 mm Hg and presented with acne, moon facies, purple abdominal striae and hirsutism that she first noticed five weeks before admission . She denied headache, abdominal pain, edema, visual disturbances, or rapid weight gain. Reflexes were normal. Sonography on admission showed singleton pregnancy with growth at the 68th percentile, fetal and maternal Doppler within normal limits. The patient denied family history of pregnancy-induced illnesses including CS, hypertension in pregnancy, or a history of preeclampsia.
We initiated therapy with methyldopa and began additional medications including hydralazine 25 milligrams (mg) three times daily (TID), metoprolol 95 mg two times daily (BID), nifedipine (retard) 20 mg BID, hydrochlorothiazide (HCTZ) 12.5 mg BID. The methyldopa was maximized at 2000 mg daily. In spite of the five antihypertensive medications her blood pressure remained elevated at190/100 mm Hg. The patient was transferred to our intensive care unit where the oral medications were supplemented with intravenous urapidil (alpha 1 adrenoreceptor antagonist and 5-HT1A receptor agonist). Hydralazine was given intravenously.
Pheochromocytoma was ruled out (free metanephrine 18.5 nanogram/Liter (ng/L (normal 7.9–88.7)), free normetanephrine < 2.8 ng/l (normal 20.1–135.4)). A negative renal artery Doppler allowed us to rule out stenosis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to rule out adrenal adenoma was inconclusive. Micronodules in the left adrenal gland (the largest 4 millimeter) were found so that unilateral adrenal hyperplasia could not be completely ruled out. After consultation with our urology department, surgical intervention was not warranted.
MRI of the neck and thorax were negative for tumors. In 241/7 weeks we saw an increase in aspartate aminotransferase (AST) to 74 U/l and in alanine aminotransferase (ALT) to 102 U/l (normal < 50 U/l and < 45 U/l respectively) with a decrease in thrombocytes to 89 Giga/l (normal 150–450 Giga/l) and a decreasing haptoglobin to 0.41 g/l (normal 0.3–2 g/l).
The patient began rapidly gaining weight (13 kg within 13 days).
Due to the complex clinical presentation we consulted with our endocrinology department and performed additional diagnostic tests. Plasma cortisol levels were found to be elevated at 50.3 mcg/dl, (normal 2.47–19.5 mcg/dl), urinary free cortisol (UFC) was elevated at 974 µg/day (mcg/d, normal 50–190 mcg/d), ACTH was low at 3.6 pg/ml (normal 7.2–63.3), and the aldosterone-to-renin ratio (ARR) was elevated at 100.1 (normal 0.5–37.8). A summary of the hormonal results can be found in Table .
A dexamethasone suppression test was performed and resulted in a cortisol of 39 mcg/dl (no suppression) and ACTH < 1.5 pg/ml. The patient was diagnosed with CS and PA and started on spironolactone 100 mg BID and metyrapone 2.5 g daily at 250/7 weeks.
A risk of undervirilization has been described in male rat infants exposed to high doses of sprinolactone. To date undervirilization not been observed in humans . The sex of the fetus (female) was determined and confirmed on multiple occasions prior to beginning the spironolactone therapy. Following consultation with our endocrinology and embryotoxicology departments and after reviewing the literature, we began therapy with spironolactone 100 mg twice daily.
Hypomagnesemia was treated intravenously after oral substitution attempts failed. After three days of therapy the intravenous urapidil and hydralazine could be discontinued.
The fetus was monitored for growth and fetal Doppler and cardiotocography were regularly performed.
In 260/7 weeks an abnormal fetal Doppler with near zero flow in the ductus venosus, zero flow in the umbilical artery and low flow in the middle cerebral artery (MCA) was diagnosed. The patient was delivered by cesarean section on the same day. Antenatal corticosteroids were not given due to the elevated maternal cortisol blood levels.
We delivered a female newborn with birthweight 595 g (13th percentile), Apgar 4/7/10, umbilical artery pH 7.20, Base Excess − 4.7. The newborn was admitted to the neonatal intensive care ward and received surfactant postnatally. Hypoglycemia and hyponatremia were successfully treated. Our neonatologists were concerned about the high levels of maternal cortisol that were potentially transferred to the fetus in utero. The newborn had a significant risk for postnatal adrenal cortex insufficiency (due to potential in utero suppression) with subsequent hypocortisolism. A prophylactic hydrocortisone therapy was initiated to decrease the risk of a subsequent life threatening Addisonian crisis. Stress of delivery alone can lead to elevated cortisol levels in newborns after delivery. Neonatal cortisol levels remained elevated on the second day of life. The hydrocortisone therapy could be reduced and eventually discontinued on day 8 of life.
There were no further complications, no evidence of bronchopulmonary dysplasia, intraventricular hemorrhage or necrotizing enterocolitis. The newborn was discharged without long term medications or complications.
The patient was discharged with metyrapone 2.5 g daily, spironolactone 100 mg BID, methyldopa 2000 mg daily, hydralazine 25 mg TID, metoprolol 95 mg BID, HCTZ 12.5 mg BID and nifedipine 5 mg BID. Within 2 months all medications could be discontinued, the blood pressure was within normal limits (110/70 mm Hg) and within 4 months all laboratory values were within normal limits .