A 74-year-old man was admitted to our department in January 2015 with general malaise, weight loss, dyspnoea, abdominal pain and back pain. His history revealed active rheumatoid factor positive rheumatoid arthritis (RA) since 1972, treated with prednisone since January 2000 and abatacept since August 2014, deep venous thrombosis, emphysema, and hypertension. In 2008, an infrarenal abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) was diagnosed and treated with an endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) in February 2012 after symptomatic presentation. In October 2012, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed aneurysms of the aortic sinus (44 mm) and ascending aorta (42 mm), without valve abnormalities. In February 2014, increasing back pain and left-sided abdominal pain, without fever, night sweats or weight loss, resulted in admission to the department of Surgery. CT angiography (CTA) showed right renal artery occlusion, and an expanded AAA connecting with a fluid collection around the left iliopsoas muscle. The infectious diseases specialist advised to perform Q fever diagnostics. The PCR (in-house real-time PCR targeting IS1111a), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA, Pan-Bio Pty Ltd., Windsor, QLD, Australia), and complement fixation assay (CFA; Virion-Serion, Würzburg, Germany) on serum were negative. Repetitive TTE in 2014 depicted a stable cardiac condition. On physical examination at presentation in January 2015, he was afebrile with a blood pressure of 184/97 mmHg, with 96 % saturation. Cardiac examination was normal, endocarditis stigmata were absent, as was lymphadenopathy. Pulmonary examination revealed left-sided rales and right-sided crackles. He reported tenderness on palpation of the thoracic spine. Besides a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 67 mg/l (normal range, <5 mg/l) and hemoglobin level of 7.3 mmol/l (normal range, 8.4–10.8 mmol/l), laboratory results were normal. Chest X-ray revealed a recent thoracic spinal fracture, and abdominal ultrasound showed hepatomegaly and a psoas hematoma. CTA showed no leakage of the aortic graft. 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/low-dose CT (18FDG-PET/CT) 3 days later showed a normal FDG distribution in the patients’ head, neck, and brain parenchyma, but a high pulmonary FDG-uptake suggestive for pneumonia, and signs of an infected AAA expanding to the left psoas muscle. CT-guided puncture of the psoas abscess revealed pus, which was PCR positive for C. burnetii. Immunofluorescence assay (IFA; Focus Diagnostics Inc., Cypress, CA, USA) showed high anti-C. burnetii antibody titres: IgG phase I 1:4096, phase II 1:2048, IgM phase I and II negative. Serum PCR remained negative. Chronic Q fever was diagnosed and treatment with doxycycline 200 mg/day and hydroxychloroquine 600 mg/day was initiated. Prednisone (5 mg/day) was continued, but abatacept was stopped and the abscess was drained percutaneously. Shortly after being discharged, he was readmitted because of collapse, confusion, and increasing back pain. CT showed a new thoracic aortic aneurysm (52 mm) and an expanded multiloculated psoas abscess, which again was drained percutaneously. In the absence of a clinical response, moxifloxacin 400 mg/day was added, but had to be stopped due to a markedly prolonged QTc-interval. Despite several drains in the multiloculated abscess, CRP increased to 261 mg/l and he developed a fever. His hospital stay was complicated by two episodes of presumed hospital-acquired pneumonia (for which he received piperacillin/tazobactam), acute decompensated heart failure, respiratory failure presumably due to an aspiration pneumonia, and sepsis, for which he was temporarily transferred to the intensive care unit twice. Furthermore, he developed a gastroparesis, acute progressive renal insufficiency and a delirium. A new 18FDG-PET/CT showed increased FDG-uptake extending into the vertebrae and high FDG-uptake in his spleen suggestive for satellite infection. Despite treatment with adequate doxycycline levels, the patient died 4 months after presentation. Autopsy was performed, macroscopically showing inflamed tissue around the EVAR with fistulas to the iliopsoas muscle in continuation with the spine with softened vertebrae. Microscopy yielded a chronic granulomatous necrotizing inflammation of the aortic vascular wall around the EVAR, fully necrotic iliopsoas muscle and surrounding area, and a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Necrotizing granulomas were found in both lungs, being PCR positive for C. burnetii, as were EVAR specimens, pus from the psoas abscess and ascites from the abdominal right lower quadrant around the appendix. Cultures for C. burnetii remained negative. Post-mortem examination of the brain was not performed. Retrospectively, IFA was performed on stored serum from February 2014, already showing an IgG phase I 1:4096, IgG phase II 1:2048, with negative IgM phase I and phase II, suggestive for chronic Q fever. Retesting the stored serum with CFA and ELISA confirmed the previously found negative results.