A 58 year old lady was admitted to our unit with acute onset epigastric pain and vomiting for 4 h duration. She is a diagnosed patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus for 10 years and hypertension for 5 years. Her diabetes was well controlled with HbA1c of 6 and without significant micro or macrovascular complications. She is a nonalcoholic. Following admission she complained of retrosternal tightening type of a chest pain suggestive of acute coronary syndrome. Pain was sudden onset, lasted for 20 min in moderate intensity and responded to the medications given in hospital. Physical examination revealed severe epigastric tenderness. There was no rebound tenderness. Cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were normal. She was haemodynamically stable with a blood pressure of 130/90 mmHg and pulse rate of 96 bpm. 12 lead electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed T wave inversions in lateral leads including I, aVL, V5 and V6 . Her serum troponin I titer was 14 ng/mL (normal less than 0.8 ng/mL). 2D echo revealed lateral wall hypokinesia with preserved left ventricular function. Her serum amylase level on admission was 1741 U/L (20–115 U/L). Contrast computerized tomography (CT) abdomen revealed acute severe necrotizing pancreatitis without pseudocyst formation . Serum calcium, creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) and triglyceride levels were normal. Therefore she belongs to the moderately severe acute pancreatitis according to revised Atalanta criteria (2013). She was free of chest pain and haemodynamically stable following starting treatment with aspirin, clopidogrel, atorvastatin and nitroglycerin. Therefore she was given unfractionated heparin for 72 h and a coronary angiogram planned to be done later. Her serial ECGs showed minor dynamic T wave changes. She was given intensive care and improved during next few days with standard management protocol of acute pancreatitis. Three days later her repeat serum troponin level remained at 9.2 ng/mL and amylase level was 504 U/L. A coronary angiogram was done after 2 weeks. It revealed minor coronary artery disease with only 20–30% stenosis at proximal left anterior descending artery.