A sixty-one-year-old Caucasian male referred to our department suffering from anal pain and a combination of mucopurulent and stercoraceous discharges. The patient is HIV-positive with very low viral load, T4 577 c/ul, T8 1006 c/ul and T4/T8 = 1. During clinical examination, warts were found in the anal region. The external orifice of a fistula was in the right lateral wall of the internatal region. Prior any intervention, a fistulography and a colonoscopy were performed as initial evaluation to help rule out any other disease process in the rectum. Fistulography revealed an extrasphincteric fistula with a 5 cm length and a 1.5 mm breadth. Colonoscopy didn't reveal any pathological findings. Because of the patients' immunological status, we opted against the surgical decision that required a colostomy formation, and instead recommended the closure of the fistula by using a fibrin glue plug. Prior fibrin glue application, on the same session, a new fistulography was performed, aiming to identify the internal orifice of the fistula and place a catheter proximal to this orifice, in order to infuse the glue (Starting from the internal orifice and coming out). During fistulography, we discovered the existence of a second anal fistula. As show in the schema , both fistulas shared a common internal orifice in the rectal wall. No acute purulence or inflammation of the fistulas was oberserved at the time of intervention. The two fistulas were managed separately. The anal fistula was managed by a seton-type prolen-0 stitch. Following the seton placement, we catheterized the external orifice of the extrasphincteric fistula, we were then able to place a catheter near the internal orifice of the fistula in order to infuse the fibrin glue. The fibrin sealant Beriplast P (Behring, Marburg, Germany) was used as fistula plug. The kit contains freeze-dried fibrinogen and aprotinin solution and freeze-dried thrombin and calcium chloride. These substances are mixed to form two components--sealer and thrombin solution--that are kept in two separate syringes. Local application of the components was accomplished under radioscopic vision via a catheter passed through fistula. The two components were injected with separate syringes, and simultaneous mixing at the catheter tip led to rapid coagulation and mechanically stable fibrin clot formation inside the fistula tract. Immediate post-interventional fistulography showed to evidence of fistula tract. The patient was discharged the same day. A follow-up examination was performed 5 days after the initial fibrin glue application. Catheterization of the internal orifice of the fistula showed that the fistula canal was closed. Three months and a year after the initial intervention a new radioscopic examination was scheduled proving that both anal fistulas were successfully closed.