A 79-year-old Chinese man came to the hospital due to bilateral inguinal reproducible masses he noticed one week prior. The patient had a history of cerebral infarction and prostatic hyperplasia. An open tension-free hernia repair bilateral direct inguinal hernia (Bard Modified Kugel Hernia Patch) was performed on February 4, 2021, and the patch was placed in the preperitoneal space. The patient had no prophylactic antibiotics before surgery and was discharged 2 days after surgery with no swelling at the wound site. On February 8, the patient came to our hospital for symptomatic treatment of wound dressing change and had redness and swelling around the left groin wound, accompanied by a small amount of pale-yellow exudate. On February 11, the patient’s bilateral groin wounds were red and swollen, with skin necrosis. He came to our hospital’s surgical outpatient clinic again, and was admitted to the hospital with wound infection. Measurement of vital signs revealed a body temperature of 38.8 °C, blood pressure of 121/57 mmHg, and a pulse rate of 120 beats/min. Abdominal examination showed no positive signs. Physical examination showed wounds of approximately 5 cm in length in the bilateral groin areas. The wounds were marked by redness and swelling, and the skin around the wounds were red and white with a slightly yellowish exudate . In addition, an abscess of approximately 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm was seen on the left wrist without rupture . He was diagnosed with bilateral inguinal wound infection. Pelvic CT scans showed that the subcutaneous fat space in the wound area was blurred, a small amount of gas was scattered under the skin in the wound area, and the fat space in the pelvis was blurred . The results of laboratory examination were as follows: white blood cell (WBC), 17.4 × 109/L; haemoglobin level, 95 g/L; C-reactive protein (CRP), 200 mg/L; procalcitonin (PCT), 2.610 ng/mL; albumin, 30.7 g/L; potassium, 2.90 mmol/L; sodium, 129.0 mmol/L.
Bacterial culture and selection of antibiotics: For the wound infection after bilateral inguinal herniorrhaphy, the patient was given cefoperazone sodium sulbactam sodium and ornidazole for anti-infection supplemented with other symptomatic support treatments. The inguinal wound discharge, left wrist abscess, and blood were sent for bacterial culture on February 12. During treatment, the patient continued to have a fever, the scope of the wound infection continued to expand, and it continued to invade the surrounding epidermis. We considered the possibility of Gram-positive bacterial infection, so the patient’s antibiotics were changed to moxifloxacin and penicillin on February 14. On February 15, normal abdominal wall and spermatic cord tissue were seen after opening the external oblique muscle aponeurosis, without pus, tissue necrosis, and patch exposure. It was considered that wound infection had not significantly affected the patch at present. One day later, the necrotic tissue of the inguinal wound was sent for pathological examination, and the bilateral inguinal wounds were subjected to a simple VAC device . VAC therapy was used after debridement. On February 17, bacterial culture results showed that no bacteria were cultured from the inguinal wound discharge, while Staphylococcus epidermidis (MRCNS) was detected in blood culture, and the pus in the left wrist was cultured with Acinetobacter lwoffi. According to the drug susceptibility results, penicillin was replaced with clarithromycin as anti-infection agents on February 17, and the inflammatory indices (WBC, CRP, and PCT) were significantly decreased compared with the previous examination. Through the joint consultation of the Department of Infectious Diseases and the Department of Pharmacopathology with the drug susceptibility results, the patient was placed on imipenem and vancomycin for anti-infection treatment on February 18. The inguinal wound discharge and blood were sent for bacterial culture again on February 20. However, the puncture site of the left wrist had scabbed, and the wound discharge could not be taken for culture . No bacterial growth was found in the re-examination results, and the patient’s body temperature and inflammatory indices gradually decreased to normal levels. Imipenem was discontinued on February 27. One day later, Vancomycin and VAC were discontinued, and the wound dressings were changed regularly. Linezolid was used to fight infection on March 1. On March 3, the inguinal wound was resutured, and a surgical drain was placed for drainage . Two days later, the surgical drain was removed. Body temperature monitoring and re-examination of inflammatory indicators were normal, and linezolid was discontinued on March 7.
Surgical wound treatment and outcome: Regular wound dressings were performed, but the wound infection developed rapidly and invaded the surrounding tissue in a circular band. Grey‒white necrotic tissue was visible in the skin around the wound after the wound was split. The skin in the middle was purplish red, and the outer skin was red and swollen. The pathological results showed that the wound tissue had hyperplasia of collagen fibres and inflammatory cell infiltration with necrosis. The bilateral groin wound infection was significantly improved after active treatment modalities. The wound sutures were removed on March 17. The bilateral groin wounds were almost healed on March 21. Regular wound dressings and outpatient follow-up were continued after the patient was discharged from the hospital. The wound had completely healed on April 20. The patient showed no signs of complications after 10 months of follow-up.