A 35-year-old nulliparous Arab woman with an 8-year history of primary infertility presented to our infertility center. During these 8 years, she was diagnosed with uterus didelphys with two cervices and no vaginal septum . She underwent hysterosalpingogram (HSG), three-dimensional ultrasound (3D US), and diagnostic laparoscopy, which proved the diagnosis . Hence, no magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done since the 3D US was enough to determine the sizes of both horns, which showed minor differences in dimensions.
She had no specific history, apart from her irregular period explained by the diagnosis of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), was not a smoker, and did not consume alcohol. Her weight was 87 kg and her height 158 cm.
Her spouse was 44 years old, with uncontrolled type 2 diabetes, a recent history of coronary angioplasty and stents, and chronic hypertension.
They had three previous failed intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) trials outside our center years prior due to an indication for a male factor (oligo-astheno-teratozoospermia).
The couple was very anxious, depressed, and distressed at the first consultation, to which they brought a new semen analysis showing azoospermia.
The male, who had a medical condition, declined any intervention to extract the sperm surgically per recommendations from the anesthesiologists and cardiologists. A diagnosis of retrograde ejaculation was made, as well as a plan for isolation of the sperm from a urine sample after the preparation. Three vials of frozen motile sperm were obtained before embarking on the fourth IVF trial.
Four blastocysts were obtained from the first IVF/ICSI antagonist cycle in February 2018 , one of which (4AA) was transferred to the left uterus, and surplus freezing was done. The patient tolerated the procedure very well with no need for sedation or anesthesia. Her vital signs were normal (blood pressure 118/67 mmHg, heart rate 73 beats per minute, temperature 36.7 °C).
Both horns had a highly suitable endometrium, with a triple line with an average thickness of 10.3 mm. The left horn was chosen because it was more accessible to the left cervix at the moment of embryo transfer. It was planned to transfer one embryo, and the couple was counseled by our high-risk-pregnancy consultant to improve the obstetrics outcome for this uterine anomaly.
The first successful IVF journey ended with no need for cerclage and with no obstetrical complication by an elective C-section at 35 weeks for a baby girl of 2800 g weight, 46 cm length, 31.5 cm head circumference, and 7/10 Apgar score at delivery.
The couple visited our infertility center again in 2020 with the goal of conceiving a second child. The first child was with them, showing very good progress, normal development, and intelligence as per her parents. They extended their request to transfer one of the frozen embryos.
The endometrium was prepared by hormone replacement therapy (HRT) protocol for embryo transfer for the frozen embryo transfer (FET) cycle using 6 mg ethinyl estradiol daily starting from second day of period. Progesterone was added on day 14, when reaching triple-line endometrium with thickness of 11.1 mm. One blastocyst was thawed and survived. The initial decision was to transfer the embryo to the same horn (left) because of the previous successful transfer. The very deep and long vagina forced us to reach one of the cervices. The outer sheet of the embryo transfer catheter was used and showed that we were targeting the right horn.
Embryo transfer proceeded successfully and smoothly , in which the embryo was placed in the right uterus without changing or manipulating the anatomy, and the embryo was placed 1 cm from fundus. The patient tolerated the procedure well, and the couple was counseled properly.
Nine days later, her beta human chorionic gonadotropin (b-hCG) level was 258 mIU/ml. A single gestational sac with a viable pregnancy (positive heart beat) was observed in the right uterus, and the patient was referred to our high-risk-pregnancy specialist for follow-up. An elective C-section was performed at 34 weeks for a baby boy of 2650 g weight, 47 cm length, 31 cm head circumference, and 6/10 Apgar score at delivery.