The patient is a 76-year-old active male, community ambulator, with a medical history of coronary artery disease, Stage III chronic kidney disease, HIV infection, hypertension, and hyperlipidemia, who presented with right hip pain following a mechanical trip and fall. He had reported mild antecedent groin pain and had previously sustained a right femoral shaft fracture 20 years prior that was treated with an antegrade, statically locked, piriformis entry, slotted intramedullary femoral nail .
After medical optimization, he was taken to the operating room within 24 hours for nail extraction and a cemented THA. The patient was positioned in a lateral decubitus position and the previous incision for the femoral nail was extended distally and a modified Hardinge approach was undertaken. The anterior femoral neck and piriformis fossa nail entry site were exposed and the femoral head was removed. In preparation for nail extraction, the nail cap was removed and the appropriate threaded nail extraction device was inserted. The proximal and distal interlocking screws were then removed. Flexible osteotomes were used to clear the cancellous bone surrounding the nail proximally. Extraction was attempted but the nail appeared to be well fixed distally. The distal screw hole was drilled to remove any bridging bone, and a ball-tipped guide wire was inserted through the nail and passed successfully. Extraction was attempted again but without success. A medial parapatellar approach to the knee was then performed and a retrograde nail starting point was determined under fluoroscopic guidance. An opening reamer was utilized and a bone tamp was inserted flush to the distal end of the nail for attempted retrograde extraction. Flexible osteotomes were then used to free any bone surrounding the distal ends of the nail, as well as into the longitudinal slot distally. Despite all attempts the nail appeared well fixed, and as a result of the repeated impaction, a non-displaced distal femur fracture was sustained. At this point, the proximal as well as the original distal interlocking bolt were reinserted along with another distal interlocking screw to stabilize the femoral shaft . The decision was made to return to the operating room at a later date with more equipment to facilitate extraction.