We report the case of a 19-year-old Caucasian woman diagnosed with a cyst in her upper jaw, expanding from regions 23–26.
The first orthopantomogram was conducted in January 2001 by her local dentist during a routine examination. The orthopantomogram revealed a large radiolucent, multilocular periapical lesion expanding from regions 23–26, reaching into the maxillary sinus. The edges of the lesion appeared sclerosed .
The involved teeth showed no signs of root resorption and all tested positive for vitality. The patient had an unremarkable drug, family, and psychological history and showed no clinical symptoms or pain, which is considered a typical characteristic of COF.
The attending dentist referred the patient to the General Hospital in Vienna (AKH) and a biopsy was performed. During the operation, tooth 24 had to be extracted.
The following analysis of the specimen combined with the clinical and radiological findings led to the diagnosis of a solitary bone cyst.
Unfortunately, the patient refused any further treatment, including a cystectomy.
The patient did not reappear from 2001 until 2007 due to the absence of any clinical symptoms or pain. In late 2007, she was referred to the General Hospital in Vienna, Department of Maxillofacial Surgery.
She was suffering from intraoral swelling on the left side of her maxilla and complained about a strong feeling of dull pressure in the left eye region. During the ensuing 6 years, the already large cyst had expanded even further, pushing apart the roots of the adjacent teeth. Throughout the clinical oral examination, painless swelling of the left maxilla (regions 24–26) was observed. All of the patient’s teeth, including those inside the lesion, reacted positively to the vitality check.
A newly taken orthopantomogram showed the now massive extension of the tumorous lesion, covering almost the entire part of the left maxillary sinus. The lesion had a diameter of approximately 3.4 × 3.2 cm.
After informing the patient about the findings and upcoming treatment, she provided consent for the necessary operation. A preoperative computer tomography scan showed a 3.4 × 3.2 × 2 cm distension within the left maxillary sinus . The marginal edges of the cystic lesion appeared sclerosed. There was no sign of infiltration of the surrounding soft tissue.
Two weeks later, the patient underwent surgery under general anaesthesia by the head of the Department of Maxillofacial Surgery. The lesion was removed using an intraoral approach, and a mucoperiosteal flap was placed from regions 23–28. After bone windowing, the tumour was removed completely .
The patient received postoperative antibiotics, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent, and a proton pump inhibitor and was discharged after a few days.
The resected 3.4 × 3.2 × 2 cm specimen was histopathologically examined. Microscopically, the bone section was deformed by a cystic lesion filled with blood, and the cyst wall of the loose connective tissue was covered with granulation tissue of different ages.
Each trabecula was lined with distinct and thick osteoblast segments in different places. The osseo-trabecula had sections of dense cellular lesions consisting of small spheres of a cementitious material bounded by plump, fuzzy cells with many vascular gaps in between .
This morphological description of the lesion matched a solitary bone cyst plus focal sections of cemento-osseous dysplasia. There were no signs of malignancy.
The patient attended regular follow-up appointments. Six months after surgery, she remained symptom-free and was in the ninth week of pregnancy.
During a regular follow-up CT in 2009, new cystic changes were found within the left maxilla from regio 22–24. Another cystectomy was performed under general anaesthesia by the head of the Department of Maxillofacial Surgery at the University Hospital St. Pölten.
Using an intraoral approach, an incision from region 22–26 was preformed and the raised mucoperiosteal flap was carefully extended to expose the incisal nerve. After bone windowing the cystic like lesions were revealed and then removed in several fragments. A fibrin sealant, Tachosil®, was used on the operated tissues to stop the bleeding. This minimally invasive approach enabled the patient’s rapid recovery with no complications.
The patient was given postoperative antibiotics, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agent, and a proton pump inhibitor and was discharged in stable condition a few days later.
The removed fragments were histologically examined and showed a calcified material that consisted of various differently sized and generally small spherical basophilic cement elements with cellular fibrous stroma. The final diagnosis was revised to cemento-ossifying fibroma with cystic formations matching a solitary bone cyst.
A radiological follow-up in 2010 showed no signs of recurrence.
The residual sinus walls were clearly sclerosed. In addition, inflammatory residual remnants less than 1 cm were found in the surgical site. The partially lytic, partially sclerosed changes in the alveolar process of the left maxilla remained, with increasing sclerosing at regions 22 and 23. The local status of the teeth remained unchanged.
Since then, the patient has been under regular clinical and radiological follow-up.
DVTs taken in 2016, 2017, and 2019 showed insignificant changes in the left maxilla.
To date, approximately 10 years after the second operation, there have been no signs of recurrence and the patient is clinically symptom-free. Moreover, the patient is satisfied with the outcome of treatment.