A 14-year-old adolescent male was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) of our hospital due to sudden “transient unconsciousness while running 2 h ago.” At that time, the patient was pale and sweating profusely, which resolved spontaneously after 2 min. After waking, he complained of chest tightness and cold limbs, and went to the emergency room. At that time, his blood pressure was 95/60 mmHg, heart rate 160/min, with ventricular tachycardia, respiratory rate 34/min. The emergency doctor gave amiodarone for anti-arrhythmic. Approximately half an hour later, the patient suddenly experienced ventricular fibrillation, loss of consciousness with a Glasgow Coma Score of 4 (GCS: E1, M1, V2). Immediately chest compressions, defibrillation, graded intravenous push of epinephrine, and tracheal intubation were performed. After cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), the patient’s blood pressure was 83/53 mmHg with a norepinephrine infusion of 2 ug/min.kg pump and lidocaine for antiarrhythmic. He had experienced syncope during exercise two times and both were relieved after rest without medical attention when he was 12 years old. There was no family history of sudden death. Emergency laboratory results were as follows: hemoglobin, 126 g/L, white blood cells, 11.55 × 109/L, platelet, 208 × 109/L, total bilirubin, 18.4 umol/L, alanine transaminase, 702 u/L, aspartate transaminase, 1197 u/L, creatinine, 143 umol/L, glucose, 17.5 mmol/L, lactate, 10.9 mmol/L, bicarbonate, 14.6 mmol/L, troponin I, 29.5 ng/ML, myoglobin, 18680 ng/ML, creatine kinase-MB, 501 u/L, N-terminal pro-BNP, 1430 pg/ML. An electrocardiogram showed a wide QRS complex tachycardia . Emergency point-of-care ultrasound prompted: extremely weak heart contraction. Considering that the patient would suffer cardiac arrest again at any time, he was immediately admitted to the ICU.
When the ventilator with PEEP 16 cmH20, the patient still had a large amount of pink foamy sputum gushing out of the tracheal tube, and extensive blister sounds could be heard by stethoscope in both lungs. Simultaneously, he was anuria. High-dose vasopressor drugs (maximum norepinephrine, 3 ug/kg.min combinated epinephrine, 0.1 ug/kg.min [intravenously pumped]) were administered to maintain circulation. Fast echocardiography revealed diffusely weakened full ventricular wall motion and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 20%. The patient was a student in the third year of junior high school, preparing for the high school entrance examination and was in a state of fatigue. He had no high-risk factors for myocardial infarction such as diabetes and coronary heart disease. Although he had no signs and symptoms of recent viral upper respiratory infection or enteroviral infection, he was diagnosed with acute fulminant myocarditis (FM), cardiogenic shock, malignant arrhythmias, cardiac arrest and post-CPR, multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, acute pulmonary edema, acute renal injury, acute hepatic dysfunction, and metabolism acidosis.
Considering his rapid clinical deterioration, bedside veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (VA ECMO) was implanted (right internal jugular vein-right femoral artery), and initial ECMO centrifugal pump speed was 3300 rpm which supported flow rate 3.0 L/min. The heat exchanger was setted 35.5°C to keep the patient’s blood temperature was less than 36°C for brain resuscitation. The distal perfusion catheter was placed which directed a proportion of the returned oxygenated blood flow from the ECMO circuit to the distal of the right femoral artery to prevent limb ischemia. Considering the patient was volume overload, anuria, severe metabolic acidosis with acute renal injury, continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) was connected to the ECMO to provided solute depuration, fluid removal, and control of electrolyte and acid-base balance. The bleeding end of CRRT was connected behind the membrane of ECMO, and returned to the front of the ECMO membrane. Continuous venovenous hemofiltration (CVVH) with predominantly convective solute clearance was used. The formulation of CRRT was adjusted according to the blood gas results. He was administered high-dose methylprednisolone, concomitant antiviral therapy with acyclovir, and systemic anticoagulation with argatroban.
With the help of ECMO, the doses of vasopressor drugs were gradually reduced. After 20 h of ECMO, the patient became conscious and urinated with a urine output of 50 ml/h. We used remifentanil for pain relief and propofol for sedation, and we deactivated CRRT on hospital day (HD)3. By HD5, the patient’s cardiac systolic function was progressively enhanced, and daily bedside echocardiography showed that LVEF gradually increased to 47% under the condition of ECMO flow rate of 2 L/min with 0.1 ug/min.kg of norepinephrine intravenously pumped. Therefore, we reduced the flow rate of ECMO to 1 L/min. There was no significant change in the patient’s vasopressors for about 1 h, and ECMO was weaned. There was no significant change in the vasopressor drugs and LVEF after weaned from ECMO. Ventilator condition was pressure support ventilation (PSV) with the PEEP 6 cmH2O on HD6, so we removed the tracheal intubation. On the night of HD6, the patient complained of chest tightness and experienced cardiogenic shock again, while his blood pressure decreased, as low as 55/32 mmHg (0.3 ug/min.kg of norepinephrine combinated epinephrine 0.1 ug/min.kg). Bedside echocardiography revealed left ventricular filling, and his cardiac systolic function (LVEF, 38%) was worse than before (LVEF, 46% by HD6 before extubation). Thus, we placed IABP to support circulation. After the use of IABP, the patient’s circulation improved again, the dose of vasopressor drugs was reduced. Repeat bedside echocardiography revealed that his cardiac function (LVEF, 46%) had improved. Therefore, we gradually reduced the IABP counterpulsation ratio from 1:1 to 1:3. At HD12, the IABP counterpulsation was stopped for 1 h. The patient had no chest tightness, normal urine output, no drop in blood pressure (0.05 ug/min.kg of norepinephrine), blood gas suggested no metabolic acidosis and IABP was removed.
The patient’s vital signs were stable and there was no vasopressors on HD20. But his activity tolerance remained poor, and bedside echocardiography: left ventricular systolic function was still weak, and other cardiac functions were normal. Therefore, we decided to take the patient out of the ICU to further search for his underlying cause. Considering that he was a juvenile patient and suffered cardiac arrest after exercising, we began to pay attention to the coronary origin. Echocardiography on HD20 revealed LVEF, 45%. The left main (LM) coronary artery originated from the right coronary sinus with an initial interarterial course between the aorta and pulmonary artery, which was obviously compressed by the aorta especially during systole. The opening of the LM was narrowed with a diameter of 1.27 mm, and the blood flow of interarterial course was accelerated. Myocardial systolic longitudinal strain in the area of the left coronary artery was decreased (left ventricular global longitudinal strain [GLS], −10%). Coronary computed tomography angiography (CTA) revealed the varied origin of the left coronary artery, running between the aorta and pulmonary artery, and evident stenosis after being squeezed by the aorta and pulmonary artery. Contrast-enhanced cardiovascular magnetic resonance image (MRI) revealed abnormal enhancement of the left ventricular endocardium, suggesting subendocardial myocardial infarction. The patient’s troponin I was up to 190 ng/ml (at 20 hours of onset), and then gradually decreased to normal level. showed dynamic evolution of troponin I during the patient’s hospitalization.
The patient was diagnosed with congenital left coronary artery anomalies originating from the right coronary sinus with an interarterial course between the aorta and pulmonary artery, acute left ventricular subendocardial infarction, cardiogenic shock, malignant arrhythmias, cardiac arrest and post-CPR, multiple organ dysfunction syndrome, acute pulmonary edema, acute renal failure, acute hepatic dysfunction, and metabolism acidosis.
The patient had cardiac insufficiency, and New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class II. Therefore, long-term, restorative strategies for neuroendocrine inhibition with sacubitril/valsartan, metoprolol, and aspirin for platelet aggregation were administered therapeutically. On HD35, the patient was discharged, and follow-up treatment focused on improving myocardial remodeling and restoring cardiac function. Six months later, he underwent successful unroofing of the intramural portion in another hospital to relocate the left coronary artery in the appropriate sinus. Echocardiography 1 month post-operatively revealed LVEF, 40%, the opening diameter of the LM was 3.94 mm, and blood flow velocity was normal. Moreover, the GLS of the left ventricle was 6.1%. At follow-up, the patient came to our hospital for reexamination about once a month. He was in good physical and psychological condition. He had been taking oral sacubitril/valsartan, metoprolol, and aspirin. He was asymptomatic at rest, and his physical activity was mildly restricted (NYHA Class II cardiac function). The patient is currently suspended from school for recuperation, and at the same time studies moderately for 2 h a day, and is ready to return to school in the second half of the year. The progress and decision-making of the case above are reflected in the timeline .