A 25-year-old man presented to hospital with one week of left neck swelling. Four months previously he had recently returned from an eight-month stay in South Africa and his country of birth, Namibia. While in Africa he had stayed with relatives in an urban apartment; he had no animal exposures, health care contact or participation in rural or freshwater activities. His prior medical history included systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) previously on prednisone and hydroxychloroquine, however he had stopped all immunosuppression over six months prior to presentation out of personal convictions. He also had been incompletely treated for extensively drug-resistant tuberculous meningitis ten years prior.
Physical examination revealed soft tissue swelling and warmth of the left neck and earlobe, without fever or other systemic symptoms. A computerized tomography (CT) scan showed necrotic cervical lymphadenopathy with overlying myositis and cellulitis [Fig. ]. He was assessed by the otolaryngology service which noted cellulitis involving the lower auricle but no tympanic membrane distension or otorrhea. He was discharged on oral amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and ciprofloxacin/dexamethasone ear drops for possible otitis externa.
He returned five days later with worsening pain. Laboratory investigations revealed mild anemia and leukocytosis with normal platelet count and liver enzymes [Table ]. HIV serology and heterophile antibody were negative. Blood cultures were negative but intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam was initiated for extensive soft tissue infection of the auricle and neck. Given his medical history, there was suspicion that the underlying lymphadenopathy was secondary to mycobacterial lymphadenitis or an SLE flare with secondary cellulitis. Mycobacterium tuberculosis DNA was not amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on fine needle aspirate of the lymph nodes, but there was insufficient tissue for mycobacterial culture or pathology. Excisional biopsy was not possible due to the overlying cellulitis. Blood, urine, and stool samples were smear negative for acid fast bacilli. Serology was not consistent with an SLE flare. Investigations for travel related infections were also sent including negative blood parasite smears and negative serologies for Hepatitis B, Hepatitis C, and Schistosoma. He did have positive strongyloidiasis serology with negative stool ova and parasite examination and was treated with two doses of ivermectin. He was discharged after nine days with a plan to complete fourteen days of piperacillin-tazobactam for the cellulitis followed by an excisional biopsy. Fungal cultures as well as Bartonella henselae and Brucella serology were pending at the time of discharge.
The patient returned to hospital six days later with fever, sore throat, malaise, and fatigue. The cellulitis had improved. Investigations revealed new pancytopenia, elevated liver enzymes, hypertriglyceridemia, hyperferritinemia, hypofibrinogenemia, and elevated C-reactive protein [Table ] and a bone marrow biopsy showed hemophagocytosis without signs of lymphoma. He was diagnosed with hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis based on the HLH-2004 criteria [Table ]. Repeat bacterial and fungal blood cultures, Epstein-Barr virus and Cytomegalovirus PCR on blood were negative, as were Brucella and histoplasma serologies from his first admission. However, Bartonella henselae Immunoglobulin G was noted to be strongly positive at 1:1024. Based on the strongly positive serology and hallmark clinical syndrome of painful regional lymphadenopathy, a presumptive diagnosis of Bartonella henselae infection was made. Unfortunately, the lymph node aspirate did not have sufficient sample for PCR or culture.
On further history, the patient reported being scratched on the left arm by a family member’s new pet dog approximately 10–14 days prior to the first emergency department visit; the dog was not known to be unwell, but the patient did not know if it was up to date on vaccinations. The patient had no exposure to cats, rodents or other animals, and had no lice, mites or other known arthropod bites, and had participated in no activities high risk for arthropod bites.
Under multidisciplinary care, he was started on oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for Bartonella henselae infection, which was presumed to have precipitated HLH. There was initial hesitation to add immunosuppression concern for tuberculous lymphadenitis, however after the negative biopsy and given the progression of HLH, he was ultimately started on high dose methylprednisolone, intravenous immunoglobulin and anakinra. After three days, he began to show clinical improvement and was transitioned to oral prednisone 60 mg daily and other immunosuppressants were stopped. An echocardiogram showed no signs of endocarditis and repeat imagining at six weeks from initial presentation showed resolution of cervical lymphadenopathy. He completed a three-month course of doxycycline and three-month prednisone taper with complete resolution of symptoms.