3-year-old girl with homozygotic SCD (Hb SS), diagnosed with newborn screening. She was brought to the emergency room by her father with a fever of 39°C, coughing, vomiting, and pain in the lower limbs. 2 weeks before she had presented a self-limiting febrile episode that included the appearance of mouth ulcers and a blood analysis that was not indicative of drop in her baseline hemoglobin level or hemolysis, so she did not require hospitalization.
Her physical examination upon arrival revealed mucocutaneous paleness, tachycardia, sleepiness, and a noteworthy splenomegaly (spleen at 8 cm below rib edge).
Due to her hemodynamic instability, intravenous isotonic saline solution was administered at 10 mL/kg, a blood sample was drawn for analysis and cross-matching, and a first dose of intravenous antibiotic was administered (ceftriaxone, 100 mg/kg/day). The blood analysis revealed severe anemia with a hemoglobin level of 3.7 g/dL, reticulocytopenia (22,000 reticulocytes/mm3), and an elevated level of the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (1097 U/L). The blood analysis and biochemistry were otherwise normal.
Due to the clinical suspicion of splenic sequestration and aplastic crisis, a red blood cell concentrate transfusion was performed, with the target hemoglobin calculated at 8 g/dL. This was completed without incident, and the normalization of the hemoglobin level was checked by a blood analysis carried out 90 minutes later, which revealed a hemoglobin count of 8.3 g/dL.
In addition, to complete the etiological study, a chest X-ray was ordered , which was normal, along with a serological test for the Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, leishmaniasis, and parvovirus B19.
After the blood transfusion, she remained clinically and hemodynamically stable. 48 hours later, the serology results were received: the IgM and IgG were positive for parvovirus B19. Having remained afebrile, with a negative blood culture at 48 hours, a blood analysis that was not indicative of bacterial infection, and the confirmation of a recent parvovirus B19 infection, the intravenous antibiotic was discontinued and she was discharged and scheduled for a clinical follow-up 48 hours later.
On the day of her discharge, the blood analysis was repeated, which showed: stable hemoglobin (8.8 g/dL), clearly increasing reticulocytes (615,000 reticulocytes/mm3), and a decreasing lactate dehydrogenase level (898 U/L). The physical examination revealed a reduced spleen size (6 cm below rib edge).
3 months later, she had another episode of splenic sequestration secondary to an upper respiratory tract infection. She was thus sent to a referral hospital for splenectomy.