In 2010, a 56 year-old man presented with pain in the anal region. His medical history was unremarkable. A digital rectal examination revealed a markedly enlarged prostate with a smooth, bulging surface. The serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level was 1.1 ng/mL. Computerized tomography (CT) images showed a 6 cm heterogeneous, infiltrative tumor within the prostate gland extending to the trigon of the bladder, left seminal vesicle and rectum . No lymph node involvement or any metastatic focus including bones was recorded. The colonoscopic examination revealed an extraluminal large asymmetric mass. The tru-cut biopsy of the prostate was reported as leiomyoma. At surgical observation, there were four seperate, circumscribed tumor masses located in the extraperitoneal, rectovesical and retroprostatic regions with no definitive association identified to the neighboring organs and structures. The masses were easily and completely removed from the adjacent structures. On macroscopic definition, the largest mass was measured 4 cm in diameter. The masses had well-defined borders with a pseudocapsule in shape and the cut surfaces were solid, firm and grayish-white. There were also some gritty areas in the macroscopic examination. Microscopic evaluation showed an infiltrative spindle cell proliferation with a mild cytologic atypia (, , , ). There were 4 mitosis per 50 high power fields (HPF) and there was no necrosis. The immunoprofile of the tumor was as follows: CD117 >50%: 3 (+), CD34 >50%: 1 (+), smooth muscle actin (SMA) <10% 1 (+), S-100 (-), desmin (-), Ki67 1% . The case was reported as EGIST within the intermediate-risk category with free surgical margins. A close follow-up was planned with CT scan for every three months in the first year and later for every 6 months. Because of the intermediate risk of the tumor, and the legislations regarding drug prescription rules in our contry, imatinib was not prescribed as a synchronous treatment. The patient was problem-free for the rest 49 months. While there was no significant finding in April 2014, eight months later, in November, the CT scan showed multiple nodules, with a greatest dimension of 3.5 cm - showing irregular contours with extraprostatic extension. Additionally, severe nodal involvement, including the left obturatory and right inguinal area, was reported. On positron emission tomography, both asymmetric masses in the right prostate lobe and lymph nodes showed high metabolic activity. Serum PSA level was 3.91 ng/mL. A fixed mass was palpated on the right lobe on digital rectal examination. The tru-cut biopsy of prostate had a spindle cell tumor consistent with EGIST. The immunostaining results were almost the same as the first specimen: SMA (+), CD117 (+) (1+) 100%, CD34 diffuse (+) 100%, smoothelin (-) some isolated cells, α-methylacyl coenzyme A racemase (-), Keratin AE1/AE3 mildly-focal (+), S100 (-), estrogen and progesterone receptor (-), desmin focal (+). Ki67 proliferation index was 1%. Mitotic figures were noted as 1/50 HPF. There was no necrosis. While two quadrants had 98% tumor, one had only 5% tumor. Because of the prostatic recurrence with nodal involvement, imatinib (Glivec; Novartis, Stein, Swiss) therapy was planned as a neoadjuvant therapy before radical surgery. A control CT showed regression in the tumoral masses in the 6th month of follow-up and the patient has remained uneventful. Written informed consent has been obtained from the patient.