A 38-year-old Hispanic male from Mexico, with alcohol-induced hepatic cirrhosis (Child-Pugh C/MELD 45) and type 2 diabetes mellitus was admitted to the emergency room due to deteriorating encephalopathy. His diabetes had been diagnosed 10 years before. Metabolic control during this time was very poor because of alchoholism. One month before being admitted to the emergency room, he experienced sudden onset of increasing localized pain in the left thigh while resting. He had no fever or chills. Relatives said he did not experience trauma, skin lesions and insect bites. Analgesics only mildly soothed the pain. In the following weeks, he was unable to walk. Common oral analgesics no longer delivered relief from moderate to severe pain. He remained at rest until three days before admission when the encephalopathy worsened. During physical examination, he had no fever. His blood pressure was at 110/70 mmHg, his pulse rate was at 112. His respiratory rate was 24 per minute. He was conscious and oriented with grade II encephalopathy. Upon examining the left thigh, a 10 × 10 cm mass was located in the anterior and external part of the middle portion of the thigh. This lesion was not well-defined. It was tender and associated with tense skin with erythema, ecchymoses and an increase in temperature. He The patient experienced increased pain in the thigh when moving the limb. There was no peripheral edema. Ollow's sign and Homman's sign were absent. On neurological examination, vibratory and pain perception were bilaterally decreased.
Blood testing (see table ) showed a macrocytic, normochromic anemia with neutrophilic leucocytosis, thrombocytopenia and prolongation of coagulation times. A non-fasting plasma glucose value was elevated. Blood cultures and antiphospholipid antibodies were negative. X-ray imaging of the left thigh showed only soft tissue edema; a Doppler ultrasound ruled out deep vein thrombosis and an MRI showed edema and inflammatory changes of the quadriceps muscle with a hyperintense signal on T2-weighted images. There was also a subacute hematoma .
Once diabetic myonecrosis and subacute hematoma were diagnosed, conservative management was initiated. Treatment included complete bed rest, parenteral analgesics and antibiotics to prevent spontaneous bacterial peritonitis. Therapy for hepatic encephalopathy, decompensated liver cirrhosis, and diabetes was also provided. There was a rapid improvement in pain control and resolution of the edema and the area of cellulitis. Five days later, however, there was increased pain in the erythematous area of the thigh. He also experienced low grade fever. An ultrasound guided muscle biopsy revealed only necrosis. Gram stain and cultures for anaerobic and aerobic bacteria and fungi were negative. During the procedure, partial evacuation of the subacute hematoma was carried out. After a slow and progressive improvement of the mass and edema, he was discharged from the hospital. Three weeks later, he came back to the emergency room with grade IV encephalopathy. Examination of the limbs did not reveal any abnormalities. Progressive deterioration of hepatic function led to severe liver insufficiency and death four days after admission.