In April 2012, a 57-year-old man presented with aggravating frequent urination and dysuria was admitted to the Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Dr. J.P. took charge of this patient. Digital rectal examination (DRE) revealed palpable hard nodules and the blood test showed prostate-specific antigen (PSA) concentration was 140 ng/ml. Further ultrasound examination suggested PCa with the right seminal vesicle invasion, chest computed tomography (CT) scan indicated metastatic tumors in bilateral lungs and enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum , bone scan demonstrated multiple metastases in the scapulae, ribs, sacroiliac joints, hip joints, thoracic vertebrae, lumbar vertebrae, etc . The diagnosis of PCa was further confirmed by transrectal ultrasound-guided prostate biopsy, with a Gleason score 4 + 5 = 9.
Androgen deprivation therapy (triptorelin) was administered immediately by intramuscular injection, together with anti-androgen (bicalutamide) orally and zoledronic acid intravenously. What’s more, the chemotherapy regimen (docetaxel, 75 mg/m2 every 3 weeks) was carried out synchronously, combined with prednisone 5 mg orally twice a day. After six cycles, chest CT and bone scan showed that the metastatic tumors in the lungs were surprisingly disappeared, and the metastatic tumors in the bones lessened significantly , along with a remarkable reduction in PSA level (< 2 ng/ml).
Subsequently, namely November 2015, intermittent androgen deprivation (triptorelin combined with bicalutamide) was conducted until 2018, during this period, no regular follow-up was executed for various reasons. In August 2018, the patient was readmitted to hospital due to lumbar compression fractures in an accident fall, his serum PSA level was found to be 75 ng/ml, and rapidly increased to 250 ng/ml 2 months later, implying that the disease had progressed to castration resistance period. A second time he received docetaxel 75 mg/m2 immediately but sadly he could not tolerate it, severe fatigue and poor appetite debilitated and troubled him in the extreme, he was much frailer than several years ago. Instead, oral abiraterone was administered, together with prednisone. Fortunately, the PSA level decreased to 15 ng/ml a few months later. However, good times don’t last long, abiraterone was discontinued in March 2019 due to intolerable nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. Soon, the PSA level went up to 95 ng/ml, again abiraterone was administered but failed to work, and the PSA level increased to 150 ng/ml, suggesting that the disease was resistant to abiraterone.
In October 2019, the patient came to our center presenting with poor appetite, general fatigue, and broad bone pain. CT/MRI scan showed widespread metastases in the lungs, liver, bilateral adrenals, thoracic and lumbar vertebrae, and pelvis bones , the PSA level was higher than 400 ng/ml. Considering the poor performance status of the patient and the failure experience of abiraterone and standard chemotherapy regimen, we administered docetaxel in a modified approach (day 1 40 mg/m2 + day 8 35 mg/m2). Luckily, the PSA level decreased rapidly, the bone pain was greatly relieved, and no obvious side effect was observed, the patient regained satisfying appetite and mental status as a consequence.
Four cycles later, the PSA level decreased to 11.48 ng/ml, the metastatic tumors in the lungs, bones, and adrenals shrank except that in the liver. To determine the pathological type of the prostate cancer and the property of the metastatic tumors in the liver, we performed prostate biopsy and liver biopsy. Consequently, no tumor cell was observed in the specimen of prostate, immunohistochemical stains showed expression of P63 and 34BE12 surrounding the gland . In the specimen of liver tumor, prostate adenocarcinoma was observed and the expressions of AR, PSA, P504S, MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2 were observed in the immunohistochemical stains, with ERG, Syn, CgA, hepatocyte, arginase-1, and PSAP not observed . Docetaxel failed to work effectively any more, the PSA level elevated gradually. We took enzalutamide, apalutamide, cabazitaxel, olaparib, and metronomic chemotherapy into consideration as an alternative but soon the proposal was denied because of the high cost or unavailability, uncertain effects of these drugs. In June 2020 and July 2020, we took two more cycles of docetaxel when the patient was back to our center, the PSA level decreased to a certain extent but soon rebounded. At the meanwhile, the patient’s performance status deteriorated speedily, and the total plasma bilirubin level elevated significantly, he could not tolerate any aggressive treatment. Finally, the patient died of multiple organ failure in August 2020. The overall process of disease progression, treatment course and changes of the PSA level were provided below in detail .