A 63-year-old man with a past history of rectal cancer was admitted to our hospital for the treatment of CRLM. The patient had undergone laparoscopic high anterior resection to treat rectal cancer 7 months previously. The pathological stage of the rectal cancer was T1N1aM0 stage IIIA, according to the Union for International Cancer Control classification (seventh edition). The patient did not experience any perioperative complications. He refused to receive adjuvant chemotherapy. Computed tomography (CT) performed 7 months after primary surgery revealed liver metastasis in the left lateral section. Indocyanine green retention at 15 min (ICGR15) was 4.1%. The patient’s Child-Pugh classification was class A. Tests for hepatitis B virus surface antigen and antibodies against hepatitis C virus were negative. Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed a hypovascular tumor of 38 mm in size in the left lateral section . The ligamentum teres was observed on the right side of the gallbladder . Three-dimensional CT clearly showed that the umbilical portion of the portal vein was located on the right anterior portal vein, where the RSLT connected . Considering the segmentation of the liver according to the Brisbane 2000 terminology , the right anterior branch of the portal vein was ramified from the right portal vein. The lateral superior branch of the portal vein (P2) branched off behind the bifurcation of the portal vein, running separately from the common branch of the lateral inferior branch (P3) and left paramedian branch (P4). The patient was diagnosed with CRLM, and LLLS was planned. We fixed the patient in the supine and open-leg position and inserted four ports. The intraoperative findings showed an RSLT with a left-sided gallbladder . After mobilizing the left lateral section, the resection line was carefully decided by identifying the origin of the P3 and P4 of the portal vein using intraoperative ultrasonography (IOUS) . The P2 was independently ramified from the left portal vein and was identified by IOUS . The resection line was on the left side of the falciform ligament. Liver resection was performed using an ultrasonic scalpel (Harmonic Scalpel; Ethicon, CO) and repeatedly using IOUS to ensure the resection of the lateral superior branch of Glisson (G2) and lateral inferior branch of Glisson (G3) . The G3 and the G2 had to be separately clipped and resected, because of the wide distance between the two branches on the resection line . The vein draining the left lateral superior section (V2) and left hepatic vein (LHV) were resected at the cut surface, and the left paramedian branch of Glisson (G4) was correctly preserved using intraoperative ultrasonography. The operation time was 2 h and 58 min and the intraoperative blood loss was 50 g. The patient had a favorable clinical course without any complications and was discharged on postoperative day 5.