A 61-year-old woman with a medical history of hypertension and chronic kidney disease (CKD) was admitted to our hospital for proteinuria and progressive deterioration of renal function. She attended the hospital as an outpatient and was administered olmesartan, cilnidipine, and azosemide. Her serum creatinine level was 1.0 mg/dL, and no urinary abnormalities were observed in the local clinic. 2 months before admission, there were subjective symptoms of pedal edema and blood pressure elevation. Her creatinine level increased to 1.52 mg/dL, and heavy proteinuria was observed at a local clinic. Subsequently, she was referred to our hospital for further management.
At the initial visit, the patient had a blood pressure of 135/88 mmHg, body height of 149.5 cm, and weight of 42.5 kg. Physical examination revealed bilateral edema of the lower extremities. Urinalysis showed proteinuria with protein excretion of 4.15 g/g creatinine and 5–8 red blood cells per high-power field. Hematologic tests indicated a white blood cell count of 6.3 × 103/μL, hemoglobin level of 12.0 g/dL, and platelet count of 315 × 103/μL. Laboratory investigation revealed a serum creatinine concentration of 1.85 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen of 37 mg/dL, and estimated glomerular filtration rate of 22.8 mL/min/1.73 m2. The total serum protein level was 5.2 g/dL with a serum albumin level of 3.1 g/dL. The following laboratory data were obtained: total cholesterol: 280 mg/dL, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol: 175 mg/dL, triglycerides: 237 mg/dL, uric acid: 6.3 mg/dL, C-reactive protein: 0.03 mg/dL. Liver dysfunction, diabetes mellitus, and electrolyte imbalance were not observed. Immunological studies showed a serum IgG concentration of 283 mg/dL (normal range 870–1700 mg/dL), IgA of 259 mg/L (normal range 110–410 mg/dL), and IgM of 183 mg/dL (normal range 35–220 mg/dL). The serum complement C3 level was 33.2 mg/dL (normal range 86–160 mg/dL), C4 was 3.3 mg/dL (normal range 17-45 mg/dL), and total hemolytic activity (CH50) was 9.1 U/mL (normal range 31.6–57.6 U/mL). Marked hypocomplementemia was recognized. Tests for hepatitis B and C, rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibody, anti-DNA antibody, anti-SS-A/SS-B antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti-cardiolipin antibody, and cryoglobulin were all negative.
She was admitted to our hospital 2 days after the initial consultation for a careful examination. As a result of the additional examinations, the serum and urine immunoelectrophoresis showed no monoclonal bands. Furthermore, the entity of monoclonal protein was not identified on immunofixation electrophoresis. The serum free κ light chain level was 45.1 mg/L, λ light chain was 57.6 mg/L, and κ/λ ratio was 0.783 (normal range 0.248–1.804). Serum amyloid A protein level was not elevated at 2.7 μg/mL (normal 0–8.0 μg/mL). In the bone marrow examination, the CD 138 positive cells proliferate slightly, but they were not clear tumorous proliferation. Plasma cells are 0.5% in the bone marrow and heteromorphy has not been confirmed. Pathological proliferation of plasma cells was also denied by flow cytometry. Ultrasound examination indicated renal atrophy; therefore, laparoscopic renal biopsy was performed for accurate diagnosis.
The kidney specimens were studied by light microscopy, immunofluorescence stain, and electron microscopy using standard techniques. For direct immunofluorescence stain, 3-μm cryostat sections were stained using polyclonal fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated antibodies to IgG, IgA, IgM (Medical & Biological Laboratories, Nagoya, Japan), C3, C4, C1q, κ, and λ(Dako, Copenhagen, Denmark). Further staining of the IgG subclasses was performed using mouse monoclonal antibodies to human IgG1 (Bio-Rad Laboratories, California, USA), IgG2, IgG3 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), and IgG4 (Binding Site, Birmingham, UK), followed by FITC-conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (Jackson Immuno Research Inc., Pennsylvania, USA).
The sample contained 13 glomerules, none of which were globally sclerosed. By light microscopy, glomerules showed a diffuse increase in the mesangial matrix and mild mesangial hypercellularity. Most glomeruli were lobulated and exhibited remarkable nodular formation in the mesangial area that narrowed the capillary lumens. Capillary walls were irregularly thickened. Duplication of the GBM accompanied by endothelial cell swelling indicated an endothelium disorder. Endocapillary proliferation and mesangiolysis were observed in several glomeruli. Crescents were not detected in the specimen. Tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis was mild with patchy infiltration of mononuclear cells. Vessels showed moderate arteriosclerosis . Congo red staining was negative. Immunofluorescence staining showed moderate-intensity (2+) for IgG and C3 and mild intensity (1+) for C1q in the mesangium and along the capillary walls. Staining for IgG also was positive on TBM. However, no staining for light chains was observed in the mesangium, along the capillary walls, or on the TBM. IgG subclasses showed intense staining for IgG3, but IgG1, IgG2, and IgG4 were entirely negative . Electron microscopy revealed electron-dense deposits (EDD) without organized structures along the inner aspect of the GBM. In the expanded mesangium area, nodular EDD were observed . The pathological findings in this case corresponded with γ3-HCDD.
Initially, the patient was treated with oral prednisolone (PSL) at a dose of 40 mg/day. However, the therapeutic response was very poor. The serum creatinine level increased to 3.65 mg/dL and blood urea nitrogen to 122 mg/dL, while the severe hypoalbuminemia (2.4 g/dL) did not improve. Urinary protein excretion did not decrease (4.27 g/g creatinine on admission to a maximum of 12.02 g/g creatinine), and in addition, the ascitic fluid and bilateral edema of the lower extremities became worse. The serum C3, C4, and CH50 titers remained extremely low (C3 19.7 mg/dL, C4 7.3 mg/dL, and CH50 13.6 U/mL). Therefore, the patient was treated with chemotherapy consisting of melphalan and PSL at a dose of 40 mg/day for 4 consecutive days. The daily use of PSL was rapidly tapered and stopped after chemotherapy. MP therapy was conducted 4 times in 7 months. The treatment interval was 1 month at short and 3 months at long. The dosage of melphalan was adjusted in accordance with renal function, 4 mg in the first and second courses, 6 mg in the third and 8 mg in the final. After 4 courses of MP therapy, the serum C3 and C4 titers were markedly elevated (C3 84.6 mg/dL and C4 31.3 mg/dL), and the serum creatinine level was decreased to 1.52 mg/dL. After discontinuance of MP therapy, the laboratory data did not deteriorate. To date, the patient has been followed for 28 months. The serum albumin levels have been maintained at over 3 g/dL, and the quantitative analysis of urinary protein was decreased to 2.72 g/g creatinine. NS was not observed and renal function was stable (the serum creatinine level was around 2.0 mg/dL). The patient’s condition improved with no edema, which had been observed initially.