A 67-year-old man was directly transferred to the Catheterization Laboratory because of constrictive chest pain radiated to the jaw lasting for 5 hours with out-of-hospital evidence of ST-segment elevation inferior myocardial infarction. Physical examination was unremarkable and the patient showed no signs of heart failure (Killip Class I).
Besides hypertension and dyslipidaemia on medical treatment, his medical history included a previous inferior acute myocardial infarction 20 years before treated with stent implantation on the second segment of the right coronary artery (RCA) and subsequent percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty for restenosis after 9 months.
After 250 mg i.v. of acetylsalicylic acid and 5000 IU of unfractionated heparin, the right radial was instrumented with a 6 French (Fr) sheath and a Judkins left guiding catheter, and left coronary angiography was performed showing a diffusely ectatic left main and proximal left anterior descending coronary artery with multiple irregularities but no significant obstructive lesions. The RCA was engaged with a 6 Fr Judkins right guiding catheter and an occlusion of the third segment distal to the previously implanted stent was found (Video 1). No visible calcium was present angiographically. The occlusion was easily crossed with a Runthrough® NS Floppy guidewire (Terumo Medical Corporation, Somerset, New Jersey, USA). A 2.0 × 15 mm balloon expanded well at 14 Atmospheres (Atm), leading to restored anterograde flow, chest pain reduction, and ECG normalization. Angiography showed a long critical stenosis throughout the third segment of RCA (Video 2). Cangrelor administration was started and a 2.75 × 38 mm Everolimus eluting stent (Xience Sierra, Abbott, USA) was deployed with a short overlap with the previous stent proximally. Multiple post-dilatations with 3.00 × 12 mm and 2.75 × 6 mm NC balloons at high pressure (up to 24 Atm) failed to dilate the stent distally, where a focal underexpansion of the stent gave a typical image of ‘dog-boning’ to all balloons . Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) (Opticross™ HD 60MHz, Boston Scientific, USA) was performed and a focal circumferential (360°) highly calcified lesion with a minimum stent area (MSA) of 1.98 mm2 was found (, ). After the second series of 10 pulses with a 3.00 × 12 mm IVL balloon (Shockwave Medical Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) the ‘dog-bone’ distortion of the balloon disappeared, with full expansion at 4 Atm and 6 Atm . Final stent post-dilatation with a Sapphire® II NC 3.25 × 8 mm balloon (OrbusNeich, Hong Kong, China) was done at 8 Atm distally and up to 24 Atm proximally across the overlapping stent struts. Angiography showed an excellent result (Video 3) and IVUS confirmed the complete stent expansion (MSA 6.92 mm2, residual stenosis 0%, TIMI 3 flow) (, ). At the end of the procedure ticagrelor 180 mg was administered and cangrelor was stopped after 2 h. The patient was transferred to the cardiology unit where the echocardiogram showed inferior wall hypokinesia with normal left ventricular ejection fraction. High sensibility troponin T peak was 1693 pg/mL (URL 14 pg/mL). After 72 h the patient was discharged and started a cardiac rehabilitation program as an outpatient. On follow-up visit 2 months later, the patient was asymptomatic and no complications occurred.