A 40-year-old man presented to the emergency department with a swelling and pain in the left hemiscrotum with no history of trauma or surgical procedures. Therefore, he was referred to the urology department. Drugs and Family history are unremarkable, the patient does not take any medication and he does not recall any type of allergy. He smokes one pack-year and does not drink alcohol and works as trader.
Physical examination indicated an acute left epididymitis. In palpation, we noticed a scrotal mass in the right hemiscrotum.
His parents had first noticed scrotal mass when he was two years old and was diagnosed incorrectly as hydrocele by an unauthorized practitioner. He had not undergone any further investigation.
We performed US, which showed normal left testis and enlarged left epididymis with hypoechoic. In addition, we performed Doppler evaluation to demonstrate blood flow, which was increased. Therefore, we confirmed acute epididymitis diagnosis that was treated conservatively with antibiotics and NSAIDs. In the right hemiscrotum, Color Doppler ultrasound evaluation revealed oval lump with echotexture and blood flow similar to the ipsilateral testis .
We put Triorchidism and adenomatoid tumor as differential diagnosis for this lump.
The Serum tumor markers were in the normal range. (AFP; 1.44 IU ML−1), and (beta-HCG; 0.5 MUI ML−1).
MRI showed that the lump had separate epididymis and shared a common vas deferens with the right testis, that was not obvious on Doppler ultrasound evaluation, which confirmed the diagnosis of supernumerary testis (Triorchidism). The supernumerary testis had intermediate signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images and that is the same of normal testes .
The left testis measured 43 mm in Long axis, the right testis measured 46 mm, and the supernumerary testis measured 58 mm and situated posteriorly and inferiorly to the right testis.
No Histological examination was performed because the patient refused the biopsy.
The classification of the Supernumerary testis was type A2 according to Bergholz and wenke (2009) classification and type C according to Leung classification.
The patient underwent a follow-up ultrasound after a month and after six months of his presentation. Then we put the patient on regular follow-up yearly. The patient is still radiologically stable 6 month after his presentation, with his radiologic follow-up the patient has good prognosis, and he did not have any complications as the clinician expected.