A 70-year-old man with dyspnoea on exertion was diagnosed with triple vessel coronary disease ( and ) with reduced LV systolic function (LVEF 32%). The patient’s past medical history included hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and emphysema. Trans-thoracic echocardiography revealed what appeared to be a tricuspid aortic valve with trivial aortic regurgitation (–). Computed tomography showed dilatation of the ascending aorta of 51 mm, mild dilatation of the sinotubular junction of 41 mm, and a Valsalva sinus of 47 mm. His brain natriuretic peptide and troponin I levels were elevated to 532 and 231 ng/mL. Cardiac CT was considered to be relatively contraindicated because of the presence of renal dysfunction (estimated glomerular filtration rate of <30 mL/m2) and heart failure due to reduced LV function. The patient was taking anti-hypertensive drugs, beta-blockers, aldosterone receptor antagonists, diuretics, and statins, which consist of candesartan 4 mg, bisoprolol fumarate 1.25 mg, spironolactone 12.5 mg, azosemide 30 mg, tolvaptan 3.75 mg, and atorvastatin 10 mg. The patient was recommended coronary artery bypass grafting due to triple vessel disease with a high SYNTAX score (40.5), reduced LV function, and ascending aortic pathology with an indication for surgery.
We performed coronary artery bypass grafting and graft replacement of the ascending aorta (28 mm J Graft; Japan Lifeline Inc., Tokyo, Japan) with sparing of the normally functioning aortic valve. Acute aortic regurgitation occurred with ventricular fibrillation during cooling for deep hypothermic circulatory arrest prior to the graft replacement. After de-clamping the aortic graft, the left ventricle rapidly became distended and the heart did not resume beating. Trans-oesophageal echocardiography revealed massive aortic regurgitation without dissection of the aortic root. The aorta was re-clamped, and we found that the aortic valve was the fused type (right–left fusion) BAV, very asymmetrical leaflet (commissure angle of the non-fused leaflet 135°), and three aortic sinuses. The conjoined aortic leaflet originated from the myocardium in the coronary aortic sinuses without the normal attachment to the fibrous portion of the aortic annulus . The fibrous strands originated from the raphe of the conjoined leaflet connected to the aortic wall . The aortic leaflet, fibrous strands, and aortic root were not injured by manipulation of the proximal anastomosis of the ascending aorta. We resected the aortic leaflets and found that the attachment of the conjoined leaflet was separate from the anatomical ventriculo-arterial junction without fibrous connection and was displaced downwards into the left ventricle. A prosthetic valve (CEP MAGNA EASE #25 mm; Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, USA) was implanted at the supra-annular position using non-everting mattress sutures from the site of attachment of the conjoined aortic leaflet. The patient was successfully weaned from cardiopulmonary bypass . We reviewed the pre-operative echocardiographic findings and found that the width of the myocardium between the attachment of the leaflets and their supporting coronary sinuses was 17.1 mm, which was consistent with the intra-operative findings . One year later, there was no para-valvular leak, and the patient’s LV function had recovered well (LVEF 63%).