A 61-year-old man with hypertension and dyslipidemia presented at Buriram Hospital, a government regional hospital located in Buriram province, Thailand, with progressive bilateral lower-extremity weakness over a 6-week period. Two months earlier (in December 2022, during the later stages of the COVID-19 pandemic in Thailand and worldwide), he had been diagnosed with mild COVID-19 after experiencing an acute febrile illness and cough. The diagnosis had been confirmed through a rapid antigen test for SARS-CoV-2 using a nasopharyngeal swab. He did not receive any antiviral or steroid treatments, and his COVID-19 symptoms had resolved within 10 days of home quarantine. Nevertheless, the patient complained of progressive bilateral lower limb weakness, numbness below the nipple, and urinary retention 2 weeks after the COVID-19 diagnosis. Previously, he received two doses of the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vaccine (Oxford–AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine), with the last dose having been administered in January 2022. The patient visited various clinics and hospitals, undergoing a two-day admission at the last one before arriving at our facility with an inconclusive diagnosis.
The patient was referred to the emergency department of our hospital and was subsequently admitted to the inpatient department of internal medicine. Upon examination at our hospital, the patient was afebrile with normal vital signs and already had a Foley catheter in place for urinary retention. Neurological examination revealed a reduced pinprick sensation below the T4 level, a muscle strength of 2/5 in both lower limbs, and no weakness or numbness in either upper extremity. All blood tests and nasopharyngeal swabs were conducted on the first day of admission. The nasopharyngeal rapid antigen test for SARS-CoV-2 and serum anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgM tests yielded negative results, while the immunochromatographic assay for anti-SARS-CoV-2 IgG showed positive results. The complete blood count, blood chemistry, renal function, and liver function test results were normal. Serological tests for hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and human immunodeficiency virus yielded negative results. The spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), performed on the second day of admission, revealed multifocal regions of high signal intensity at the C2–C6, T2–T7, and T10–T11 levels on both the T2-weighted ( and ) and STIR-weighted ( and ) imaging sequences, without gadolinium enhancement on the T1-weighted images . Additionally, degenerative changes with disc bulging at L1–L2 and L2–L3 were noted, resulting in moderate central canal and bilateral foraminal stenosis. On the third day of admission, a lumbar puncture was performed, which revealed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein and glucose levels of 32.8 mg/dL and 81.9 mg/dL, respectively, without any CSF pleocytosis (three white blood cells/mm). Tests for serum aquaporin-4, serum myelin-oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies, and CSF oligoclonal bands returned negative results. Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with probable COVID-19-associated myelitis. Initial treatment began on the third day of admission, starting with intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g/day) for 5 days, followed by oral prednisolone (50 mg/day). Despite the treatment, no clinical improvement was observed. Subsequently, the patient underwent five cycles of plasmapheresis, with the first cycle starting on the tenth day of admission. Plasmapheresis was done using fresh frozen plasma at 3 L per cycle. After a 3-week hospital stay, the patient was discharged with slight improvement, displaying a muscle strength of 3/5 in the right lower extremity, while the left lower extremity maintained the muscle strength of 2/5. Three months after discharge, the patient demonstrated improved muscle strength at 4/5 in both lower extremities, along with the resolution of sensory and urinary symptoms.