A 29 year old woman with a previous history of migraine, mild asthma, congenital asymptomatic bicuspid aorta valve accidentally discovered during routine examination, missed abortion and anembryonic pregnancy was diagnosed with relapsing-remitting MS. She was treated with interferon beta1-b for five years, until it was decided to escalate the treatment due to new gadolinium enhancing MRI lesions and a sensory attack. The Expanded Disability Status Scale score was 2,0. Tests for tuberculosis, HIV, hepatitis B and C, routine blood and urine analyses, as well as respiratory examination and chest X-ray were negative. She had stopped smoking four years previously, and stopped using interferon beta 1b four months prior to the first alemtuzumab infusion because she wished to get pregnant.
The patient received standard premedication with 1000 mg methylprednisolone, 10 mg cetirizine, 1000 mg paracetamol and 400 mg acyclovir per day before each alemtuzumab infusion (12 mg per day). Prior to administration of alemtuzumab hypotension (70/35 mmHg) and bradycardia (45 beats per minute) was noticed and patient reported mild dizziness that improved after administration of Ringer’s acetate. A vasovagal reaction was suspected. For this reason, the alemtuzumab infusion was started at a low rate (12 ml/hour). Except mild headache that was treated with paracetamol and ibuprofen no infusion-associated reactions were observed the first day. Blood pressure and heart rate were normal during the alemtuzumab infusion.
At the end of the second alemtuzumab infusion, 24 h after the start of the first infusion, the patient developed chest pain on inspiration, shortness of breath, and cough. Four hours later she started coughing up bright red blood tinged sputum without clots. Body temperature, blood pressure, heart sounds and oxygen saturation were normal. Electrocardiogram showed sinus bradycardia at 48 beats/min. Auscultation revealed crepitations over the right lung, and chest x-ray showed corresponding shadowing. Platelet and leukocyte counts two hours after symptom onset were normal, and c-reactive protein was 26 mg/l (ref. < 5). Arterial blood gas analysis four hours after onset of haemoptysis was normal except for pO2 at the lower reference limit (11,0 kPa; ref. 11,0–14,4) and elevated lactate 1,3 mmol/l (ref.0,4-0,8). Haemoglobin fell from 12,0 g/dl (ref. 3, 7–15 g/dl) before the first infusion to 10,5 g/dl the day after onset of haemoptysis. Urinary analysis and serum creatinine remained normal.
Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiography performed shortly after onset of haemoptysis showed extensive bilateral upper and lower lobe opacities with centrilobular distribution and minimal (up to 5 mm) bilateral pleural effusions without evidence of pulmonary embolism . Interlobular septal thickening and dependent gradient were not present. The heart size was normal. At bronchoscopy performed 60 h after onset of haemoptysis the bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid was persistently macroscopically markedly bloody, without dilution on successive aliquots. There were no evidence of pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or atypical cells. Differential cell count of the BAL revealed 6% macrophages without hemosiderin inclusions on iron staining and 94% neutrophils indicating acute lung injury. Microscopy of BAL fluid showed many erythrocytes but counting in successive aliquots was not performed.
The patient remained stable from a respiratory point of view with normal vital parameters. No treatment for lung haemorrhage was given. Chest pain and haemoptysis resolved in two days. At discharge from hospital one week after onset of haemoptysis CT showed total resolution of pulmonary opacities and pleural effusions on the right side, and unchanged minimal amounts of pleural effusion on the left side. Her cough resolved after four weeks, and she has thereafter not experienced respiratory symptoms.
Alemtuzumab was discontinued after the second infusion. Her MS has remained clinically and radiologically stable, and new treatment has not been initiated because of prolonged lymphopenia (0,33 10*9/l 13 months after alemtuzumab infusions).