A 36-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with complaints of upper abdominal pain for 2 months and inability to pass stool for 2 days. The pain was epigastric, colicky in nature, increasing in intensity, and radiating to the back. It was partially relieved by analgesics, but otherwise there were no alleviating or aggravating factors. There was associated nausea and vomiting (food particles), but no hematemesis. The patient also complained of recurrent attacks of night sweats, fever, chills, and fatigue, and weight loss of more than 11 kg over the previous 2 months. There was no history of chest pain, dyspnea, heart burn, reflux symptoms, dizziness, headache, or jaundice. At 17 years of age, the patient had been diagnosed with Helicobacter pylori infection at K.F.S.H. The infection had persisted despite several courses of treatment, and she was finally discharged on ranitidine. Her past history was also remarkable for recurrent benign nasal tumor (myxoma).
The patient was not on any regular medication. She had no known drug or food allergies. There was no family history of any gastrointestinal disease or malignancy, and no documented genetic disease.
On examination, the patient was conscious, alert, oriented, and mildly dehydrated. She looked pale and was obviously in pain. Blood pressure was 119/78 mmHg; heart rate, 110 beats per minute; temperature, 37.3 °C; and peripheral capillary oxygen saturation, 100 % on room air. The abdomen was soft, with no distention. A mass was palpable in the left upper quadrant; it measured about 16 × 10 cm in size and was dull on percussion. Bowel sounds were increased. Rectal examination was normal.
The laboratory results were as follows: white blood cell count, 17.5 × 109/L, with 67.8 % neutrophils; hemoglobin, 12.5 g/dL; hematocrit, 38.1 %; platelet count, 328 × 109/L; C-reactive protein, 320 mg/L; and serum lactate, 1.3 mmol/L. Kidney function, liver function, albumin 30, and serum electrolytes were within normal limits. Hepatitis profile and HIV test were negative. The coagulation profile was normal, and sepsis workup was negative. The chest radiograph was unremarkable. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed significant circumferential wall thickening of the transverse colon (extending about 16 cm), but no stricture; there was pericolic fat stranding. CT also revealed a necrotic lymph node, measuring 6 × 6 cm, lying posterior to the pancreatic head and displacing it anteriorly. Multiple enlarged mesenteric lymph nodes were also present, the largest measuring 1.2 cm in diameter (, , ).
Based on these findings, out provisional diagnosis was an invading colonic mass; the differential diagnoses included lymphoma, colon cancer, and pancreatic cancer. The patient was admitted for further investigations. After multidisciplinary consultation, lymphoma involving the colon was considered the most likely possibility. Intravenous antibiotic was started and the patient was prepared for colonoscopy (with enema and Movicol). Colonoscopy revealed an ulcerated, fungating mass in the transverse colon, approximately 70 cm from the anal verge. There was narrowing of the lumen. Eight biopsy samples were obtained from the mass. Stenting not done because there was no definite obstruction. Following the colonoscopy, the patient started passing stool and tolerating oral fluid. However, at day 7 post admission, the patient started complaining of abdominal distention and inability to pass stool or flatus, Her vital signs were within normal limits, and abdominal examination findings were the same as before. She improved with conservative management. On day 12, colonoscopy biopsy result revealed zygomycosis.
The infectious disease specialist advised intravenous liposomal amphotericin B (300 mg daily for 3–6 months) and, if possible, surgical excision of the colonic mass plus the retroperitoneal lymph nodes. Soon after the first dose of amphotericin, the patient developed chills and tachycardia, and her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score dropped to 7. The pupils were dilated and reactive. She also developed generalized edema. Suspecting anaphylaxis, we transferred the patient to the intensive care unit, where she was intubated. At admission to the ICU, her arterial blood gas parameters were as follows: pH, 7.51; PCO2, 27; HCO3 23; and base deficit, −0.2. Blood examination showed the following: white blood cell count, 9 × 109/L, with 74 % neutrophils, 17 % lymphocytes, and 6% eosinophils; hemoglobin 9 g/dL; hematocrit, 31.5 %; platelet count, 435 × 109/L; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 82 mm, serum lactate, 7 mmol/L; and C-reactive protein, 158 mg/L.
Intravenous ceftazidime was started in the ICU. The neurologist ordered brain CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to check the cause of the decreased level of consciousness. The otolaryngology team asked for sinus CT to exclude nasal zygomycosis. Brain CT showed a slight narrowing of the ventricular system with minimal loss of surrounding sulci. MRI showed bilateral thalamic ischemia with patent cerebral vessels, indicating total circulatory collapse, global hypoperfusion, and septic shock. CT of the paranasal sinuses showed bone resorption in the floor of the nasal cavity (hard palate), extending up to the pterygoid plate. There was a soft tissue density suggestive of a nasal tumor or postoperative change. Mucosal thickening in the left maxillary sinus was present. The patient’s family refused biopsy of the nasal mass.
On day 14, she developed sinus tachycardia (180 per minute) and fever. Echocardiogram was normal. Amphotericin B was resumed preceded by hydrocortisone. Surgical intervention was not offered at the time as we hoped that reduction in mass size would allow complete resection later. Over the next week, her condition improved. GCS score increased to 14/15, and she could be extubated. She resumed oral fluids, but started vomiting again. An interventional radiologist inserted a nasojejunal tube to bypass the compressed area of the stomach and duodenum.
On day 21, her condition deteriorated. She developed hypotension, tachycardia, and respiratory acidosis. She was intubated again. Her abdomen was tensely distended and silent. The serum lactate level was 19 mmol/L. CT abdomen showed air under the diaphragm. At emergency laparotomy, a perforated mass was found in the transverse colon. The mass involved the transverse colon, small bowel, and stomach. The small bowel was ischemic from the duodenojejunal junction up to the distal jejunum. However, there was viable bowel 120 cm from the ileocecal valve. En bloc excision was performed , and the abdominal incision was closed for a second-look procedure (damage control surgery). Abdominal fluid was sent for cytology. The patient was returned to the ICU and placed on ventilator and inotropic support; however, her condition continued to deteriorate and she died on day 24 post admission. The second-look surgery could not be performed before her death.
Two weeks after the patient’s death, the cytology results came back negative for malignancy. Histopathology was negative for malignancy, but was consistent with intestinal basidiobolomycosis. The typical picture comprised zygospores and irregular wide hyphae with occasional septa, surrounded by thick eosinophilic material (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon; , ). A mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate (eosinophils, neutrophils, and few giant cells) was present in the submucosa and pericolic fat. Fungal invasion of blood vessels was evident.