A 56-year-old, 112-cm, 30-kg woman was scheduled to undergo partial mastectomy in the right upper inner to the outer region of the breast and sentinel lymph node biopsy for cancer of the right breast. She had short limbs, scoliosis, and thorax deformation because of achondroplasia, but she used a wheelchair and maintained activities of daily living. She had received carvedilol, losartan, and furosemide for chronic moderate to severe mitral regurgitation due to shortening of the posterior leaflet of the mitral valve. She had a history of catheter ablation for paroxysmal atrial tachycardia; however, her preoperative electrocardiogram revealed normal sinus rhythm. She showed no signs of respiratory symptoms with exercise; however, she could not maintain a supine position for a long period because of shortness of breath. A preoperative respiratory function test revealed a volume capacity of 1.51 L and a forced expiratory volume in 1 second of 1.21 L. Preoperative examination revealed normal opening of the mouth, a Mallampati grade of 2, and normal flexion of the neck. We weighed the risk of general anesthesia for respiratory and cardiac functions of the patient and possible difficult airway against the feasibility of intraoperative management without general anesthesia. Consequently, intraoperative management using Pecs II block, TTP block, and sedation with dexmedetomidine was planned.
In the operating room, the patient was monitored for non-invasive blood pressure, electrocardiogram, and peripheral oxygen saturation. After the commencement of oxygen inhalation at 2 L/min via a nasal cannula, intravenous dexmedetomidine at 6 μg/kg/h was administered for 10 min and thereafter at 0.4 μg/kg/h. After infiltration of each puncture site with 5 mL of 1% lidocaine, the following ultrasound-guided blocks were performed with a 70-mm long 22-gauge Tuohy needle and ultrasound equipment SonoSite Edge (FUJIFILM SonoSite, Bothell, WA, USA). Firstly, Pecs II block was performed. The operator stood at the head side of the patient and placed the ultrasound probe at the caudal side of the clavicle. After identifying the plane between the pectoralis minor muscle and serratus anterior muscle at the fourth rib, the needle tip was positioned in this plane and 15 mL of 0.25% levobupivacaine was injected. The needle tip was then pulled back to the plane between the pectoralis major and pectoralis minor muscles, and 10 mL of 0.25% levobupivacaine was injected . Secondly, TTP block was performed. The operator stood at the left side of the patient and placed the ultrasound probe at the right lateral border of the sternum between the third and fourth ribs. The needle was advanced to the plane between the internal intercostal muscle and transversus thoracic muscle with an in-plane approach, and 11 mL of 0.25% levobupivacaine was injected . The longitudinal spread of local anesthetics between these muscles from the second to the fifth rib was ultrasonographically confirmed immediately after the injection. Sensory blockade of the inner to outer region of the right breast at the Th2–5 of the intercostal nerve and right axilla was confirmed by a pin-prick test performed 15 min after the blocks, and the surgery was initiated. During surgery, the administration of additional analgesics or sedatives was not required because the patient did not complain of pain. She complained of dyspnea twice during surgery, but her symptoms improved after she was encouraged to take several deep breaths and the dexmedetomidine dosage was increased to 0.7 μg/kg/h. During surgery, her hemodynamic state was stable, peripheral oxygen saturation was maintained at 99–100%, and respiratory rate was 18–22/min. As there was no metastasis in the sentinel lymph node, the surgery was completed after partial mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy, with a total operation time of 37 min. Before completion of the surgery, 30 mg of flurbiprofen and 450 mg of acetaminophen were intravenously administered for postoperative multimodal analgesia. Immediately after the surgery, the patient rated her pain as 0/10 on the numeric rating scale. The next morning after the surgery, she rated her pain as 0/10 at rest and 1/10 while moving, without additional analgesics. The patient had a good postoperative course and was discharged from the hospital 2 days after the surgery.