The 23-year-old male patient was admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of Xiamen University on April 26, 2020 with the main complaint of left back pain for two days. Computed tomography of the abdomen showed multiple stones in the left kidney. The patient had a medical history of laparotomy and urinary stone removal in another hospital 10 years previously. On December 10, 2018 and September 16, 2019, left kidney and ureteral calculi lithotripsy on the left side were performed using a flexible ureteroscope in our hospital. Routine analysis of stones by infrared spectroscopy analysis system showed that the stones were composed of xanthine. After completing the relevant examinations on his most recent admission, the patient was diagnosed with a solitary kidney and ureteral stone incarcerated by hydronephrosis. On April 27, 2020, the patient underwent left transurethral ureteroscope laser lithotripsy, followed by left side urethral ureteroscopy laser lithotripsy (flexible cystoscope) on May 27. Postoperative analysis revealed that the stone was composed of xanthine.
The patient’s blood metabolism test showed that his blood uric acid (661 mol/L) was significantly higher than the normal range (88–430 mol/L), which was inconsistent with the common symptoms of xanthine stones. Genetic testing by next-generation sequencing (NGS) carried out with the patient’s informed consent revealed a homozygous nonsense mutation (c.1113C> A, p.Tyr371*) in the SLC3A1 gene. There are multiple reports of nonsense variants causing disease in the upstream and downstream of this variant [, ], thus implicating loss-of-function as one of the pathogenic mechanisms of the disease. Four cases of heterozygotes of this variant are reported in the gnomAD population database, while no homozygous individuals have been found. To clarify the source of the variant, Sanger sequencing of this site was performed on the patient, his parents and his sister. The patient’s parents were found to carry the heterozygous mutation (the parents were not in a consanguineous marriage), and the sister did not carry the mutation . According to previous studies, pathogenic variants in the SLC3A1 gene can cause cystinuria. The diagnosis of cystinuria was confirmed by performing 24-h urine metabolism analysis of cystine, which was found to be 644 mg/24 h (normal value <320 mg/24 h). After discharge from the hospital, the patient was treated with potassium hydrogen citrate sodium (2.5 g/time, 4 times/day), aluminum phosphate gel (20 g/time, 2 times/day), and cefdinir capsules (0.1 g/time, 3 times/day). Preventive measures including drinking sufficient amounts of water, exercising moderately, and restricted meat, fish, shrimp and other high-purine foods were ordered and reviewed regularly.