A 58-year-old Japanese man with upper abdominal pain and loss of 4 kg in weight over the course of 1 month was referred to our hospital for the examination of a pancreatic mass that had been identified by a previous doctor on abdominal ultrasonography. Laboratory data revealed that the complete blood counts, liver function tests, and amylase and lipase levels were all within the normal range. Elevated fasting blood glucose (152 mg/dl) and HbA1c (5.9%) levels indicated abnormal glucose tolerance. The levels of tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and Dupan-2 were all within the normal range.
A computed tomography (CT) scan showed that the original lesion in the pancreatic body was a complex heterogeneous mass measuring 5.0 cm in diameter that contained cystic and mixed solid areas . No evidence of metastasis was observed. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumor in the pancreatic body that was visualized as low intensity on T1-weighted images and relatively high intensity on T2-weighted images . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed an obstruction of the main pancreatic duct and a dilation of the distal main pancreatic duct . Based on the diagnosis of pancreatic body cancer, distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was performed, and regional lymph nodes were removed.
In the resected specimen, an ill-defined infiltrative tumor was macroscopically observed at the cut surface of the pancreatic body . The main pancreatic duct was identifiable only in the portion of the pancreatic head side of the tumor. The cystic area within the tumor corresponded to a retention cyst .
Histologically, the tumor was composed of an area of invasive adenocarcinoma and an area of sarcomatous spindle cells . The vast majority of the tumor was composed of sarcomatous spindle cells, and the adenocarcinoma component accounted for less than 5% of the total tumor. A transition was observed between the adenocarcinoma component and the sarcomatous component . The lumen of the main pancreatic duct within the lesion was covered by dysplastic epithelia corresponding to high-grade pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia , and there was no pathological evidence showing that the adenocarcinoma or sarcomatoid component had arisen from intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm.
The adenocarcinoma component was accompanied by mild lymphocyte infiltration in the tumor stroma, and lymphocyte infiltration was negligible in the sarcomatous component . The cellularity of the sarcomatous component was not as pronounced, and it contained an abundant fibrous stroma . The sarcomatous component invaded the splenic artery and the splenic vein located at the periphery of the tumor. Necrotic tendency, heterologous elements such as bone and cartilage, and osteoclast-like giant cells were not observed.
Immunohistochemically, the adenocarcinoma component was reactive to an antibody against cytokeratin (AE1/AE3), and the sarcomatous component was reactive to antibodies against both cytokeratin and vimentin . Based on the classification of tumors by the World Health Organization (WHO) (5th edition, 2019), a pathological diagnosis of SCP was made . The MIB-1 labeling index, that was assessed for more than 500 cells at the hot spot, was 38% in the adenocarcinoma component and 11% in the sarcomatous component . The immunohistochemical expression of programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) was not observed in the adenocarcinoma and sarcomatous components (data not shown).
The transition feature observed between the adenocarcinoma component and the sarcomatous component indicated the occurrence of EMT. To further clarify this, an immunohistochemical analysis was performed to examine the expression of pSmad2/3, Snail, and fibronectin. Within the tissue section, the expression of these molecules was separately evaluated in the adenocarcinoma component, the sarcomatous component, and the transition zone. As shown in Fig. , the expression of pSmad2/3 was observed in the nuclei of both the adenocarcinoma and the sarcomatous components, whereas Snail and fibronectin were preferentially expressed in the sarcomatous component.
A total of forty-four lymph nodes were resected, and histological examination showed the presence of carcinoma cells of the sarcomatous component in three lymph nodes around the tumor, where they were affected by the direct invasion into the lymph nodes, not by the metastasis via the lymphatic vessels. The final clinical stage was T3N1M0, stage IIB according to the UICC TNM staging system.
Following the operation, the patient completed a 6-month course of adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine and was then followed up with CT. At 10 years after the operation, he is alive with no recurrence and treated with insulin for diabetes.