A 32-year-old generally healthy male patient with no history of eye disease nor significant family history presented with a complaint of floaters in his right eye for 3 months with preserved visual acuity and −0.50 refraction in both eyes. Upon examination, the anterior segment in both eyes and the left fundus were within normal limits. Dilated fundus evaluation of the right eye revealed telangiectasia of the retinal vessels, with subretinal exudation in the superonasal quadrant, not involving the macula, as shown in . At this point, the patient was diagnosed with Coats disease stage 2A according to the Shields classification, supported by the presence of telangiectasia and extrafoveal exudation.
After thoughtful consideration of our patient’s initial presentation, it was decided to follow up closely with our patient; this decision was made per recommendations from the Shields guidelines established by Sen et al. , stating that patients with little or no exudation not threatening the vision can be followed up closely, and treatments such as photocoagulation can be initiated upon progression. In the following month, our patient developed exudative RD in the superonasal quadrant. Consequently, his staging went up from 2A to 3A1, signifying that an intervention should be done to stabilize the retina and prevent further RD to preserve the patient’s vision. The area of the retinal lesion was initially treated with cryotherapy and bevacizumab injections, and close follow-ups were scheduled. Three weeks later, the vision deteriorated to 20/200 BCVA, and the exudative RD progressed toward the macula, accompanied by a new traction on the superonasal region of the retina. In a meticulous examination with a scleral depression, we saw two holes near the traction area. We realized that we were facing a complex case of severe exudative RD accompanied by retinal traction and two retinal holes. Dilated fundus evaluation in LE showed telangiectasia of the retinal vessels with subretinal exudation in the superonasal quadrants and the presence of subretinal fluid in the superior area extending into the fovea. There was also the presence of fibrosis with traction on the superonasal part with two holes under it around the 11 o’clock position.
Consequently, the patient underwent a scleral buckle with 360° broader bands (e.g., 42 band, 4 mm width). A radial element was cut from the band and placed under the band on the superior nasal quadrant to support the tractional RD. A pars plana vitrectomy with membrane peeling was combined with the scleral buckle to alleviate the traction and allow the retina to reattach. Silicon oil tamponade was then performed to stabilize the retina, and the patient received one injection of bevacizumab post-vitrectomy to address the retinal exudation.
One week post-vitrectomy, his visual acuity improved in the affected eye from 20/200 BCVA to 20/60 BCVA with a refraction of +4.00 + 0.50cyl@85 due to the combination of silicone oil tamponade and scleral buckle. The recovery was uneventful following the surgery. Fundus imaging 1 week post-operation showed that the retina is attached with the presence of residual exudation in the superonasal quadrant, and OCT imaging illustrated that the fovea was successfully reattached, also showing the residual subretinal fluid on the temporal side . In the following months, the patient received bevacizumab injections every 8 weeks since exudation was still present and leaking in the pathological area was suspected. One month following the initial bevacizumab injection, the retina was seen as entirely flat, the bleeding was almost completely absorbed, and no residual subretinal fluid remained in the macula. Finally, at the 6-month post-vitrectomy follow-up, the retina was totally flattened, showing no signs of traction and exudative RD, as seen in , and his vision improved to 20/30 BCVA with a refraction of +4.00 + 0.50cyl@85. The silicon oil tamponade is still present in the vitreous chamber.