A 25-year-old male with a history of celiac disease underwent heart transplantation at the Sahlgrenska University Hospital in 2011 due to giant cell myocarditis. He was placed on an immunosuppressive regimen comprised of tacrolimus, MMF, and prednisolone. Rejection surveillance with endomyocardial biopsies was performed according to a protocol during the first year and, thereafter, only on indication. During the first 3 post-transplant years the patient developed several treatment-requiring episodes of acute cellular rejections, but this subsided when the immunosuppressive maintenance protocol was intensified with everolimus. In 2013, a routine electrocardiogram revealed atrioventricular (AV) block III and the patient received a pacemaker. Over the following years, there were no further significant complications and graft function remained essentially intact.
In the beginning of May 2017, the patient developed a fever without any focal symptoms. After a week at home without improvement, he was admitted to the local infection clinic and underwent extensive screening for potential infectious causes. Laboratory tests showed an extensive inflammatory reaction, but screening for a wide array of viral causes with real-time PCR, as well as bacterial cultures, were negative. Electrocardiogram from May 2017 revealed a biological sinus tachycardia with a rate of 108 and supraventricular extrasystoles. Further, a QRS morphology consistent with right bundle branch block (RBBB) and left anterior fascicular block (LAFB), and high QRS amplitudes in the limb leads indicating left ventricular hypertrophy. Initial chest X-rays were unremarkable, and an abdominal ultrasound showed no signs of organomegaly. Serum concentrations of immunosuppressive drugs were adequate. In the absence of an apparent infectious cause, intravenous hydrocortisone was added to the treatment to counteract the inflammation.
Due to the presence of pancytopenia [Hb 97 g/L (134–170), WBC 2.1 × 109/L, platelet count 139 × 109/L (145–348)], elevated ferritin levels [1378 µg/L (30–400)], hypertriglyceridaemia [4.1 mmol/L (0.45–2.6)] and decreased fibrinogen [1.37 g/L (1.8–3.8)], also HLH was considered a differential diagnosis at this early stage. However, since a bone marrow biopsy showed no obvious signs of haemophagocytosis the investigative focus shifted towards other possible explanations. Empiric treatment with wide spectrum antibiotics (cefotaxime) was initiated. Despite the current treatment, the patient’s condition continued to deteriorate. Due to worsening heart and renal function the patient was transferred to the local cardiology clinic, and owing to a growing suspicion of an acute allograft rejection, he was transported to the Sahlgrenska University Hospital for further evaluation and treatment.
At the Sahlgrenska hospital, echocardiography showed impaired systolic graft function (ejection fraction = 35%) but myocardial biopsies showed no signs of rejection. Persisting pancytopenia and further elevation of ferritin and triglycerides once again highlighted HLH. A second bone marrow sample still revealed no signs of haemophagocytosis, but the levels of soluble IL-2 where clearly elevated [6000 U/mL (45–1100)], which was considered confirmative of HLH. Due to respiratory deterioration the patient was transferred to the cardiothoracic intensive care unit and received mechanical ventilation. He was treated with intravenous betamethasone and human immunoglobulin (KIOVIG). Herpes simplex (HSV) 1 virus was detected with PCR analyses of serum (log 2.48) and treatment with acyclovir was added. At this stage, the patient exhibited severe deterioration with the development of pulmonary oedema and circulatory shock. He was placed in veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), but a progressive multiorgan failure could not be reversed and the patient died 2 weeks after the initial onset of symptoms.