A 63-year-old, right-handed Hispanic man was brought to the emergency room with the complaint of abnormal movements of right arm and right leg for about 6 weeks. The patient initially developed intermittent twitches in the right shoulder and arm as noticed by his daughter, which the patient was unaware of. Two weeks later, he was briefly admitted to an outside hospital for dizziness, dehydration, and high serum glucose levels up to 1,100 mg/dL. He was diagnosed to have DM and was started on subcutaneous insulin regimen. After 6 days of discharge from the hospital, he experienced worsening of involuntary movements which now involved whole right upper extremity and progressed in 2 weeks to right leg and foot. These movements were interfering with his daily activities prompting him to come to our hospital. He did not have abnormal behavior, headache, and weakness on any side or sensory disturbances. Patient was never treated with antipsychotic, antiemetic, or herbal medications. Family history was unremarkable. He was a reformed smoker and alcoholic.
On examination, he was alert, awake, and oriented. Blood pressure was 148/60 mmHg, and heart rate was 64/min. Cranial nerve examination was normal. Motor examination revealed normal strength, but hypotonia, hyporeflexia, and rapid, jerky, continuous non-stereotyped involuntary choreiform movements involving right upper and lower extremities. Plantar reflex was flexor bilaterally. The sensations were intact. He could not walk without support due to abnormal movements in right leg and foot.
Complete blood count, liver, and renal function tests were normal. His serum glucose was 328 mg/dL, HbA1C level 9.9%, and serum ketones were negative. Urine toxicology, serum alcohol, as well as TSH and HIV were unremarkable. CT brain revealed a 1×1.7 cm area of subtle increased density in left lentiform nucleus with surrounding decreased attenuation. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain with gadolinium contrast showed non-enhancing hyper intense lesions in bilateral lentiform and caudate nuclei on T1W images and old stable infarcts .
Despite adequate glycemic control using insulin, he continued to have HC and responded partially to haloperidol. At 3-month follow-up, the patient had persistent but mild choreiform movements.