An 87-year-old female with a past medical history significant for hypertension and Alzheimer’s dementia presented to the emergency department (ED) with her daughter, endorsing throat pain that began upon awakening in the morning. The patient’s daughter reported that her mother had consumed a regular meal without difficulty the night prior. The patient also reportedly had consumed caustic substances in the past including cleaning supplies, confusing them for water/juice. According to the patient and her family, she had not had any upper respiratory infection symptoms such as cough and fever. The patient also specifically denied chest pain, shortness of breath, abdominal pain, and vomiting. She was hemodynamically stable and afebrile on presentation including blood pressure of 138/87 millimeters of mercury and heart rate of 82 beats per minute with an oxygen saturation of 98% on room air. On physical examination, airway was patent with no erythema or swelling of the oropharynx, no pulse deficits in the extremities, lymphadenopathy, or neurological deficits with the exception of baseline orientation to self only.
Laboratory work-up was significant for elevation in serial troponin from 0.048 to 0.086 nanograms/milliliter (ng/mL) (reference range: 0.000–0.034 ng/mL). Initial electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus bradycardia at a rate of 43 beats per minute with T-wave inversions in leads I and aVL, more pronounced compared to prior studies. Chest radiograph revealed atherosclerotic calcifications of the aorta and mild blunting of the right costophrenic angle without widening of the mediastinum. There was less than 5 millimeters of separation of the intimal calcification from the outer aortic border, which was similar to findings in a previous radiograph .
Given the patient’s ECG changes and elevated troponin, admission for acute coronary syndrome work-up was pursued. Additionally, the history of previous caustic ingestions in the setting of severe dementia and presenting complaint of throat pain raised clinical suspicion for corrosive upper gastrointestinal tract injury. A CT soft tissue neck with contrast was obtained to evaluate for edema, stranding, stricture formation, and associated fistulous complications.
During evaluation, the patient became severely bradycardic, apneic, and eventually unresponsive. Resuscitation efforts were initiated and discontinued shortly thereafter, following clarification from the patient’s daughter of “Do Not Resuscitate/Do Not Intubate” code status. At the conclusion of the code, radiology called to inform of fluid in the superior mediastinum suggestive of aortic leak and contrast extending into the posterior wall of the proximal descending thoracic aorta suggestive of penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer .