Informed consent was obtained from the patient for inclusion in this case report.
A 63-year-old man was admitted to our clinic with fistula connected to the joint medially and below the patella. Primary cemented total knee arthroplasty (TKA) with a posterior-stabilized knee was performed for rheumatoid arthritis at an external hospital 9 years previously. One year after the primary TKA fistula opened and functioned for 8 years . In preoperative punctate Staphylococcus aureus was identified (106).
Knee radiography demonstrated massive bone lesion under the tibial component .
The American Knee Society Score (KSS) and Oxford Knee Score (OKS) were obtained upon admission to our clinic and at 48 months.
On admission, the KSS Clinical score was 55 points, KSS Functional score was 60 points, and OKS was 30 points.
Under general anesthesia, we explanted the prosthesis and after radical debridement and jet-lavage with 10 liters of antiseptic solution we evaluated size and shape of bone defects, range of motion, joint stability and patella tracking using revision knee trials. After we accomplished tibial component of a “spacer” out of polyethylene liner fixed on antibiotic loaded bone cement (ALBC) dowel armed by 6 mm threaded stainless-steel rod and femoral armed dowel . As soon as tibial component and femoral dowel cement polymerized and cooled to the room temperature, femoral dowel was introduced into femoral canal .
Tibial and femoral components of the spacer were implanted on ALBC separately (DePuy® SmartSet GMV Endurance + 2 g of Vancomycin and 1 g. of microsilver (BioGate Germany provided by Prof. R. Schnettler, Germany) per 40 g pack of cement).
Stem of a tibial component was implanted press-fit and metaphyseal part-cemented. We did not perform augmentation on the femoral side due to the minor femoral bone defects (AORI type F1) and optimal patellar tracking was achieved. Three cultures were obtained intraoperatively, and methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (MSSA) was identified in all of them. The joint was drained for 24 h postoperatively.
After spacer implantation for 2 weeks, the patient received two antibiotics intravenously: cefazolin 1 g three times a day and amikacin 500 mg twice a day, and later for 3 weeks, peroral Amoxicillin + clavulanic acid 1000 mg twice a day.
At 3 months after the spacer implantation patient rejected proposed knee reimplantation.
At the last follow-up (at 52 months) knee radiography revealed the proper components and limb alignment.
At the last follow-up the patient had no clinical or laboratory signs of PJI (no pain or laboratory signs of infection), full range of motion 0°/0°/125° . The KSS showed improvements in clinical scores of up to 90 points and functional scores of up to 85 points and up to 18 points in the OKS. After 52 months , radiography showed no change at the cement/bone interface, no plastic deformation of the bone cement. Patient was employed and physically active.