A 16-year-old boy was presented to a peripheral hospital after waking up with left-sided weakness and facial droop. There was no dysphasia or dysarthria. He had a history of a non-productive cough managed without medications. He takes no medications, illicit drugs, or alcohol and had no known allergies. He was fully independent, performing well at school and was captain of his local soccer team.
Imaging with computed tomography (CT) angiography and CT of the brain showed an occluded right internal carotid artery extending to the right middle cerebral artery and a small infarct involving the posterior limb of the right internal capsule. He did not receive thrombolysis due to an uncertain time of symptom onset but transferred to a tertiary centre with endovascular clot retrieval (ECR) capabilities. At our facility the patient was alert, answering questions and following commands. His blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg, heart rate was 100 b.p.m., respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 95% on room air. On cardiovascular examination, his jugular venous pressure was elevated to 7 cm with an audible S3 but no appreciable murmurs. Air entry was mildly reduced in the left lower zone without inspiratory crackles but he had mild pitting oedema in the lower limbs to the mid shins. On neurological examination, his left upper and lower limbs had increased tone, reduced power (1−2/5), very brisk reflex responses (3+/5), and loss of pin prick sensation. In addition, he had a left facial droop involving his eye and lower half of his face. The remaining cranial nerve examination was normal. His National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 12.
Laboratory workup showed acute kidney injury with elevated creatinine [137 μmol/L (62–115 μmol/L)]; other blood results were within the normal limits. An electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia . Chest X-ray showed left lower-lobe collapse/consolidation and associated pleural effusion with cardiothoracic ratio of 0.76. He underwent successful ECR by the interventional neuroradiology team but unfortunately developed pulmonary oedema and cardiogenic shock requiring inotropic support and intubation. CT of the abdomen showed several infarcts involving both kidneys and the spleen and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain confirmed a hyper-intense signal within the right internal capsule consistent with acute infarction .
Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography (2D TTE) revealed biventricular cardiomyopathy with severe left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction and apical thrombi; valve function was normal with no evidence of mitral or tricuspid regurgitation detected. 3T cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging confirmed biventricular cardiomyopathy and multiple LV thrombi (largest measuring up to 14 mm); left ventricular end-diastolic volume index (LV EDVi) 270 mL/m2, right ventricular end-diastolic volume index (RV EDVi) 165 mL/m2, left ventricular ejection fraction 21%, and right ventricular ejection fraction 34%. The LV had some features of non-compaction with mildly diffuse hyper-trabeculation as well as evidence of scar with extensive late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) in the mid-anterolateral and inferolateral walls with a mid-myocardial distribution . He had short runs of non-sustained ventricular tachycardia (6–10 beats) but no long-sustained arrhythmias.
On investigation of family history, his mother was adopted and died at 42 years of age from pancreatic cancer and his father had normal cardiac function on 2D TTE. However, an estranged maternal uncle was diagnosed with a dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) requiring cardiac transplantation at 17 years of age; genetic testing identified an X-linked dystrophin gene mutation. Subsequent genetic testing in our patient also confirmed the same dystrophin gene mutation c.31+G>T (IVS1G>T).
The patient was commenced on carvedilol 6.25 mg twice daily, frusemide 40 mg twice daily, irbesartan 75 mg daily, spirinolactone 12.5 mg daily, and intravenous heparin as a bridge to warfarin. Following a 4-week period of stroke convalescence, the patient had dramatic improvement in neurological function with normal facial symmetry and normal left-sided tone, power (5/5) and reflexes (2+/5). He was referred to the transplant unit and underwent successful cardiac transplantation.