A 42-year-old man presented with persistent pain, redness, watering and diminution of vision in the right eye for three weeks. Referring ophthalmologist performed pterygium surgery using bare sclera technique and patient was fine for four weeks and then developed symptoms. The referring ophthalmologist treated the patient with topical antibiotic and steroid for three weeks. Observing no response, the patient was referred to. No antimetabolites or postoperative beta radiation were used in this case. The operating surgeon had used heat cautery on the sclera. Patient did not reveal any history suggestive of systemic autoimmune disorder. At the time of presentation, his visual acuity was 4/60 in the right eye and 6/6 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure in the left eye was 16 mmHg. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy revealed large area of corneal perforation (3.53.5 mm) and extensive corneo-limbo-scleral necrosis [Figure 1]. The left eye did not reveal any abnormality.
The material obtained on corneal scrapings were subjected to the detailed microbiological tests. Direct microscopy and cultures of the scraping material did not reveal any bacterial or fungal pathogen. Hematological investigations including complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, rheumatoid factor, anti-nuclear antibody, ant-DNA antibodies, liver function tests, renal function tests, C-reactive protein and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies were normal. Serology markers of human immunodeficiency virus 1 and 2, varicella-zoster virus, hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis C and venereal disease research laboratory test were non-reactive. Chest radiography and the Montoux test were normal.
Retrocorneal scleral patch augmented cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive application was done under peribulbar anesthesia, in the operating room using surgical microscope. The right eye was prepared and draped aseptically. The ocular surface was exposed using Barraquer eye speculum. The area of corneo-limbo-scleral ulceration was cleaned and the debris was removed. The size of the corneal perforation was measured with Castroviejo calipers. The corneal perforation measured 3.53.5 mm [Figure 2a]. The donor sclera was obtained from eyes not suitable for optical PKP. Donor sclera obtained from the local eye bank and stored in pure glycerin was taken out and placed in the normal saline for 15 min. The sclera was placed in the solution containing amikacin sulphate 2% (Alfakim 500 mg/2 ml Ranbaxy India) and vancomycin hydrochloride 5% (Vanking 500 mg/vial Neon Laboratories India) for 5 min. The sclera was thinned to one-third of its thickness and a patch (4.54.5 mm) was punched out with skin biopsy punch [Figure 2b]. The scleral patch was thinned to one-third of its thickness with crescent knife. The adhesions between the iris and the margin of corneal perforation were lysed. A small iridotomy was performed. The scleral patch was placed on the iris, beneath the corneal perforation [Figure 2c]. The scleral patch and the surrounding cornea surface were dried with Weck-cel ophthalmic sponge. Isoamyl 2-cyanoacrylate (Amcrylate; Concord Drugs Ltd, Hayathnagar, Andhara Pradesh, India) was drawn into a 2 ml disposable syringe with a 26 gauge needle. The minimal amount of cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive (Amcrylate; Concord Drugs Ltd, Hayathnagar, Andhara Pradesh India) was applied on the retrocorneal sclera patch and margin of the corneal perforation [Figure 2d]. The cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive was allowed to polymerize [Figure 2e]. An air bubble was placed in the anterior chamber. The ulcerating limbus and the sclera were covered with double-layered amniotic membrane graft. Amniotic membrane graft was sutured with Vicryl 8 `0' suture. A bandage contact lens was placed [Figure 2f].
The patient was put on topical moxifloxacin 0.5% (Vigamox; Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, TX) four times a day, atropine sulfate 1% (Atropine; Jawa Pvt. Ltd., Gurgaon, Haryana, India) three times a day, and carboxymethylcellulose 1% (Refresh Liquigel; Allergan, Pithampur, Madhya Pradesh, India) four times a day. After 72 hr, topical prednisolone 1% (Allergan Ltd, West-port, Co, Mayo, Ireland) four times a day was added. The patient was given intravenous methylprednisolone (1 gr) daily for three days followed by oral prednisolone 60 mg daily for two weeks and tapered over six weeks.
At 72 hr, the scleral patch, cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive plug, and double layered amniotic membrane graft were in place [Figure 3a]. At two weeks, corneal perforation was sealed and scleral necrosis started healing [Figure 3b]. At eight weeks' follow-up, cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive plug became lose and the scleral patch developed vascularization. The cyanoacrylate tissue adhesive plug was carefully separated from the underlying sclera patch and removed. At 12 weeks, the corneal perforation healed and the patient developed pseudo-pterygium. At 20 weeks, patient was diagnosed as suffering from intumescent cataract. Cataract surgery was performed. He was advised excision of the pseudo-pterygium but was reluctant [Figure 3c]. During the 18 months' follow-up, patient did not develop any recurrence, the scleral patch remained in place and the patient had pseudo-pterygium [Figure 3d].