An 88-year-old male presented to our hospital with acute confusion. He had a 1-week history of increasing confusion prior to this presentation, as well as increasing dyspnoea. On examination he was pyrexial at 37.7°C, with a pansystolic murmur on auscultation, pitting oedema to his mid-shins bilaterally and signs of chronic venous insufficiency. He had no peripheral stigmata of IE or other signs of infection. His history was significant for a MitraClip operation performed 11 weeks prior to the current presentation for severe mitral regurgitation (MR). Post-MitraClip implantation the patient had received 24 h of intravenous (IV) Cefazolin. Other history included stenting to the left anterior descending artery, chronic kidney disease (creatinine 187.2 mg/L, normal range < 3.0 mg/L), cognitive impairment, and previous back surgery. Admission medications included Pantoprazole, Aspirin, Clopidogrel, Pregabalin, Furosemide, Ramipril, Macuvision, and Chlorvescent. A septic screen was performed including blood and urine cultures and he received IV Gentamicin and Flucloxacillin to cover for sepsis of unknown origin. His c-reactive protein was significantly elevated at 187.2 mg/L (normal range < 5), with an initial normal white cell count. A computed tomography (CT) chest was performed which was consistent with interstitial lung disease. The following day he went into new atrial fibrillation with rapid ventricular response. Blood cultures showed Gram-positive cocci (enterococcus faecalis), sensitive to Ampicillin, Amoxicillin, and Vancomycin. The urine culture was negative, and a magnetic resonance imaging of the brain demonstrated global atrophy and microvascular change, without evidence of septic foci.
His antibiotic regime was changed to IV Ampicillin 2 g 4 hourly. He underwent a CT abdomen pelvis which did not identify a source for enterococcus faecalis bacteraemia. Considering his MitraClip, and with no other source of bacteraemia identified, he underwent a transthoracic echocardiogram which did not identify any conclusive vegetations. He subsequently underwent a transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) which confirmed the presence of a 4 mm × 2 mm echodensity on atrial side of the prolapsing posterior mitral valve leaflet, concerning for a vegetation . Other findings included moderate mitral stenosis, persistent mild-moderate mitral regurgitation (Video 1), and likely rupture chordae. Differentials for this lesion included thrombus, fibrin, redundant leaflet tissue, or malignancy. However, these did not fit the clinical picture of an enterococcus faecalis sepsis of unknown source and recent MitraClip procedure.
Due to his age and the presence of a concurrent delirium on the background of underlying cognitive impairment, he was deemed unsuitable for surgical mitral valve replacement. His treatment plan was for 6 weeks of IV antibiotics (Ampicillin 2 g 4 hourly as well as Ceftriaxone for synergistic therapy), followed by lifelong oral amoxicillin. After 2 weeks on IV therapy, he was changed from Ampicillin to Benzylpenicillin to assist with the logistics of administration on discharge. A follow-up TOE was performed ∼3 weeks into treatment which showed an increase in vegetation size to ∼1 cm, compared to a previous 4 mm. In discussion with the infectious disease team, this was thought secondary to the development of a mature biofilm. At that point he was switched back from Benzylpenicillin to Ampicillin, with synergistic Ceftriaxone. He also received 1 week of Metronidazole to cover for a presumed aspiration pneumonia 3 weeks after presentation. After completing 6 weeks of IV, a repeat TOE showed a reduction in size of the vegetation to 5 mm × 2 mm, with a mobile 8 mm strand on the atrial side of the mitral valve. He was discharged on lifelong oral Amoxicillin 1 g 6 hourly and was to be followed up by a cardiologist after 4 weeks. The patient did not attend for follow-up at 4 weeks and their status is unknown at this time.