A 32-year old man was admitted to a Danish hospital due to right sided flank pain of four days duration. He had no confirmed medical diagnoses, but had previously been tested for Sarcoidosis, Polycythemia vera, stroke and acute coronary syndrome. He also had a history of former steroid-use. The available medical records did not state his vaccination status or previous childhood infections. At hospitalization, he presented with intermittent right sided flank pain, turning into constant pain of VAS 7-8 and radiating to the right side groin. Additional symptoms were nausea, chills, and observation of blood in the urine. Physical examination revealed right sided abdominal and renal pain and a temperature of 38.0 degrees Celsius. His urine tested positive for leucocytes, erythrocytes, nitrite and protein 1 g/L and blood samples showed normal urate levels, elevated ionized calcium levels 1.56 mmol/L, creatinine 122 µmol/L, leukocytosis of 15.9 x 109 /L and CRP 6.4 mg/L increasing to 172 mg/L the next day. CT scan showed bilateral nephrolithiasis as well as right side ureterolithiasis causing obstruction Fig. . Direct microscopy on three out of three blood culture bottles revealed small gram-negative pleomorphic rods within 24 hours of incubation. Mass spectrometry (Bruker Daltonics using MBT Compass software version 4.1 that contains 6903 MSP´s) identified the strain as H. influenzae with a score of 2.24. Microbiology testing of urine routinely cultured on a 5% blood agar plate and a UTI chrome agar plate showed 105 growth of H. influenzae confirmed by MALDI-TOF MS (score of 2.15). The strain was found to be a non-capsulated biotype II, susceptible to all antibiotics tested by disc diffusion: penicillin (1 unit, zone diameter: blood = 15 mm, urine = 15 mm), amoxicillin-clavulanate (3 µg), ampicillin (10 µg), ciprofloxacin (5 µg, zone diameter: blood = 35 mm, urine = 41 mm), cefuroxime (30 µg) and piperacillin-tazobactam (36 µg) using EUCAST disc diffusion recommendations. After microbiology samples had been collected, the patient started antibiotic treatment with intravenous ampicillin 1 g x 4 daily and a right sided JJ ureteric stent was surgically inserted. The patient received two doses of ampicillin, but due to subjective discomfort, treatment was changed to cefuroxime 1500 mg x 3 daily. After three days, the patient was discharged with 5 days of peroral ciprofloxacin 500 mg x 2 and a scheduled ambulant stone-removal surgery.