A 44-year-old female was admitted to our hospital due to epigastric pain with a duration of 6 months. There was no obvious cause of the paroxysmal dull abdominal pain when the pain was intense, radiating to the back. There was no history of loss of appetite, postprandial vomiting or gastrointestinal bleeding. Proton pump inhibitors were started but did not relieve the symptoms. Physical examination and her routine laboratory investigations were unremarkable. Computed tomography (CT) identified a 5.8 * 3.9 cm epigastric mass that appeared to be a heterogeneous cystic and solid submucosal tumor arising from the thick posterior wall of the antrum proximal to the pylorus . Enhanced CT displayed irregular mixed cystic and solid lesions with thick walls and intracystic fluid. In the arterial phase, the solid part was unevenly enhanced, and the thick wall of cystic cavity was obviously enhanced until the venous phase . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a lesion elevated from the submucosa that was located from the posterior wall of the gastric antrum to the gastric angle with normal overlying mucosa . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) noted a smooth 5.5 cm + 3.8 cm mixed cystic and solid anechoic lesion in the submucosal layer, partially in the muscularis propria and serosa ; the cystic wall became thicker when approaching the pylorus , with features suggestive of lymphangioma. Because of the size, the unknown pathology, and its involvement of the antrum whereby an attempt at local resection would have markedly narrowed the antrum, a decision was made to perform a distal gastrectomy. Clear transparent fluid was found in this cystic mass when opened in the pathology laboratory.
Histopathologic examination of the resected mass showed aberrant pancreatic tissues, including numerous acini, few ducts and islet cells involving the submucosa, muscularis propria and serosa; furthermore, the cysts were lined with a single layer of short columnar or cubic serous epithelia with clear cytoplasm, and all of these histological features supported a final diagnosis of EP with serous oligocystic adenoma (SOA) . The postoperative course was uneventful, and she has been asymptomatic with no recurrence for 18 months to date.