A 79-year-old, hypertensive, diabetic, male patient with a thoracic aortic aneurysm and aortic valve stenosis was scheduled for total aortic arch replacement and simultaneous aortic valve replacement. Following sternal entry, CPB was established by right axillary and femoral arterial cannulation with bicaval cannulation. After aortic cross-clamping, myocardial protection was achieved with antegrade, retrograde, and selective cold blood cardioplegia without any technical problem. The aortic valve was replaced with a 21-mm bioprosthesis (Inspiris Resilia, Edwards Life Sciences, Irvine, CA). Subsequent total aortic arch replacement was performed under antegrade selective cerebral perfusion with moderate hypothermic circulatory arrest. After aortic declamping, a small point of oozing hemorrhage was identified on the epicardial surface of the right ventricular outflow tract. The oozing was controlled by hemostatic agent application, followed by the reconstruction of the arch vessels. The surgical maneuver was completed without any technical difficulty; however, we noticed the progressively expanding hematoma at the right ventricular surface to the size of a Japanese rice ball measuring 50 × 50 mm . The hematoma was hard, and the epicardial surface was dark red and notably swollen with multiple oozing ruptures. There was no evidence of ST-T changes on electrocardiogram. No cardiac wall motion abnormalities were observed on transesophageal echocardiography. Because of the rapid growth of the hematoma, we decided that early discontinuation of CPB and protamine administration should be mandatory. After termination of CPB, followed by the administration of protamine and fresh frozen plasma/platelet transfusion, manual compression with hemostatic agents such as Surgicel (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) and Tachosil (CSL Behring, Tokyo, Japan) were applied for 15 min. Thereafter, hemostasis was achieved on the epicardial surface, and the hematoma did not expand further without hemodynamic deterioration. The patient showed uneventful postoperative course. Postoperative computed tomography showed hematoma absorption, and transthoracic echocardiography revealed normal ventricular function of both the right and left ventricles. He is doing well 1 year after surgery.