A 69-year-old man was admitted to our hospital complaining of appetite loss, constipation, epigastric dull pain, and jaundice. His past medical history was unremarkable. He denied prior liver disease or gastrointestinal surgery. His family history was negative for liver disease and cancer. On physical examination, his height and body weight were 163.0 cm and 48.0 kg, respectively. Blood pressure was 147/95 mmHg, and body temperature was 36.8 °C. Jaundice was detected in the palpebral conjunctiva and the skin, and he had slightly tenderness on his upper abdomen. No other abnormal findings were observed. The laboratory data were as follows: serum aspartate aminotransferase, 389 IU/l (reference range, 227–416); alanine aminotransferase, 740 IU/l (227–416); γ-glutamyl transferase, 1824 IU/l (227–416); lactate dehydrogenase, 451 IU/1 (227–416); total bilirubin, 10.28 mg/dl (0.3–1.2); direct bilirubin, 6.52 mg/dl (0.05–0.3); fasting blood sugar, 275 mg/dl (70–110); hemoglobin A1c, 8.2% (4.6–6.2); amylase, 170 IU/1 (50–158); and lipase, 260 IU/1 (0–129). All other laboratory data were within normal limits. The tumor marker values were as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), 1.2 ng/ml (reference range, < 5.9 ng/ml); carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), 336.6 U/ml (< 37 U/ml); DUPAN-2, 243 U/ml (< 150 U/ml); SLX, 18.8 U/ml (< 38 U/ml). Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance image (MRI) revealed a pancreatic head tumor that measured 5 cm. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a slight enhancement with a poor enhanced spot in the tumor . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed a dilation of the main pancreatic duct from the body to the tail of the pancreas and luminal narrowing of the lower common bile duct . On the day following hospitalization, endoscopic sphincterotomy and endoscopic retrograde biliary drainage with a 7-Fr, 7 cm pigtail plastic stent were performed. At 4 weeks following the procedures, all tumor markers (CEA, CA19-9, DUPAN-2, and SLX) were within the normal range. CT revealed that the size of the pancreas head increased to 6.5 × 5.2 × 4.5 cm, but there was no sign of invasion in the main blood vessels, remote transition, peritoneal metastasis, or lymph node metastasis.
The patient was diagnosed with pancreatic head cancer, and a pancreatoduodenectomy reconstructed by Child’s procedure with resection of regional lymph nodes was performed. Neither liver metastasis nor peritoneal metastasis was observed, and lymph node metastasis was not readily identified intraoperatively.
The resected specimen clearly showed a large tumor located in the pancreatic head . The cut surface of the tumor was gray-white in color, measuring 7.0 cm in diameter at the widest point. It showed expansive growth and invaded the distal bile duct in the pancreatic head.
Histologically, the tumor consisted of an admixture of two different components: ACC and DAC . The ACC component was predominant and accounted for more than 90% of the entire tumor. In the ACC component, the tumor showed acinar, cribriform, or solid patterns of growth with no or little fibrous stroma, and necrotic tendency was focally observed. In the DAC component, the tumor showed a glandular growth pattern with desmoplastic fibrous stroma associated with inflammation, and mucin production was detected by staining with Alcian blue pH 2.5 . The focus of DAC was located at the periphery of the tumor, and histological transition was observed between the components of ACC and DAC. The foci of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) were not observed in the pancreatic ducts. Nodal metastasis was found in one of 35 dissected lymph nodes.
Immunohistochemical analysis was performed using primary antibodies listed in Table . The results of immunostaining as well as mucin staining were graded as follows: − (negative), + (focally or weakly positive), and ++ (diffusely positive). On immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells of ACC showed diffuse positivity for acinar cell markers, trypsin, and BCL10 and negativity for the ductal marker MUC1 . In contrast, the tumor cells of DAC were positive for MUC1 and p53, and focal weak positivity for trypsin was also observed. The expression of BCL10 was not observed, and the expression of p16 and Smad4 was lost in the DAC component. These results confirmed the histological diagnosis of ACC and DAC. The transitional zone of ACC and DAC displayed equivocal immunohistochemical results for these markers. The metastatic tumor in the lymph node showed glandular structure with positive immunoreactivity for MUC1, indicating DAC origin. The analysis of KRAS mutations was conducted in the laboratory of a private contracting company (BML, Inc.; Tokyo, Japan), and the results showed that KRAS mutations at codons 12 and 13 were not observed in either component of ACC or DAC.
The World Health Organization (WHO) categorizes mixed acinar–ductal carcinoma as a subtype of ACC, and it is defined as having > 30% of each line differentiation . In this case, since the DAC component accounted for less than 10% of the tumor, the tumor was pathologically diagnosed as ACC with a DAC component of the pancreas. The TNM classification according to UICC was conclusive in T2, N1, M0, and stage II B.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The patient was treated with adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 for 1 year. No evidence of recurrence or metastasis was observed after 9 years of follow-up.