A 29-year-old, Caucasian, male patient, born to nonconsanguineous parents, was referred for evaluation due to suspicion of being affected by an LSD as was his older brother in 1994, who presented a similar phenotype and has been investigated for MPS. The pregnancies were uneventful, and all prenatal evaluations were reported as normal. There was no exposure to teratogenic agents during pregnancy.
During infancy and childhood, there were no reports of delays in achieving motor skills. As the patient presented phenotypic traces of an LSD and his brother was diagnosed with MPS VI, he was also subjected to biochemical investigation for MPS and skeletal X-rays.
He received the confirmatory diagnosis of MPS VI at the age of 2.5 years (September 1994). Genotyping indicated compound heterozygosity for a missense mutation (p.R315Q9) and a frameshift mutation (c.1534del23) in the ARSB gene. As the phenotypic traces of MPS continued to progressively evolve, the patient was followed-up by a multidisciplinary team of healthcare specialists. The older brother died in 1995, at the age of 6 years, due to MPS-associated respiratory complications.
During clinical follow-up visits, the patient was physically examined to evaluate growth (weight, height, and cephalic perimeters), pulmonary and cardiac auscultation, mobility and gait, and organomegaly. The clinical progression of the disease was characterized by growth deficiency, joint contractures, and coarse facial features. In addition, abnormalities in cardiac valves, and conductive hearing loss and, due to chronic cranial hypertension, the patient developed bilateral optic atrophy and irreversible vision loss.
In October 2003, the patient was enrolled in a phase III clinical trial with ERT using a recombinant arylsulfatase B (galsulfase, Naglazyme, BioMarin Pharmaceuticals Inc., USA), and continued to receive weekly infusions of galsulfase, 1.0 mg/kg, when the study was completed.
In more than 15 years of ERT, the patient’s clinical condition was kept stable, with improvement of some parameters, such as hearing. Unfortunately, as his blindness was a consequence of optic nerve atrophy due to hydrocephalus, ERT failed to revert it.
At the age of 28 years, the patient displayed height below the third percentile, weight between the 75th and 90th percentiles, cephalic perimeter between the 50th and 95th percentiles, facial coarseness, depressed nasal bridge, thick lips, muscular contracture and joint stiffness, clawed hands, thick skull hair, umbilical hernia, hepatosplenomegaly, osteotendinous reflexes in upper and lower limbs grade 3, exhaustible clonus in lower limbs, and cutaneous-plantar reflex in extension.
Regarding the complementary exams, a radiographic study showed signs of dysostosis multiplex. Echocardiogram revealed a thickened mitral valve and electromyography showed the presence of multiple sites of nerve compression compatible with carpal tunnel syndrome. Finally, audiometry revealed conductive hearing loss.
Despite the important manifestations of the disease, the patient graduated in law, works regularly, and was taking classes in the business school, showing no intellectual deficit, as is expected in MPS VI. His survival is much longer compared with his untreated affected sibling and also to historical untreated controls .