The patient was a 53 year old lady, who reached menopause 3 years ago, with a history of 2 vaginal deliveries. She had severe pelvic pain and abnormal uterine bleeding and underwent diagnostic curettage before visiting us. The report was normal with atrophic endometrium. Sonographic evaluation revealed a lobulated hypoechoic mass, 67×46×64 mm in size, from posterior uterine wall towards cervix. Gynaecologic evaluation revealed a mass in left side of uterus and MRI report was suggestive of a uterine sarcoma.
The patient underwent bilateral oophorectomy and hysterectomy. A 5 mm and a 12 mm trocar were used to enter abdominal cavity. A mass behind cervix and frozen pelvis were observed. An enlarged uterine with a bulging cervix, adhesion of ovaries to pelvic floor, and intestinal adhesion to cervix and left adnexa were observed. Uterine with the mass in cervix was separated intactly and removed from vagina (manipulator was not used due to probability of malignancy). The sample was sent to frozen section and in frozen section, using cryotomy and touch smear, a tumor consisting of monomorphic cells with moderate atypia and necrosis sites was observed. Mesenchymal tumor in favor of cervical sarcoma was reported. Left parametrium was thoroughly involved compressing left urethra. Right parametrium had lower involvement. Bilateral double J was inserted. The mass had sarcomatous pattern. Left parametrium was completely removed. An omental biopsy was performed. Then lymph nodes of both obturator and iliac region, left and right sides, were removed completely. An old thrombotic vein in pelvic floor and left side was observed and was not touched due to its creation of thrombosis in her last pregnancy. Samples were sent to pathology laboratory for cytological and immunohistochemistry evaluation.
In pathologic sample, a round soft mass in uterus wall, 7 cm in diameter, was observed and cervical mucosa was normal. Tissue samples were fixed by formalin 10% and colored with hematoxylineosin. A tumor consisting of monomorphic cells in regular nests and hypervascular background including delicate microvasculature separating cellular nests was observed. In larger view, multidimensional cells with clear cytoplasm and same nucleus with low to moderate atypia were observed. Cells were around vessels. Cells were colored using immunohistochemistry with HMB45, vimentin, and Melan A makers. P63, S100, cytokeratin, desmin, h-caldesmon were negative and differential diagnosis for the patient was PEC-omas (–).
Pathology lab report revealed malignant PEC-oma without involvement of peritoneum, pelvis, parametriums, lymph nodes, and omentum. The patient was discharged after two days with a good general health and was referred to the radiotherapist. As there was no pelvic involvement, NEORAPA (antineoplastic agent) and Rapamune were prescribed for the patient. The patient is followed regularly.