A 75-year-old man had a history of left brainstem infarction due to atherosclerotic BA occlusion at the age of 67 years . At that time, conservative medical treatment was performed though direct surgery, and endovascular treatment was considered. He was discharged after a month, with moderate right hemiparesis and mild dysarthria. Eight years after BA occlusion, he was admitted to our hospital with sudden onset of right hemiparesis and dysarthria. His Glasgow coma scale score was 6, and computed tomography (CT) showed right cerebellar hematoma and subdural, subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), and intraventricular hemorrhage at the posterior cranial fossa [Figure and ]. His Hunt and Hess grade was grade III. Emergent ventricular drainage was performed for acute hydrocephalus.
One week after admission to our hospital, three-dimensional (3D) computed tomography angiography (CTA) and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed a 3.6-mm distal PICA saccular aneurysm at the cortical segment . He received treatment for meningitis, pneumonia, and a renal function disorder. Neck clipping was performed via a midline suboccipital approach in the prone position to prevent re-rupture 2 months after admission . Postoperative 3D CTA showed complete clipping of the aneurysm and no ischemic change, and his consciousness was better postoperatively than preoperatively.
A week after the neck clipping, brain scintigraphy showed cerebellar hemodynamic ischemia (right dominant side). Hemodynamic cerebral ischemia can be stratified into Stage I and II ischemia (Misery perfusion). According to vasodilatory and metabolic compensation for reduction of cerebral perfusion pressure, stage II ischemia is defined as a reduction of the resting cerebral blood flow (<34 mL/100 g/min), loss of vascular reserve (<10%), and elevation of the oxygen extraction fraction. Accordingly, in the Japan Extracranial-Intracranial Bypass Trial, the incidence of stroke recurrence was significantly lower in the surgically-treated group than in the medically-treated group.
Three months after the onset of subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), right STA-SCA bypass was performed via the right subtemporal approach in the “parkbench” position to prevent the occurrence of a hemodynamic stress-induced de novo aneurysm and recurrent bleeding . Postoperative DSA confirmed bypass patency supplying the bilateral SCA territory and showed bilateral posterior cerebral arteries via the posterior communicating artery . His postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged without neurological deficits. Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) performed 3 months after bypass surgery showed improvement in the cerebellar and occipital blood flow (left cerebellar hemisphere: Before, 23.4 and after, 25.4; right cerebellar hemisphere: Before, 25.2 and after, 29.0; left occipital lobe: Before, 33.2 and after, 38.1; right occipital lobe: Before, 35.4 and after, 37.9 mL/100 g/min) . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 11 months after bypass surgery revealed no de novo aneurysm.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this report.