A 55-year-old Asian woman with pneumonia was admitted to the hematology department of a general hospital in January 2016. Upon examination, leukopenia (0.5 × 103/µL), anemia (hemoglobin, 7.0 g/dL), thrombocytopenia (133 × 103/µL), and splenomegaly were observed. From the first visit, the patient showed symptoms of periodontitis that made oral intake difficult and thus resulted in anemia. Antimicrobial therapy was administered to the patient, and she also had pneumonia; however, a definitive diagnosis that could explain the pancytopenia and giant splenomegaly had not been established. The patient had been receiving regular dental care from her family dentist before she developed pancytopenia. The patient and her family confirmed the patient’s rapidly worsening periodontal disease over the year. We then obtained her previous panoramic radiographs, taken approximately 1 year and 5 months prior to referral. These radiographs revealed alveolar bone resorption in the maxillary and mandibular molar regions with the maximum resorption extending to half of the root’s length . A panoramic radiograph taken at our facility showed extensive and rapidly progressing alveolar bone resorption extending to the root apex and attachment loss in most maxillary and mandibular molars . The family dentist referred the patient to the Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at a university dental hospital, although the cause of the leukopenia was unknown at this point. The oral surgeon consulted at the university dental hospital found it difficult to provide dental treatment while managing the leukopenia and referred the patient to our department for tooth extraction and interdisciplinary management.
During the initial examination, the patient had poor oral hygiene and poor restorations on mandibular molars. The panoramic radiographs revealed horizontal and vertical bone resorption mainly in the bilateral maxillary and mandibular molar regions. Blood tests revealed leukopenia (0.6 × 103/µL), 12% segmented neutrophils, anemia (red blood cell [RBC] count 256 × 104/µL, hemoglobin 7.4 g/dL), and thrombocytopenia (103 × 103/µL). After a thorough clinical examination of the periodontal disease and oral cavity, a treatment plan was developed based on the periodontal findings . The periodontal pocket depth was measured at six points around each tooth to assess periodontal deterioration. Periapical radiography was performed to assess the extent of alveolar bone loss. Most molars showed severe alveolar bone loss extending into the apex area . We confirmed deep periodontal pockets with probing pocket depths (PPDs) ranging from 4 to 12 mm. The periodontal inflamed surface area (PISA) was 3,210.6 mm2 . A diagnosis of severe generalized periodontitis was made based on the findings of the initial periodontal examination (generalized Stage IV Grade C periodontitis) . The onset of FS and poor oral hygiene, which may not be a major problem for dental patients with an otherwise normal immune status, caused severe and rapid alveolar bone resorption because of leukopenia and the consequent severe decrease in neutrophils, which are the chief immune cell population in healthy periodontal tissue [–].
We planned the extraction of more than 10 teeth and implementation of thorough oral hygiene protocols to prevent aggravation of the dental infections due to compromised immune function.
Since the cause of the pancytopenia had not been identified during planning, and postoperative infection was anticipated, intravenous tazobactam/piperacillin was administered to the patient. Over 10 extractions were performed during the patient’s hospitalization followed by basic periodontal treatment with detailed oral hygiene instructions, scaling, and root planing . The cause of the pancytopenia was still undetermined at the end of the treatment. After extensive extraction of multiple teeth and basic periodontal treatment of the remaining teeth, the patient was discharged from the hospital, and treatment was continued on an outpatient basis. The anemia symptoms of the patient worsened during prosthodontic treatment with a crown, bridge, and removable partial denture; hence, the dental treatment was suspended, and she was admitted to the hematology department of a general hospital. An ultrasound examination of the hands and ankles revealed synovitis in the right knee and joint effusions in the ankle and knee joints; this was coupled with rheumatic signs, such as pancytopenia and joint pains. FS was diagnosed based on her previous leukopenia, splenomegaly, and the three main symptoms of chronic RA. Oral corticosteroid therapy (oral prednisolone 40 mg/day) was initiated immediately, and the pancytopenia improved. Additionally, blood test results indicated improved white blood count of 1.6 × 103/µL, 64% segmented neutrophils, RBC count of 387 × 104/µL, hemoglobin level of 13 g/dL, and a platelet count of 94 × 103/µL.
The patient returned for restoration of oral function with crowns, bridges, and partial dentures following improved pancytopenia. Following tooth extraction and basic periodontal treatment, the O’Leary plaque control record improved from 80.2 to 29.2% after treatment, the average PPD decreased from 5.7 mm to 2.5 mm, bleeding on probing reduced from 141 sites (83.4%) to 13 sites (18.1%), and the PISA decreased from 3210.6 mm2 to 100.8 mm2. Although all the molars were lost, there was no evidence of progressive alveolar bone resorption in the remaining teeth, as indicated by the dental radiographs . Supportive periodontal therapy was initiated following treatment . To date, there has been no recurrence of periodontitis with pancytopenia or bone resorption. The patient is currently receiving supportive periodontal therapy for periodontitis while being monitored for FS. There are no signs of relapsing periodontitis.