A 60-year-old male patient was presented to our outpatient clinic with the complaints of swelling and pain in the second finger of his right hand. BD had been diagnosed 33 years earlier. He had experienced swelling in his right knee about 30 years earlier, but he was symptom-free after joint aspiration. Then, 20 years ago, he had a swollen left ankle, which improved spontaneously within 10 days. At that time, he used colchicine for 2 years, but stopped this drug himself due to gastrointestinal adverse effects. At the time of presentation to our clinic, the patient had not used colchicine or other medication for the last 10 years. He mentioned that he had been having difficulty using his hand due to swelling and pain in the second finger for the last 3 months. On physical examination, there was pain and swelling in his second MCP joint. He had no oral or genital aphthae. The fundus examination revealed no uveitis. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 9 mm/h and C-reactive protein was 8.5 mg/liter (normal range is 0–5). Rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibody were negative. HLA-B51 antigen was positive. The kidney and liver functions and other blood tests were within normal limits. Since we suspected destructive changes in the second MCP joint of the right hand on plain radiograph , we evaluated the patient by GE Logiq 5 ultrasonography (US) in our department. The US examination was performed from dorsal aspect of the second MCP joint with longitudinal and transverse scans. A step-down contour defect of the erosion was observed in the second MCP joint on longitudinal image. The normal and erosive articular surface of the second MCP joint were indicated, on longitudinal images in Fig. and on transverse images in Fig. . After the diagnosis of the bone erosion, the patient was prescribed a weekly dose of 10 mg methotrexate. At the three-month follow-up, his complaints had almost completely been resolved. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this report.
We searched PubMed, MEDLINE, EMBASE, Scopus, and Web of Science using the keywords, ‘Behçet’s disease [AND] erosive arthritis’ and ‘Behçet’s disease [AND] destructive arthritis’. The original articles, letters and case reports published in English between 1985 and December 2019 were identified. Publications containing abstracts with limited information, comments or papers written in languages other than English, irrelevant articles, and duplicates were excluded.
We carefully reviewed 10 articles and the references therein. Five articles were not further evaluated because their main text was in French. Eight of the 10 articles were case reports/letters and two were original articles/reviews. Most case reports were published after the year 2000. Table presents the characteristics of the 19 patients with erosive arthropathy reported in the evaluated articles. The mean age of these patients was 43.89 (range 19–72) years, and 10 were female. The main presenting symptoms were usually monoarthritis or asymmetrical oligoarthritis.