A 74-year-old Caucasian woman had a 36-month history of initial depression and a slow progressive cognitive impairment. Past medical history reported hypertension and cataract surgery. No information about family history of dementia was recorded. Nine years ago, in the mourning for the deaths of her spouse and other relatives, she developed a depressive disorder which was considered reactive and was left untreated. During the following months she showed bradypsychia and speech impairment without behavior disorder or evident memory loss. Ten months later, while still autonomous and able to take care of her grandchildren, she went for the first time to a neurologist. The neurological examination disclosed a bradypsychia, a depressive facies and a slightly dysarthric, monotonous and dysprosodic speech. She was cooperative, oriented with respect to time and space but she followed the instructions clumsily. She was unable to write (she was low-literate) and presented gesture ideomotor apraxia that her anxiety made difficult to examine. Akinetic-rigid syndrome or fasciculations were absent. The overall examination revealed nothing but a systolic aortic murmur.
The patient’s clinical picture was interpreted as a reactive depression in addition to an isolated language disorder characterized as pseudobulbar speech that led to the presumptive diagnosis of a frontal degenerative disorder diagnosis. Neither Parkinson’s disease with cognitive impairment, nor Alzheimer’s disease was suspected at that time. Cardinal features of progressive supranuclear palsy or motor neuron disease were absent. Additional studies included a cranial MRI showing atrophy of the bilateral frontoparietal and cerebellar hemispheres, laboratory tests for B12 vitamin, folic acid and thyroid hormone levels with normal results, as well as an echocardiograph showing mild aortic insufficiency. Treatment with paroxetine (20mg/day) was initiated. After a month, a new examination revealed worsening of the language impairment. The patient’s clinical picture matched with a progressive degenerative cognitive impairment and hence the suspicion of Alzheimer’s disease or frontotemporal dementia was raised. During the following months, the disease progressed, affecting gait and causing several falls that included a broken humerus six months later. A cranial single-photon emission computed tomography performed at that time demonstrated frontal hypocaptation more prominent on the left that extended to both temporal lobes. The first electroencephalography (EEG), performed three months after initial consultation, was normal and a second EEG, five months later, revealed generalized slow activity. Then the patient abruptly worsened showing akinetic-rigid Parkinsonism with pseudobulbar syndrome and gait impairment with motor apraxia, visuospatial discoordination and evident frontal dysfunction features such as grasping, palmomental reflex and brisk perioral reflexes. Sensory examination could not be performed at that time. Differential diagnosis included dementia with Lewy bodies, corticobasal ganglionic degeneration, or prion disease. The patient was hospitalized to perform a lumbar puncture; examination of her cerebrospinal fluid showed two cells with normal biochemical and microbiologic parameters including negative 14-3-3 test, serology against Borrelia burgdorferi and Rapid Plasma Reagin (RPR) test. From then on for the next 25 months the patient was hospitalized at home. She was then taken to hospital due to pneumonia. At that time she was totally dependent with incontinence and an akinetic-mutism-like syndrome. She died two months later. Informed consent was obtained from the patient’s relatives for autopsy.
Necropsy was performed within 24 hours after death and samples from nine locations were taken in duplicate for histopathology and molecular processing. Briefly, each sample was fixed in 4% formalin, treated with formic acid and embedded in paraffin. Sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin or processed for PrP immunohistochemistry with and without PK pretreatment. Frozen non-fixed samples were submitted to immunoblotting for band pattern identification, and comparative enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for PK-sensitivity analyses were performed as described previously .
Spongiform change was found in the upper and inner layers of the cerebral cortex, including frontal and temporal cortex, entorhinal cortex and subiculum. The striatum and thalamus showed moderate spongiform change. PrP immunoreactivity followed a synaptic pattern and was accompanied by dot-like (target-like according to the nomenclature of Zou et al. ) deposits, particularly in the deep cortical layers. PrP deposition was largely sensitive to PK treatment, except for the majority of target-like deposits that were PK-resistant . Perineuronal PrP-immunoreactive deposition was absent.
The cerebellum showed spongiform change in the molecular layer, moderate loss of Purkinje cells and occasional axonal torpedoes . PrP immunohistochemistry showed elongated plaque-like deposits in the molecular layer which were resistant to PK pretreatment . Plaque-like deposits in the granular layer of the cerebellum as are often seen in sCJD VV2 were absent.
Accompanying findings were neurofibrillary tangles in the entorhinal cortex, subiculum, hippocampus, inferior temporal cortex, and rarely in the frontal cortex, and β-amyloid plaques, diffuse and neuritic, in the cerebral cortex corresponding to Alzheimer’s disease-related changes in neuritic stages VB of Braak.
The entire PRNP open reading frame was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR ) using genomic DNA extracted from fresh brain tissue. PCR was carried out in a final volume of 25μl with 45ng DNA, 0.1mM dNTP, 1mM MgCl2, 0.2μM of each primer (Forward: 5′-CCATTGCTATGCACTCATTC-3′; Reverse: 5′-CGGGACAAAGAGAGAAGAAA-3′), 0.2mg/ml bovine serum albumin BSA, 0.5 units of Taq Polymerase and 1x Taq buffer, under the following conditions: initial denaturation step at 95°C for ten minutes, 35 cycles of denaturation at 95°C for 45 seconds, annealing at 60°C for 30 seconds and elongation at 72°C for one minute, and a final elongation step at 72°C for ten minutes. Sequence analysis was done directly by automated sequencing. The patient was homozygous for valine at codon 129 of PRNP and no mutations, insertions or silent polymorphisms were found.
Routine immunoblot examinations revealed lack of signal in all brain regions and a weak three band pattern of pathogenic PrP in the cerebellum corresponding to a 2A protein type . The recent description of a case of protease-sensitive prionopathy 129MV and the use of technologies based on PrP detection without proteinase K treatment allowed us to reanalyze this case. Immunoblotting under less restrictive conditions and incubation with 3F4 antibody revealed a ladder-like PrP pattern in all brain regions excluding the cerebellum, which maintained the three band pattern typical of sCJD type 2A . The evaluation of PrP PK sensitivity in the comparative ELISA showed a PrP mean signal detection rate decreased by 71% . The highest values ranged from 72% to 78% for cortex, striatum and thalamus, and the lowest value of 43% corresponded to the cerebellum. This could partially explain the absence of protein signal in immunoblot in the aforementioned brain regions and the weak signal detected in the cerebellum.