We report a case of an otherwise healthy 20-year-old caucasian male patient, born to non-consanguineous healthy Portuguese parents. He was referred to our Pediatric and Young Adult Rheumatology Clinic for suspected inflammatory artropathy, due to a five-year history of painful and swollen hands, knees, ankles and feet. The pain had an inflammatory pattern, with prolonged morning stiffness and prompt relief with non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs. He also reported late onset facial acne and palmoplantar hyperhidrosis. There were no constitutional symptoms, rashes, ulcers, ocular, gastrointestinal, cardiac or respiratory complaints.
On clinical examination, he presented painless clubbing of the fingers and toes, moderate acne and marked facial skin thickening with prominent forehead and scalp folds. He had hand, knee, ankles and feet soft swelling . Plain radiographs revealed soft tissue swelling, periosteal ossification and cortical thickening of the skull, phalanges, femur and toe acroosteolysis . Ultrasound showed no knee or ankle joint effusions. There was a layer of irregular echogenic tissue surrounding the femur and tibia, without Doppler signal.
Routine laboratory tests showed increased levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) (35.5 mg/L, normal range < 3 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (27 mm/h, normal range 0–15 mm/h). Complete blood count, renal and hepatic function, bone biochemistry were normal, as well as immunological panel. Normal thyroid function tests, growth hormone, and insulin-like growth factor ruled out endocrinopathy. An abdominal ultrasound, electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, plain chest film, and tuberculin skin test were also performed to exclude secondary causes, which were unremarkable. Plasma PGE levels may be useful in suspected PHO cases, however, this was not available in our centre.
Clinical and imagiological findings were compatible with a diagnosis of hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, so molecular analysis of HPGD and SLCO2A1 genes was required. After obtaining a written consent, peripheral blood samples were obtained. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes using standard techniques. The analysis performed was PCR amplification and sequencing of all coding exons, and flanking intronic regions, of the HPGD and SLCO2A1 genes. No HPGD mutation was found, while SLCO2A1 gene analysis detected c.1259G > T mutation in a homozygous state, in exon 9 of the gene, which causes the exchange of the highly conserved amino acid cysteine by a phenylalanine in 420 position in the protein. PHO type 2 diagnosis was made.
Therapy with naproxen 500 mg/day was started and is currently maintained, with significant clinical improvement. ESR and CPR subsequently declined (19 mm/h and 21 mg/L, respectively).