A 13-year-old white male presented with iron-deficiency anemia and weight loss.
The patient had a past medical history of B-cell precursor ALL at 2-years of age. He achieved remission in 28 mo after completing standard risk chemotherapy treatment for ALL with doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide. At 7-years of age he developed cough, shortness of breath, and tiring easily. Echocardiogram was normal. Three months later he presented to the pediatric emergency room due to worsening pulmonary symptoms; a chest-x-ray showed hilar adenopathy and right-sided pleural effusion. Echocardiogram showed a large mass in the right atrium with a pericardial effusion. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck, chest, abdomen and pelvis with contrast revealed a 4.5 cm right sided mediastinal mass extending into the right atrium causing obstruction of the superior vena cava, right main pulmonary artery, and distal airway compression with paratracheal and mediastinal adenopathy. Flow cytometry was non-diagnostic for malignancy and bone marrow aspirate showed no evidence of infiltrative disease. Cardiac catheterization and biopsy of the tumor was initially interpreted as inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, and chemotherapy was initiated with ifosfamide, doxorubicin, and celecoxib which achieved a decrease in tumor size. Following three courses of scheduled chemotherapy, cardiovascular surgery performed tumor resection. Final pathology was consistent with necrotic lymphoma consistent with recurrent B-cell lymphoma. He completed chemotherapy and began maintenance therapy. Eighteen months later he presented with weight loss and anemia.
Approximately 18-mo later, at 13 years of age, he was seen in pediatric gastroenterology clinic for iron-deficiency anemia, decreased oral intake, and weight loss of 5.7 kg. He did not have fatigue, malaise, shortness of breath, palpitations, melena, hematochezia, or abdominal pain.
The patient was a student in good standing. Family history was negative for inflammatory bowel disease, polyp syndromes, and bleeding dyscrasias.
On physical examination he had no tachycardia or cardiac murmur, his lungs were clear to auscultation, his abdomen was soft, non-tender, without hepatosplenomegaly, there was no bruising, digital rectal exam revealed brown stool that was positive for fecal occult blood.
Complete blood count revealed a normal white blood cell count (9200/mm3), microcytic anemia (hemoglobin = 9.0 g/dL, hematocrit = 30.9%, mean corpuscular volume = 61 fL), and thrombocytosis (platelets = 726000/mm3). Other laboratory values were normal including a liver panel, renal panel, lactate dehydrogenase and uric acid.
The patient underwent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and colonoscopy. EGD results were unremarkable; however, a large, firm mass in the mid-ascending colon was discovered on colonoscopy and subsequently biopsied . The biopsy confirmed recurrent B-cell ALL. CT scan showed ileo-colonic intussusception with the mass acting as the lead points. Pathology results showed a recurrent B-cell lymphoma in the ileum causing chronic intussusception.