A 75 year old female presented to the emergency room with a dislocated femoral neck fracture after a fall off her electrical bike on the left hip. She had a history of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease gold (COPD)III, hypertension with stage III renal failure and an abdominal aortic aneurysm, for which an endovascular aortic repair was performed (‘16) and later on an aortic bifurcation graft was inserted (‘18). Since it was an isolated fall on her hip and the neurological exam was normal, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the brain was not performed. She was admitted to the surgical ward with systemic opioids and a femoral nerve catheter with bupivacaine 0.25% as analgesia and surgical fixation by a hemi arthroplasty was performed the next day. Anesthesia consisted of a spinal block with bupivacaine 0.5% and midazolam (2mg) was administered as part of sedation. After surgery she remained unresponsive with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GSC) of 4 (E2M1V1) and on examination the patient appeared to be sweating and showed an impaired breathing pattern. Her vital signs showed a mild tachycardia (110/min) with normal blood pressure. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a mild hypercapnia (pCO2 7.2 kPa). Other important lab values contained a hemoglobin level of 7.1 mmol/l, a leukocyte count of 26.4 × 109/l, a C-reactive protein level of 103 mg/l and a blood glucose level of 6.5 mmol/l. Naloxone was administered as an antidote for the opioids and Flumazenil as an antidote for midazolam, both without clinical effect. Fysostigmine was administered to treat a possible central anticholinergic syndrome, also without any clinical effect.
The patient was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) with non-invasive ventilation for further diagnostics and treatment. The neurologist was consulted to exclude neurologic pathology for the impaired consciousness. Neurologic examination showed an impaired consciousness with a GCS of 4 (E2M1V1), no signs of lateralisation, pupils normal in size, shape and responsive to light, normotone muscle state and symmetrical hyporeflexia with indifferent Babinski reflexes. Within 1 hour her consciousness improved to a GCS of 7 (E2M4V1). A CT brain was not performed because of an improvement in consciousness and vital signs that were not typical for a neurologic origin of an impaired consciousness.
A few hours later, her clinical status deteriorated with an acute drop in blood pressure and hypoxia which made us decide to intubate and start mechanical ventilation. Subsequently a central venous line for vasopressors was placed. A chest X-ray was performed which showed no abnormalities. Bedside transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) of the heart showed a remarkable dilatation of the right ventricle with multiple hyperechoic particles . This made us think of Fat Embolism Syndrome (FES) as a cause for her neurologic, respiratory and hemodynamic symptoms. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus tachycardia without signs of acute ischemia.
A CT of the brain without contrast was performed and showed no abnormalities. A CT with contrast (arterial phase) of the thorax was performed which excluded pulmonary embolisms, but did confirm a widened right ventricle. On the third day of admission both a transthoracic and transesophageal ultrasound of the heart were performed which showed a dilatation of the right ventricle, no signs of ischemia and moreover no patent foramen ovale (PFO) or other intracardiac shunt. Having excluded other more common causes for the symptoms, we suspected FES as cause for the obstructive shock. Furthermore, we suspected cerebral fat embolisms (CFE) as a possible cause for the impaired consciousness. As recommended, we continued with “best supportive care”, which mainly included mechanical ventilation for respiratory insufficiency and inotropic and vasopressor medication for an obstructive shock.
On day 4 of admission a CT scan of the brain with venous contrast was performed to exclude a basilar artery occlusion and did not show any abnormalities. On day 6 a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the brain was performed which showed diffuse small foci of reduced diffusion and edema on the diffusion-weighted scan as well as petechial hemorrhage on the T2-weighted scan. These lesions are described in literature as the “Starfield” pattern, a radiographic phenomenon suggestive for CFE. Patient remained hemodynamically stable after recovery and with the use of a tracheostoma she was weaned of mechanical ventilation. In light of her COPD gold III, we chose rapid weaning of mechanical ventilation using early tracheostomy to minimize muscle loss. During 3 weeks of ICU admission the neurologic state slowly ameliorated to a maximal EMV score with a partial recovery of verbal communication and an improving critical illness polyneuropathy.