The patient is a 24-year-old human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive male from Nicaragua who presented for excision of condylomas on his anal mucosa. He was diagnosed with HIV/AIDS ∼3 years earlier and was started on antiretroviral therapy at that time. At the time of his diagnosis with HIV/AIDS, a peri-rectal skin tag was also noted, but no other symptoms or cutaneous findings were observed. At 1 month prior to his excision of his condyloma, the patient had an HIV viral load of 65 copies ml− 1 and CD4 T cell count of 144 cells μl− 1. At the time of the procedure the patient had no additional health concerns, cutaneous findings or symptoms, but he was noted to have been only intermittently compliant with his antiretroviral therapy due to intolerance of side-effects and lack of medical insurance.
Anal condyloma tissue was submitted for histopathology. Microscopic examination of the haematoxylin and eosin-stained anal condyloma tissue revealed koilocytic change, ulceration and brisk histiocytic inflammation containing numerous small intracellular bodies with kinetoplasts, suggestive of Leishmania amastigotes (cutaneous herpesvirus cytopathic effect was also present) . Grocott–Gomori methenamine silver , Periodic Acid–Schiff, mucicarmine and Fontana–Masson stains were negative (not shown), which indicated the intracellular objects were not fungal in origin. The patient also had a few papillary lesions on his back, which were biopsied and also contained forms consistent with Leishmania species amastigotes. Given the unusual anatomical location (i.e. anal mucosa) for a disease transmitted by an insect vector coupled with the patient's previous residence in Central America, concerns for VL arose. The patient had lived in the USA for the previous 6 years and had no travel history to areas endemic for Leishmania since leaving Nicaragua. A bone marrow biopsy was performed and demonstrated similar intracellular forms by Giemsa stain , confirming that the patient did have VL.
The condyloma tissue and bone marrow aspirate were sent to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)’s Parasitic Diseases Branch for confirmation of Leishmania infection and speciation. Specific immunohistochemical staining of the tissue section was positive for Leishmania species. Leishmania reverse transcription PCR was positive, and Leishmania PCR and DNA sequencing identified the isolate as Leishmania donovani. Culture isoenzyme results also matched L. donovani.
Accordingly, the patient resumed antiretroviral therapy and received anti-Leishmania therapy (intravenous Pentostam) in coordination with the CDC. The lesions on the patient's back diminished in size and a second bone marrow biopsy was negative by microscopy, but did grow parasites upon culture.
The patient has completed anti-Leishmania treatment and is stable on antiretroviral therapy.