A 68-year-old man with no significant medical history was referred to our hospital because bladder and PCas were suspected based on abdominal MRI performed as part of a thorough medical checkup. MRI showed areas with low intensity on T2-weighted imaging and high intensity on diffusion-weighted imaging at the bladder trigone and in the peripheral zone of the right lobe of the prostate . His PSA values were within the normal range (2.839 ng/mL). Urinary cytology was negative for high-grade urothelial carcinoma and cystoscopy revealed a submucosal nodular tumor in the bladder trigone . The patient underwent TURBT. Histopathological examination showed the existence of both benign prostatic tissue and a submucosal adenocarcinoma of Gleason Grade group 4 that was positive for PSA and negative for p50 the tumor was not continuous with the prostate gland. Transrectal prostate needle biopsy was performed at the time of TURBT, and pathological examination indicated an adenocarcinoma of Gleason Grade group 1 in 3 of 12 specimens . Based on the overall findings, the patient was diagnosed with the coexistence of prostatic adenocarcinoma in the EPT in the urinary bladder and low-risk orthotopic PCa (cT2aN0M0). Follow-up TURBT 3 months later indicated no residual carcinoma in the urinary bladder. Active surveillance was chosen for low-risk orthotopic PCa.
Four years after the diagnosis, a transrectal prostate needle re-biopsy was performed because of elevated PSA (4.41 ng/mL). Pathological examination indicated that the tumor had progressed to Gleason Grade group 2, which upgraded the tumor to intermediate-risk. The patient underwent robot-assisted radical prostatectomy with resection of the scar in the bladder trigone. Pathological examinations revealed a diagnosis of pT2 acinar prostatic adenocarcinoma and no residual EPT or adenocarcinoma in the urinary bladder, which suggested that the TURBT performed 4 years previously was curative. The patient has maintained a low PSA level (<0.006 ng/mL) and has had no recurrence 3 months later.