A 76-year old Caucasian male with a history of compensated alcoholic liver cirrhosis, NYHA II heart failure, gastrectomy after gastroesophageal junction cancer and prostatectomy after prostate cancer and indwelling suprapubic catheter noticed lesions on hands and feet. Due to progressive pruritus and swelling, he shortly presented in our outpatient clinic of the Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Frankfurt. Physical examination revealed symmetric distal limb swelling, and a purpuric rash with palpable maculae on extensor and flexor parts of both hands, legs and thighs reaching up to the lower abdomen . The smallest purpura lesions were a few millimetres in size and confluent up to centimetres in size. The lesions persisted on diascopy. Upon presentation, the patient denied symptoms of fever, dyspnoea, arthralgia or anuria, but he reported of melaena and diarrhoea the day before. The patient had no history of allergic predispositions or systemic autoimmune diseases. He denied to have started any new medication recently or any changing in alimentary habits. Yet, the patient reported that 12 days ago he received his second mRNA-based vaccination for COVID-19 with BNT162b2. Interestingly, the described skin findings were not seen on his last regular visit 2 days before the second vaccination. After his first vaccination with BNT162b2 6 weeks earlier, he had experienced significant vaccine related myalgia, fever (39.5 °C), hoarseness and fatigue, yet no skin related adverse events had occurred. Before that, he had never experienced any adverse events on previous vaccinations including influenza, herpes zoster or pneumococcal vaccinations.
Laboratory findings revealed elevated blood sedimentations rate, interleukin-6 levels and C-reactive protein levels. In addition, signs of discrete haemolysis and elevated ammonium levels could be detected. Known moderate micro-erythruria and leukocyturia did not worsen, but stool tests on occult blood was positive and stool calprotectin levels were moderately elevated. Virological tests on human herpes viruses and further human pathogenic viruses showed no new reactivation or infection .
In consultation with our senior physician specialist from the Department of Dermatology, Venereology and Allergology, the correlation of the clinical presentation, laboratory findings and recent COVID-19 vaccine, we established the diagnosis of cutaneous and gastrointestinal immune complex vasculitis probably triggered by BNT162b2 injection. The patient was started on 40 mg oral prednisolone once daily. Shortly after, the patient reported of symptom relief. On the 5th day of therapy, he already presented with rapid resolving skin lesions . At follow-up visit 23 days after BNT162b injection, we could observe small remaining scabs on both lower legs and the patient described remaining hyperalgesia while touching these lesions. Oedema, pruritus and purpuric lesions fully resolved and inflammation markers decreased. Stool formation and colour returned to normal. Prednisolone was quickly tapered and stopped.