A 69-year-old gentleman, with a history of urothelial bladder cancer under complete remission 2 years previously, was diagnosed with metastatic advanced non-small cell lung cancer. He was started on first-line therapy without response. He was subsequently treated with pembrolizumab as second-line therapy completing his first cycle of treatment. Approximately 3 weeks after, the patient was hospitalized due to drug-related autoimmune hepatitis which was treated with a slow tapering off corticosteroid regimen with favourable clinical and laboratory markers response.
Five days later, the patient presented a sudden episode of shortness of breath. On physical examination, he was tachypnoeic at 35 breath per minute with intercostal retraction, had a raised jugular venous pulse and bilateral lung crackles. His SpO2 was 95% on room air, blood pressure was 165/90 mmHg and pulse was regular at 110 b.p.m. His chest X-ray was normal. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed 1 mm anterolateral ST-segment elevation and anterolateral and inferior negative T waves. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a non-dilated left ventricle, with moderately reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) and anterior-septal-inferior apical hypokinaesia (previously normal). Biochemical analyses revealed elevated myocardial injury markers [high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T 1563 ng/L (URL <13 ng/L) and creatine-kinase 1176 UI (nL < 36 UI)].
Oxygen therapy (FiO2 26%) and intermittent intravenous furosemide were started. An urgent coronary angiography was performed showing normal coronary arteries ; a left ventriculography was performed confirming severe left ventricular function impairment with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 32% . Due to clinical instability, a myocardial biopsy was not performed and the patient was transferred to the Intensive Cardiac Care Unit where high-dose boluses of methylprednisolone (1 g/day during 72 h), systemic vasodilators and loop diuretics (continuous infusions of furosemide and sodium nitroprusside) were administered under suspicion of acute pharmacological myocarditis. Oxygen face mask was also needed (FiO2 30%) without the need for neither ventilatory support nor inotropic treatment. He presented with favourable clinical course, restoring the haemodynamic stability. Corticosteroid dosage (methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg/day), therapy was reduced progressively within 2 weeks without further incidents and enalapril, bisoprolol, and spironolactone were initiated at low doses. An improvement of left ventricular ejection fraction (45%) was evidenced in a control echocardiography before hospital discharge.
Cardiac magnetic resonance with gadolinium contrast, including T1 and T2 mapping and T2-STIR sequences, was performed after 2 weeks of treatment with a 1.5 scanner (Interna CV, Philips Medical System Best, The Netherlands). An LVEF improvement (48%) was confirmed, although slightly reduced due to the overall dyssynchrony of the LV. T1 and extracellular volume values were normal (1044 ms and 26%, respectively) at the mid-septal area and no myocardial late gadolinium enhancement was depicted in the myocardium, but an increase of the myocardial intensity signal in the T2-STIR sequences and T2 values (74 ms, nL <56 ms) in the parametric images were found at the apical LV segments, suggesting the presence of residual myocardial oedema in this region . These findings supported the previous clinical diagnosis of acute myocarditis, with no signs of permanent myocardial injury. Three weeks later, the patient was discharged showing regression of the altered repolarization and of the LV regional contractility abnormalities (LVEF 53%).
Four weeks after clinical presentation, the patient was readmitted due to new-onset pharmacological myasthenia-like syndrome.