A 4-year-old, Caucasion, girl was admitted to the emergency service in an unconscious state after a cardiopulmonary resuscitation in another hospital. She had compression of the whole of the left arm, the shoulder and the left side of the thorax, caused by a lift. Upon arrival in the other hospital, about 15 min after the accident, she had cardiopulmonary arrest, intubated orotracheally, cardiopulmonary resuscitation was performed for 15th minutes. Her head, neck, and upper chest were strikingly cyanotic and edematous, with multiple petechiae; she also had bilateral subconjunctival hemorrhages. Her neck was stabilized with a hard collar. In neurological examination; the patient was Glasgow Coma Score of E1M2Ve [coma score of 3], papillary was isochoric and light reflex were bilaterally reactive. She was paraplegic. Past medical history was noncontributory. Her heart rate was 130 bpm, arterial blood pressure was 100/65 mm Hg, and peripheral pulses were weakly palpable in both upper extremities. Breath sounds were not obtained in the left hemi thorax. The abdomen was soft. Blood gas analysis just after she was admitted to the intensive care unit was: pH 7.30, PaCO2 45 mmHg, PaO2 60 mmHg, base excess -2.8 mMol·L-1, breathing 5 L·min-1 100% oxygen by self-inflating bag via endotracheal tube. On the pulmonary x-ray, pneumothorax was determined and tube thoracostomy was performed. Spinal and abdominal X-ray and echography showed no injuries. Hemorrhage and edema were not observed in the brain and spinal by computed tomography. Ophthalmological examination, including fundoscopy, revealed no abnormalities. Respiratory failure developed and the patient required mechanical ventilation. She was observed in the intensive care unit and treated with methylprednisolone sodium succinate within 24 hours (intravenous bolus of methylprednisolone [30 mg/kg], methylprednisolone infusion of 5.4 mg/kg per hour for 24 hours). After the respiratory failure was recovered, on the 20th day, cervical Magnetic Resonance Imaging revealed an intramedullary hemorrhage lesion to Thoracal [Th ] 2–3 intervertebral disc level situated. The lesions were seen heterogeneous on Th-1 and Th-2 weighted images, which is started to resorption [figure ]. The patient transferred to the rehabilitation unit in state of Glasgow Coma Score of E3M5V2 [coma score of 10].