A 31-year-old left-handed Chinese woman was admitted to our hospital due to disordered consciousness. She had undergone abdominal liposuction followed by the bilateral injection of 10.6 mL of autologous fat into the temples and tear troughs under general anesthesia 6 h ago. After the 2-h procedure, the patient was unconscious, and her right limbs were unresponsive to pain stimulation, which was attributed to a lack of recovery from general anesthesia by the cosmetic doctor. However, 1 h after the surgery, the patient had still not woken up, and her heart rate had declined to 60 bpm, which increased to 70 bpm after an intravenous bolus of 0.5 mg atropine. Before the procedure, she had been in good health and had undergone a similar procedure at the same beauty salon 5 months ago and recovered well.
On admission to our hospital, the patient's vital signs were stable. A neurological examination revealed stupor, round and bilaterally equal pupils (3 mm), bilaterally diminished pupillary light reflexes, right-sided central facial palsy, no response to pain stimulation of the right limbs, and a positive Babinski sign on the right. Considering the type of operation and the patient's symptoms and signs, we suspected a cerebral fat embolism, most likely involving a vessel in the left internal carotid artery system. Although the patient had undergone abdominal liposuction, she had no rapid respiratory rate, hypoxemia, or chest CT signs such as the “blizzard sign,” ruling out pulmonary fat embolism. Cranial non-contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple low-density shadows along the blood vessels . Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) confirmed fresh infarctions in the left frontal, parietal, and temporal lobes . The lesions appeared much smaller on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and T2-weighted sequences . Magnetic resonance angiography demonstrated the occlusion of the left internal carotid artery (ICA), left anterior cerebral artery, and left middle cerebral artery . No obvious hemorrhage was observed on susceptibility-weighted imaging, and the hypointense lesions along the cerebral vessels indicated slowed blood flow caused by fat emboli .
Owing to the mismatch between the FLAIR and DWI findings, we performed digital subtraction angiography, which confirmed the occlusion of the left ICA and external carotid artery . After obtaining consent from the patient's family, we immediately performed mechanical thrombectomy (MT) using the ADAPT (a direct aspiration first pass technology) and SWIM (Solitaire FR/stent with intracranial support catheter for mechanical thrombectomy) techniques but failed to achieve complete recanalization . Pathological examination of the emboli confirmed the presence of adipocytes . After the operation, the patient's unconsciousness deepened, and she fell into a deep coma. Her right pupil (4.5 mm) became larger than the left one (3 mm). Immediate cranial non-contrast CT showed a large cerebral infarction in the left cerebral hemisphere and a slight rightward shift of the midline . Decompressive craniectomy was promptly performed . Mannitol, glycerol fructose, torasemide, and albumin were administered to decrease intracranial pressure. We also actively provided symptomatic and supportive treatments, including nutritional support, antibiotic therapy, mechanical ventilation, neurotrophic factors, and cerebral protection.
Unfortunately, due to the large cerebral infarction and edema, the brain herniation progressed, compressing the hypothalamus and brainstem. The patient lost spontaneous respiration and was in a state of metabolic disorder. She also developed a severe infection of multiple systems. Eventually, on the 16th day of hospitalization, she was diagnosed with brain death.