A 15-year-old boy affected by PE with severe asymmetric deformity of the chest wall was evaluated for elective corrective surgery . He was asymptomatic except for shortness of breath during sport activity. Preoperative electrocardiogram, echocardiography, and pulmonary function tests at rest were normal.
Preoperative CT showed a severe thoracic defect with a Haller index of 5.7 and a correction index of 0.40. He also had a left-sided rotation of the sternum.
After an exhaustive discussion with the patient and his parents, comprehensive of all potential complications, including cardiac injury, a preoperative informed consent for MIRPE procedure was obtained from the parents.
Under general anesthesia, a right thoracoscopy was performed showing a severe sternal defect. We decided to use a vacuum bell to create a space between the sternum and the heart, and a 5-mm port was placed into the right hemithorax. Blunt dissection was done from the right to the left pleural cavity, under vision, using a Johann grasper. The introducer was passed through the retrosternal tunnel under thoracoscopic vision emerging into the left pleural cavity, and arrhythmia and hypotension were noted by the anesthesiologist. The introducer was immediately removed, and massive bleeding was seen coming from the tunnel. A major cardiac or pulmonary injury was suspected. The cardiac surgeon was immediately notified, and a clamshell thoracotomy was performed. Pulmonary bleeding was identified on the lower right lobe, initially controlled with a vascular clamp, and a concomitant pericardium tamponade was noticed. Open cardiac massage was performed while cardiopulmonary bypass was started by inserting cannulas into his right femoral vessels. Two cardiac lesions were seen: one on the anterior part of the interventricular wall, very close to the right coronary vessel, and one on the right atrium. An additional cannula was inserted into the lower vena cava, and right atriotomy was performed; the two wounds were repaired with non-absorbable sutures. On the right lower pulmonary lobe, four lesions were seen and repaired with non-absorbable sutures.
The patient developed an acute hypoxemic respiratory failure, and intraoperative x-ray chest showed an ARDS (Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome) syndrome . The cardiac surgeon decided to shift the cardiopulmonary bypass into veno-arterial ECMO assistance. At the end of cardiac surgery, a weak pulse and skin discoloration were observed on the right limb, and an emergency fasciotomy was performed in the lateral and posteromedial compartments. The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit on ECMO.
A right lower lobectomy on ECMO assistance was necessary due to the persistence of ARDS and pulmonary bleeding on the fifth postoperative day . A temporary tracheostomy was performed on the 15th postoperative day because of prolonged intubation. Delayed primary wound closure was possible after negative pressure wound therapy for the right lower limb.
The patient was discharged to rehabilitation unit after 3 months with no brain injuries, minor neurosensitive hearing loss, and a temporary tracheostomy tube. After 6 months of rehabilitation, the tracheostomy tube was removed without any complications.