A 3.5-year-old boy with no relevant medical history was referred to the Pediatric Dentistry Unit of Policlinico Umberto I of Rome. Parents reported that the boy suffered a dental injury from a fall while playing at home. The child did not lose consciousness or vomit after the injury. Once informed consent from his parents was obtained, a medical anamnestic chart was filled, and a clinical exam was performed within 1 h of the trauma. During extraoral examination, no abnormalities of the temporomandibular joint were reported. Soft tissue lacerations with hematoma and a displacement of 3 mm along the axis of the deciduous maxillary right central incisor (5.1) were observed during intraoral examination. These resulted in a diagnosis of extrusion (a). Furthermore, occlusal interference due to extrusion of the incisor prevented the molars from a proper occlusion. A periapical radiograph of the anterior teeth did not show altered periodontal ligament space, but horizontal root fracture was diagnosed (b).
According to the protocols proposed by the IADT [,], the degrees of displacement and mobility, the root formation, the alteration of PDL space, and the child’s ability to deal with an emergency should be considered when planning the treatment. In cases of extrusion equal to or less than 3 mm, the protocol suggests careful repositioning or waiting for spontaneous repositioning. In cases of extrusion more than 4 mm, the tooth should be extracted. Furthermore, for root fracture with increased mobility and displacement, the protocol also suggests placement of orthodontic splinting according to the degree of mobility and compliance of the patient, in addition to periodic follow-up appointments.
Therefore, in the reported case, a thorough evaluation was carried out, and treatment was planned. The oral cavity was rinsed with 0.12% chlorhexidine solution, and local anesthesia was performed. An orthodontic flexible splint was prepared to be attached to the adjacent unaffected teeth (a); then, the tooth was gently repositioned (b), in order to avoid occlusal interference, and stabilized through the splint (c,d).
A good prognosis following an oral trauma depends on effective oral hygiene; therefore, parents were instructed on how to take care of the injured tooth and prevent further injury by supervising potentially hazardous activities. They were instructed not to further traumatize the injured tooth when eating; nonetheless, a return to normal function as soon as possible was encouraged. Parents were advised to use a soft brush or cotton swab combined with alcohol-free chlorhexidine gluconate (0.12%) applied topically twice a day, in order to prevent accumulation of debris and to reduce the bacterial load. They were advised about possible complications that might occur, such as increased mobility, swelling, or a sinus tract; children might not complain about pain, but infection might still occur. If that happens, the child should be taken to a dentist for treatment.
In the reported case, a follow-up clinical examination was made 1 week after the injury, and the tooth was asymptomatic; there was normal color of the crown and lack of any signs of pulp necrosis and infection. The same follow-up appointment was planned for 4 weeks after the trauma for splint removal, if supported by healing signs. Aspects to be examined when carrying out a splint removal are color, symptoms, and mobility of the tooth, as well as healthy surrounding tissues. In this case, element 5.1 was asymptomatic; realignment of the root-fractured tooth was observed, mobility was physiological, and crown had a normal color. Supporting tissues were clinically healthy, and no signs of pulp necrosis or infection were observed. Thus, the splint was removed, and another follow-up appointment was planned for 8 weeks after the trauma. The same conditions and signs were observed at the subsequent checkups.
At the 1-year follow-up appointment, the deciduous tooth showed no sensitivity to percussion nor pulp alterations. Tooth-supporting soft tissue was intact, and no pain or discomfort was reported. The crown showed no signs of alteration in color (a). An anterior periapical radiograph was taken, and early signs leading to pulp canal obliteration (PCO) were present; PCO often occurs after dental injuries and can be associated or not with crown discoloration. No signs of pulp necrosis were present. Another aspect that can be observed in the periapical radiograph (b) is the atypical resorption of the apical fragment, where—even if different from the physiological one–its characteristics are also different from pathologic root resorption.
Frequent follow-ups were scheduled until the eruption of the permanent teeth; no abnormal changes were observed. After 3 years, when the child was 6.5, the deciduous maxillary right central incisor exfoliated and was physiologically replaced by the permanent right maxillary incisor (element 1.1). In the subsequent checkups, normal development of element 1.1 was observed, with no alteration in color or shape, demonstrating effective management of the trauma. The panoramic view in a shows the follow-up at age 10, while b,c show the clinical view at age 12.