A 6-month-old girl with confirmed PTPN11 mutation Noonan syndrome and cystic hygroma presented for tetralogy of Fallot repair. Informed parental consent was obtained for all procedures described hereafter.
Cardiac surgery consisted of a right ventricular (RV) outflow tract resection, pulmonary valvuloplasty, patch augmentation of the main pulmonary artery, and closure of atrial septal defect, leaving a small fenestration. Bilateral chylothorax developed postoperatively. Initially, 50–150 mL of fluid drained per day. Conservative therapy (medium-chain triglyceride/total parenteral nutrition) was instituted. This management strategy was ineffective so right and left pleurodeses via right thoracotomy were performed on postoperative days 24 and 25, respectively. During the procedure, there was no identification of the thoracic duct on the right side, suggesting anatomical variation of intrathoracic course. 50–150 mL/day continued to drain from the chest tube, so multimodality lymphatic imaging was performed to evaluate lymphatic flow contribution to chylothorax.
For NIRFLI, described previously , performed under FDA (IND 122,035) and institutional IRB approval, intradermal injection of 0.05 cc of 0.25 mg/mL of indocyanine green (ICG; Akorn, Lake Forest, IL) to each dorsal foot was followed by observation for 1 h, and then injection to each hand was followed by observation for 20 min. Images revealed normal fluorescent dye uptake into leg lymphatics and inguinal lymph nodes; however, dye uptake into arm lymphatics was not observed—only diffuse, faint fluorescence . This abnormal drainage pattern may have shown lymphedema consistent with lymphatic abnormalities commonly seen in Noonan syndrome patients, or that impaired drainage from the left-hand injection was due to high pressure in the central vein secondary to heart failure, considering that thrombotic occlusion of the subclavian veins had been ruled out by prior Doppler studies. Because NIRFLI was unable to identify a site of leakage, Coronal 3D T1 mDixon FFE dynamic MRL utilizing a 3 T Philips Ingenia MR scanner (Philips, Best, Netherlands) was then performed. 1.4 cc Gadavist (Bayer, Whippany, NJ), diluted 1:2 in normal saline, was injected into inguinal lymph nodes using ultrasound guidance. Firstly, MRL confirmed that the thoracic duct was located in the left mediastinum, explaining why the thoracic duct could not be identified during right thoracotomy. Opacification was promptly seen in the right retroperitoneal lymphatics, with chylolymphatic reflux in the left retroperitoneal lymphatics, and hiatus-level thoracic duct dilation. Furthermore, contrast leak from the thoracic duct proximal to the level of the T9 vertebra along the left paravertebral region, where thoracic duct caliber decreased, was observed .
Based on the NIRFLI and MRL findings, conventional lymphangiography and transcatheter occlusion of the thoracic duct was attempted. Use of a water-based contrast, due to right-to-left shunting at the atrial septal level, was unsuccessful, due to inability to opacify the thoracic duct to cannulate. Thoracic duct ligation was performed via left thoracotomy guided by dynamic MRL. Chest tube drainage significantly dropped to 10–15 mL/day, but intermittent fevers, elevated white blood cell count (in the range of 50,000/cmm), low platelet count, blood culture growth of Staphylococcus non-aureus, and heparin-induced thrombocytopenia developed.
Four months after the initial cardiac surgery, a second heart surgery was performed to remove a right atrial thrombus and repair restenosis in the RV outflow tract and pulmonary arteries. Postoperatively, the patient developed severe ascites (drain output 600–1500 mL/day), and white blood cell count increased to 112,000/cmm. The patient was diagnosed with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia, treated with allopurinol and 6-mercaptopurine. Severe ascites continued, and 32 days postoperatively, the patient succumbed to a bradycardic arrest.