A 30-year-old male was referred to Emergency Department of Alzahra Teaching Hospital affiliated to Isfahan University of medical Sciences, Iran, with the chief complaint of persistent crescendo-decrescendo chest pain as well as severe refractory pain in the left flank. He has been a known case of Marfan’s syndrome since 16 years ago, and it was initially diagnosed by bilateral lens dislocation, chest wall deformity (pectus excavatum), joint elasticity and vascular problems. The patient had previously undergone surgical repair for the diagnosis of Type A aortic dissection. On admission, the patient’s hemodynamic status was stable and his vital signs were as follow: blood pressure of right and left arm (140-90 and 150/60 mmHg, respectively), heart rate: 78 bpm, respiratory rate: 30 and temperature: 37 °C. On physical examination, peripheral pulses were palpable. Pulses of left femoral artery, dorsalis pedis and posterior tibialis were weaker than those on the right. His laboratory data were as follow: blood urea nitrogen: 15.4 mg/dl, creatinine: 1.1 mg/dl, blood sugar: 145 mg/dl, white blood cells: 11,300/µ, platelet: 126,000/µ and hemoglobin: 16.6 mg/dl. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed incomplete right bundle branch block. Trans-thoracic echocardiography indicated moderate mitral regurgitation, moderate left atrial enlargement, moderate aortic insufficiency and dilated aortic root (4.45 cm) with previous dacron patch placement other ECG measures were within normal limit.
Patient was admitted with a diagnosis of aortic dissection. 64-slice computed tomography angiography (CTA) of thoracic and abdominal aorta was performed after intravenous injection of 100 ml of contrast agent. CTA of thoracic and abdominal aorta demonstrated evidences of flap and dissection originated adjacent the origin of left subclavian artery, extending to the proximal section of left femoral and left renal arteries without the presence of thrombosis in true/false lumens. A huge false lumen (8 cm) was seen. Superior mesenteric artery (SMA) was normally opacified, and celiac artery was originated from SMA as a normal variant. Right renal artery was well opacified and without any evidence of dilation .
Aortic angiography showed spiral dissection originating from left subclavian artery and extended to iliac arteries (Video 1). Thus, the diagnosis of acute Type B dissection was confirmed.
He underwent endovascular repair by diagnosis of expanding Type B dissection. Through brachial and femoral access, the wire passed from true lumen and sized with a pig tail catheter was performed. Then, covered stent was previously deployed in ascending aorta. Subsequently, bare metal stent was deployed in descending aorta. Re-angiography of arch, ascending and abdominal arteries showed good results. In final injection, true lumen was seen, and both renal arteries were patented (Video 2). We decided to continue medical treatment for abdominal aorta dissection. After procedure, the force and movement of upper and lower extremities were normal. He was stable during hospitalization. In follow-up CTA, thrombotic false lumen was noted in descending aorta, associated with implanted stent which was placed from descending aortic arch down to the proximal part of abdominal aorta (just before SMA takes off). There was no evidence of aneurismal dilation in the thoracic aorta and major vessels originating from aorta . Left common iliac artery was involved in abdominal aorta dissection with good flow. The patient discharged on beta-blocker, angiotensin II receptor antagonist, aspirin, plavix and atorvastatin. He was serially followed-up after discharge. So far, he is asymptomatic.