A 13-years-old female presented with pain on her left knee since 8 months ago. The pain was continuous and got worse at night. The patient went to a traditional masseuse and was given topical herbal ointment. Three months later, a lump appeared at her knee at a size of table tennis ball and getting bigger. The patient then went to a general surgeon, and histopathological examination demonstrated bone tumor. She was subsequently referred to our hospital.
Physical examination demonstrated a lump on the anterior part of proximal tibia with previous surgical biopsy scar and venectation. The lump had hard consistency with ill-defined border, smooth surface, immobile, and pain (visual analogue scale 2-3). Size circumferential of the leg was 33 cm compared to 27 cm on the contralateral. Neurovascular was good. The range of movement of both of the knee and ankle was normal .
Plain radiography suggested mixed lytic and blastic bony lesion in metaphyseal area of proximal tibia, with ill-defined margin, wide transitional zone, periosteal reaction, matrix osteoid and also soft tissue involvement (a). Plain radiography of chest showed no sign of pulmonary metastasis (b). Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed heterogeneous mass and no neurovascular bundle involvement . Laboratory examination demonstrated increased erythrocyte sediment rate 47 mm/hour (N: < 15), and lactate dehydrogenase 717 U/L (N: < 480).
We did a review slide of the previous biopsy sample by the pathology of anatomy in our hospital. The result came out an osteosarcoma with osteoblastic cells. Then the case was brought to clinicopathological conference (CPC – A board consisting of experts from Orthopaedics Surgeon, Radiology, and Pathology Anatomy Department) – and the patient underwent chemotherapy neoadjuvant followed with surgery by limb salvage surgery procedure, wide excision and reconstruction with hemiarthroplasty system. The patient underwent chemotherapy neoadjuvant for 4 cycles weeks with regiments Cisplatin and Doxorubicin. After that, patient underwent a limb salvage surgery.
Intraoperatively, we managed to perform wide excision, while preserving some part of patellar tendon, medial collateral ligament, and cruciate ligament . We excised the tumor and then we measured the bone defect is 19 cm from joint line . Then we reconstructed a hemiarthroplasty system to fill in the defect. We used a tibial component and insert of the primary total knee replacement implant and we connected to the distal using a Kuntscher Nail and a proximal tibial locking plate. We put the nail intramedullary to distal remaining bone . We fixated all the implants with bone cement and we reconstructed the soft tissue using a mesh in anterior side of implants. We reconstructed the cruciate ligament through the insert and tied to the mesh and also we tied all the medial collateral ligament and the remaining patellar tendon to the mesh . We added medial gastrocnemius flap to add coverage of soft tissue covering the implants . We put a posterior splint directly after operation . The patient routinely controlled to our outpatient clinic every month. After 6 weeks, we removed the splint and patient started range of motion 6 weeks after and partial weight bearing using bilateral crutches. Subesquently, we confirmed the histopathology result for HUVOS result and continued with chemotherapy adjuvant for another 5 cycles with regiments of iphosphamide, cisplatin and adriamycin.
Eight months later, lump re-appeared at the same site of previous lesion with pain. The lump size was 2 × 2 × 2 cm with hard consistency and pain visual analogue scale 2-3 . No venectation, no sinus or wound appeared. X-ray confirmed that position of the implant still good with no bony lesion. Then, we did excision of the mass and it came out the result was osteosarcoma (, ).
On 1 year of follow-up, the patient could walk with full weight bearing without any additional aid. She complained no pain, and she could do her daily activity well. The leg length discrepancy was approximately 1 cm, her knee flexion-extension range of motion was 10 to 50 degrees within stable varus valgus test, motoric strength 4, and the MSTS score was 21 .