A 44-year-old man with no specific medical history presented to his previous physician with a chief complaint of abdominal pain. He was transferred to our hospital on suspicion of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm. Two liters of transfusion was administered to maintain blood pressure. When he arrived at our emergency room, his blood pressure was 75/50 mmHg and heart rate was 110/min. His consciousness was clouded. Physical examination revealed tenderness in the pericardial area. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed contrast leakage from the PDA mass, and the CA was compressed by MAL, leading to the diagnosis of PDA aneurysm rupture associated with MALS . IVR was performed to block the blood flow to the aneurysm . There was no evidence of extravasation from the aneurysm after hemostasis. Abdominal distention due to intra-abdominal bleeding was prominent, and intravesical pressure was measured at 30 mmHg. There was concern about abdominal compartment syndrome, but since the patient’s hemodynamics was stable and there was no evidence of organ damage, laparotomy to decompress the abdomen was not performed. After IVR embolization, the patient was still intubated and admitted to the ICU to perform decompressive laparotomy immediately when it was needed. After admitting to the ICU, continuous aspiration was performed from the nasogastric tube. Two hours after the first IVR, his intravesical pressure had dropped to 10 mmHg. The patient was extubated the day after the first IVR. Intravesical pressure had normalized. Abdominal compartment syndrome did not occur. The patient’s condition stabilized and he was discharged on the ninth day of hospitalization. Therefore, the patient was admitted 2 months after treatment with IVR and underwent retroperitoneal endoscopic MAL incision . There were no complications and the patient was discharged 8 days after surgery. Echocardiography and contrast-enhanced CT 2 months after discharge confirmed that the compression and flow of the CA had improved.