A 45-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital by his local dentist; he had constant pain in the head and neck region, particularly on the right side. The dentist had initially suspected temporomandibular disease, but owing to atypical symptoms, he was eventually referred to our hospital for further examination. He had various symptoms, including dysphagia, foreign body sensation, and headache. Our patient had been treated by several specialists including an otolaryngologist, a neurologist, and another dentist, during the past few years with no relief or signs of improvement. At first presentation, he complained of constant neck pain and odynophagia; however, palpation of the tonsils did not worsen the pain. Our patient had no history of a trauma, surgical treatment, or neurological or infectious foci. After clinical examination and basic radiological diagnostics, an elongated SP was suspected as the cause of his problems. Computed tomography (CT) images showed a longer and thicker right SP when compared with the left side. Our patient was diagnosed with Eagle’s syndrome in view of the neck pain and radiographic images . Analgesics (daily doses of meloxicam 10 mg) were administered to our patient; the condition was explained to him and operative treatment was recommended. Our patient declined the strong percutaneous approach; therefore, we decided to use the transoral approach. To minimize the risk of damage to the surrounding healthy tissue and difficulty in locating the SP, preoperative digital planning was performed for computed navigation.
An investigation of the cervical blood vessels on the right side demonstrated that the SP and the branches of the internal and external carotid arteries were located in proximity to each other. Therefore, accurate preoperative planning was essential. Furthermore, since the transoral approach was being employed, it was necessary to reproduce the same mouth opening conditions during the taking of preoperative images as that required during surgery. This is because the position of the SP and the blood vessels may change depending on the position of the mandible during the mouth opening. As it is difficult to implement the locational findings from the preoperative imaging data while performing the surgery owing to the mobile nature of the mandible, we used a custom interocclusal splint for repeated maximum opening in the same mandibular position while enabling surgical access. As part of the CT imaging preparation for navigation, a custom interocclusal splint was fabricated by pressing acrylic resin into a dental mold obtained during the first visit. First, the created bimaxillary upper and lower jaw splints were adhered with resin at the maximum mandibular opening position. Because there was the possibility of distortion with fixation of only the molar portion, we added a supplementary small strut to the anterior region without hindering the surgical approach . Maxillofacial CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were obtained using the customized interocclusal splint to maintain the mandible in the same position during repeated movements; this was vital to maintain accuracy during the transoral approach.
The imaging data were obtained in Digital Imaging and Communication in Medicine format and transferred to a Medtronic StealthStation S7 workstation using the Synergy Fusion Cranial 2.2.6 software (Medtronic Navigation Inc., Louisville, CO, USA). Our patient was taken to the operating room where the custom interocclusal splint was reinserted. A Patient Tracker EM, which acted as a reference array to track the navigation probe, was affixed on to our patient’s forehead. To perform patient to CT and MRI data registration, the instrumentation navigation probe was used to trace the reference array and soft tissue landmarks of the face . After data registration was complete, continuous three-dimensional (3D) tracking of the navigation probe was available to the surgeon in real time. This was possible because of the maximum mandibular opening position during CT and MRI and in the operating room following the use of the interocclusal splint. In this case, as the splint was not in direct contact with the surgical site, it was not sterilized but was chemically disinfected with benzalkonium chloride.
Using the navigation pointer, the tip of the elongated SP was detected based on the navigation image on the screen and easily located through the oral mucosa . The incision in the oral mucosa was designed closest to the tip of the SP to enable easy access with minimal injury. An oral lingual incision (20 mm) was made in the mucosa posterolateral to the pharyngopalatine arch and superior to the tonsillar bed, without tonsillectomy. The blood vessels surrounding the SP were also visible on the navigation monitor, and therefore, we could treat them with care. The navigation pointer was inserted into the wound and moved along the SP until it reached the intended resection spot . After the resection spot was confirmed, the SP was pinched off using bone-holding forceps while the thicker portion was cut down by piezoelectric surgery . The resected SP was then taken out , and a prophylactic drain was left in place before closing the wound on the next day of surgery. The operation time was 37 minutes. The amount of bleeding was very small and it was difficult to measure. Follow-up examination showed an uneventful recovery with no complications. He noticed complete relief of the symptoms on his right side, and he stated after surgery that his quality of life has improved.