An 18-year-old man was referred to the accident and emergency department of our hospital with a 5-day history of abdominal discomfort, vomiting and fresh blood in his stools. The patient had passed bloody stools five times in the last 36 hours. The clinical evaluation revealed diffuse abdominal pain, localized mostly in the right lower quadrant with no signs of peritoneal irritation. The rectal examination was positive for blood. His vital signs were: blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, pulse rate 92/minute, respiratory rate 16/minute, and temperature 37.10 C. Physical examination of the other systems showed no abnormality. Laboratory tests returned the following values: white blood cell count 7.53 K/μL (Neut. 56.2%, Lymph. 34.7%, Mono. 6.6%, and Eos. 2.0%); red blood cell count, 3.94 M/μL; hematocrit, 29.3%; hemoglobin, 11.3 g/dL; platelets, 239 K/μL; C-reactive protein, 0.1 mg/dl; erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 1 mm/hour; and normal biochemical parameters and urinalysis. The patient had a long history of recurrent abdominal pain. From the age of 12, he started occasionally having mild abdominal pain located mostly in the right lower quadrant and radiating into the back. He was not passing bloody stools. Three years previously, an ultrasound of the upper and lower abdomen was performed which revealed findings of ileitis. Therefore a computed tomography (CT)-scan of the abdomen with contrast was obtained which showed a thickened wall of the terminal ileum and a small amount of fluid at the lower limit of the cecum, inside the small pelvis. The possibility of the presence of an inflammatory disease of the bowel was considered and a colonoscopy with multiple biopsies was performed. The colonoscopy showed no macroscopic abnormalities of the large-bowel mucosa and the terminal ileum (15 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve). However, histological findings were compatible with Crohn's disease. Although the patient received mesalazine, his clinical condition deteriorated and therefore a more detailed evaluation was performed including video capsule endoscopy, CT enteroclysis with barium meal and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen. Nevertheless, these investigations showed no abnormality. An exploratory laparoscopy was undertaken for suspected MD without discovering any findings which could explain the patient's symptomatology and an incidental appendicectomy was performed.
The patient was admitted to our hospital for further investigation. A Tc-99 m scan was performed which revealed an accumulation of pertechnetate in the abdomen laterally to the bifurcation of the iliac artery . This finding was compatible with a MD and a second laparoscopic exploration was performed. Under general anesthesia, a 10-mm subumbilical port for the laparoscope was inserted by the Hassan technique and a pneumoperitoneum was created with carbon dioxide insufflation at a pressure of 12 mmHg. Two working ports (5-mm and 10-mm) were inserted into the lower abdomen to facilitate bowel examination. The general laparoscopic examination was negative for gross intra-abdominal lesions. Through inspection with a 0 grade laparoscopic optic fiber, the ileocecal junction was identified. A carefully step-wise inspection from the ileocecal junction proximally was accomplished. A MD was found, located 50 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve. After dissecting the mesenterium with Ligasure, the MD was resected by tangential excision using an Endo-Gia-stapler and it was removed using an Endocath. The histological examination of the resected specimen confirmed the presence of heterotopic gastric mucosa (HGM) and the complete resection. Recovery was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. The patient remains asymptomatic 6 months after surgery.