A 35-year-old right-handed male presented to the emergency department at our hospital with a 24 history of a painful swollen right thumb with surrounding cellulitis. The patient worked at a metal fabrication factory, dealing with cutting, and welding of various metals from international suppliers. Other than a lumbar decompression a few years ago, he had no previous medical history of note. As a child, the patient had received a full immunization program but had no further boosters. There was no history of acute trauma, and he was systemically well. He was sent home with oral flucloxacillin and advised to return if symptoms worsened.
A few hours later, he developed a high temperature with chills and returned to the emergency department where he was referred to the on-call orthopedic team. On further questioning, the episode had started with pain and swelling in the distal phalanx of the thumb the previous day. While at dinner, he experienced an episode lasting 30-60 s, when his thumb had become rigid, and he was unable to use cutlery, but this resolved spontaneously.
On examination, his right thumb and thenar eminence were grossly swollen, erythematous, and exquisitely tender to palpation. He held the thumb in flexion, with the interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joint movements very limited and painful. There was a small superficial collection dorsally on the radial aspect of the proximal phalanx base. Ascending lymphangitis was present extending into the axilla but without palpable lymph nodes. Furthermore, noted was a small, nearly completely healed puncture wound at the fingertip. He recalled that 2 weeks ago, he had been injured with a metal splinter that he was able to extract it using a needle; however, the wound became infected. It discharged pus for a few days, and then seemingly resolved of its own accord, so he did not seek help.
The patient was then admitted for intravenous antibiotics and strict elevation. Blood tests showed mild neutrophilia (8.8) and elevated C-reactive protein (114). Calcium, magnesium, liver function, and thyroid function tests were all within range. All investigations carried out on admission are summarized in .
The patient was taken to theater the next morning for a formal wound exploration and washout. At the time of tourniquet inflation, his right hand went into a carpopedal spasm, with full flexion of the metacarpophalangeal joints and wrist joint of the right hand with extension of the interphalangeal joints. His hand would remain in this position until an infusion of a muscle relaxant was given to allow surgery to proceed. At surgery, there was only a superficial collection with no tendon sheath involvement.
The unusual intra-operative events were discussed with a consultant microbiologist, who agreed that the signs would be consistent with a case of localized tetanus. Metronidazole was added to the antibiotic regimen, and a single infusion of human immunoglobulin (10,000 units) was given, as no tetanus immunoglobulin was available within the trust.
A single dose of tetanus toxoid was also given as a booster, and the patient was then sent home after 48 h of monitoring. Wound swab taken intraoperatively did not grow any organisms.