A previously healthy 18-year-old man presented with a 2-month history of spontaneous right foot drop. The symptoms of tingling numbness started after the patient sat in cross-legged position for 2 h as a part of military training. When the patient got up from the cross-legged position, he was not able to dorsiflex his foot and had numbness in the foot. Physical examination showed numbness of the lateral leg and dorsum of the foot and 0 out of 5 grade of the Medical Research Grading Scale in ankle and great toe dorsiflexion and ankle eversion. The knee and leg radiographs and magnetic resonance imaging did not show any space-occupying lesions. The patient was treated with an ankle foot orthosis, physiotherapy, and oral 5-day course methylprednisolone therapy. The symptoms of foot drop and sensory loss did not improve with non-operative treatment over 3 months. Nerve conduction studies showed increased latency and decreased amplitude of the right peroneal nerve at the knee, whereas electromyography showed denervation of the tibialis anterior and extensor digitorum brevis. A clinical diagnosis was made of CPN palsy due to CECS not responsive to non-operative treatment.
The patient underwent a surgery for CPN and superficial peroneal nerve (SPN) neurolysis and anterior and lateral leg compartment release with two separate incisions. Proximally, a 5 cm incision centered on the head of the fibula was used to release the fascia over CPN . The nerve was traced proximally and showed no compression. Distally, the anterior compartment of the leg was decompressed by incising the anterior septum between the tibialis anterior and extensor hallucis longus . The lateral compartment was released by incising the posterolateral septum between the extensor hallucis longus and peroneal muscles and also the septum posterior to the peroneal muscles. A second incision measuring 12 cm centered 11 cm proximal to the tip of the distal fibula and 2 cm lateral to the anterior border of the tibia was used to decompress the SPN. The nerve was identified as it emerged from the deep lateral compartment and the fascia around it was released. The subcutaneous lateral compartment fasciotomy was performed all the way to the proximal tibia followed by a distal release down to the peroneal tunnel. The anterior compartment was released proximally all the way to the origin of the tibialis anterior and distally to the ankle extensor retinaculum.
After 12 days postoperatively, the patient had improvement in active ankle dorsiflexion up to neutral but no sensory improvement. At 3 months postoperatively, the patient had improvement in dorsiflexion and eversion of grade 3 out of 5 and 50% sensory improvement in the lateral part of the leg and dorsum of the foot. At 6 months postoperatively, the patient had full recovery of muscle power in ankle dorsiflexion and eversion and sensation in the lateral part of the leg and dorsum of the foot. At the last follow-up of 1 year after surgery, the patient returned to daily and recreational activities of playing football and paddle tennis without limitations.