The patient was hospitalized on January 26, 2022, because of abdominal pain, palpitations, and numbness in both lower limbs for a duration of 2 d
A 25-year-old woman presented with unexplained splenomegaly during a physical examination at 18 years of age. She felt no discomfort so had no further diagnosis and treatment until she was admitted to the hospital in November 2018 because of recurring abdominal pain caused by calculous cholecystitis. We planned to perform cholecystectomy, with preoperative abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showing splenomegaly and normal liver imaging morphology. Gastroscopy examination indicated esophageal varices and portal hypertensive gastropathy, Blood analyses indicated a significant reduction in platelet count (33 × 109/L). This finding was attributed to hypersplenism resulting from splenomegaly. However, no additional investigation was performed via bone marrow puncture. Selective laparoscopic cholecystectomies and splenectomies were performed. Nodular changes were observed on the surface of the liver during surgery and a small amount of liver tissue was obtained for pathological analyses. The postoperative pathological diagnosis of the liver tissue revealed the presence of liver cirrhosis and bile duct injury (epigastrium CT, gastroscope, liver and spleen pathological tissue pictures are shown in Figure ). The results of the laboratory tests for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBSAg), hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody, ceruloplasmin, iron, ferritin, antinuclear antibody (ANA) antibody spectrum, autoantibody against the liver, anticardiolipin antibody, and antineutrophil were negative. The etiology of liver cirrhosis remained unclear. Because of the apparent elevation of ALP and GGT levels in the liver, ursodeoxycholic acid was administered at a dose of 15 mg/kg/d. In July 2020, positive urinary protein was initially detected, followed by the onset of persistent proteinuria and hypoproteinemia. The patient received medical attention from the nephrology department to exclude the possibility of rheumatism and immune-related ailments. However, the etiology of this condition remained unknown. The patient was hospitalized on January 26, 2022, because of abdominal pain, palpitations, and numbness in both lower limbs for a duration of 2 d.
The patient has no history of alcohol consumption, medication, or hepatitis.
The patient refrained from consuming alcohol or any form of drugs. The patient denied any family history of tumors.
The results of the physical examination revealed tenderness in the upper abdominal region, along with the presence of ascites and edema in both lower extremities. No apparent jaundice of the skin or sclera was observed, and the nervous system exhibited normal function.
Peripheral blood tests indicated a significant increase in GGT and ALP levels, which are indicative of impaired liver function. However, renal function was within normal limits. Additionally, the levels of N-brain natriuretic peptide precursor and troponin were significantly elevated. Routine urine analyses indicated a urinary protein level of 3 + and a 24-h urinary protein level of 744.98 mg/24-h. Following the administration of symptomatic treatment, the patient’s symptoms improved. The etiology of liver cirrhosis, including but not limited to HBSAg, HCV antibody, ceruloplasmin, ANA antibody spectrum, and autoantibodies, yielded negative findings.
An abnormality was observed on electrocardiography. CT of the upper abdomen revealed ascites attributed to cirrhosis . To investigate the etiology of liver cirrhosis, exons of the entire genome from patients’ peripheral blood were analyzed. These findings revealed the presence of a heterozygous mutation in the ABCB4 c.2318G>T gene (see Figure for the electrocardiography, electromyography, and ABCB4 gene mutation sites). ABCB4 mutations are associated with several clinical manifestations including cholecystolithiasis, bile duct injury, and cholestasis. In some cases, patients may progress to cirrhosis, as evidenced by persistent and significant abnormalities in GGT and ALP liver function tests. However, the development of additional symptoms such as massive proteinuria, abnormal cardiac function indices, and numbness in both lower limbs suggests the presence of other factors that contribute to the development of systemic multiple organ diseases. In light of the patient’s splenomegaly of unknown etiology at the age of 18 years, there was a potential association with hematologic or neoplastic pathologies. Subsequent analyses revealed the presence of hyperplastic anemia on standard bone marrow examination, whereas bone marrow biopsy indicated a significant decrease in hematopoietic tissue proliferation. The serum and urine immunofixation electrophoresis results were negative. Immunohistochemical analyses of hematological tumors (specifically, bone marrow blood) did not detect monoclonal B cells. The results of cardiac ultrasound and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging plus pyrophosphate radionuclide scanning were within normal limits. The positron emission tomography-CT scan yielded negative results for tumor lesions. However, the levels of free κ and λ light chains in serum and urine increased (blood free κ light chain 45.41 mg/L, blood free λ light chain 63.07 mg/L, urine free κ light chain 72.40 mg/L, and urine free λ light chain 65.20 mg/L). Electromyography results indicated a decrease in the conduction velocity of the superficial peroneal nerve. These findings suggested the potential presence of amyloidosis; however, a pathological assessment was required for confirmation. The liver and spleen pathological tissues that were preserved after the 2018 operation, as well as the bone marrow biopsy tissue from the current hospitalization, were subjected to Congo red staining with permission from the patients and their families. The staining findings were uniformly positive. Additionally, further renal puncture examination revealed positive Congo red staining in the pathological tissue, immunohistochemical κ staining positive, λ staining negative. Liver mass spectrometry (MS) analyses also confirmed κ light chain amyloidosis . Although heart involvement was suspected, the patient and his family refused myocardial biopsy considering the danger, but the diagnosis of primary light chain (κ) amyloidosis was sufficient. At this point, the mystery of splenomegaly with an unknown etiology, persistent cirrhosis, proteinuria, peripheral neuropathy, and cardiac function damage was finally resolved.