A 34-year-old Asian woman presented to the nephrology department of Peking University First Hospital in August 2015 with an over two-week history of intermittent fever. She had been on continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis for 9 months before admission. The patient had type 2 diabetes mellitus and initiated insulin injection five years before. Four months before admission the hemoglobin A1c level was 6.2%. Besides, she was diagnosed as anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) associated glomerulonephritis three years before and treated with immunosupressive therapy of corticosteroid, cyclophosphamide and azathioprine. Except for predinisone with a dosage of 2.5 mg (mg) daily, other immunosuppressive agents had been discontinued one year before. She did not smoke, drink alcohol, or use illicit drugs. Her mother had diabetes mellitus too.
Fifteen days before admission, this patient had suffered from a fever of 37.5–38 degrees Celsius, and abdominal pain. Culture of cloudy peritoneal fluid with a high nucleated cell count of 1848/m3 (80% polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs)) grew Acinetobacter baumanni. She was diagnosed as PDAP and treated with intraperitoneal vancomycin (1 g every five day) and oral moxifloxacin, Clinically improvement was observed within 24 h. Peritoneal effluent became clear and nucleated cell count decreased to 10/m3 within five days. One week before admission, the patient presented to our emergency room with a high fever (39–40 degrees Celsius) again. She reported with nausea and anorexia, but without significant respiratory or abdominal symptoms. Initial laboratory tests showed significantly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP, 114 mg/L; reference range < 8 mg/L) and procalcitonin (PCT, 19.68 ng/mL; reference range < 0.05 ng/mL). A diagnosis of relapsing peritonitis was naturally suspected. Antibiotic therapy of intravenous meropenem and moxifloxacin were given immediately according to the antimicrobial susceptibility results of the last episode of PDAP. However, the patient did not respond to the antibiotic therapy. Clinical worsening was evident with a persistent fever (> 38 degrees Celsius) and symptoms of heart failure including dyspnea and chest distress.
Infectious causes of fever were thoroughly sought. Repeated exam of the peritoneal fluid nucleated cell count and PMNs showed no abnormal. No signs of bacteria, fungi or tuberculosis were found in the peritoneal fluid. Repeated cultures of peritoneal fluid and blood came back negative. A panel of respiratory viral antibodies were screened and no significant positive results were shown. Hypae of Candia albicans in the induced sputum was found. Chest computer tomography (CT) without contrast presented large areas of lung consolidation and ground-glass opacification. Thus, pulmonary fungal infection was suspected and oral voriconazole was added, although the bronchoscopy later found no significant inflammation and culture of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) came back negative including fungi. Immunological tests showed negative ANCA, The levels of immunoglobulins and complement components had no obvious abnormalities. Abdominal and pelvic CT with contrast had no significant findings. The serological tumor markers were unremarkable.
On admission, the vital signs were as follows: temperature 38 degrees Celsius, respiratory rate 20 breaths/minute, blood pressure 130/80 mmHg, saturating 94% with supplementary oxygen through a nasal cannula at 4 L/min. Physical examination found no skin rash or enlarged lymph node. Breath sound was lower in both lungs. On abdominal exam, she was found abdominal distention with weak bowel sounds probably due to hypokalemia (serum potassium 2.0 mmol/L), but no hepatosplenomegaly. There was mild pitting edema bilaterally in the lower limbs. The patient switched to continuous vena-venous hemofiltration (CVVH) and the symptoms of heart failure improved. However, fever persisted without any response to antibiotic therapy. Meanwhile, we observed the pancytopenia, progressive decrease of fibrinogen, as well as elevated liver enzymes .
Pulmonary infection was initially suspected but was later ruled out. Firstly, the patient had no specific symptoms of pneumonia, including coughing and sputum. The symptoms of dyspnea and chest distress were probably due to the acute heart failure, since these symptoms improved soon after CVVH therapy. Secondly, repeated chest CT (five days after the first chest CT) showed both lung consolidation and infiltration mostly absorbed. This dramatic change of chest image was more likely caused by heart failure, rather than pulmonary infection. Drug fever was also considered since the patient had administrated variety antimicrobial agents during the period. However, drug fever could not explain the deterioration of the clinical status and lab index. Further biochemical serum tests showed highly elevated ferritin (15,043.2 ng/ml). A bone marrow aspiration showed the presence of hemophagocytosis . The HLH was suspected. Further molecular testing indicated low natural killer cell activity (11.16%, reference range 15.1–26.9%) and high levels of soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL2R, > 44,000 pg/mL, reference range < 6400 pg/mL), which added to fever, cytopenia, hypofibrinogenemia, increased ferritin and the presence of hemophagocytosis in bone marrow, met the criteria of HLH .
Intravenous methylprednisolone (Medrol) was administrated at a dosage of 40 mg daily. The general condition of the patient improved dramatically including the disappearance of nausea and abdominal distention. Fever subsided after the first dose of Medrol and the body temperature remained normal afterwards. The levels of CRP and PCT gradual dropped to normal range . However, lab results still showed rapid decline of neutrophil count (minimum 0.5 × 109/L), PLT count (minimum 34 × 109/L), and fibrinogen (minimum 1.05 g/L) during the next week , whereas the other coagulation parameters (prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin time) were all within the normal range. The dosage of Medrol increased to 40 mg twice a day, and cyclosporine was then administrated with target plasmatic levels between 100 and 200 μg/L, together with supportive treatment of intravenous immunoglobulin, fibrinogen, and fresh frozen plasma transfusion. We observed a gradual improvement of cytopenia and coagulopathy . The patient was discharged and continued the maintain-phase treatment of HLH on a regimen of oral prednisolone and cyclosporine. The full course of glucocorticoid and cyclosporine was 12 weeks referring to the HLH-2004 protocol . After discharge, the patient went on intermittent hemodialysis in our hemodialysis center. The laboratory tests were taken every 3–6 months. The latest lab results (June 2018) showed normal complete cell count (white-cell count 5830/mm3, hemoglobin 11.5 g/dL, platelets 138,000/mm3). The levels of ferritin and CRP were also in the normal range (123.5 ng/ml and 3.04 mg/L, respectively). Until now, no recurrence of HLH was observed.