A 27-year-old Caucasian woman was brought to the emergency room of our hospital because of newly developed tachycardia with palpitations and hemoptysis. Our patient was receiving regular treatment for her Still's disease in our hospital's Department of Rheumatology. One week before her presentation to our emergency room, she was hospitalized in the Department of Rheumatology because of arthralgia and cough. The symptoms of cough and arthralgia were interpreted to be in keeping with her Still's disease and were treated symptomatically. During the next week at home, her arthralgia disappeared, but she developed swelling of both legs. The swelling worsened dramatically during the last days before her hospitalization. Our patient has a personal history of penicillin allergy. At the age of 20, she had been diagnosed with adult-onset Still's disease. She underwent many different treatments for her rheumatological disease, including cyclosporine, methotrexate, etanercept, steroids, adalimumab, infliximab and leflunomide, but every therapy was limited by side effects and non-compliance of our patient. The best results were actually achieved with permanent steroid therapy. Two weeks before her hospital admission the rheumatologists started a new treatment with anakinra.
At the time of admission, our patient's daily medications were prednisolone 20 mg daily, indomethacin 75 mg daily, esomeprazole 20 mg twice daily, and calcium carbonate with vitamin D3 twice daily. In our emergency room, our patient was drowsy and anxious. Her weight was 63.4 kg. Her blood pressure was 170/110 mmHg, her pulse rate was 160 beats/min (regular), and her temperature was 38.8°C. Her breathing rate was 40 breaths/min. She had normal cardiac auscultation without any murmurs. Her jugular venous pressure was elevated, and she had severe edema. Crackles were heard over both sides of her lung. On palpitation her abdomen was soft and non-tender without any pathological findings. Her neurological examination showed no sensory or motor deficiency. An arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.45, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 3.53 kPa, partial pressure of oxygen 10.5 kPa, hydrogen bicarbonate 18.2 mmol/L, and oxygen saturation 97%. Her electrocardiogram revealed a sinus tachycardia.
Her laboratory results at the time of admission are shown in Table . Serology for hepatitis B and C virus as well as human immunodeficiency virus testing was negative. Immunological tests showed rheumatoid factors < 10 IE/mL (normal value, < 20 IE/mL), antinuclear antibodies ratio 1:160 (normal ratio, < 1:10), anti-native DNA 92 IE/mL (normal value, < 20 IE/mL), anti-smooth muscle antigen 3 E/mL (normal value, < 10 E/mL), anti-U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein 1 E/mL (normal value, < 7 E/mL), antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies 1:160 (normal ratio, < 1:10), glomerular basal membrane antibodies < 10 E/mL (normal ratio, < 1:10 E/ml), neopterin 24.60 ng/mL (normal value, < 2.50 ng/mL), complement component 3 c 0.32 g/L (normal range, 0.90-1.80 g/L), complement component 4 0.07 g/L (normal range, 0.10-0.40 g/l), immunoglobulin free κ-chains 60.70 mg/L (normal range, 3.30-19.40 mg/L), and immunoglobulin free λ-chains 60.10 mg/L (normal range, 5.71-26.30 mg/L). The κ/λ quotient was within the normal range at 1.01 (normal range, 0.26-1.65). The sputum Gram stain showed no bacteria, but the polymerase chain reaction assay was positive for Legionella pneumophila in more than one sputum test. Our patient refused to undergo a bronchoscopy. Antigen testing of our patient's urine for L. pneumophila serogroup 1 was also positive.
In the first urine test, significant proteinuria and hematuria were conspicuous, but our patient was menstruating. Her chest X-ray revealed an infiltrate in her posterior right upper lung with small pleural effusion . Antibiotic treatment with levofloxacin (500 mg twice daily) was started.
Our patient's condition got better over the two days after therapy started, and her respiratory condition gradually improved. However over the next days, edema in both of her legs became worse and her weight (maximum weight, 68.4 kg) and creatinine level (maximum level, 121 μmmol/L) both increased. Her albumin level sharply decreased to 18 g/L. The repeated urine test still revealed severe proteinuria and hematuria. Her erythrocytes were dysmorphic, and there were some cylinders present (hyaline and granulated). Proteinuria of 6.76 g/24 h and albuminuria of 3112.4 μg/min were measured. A renal ultrasound showed bilateral renal enlargement with a reversed core-cortex border and normal vascular function.
An ultrasound-guided renal biopsy was performed on her sixth day in hospital. The biopsy showed extracapillary proliferation in almost all glomeruli, with evidence of fibrinoid necrosis. The glomeruli displayed diffuse mesangial and endocapillary hypercellularity, and in several capillary loops there were neutrophilic granulocytes . Some mesangial areas showed mesangiolysis. No abnormalities of the glomerular basement membrane were seen using light microscopy. The accompanying interstitial changes revealed fibrosis and some degree of edema with lymphocytic infiltration. Tubules and vessels were without relevant pathological findings, especially without signs of vasculitis. An immunofluorescence examination showed mainly mesangial positivity for immunoglobulin G, complement component 3, complement component 1 q and immunoglobulin A, as well as κ- and λ-light chains. Electron microscopy confirmed the presence of subendothelial and mesangial electron-dense deposits, and in some capillary loops there were subepithelial, hump-like deposits. Podocyte feet effacement was diffuse .
These findings were consistent with an endocapillary proliferative immunocomplex glomerulonephritis with post-infection glomerulonephritis. Although our patient had no symptoms of streptococcal infection, we performed tests for antistreptococcal antibodies, all of which were negative (antistreptolysin O < 200 IE/mL, antihyaluronidase < 300 U/mL). So, we found no signs of a streptococcal infection.
Steroid therapy was initiated (prednisone 0.5 mg/kg body weight). Additionally, therapy with diuretics and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors was started. After starting this treatment, our patient's renal function normalized, and over the next weeks her edema and proteinuria disappeared.
We identified a hot water boiler in the patient's apartment as the source of her L. pneumophila infection. The same L. pneumophila serogroup 1 infection that we found in our patient's sputum was found in the water of the boiler.