A 70-year-old Japanese man complained of blurred vision in both eyes and was referred to our clinic because of bilateral fundus lesions. He had a history of CKD and secondary hyperparathyroidism with no family history. CKD is defined as any renal disorder lasting more than 3 months, the severity of which is classified into 1 to 5 stages based on its etiology, urine protein levels and renal function. This patient suffered stage 5 CKD (i.e., end-stage renal failure) of unknown etiology, having received hemodialysis for 35 years.
His best-corrected visual acuity was 0.9 OD and 1.0 OS with mild myopia, and his intraocular pressure was normal OU. Slit-lamp microscopy did not detect any findings except mild cataract OU. Color fundus photography (CFP) revealed pale choroidal lesions in the inferior mid-periphery OD and in the superior and inferonasal regions OS . A cluster of choroidal folds in the superotemporal extra-macular region OS and a choroidal nevus in the temporal mid-periphery OD were also observed. Swept-source OCT (SS-OCT) demonstrated parafoveal ellipsoid zone (EZ) disruption OD , retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) undulation OS and dilated Haller layer veins OU. Choroidal thickness was more than 300 μm OU at the central fovea and attenuated by scleral elevation around the upper arcade . Fluorescein angiography (FA) detected hyperfluorescent spots at the macula from the early to late phases OD , whereas no change was found OS. Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) demonstrated choroidal vascular hyperpermeability (CVH) at the macular areas OU, together with numerous scattered hypofluorescent lesions in the mid-venous phase OU . Linear hyperfluorescent lesions were detected OS corresponding to the extra-macular choroidal folds on CFP and SS-OCT. Fundus autofluorescence (FAF) showed multiple hypoautofluorescent spots surrounded by hyperautofluorescent areas at the posterior pole OD, suggesting RPE disruption , whereas no significant abnormalities were found OS. Laser speckle flowgraphy (LSFG) is a blood flow imaging device based on laser scattering, which non-invasively allows for two-dimensional visualization of fundus circulation in diseases such as intraocular tumor . On LSFG, both eyes exhibited macular hypoperfusion represented by cold colors, and the right eye with RPE/EZ disruption at the macula showed a colder color pattern than the left eye . B-mode echography displayed hyperechoic solid lesions with acoustic shadowing , which indicated calcification in concert with bilateral scleral high-density areas on orbital computed tomography .
Laboratory tests revealed that serum creatinine levels increased at 6.35 mg/dl. Serum calcium and phosphorus levels slightly decreased to 8.3 mg/dl (normal: 8.8–10.1), and 2.6 mg/dl (normal: 2.7–4.6), respectively. Vitamin D3 levels decreased to 9 pg/ml (normal: 20–60). Since he had taken a daily oral use of the vitamin D analogue alfacalcidol, parathyroid hormone levels were within the normal range. The patient was diagnosed with SCC based on the multimodal imaging characteristics. The patient’s ocular manifestation was observed with no treatment. His ophthalmological findings remained unchanged 7 months after the diagnosis.