A 70-year-old man with a prior medical history of hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, smoking, and severe peripheral arterial disease treated with femoro-femoral bypass presented to the emergency department with hypotension and severe dyspnoea. On physical examination, he had a slow rising pulse and auscultation revealed a 3/6 ejection systolic murmur radiating to the carotids, with reduced second heart sound. Presenting vital signs included 85/60 mmHg, 120 b.p.m., 28 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation of 80% on room air. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (30%) and low-flow, low-gradient AS (pressure gradients of 55 mmHg peak/34 mmHg mean; peak velocity of 3.5 m/s; stroke volume index 28.6 mL/m2; and aortic valve area of 0.59 cm2). Mechanical ventilation and inotropes were initiated. Admission labs were notable for elevated N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) (14 960 pg/mL) and high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T (200 ng/L). Electrocardiogram showed a right bundle branch block and normal PR segment. A left heart catheterization was performed 24 h after admission, showing a critical stenosis in proximal left artery descending (LAD). Severity assessment of aortic stenosis was completed invasively (aortic valve peak to peak pressure gradient of 63 mmHg and mean gradient of 50 mmHg).
Based on his age, comorbidities, and the haemodynamic presentation, the heart team decided to perform proximal LAD stenting followed by TAVR. A multi-slice cardiac computed tomography (CT) showed an aortic valve annulus diameter of 29.7 mm and a perimeter of 94.4 mm. Of relevance, a significant left ventricular outflow tract calcium nodule was also noted. In addition, obstruction of the right external iliac artery and femoro-femoral bypass occluded with obstruction of the superficial femoral artery were observed.
Angioplasty with drug-eluting stent (XIENCE 3 × 28 mm) was performed on the proximal LAD. A 25 mm balloon valvuloplasty (True Balloon) was performed, and a balloon-expandable (Edwards SAPIEN 3) 29 mm valve was implanted via left transfemoral route. The post-procedural TTE revealed high-velocity left-to-right systolic–diastolic flow from the aortic root (immediately above the prosthesis at the level of the right coronary sinus) to the right ventricle suggestive of a fistula with a calculated Qp/Qs > 2 . During the hospitalization, serial TTEs were performed for monitoring, with stability of the ARV fistula and right ventricular function. The patient was discharged, but during follow-up, the functional class worsened with persistent high levels of NT-proBNP (>2000 pg/mL) despite optimal medical treatment. The heart team decided to close the ARV fistula percutaneously 2 months after TAVR.
Due to the complex anatomy and technical difficulty of the procedure, it was decided to create a 3D model of the heart to better plan the procedure . The patient’s CT scan was segmented using Mimics software (Materialise, Belgium), generating a high-fidelity, patient-specific model. To allow for physical inspection and benchtop testing by the interventional team, the 3D biomodel was then transferred to a prototyping program (Rhinoceros software 5.0, Robert McNeel & Associates, Seattle, WA, USA) to plan the 3D printing process and subsequently print the model using a combination of resin and filament 3D printers. Simulations were exclusively performed on this 3D printed model to better understand the complex anatomy and determine the feasibility of intervention (see online). The simulation process was performed under fluoroscopy, simulating either an antegrade or retrograde approach. The deployment of the Amplatzer device was also simulated step by step.
An antegrade approach (through the right femoral vein) was attempted crossing the defect with a 0.035 in hydrophilic wire with a straight tip (Terumo Radifocus®), and an arteriovenous loop was established using a 20 mm Goose Neck snare (Palex Medical). A 9F Amplatzer® TorqVue® (St. Jude Medical) delivery sheath was then advanced from the right ventricle, crossing the defect and entering the aorta. This approach was unsuccessful because the VSD Amplatzer® device consistently migrated towards the RV and did not secure well between the sinus of Valsalva and the TAVR. Therefore, a retrograde approach was perofrmed, and an 18 mm Amplatzer® atrial septal occluder occluder was implanted. The post-procedural TTE showed a decreased residual fistula without significant shunt and a calculated Qp/Qs 1.5 . At 2 years follow-up, the patient was stable, with improvement in functional class [New York Heart Association (NYHA) I–II/IV] and NT-proBNP levels lower than 1000 pg/mL.