A 16-year-old boy was referred to our department due to persistent high fever and an abnormal chest shadow.
Four months earlier, he had been diagnosed with RUNX1-RUNX1T1-positive acute myeloid leukemia (AML) (WHO classification 5th ed). RUNX1-RUNX1T1 is a fusion oncogene resulting from the chromosomal translocation t(8;21) and plays a crucial role in AML . After one course of induction therapy (idarubicin 12 mg/m2 day1–3, cytarabine 100 mg/m2 day1–7), hematological complete remission (CR) was achieved, and the patient underwent consolidation therapy with a high-dose cytarabine (HDAC) regimen (cytarabine 2 g/m2 q12h day1–5). During the second course of HDAC therapy, the patient developed febrile neutropenia and was empirically treated with cefepime and teicoplanin. Later, blood culture showed Corynebacterium striatum. Despite the continuation of antibiotics and conversion to negative blood cultures, the patient consistently had high grade fever (temperature 40.1℃ axillary) and increased levels of inflammatory marker (C-reactive protein 12.85 mg/dL).
At the time of consultation, the patient showed leukopenia due to chemotherapy, with white blood cell count 200/μL, neutrophil count 20/μL, and lymphocyte count 30/μL. Chest radiography showed bilateral miliary nodules and chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple diffuse small pulmonary nodules with random distribution . Miliary tuberculosis, disseminated infection, and malignancy (lung lesion of leukemia, lung cancer, and metastases of other cancers) was considered in the differential diagnosis from these radiological findings. Notably, the patient tested negative for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). The cultures of three sputum specimens, lung biopsy specimens, blood, urine, and bone marrow fluid were all negative, although the acid-fast bacillus (AFB) were found in one of both the sputum and urine samples. Both Tb-PCR and 8 weeks culture was negative in these samples. Transbronchial lung biopsy showed neutrophil and lymphocyte infiltration in the alveolar space and thickened alveolar septums with no malignant findings. No causative mycobacteria, fungus, and bacteria were found in these lung biopsy specimens by staining and tissue culture. After recovery from the nadir period, as the neutrophils and lymphocytes increased, the small nodules found on chest CT enlarged and were accompanied by discrete hypoxemia . As we could not completely rule out the possibility of miliary tuberculosis, empiric anti-tuberculosis treatment (isoniazid 200 mg/day, pyrazinamide 1 g/day, ethambutol 750 mg/day, and rifampicin 450 mg/day) was initiated. After the initiation of the treatment, the patient’s clinical symptoms gradually improved. The fever and inflammatory markers decreased, and oxygen administration became unnecessary . Subsequently, 7 weeks after chemotherapy initiation, a blood culture from a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line showed the growth of RGM. The PICC was inserted 3 weeks before the consultation. Mass spectrometric analysis by MALDI TOF–MS (Bruker Corp., Massachusetts, USA) revealed that the cultured mycobacterium was M. obuense. Susceptibility to antimicrobial drugs was tested , and the identification of M. obuense was confirmed by gene sequencing of 16 s rRNA. Therefore, the PICC was removed and intravenous amikacin 400 mg/day with a combination of oral medication (rifampicin 450 mg/day, azithromycin 500 mg/day, and moxifloxacin 400 mg/day) was initiated. After 4 weeks of combination therapy, the patient’s clinical symptoms and chest CT findings showed significant improvement , and the patient was discharged. 14 weeks have passed after discharge, and the patient is still continuing oral medication of rifampicin, azithromycin, and moxifloxacin at the outpatient department without relapse or any major adverse events.