In August 2018, a thin, 63 year-old Caucasian female presented to the emergency room with a three-day history of right upper quadrant pain. She was known to have metastatic carcinoid cancer for seven years, receiving treatment with octreotide LAR, which was increased to 50 mg every month one year ago. Everolimus, 10 mg daily, was also added at the same time. During the last year, she developed secondary diabetes which was treated with an oral hypoglycemic agent, metformin.
The patient’s a body temperature was 37.1 °C. She was slightly jaundiced. Murphy’s sign was positive, and a mass was felt in the right upper quadrant. White cell count was 10,400/mm³ with a neutrophil count of 79%. Total bilirubin value was 36 μmol/L (normal: 3–21 μmol/L); aspartate aminotransferase 197 U/L (normal: 5–35 U/L) and alanine aminotransferase 175 U/L (normal: 5–35 U/L). Blood glucose level was 9.6 mmol/L (normal: 4.0–6.0 mmol/L) with HbA1c of 0.078 (normal: 0.045-0.060). Four months before, chromogranin A was 374 μg/L (normal: 0–82 μg/L).
Abdominal ultrasound showed a massively distended gallbladder with multiple gallstones. The common bile duct was dilated as were the intrahepatic bile ducts. Computed tomography demonstrated gallbladder with a thickened wall, measuring 15 cm in length and 5 cm in width. Common bile duct was measured at 1.6 cm with a possibility of stricture.
The patient was admitted with a diagnosis of cholecystitis and treatment with piperacillin-tazobactam was initiated. An endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was scheduled to rule out a stricture or the presence of stones, and this test was done four days later. One obstructive stone was retrieved and there was no evidence of underlying stricture. The same day, an open cholecystectomy was carried out. Laparotomy was elected because of the large size of the gallbladder in a thin patient. At laparotomy, there was no evidence of intraperitoneal tumor. The gallbladder was removed without complication. A drain was left in place. Postoperative care was uneventful. The gallbladder contained several stones and had a necrotic and hemorrhagic wall .
After reviewing the chart of the patient, an abdominal tomography had been performed once a year from the initial diagnosis. The patient was diagnosed in 2011 with an ovarian carcinoid tumor. She underwent bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, hysterectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection. Following surgery, treatment with octreotide LAR was initiated. She developed metastases in nodes, bones and muscles with few months. She developed hearth complications and had tricuspid valve replacement and pacemaker installation in 2013. Everolimus was added to her treatment in August 2017, one year prior to her presentation to the emergency room in 2018.
All exams until 2017 showed a normal nondistended gallbladder. Prior to the acute presentation in 2018 when multiple stones were seen in the gallbladder, no stones were demonstrated; however, records showed that there were no ultrasound exams.