A 25-year-old male presented with low back pain, progressive weakness in lower limbs since 1-month and bladder incontinence since 2 weeks. He had no past or family history of TB. On examination, he was afebrile and other vital parameters were normal. Tenderness and gibbus was present in the lower lumbar spine. Neurological examination revealed Grade 3 power in both lower limbs and hypoesthesia below D8 level. Knee, ankle reflexes were exaggerated with clonus. Babinski reflex was positive bilaterally. There were no signs of meningeal irritation. His erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 77 mm at the end of 1-h. HIV enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was negative. Mantoux test was positive. Chest X-ray showed no abnormality. Plain radiograph of the spine showed paradiscal lesion L2-3 level, while rest of the spine was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine demonstrated paradiscal lesion with paravertebral abscess at L2-3. At the level of D8 vertebra, there was an intramedullary lesion of 12 mm × 9 mm which was hypointense on T1, isointense lesion in T2, and demonstrated ring enhancement on gadolinium contrast . Based on this clinico-radiological picture, a diagnosis of L2-L3 TB with intramedullary tuberculoma (IMT) at D8 level was made and patient was started on multidrug treatment (isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide) and a short course of dexamethasone. At 6 weeks, patient was deteriorated neurologically with Grade 2 power in both lower limbs. Anti-tuberculous therapy was continued. And at 12 weeks patient did not show any signs of improvement. At this point, surgery for spinal cord decompression with excision of the lesion was offered to patient. Surgical resection was performed through posterior approach in prone position. D7-8 laminectomy followed by midline durotomy was performed. Spinal cord was swollen and there was no evidence of any extramedullary lesion. Posterior longitudinal myelotomy was done. We found a grayish mass with a good plane of cleavage from the surrounding cord . A grey, irregular, multilobulated soft mass measuring 12 mm × 10 mm × 6mm was removed completely . Surgery was uneventful and postoperative, his neurological remained same. Histopathology examination showed diffuse & dense infiltrate compromising of lymphocytes, plasma cells, and neutrophils with large areas of caseous necrosis surrounded by sheets of the epithelioid cell and Langerhans type of giant cells. Z-N stain showed no acid-fast bacillus, while tissue culture was negative. Patient slowly showed signs of neurological recovery after 6 weeks however his bladder disturbance persisted. At 3 months after surgery, his lower limb power in hip and knee was completely recovered, with recovered bowel and bladder retention. Post-operative after 6 months patient was walking without support and had functional power in both lower limbs.