A 70-year-old man, with no other medical history, had undergone TUR-BT for a broad-based papillary tumor expending spread to the bladder neck. Pathological findings of TUR-BT revealed urothelial carcinoma, high grade, G3, pT2. The patient underwent preoperative chemotherapy with gemcitabine and cisplatin. However, it was discontinued because skin rashes appeared in the first course. It was changed to chemotherapy with methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin; a total of three cycles were performed.
After neoadjuvant chemotherapy, we performed RARC and neobladder reconstruction by extracorporeal urinary diversion with cT2N0M0. After RARC, a small bowel segment, 55 cm in length, was resected approximately 20 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve, the ileum was arranged in J-shape by the Studer modified technique. The afferent parachute was set to 15 cm and the rest was detubated. It was confirmed that the reservoir reached the pelvic floor after its creation, the internal urethral orifice was formed, and everting suture was performed. The ureter was anastomosed by the Wallace method. The urethral anastomosis was performed with difficulty, due to the tension created, using six singular sutures by 3-0 absorption thread. Although a minor leakage was found during the leak test, we decided to observe. The drainage tube was placed on the pelvic floor. Immediately after surgery, we found the urethral catheter falling off spontaneously. We tried to replace it with a cystoscope. However, it was impossible because anastomosis between the ileal neobladder and urethra was separated. Thus, we reopened the abdomen and sutured it again. Only minor leakage was found during the leak test. Pathological findings revealed invasive urothelial carcinoma with glandular differentiation (pT4aN0Mx) and the surgical margin was negative. A CT performed to evaluate the fever etiology on the 11th POD showed fluid storage near the urethral anastomosis (Fig. ). We suspected lymphocele infection and CT-guided drainage was performed and a pigtail-type drainage tube was placed (Fig. ). The drainage creatinine level was 50.2 mg/dL. The cause of fever was diagnosed to be urine leakage. The leakage was also found on cystography (Fig. ) and the urethral catheter was lightly towed. On the 21st POD, a CT scan showed that the urethral catheter had completely fallen off the neobladder (Fig. ). The position of the urethral catheter was adjusted into the neobladder under fluoroscopy immediately. Five days later, a similar incidence happened, which suggested the existence of a large space peri the neobladder-urethral anastomosis.
On the 33rd POD, we performed bilateral PCN and confirmed the anastomotic dehiscence of suture in the 1 to 6 o'clock direction with cystoscopy. Leakage did not improve at all on the 40th POD, and we decided to use fibrin glue to treat the severe anastomotic leakage. Since the patient's nutritional status had already improved postoperatively and it would take a long time to close the anastomotic dehiscence, thereby we decided to actively intervene. On the 42nd POD, we observed the anastomotic dehiscence and the pigtail-type drainage tube using a cystoscope. Then, we injected 10 mL of fibrin glue into the large space beside the anastomosis from the drainage tube . Finally, we sprayed 5 mL around the anastomotic dehiscence of suture from the ureteral catheter using a cystoscope . The drainage tube was immediately removed to avoid clogging with the fibrin glue. On the 54th POD, we cystographically confirmed no leakage (Fig. ); we then removed the bilateral nephrostomy catheter. The patient was discharged after 61 days of hospitalization. Urinary incontinence continued for about 2 months after discharge from the hospital, though improved thereafter and the patient was managed with spontaneous voiding by abdominal pressure. It has been 1 year since then without any leakage, anastomosis stricture, or recurrence of cancer.