We describe the case of an 18-year-old woman with chest pain radiating to the left arm at rest. Her past medical history was unremarkable, apart from Graves’ disease on treatment with methimazole at a dosage of 5 mg/die. She came to our attention in 2020, when she was admitted to the emergency department (ED) for the onset of sharp chest pain radiated to the left arm and to the trapezius ridge. Pain was less severe when in a seated position and more severe when in a supine position, when breathing deeply or during coughing. No episodes of fever, diarrhoea, respiratory symptoms, or myalgia were reported in the previous days. In the ED, the pain was persistent; laboratory findings showed no significant abnormalities. In particular, cardiac markers, D-dimer, complete blood count, C-reactive protein, and procalcitonin were normal. The ECG showed tachycardia at 128 b.p.m. and diffuse, concave (‘saddle-shaped’) and non-specific ST-segment elevations in all leads except aVR and V1, and PR-segment depression except aVR. Analgesic drugs were administered and the patient was then hospitalized in the Cardiology Department for further diagnostic and therapeutic assessment. On physical examination, blood pressure was 141/63 mmHg and body temperature 36.5°C. On cardiac auscultation, S1 and S2 heart sounds were normal and no pathological murmur was reported; no friction rub was heard. Absence of jugular vein distension and no pulsus paradoxus was reported. Laboratory tests were repeated and showed no significant abnormalities: serum Beta 2 microglobulin, electrolytes, lactate dehydrogenase, and transaminases (ALT, AST) were normal and renal function was not impaired, thus ruling out uraemic pericarditis. Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was suppressed (<0.0008 mIU/L, local lab normal reference range: 0.4–4 mIU/L) and serum-free thyroxine 4 was increased (61.24 pg/mL, reference range: 8–19 pg/mL); cardiac markers and acute-phase proteins were still negative. Antithyroid therapy was optimized, increasing methimazole dosage to 10 mg TID, and oral propanolol 10 mg TID was introduced. Laboratory tests for autoimmune diseases were performed and the antinuclear antibody panel, lupus anti-coagulant, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasm antibodies were negative. Additionally, anti-mitochondrial (AMA, M2), anti-extractable nuclear antigens, anti-actin smooth muscle antibodies, and anti-Scl-70 (topoisomerase I) antibodies were negative, excluding systemic autoimmune and auto-inflammatory causes of pericardial diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma and vasculitis. Tests for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) (nasopharyngeal swab), Epstein–Barr virus, human immunodeficiency virus, hepatitis C virus, Enterovirus, Parvovirus B19, and Adenovirus were also negative, so that the main viral infectious causes of pericarditis were excluded. Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction (EF = 65%), absence of valvular diseases, no pericardial effusion, and normal right ventricular dimensions and function. Thoracic non-ECG-gated CT angiography was then performed and acute aortic and pulmonary diseases were ruled out. The CT showed the presence of a pericardial effusion with slightly increased density (with radiological characteristic not consistent with blood nature) having a maximum thickness of 15 mm in the upper mediastinum. To characterize this effusion, gadolinium cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and the effusion turned out to be an extrapericardial mass of 73 × 51 mm located in the upper mediastinum. A minimal pericardial effusion was found near the anterior mid-basal wall of the left ventricle where the mass had contact with the pericardium. The pericardium, however, showed no signs of infiltration by the mass and no late gadolinium enhancement was described. In view of this and in the absence of surrounding lymphadenopathies, the haematology specialist indicated biopsy of the mass, which was then performed through video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery. Histological analysis showed true thymic hyperplasia and, from an anatomopathological point of view, prevalence of thymic cortex with various Hassall’s bodies in the absence of lymphoid infiltration was described. After the improvement of the symptoms, the patient was discharged and ambulatory follow-up was planned. At the 1-month follow-up visit on 4 November 2020, the patient was asymptomatic, TSH levels were normal (3 mIU/L), anti-TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb) were 10 IU/L (vs. 35.50 IU/L on admission; reference range <0.55 IU/L), and a 12-month cardiac MRI was planned.