Three years before presenting at our ENETS center, when he was 43 years old, the patient was diagnosed with a WHO grade 1 subependymoma. This intracranial lesion was resected microsurgically in an external hospital. Further pre-existing conditions were unknown. After surgery the patient complained about dyspnea and cough. An X-ray examination at that time revealed a right-sided basal pneumonia, which was treated with antibiotics. However, during the following years, the patient suffered from an abnormal feeling of satiety, weight gain of 20 kg in 3 years and acral enlargement . His shoe size increased from 44 to 46, the size of gloves from 9 to 11. Furthermore, he developed pain in his ankles, knees as well as in his hips and femur. He noticed a protrusion of the jaw and a clipped speech due to macroglossia and sleeping apnea. Repeated contrast-enhanced imaging studies were performed to rule out pathologies at the level of the pituitary gland. These examinations did not reveal any evidence of a pituitary adenoma. However, growth hormone (GH) and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) levels were found to be massively elevated . In contrast, growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) was not elevated. GH suppression testing showed clearly the presence of a clinically active acromegaly. A subsequent 68Gallium-DOTATOC PET-CT revealed a large tumor-atelectasis-complex in the right basal upper lobe with a compression of the middle and lower bronchus with somatostatin receptor positivity indicative for a well-differentiated neuroendocrine pulmonary tumor . Retrospectively, a tumor formation could be assumed when comparing X-ray images of 2010 with actual PET-CT. Metastatic lesions were not detected by PET-CT indicating a localized disease stage. Subsequently, endobronchial ultrasound with transbronchial needle aspiration was performed. The tissue was analyzed immunohistochemically revealing an intense positive staining for synaptophysin, chromogranin A and CD 56 with a small amount of Ki-67 positive cells . In contrast, TTF-1 was negative. Following interdisciplinary tumor board recommendation, the patient has been resected in curative intent and lobectomy was performed. Afterwards, immunohistochemical evaluations presented a typical pulmonary carcinoid (Ki-67 < 2 %) with abundant IGF-1 expression as cause of the acromegaly . Postoperative blood tests confirmed the normalization of circulating GH and IGF-1 as markers of complete removal of the tumor . Clinically, the patient improved dramatically. Analysis of the coding region of the MEN 1-gen (Exon 2–10; Chromosome 11q13) and flanking intron regions did not reveal any aberration of the sequence or deletion/duplication of single exons. Moreover, also the family history of the patient did not present the diagnosis of a neuroendocrine neoplasia. To date, the patient is recurrence-free and under follow-up.