A 29-year-old gravida 1 woman presented at 6 weeks and 2 days of gestational age for prenatal care. She had a history of liver toxicity that occurred in 2009 and again in 2014, which was thought to be related to drug-induced liver injury caused by oral contraceptive pills. At the time of her liver toxicity episodes, she had had an extensive infectious and autoimmune workup, which included testing for acute and chronic hepatitis A, hepatitis E, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and human herpesvirus, all of which were negative. A liver biopsy was taken in 2014 which was consistent with possible drug-induced cholestasis. At the beginning of her pregnancy, she started having symptoms of pruritus, dark urine, and pale stool. She was followed by the hospital's monthly maternal critical care conference meetings from the beginning of her pregnancy because of her cholestasis diagnosis, elevated liver enzymes, and initial elevated TSBA levels of 215 μmol/L at 8 weeks and 3 days of gestation.
She was being followed by hepatology experts and was initially started on ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) 300 mg 3 times a day, which was subsequently increased to 600 mg 2 times a day in her first trimester. She reported mild improvement in her symptoms after she was started on ursodiol. Her liver enzymes, which had been in a mixed hepatocellular and cholestatic pattern, improved after starting the UDCA. An underlying genetic cause within the differential diagnosis was suspected as the culprit of her clinical presentation, especially because of the patient's previous recurrent cholestatic episodes before her pregnancy. The follow-up plan during her pregnancy included liver profile and bile acid monitoring every 2 to 4 weeks , weekly bilirubin checks , serial growth ultrasounds every 4 weeks, nonstress tests twice weekly starting at 32 weeks of gestation, and ultimately delivery via induction of labor at 36 to 37 weeks and pending maternal and fetal status. Her growth ultrasounds were within normal limits with the last growth done at 32 weeks of gestation. Because of her increasing TSBA levels, the patient's UDCA dose was increased to 600 mg 3 times daily (15 mg/kg/day) . The plan was then to schedule induction of labor at 36 weeks with administration of 2 doses of betamethasone before her scheduled induction. When she presented for her betamethasone, she had a reactive nonstress test and received her first dose of betamethasone followed by a second dose the next day.
She arrived at 36 weeks and 0 days for induction of labor. She reported having contractions and leakage of yellow-brown fluid, with decreased fetal movement. The patient's cervix was 4 cm dilated with no evidence of prelabor preterm rupture of the membrane. No fetal heart tones were noted, and fetal death was confirmed upon evaluation by 2 healthcare providers. The patient was induced at that time with oxytocin and vaginally delivered a male newborn a few hours after the start of her induction. The newborn had normal anatomy. The patient had fetal death laboratory workup that included assessment of Kleihauer-Betke fetal hemoglobin, complete blood count, thyroid-stimulating hormone, and lactate dehydrogenase levels, in which all were within the reference range, as well as testing for the presence of toxoplasmosis, parvovirus, and antiphospholipid syndrome, all of which were negative. Her liver enzymes remained elevated . A karyotype was performed on the newborn and showed a normal male karyotype. The patient underwent genetic testing after delivery, and her result showed a heterozygous variant of ABCB11, which is one of several recessive alleles associated with BRIC.