A 55-year-old Sri Lankan man employed as a chef in Dubai, United Arab Emirates, presented to the National Hospital of Sri Lanka with fever for five days and associated headache, arthralgia, myalgia and severe prostration approximately 3 weeks after spending 2 months in South Africa as part of his employment. He had been previously well and had not been on chemoprophylaxis for malaria while in South Africa. He has had a worsening non-productive cough and shortness of breath 1 day prior to presentation. On examination, he was pale and had posterior cervical lymphadenopathy. His respiratory rate was 30 cycles/min and he had bilateral diffuse scattered crepitations and rhonchi in both lung bases. Rest of the systems examination was normal.
Initial investigations revealed a marginal neutrophil predominance with thrombocytopaenia (platelets—55,000/mm3) and the chest radiograph showed alveolar-interstitial shadowing. The patient was empirically treated with clarithromycin for 7 days, which resulted in the resolution of the chest symptoms and signs, but with poor resolution of fever. His serum Mycoplasma IgM ELISA (Sigma Aldrich) antibody titre was strongly positive at a dilution of 1/1260 with a repeat titre noted at 1/7560, four weeks after the initial presentation. Given the recent travel history, a blood film was examined for evidence of malaria, but was noted to be negative. Despite initial improvement, progressive thrombocytopenia and worsening anaemia were noted from day 7 of his illness. By day 10, his level of consciousness deteriorated demonstrating abnormal behaviour and worsening drowsiness. Frequent, stereotyped, intermittent orofacial dyskinetic movements, not attributable to any of the drugs administered, were noted (see Additional file ). Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was normal. A blood film done at this time demonstrated multiple ring forms of P. falciparum with a parasite load of 300,000/μl. Intravenous artesunate was commenced and the patient demonstrated remarkable clinical improvement with resolution of abnormal movements and improvement of level of consciousness within 24 h. The high-spiking fever which was persistent up to day 12 of illness resolved. However a further decline in the platelet count was noted up to day 14 and a fall in the haemoglobin to 7 g/dl. His fasting triglyceride level was 405 mg/dl, serum ferritin 25,000 ng/ml and lactate dehydrogenase 1600 U/l. His INR was 1.7; APTT 41s; and fibrinogen level 1.1 g/l. Ultrasound scan of the abdomen demonstrated hepatosplenomegaly. Bone marrow examination demonstrated evidence of resolving haemophagocytosis.
These haematological manifestations subsequently resolved within the next 72 h and the patient made a complete clinical recovery.