A 40-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a chief complaint of lower abdominal pain and melena. His medical history included surgery for acute brachiocephalic dissection at the age of 17 years. He was diagnosed with vEDS by genetic testing, which found missense variants in COL3A1, while hospitalized for symptoms associated with hemothorax at the age of 34. He had no family history of vEDS; however, his mother had died suddenly due to acute aortic dissection.
At our hospital, he was diagnosed with ischemic colitis and conservatively treated by fasting and with antibiotics. Three days after hospital admission, his symptoms exacerbated, and abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed intraperitoneal free air and thickening and thinning of the sigmoid colon wall . Pan-peritonitis caused by the ischemic colitis and consequent perforation of the sigmoid colon was diagnosed. An emergency operation was performed, and contamination of the abdominal cavity with feces was intraoperatively revealed. Moreover, the colonic wall was thinned and edematous, the tissue color was poor from the descending colon to the sigmoid colon, and a 2-cm perforation was observed in the sigmoid colon . As we expected, the tissue was very fragile and bled easily; hence, we performed the surgery more protectively than usual. We resected the descending colon and sigmoid colon, washed the abdominal cavity with 10 L of saline, and constructed a colostomy in the transverse colon. We confirmed the upper abdominal cavity during intraperitoneal lavage, but no obvious organ damage including common hepatic artery was observed. We confirmed sufficient hemostasis and placed two prophylactic drain tubes at the rectovesical pouch and left subdiaphragm. Macroscopically, a perforation was found in the sigmoid colon . Microscopically, infiltration of inflammatory cells and rupture of the muscular layer were observed, and collagen fibers in the submucosal layer tended to be slightly thin .
After the operation, the patient entered the intensive care unit and was managed systemically. Because there were no initial drain-related problems, he was moved to the general ward 3 days after surgery. Five days after surgery, bleeding from the abdominal drainage tube suddenly occurred, and the patient had low blood pressure and was unconscious. Enhanced CT revealed a common hepatic aneurysm rupture that was not present before the surgery . We considered emergency surgery or intravascular treatment, but the patient went into cardiopulmonary arrest, did not respond to resuscitation, and died.