A 35-year-old Ethiopian woman, Gravida 7 and Para 6, with no significant past medical history presented to Dilchora Referral Hospital at gestational age of 36 weeks with a sudden onset right upper quadrant pain of 7 hours duration that radiated to her back. She had experienced nausea and vomiting during the night prior to her presentation at the hospital coupled with inability to tolerate oral intake. Her presentation at the hospital was driven by worsening of these symptoms. She had history of intermittent burning type of epigastric pain prior to pregnancy. She also had contraction and leakage of liquor of 2 hours duration which started while on the way to our hospital. There was no history of vaginal bleeding.
Upon arrival, the patient was in acute distress, with the following vital signs: blood pressure, 95/60 mmHg; pulse rate, 132 beats per minute (bpm); respiratory rate, 32 breaths per minute; and body temperature, 35.9 °C. Abdominal examination showed a grossly distended, rigid, and diffusely tender abdomen, which showed limited movement with respiration. Uterine fundal height was consistent with the gestational age. There were three uterine contractions in 10 minutes, each lasting for 35–40 seconds. The fetal heart beat (FHB) ranged from 120 to 158 bpm. Digital vaginal examination revealed a cervix of 3-cm dilation, a ruptured membrane, clear liquor, and high station. An upright abdominal X-ray demonstrated air under the diaphragm . A bedside ultrasound showed a single intrauterine pregnancy, positive FHB, fundal anterior placenta with a central thickness of 35 mm, gestational age of 36 weeks, an estimated fetal weight of 3000 g, no gross anomaly, and massive amount of intraperitoneal fluid.
With the diagnosis of latent first stage of labor plus acute abdomen secondary to presumed perforated PUD, a general surgeon was consulted, and it was decided to perform laparotomy after delivery. She was resuscitated with crystalloids and put on intranasal oxygen, a nasogastric tube was inserted, and she was catheterized. She was started on intravenous ceftriaxone, metronidazole, and omeprazole. At 4 hours after admission, the labor was augmented with oxytocin, and an alive male neonate weighing 2900 g with an Apgar score of 5 and 8 in the first and fifth minutes respectively, was delivered vaginally. At 2 hours after delivery, a general surgeon performed a laparotomy via midline abdominal incision. This revealed a copious amount of thin pus in the abdominal cavity and a 0.5 × 0.5-cm anterior perforation of the first part of the duodenum . The perforation was repaired, and an omental patch (Graham’s patch) repair was performed. The patient was transferred to an intensive care unit (ICU) and was discharged 1 week later in stable condition with a prescription for 20 mg omeprazole daily for 1 month.