An 18-year-old girl was visited at our Surgery Clinic for a symptomatology characterized by vague and recurrent colic-type pain localized to the upper abdominal quadrants. Her GP, having seen the ultrasound and gastroscopy performed, directed the patient to our attention. In fact, the gastroscopy was negative for gastritis, while the ultrasound revealed the presence of cholelithiasis, without inflammatory features or biliary tract abnormalities. Her clinical history was silent for other pathologies or previous surgical interventions. She was scheduled for laparoscopic cholecystectomy, which was performed two months later in our Surgical Department, after that magnetic resonance cholangiography (MRC) excluded presence of biliary sludge in the extrahepatic biliary ducts. The standard technique with 4 ports was performed. Using monopolar L hook, Calot’s triangle was isolated, cystic duct and artery were identified and then clipped and dissected. Posterior dissection of the gallbladder was finally done, and it was removed using an endobag device. Due to viscero-perietal tight adhesions and due to the close proximity of the cystic duct to the biliary ducts, the Calot’s triangle exposure resulted complicated, and we suspected that a bile duct injury occurred in this surgical phase. So, decision was taken to convert to open surgery, thermal injury was confirmed, and a suture was performed to repair the choledochal duct injury. At the same time, after explorative intra-operative endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), an endoscopic papillotomy was performed with subsequent positioning of an 11.5 Fr, 12 cm Cotton-Leung plastic stent (Cook Medical, USA) at the hepatocholedochus, to protect the injured section which had been surgically sutured. A week later, a new ERCP control examination showed a spread of the contrast out of the biliary tract, so another biliary prothesis of the same type was positioned.
One month after surgery, the patient had an upper gastrointestinal bleeding (hematemesis); she underwent urgent endoscopy and the biliary stent was removed. Blood residues were present in the stomach, but no signs of oesophageal or gastric bleeding were detected; laboratory studies revealed the following values: haemoglobin level, 8.8 g/L; white blood cells count, 11.9 × 103 /uL; haematocrit 25.2%; total bilirubin, 2.05 mg/dL. The patient showed clinical signs of hypovolemic shock, so she underwent urgent explorative laparotomy. An active bleeding was detected over the clipped cystic artery stump. To perform a correct haemostasis, the previous clip was removed and a new one was positioned.
Six days after this episode, the patient showed again signs of hypovolemic shock. Laboratory tests revealed: haemoglobin level, 8.2 g/L; white blood cells count, 11.3 × 103 /uL; haematocrit 23.7%. She underwent Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA), showing a possible arterial lesion, just adjacent to surgical clip, with choledocic luminal hyperdensity, as for haemobilia . Therefore, patient underwent digital subtraction angiography (DSA).
After obtaining a femoral approach, selective catheterization of common hepatic artery and proper hepatic artery was performed. Diagnostic examination showed cystic artery originated from the very proximal left hepatic artery , moreover, an 8 mm pseudoaneurysm arising from cystic artery, just adjacent to surgical clips, was confirmed (, ). With a coaxial system, superselective catheterization of the vessel was performed and two coils (Interlock 3 mm x 6 cm; Boston Scientific) were released disto-proximally, according to “sandwich” technique, until obtaining complete exclusion of the vascular lesion . Finally, selective catheterization of superior mesenteric artery was performed to rule out possible retrograde flow into the pseudoaneurysm.
Liver function tests were normal after the procedure and 3 days after that. The patient was discharged five days after procedure with good general condition.
An MRC was performed a month later, after endoscopic removal of the prosthesis. It reported “non-dilation of the intra and extra-hepatic biliary tracts: in particular, regular diameter of the hepatocoledocus; presence of minimal diameter reduction immediately after the confluence of the hepatic ducts. No free fluid effusion in the abdomen”. One year later, the patient again underwent control abdominal US and MRI, in the absence of symptoms. No dilatation of the biliary tract, neither abdominal effusion was detected.