A 29-year-old female German law student was referred to our outpatient department (OPD) with a two-week history of severe frontal headache and high-grade fever reaching 41°C (106°F). Upon her first presentation, diarrhea, bloody discharge or abdominal cramps were denied. She did not report any weight changes or high-risk sexual behaviour. She had no previous history of diseases and was not on any medication. Paracetamol had relieved pain and fever for up to eight hours.
Her travel history was remarkable for a three-month sojourn to Delhi, India, where she had completed an internship in an upper-class neighbourhood and from which she had returned three weeks prior to presentation. During the last months, she had not taken any antibiotics and was not on malaria prophylaxis. Before travelling, she had received all recommended vaccinations including for typhoid fever (Ty21a) and hepatitis A. Her clinical examination was unremarkable. Routine laboratory tests showed a mild thrombocytopenia of 112Gpt/L (150 to 300) whilst leukocyte counts were not elevated. Her rapid malaria test results were negative. Serum antibodies against typhoid fever (O and H antigens, cutoff 1:200), Serum antibodies against typhoid fever (O and H antigens, cutoff 1:200), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), herpes simplex virus (HSV) 1/2, dengue fever, and hepatitis C could not be detected. Stool microscopy, stool culture and specific antigene assays were unremarkable for pathologic bacteria, viral antigens, worms or protozoa. As she had no fever at the time of presentation, the attending physician did not take blood cultures.
However, she returned to the OPD five days later as her fever and headaches had not ceased. She then also complained of a non-productive cough, bone and muscle pain, abdominal discomfort and constipation. Blood cultures were taken and she was admitted to the gastroenterology ward.
On clinical examination, we saw a deterioration in the young woman’s general and nutritional condition. Her body temperature was 38.3°C (101°F); her heart rate was 90/min with a blood pressure of 115/70mmHg. There was no lymph node swelling. Her sclera were white and without suffusions. Her chest examination result was unremarkable. Her abdomen was slightly tense with reduced bowel sounds. There was no liver or spleen enlargement. Her laboratory test results were remarkable for elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) 142mg/L (<5); aspartate aminotransferase (ASAT) 8μkat/L; alanine aminotransferase (ALAT) 5μkat/L (both <0.6); lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 17μkat/L (2.2 to 3.5); a decreased thrombocyte count of 109/μL and a cholinesterase activity of 58μkat/L (71 to 181). There was no eosinophilia, and microscopic differentiation showed normal leucocyte values (4.8Gpt/L (4.0 to 9.0), neutrophils 66.6%, lymphocytes 27.5%, monocytes 5.5%, eosinophils 0.0%, basophils 0.4%). Her chest X-ray revealed milky opacities of the basal parts of the lung as well as a prominent scoliosis . A urinary tract infection was ruled out. Stool microscopy and culture were again negative. A calculated antibiotic regimen with intravenous ciprofloxacin 500mg twice daily was initiated and switched to an oral formula after three days. Her antibody test results (including the Widal test) were again negative.
Five days later, three out of four blood cultures returned positive for Salmonella enterica serovar typhi. The pathogen was found to be sensible to all tested antibiotics including beta-lactams, fluoroquinolones and cotrimoxazole. Chloramphenicol sensibility was not tested. On the same day, the fever decreased and the headaches resolved. Repeated stool controls were negative for Salmonella spp. The patient was discharged after seven days in an improved condition. In order to control Salmonella carriage further, stool controls were performed by German health authorities. Only one out of six stool samples turned out to be positive for Salmonella typhi. Up to now, the patient remains healthy and has not experienced any typhoid relapse.