We present a 49-year-old man with a 5-year history of hypertension. His blood pressure was uncontrolled despite a combination of five different antihypertensive drugs at target doses (valsartan 80 mg, amlodipine 5 mg, bisoprolol 10 mg, hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg, terazosin 5 mg) with optimal patient compliance to therapy. At admission, the average ambulatory blood pressure was 158/100 mmHg with a non-dipper night pattern. The patients had a normal BMI and renal function. He had left ventricular hypertrophy with a mild left ventricular diastolic dysfunction. The recommended work-up has been done to rule out possible causes of secondary hypertension.
Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed a highly tortuous left renal artery and a relatively normal right renal artery . Given the diagnosis and evaluation of the resistant.
hypertension, the patient was eligible and selected for percutaneous RDN. After local anesthesia with lidocaine, a 6-French sheath was placed into the right femoral artery. Renal artery angiography confirmed the high tortuosity of the left renal artery with no stenosis in either left or right renal arteries . Along a guidewire, an Iberis ablation catheter (Multielectrode Renal Denervation System, AngioCare Medical Technology. Shanghai, China ) was inserted into the left renal artery. Due to lack of sufficient support force, the ablation catheter failed to reach the target vessel for ablation after several attempts . A 5-French GuideZilla extension catheter (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA) introduced into the proximal segment of the main left renal artery to provide extra support force . After that, successful ablation was achieved in both upper and lower branches of the left renal artery. Ablation of the right renal artery was successfully performed without using an extension catheter . A total of six ablation sites were performed in a spiral fashion in each renal artery. Post-ablation angiography of bilateral renal arteries showed no vasospasm, stenosis, or dissection. No vascular or renal complications occurred during hospitalization.
At 1 month follow-up, the average ambulatory blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg with a significant reduction of 18/10 mmHg, and his renal function was normal. During the 6 months after the procedure, the antihypertensive drugs were decreased from five to three drugs (valsartan 80 mg, amlodipine 5 mg, hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg).