A 58-year-old Chinese woman who underwent radical proctectomy because of rectal cancer 14 months prior experienced sudden swelling in the right lower limb for 4 days. Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) of the lower limb was diagnosed by primary ultrasonography, but a tumor thrombus of the right common iliac vein was finally confirmed by interventional angiography and biopsy.
In April 2020, the patient received a diagnosis of rectal adenocarcinoma. The patient had no history of hypertension, diabetes or heart disease and had no family history of cancer. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the lesion was located in the lower part of the rectum, and there was no lateral lymph node metastasis in the pelvis . The preoperative clinical stage was cT3N + M0. The patient refused neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy due to economic reasons.
Laparoscopic-assisted abdominal-perineal resection (APR) was performed on April 22, 2020. Postoperative pathologic examination showed stage IIIA, moderately differentiated, KRAS mutated (exon 4) adenocarcinoma with no lymph node involvement (0/12) and a tumor deposit in the rectal mesentery. The circumferential resection margin (CRM) was negative (2 mm). Immunohistochemical marker results were as follows: CK (+), HER-2 (−), p53 (+), Ki-67 (approximately 65%), MSH2 (+), MSH6 (+), MLH1 (+), PMS2 (+), Syn (−), and CgA (−).
Between May 2020 and October 2020, the patient continued adjuvant chemotherapy after surgery, completing eight cycles of oxaliplatin and capecitabine (CAPEOX regimen). The patient refused postoperative radiotherapy due to a fear of radiation-related complications. No metastasis was found in the latest postoperative follow-up on November 16, 2020 .
On June 21, 2021, the patient presented swelling of the right lower limb with dark skin for 4 days. The right lower limb was highly swollen, the skin tension was tight, and the tenderness was positive. The temperature and color of the skin were higher and darker than those of the opposite side, respectively.
On June 21, 2021, ultrasonography indicated the possibility of DVT in the right common iliac vein , and the right lower limb of the patient was obviously swollen, so it was recommended to remove the thrombus by interventional therapy. Computed tomography (CT) showed suspected soft tissue nodules in the bilateral pelvic wall and no liver or lung metastasis . The MRI results showed that the pelvic lateral lymph nodes were enlarged . The patient’s serum cancer antigen 199 (CA199) level was 37.4 U/ml, and her D-dimer level was 0.63 µg/ml. Other parameters were normal.
Emergency interventional angiography was performed on June 22, 2021. The results showed that the left femoral vein and iliac vein were unobstructed, as was the deep vein of the right lower limb. However, a circular mass was observed in the right common iliac vein, the boundary was smooth, and the iliac vein cavity was completely blocked . IVC angiography plus filter implantation plus balloon dilatation plus aspiration biopsy was performed. A small amount of tissue was biopsied and sent to pathology . Photomicrographs showed adenoid and nipple-like structures combined with atypical cells in the fibrous stroma . Pathology confirmed that the tumor thrombus was metastatic rectal cancer according to the immunostaining results of positive CK20, CDX2 and SATB2. The symptoms of swelling and pain in the right lower leg disappeared after interventional therapy. No tumor thrombus was found in the right common iliac vein by ultrasonography on July 25, 2021 .
In July 2021, the patient began concurrent chemoradiotherapy, and received capecitabine and radiotherapy. The radiotherapy doses based on the pelvic gross tumor volume (PGTV) and pelvic target volume (PTV) were DT60 Gy/30 f/qd and DT50 Gy/25 f/qd, respectively, and the chemotherapy dose of capecitabine was 2.5 g per day (825 mg/m2 twice daily).
On September 9, 2021, the CA199 level was 56.8 U/ml. MRI showed enlarged lymph nodes in the retroperitoneum, and CT showed metastatic nodules in the right lung . After chemotherapy with irinotecan and capecitabine, the patient developed leukopenia. ECG and ultrasonography showed that cardiac function was decreased, and the patient could not tolerate capecitabine. On October 22, 2021, the CA199 level was 45.4 U/ml, and CT showed that new metastatic nodules of the right lung and the other lesions were stable . After the bevacizumab + irinotecan + raltitrexed regimen, the patient developed bleeding, diarrhea and fungal infection; thus, the treatment was interrupted again. The patient showed symptoms of abdominal pain on January 5,2022. The CEA and CA199 levels were normal. CT showed that the right pulmonary metastatic nodules had obviously progressed, MRI showed 2nd sacral vertebral metastases, retroperitoneal lesions were stable, and pelvic lymph nodes were significantly enlarged . Due to the poor physical condition, the patient gave up further treatment, and accepted analgesic therapy. At present, the patients is living with tumors and systemic pain.