A 22-year-old Greek woman sustained a direct injury to the right buttock following a fall down the stairs. After the injury she had an antalgic gait due to pain in the right inferior gluteal area with radiation to the proximal posterior thigh. Pain was aggravated by sitting and squatting. MRI examination at that time revealed an extensive hematoma extending to both the quadratus femoris and obturator externus muscles, in keeping with strain grade II . She was treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) without improvement.
Six months after the injury, she was referred to our tertiary health care hospital for consultation due to persistent sciatica. Physical examination revealed an active young woman with healthy muscular development. There were no abnormalities on examination, such as soft tissue swelling, ecchymosis or erythema of the right gluteus and lower leg. There was tenderness upon palpation at the right ischial tuberosity associated with reduced muscular strength at right hip external rotators. Right straight leg rising (SLR) reproduced symptoms at 30° and her Lasegue test was positive. Passive hip internal rotation also reproduced pain in the proximal posterior thigh, with positive Freiberg and flexion, adduction, internal rotation (FADIR) tests. Her vascular clinical tests and the lumbar spine examination were normal. Standard hip, lumbar spine and pelvis radiographs were unremarkable. The complete laboratory work-up did not reveal any indication for infection or coagulopathy. Based on the above, the initial clinical impression was piriformis syndrome. A new MRI examination of our patient was requested for confirmation. This showed that the previous muscular strain showed only a minor degree of hematoma absorption compared to the previous study . Thus, hematoma formation was thought to be responsible for her persistent sciatica. A conservative approach, by means of strengthening of our patient's external rotators muscles, did not show any improvement for one month. The lack of obvious fluid effusion did not allow computed tomography (CT)-guided drainage. A surgical exploration of our patient was then performed through a posterolateral approach of the right hip. Intra-operatively, an atrophic quadratus femoris muscle was found, with complete detachment at the tendon-bone junction from the quadrate tubercle of the femur (grade III strain) . An associated solid mass (5 cm × 2 cm × 3 cm), representing chronic hematoma and fibrosis, was attached to and compressed the sciatic nerve. After decompressing the sciatic nerve from the fibrotic and granulation tissue, the newly formed mass was evacuated. The greater trochanteric bursa and contiguous structures were noted to be normal. The histological findings were compatible with degenerative muscular changes including fibrotic tissue, significant atrophy and fatty replacement .
Post-operatively, management consisted of physical rehabilitation with emphasis on the strengthening of the external rotator muscles with pain-free isometric progressive exercises. One month after surgery, our patient was free of symptoms and returned to work. At the one-year follow-up, she had no abnormal symptoms or signs.