The patient was a 75-year-old woman who had been taking oral medication for underlying hypertension. Prior to surgery, she could independently perform activities of daily living without experiencing symptoms, such as numbness in the lower extremity. She was scheduled to undergo an abdominal total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy for suspected endometrial cancer. After admission to the operating room, an epidural catheter (Perifix®, B. Braun, Germany) was inserted at T11/12 with the patient in a lateral position using a para-median approach with an 18-gauge Tuohy needle. A loss of resistance with normal saline was used to confirm needle advancement into the epidural space. The distance from the skin to the epidural space was 6 cm, and a catheter was inserted 5 cm toward the epidural space. The needle entered smoothly, with no observed bleeding, paresthesia, or pain. General anesthesia was induced with 0.25 μg/kg/min remifentanil, 50 mg of propofol and 40 mg of rocuronium and maintained with sevoflurane and remifentanil. The trachea was intubated with an endotracheal tube.
Vasoconstrictors, such as ephedrine and phenylephrine, were required to maintain an intraoperative systolic blood pressure of 80–90 mmHg. During surgery, 4 mL of 0.25% levobupivacaine and 0.1 mg of fentanyl were administered via the epidural catheter. The total operative duration was 80 min, and the total anesthesia duration was 123 min. For postoperative analgesia, the patient received a continuous 4 mL/h infusion of a 2.5 μg/mL fentanyl and 0.2% levobupivacaine solution.
The patient promptly regained consciousness and was transferred from the operating room following extubation. She could move her bilateral lower extremities without difficulty when leaving the operating room. During the afternoon of the first postoperative day, she could stand without numbness or weakness in the lower extremities. On the night of the same day, the patient complained of a loss of sensation and weakness in the bilateral lower extremities. Her lower extremity symptoms failed to resolve by the following morning (second postoperative day), at which point sustained-release epidural administration was stopped. However, the patient developed paralysis and a loss of touch, temperature, pinprick, and vibration sensations below the T5 level. In addition, her lower extremities were flaccid. To determine whether an epidural hematoma had occurred in her epidural space, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination was immediately performed. The MRI revealed the following: (1) There were no epidural masses, i.e., no epidural hematomas. (2) The patient exhibited yellow ligament ossification. (3) T2-weighted MRI revealed hyperintensity in the T8-T11 spinal cord region . In addition, a computed tomography (CT) examination revealed that the epidural catheter had been inserted at the same site where the thoracic canal stenosis was most severe . Therefore, she was diagnosed with a spinal cord infarction. Other spinal diseases (e.g., spinal degenerative disease) were excluded because of the rapid onset. Spinal cord infarctions are usually treated conservatively, as surgical interventions for this disease are inadequate. She was managed conservatively. She was treated with blood pressure control therapy and rehabilitation consisting of muscle training and walking practice, among other exercises. The epidural catheter was removed on the third postoperative day. One week later, an MRI examination revealed that the hyperintense region had extended superiorly to the T4 level . The patient underwent rehabilitation and regained the ability to move her lower extremities on postoperative day 30. Although the patient could stand on her left leg, she was unable to stand on her right leg. She received continuous bladder catheterization, and her defecation was controlled by drugs. An MRI examination on postoperative day 93 demonstrated that the hyperintense region was localized to T11, where the thoracic canal stenosis was originally present and the epidural catheter was inserted . On postoperative day 286, the patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital.