The patient was 5 years old and was referred to our department for ambiguous sex; he was the second child of a non-consanguineous couple. His parents and sister were healthy. The patient’s birth weight was 3.5 kg and length was 50 cm, which were within normal ranges; his intelligence was normal, and he had no pertinent medical history. At 5 years old, the patient’s height was 117 cm and weight was 20.5 kg. Physical examination revealed scrotal hypospadias and bilateral cryptorchidism . The bilateral gonads (approximately 1.0 × 0.6 cm) were palpated in the upper inguinal region. Ultrasonography indicated bilateral cryptorchidism with a normal testicular morphology . Abdominal ultrasound did not show internal female genitalia, and echocardiogram results were normal. Hormonal laboratory tests showed low basal levels of testosterone (T; < 2.5 ng/dL); the post-3-day human chorionic gonadotropin stimulation test showed an increase in T to 62.90 ng/dL, and the post-human chorionic gonadotropin test showed a normal level of double hydrogen testosterone (80.37 pg/mL). Thus, there was a good T response to human chorionic gonadotropin stimulation. Luteinizing hormone was low (< 0.1 IU/L) and follicle stimulating hormone was normal (0.4 IU/L). Anti-Mullerian hormone (48.48 ng/mL), prolactin (4.87 ng/mL), and 17-α-hydroxyprogesterone (0.8 nmol/L)levels were also normal . As patient growth and development were normal, we did not screen for growth hormone or adreno-cortico-tropic hormone.
The chromosome karyotype was 46,XX, and the presence of SRY was ruled out by polymerase chain reaction analysis. Therefore, we performed whole-genome analysis for genetic detection. Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples using the DNeasy Blood & Tissue Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). The DNA quantity of sequencing library was assessed by Qubit 2.0 fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, United States). The quality and size of libraries were measured by 2100 Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA Assay (Agilent Technologies, California, United States). The qualified libraries were sequenced using the 2 × 150-bp paired-end sequencing on the Illumina NovaSeq platform (Illumina, San Diego, USA). FASTQ files were aligned to the human reference genome (hg19/ GRCh37) using BWA v0.7.13 Variants (single nucleotide variants and indels) were genotyped from recalibrated BAM files using GATK 4.0 and annotated against multiple databases, including HGVS variant description, population frequency, disease or phenotype and variant functional prediction, using ANNOVAR. Variants were classified as pathogenic, likely pathogenic, variant of unknown significance, likely benign, or benign following the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) guidelines. Copy number variants were called by DNAcopy R package, filtered classified as per the ACMG guidelines, and manually checked by using the Integrative Genomics Viewer. Target capture area was 50 M, detection range capture rate 99.9%, detection data volume 10G, average sequencing depth ≥ 100X, and the proportion of Q30 was not less than 90%. The results revealed no pathogenic or likely pathogenic single-nucleotide variation or insertion-deletion variant related to sexual development, but revealed a 1.4-Mb duplication in the Xq27.1q27.2 region (arr[hg19]Xq27.1q27.2:139,585,794–140,996,652). The duplication contained CDR1, SOX3, and SPANXA1 . According to the ACMG, this duplication is of uncertain significance. The parents did not show SOX3 duplication and had normal phenotypes.
After clinical consultation, the family decided to raise the child as a male. The patient underwent surgical procedures for the correction of hypospadias and gonad biopsy, followed by orchiopexy. Preoperative cystoscopy showed an orifice in the prostatic urethra. Upon probing with a camera, enlarged prostatic utricles were observed . The bilateral gonads were biopsied, followed by orchiopexy. Gonadal histology showed ovotesticular tissue on the right side and testicular tissue on the left side; both testicular tissues exhibited features of testicular dysgenesis. The ovarian tissue had primordial and primary follicles . Owing to this complicated condition, we performed penile straightening and planned to perform urethroplasty 6 months later. After degloving of the penis, the corpus cavernosum was well developed and the penis length and diameter were 4.5 and 1.5 cm, respectively.