We report the case of a 70-year-old Caucasian man, with no significant clinical background, who presented to our casualty department with a three-week history of headache and maxillary pain on the right side, together with the recent appearance of dysphonia and dysphagia for solids. No urinary disorder was reported. A neurological examination revealed a paresis of cranial nerves IX and X, manifested by the displacement of the soft palate to the right and difficulty swallowing. Paresis of cranial nerves XI and XII was also observed, indicated by the lowering of the right shoulder and hypotonia of the right trapezius muscle, and was accompanied by displacement of the tongue toward the right, right-side hypotonia and muscle twitching . Results of the rest of the physical examination were normal.
Blood analysis results revealed an alkaline phosphatase level of 350 UI/L (normal range 44 to 147 UI/L) but no other significant alterations. In view of the paresis of the four lower cranial nerves, a CT scan of the larynx and neck was performed; the CT scan revealed an asymmetrical union between the clivus and the right occipital condyle, adjacent to the jugular foramen, with increased ground-glass bone density. There was no visible lesion to the bone cortex or soft tissues. This study was complemented with an MRI scan, which revealed a bone lesion producing a hypointense signal at sequences T1 and T2. Administration of a gadolinium contrast agent produced a moderate degree of enhancement at the base of the skull, affecting the right occipital condyle and part of the right side of the basilar bone . The image corresponded to a moderately space-occupying blastic lesion, visible in the CT scan, which slightly decreased the caliber of the jugular foramen and the condylar canal. Therefore, fibrous dysplasia, Paget's disease and metastasis were considered in the differential diagnosis.
Subsequently, an additional radiographic examination of the lumbar column and pelvis was carried out; this examination did not reveal any lesions suggestive of Paget's disease. A bone gammagraphy was then requested, and images showed multiple pathological foci of tracer uptake in the right maxilla, the rib cage, right scapula, spine and pelvis. These foci were compatible with disseminated bone metastases. The blood analysis was repeated, and tumor markers were studied. The initial prostate-specific antigen (PSA) value was 21.30 ng/mL.
A physical examination revealed an enlarged prostate with a hard consistency, destructured in the left lobe. Because there was a strong suspicion of prostate neoplasm, a biopsy was performed. The anatomic pathology findings were bilateral common adenocarcinoma, with a Gleason grade of 8 (4+4), affecting 60% of the tissue. There was no presence in the periprostatic adipose tissue and no perineural infiltration.
Following the diagnosis of stage IV prostate adenocarcinoma by metastatic bone dissemination with Collet-Sicard or jugular foramen syndrome, hormone treatment was begun with an antiandrogen. Then, 15 days later, a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) analog was added and a monthly dose of zoledronic acid was subsequently included. The PSA value during the diagnostic process, prior to the start of antiandrogen therapy, was 71.9 ng/mL.
After three months of treatment, our patient was able to swallow normally, but the dysphonia remained. The rightward displacement of the palate, the lowering of the right shoulder and the atony of the right side of the tongue (paresis of cranial nerves XI and XII) remained unaltered. The latest PSA value was 0.11 ng/mL.