The patient is a 41-year-old man, without any history of disease or medication. He is slightly obese and a current smoker (>50 pack-years) and reports moderate alcohol consumption. He was admitted in a regional hospital with sudden onset of hemoptysis and headache. There, the patient was diagnosed with hypertension (systolic blood pressure: 240 mmHg, diastolic blood pressure: 110 mmHg), and hemoptysis was confirmed. A brain and chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed that showed no findings from the brain and alveoral hemorrhage, respectively . In addition, the patient underwent a formal transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE), which revealed mild to moderate mitral valve regurgitation and prolapse. Blood tests were within normal rates. The patient was subsequently transported to the Pulmonary Department of our hospital for further investigation and treatment.
Upon his admission, the patient's temperature was 37.6°C, heart rate was 98 bpm, respiratory rate was 22 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 177/89 mmHg, and an arterial blood gas showed mild hypoxemia in room air (pH = 7.47; pCO2 = 34 mmHg; pO2 = 68 mmHg; HCO3 = 18 mmol/L; O2 saturation = 93%). Blood tests were normal again, except for elevated uric acid levels. Blood cultures were collected, and he was initially started on empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment of piperacillin-tazobactam and oxygen supplementation due to hypoxemia. Chest CT was performed once again, which identified findings compatible with alveoral hemorrhage and consolidation in the right middle lobe. An abdominal CT scan resulted in findings such as slightly enlarged liver without focal lesions and bilateral, well-defined adrenal lesions, possibly adenomas. The patient refused to undergo a new brain CT or MRI scan. Pulmonary function tests showed obstructive lung disease, and bronchoscopy revealed blood clots in the right middle lobe. His HIV-screening test was negative, as was Mantoux tuberculin skin test (TST).
Two blood cultures revealed bacteremia by Serratia marcescens, and this finding was confirmed with one more blood culture, taken 5 days later. The Serratia marcescens isolate was susceptible to cefepime, meropenem, gentamicin, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim, and ciprofloxacin. An urgent transesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) was performed which demonstrated severe mitral regurgitation accompanying ruptured mitral chordae tendineae . The patient was transported to the Infectious Diseases Department, and antibiotic treatment was subsequently changed to meropenem 2 g tid, ciprofloxacin 400 mg bid, and gentamicin 80 mg tid intravenously, according to antibiogram. Of notice, he reported a diagnostic arthrocentesis in his left knee joint a few weeks ago.
Three days later, the patient was afebrile, hypoxemia and hemoptysis were resolved, blood tests remained within normal limits, including inflammation markers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and WBC, and multiple subsequent blood culture results came back negative. A new transesophageal echocardiogram was performed 20 days after the previous one, without further deterioration.
The patient, after having stayed at our hospital for 4 weeks, was transported back to the regional hospital in order to continue his intravenous antibiotic treatment with meropenem and ciprofloxacin for a total of 6 weeks. He had already completed 2 weeks of gentamicin treatment.
Both cardiologist and cardiac surgeons suggested surgery for valve repair or replacement, but the patient refused. Therefore, close surveillance with repeat echocardiograms every 3–6 months was recommended. Moreover, pulmonary surveillance with a repeat bronchoscopy was advised after completion of therapy. After 24 months, he is currently asymptomatic, without limitations in physical activity.