A 68-year-old Caucasian man was hospitalized because of headache of varying intensity, vomiting, and ataxia of several days’ duration prior to admission. The exact time of symptom onset could not be determined. On admission he was conscious with a Glasgow Coma Scale Score of 14. Non-enhanced computerized tomography showed blood in both occipital horns and a round, hyperdense, partially calcified structure localized just above the foramen magnum and imprinted in the medulla oblongata from the left. Computerized tomographic angiography revealed that the structure corresponded to an irregular aneurysm measuring 10mm×13mm, apparently originating from either the left VA or the left PICA (Figure a). Diagnostic angiography showed that the aneurysm originated from the junction left PICA–left VA (Figures b,
c), although the exact anatomical relationship between the aneurysm, PICA and VA remained unclear. The right VA was hypoplastic and occluded (Figure d). The lumen of the VA at the origin of the PICA was irregular and highly stenotic, measuring only 1.6mm. The left anterior inferior cerebellar artery was hypoplastic. The left PICA supplied almost the whole left cerebellar hemisphere.
The patient was under observation and was treated conservatively during the first 9 days after hospitalization. Before the intervention he received a single dose of clopidogrel 600mg. A 6F MPD (Envoy, Cordis, Bridgewater, NJ, USA) guiding catheter was placed in the left VA via a sheath inserted in the right femoral artery. Predilatation of the stenotic left VA was attempted with a compliant 4×10 HyperGlide™ Balloon (eV3/Covidien, Plymouth, MN, USA). In spite of balloon overinflation, the VA stenosis remained unchanged.The balloon was withdrawn, a Vasco 21 microcatheter (Balt Extrusion, Montmorency, France) was navigated through this segment of the left VA, and a 3×25 Silk stent (Balt Extrusion) was deployed in the VA via the microcatheter, covering the origin of the PICA (Figure a). Control angiography performed immediately after stent deployment showed contrast stagnation in the aneurysm; however, a control run performed a few minutes later showed thromboembolic occlusion of the basilar artery and the VA distal to the aneurysm (Figure b). Intravenous abciximab (ReoPro®, Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN, USA) 10mg was administrated immediately, with simultaneous injection of 40mg recombinant thromboplastin activator via the microcatheter into the stent, VA, basilar artery, and both posterior cerebral arteries.Angiography showed reopening of the arteries of the vertebrobasilar system (Figure c). Right carotid angiography now showed that the right posterior cerebral artery was fed by the right internal carotid artery (ICA) via a well-developed posterior communicating artery (not shown).Diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed 24 hours after treatment showed a few minor lesions in both cerebellar hemispheres (Figure ). The patient recovered slowly but completely. Follow-up angiography performed 4 months and 1 year after endovascular treatment showed reduction of the circulating lumen of the aneurysm and patent arteries of the vertebrobasilar system (Figure ). Stenosis of the left VA remained stable during follow-up. MRI showed moderate shrinkage of the aneurysm, with gradual reduction of compression on the medulla as well as gradual improvement of anatomical relationships in the foramen magnum (Figures a to
c). At the most recent follow-up, 3.5 years after endovascular treatment, the patient is in good condition and has a normal life.