Right upper quadrant pain for more than 2 d, which worsened 3 h prior to admission.
More than 2 d prior, the 76-year-old female patient had developed intermittent, dull pain in the right upper quadrant with no obvious cause. There was no radiating pain in other body parts. There was also no chest tightness, fever, yellow eyes, yellow urine, yellow skin, nausea, vomiting, abdominal distension, diarrhea, low back pain, hematuria or other discomfort. Three hours prior to this admission, the patient’s symptoms worsened and became unbearable.
The patient had a 2-year history of hypertension, irregular use of calcium channel blockers, and poor blood pressure (BP) control.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors.
Physical examination vital signs: body temperature: 36.5 °C, BP: 130/90 mmHg, heart rate (HR): 82 beats per min, and respiratory rate: 19 breaths per min. The cardiopulmonary examination was normal. The patient exhibited right upper quadrant tenderness, a positive Murphy sign, no obvious pain on percussion of both kidneys, no abdominal pressure, decreased bowel sounds, and no signs of abdominal irritation.
The white blood cell count was normal, the neutrophil ratio was 78.5%, and the liver function tests were normal.
On the 1st day after admission, the patient still had paroxysmal pain in the right upper quadrant. Magnetic resonance imagery showed multiple gallstones, so the condition was misdiagnosed as pain from gallstones. On the 2nd day after admission, the pain was accompanied by abdominal distension, and defecation and exhalation from the anus ceased. On the 3rd day after admission, a cluster of red blisters was found on the right abdomen, extending beyond the midline of the back, involving the T5-T10 dermatomes, with small clusters of blisters and obvious tenderness . A dermatological diagnosis of herpes zoster was made. Plain abdominal radiographs and three-dimensional helical computed tomography showed stepped dilatation of the small bowel, suggesting low-grade small bowel obstruction, but no obvious obstruction was found .