An 8-year-2-month old Taiwanese boy presented with dyspnea for 1 day. He had no preceding symptoms such as polyphagia, polydipsia, polyuria, or body weight loss during this episode. His past medical history is notable for bronchial asthma and allergic rhinitis without using regular medication. Family history revealed no T1DM or T2DM in family members. Two days before admission, he was noted to have runny nose, productive cough and fever. He was treated with antitussives and antipyretics at a local clinic initially. Because dyspnea along with decreased oral intake was noticed 1 day later, he was sent to primary healthcare center where inhaled terbutaline sulfate and intramuscular dexamethasone were given in consideration of acute exacerbation of bronchial asthma (AEBA). After treatment, laboratory tests showed no acidosis or alkalosis; however, hyperglycemia was noticed . Owing to persistent dyspnea, he was referred to our hospital.
On examination, the patient was alert but distressed. He had normal skin turgor and no dehydrated mucous membranes. Use of accessory muscle and bilateral diffuse wheezing were noticed. There was no acanthosis nigricans over posterior neck or axillae. The thyroid was non-palpable. Laboratory tests showed hyperglycemia, ketonuria and ketonemia . Chest radiograph revealed bilateral pulmonary infiltration. Under impression of AEBA, he was admitted to pediatric ICU (PICU).
On observing hyperglycemia, exclusively half-normal saline was infused on the first day of hospitalization. Inhaled beta-2 agonists and intravenous corticosteroids were also given. Nevertheless, blood glucose monitoring disclosed fluctuating hyperglycemia. Although this SH might result from AEBA per se and/or medication, his baseline blood glucose levels were inexplicably higher than 150 mg/dL within the first 24 h and frequently rose above 300 mg/dL or even 400 mg/dL . The delta blood glucose levels (△BG) could reach 150 to 300 mg/dL in a single hour, suggesting extremely high GV. Moreover, blood glucose exceeding 150 mg/dL could be detected even at 48 h after admission, indicating prolonged hyperglycemic duration. To elucidate this unusual fluctuation of glucose values, further investigations were done which showed increased hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c), positive islet autoantibodies, and insulinopenia in glucagon test . Finally, he was diagnosed as T1DM despite the absence of classical DM symptoms.