A 32-year-old female presented to our outpatient clinic with inability to lie in supine position due to prominence in her back. She also had severe debilitating axial mechanical back pain. The patient first noticed this deformity 5 years ago and it gradually progressed to present magnitude. However, she reported late due to the social stigma of deformity and did not give any history of childhood infection. Apart from local tenderness and gibbus over lower back, she had normal neurology as per MRC grading in lower limbs with Oswestry disability index (ODI) score of 70%. The visual analog score (VAS) for back pain was 8.
Radiographs and computed tomography (CT) scan of thoracolumbar spine showed marked round kyphosis of 114 degrees due to fusion of T12 to L4 vertebrae with corresponding wedging of anterior vertebral bodies (, ).
The patient had a positive sagittal imbalance with sagittal vertical axis deviation by 41.6 mm. CT also revealed dysplastic pedicles of L1 and L2 vertebrae. MRI scan revealed spinal cord ending at L2 with no other intraspinal anomaly. Thecal sac was draped over internal gibbus manifested by the deformity. The patient was explained about spinal osteotomy surgery and possible need of another surgery in future to achieve further correction. L2 pedicle subtraction osteotomy (PSO) was planned initially. However, intraoperative correction of thoracolumbar kyphosis was insufficient; hence, PSO involving both L1 and L2 vertebrae was performed and the segmental fixation extended from T11 to L4. Significant dural kinking was noted at level of correction . Hence, further correction was abandoned. The patient woke up with monoplegia involving right lower limb with normal neurology in the left lower limb. Post-operative CT scan showed medial breach of the right L3 pedicle screw. The patient was taken to operating room immediately and right side L3 pedicle screw was removed. Post-operative day 2, the patient started showing brief ankle movement with significant spasticity in the right lower limb which improved over a period of 1 month to normal neurology as per MRC grading. VAS score for back pain improved to 2 on 14th post-operative day. Follow-up X-ray at 6 months showed fusion at osteotomy site (, ). At present, the patient has been mobilized without any assistive device with a 1-year follow-up duration. The ODI at 1-year follow-up is 10% with no back pain.