An 80-year-old woman with a history of hypertension and hyperlipidaemia on Carvedilol 5 mg/day and Atorvastatin 5 mg/day had undergone AVNeo using autologous pericardium for degenerative severe tricuspid AS 6 years previously. At the 1-year follow-up after the surgery, transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed an effective orifice area (EOA) of 1.40 cm2 and no AR. She remained asymptomatic and had no further healthcare contact up to this presentation. At this time, she was admitted to our hospital complaining of shortness of breath of New York Heart Association 2 when walking up stairs. She had neither chest pain nor dizziness. Her blood pressure was 131/64 mmHg, with a heart rate of 58 b.p.m., and an oxygen saturation of 99% in room air. On physical examination, she had normal respiratory sounds, a normal cardiac examination with S1, S2, and a systolic ejection murmur, no jugular venous pressure elevation, and no leg oedema. A chest X-ray showed a normal cardiac size and no congestion nor pleural effusion. Electrocardiography revealed a normal sinus rhythm, left axis deviation, and left ventricular hypertrophy. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed that the reconstructed aortic valve was thick and elongated, and its motion was restricted. It resulted in severe AS with an aortic flow velocity of 5.39 m/s, a mean aortic valve pressure gradient (MPG) of 74 mmHg, and an EOA of 0.55 cm2. Her left ventricular ejection fraction was 68%, and her left ventricular end-diastolic diameter was 41 mm. Aortic regurgitation was mild. Multidetector computed tomography revealed stenosis of the reconstructed aortic valve with elongated, thickened, and marginally calcified leaflets . Parameters of the aortic annulus were as follows: area, 335 mm2; perimeter, 67.5 mm; and maximum and minimal diameters, 24.5 and 17.1 mm, respectively. The mean diameter of the sinus of Valsalva (SOV) was 23.4 mm, and the heights of the right and left coronary arteries were 12.9 and 10.4 mm, respectively. The length of the right and left reconstructed right coronary leaflets were 18.4 and 24.6 mm, respectively.
The heart team considered a TAVI appropriate for two reasons. First, redo heart valve surgery would be of higher risk. The patient’s EuroSCORE II was 7.75%. Second, the aortic annulus size was small. Thus, TAVI seemed to be a better alternative to achieve larger EOA than that obtained by surgical aortic valve replacement (AVR). Informed consent was obtained from the patient.
Transfemoral TAVI from right femoral artery was performed under transoesophageal echocardiography guidance. The stenotic valve was crossed with the Judkins right catheter and straight wire. The risk of coronary occlusion was the key in this procedure because the aortic valve leaflets constructed with autologous pericardium were very long and much higher than each coronary height. Furthermore, the SOV diameter was small. We selected SAPIEN 3 (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) because the SOV diameter was smaller than that recommended by the manufacturer of EvolutR (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) (>27 mm for 26 mm CoreValve series). We chose a larger size of SAPIEN 3 as 23 mm for the annulus area of 335 mm2 (21% oversizing) due to the low calcified valve. Considering the risk of tearing implanted leaflets, a balloon valvuloplasty was skipped and transcatheter heart valve (THV) was directly deployed with a coronary protection for both coronary arteries. Soft tip 6 French Hyperion (ASAHI INTECC CO., LTD., Aichi, Japan) coronary guide catheters were utilized for coronary protection; the Judkins right and left types for the right and left coronary arteries, respectively. Both catheters have side hall. A 0.014-inch coronary wire was advanced into each coronary artery, and THV was deployed under rapid pacing. We implanted the THV at a low position to cover the constructed leaflets which had migrated down into the left ventricular side as shown in the aortography . With this management, the coronary obstruction did not occur. Transoesophageal echocardiography showed AR was trivial after THV deployment . At the 1-year follow-up, the patient was well, and TTE revealed an EOA of 1.89 cm2, MPG of 8 mmHg, and trivial paravalvular leak.