A 65-year-old gentleman with underlying allergic rhinitis, eczema, dyslipidemia, and benign prostatic hyperplasia initially presented with insidious onset of the left eye blurring of vision over the past 3 years which progressively worsened. On examination, the patient had left visual field quadrantanopia with no papilloedema and no other neurological deficit. MRI brain reported a pituitary macroadenoma size 2.0 cm × 1.8 cm × 2.0 with compression to the left optic chiasma. The patient’s neuroendocrine workup showed low cortisol, low growth hormone, and low testosterone. Other neuroendocrine hormones were normal. He was electively admitted for TSH and excision of the tumor. Intraoperatively, the dura was not breached, and the procedure went uneventful. He was extubated postoperatively and transferred to the ward for observation. He developed polyuria on the 1st day postoperatively and was treated for cranial diabetes insipidus with desmopressin. On day 7, he was febrile, tachypneic, tachycardic, and had minimal cough with no neurological symptoms. There was no cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) rhinorrhea on examination. Air entry in his lung was equal with no adventitious sound. The chest X-ray revealed minimal perihilar haziness. White blood cell (WBC) count was 9000 cells/cm3, and C-reactive protein was 200 mg/L, and he was started on IV Tazosin 4.5 g 6 hourly empirically for hospital acquired pneumonia. Subsequently, the patient complained of headache and neck pain on the same day. After counseling, he was indecisive about a lumbar puncture to diagnose meningitis. On day 9, the patient’s Glasgow Coma Scale dropped from E4V5M6 to E3V3M5. The pupils were still 3/3 reactive but with neck stiffness with positive Kernig’s and Brudzenski signs. Blood sepsis parameter showed increased WBC to 14,000 cells/cm3 and CRP >200 mg/L. Blood culture preliminary report taken on day 7 of illness came back as E. meningoseptica, Carbapenam Resistance Enterobacteriaceae (CRE). On MacConkey agar, a nonlactose fermenter colony was seen, and the Gram stain showed the Gram-negative bacilli and nonmotile, and oxidative positive was identified by Vitek GN ID card. Antibiotic susceptibility testing using minimum inhibitory concentration and not disk diffusion following Clinical and Laboratory Standard Institute, CLSI M100. The patient was intubated for septic shock with meningitis and transferred to the neurocritical care unit for intensive care management. He was started on IV Meropenem 2 g TDS and IV Ciprofloxacin 400 mg TDS. On day 9, lumbar puncture and the CSF results were reported as clear and yellowish, total WBC increased 10 cells/mm3 with predominant polymorphs cell, RBC was nil glucose 2.2 mmol/L, and protein 0.57 g/L with positive culture E. meningoseptica CRE. CSF lactate dehydrogenase was not performed. The patient was diagnosed with bacteremia and meningitis due to positive clinical signs and multiple isolations of E. meningoseptica from the blood and CSF cultures and biochemistry profiles. Subsequently, the patient did not improve neurologically post antibiotics despite improvement of the septic parameters and was subjected to a contrast-enhanced CT brain. On assessment of the CT scan, the patient developed short-segment superior sagittal sinus thrombosis. The patient was started on SC clexane 80 mg BD. On day 13, the tracheal aspirate culture and sensitivity grew Acinetobacter baumannii Extreme Drug-Resistant (XDR). IV Polymyxin B 750000 U BD was added for this patient to cover the CRE and XDR. The patient completed IV Polymyxin for 14 days and IV Meropenem for 14 days. IV Ciprofloxacin was completed for 14 days and followed by 14 days of T. Levofloxacin 750 mg BD. The patient’s condition markedly improved, and he was extubated well on day 17. The course of culture and sensitivity and antibiotics therapy is simplified in . On repeated CTV Brain, the venous sinus thrombosis was resolving. The patient’s septic parameter normalized to WBC 7000 cells/cm3, and CRP was negative. The patient was seen in a follow-up clinic after hospital discharge will full neurological recovery.