A healthy 28-year-old man visited the dental clinic with the upper right central incisor avulsed 16 hours after an accidental fall. The patient went to the hospital’s medical emergency services and there his soft tissues and mucous membranes were disinfected, but did not reposition the avulsed tooth. The tooth had been kept in milk, except for the two hours prior to the clinical visit. The patient delivered it on a paper napkin and completely dehydrated. After the clinical examination, photos and Cone Beam Computed Tomopraphy (CBCT) scan it was observed contusion of the upper lip , avulsion of the right upper central incisor , enamel cracks after trauma of left upper central incisor and upper left lateral incisor crown fracture, according to Andreasen’s classification which was also confirmed by the X- ray periapical study, CBCT scan (WhiteFox, Acteón Médico-Dental Ibérica S.A.U.-Satelec, Merignac, France) with the following exposure parameters: 105.0 kilovolt peak, 8.0 milliamperes, 7.20 s, and a field of view of 15 × 13 mm. and both thermal (Endo-Ice; Coltène/Whaledent, Lezennes, France) and electrical pulp tests (Parkell; Edgewood, NY, USA). As for the alveolar classification was a type 1, presenting all the bone plate preserved.
Initially, the avulsed tooth was cleaned carefully with sterile saline serum (Braun, Jaén, Spain) . During the clinical procedure the tooth was taken by its anatomical crown to prevent root surface damage. Subsequently, the endodontic access cavity was performed to allow a straight access to the root canal system. The working length of the root canal was established using a direct method, by subtracting 1mm from the actual root length determined by introducing a 10/.02 K-file (Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland) until it was visible through the apical foramen. Subsequently, extraoral root canal treatment was performed using a R25 reciprocating endodontic file (Reciproc; VDW, Munich, Germany) and irrigated with 5 ml of 5.25% sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) (Clorox; Oakland, CA, USA), 5 ml of 17% ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) (SmearClear; SybronEndo, CA, USA), and 5 ml of sterile saline solution (Braun, Jaén, Spain) using an endodontic needle (Miraject Endo Luer; Hager & Werken, Duisburg, Germany) with a diameter of 0.3 mm inserted 1 mm into the working length . The contact between the irrigating solution and the surface of the root canal walls was enhanced by using an ultrasonic tip (IRRI S, VDW®, Munich, Germany). Afterwards, the root canal system was dried with sterile paper points (Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland) and finally, each root canal system was sealed using a warm gutta-percha system (Calamus, Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland) and an epoxy-amine resin-based sealer (AH Plus, Dentsply DeTrey, Konstanz, Germany) until the cemento-enamel junction. Furthermore, the access cavity was filled with a direct composite resin restoration (Filtek Supreme XTE, 3M™, MN, USA). Then, an apicectomy were carried out, removing the apical 3mm from the apex. A 3mm retrocavity was designed by means of an ultrasonic diamond tip (Ref.: PUSURG #2, ProUltra®, Dentsply Maillefer®, Ballaigues, Switzerland). and the retrocavity preparation was sealed with mineral trioxide aggregate as root-end filling material (ProRoot® MTA white, Dentsply Tulsa Dental®, Tulsa, UK).
Replanted tooth was performed using infiltrative anaesthesia with lidocaine 2% and 1:100000 epinephrine (Artinibsa; Inibsa, Lliça de Vall, Barcelona, Spain). The alveolar socket was activated causing bleeding before intentional replantation. The activation of the socket was carried out because the clot had already been established. The tooth was replaced into his alveolar socket and splinted for 15 days with an orthodontic wire from 13 to 23 (Onlyorto, S.L., Barcelona, Spain) and composite resin (Filtek Supreme XTE, 3M™, MN, USA). Occlusal stops were also placed in tooth 4.6 and 3.6 to prevent occlusal contacts due to patient overbite. Antibiotic treatment was prescribed (Augmentine®, GSK,80 G, Brentford, United Kingdom) with analgesics (Dexketoprofen 25 mg, Menarini S.A., Barcelona, Spain), for one week. The patient was instructed in oral hygiene accompanied by chlorhexidine rinses and soft diet. The patient was scheduled for follow-up appointments at 1, 3, 6, 12 months in order to assess the clinical and radiographic evaluation of the treatment. At the 12 months follow-up visit, the patient remained asymptomatic and CBCT scan (WhiteFox, Acteón Médico-Dental Ibérica S.A.U.-Satelec, Merignac, France) was performed .
Three months after the replanted tooth, the upper left central incisor presented crown discoloration . The tooth was non-sensitive to both thermal (Endo-Ice; Coltène/Whaledent, Lezennes, France) and electrical pulp tests (Parkell; Edgewood, NY, USA). Periapical radiographs were taken to confirm the diagnosis of pulp necrosis. Root canal treatment was performed using infiltrative anaesthesia with lidocaine 2% and 1:100000 epinephrine (Artinibsa; Inibsa, Lliça de Vall, Barcelona, Spain). Rubber dam (Hygenic Dental Dam; Coltene Whaldent Gruppe, Altstätten, Switzerland) was disinfected with a povidone-iodine solution (Betadine; Meda, Solna, Sweden). Subsequently, the pulp chamber was opened to enable access to the root canal system. Root canal system instrumentation was performed with a 10/.02 K-file (Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland), and 1 ml of sterile saline solution (Braun, Jaén, Spain) was used to irrigate the canal and detach any bacteria adhered to dentin. The working length of the root canal system was determined using an electronic apex locator (Raypex 6; VDW, Munich, Germany) and verified with a working length radiograph using a 20/.02 K-file (Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland). The root canal system was prepared using an R25 reciprocating endodontic file (Reciproc; VDW, Munich, Germany) and irrigated with 5 ml of 5.25% NaOCl, 5 ml of 17% EDTA (SmearClear; SybronEndo, CA, USA), and 5 ml of sterile saline solution (Braun, Jaén, Spain) using an endodontic needle (Miraject Endo Luer; Hager & Werken, Duisburg, Germany) with a diameter of 0.3 mm inserted 1 mm into the working length. The contact between the irrigating solution and the surface of the root canal walls was enhanced by using an ultrasonic tip (IRRI S, VDW®, Munich, Germany). Afterwards, the root canal system was dried with sterile paper points (Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland) and finally, each root canal system was sealed using a warm gutta-percha system (Calamus, Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland) and an epoxy-amine resin-based sealer (AH Plus, Dentsply DeTrey, Konstanz, Germany) until the cemento-enamel junction.
Furthermore, the access cavity was filled with a temporary restoration (Fermit, Liechtenstein, Ivoclar Vivadent). An internal-external bleaching of that tooth was subsequently carried out using 35% hydrogen peroxide (Philips Zoom WhiteSpeed, Royal Philips, Amsterdam, Holanda) combining with photoactivation using a LED lamp (Lamp Philips Zoom WhiteSpeed, Royal Philips), lasting 15 minutes in three applications. At the end of the first clinical session sodium perborate (Endoperox, Septodont) was placed inside the pulp chamber and it was sealed with the same provisional seal. Between clinical sessions had to pass 14 days and a second clinical session was held again, also of three photoactivated applications for fifteen minutes. Again sodium perborate was placed inside the pulp chamber for seven days and the temporary seal was put back . A week later it was checked if an harmonic tooth color had been reached with adjacent teeth and since this had been achieved, sodium perborate was removed again. In addition, a piece of cotton was placed inside the pulp chamber and a new temporary seal was made. Furthermore, the access cavity was filled with a direct composite resin restoration (Filtek Supreme XTE, 3M™, MN, USA). The patient was scheduled for follow-up appointments at 1, 3, 6 and12 months in order to assess the evaluation of the treatment. At the 12 months follow-up visit, the patient remained asymptomatic and periapical radiograph and CBCT scan (WhiteFox, Acteón Médico-Dental Ibérica S.A.U.-Satelec, Merignac, France) was performed. Six months after the intentional replantation the occlusal stops were removed .