A 29-year-old male patient complained about recurrent bouts of headaches. In the following month he developed a progressive right-sided slowness, which limited his ability to work. On admission to hospital in 1988 he was diagnosed with strictly right sided parkinsonism, however, the symptoms were only partially responsive to levodopa. CT scans revealed multiple cystic lesions within the brainstem as well as a posterior cerebral artery aneurysm. Due to the severity of the motor symptoms as well as the indication of surgical treatment for the aneurysm, the patient underwent neurosurgical intervention with partial resection of the cystic lesions and aneurysm clipping at an outside institution. Subsequently, the patient was asymptomatic for 20 years and able to pursue his former work without any physical limitations. In 2009 the patient presented again with chronically progressive unilateral tremor and thalamic pain affecting the right arm. DAT-SPECT revealed severe strictly unilateral dopaminergic denervation on the left side. Despite symptomatic treatment with escalating dosages of levodopa and pramipexole, symptoms worsened over time .
Clinical examination in August 2014 revealed further progression with increasing right-sided hemiparkinsonism, hemidystonia, hemithalamic pain as well as pyramidal signs. The patient was severely impaired in his activities of daily living and was suffering from mild depression. Repeated CT scanning showed progressive temporo-mesial and basal ganglia cysts as well as the development of a secondary hydrocephalus. As posterior cerebral artery aneurysm clipping was performed in the 90ies, magnetic resonance imaging to determine the exact configuration of the intracerebral cysts was contraindicated. Digital subtraction angiography revealed an aneurysm recurrence. In an open microsurgical procedure, fenestration of cystic membranes was performed, whereas full exploration of the aneurysm was abolished because of the limited access and the potential morbidity associated with a dissection within the severely scarred tissue. Parkinsonian signs, as measured by the MDS Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) part III, improved with a score reduction from 39 (pre-operatively) to 21 (postoperatively), showing a very good response of motor symptoms to the treatment. The pre and post-operation video assessment is included in the supplementary file. Concerning the non-motor symptoms, thalamic pain as well as depression improved markedly. The follow-up CT scan revealed no significant volume change of the cystic lesions Neuropathological examination revealed features of arachnoid cysts.
At last follow-up in April 2016 the patient marginally deteriorated again on a daily dose of 1200 mg of levodopa. He reported motor fluctuations with shuffling of gait, increasing rigidity, nervousness and dystonia during Off-periods. Neurological examination revealed secondary right-sided hemiparkinsonism with superimposed hemi-ataxia, and spastic hemiparesis, although repeated CT scans demonstrated no significant morphological change.