Here, we report the case of a 14-year-old Caucasian girl, who presented with bilateral agenesis of the upper incisors, diagnosed via orthopantomography (OPG) and skull X-ray in the laterolateral projection. Approximately one year after starting orthodontic treatment, our patient came to the emergency department because of a phlegmonous tumefaction of the lateroposterior upper left maxillary region. A careful intraoral examination revealed remarkable swelling and mobility of teeth 26 and 27, which were positive to vitality tests. OPG revealed a large area of unilocular osteolysis, with a calcific peripheral edge in the left maxillary sinus; radicular resorption of teeth 26 and 27; and the absence of tooth 28, which had been present in the previous radiographic examination .
To determine the origin of the lesion and the best surgical approach, an axial computed tomography (CT) scan of the facial skeleton was requested. The coronal section showed complete opacity of the left maxillary sinus, involvement of ethmoidal cells , and dislocation of tooth 2.8 in the sinus. The axial projection showed a large, oval-shaped area of osteolysis, measuring 3.6 × 4.3mm, with deformation and erosion of the buccal cortical bone . Considering this erosion, we immediately performed a needle biopsy of the lesion. The lesion was hemorrhagic and purulent, typical of an infected cyst. After a careful evaluation, we chose antral-cystectomy with the Caldwell-Luc technique, under general anesthesia, as the treatment for removal of the lesion and the infected sinus mucosa.
A large mucoperiosteal incision was made to create a mixed flap (marginal-paramarginal) from the central contralateral incisor to the maxillary tuberosity . Removing the flap revealed a large opening in the cortical bone. The maxillary sinus was emptied through complete enucleation of the keratocyst and removal of the ethmoidal membrane, including the eighth. The removed lesion was immersed in 10 percent formalin and sent to a pathologist for histological examination. Teeth affected by the lesion were stabilized by interocclusal splinting with wrought metal wire. A histological diagnosis of ‘odontogenic keratocyst with a specific flogistic and chronic focus’ confirmed the clinical suspicion.
The KCOT showed a typical undulated pattern in the epithelium, accompanied by parakeratinization and exfoliation of keratin in the lumen . Clinical and imaging follow-ups at 6, 12, and 24 months showed good bone trabeculation in the area of the KCOT , and positive pulp vitality results for teeth 2.6 and 2.7. Probing indicated healing of the periodontal area. Teeth neighboring the missing teeth were subjected to radicular torque, and internal hexagon implants (3.5 and 4mm in diameter) were inserted . Temporary rehabilitation was performed. Loading was deferred for 30 days after implant insertion .
The orthodontic braces were removed, resulting in an increased gum volume and ‘gummy smile’. Therefore, we performed gingivectomy using an Nd: YAG laser source .
Sixty days after implant insertion, the peri-implant soft tissues were determined to be in an excellent condition, and the final prosthetic rehabilitation with a ceramic implant-crown system was performed . At the 24-month follow-up visit, there was no recurrence, and the vitality of the dental elements was confirmed .