An 8-year-old female Bangladeshi child was referred to the pediatric emergency department of our institution with a 7-day history of thoracic pain with progressive nontraumatic cervicodorsal discomfort and constipation in the past 48 h. A medical history was unremarkable except for a precocious puberty under evaluation. Physical examination on admission showed a marked pain-induced limitation in neck movements with tenderness on palpation of cervicodorsal muscles. Abdominal distension was also detected. Neurological examination was otherwise negative. The child was admitted to the pediatric unit. Despite oral analgesia, the pain gradually increased. After 3 days of essentially normal investigations, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervicodorsal spine revealed an extramedullary blood collection at C7– T2 level, extending craniocaudally for about 35 mm, within the left posterolateral portion of the vertebral canal, displacing the medullary cord to the right. An offshoot of this collection also extended to the left T1–T2 neural foramen. After gadolinium injection, no enhancement was appreciated. Within 1 h, the child was brought to the operating room where she underwent emergency C7–T2 laminectomy with excision of a scarcely defined, capsulated dark red lesion. Part of the capsule extended anteriorly to the spinal cord between the left C7 and C8 nerve roots. This portion of the capsule was removed all the same, following a partial foraminectomy with release and decompression of the roots. By the end of the procedure, the spinal cord appeared “aligned” and well decompressed. The patient was transferred to the ICU for immediate postoperative multiparameter monitoring. She came back to the ward on postoperative day 1 and was mobilized with soft collar on postoperative day 2. A check-up MRI performed on postoperative day 4 ruled out further bleedings and demonstrated realignment of the medullary cord. The patient was discharged without neurological deficits on postoperative day 10. Histopathological examination of the specimens was compatible with the diagnosis of a hemorrhagic CM .