A 53-year-old woman presenting with three-month history of right-sided abdominal pain, early satiety, worsening nausea, and weight loss.
Symptoms started three months before presentation with worsening right-sided abdominal pain associated with early satiety, nausea and a 22-pound weight loss.
Patient has a past medical history of lupus nephritis status post renal transplant and known intestinal malrotation. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen showed large residual debris in the distal stomach and possible gastric outlet obstruction, without suspicious mass lesions or lymphadenopathy. The patient had been noted to have a mildly dilated duodenum and stomach on prior imaging and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD), thought then to be due to her intestinal malrotation.
The patient denied any family history of malignant tumors or abdominal pathologies.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 36.9 ℃; blood pressure, 118/77 mmHg; heart rate, 76 beats per min; respiratory rate, 18 breaths per min. Abdominal exam with no tenderness to palpation, non-distended, normal bowel sounds heard. No lymphadenopathy noted.
Liver enzymes and bilirubin were normal (aspartate aminotransferase 22 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 14 U/L, total bilirubin 0.3 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 0.2 mg/dL, albumin 4.2 g/dL). No abnormalities were found on routine blood and urine analysis.
After presenting with the above concerning symptoms, she underwent another EGD. This demonstrated worsened gastric and intestinal distention with numerous retained pills in a deformed first portion of the duodenum . The endoscope could not be advanced past this region. Although no fixed obstruction was noted, it appeared that this persistent, partial gastric outlet obstruction was the etiology of her symptoms. Patient’s colonoscopy was unremarkable. Both an upper gastrointestinal series and CT showed marked distention of the proximal duodenum and multiple pills present, with the second portion of the duodenum appearing normal. Additionally, given the presence of a windsock sign on the upper gastrointestinal (GI) series, a duodenal web was on the differential diagnosis. The differential also included Ladd’s bands, fibrous, compressive bands that are associated with intestinal malrotation.