A 30-year-old woman from Saudi-Arabia was admitted to our department of internal medicine with the strong suspicion of first manifestation of acute myeloid leukemia. Laboratory testing showed mild anemia and thrombocytopenia with normal leukocyte count. The differential blood cell count, however, showed 47% leukemic blasts. A bone marrow biopsy was performed immediately. With approximately 90% blasts the diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) was confirmed. Flow cytometry showed an expression of CD34, HLA-DR, CD38 and cyMPO. A cross-lineage of CD56 was found, which correlates with a poor prognosis . Cytogenetics and molecular analysis of the bone marrow cells revealed an ETV6-gen deletion in 12p13. According to the hematologic protocol intensive induction chemotherapy with HAM (high-dose Ara-C and Mitoxantron) was immediately initiated.
On day 8 after admission (2 days after the first cycle of chemotherapy was finished) the patient developed neutropenic fever up to a temperature of 39.4°C. The first laboratory testing showed a decrease in leukocytes down to 0.4 G/l with a C-reactive protein (CRP) less than 0.1 mg/dl. Escherichia coli with an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) was isolated from initially taken blood cultures, whereas all other clinical and diagnostic examinations (x-ray of the chest, urine, echocardiography and ultrasonography) were normal. Empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics was immediately initiated with Piperacillin/Tazobactam and switched to Meropenem after microbiologic testing confirmed ESBL sepsis. On that first day of fever, the patient told us, that she fell in the bathroom hurting her right knee two days before (day 6 after admission). There was no apparent injury on her leg. On further clinical examination, besides fever, her vital signs were always normal. In the course of the next 2 days neutrophils dropped below 0.1 G/l and CRP levels soared to a peak of 29.9 mg/dl. Highest procalcitonin level (PCT) measured was 1.7 ng/ml. Three days after the patient suffered from the minor injury to her lateral thigh, she suddenly presented a small hematoma with only little pain (day 9 after admission). There were no signs of superinfection of the hematoma explaining the clinical and laboratory signs of this unclear systemic infection. On that day, the patient was first presented to the surgical department. Within the next two days, the hematoma rapidly changed to a big untypical necrosis of the skin (day 11 after admission, see Figure ). Therefore, the patient was again presented to the surgical department. The patient was still in a good general condition with only little pain. A CT scan was initiated and showed entrapped air under the site of necrosis. Although the skin manifestation was not typical for a necrotizing soft tissue lesion, we considered the possibility of an untypical case of NF during severe neutropenia. Therefore, a surgical exploration was performed immediately (see Figure ). Macroscopically, subcutaneous tissue, fascia and muscle showed the typical characteristics of necrotizing fasciitis with grey necrotic tissue, facial edema, vessel thrombosis and non-contacting muscle. Intraoperative, there was only minimal resistance dissecting the subcutaneous fascia off the deep fascia, which is commonly described as positive “finger test” . The histological findings showed facial necrosis, vasculitis, thrombosis and suppuration of the veins and arteries coursing through the fascia. But, there were no signs of disease-causing bacteria or infiltration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the deep dermis and fascia as expected. First microbiological testing did not find any bacteria. The initial histopathological report could not confirm the typical picture of necrotizing fasciitis (see Figure ). In the further course of time, intensive care medicine was needed. After confirmation of adequate morphologic blast clearance in the bone marrow supportive treatment with granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) was added on day 18 (after start of chemotherapy). Neutrophils eventually recovered on day 23 (>500/μl). After beginning to recover, histopathological analyses of additional specimen of surgical resections showed the expected typical pathological findings like inflammatory cells and bacteria. Furthermore, microbiological testing confirmed ESBL infection. A multiplicity of operations with extended debridement was performed in order to eradicate the infection using negative pressure wound therapy. After successful eradication the skin defect involved the complete lateral thigh including nearly the whole circumference of the lower leg. In the further course of time, the immense skin defects had to be prepared for further reconstructive surgery. Reconstructive surgery with mesh graft harvest was complicated by the limited residual skin available on the lower extremity and the delay on wound healing of the harvest sites. Due to unfavorable cytogenetics and the complicated course of treatment our patient was assigned to undergo allogeneic stem cell transplantation in first remission. But, the transplantation was only possible with wounds totally closed. It took another six surgical interventions and nearly eight months to finally close all wounds (see Figure ). After further recovery the patient underwent allogeneic stem cell transplantation as planned. Today, she is doing well and there is no evidence of disease.