A 71-year-old man with atrial fibrillation (AF) was admitted for pulmonary vein ablation. He did not suffer from any chronic disease and had no past medical history. During pre-procedural workup, transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed a previously unknown osASD. Diagnostic cardiac catheterization revealed a significant left-to-right shunt. Coronary angiography excluded significant disease. After AF ablation, he underwent osASD transcatheter closure with a 27-mm Figulla Flex II device (Occlutech GmbH, Jena, Germany). The patient was discharged on apixaban. Thirty-two months later, he was hospitalized after an AF recurrence to undergo external electrical cardioversion. Physical examination was unremarkable. The patient was completely asymptomatic. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a LA mass attached to the left disc of the closure device and a moderate mitral regurgitation. A device-related thrombus was hypothesized, and apixaban was replaced with acenocoumarol to achieve optimal intensity of anticoagulation. Four months later, TEE showed that the size of the mass was unchanged. The mass was attached to the infero-posterior margin of the left disc of the closure device and had an isoechoic aspect with irregular margins and extreme mobility (, , ). Severe mitral regurgitation was also found. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the mass had T1 and T1 fat-saturated isointensity and heterogeneous T2 hyperintensity. First-pass perfusion enhancement (FPP) was absent. Late contrast enhancement (LGE) sequences were difficult to assess because of the small size and mobility of the mass . Coronary angiography showed that the mass was neovascularized (, , ). The case was discussed in a multidisciplinary heart team, and cardiac surgery was indicated. At surgery, the LA mass had myxoid appearance and was attached between the closure device discs . After en bloc resection of the mass and closure device, the LA septum was reconstructed using a pericardial patch. Also, the mitral valve was replaced with a bioprosthesis because of severe regurgitation due to bileaflet prolapse. On macroscopic examination, the mass had a gelatinous, friable surface, and irregular edges . The histopathological diagnosis was consistent with myxoma . The patient had a protracted time in the intensive care unit due to pneumonia, septic shock, and acute kidney injury. He was discharged to an inpatient rehabilitation facility 42 days after surgery. At 1-year follow-up, he is asymptomatic with permanent AF, and TTE shows a good surgical result and no tumour recurrence.