A 67-year-old man who was retired presented to the Oral Maxillofacial Surgery Department of Nanjing Stomatology Hospital, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China, with a 10-day history of a “lump” on the left part of his tongue. The patient felt pain when eating, and the “lump” gradually grew in size. There was a similar “lump” on the right side of his tongue, which then regressed with no treatment. Before having the “lump” on his tongue, the patient had sought treatment at a general hospital, and was given intravenous acyclovir 5 mg kg−1 8 hourly for 7 days because of a VZV infection. The patient denied fever, hematochezia, melena, hemoptysis, hematuria, and neurologic symptoms. He had no history of bibulosity, smoking, systemic diseases, or drug allergy. His family history, social history, and oral treatment history were unremarkable. No other drugs were taken during the treatment of the varicella-zoster virus infection.
Extraoral examination: There was no enlargement or change in texture of the maxillofacial and neck lymph nodes, and no limitation of mouth opening (mouth opened to 40 mm). No swelling or deformity of the maxillofacial area and neck were noted. There were several ecchymoses on the patient’s legs and feet .
Intraoral examination: There were three main lesions in the patient’s mouth. The first lesion appeared on the left margin of the tongue, a dark purple hematoma, 1.5 cm × 1 cm in size, with a medium texture and hard base. The lesion was painful on compression, but did not change color when pressed. Bleeding at the margin of the lesion was detected . The second lesion was on the left side of the tongue tip, showing a dark purple spot 0.3 cm in diameter . It was not painful on compression. The third lesion was a 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm white plaque with a bleeding spot at the center , located on the right margin of the tongue, and eliciting no pain on compression.
A complete blood count, performed on the day of presentation, showed a hemoglobin concentration of 120 g/L (120–160 g/L), a white blood cell count of 8.75 × 103/mm3 (4.6–10.2 × 103/mm3) with 58.1% neutrophils (50–70%), 25.8% lymphocytes (20–40%), and 9.6% monocytes (2–10%); the platelet count was 10 × 109/L (100–300 × 109/L) . Other laboratory tests showed normal liver function, a normal electrolyte profile, and normal haptoglobin, bilirubin (total and direct), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels. Creatinine clearance was 59.2 mL/min. Coagulation studies were normal. Tests for cytomegalovirus, hepatitis A and B viruses, and Epstein–Barr virus yielded negative results. The result for platelet factor 4 (PF4)/heparin antibodies using enzyme-linked immunoassay (ELISA) was positive. The following serotonin-release assay (SRA) yielded a negative result. ELISA was also applied for detection of acyclovir-dependent platelet antibodies in vitro, which showed positive results.
These findings, taken together with the temporal relationship between the putative drug (acyclovir) and the onset of thrombocytopenia, along with the exclusion of the other most common known causes of thrombocytopenia, established a definitive diagnosis of acyclovir-induced immune thrombocytopenia.
Initial treatment included telling the patient to stop using acyclovir, and giving him 5 units of donor platelets to elevate his platelet count. The patient was also treated with oral prednisone 60 mg daily for possible immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP).
One week later, the patient came back for a follow-up visit. We saw that the lesion on the left margin of tongue had regressed obviously. The lesion was of medium texture, had a softer base than before, was not painful on compression, and still had some bleeding spots on the margin . The lesions located on the left side of the tongue tip and the right margin of tongue were smaller, and the color had changed from purple to almost white . His platelet count was elevated to 39 × 109/L . The third visit: Another 1 week later, the patient came for a second follow-up visit. The lesions located on the left side of the tongue tip and the right margin of tongue had disappeared . The lesion on the left margin of tongue was smaller, and the color changed from purple to white, with a soft base and no pain on compression. The patient’s platelet count was elevated to 98 × 109/L.