A 52-year-old African American HIV infected female presented with three months of progressive abdominal pain, distension, and fever. The patient had never been on antiretroviral therapy and had a CD4 T-cell count of 396 cells/μL at the time of admission with an unknown HIV RNA viral load. She had a history of discoid lupus, hepatitis C, active tobacco, alcohol, and intravenous drug use (IVDU). The patient had not been hospitalized or seen in outpatient clinics in the previous year, and was not taking any medications. She reported living with a family member and denied any sick contacts.
On examination, the patient was found to be febrile at 39.6°C. Physical examination was remarkable for a distended abdomen with right-sided costo-vertebral tenderness and right lower extremity track marks. On laboratory analysis, the leukocyte count was 9240/mcl with 71% segmented neutrophils, the hemoglobin 8.3 gm/dl, creatinine 1.2 mg/dl, and albumin 1.9 gm/dl. The rest of the chemistry panel including amylase and lipase were within normal. The urinanalysis revealed 5-10 RBC/hpf with no WBC’s, a negative HCG pregnancy test, and a drug screen positive for cocaine and opiates.
The patient was admitted to the hospital for further work up. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis was done which revealed a 17.5 cm * 12.8 cm multicystic right-sided renal mass with septations and no evidence of invasion . The initial diagnostic impression was consistent with a multilocular cystic nephroma. The patient continued to be febrile and was started empirically on vancomycin and piperacllin-tazobactam. Urine and blood cultures sent on admission and multiple repeat blood cultures throughout the hospital stay came back as negative. Two weeks into her hospital stay the patient underwent surgical exploration. A large intrarenal abscess drained over three liters of purulent material and nephrectomy was subsequently performed. Cultures grew out MRSA sensitive to erythromycin, clindamycin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, levoquin, gentamycin, vancomycin, and linezolid. Based on this antibiogram we concluded that this bacterial isolate was consistent with a CA MRSA strain. Pathologic examination showed significant necrotic tissue, an abundance of inflammatory cells, and foamy histiocytes or xanthoma cells all characteristic of XGP . After surgery, the patient received a three-week course of vancomycin switched to linezolid upon discharge with complete recovery.