A 15-year-old female spayed domestic shorthair cat was presented with progressive obtundation, compulsive gait, absent bilateral menace and circling to the right. Pre-referral haematology, biochemistry, electrolytes, total thyroxine and fructosamine were within reference ranges. The cat’s heart rate was 140 beats per minute with a regular rhythm and synchronous peripheral pulse. Its blood pressure (BP) was not evaluated at admission. A right forebrain disease was suspected and an MRI was scheduled. The ASA (ie, American Society of Anesthesiology) score assigned was 3.
Butorphanol 0.3 mg/kg and medetomidine 3 µg/kg were administered intravenously (IV), achieving a mild sedative effect. General anaesthesia (GA) was induced with alfaxalone titrated slowly IV over 1 min (total dose 1.38 mg/kg). Immediately after induction of anesthesia, lidocaine spray was applied onto the larynx. A 5-mm uncuffed endotracheal tube was placed. GA was maintained with sevoflurane vaporised in 100% oxygen delivered via a circle breathing system, maintaining an end-tidal sevoflurane concentration of 1.6%. Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) was commenced using a Merlin Small Animal Ventilator (Vetronics Services Ltd), maintaining an end-tidal carbon dioxide partial pressure (EtCO2) of 30–32 mmHg. Tidal volume was 17.2–24.1 ml/kg with a peak inspiratory pressure of 7–8 cmH2O and a respiratory rate of 10–15 beats per min. High tidal volumes are often required owing to the high dead space and high compliance of our anaesthetic machine set up in the MRI suite. During the MRI, the patient was monitored using a multiparameter monitor continuously displaying pulse oximetry (SpO2), non-invasive BP (model 3880; IRadimed) and capnography, including gas analysis (Compact S5; Datex-Ohmeda). IV fluid therapy was initiated after induction of anaesthesia with Hartmann’s solution (4 ml/kg/h). The MRI revealed findings compatible with a meningioma with features of midline shift, caudal transtentorial and foramen magnum herniation (-). Dexamethasone 0.2 mg/kg and mannitol 0.5 g/kg over 30 mins were administered IV to reduce ICP. During the MRI, the median (range) pulse rate measured by the pulse oximeter was 68 (range 63–88) beats per minute, and the mean arterial pressure (MAP) was 59 mmHg (45–67). Hypertonic saline (HTS) 7% 2 ml/kg was administered IV over 10 mins, 15 mins after dexamethasone and mannitol. Bradycardia was not treated to avoid increasing cerebral blood flow (CBF) and end-tidal sevoflurane was maintained <1.6% to reduce vasodilation. Because HTS has volume-expanding properties, arterial BP improved after it was administered to treat the increased ICP.
After the MRI, emergency right rostrotentorial craniotomy was performed. Intraoperatively, capnography, spirometry, SpO2, electrocardiogram, temperature and invasive BP were monitored. Medical air was added, achieving an inspired fraction of oxygen (FiO2) of 0.6 and IPPV was maintained during the procedure with an EtCO2 of 32 (range 26–46) mmHg. An infusion of dexmedetomidine 1 µg/kg/h was started 20 mins before surgery and maintained during the whole procedure. A bolus of 2 ml/kg of HTS was administered before initiating the drilling of the skull. During surgery, the median (range) heart rate (HR) was 79 (69–93) beats per minute and MAP median (range) was 62 (52–115) mmHg. Serial arterial blood gasses analysis were performed intraoperatively . Blood gas analysis showed metabolic and respiratory acidosis. The latter improved by adjusting the ventilator settings. Using PaCO2 and EtCO2 to calculate the revised Bohr equation, we can speculate that the ventilation/perfusion mismatch present is likely due to dead space ventilation. Haematocrit was consistently low before and after surgery, which might be explained by sequestration of erythrocytes outside of the circulation during anaesthesia. Hyperglycaemia was present throughout the anaesthetic due to the effects of alpha-2-adrenoceptor agonists, as well as surgical manipulation. High adrenaline, cortisol levels and exogenous steroid therapy likely contributed to elevated blood glucose levels. The surgery was uneventful and, subjectively, a complete removal of the mass was achieved.
Spontaneous ventilation was noted immediately after mechanical ventilation was discontinued. Dexmedetomidine constant rate infusion (CRI) was halved every 30 mins to avoid excitation during recovery. Two hours after extubation, HR improved (108 beats per minute) as did BP (MAP 80 mmHg). During the postoperative hospitalisation period, the median (range) HR was 80 (120–210) beats per min, and the median (range) systolic BP was 127 (112–220) mmHg. Postoperatively, the cat received dexamethasone 0.2 mg/kg IV q24h, cefuroxime 20 mg/kg IV q8h and three dosages of buprenorphine 0.02 mg/kg IV q8h. The cat was discharged 3 days after surgery. A tapering anti-inflammatory dose of prednisolone was prescribed and discontinued 3 weeks later. Histopathological-analysis of the mass was diagnostic of epithelioid meningioma.
Eight weeks postoperatively, neurological examination was normal, besides marginally reduced menace response on the left. Eight months after surgery, the owner reported that the cat returned to its normal behaviour with no evident neurological deficits.