A 3-year-old girl presented with repeated dull abdominal pain and left abdominal mass swelling. There were no evident congenital abnormalities at birth nor any familial history of disease. On a physical examination, the child had a soft, moderately distended left abdomen that was not tender when palpated. The hemoglobin, alphafetoprotein, and beta-hCG levels were normal.
Abdominal ultrasound showed a heterogeneous soft-tissue mass measuring φ8 cm. Computed tomography demonstrated a large fatty mass within the mesentery, measuring approximately 8 × 6 cm. The mass extended from the right upper quadrant to the lower pole of the kidneys . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a well-encapsulated soft-tissue mass lesion in the mesenteric region. The mass had a clearly defined margin and a reticular pattern with an interposing fat component showing a reduced signal on fat suppression inversion recovery imaging . Based on these findings, the mass was suspected of being a benign soft-tissue tumor, most likely lipoma or lipoblastoma.
Laparotomy with resection of the mesenteric tumor was performed under general anesthesia. A well-capsuled tumor was a soft, yellow mass and found loosely attached to the mesenterium of the ileum. The tumor was located 6 cm from the ileocecal valve. The tumor was not separated from small intestine. Tumor was resected with small intestine which was 5 cm and end-to-end anastomosis of the small intestine was performed without injury to adjacent structures . The tumor was well circumscribed with a thin, fibrous capsule and a yellow, lobulated fatty parenchyma separated by thin fibrous septa with punctate vessels.
A histopathological examination demonstrated the lobular proliferation of mature adipocytes. Atypical lipoblasts were not seen . Immunohistochemically, there were adipocytic cells positive for p16 and cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) but negative for murine double minutes (MDM2) . The feature is compatible with benign lipomatous tumor, such as lipoma or lipoblastoma with maturation.
Follow-up at 2 years revealed no evidence of recurrence.