A 59-year-old man with history of migraine with aura and multiple cryptogenic strokes was referred to our centre for consideration of percutaneous closure of a PFO with associated ASA. He has previously had an embolic stroke in the territory of the left middle cerebral artery at the age of 40 years and myocardial infarction with not critically obstructed circumflex coronary artery submitted to systemic fibrinolysis at the age of 43 years. Then, he was started on bisoprolol (3.75 mg/day), acetylsalicylic acid (100 mg/day), and atorvastatin (40 mg/day) therapy. A transthoracic echocardiogram following his myocardial infarction revealed a diagnosis of visceral situs inversus and dextrocardia without any cardiac malformation except for a huge ASA (20 mm large with 15 mm bi-directional excursion) with multiple fenestrations and a large PFO. At the age of 56 years, he represented with embolic stroke in multiple areas of the middle right cerebral artery territory at which time a trans-cranial Doppler showed a massive right-to-left shunt during a Valsalva manoeuvre. Percutaneous PFO closure was unsuccessfully attempted using an Amplatzer PFO Septal Occluder (Abbott, Plymouth MN, USA) device, and therefore, he was commenced on regular anticoagulant therapy (warfarin about 30 mg/week). After 2 years, the patient spontaneously discontinued anticoagulant therapy due to gastro-intestinal bleeding. Thus, he underwent a second unsuccessful attempt of percutaneous PFO closure using an Amplatzer Atrial Septal Occluder (Abbott, Plymouth MN, USA) device and was established on aspirin (100 mg/day). His congenital anatomic arrangement likely caused the failure of the two previous failed attempts of percutaneous treatment due to supposed instability and malposition of dedicated and off-label protheses. Unfortunately, he subsequently had a transient ischaemic attack, and was referred to our centre. This case was submitted to our Heart Team discussion, and the final decision was to attempt a third percutaneous procedure using a novel, sequential anatomic-tailored approach aiming to reduce the size of the atrial septum aneurysm with a suture-based device and closing eventual residual fenestrations with standard occluding device(s). Thus, the planned procedure was explained to the patient who signed the informed consent to the procedure.
At hospital admission, clinical examination and EKG were normal. Holter EKG did not show any arrhythmia potentially related to cardio-embolism. No deep vein embolic sources were found at vascular ultrasound examination. At transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE), the atrial septum secundum appeared very thick and lipomatous while the septum primum was thin, aneurysmal, and mobile with bi-directional shunt at rest that was completely right-to-left during Valsalva’s manoeuver through a large PFO and multiple, tiny accessory fenestrations (, , ). Cardiac MRI clearly detailed the relative position of the caval veins with respect to the atrial septum.
Based on this ‘complex’ anatomic setting as well as the history of multiple failures in positioning either self-centring and not self-centring devices, we decided to perform a sequential two-step interventional approach. Thus, it was planned to close the PFO using a suture-based approach (Noblestitch™ EL, HeartStitch, Fountain Valley, CA, USA), which hopefully could have been useful also to reduce size and mobility of the ASA and then to treat the accessory fenestrations with an occluding device chosen on the basis of the local anatomy resulting from the former intervention. At cardiac catheterization, the superior and inferior vena cava angiographies clearly imaged the relative position of the systemic venous drainages with respect to the huge aneurysmal septum . Then, the stitch-implantation procedure was performed in a mirror-image fashion via the left femoral vein, resulting in complete closure of the PFO and significant reduction of size and mobility of the aneurysmal atrial septum . As expected, a mild-to-moderate residual right-to-left shunt at bubble test was imaged far from the PFO, in the middle of the septal aneurysm, due to multiple fenestrations that appeared even larger than before the stitch implantation. However, they were completely closed using a 30 mm Ultrasept PFO Occluder device (Cardia Inc., Eagan, MN, USA) that nicely seated inside the aneurysm and further stabilized the septum (, , ). At the end of the procedure, no residual shunt was imaged at TEE bubble test and the patient was uneventfully discharged under double antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel, 75 mg/day and acetil-salycilic acid, 100 mg/day) ( and ; , ). At the 6 months follow-up evaluation, neither recurrence of embolic symptoms nor procedure-related complications was recorded. At that time, the patient signed the informed research consent for participation in this case report as long as he remained anonymous.