An 80-year-old man presented with blurred vision and visual loss in the left eye that persisted for about 6 months. The patient had been treated for uveitis-associated secondary glaucoma of the left eye by a local ophthalmologist for more than 10 years. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was well controlled with topical treatments, but inflammation became severe, and IOP control became poor. Trabeculotomy was performed in the left eye in 2010. IOP elevation was noted since December 2012, and it was not improved by treatment. The patient was referred to our clinic. Past ocular medical histories were rhegmatogenous retinal detachment of the right eye treated with vitreous surgery and bilateral cataract operations. The patient was not an immunocompromised host infected by human immunodeficiency virus, nor was he treated with immunosuppressive drugs. Regarding the systemic complication, the patient had a past medical history of cerebral infarction.
On the first examination, the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 30/20 in the right eye and 6/200 in the left eye, respectively. IOP was 19 mm Hg in the right eye and 29 mm Hg in the left eye. In the anterior chamber, keratic precipitates and cells (2+) were observed in the left eye, but the right eye was normal . In the angle, no peripheral anterior synechia or pigmentation was noted, but neovascularization was observed in the angle and iris. On the fundus, the left eye flare was severe, vitreous opacity was noted, and the optic disc was pallor. In addition, granular white retinal lesions were present on the upper nasal side . No abnormal finding was observed in the right eye. On fluorescein fundus angiography (FA), contrast perfusion was noted only in the regions around the optic nerve and near the arcade, and an extensive nonperfusion area (NPA) was present around the retina . On indocyanine green FA, no finding suggested choroidal neovascularization. On high-penetration optical coherence tomography (swept source OCT: SS-OCT, DRI OCT-1 Atlantis; Topcon Corp., Japan), thinning of the outer layer and disturbance of the space in the inner layer and arrangement were noted in the retina on the temporal side over the macula in the left eye . No abnormality was observed in the right eye retina.
No abnormality was detected on blood testing or urinalysis including serum calcium, urinary calcium, and serum angiotensin-converting enzyme. On chest radiography, no finding suggested bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy. Regarding toxoplasmosis, syphilis, and intraocular lymphoma causing atypical retinal necrosis, exclusion diagnosis was performed by examining infections. CMV was positive on PCR tests of viral genomes in the aqueous humor of the anterior chamber. Based on the PCR test results and clinical findings, CMV-induced iritis and retinitis were diagnosed. Thus, valganciclovir (1,800 mg/daily) with oral steroids (20 mg/daily) were administered. Inflammation decreased after initiation of oral treatment, and vitreous opacities and white retinal lesions tended to regress on fundoscopy; the steroid dose was then gradually reduced. Since the IOP was about 25–30 mm Hg during treatment with glaucoma eye drops, acetazolamide was additionally prescribed.
Since neovascular formations were present in the iris and angle, FA was performed, and extensive NPA was detected in the retia, for which retinal photocoagulation (PC) was initiated. Intravitreal bevacizumab injection was performed at the same time, aiming at regression of iris neovascularization, and it was effective. Additional PC was applied to NPA thereafter. For IOP control, treatment with glaucoma eye drops and oral acetazolamide was continued, but a high left IOP increased to 40 mm Hg. Thus, left eye trabeculectomy was performed in January 2013. After surgery, the IOP of the left eye decreased to 7 mm Hg. The pressure was maintained at a low level thereafter, and glaucoma eye drops were withdrawn. Vitreous opacities remained, but the fundus could be observed. The oral valganciclovir dose was reduced to 900 mg/day, and the drug was then withdrawn. The condition could be maintained with 20 mg/day of oral steroid. At 1 month after surgery, the left BCVA was 0.01, the left IOP was 7 mm Hg, and vitreous clouding remained only slightly on the fundus. At 4 months after surgery, the left BCVA was 0.01, and the left IOP moderately rose to 21 mm Hg, but the inflammation was mild and stable.
At 6 months after surgery, neovascularization of the iris and angle recurred , and vitreous hemorrhage was noted on fundoscopy . Topical treatments were restarted, and iris neovascularization was treated with intravitreous bevacizumab injection. However, the filtration bleb became nonfunctional due to new blood vessels, and the left IOP rose to 38 mm Hg. Vitreous surgery was investigated aiming at applying additional PC around the retina to treat retinal ischemia, but the patient did not agree and surgery was not performed. Since IOP control was poor, reconstruction of the left eye filtration bleb was repeated on August 9, 2013. The left IOP was maintained at about 5–10 mm Hg, and the patient was referred to a local physician for follow-up. The patient developed IOP elevation again and was referred to our hospital. The left eye showed no light perception, the left IOP was 36 mm Hg, and hyphema was noted in the anterior chamber . Since it was painless, the expectation of visual acuity improvement was very low, and the systemic use of bevacizumab was accompanied by a risk, conservative treatment was selected in response to patient's request.