A 35-year-old addicted woman suffering from diabetes and hypothyroidism was referred to the hospital emergency department with the chief complaint of spontaneous abortion and a temporary loss of consciousness. Abdominal examination of this patient revealed generalized tenderness. A complete haemogram and other laboratory tests revealed severe anaemia, biological inflammatory syndrome (C-reactive protein positive), hypernatremia, hypokalaemia, diabetes and an initial functional renal deficiency. Examination of the arterial blood gas revealed metabolic acidosis .
The patient's fresh midstream urine sample was sent for macroscopic and microscopic examination. Its physical appearance was smoky and turbid, and a urine test strip revealed sugar and proteinuria. Samples were examined using the merthiolate–iodine–formaldehyde concentration method . Microscopic examination of the sediment revealed a tubular cast, a few epithelial cells, amorphous urates, bacteria, haematuria with 50–60 red blood cells per high-power field and 20–25 pus cells per high-power field. The urine sample showed a few large ovoid-shaped ciliated parasites measuring approximately 61 × 51 μm. They had a rotary, boring motion and were moving very rapidly across the slide (Video S1, available in the online Supplementary Material), suggesting trophozoites of B. coli . The trophozoite bodies were completely covered with short delicate cilia, all of uniform length, which maintained a constant synchronized motion. The cilia that lined the mouth part appeared to be longer than the others (adoral cilia). The organism had a mouth that was located at the pointed anterior end (cytostome) and a rounded posterior end (cytopyge). Several food vacuoles, a macronucleus, a micronucleus (next to the macronucleus) and a few ingested red blood cells were present within the cytoplasm. This morphology, the ciliary covering and its rotary motion were typical of B. coli. In the urine sediment, a few motile trophozoites of T. vaginalis were also seen . Repeated midstream urine samples from the patient were also positive for similar organisms. The stool samples collected were negative for B. coli trophozoites or cysts, but mucosal clamps with many pus cells were seen. The patient was given tetracycline (500 mg four times a day) and metronidazole (750 mg three times a day) for a total of 7 days, and she gradually improved.