A 47-year-old woman with a 2-day history of headache and blurred vision was referred to our department from a peripheral hospital. A CT scan of the skull had showed a large mass arising from the sella, eroding the bony structures and invading the nasal cavity.
On admission she presented Glasgow coma scale (GCS) 15, afebrile. Neurological examination showed no alterations. Visual field was intact. Body mass index (BMI) was 28.2, medical history included mild psoriasis, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), cholelithiasis, no relevant infections except in her infancy, and no previous surgeries. She did not take any routine medications. She was the mother of two children and had regular menses. Blood pressure and heart rate were within normal limits. Blood test showed microcromic microcytic anemia, reticulocytosis [hemoglobin (Hb): 8.6g/dL; hematocrit (HCT): 27.8%; mean cell volume (MCV): 64.5; mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH): 20 pg; mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC): 30.9 g/dL; red blood cell distribution width (RDW): 20.2 %)]. Leucocytes count and inflammatory indexes where within normal limits. Hormone blood concentrations were normal except for a slight decrease in thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) (0.238 μU/mL and 0.6 mU/mL); β-17-estradiol was 35.8 pg/mL. Urine osmolality was normal.
An enhanced MRI [Figure –] confirmed a solid-cystic lesion arising from the sella turcica, abutting both cavernous sinuses and wrapping both carotid siphons.
According to the clinical and radiological data, a large pituitary adenoma with a mixed solid/cystic consistence was diagnosed. The patient was admitted and scheduled for surgery the same week. Her headache was treated with pain medications. She complained of no vision problems.
Forty eight hours after onset of symptoms, her headache suddenly worsened and she rapidly developed gaze palsy and nuchal rigidity. GCS fell from 15 to 6 (E:1, V:2; M:3). After an emergency CT showed no parenchymal infarction, extra-axial bleeding, fluid collection, or ischemia , an urgent craniotomy was performed. A right frontotemporal approach was done.
After opening the dura mater, the brain was swelling, with a considerable amount of dense pus covering the brain surface [Figure and ]. More purulent material was found within the tumor located in the sella and drained .
The patient was subsequently taken to the intensive care unit (ICU), but she did not recover and died a few days later.
The pathological analysis of the intraoperative material confirmed a nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma with chronic inflammation and necrosis [Figure –]. Cultures of the intraoperative material were negative.