We report the case of a 71-year-old, previously healthy male, who was admitted through the emergency department of a North Queensland hospital with rigors, right upper quadrant pain, nausea and vomiting, 6 h after an apparently uncomplicated colonoscopic polypectomy. The colonoscopy was performed as part of routine bowel cancer screening following a positive faecal occult blood test. During the procedure, a single large polyp (15 mm × 31 mm) was removed from the proximal transverse colon with submucosal adrenaline injection and diathermy. Visual inspection at the time showed a clean base with no suggestion of perforation.
At the time of his emergency admission he was febrile at 40.1 °C, heart rate was 102 beats/min and regular, blood pressure was 131/68 mmHg, his respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute and SpO2 was 98% on room air. Physical examination revealed a soft abdomen with right upper quadrant tenderness. The remainder of his cardiorespiratory examination was unremarkable. Initial bloods revealed leukocytosis with left shift and mildly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP), ALP and GGT, but normal electrolytes and renal function. Blood cultures were taken prior to initiation of antibiotics, which failed to grow any organisms. Chest X-ray showed no evidence of subdiaphragmatic gas or other infective processes. The patient was admitted and initiated on intravenous (IV) piperacillin-tazobactam.
A CT scan the following morning revealed substantial thickening of the bowel wall of the hepatic flexure and proximal transverse colon with induration of surrounding mesocolic fat, as well as several focal intramural gas bubbles localised to the polypectomy site . There was no evidence of pericolic gas or pneumoperitoneum. Soon afterwards this same day, the patient became hypotensive, with a systolic blood pressure of < 60 mmHg despite 3 L of IV fluid resuscitation. He was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with rapidly deteriorating vital signs, becoming hypotensive tachycardic and hypoxic. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.23, HCO3− of 12.1 mmol/L and a serum lactate of 3.8 mmol/L rising to 4.8 mmol/L on serial analysis. Once in ICU he received a further 1 L of Hartman’s solution and 200 mL of albumin. Bedside echocardiography showed moderate left ventricular systolic dysfunction consistent with septic myocardial depression. The patient was given inotropic support with dobutamine and noradrenaline infusions, however he did not require intubation.
A diagnosis of clostridial myonecrosis (gas gangrene) was made, supported by the rapid deterioration of the patient, demonstrable intramural gas on CT, raised lactate potentially indicative of gut hypoperfusion and the inciting event of recent colonoscopy. Further investigations in ICU revealed a new haemolytic anaemia, with a fall in haemoglobin from 163 g/L to 120 g/L, with raised total bilirubin (45 micromol/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (371 U/L). This was consistent with the intravascular haemolysis sometimes seen with clostridial infections.
The patient’s IV antibiotics were changed to clindamycin 900 mg 8 hourly and benzylpenicillin 2.4 g 6 hourly to cover for Clostridium, in addition to meropenem 1 g 8 hourly and vancomycin 250 mg 6 hourly for other potential causes of sepsis. Colorectal surgery was consulted for potential surgical management with resection, however a trial of medical management with IV antibiotics was decided upon.
The evening of his ICU admission there was one episode of melaena. The patient remained unstable requiring IV fluids and inotropic support for 2 days before his cardiovascular stability and acidosis began to improve, and he was able to be weaned from inotropic support. He was stepped down from ICU to the ward after 4 days. Following stepdown he began passing loose stool 2–3 times per day although faecal polymerase chain reaction and cultures were negative for typical infective causes of diarrhoea, including C. diff. A repeat CT scan the day following stepdown (now 5 days after colonoscopy) showed significant reduction in transverse colon thickening with no intramural gas. He remained on the ward for a further 8 days of treatment with benzylpenicillin, clindamycin, meropenem and vancomycin. The patient was discharged 10 days after stepdown from ICU (2 weeks post colonoscopy and initial admission). At this point he had been apyrexial for 11 days, his right upper quadrant pain had resolved, bowel motions had returned to normal and appetite was increasing.
Interestingly, although blood cultures were taken daily, these as well as his initial culture, remained negative. At outpatient review 2 weeks post-discharge (4 weeks post colonoscopy) he had been gradually improving with bloods normalising and weight returning to normal, as he had lost 6 kg during the admission period. CT at this time revealed ongoing colitis of the hepatic flexure and proximal transverse colon, although this was significantly improved from previous studies, and no further intramural gas was visualised. At review 3 months post-discharge, he denied any ongoing symptoms or complications, and reported to be back to his normal full health.