We report the case of a 48-year-old male patient with a past medical history of obesity and moderate alcohol consumption, but no history of smoking or other illicit drugs habits. His father died at the age of 63 due to end-stage liver disease. No other relevant family disorders or cardiovascular diseases were reported.
He was first admitted to the ward at the age of 41 years old due to a diffuse serosal effusion with a pleural and ascitic predominance. He reported a history of progressively worsening abdominal distention and shortness of breath for the two months prior. The patient did not report any previous infections, travel abroad or lifestyle changes. No other cardiovascular symptoms, such as chest pain or loss of consciousness were referred. A history of sicca symptoms was cleared out, including dry eyes that required eye drop moisturizer, and also dry skin. No other symptoms were reported, including skin changes, mucosal ulceration, hair loss, Raynaud’s phenomenon, salivary gland swelling, joint tenderness or swelling, proximal muscle weakness, neurological or constitutional symptoms, or any pattern of fever. At examination, the patient presented with diffuse edema, most prominently at the abdomen, and diminished breath sounds with dullness to chest percussion. No other relevant changes were evident.
The combination of the presented clinical manifestations and the young age of onset prompted an in-depth etiological investigation. The admission EKG showed sinus rhythm with no acute or dynamic changes. The initial workup diagnosis included a wide range of blood tests, including serological and immunological markers. The blood count, metabolic panel and other biochemical markers showed no significant alterations, except for a C-reactive protein level of 6 mg/dL (normal < 0.3 mg/dL) and mild liver cytolysis. The serum protein (4.6 g/dL) and albumin (2.3 g/dL) levels were both low. The 24-h urinalysis was also normal. Immunofixation was negative, and serum IgG, IgA, IgM, light chains kappa and lambda and protein electrophoresis were normal. Further serological and molecular testing looking for an infectious etiology yielded negative results, having been searched the following microorganisms: Bartonella spp., Coxiella burnetii, Brucella spp., Borrelia spp, Chlamydia spp. and Mycobacterium tuberculosis spp. Specific immunological tests were performed. Antinuclear antibody immunofluorescence assay was positive at a titer of 1:320. The anti-ENA ELISA immunoassay revealed a positive anti-SS-A/Ro at a titer of 98.0 U/mL (reference < 7 U/mL), but no other specific antibody positivity was found (including the mixed connective tissue disease hallmark anti-U1-RNP). The anti-cyclic citrullinated peptides antibodies, rheumatoid factor, anti-dsDNA and ANCA antibodies were negative. Complement fractions C3 and C4 were not consumed .
The imaging workup included a chest X-ray that revealed bilateral pleural effusion. An abdominal computed tomography for additional clarification showed hepatomegaly with diffuse heterogeneity, splenomegaly and a diffuse subcutaneous cellular edema. A TTE was performed, but no significant pathological findings were reported.
The analysis of pleural and ascitic fluid revealed a transudative effusion, and cytological analysis excluded the presence of malignant cells. A pleural biopsy revealed nonspecific reactive inflammatory changes, with no evidence of pleural thickness or fibrosis. A Schirmer test of 3 mm in 5 min bilaterally proved an abnormal ocular dryness for this particular patient, in the absence of secondary causes for it. Minor salivary gland biopsy showed no signs of lymphocytic sialadenitis.
During this first hospitalization, a diagnosis of primary Sjögren’s syndrome (pSS) was made, and 2016 ACR/EULAR classification criteria for pSS were also fulfilled with a total score of 4 and no exclusion criteria present . The patient was started on prednisolone 60 mg/day and was discharged after 30 days of hospitalization with no symptoms.
The patient remained clinically stable for two years, during which he did not fully adhere to follow-up appointments, hindering treatment adjustments and optimization. After that time, the patient was readmitted due to dyspnea and abdominal distension. Hepatosplenomegaly and pleural effusion were detected, and a liver biopsy revealed hepatic peliosis, which was interpreted as a consequence of glucocorticoid therapy. A new thoracic CT scan was performed, revealing a localized pericardial thickening and a thin circumferential pericardial effusion, but a new TTE was not performed at that time. With no infectious or neoplastic cause underneath and no other symptoms suggesting a major involvement of a systemic rheumatic disease, diuretic therapy was adjusted to symptom-relief. The patient continued to receive medical surveillance through dedicated consultations and gradually reduced their prednisolone dosage until suspension due to clinical stability.
Four years after the first admission, the patient was readmitted with relapsed dyspnea, orthopnea and ascites. The physical exam was notable for jugular venous distension, lung base crackles, ascites and bilateral leg edema. Chest X-ray upon admission revealed a significant right pleural effusion with areas of passive atelectasis. The EKG showed atrial fibrillation rhythm with controlled ventricular rate of 86 bpm and T wave flattening in all precordial leads . At this time a new TTE was performed showing left and right atrium enlargement (left atrial indexed volume = 43 mL/m2; right atrial indexed volume = 31 mL/m2), small ventricular cavities with mild left and right ventricular systolic dysfunction. It was also notable for an increased respiratory phasic septal shift as well as mitral and tricuspid flow variations. The additional presence of mitral annulus reversus and annulus paradoxus, inferior vena cava plethora and of a thickened echogenic pericardium with calcifications and a small pericardial effusion raised the clinical suspicion of constrictive pericarditis. . A new thoracic CT scan was performed, showing a thickened pericardium with extensive calcified pericardial plaques . No evidence of masses or lymphadenopathies suggestive of malignancy. Subsequent cardiac catheterization confirmed the diagnosis by demonstrating elevated and equal diastolic pressures in both ventricles, a “square root” sign during diastole and an elevated systolic area index. It also reveals isolated post-capillary pulmonary hypertension .
In face of this imaging features, the diagnosis of CP was confirmed. Due to the documented extensive calcifications it was assumed a chronic CP, so the patient was proposed and accepted for cardiac surgery with pericardiectomy. During the surgery, complex calcified adherences were evident around both ventricles and only a partial pericardiectomy was performed. The histologic tissue analysis revealed areas of hyaline fibrosis and calcification and a scanty mononuclear inflammatory infiltrate, suggestive of chronic pericarditis . No evidence of granulomas, epithelial or lymphoid neoplastic tissue.
Since then, the patient referred clinical improvement with dyspnea and orthopnea relief, despite maintaining signs of peripheral congestion amenable with diuretic therapy. Imaging reevaluation with a TTE performed three months later still shows the same constrictive physiology signs that were present before surgical intervention.