A 7-year-old girl with a palpable mass in the right neck and symptoms of persistent dyspnea for the past 5 mo.
The patient had no fever, headache, trauma or skin redness. Her only symptoms were periodic episodes of dyspnea and nocturnal obstruction.
The patient has a history of bronchitis which was diagnosed in the local outpatient setting. The subsequent symptomatic treatment of bronchitis was almost ineffectual. The patient had no history of diabetes, heart disease, alcohol consumption or smoking.
The patient and family denied that they have histories of cancer, contagion or genetic disease.
The physical examination showed no abnormalities.
The physiological and biochemical values obtained from laboratory tests were normal.
She was preliminarily examined by laryngoscopy, sonography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). For the protection of the thyroid, the patient was not subjected to X-ray and Computer tomography (CT) scans.
The greyscale and Doppler imaging were performed by a conventional ultrasound machine equipped with an L12-5 Linear array transducer (Philips healthcare, Bothell, WA, the United States, with L12-5 Linear array transducer) in the initial evaluation. According to the longitudinal section and transection of greyscale images, the soft-tissue mass was measured to be 33 mm × 27 mm × 28 mm, which was located above the right thyroid and inner side of the carotid . It was found that the soft-tissue mass consisted of both hypoechoic solid-component and anechoic fluid, and it appeared as an alveolate mass with circumscribed margins and posterior acoustic enhancement. The Doppler images also suggested that some internal vascularity was present in the soft-tissue mass whereas vascular calcification was not detectable .
The well-defined mass measured 35 mm × 33 mm leading to an airway stenosis and was demonstrated in the right laryngeal and piriform recess by 3.0T MRI (Discovery MR 750; GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, the United States) afterward, which was heterogeneous equisignal, like that in skeletal muscle, on T1 -weighted images , and high signal intensity on T2 -weighted images . The contrast-enhanced MRI (gadolinium diethylenetriamine pentetic acid, Magnevist, Bayer Schering Pharma, Berlin, Germany) illustrated the outstanding enhancement with fast perfusion mode in the early arterial phase . Meanwhile, several lymph nodes nearby were revealed as well.