A previously healthy 57-year-old right-handed male was admitted to our department because of unconsciousness after a car accident for 3 days. Three days before admission, this patient had a car accident and suffered from multiple fractures of the bilateral lower extremities and pelvis. Then, he was sent to the local emergency centre and underwent external fixation surgery for the fractures. Before surgery, this patient was conscious at all times, even though he experienced hypotensive shock (blood pressure decreased to 80/50 mmHg, heart rate: 110–120 times/min) and received blood transfusion and other rescue measures. This patient was transported to the recovery room after surgery. During the anaesthesia recovery period, the sedation and analgesia drugs were continued after the patient became conscious. Then, this patient lost consciousness and could no longer be roused. Head MRI showed multiple small lesions in the whole brain, and fat embolism was taken into consideration. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed bilateral lung contusion. 3D pulmonary arteriography with contrast was also performed to rule out pulmonary embolism and lung vascular shunt. The patient was considered to be suffering from CFE, and intravenous methylprednisolone and albumin were used for three days, but no improvement was shown.
Then, this patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) of our hospital. His vital signs were stable (T: 37.3℃, P: 108/min, R: 21/min, BP: 122/84 mmHg). On neurological examination, he was in coma. His bilateral pupillary reflex was normal, and his oculocephalic, corneal and cough reflexes existed. Pain stimuli in this patient showed slight flexion of the bilateral limbs. The bilateral Babinski sign of this patient was positive. Written informed consent was obtained from the legal guardians of this patient.
This patient had severe anaemia. The routine blood test showed that the lowest red blood cell (RBC) count was 1.70*1012/L, and the lowest haemoglobin (HGB) level was 72 g/L. He also had fever (highest temperature was 38.5°C) and thrombocytopenia (the lowest platelet count was 67*109/L) during the course of the disease. The D-dimer and fibrinogen levels of this patient were higher than normal levels for more than one month before they reached normal ranges (the highest D-dimer level was 47.3 µg/ml, and the highest fibrinogen level was 115.4 g/L).
Bilateral lower extremity X-ray and pelvic CT in this patient showed multiple fractures of the bilateral lower extremities and pelvis. Head MRI showed multiple small lesions in the whole brain consistent with a “star field” pattern , including high signals on T2-weighted (T2w) and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images in the bilateral centrum semiovale; both frontal, parietal and occipital lobes; and brainstem, cerebellar hemisphere, and deep and subcortical white matter. Head MRI was re-examined 15 days after admission to our hospital and revealed that the signals of these lesions on T2w and FLAIR images were slightly decreased . Continuous electroencephalogram (EEG) monitoring showed generalized slow waves without epileptiform discharges. Bedside transthoracic echocardiography of this patient was highly suspicious of a patent foramen ovale. However, the transesophageal echocardiogram with bubble study failed to demonstrate an intracardiac defect or arteriovenous malformation (AVM) in the lung, further supporting a biochemical process.
In terms of the treatment, intravenous methylprednisolone was used for 9 days in total (500 mg *1 day, 1 g*2 days, 500 mg*3 days, 80 mg*3 days), including the first 3 days prescript in the local emergency centre; heparin was used for 8 days until side effects occurred (right leg haematoma); and mannitol, antibiotics and nutritional support were also used simultaneously.
Four days after admission, the mechanical ventilator was removed, and the blood oxygen saturation of this patient was normal. After this treatment combination was administered for 33 days, the patient’s sensorium improved with eye opening in response to painful stimuli. Forty-six days later, he could open his eyes and had some tracking eye movement. He could open his eyes to verbal stimuli and perform some simple body movements, but he did not speak coherently. Fifty-five days later, his consciousness gradually became normal, and he underwent internal fixation surgery for a right lower limb fracture. Figure shows his head MRI results 11 months after the car accident, and the lesions were almost completely absorbed. The Barthel index was 95 at the last visit 10 months later.