A 72-year-old woman presented with chest tightness and breath-holding symptoms a month before seeking medical attention, aggravated by physical activity and hindering her ability to recline at night. The patient had a history of coronary artery disease and diabetes mellitus; however, she has no family history of genetic disorders or tumors. Acute coronary syndrome was initially ruled out. Laboratory tests revealed CK-MB level at 1.5 ng/mL (normal range: 0–5 ng/mL), high-sensitivity troponin I at 19.3 ng/L (normal range: 0–0.04 ng/mL), and natriuretic peptide at 127.00 pg./mL (normal range: 0–100 pg./mL). Blood gas analysis indicated hypoxemia. The patient initiated diuretic treatment with oral furosemide. However, her breath-holding symptoms intensified after 2 weeks, leading to her hospital admission. An electrophysiology study showed third-degree atrioventricular block. A chest CT scan disclosed an enlarged and dysmorphic heart, displaying multiple nodular and clumped slightly hypodense foci in the heart and pericardium, along with effusions in the pericardium and pleural cavity (,). The diagnostic imaging physician suspected a malignant tumor of interlobar origin in the heart. Subsequent tumor marker panel analysis revealed elevated CA125 at 203 U/mL (normal range: 0–35 U/mL), CYFRA21-1 at 5.40 ng/mL (normal range: 0–3.3 ng/mL), and NSE at 17.75 ng/mL (normal range: 0–16.3 ng/mL). Cytologic examination of pericardial and pleural effusions exhibited microscopic cells characterized by large, deeply stained nuclei, scanty cytoplasm, moderate cellular anisotropy, visible small nucleoli, and distinct nuclear fission images and apoptosis . Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated positive expression of CD5, CD10, CD20, MUM1, and Bcl2 (–). In addition, Ki-67 was observed to be positive in 40% of the tumor cells. In situ hybridization remained negative for Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small RNAs (EBERs). The pathological diagnosis of cell smears and cell wax blocks in pericardial and pleural effusion confirms DLBCL.
For further staging, the patient underwent an 18F-FDG PET/CT scan. The patient was instructed to follow a high-fat low-carbohydrate diet for 24 h prior to the 18F-FDG PET/CT study and to avoid strenuous exercise (, ). Additionally, a low carbohydrate meal was advised before starting the 6-h fasting period to maintain blood glucose levels below 11.1 mmol/L. In this examination, 3,000 units of unfractionated heparin was intravenously administered 15 min before FDG administration. The 18F-FDG PET/CT scan, performed utilizing Philips GXL-16 PET/CT machines, was conducted 60 min after the intravenous administration of 18F-FDG. To ensure optimal hydration, patients were instructed to consume 1,000 mL of water and empty their bladders after 60 min of quiet rest. Routine scans were conducted from the head to mid-thigh, with separate acquisitions of the head and torso. In alignment with the European Association of Nuclear Medicine Research Limited (EARL) standards, we reconstructed the SUVmax for improved reproducibility and comparability (, ). This revealed multiple nodular soft tissue density lesions in the heart and pericardium, exhibiting increased FDG metabolism (SUVmax = 12.1). The supradiaphragmatic and infradiaphragmatic segments of the inferior vena cava exhibited irregular morphology with localized nodular changes and increased FDG metabolism in the surrounding area (SUVmax = 9.7). Additionally, multiple enlarged lymph nodes were identified in the mediastinum, left axilla, and near the left kidney, displaying heterogeneous FDG uptake with an SUVmax of 9.3, indicating lymphoma involvement . The above imaging findings suggested that the mass was a PCL.
Hence, the patient underwent a combination of chemotherapy and immunotherapy using R-CDOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, liposomal doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone). Following two courses of treatment within a span of 2 months, there was a partial remission observed in the cardiac lymphoma and the enlarged lymph nodes. She was closely monitored throughout the chemo-immunotherapy, with an established emergency plan in place to address potential complications, including arrhythmia and cardiac rupture.