A 51-year-old woman was referred because of a 20-year history of intermittent headaches and dizziness that had been accompanied by blurred vision in both eyes for 10 years. The patient did not have a family history of glaucoma. An ophthalmic examination of the patient revealed that although the best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) values were 0.8 and 0.5 in her eyes and that the intraocular pressure (IOP) was normal in both eyes, the superior visual field was narrowed in both eyes, likely due to drooping upper eyelids . A neurological examination revealed that the muscle strength and muscle tension of the limbs were normal, and Babinski’s sign, Kernig’s sign, and Brudzinski’s sign were negative. A CT scan and an MRI of the sella revealed a mass in the sellar-suparsellar-parasellar region; this mass was likely to be a meningioma, which compressed the left optic nerve. We then performed a craniotomy using the anterior cranial base approach. During the operation, the frontal sinus apex was opened, and the tumor was found to be surrounding the left optic nerve, which is also close to the internal carotid artery and the oculomotor nerve. We removed as much of the tumor as possible, sealed the top of the frontal sinus with bone wax, and sutured the epidural.
The operation was successful. A postoperative CT showed that the lesion in the saddle area had been removed, and a small amount of blood and effusion accumulated under the dural membrane of the left frontotemporal region. On the third day after operation, the patient complained of swelling and pain in her left eye, accompanied by difficulty opening the left eyelid. An examination revealed proptosis with ptosis in the left eye, eyelid swelling, and increases in intraorbital pressure and IOP . The left eye movement, especially upward movement, was limited, and the BCVA was limited to 0.1, yet the RAPD was negative. A B-scan and an MRI revealed a regularly shaped, hypodense, oval mass in the upper nasal side of the orbit; the left optic nerve, superior rectus muscle and left eyeball were significantly compressed, likely due to a foreign body, such as intraoperatively placed bone wax. Given the patient’s recent craniotomy and given the risks associated with orbital surgery, she refused to undergo a surgery to remove the bone wax. Thus, to reduce IOP, the patient was administered mannitol intravenously (125 ml q8h) daily, accompanied by Timolol topically. This treatment led to decreased IOP and intraorbital pressure, and the parameters remained stable after treatment. Three weeks after the craniotomy, the BCVA improved to 0.2, and the patient was discharged.
At 1 month of follow-up, although the BCVA of the patient’s left eye improved to 0.6 and ptosis and restricted eye movements improved significantly, there was still proptosis with respect to the orbit. Ophthalmic examination revealed that the thicknesses of the retinal nerve fiber layer in the superior and temporal left eye were decreased with a narrowed inferior visual field. A B-scan showed that the retrobulbar mass was still not absorbed . Removal of the bone wax seemed necessary for improving the patient’s ophthalmic and neurologic symptoms. However, the patient refused to undergo a surgery due to the associated risks. At a 6 month follow-up, the retrobulbar mass did not change significantly , the ophthalmic symptoms of the patient remained stable, and the visual field of the left eye did not appear to improve.