A 22-year-old female presented to the Otorhinolaryngology Outpatient Department with a complaint of swelling below the right eye for the last 10 days. The patient gave a history of a tooth extraction 3 weeks previously, 2 days after which she developed severe pain and swelling over face and eyes . The patient was being managed conservatively at another hospital for this condition. Although there was a decrease in size of the swelling, however, it persisted even after a course of antibiotics .
On enquiring further, the patient revealed that she had had an episode of toothache 4 weeks previously, following which she sought opinion from a local quack. The quack extracted a tooth from the upper alveolus on the right side according to the patient. The facial swelling followed this surgical procedure. Examination of the eye revealed a localized swelling infero-medial to the lateral canthus and below the lower eyelid, measuring about 3×3 cm. The swelling was soft and cystic but non-fluctuant. Surprisingly, there were no signs of inflammation. Although the vision was normal, the right eye mobility was restricted along the lateral gaze. The anterior rhinoscopic examination was unremarkable without any signs of sinusitis. Oral cavity examination revealed the absence of right maxillary first premolar tooth.
The patient retained a contrast enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the nose, paranasal sinuses and orbit from the previous hospital, which revealed a soft tissue mass lesion in the right orbit compressing on the lateral rectus muscle, while the optic nerve was spared, and no evidence of sinusitis. This report raised questions regarding the nature of the disease . It was also prudent to rule out other soft tissue mass lesions such as an infected dermoid cyst which is a common entity with respect to the site of swelling or any enlarging vascular lesion, for example. Hence, the patient underwent a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the nose, paranasal sinuses (PNS) and orbits.
The case history along with the radiological and clinical findings confirmed the presence of a well-circumscribed thick-walled abscess in the right orbit impinging on the right lateral rectus muscle .
Following this conclusion, the patient was subjected to orbital abscess drainage under general anesthesia. An incision was given 5 mm below the right lower eyelid and the soft tissue dissected. A thick-walled cystic swelling was encountered after dissecting through the orbital fat. On aspiration, the swelling expressed pus. About 6 ml of pus was evacuated after incising the abscess cavity wall .
The cavity was flushed with saline and povidone iodine and the incision site was closed in layers. Pus was sent for microbiological analysis and culture but revealed no growth after 48 hours of culture. The patient was continued on broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics for 7 days. The post-operative period was uneventful with slight chemosis, which settled within 48 hours. The patient maintained normal vision as before with obvious diminution in the size of the swelling . The patient was discharged on the 7th postoperative day after suture removal.