A 35-year-old young adult male presented to our department with pain over lower one-third of the right arm. Detail history taking revealed that the patient was a chronic smoker and alcoholic who sustained a compound fracture of the right shaft humerus 1 year back for which he underwent interlocking nailing at some private center. He further told us that the operating surgeon did iliac crest bone grafting 6 months after the initial surgery when no signs of union were evident. However, in spite of that, no signs of union were seen and he had persistent pain at fracture site when he used to perform household activities. He again went to the operating surgeon who referred the patient to our center. We got the anteroposterior and lateral X-rays done which revealed atrophic non-union at fracture site with one locking hole proximally and one distally . The nail seemed to be of appropriate diameter well seated in the medullary canal and removal of nail would have caused more damage to the rotator cuff. The patient was in a lot of mental trauma after the failed previous two surgeries, so he was counseled properly, and the decision was made to apply a locking compression plate (LCP) with nail in situ with iliac crest autogenous bone grafting. The patient being a chronic smoker and alcoholic was told that both smoking and alcohol cessations were mandatory before any definitive procedure and he agreed to that. After the preanesthetic checkup clearance, the patient was taken up in the theater; fracture site was opened posteriorly using triceps-splitting approach. As expected, there was rotational instability at the fracture site and no signs of callus formation were seen. The fracture margins were freshened till bleeding bone was visualized, fibrous tissue cleared, and locking compression with two monocortical holes on each side was applied along with bone graft harvested from iliac crest. Immediate post-operative anteroposterior and lateral radiograph were obtained ( and ). After the stitches were removed and wound healed satisfactory, the patient was given shoulder spica to further ensure immobilization . Shoulder spica was removed after 1 month and aggressive physiotherapy was started. Follow- up at the end of 6 months showed solid union at fracture site and excellent range of motion ( and ).