A 64-year-old Chinese female was admitted to Hunan Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine Affiliated Hospital due to productive cough for 7 mo, with blood in sputum, breathlessness and dizziness intermittently. She denied any history of skin cancer. No abnormal lesions were found in other parts of the body, including the skin, head, neck, scalp, anogenital region and eyes.
Gross examination and molecular testing: Four pieces of gray and taupe tissue (1 cm length and 0.1 mm in diameter) were obtained. KIT gene mutation was detected in the tumor tissue, while no specific EGFR mutations were found in the patient.
Microscopic examination: Histologically, the tumor was composed of small round cells and thin-walled blood vessels, with collagen fiber hyperplasia and few coagulative necrosis. The tumor cells were arranged in sheets, nests and a discohesive pattern and accompanied by vessels . The tumor cells were mostly medium-sized, rich in cytoplasm and light staining and had no clear boundary. Vacuolated nucleus and nucleoli and frequent mitoses were found in the tumor cells. However, a few of the tumor cells were darkly stained in the nucleus with eosinophilic staining in the cytoplasm. There were also individual cells with plasmacytoid appearance. In some areas, fine melanin granules exited in or out of the cells.
Immunohistochemical detection: Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining showed that the tumor cells were positive for MM markers human melanoma black 45 (HMB-45), Melan A, S-100 and vimentin, and negative for cytokeratin (pan), CD138, transcription termination factor 1, Napsin-A, Cytokeratin-7, P63, P40, synaptophysin, chromogranin-A, neuron-specific enolase, Desmin, CD99 and leukocyte common antigen . The positive rate of Ki67 was about 50%.
The patient underwent a CT scan of the lung, and the results showed a large, space-occupying lesion in the Lingual lobe. Positron emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) revealed multiple nodules located in superior lobe apicoposterior segment of her left lung. Nodules were partly integrated, well-demarcated and smooth. The largest nodule was 26 mm × 19 mm and irregular. The lesions were mostly accompanied with bronchus and lymph-vessel from peripheral to hilum of the lung. PET-CT also showed multiple left hilar lymph node metastases, and no metabolic abnormalities were detected in other parts of the body, including the head, neck, other parts of the chest, abdomen and pelvis. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed numerous enhancing nodules, suggesting brain metastasis. The patient was clinically diagnosed with primary lung cancer. To obtain a specific pathological diagnosis, a CT-guided percutaneous biopsy of the lesions was performed, and then the small tissue samples were sent for pathological evaluation.