A 55-year-old man with a history of diabetes mellitus and seronegative rheumatoid arthritis presented to the ED of the Aga Khan University Hospital (AKUH), Karachi, with a complaint of pain and swelling in the left ankle and inability to bear weight on his left lower limb after a history of ground-level fall 2 h back. He initially went to an outside hospital, where an X-ray of his foot showed an avulsion fracture of the calcaneal bone .
He was referred to AKUH for an orthopedic opinion. On arrival, he was vitally stable. The general physical and systemic examination was unremarkable. His musculoskeletal examination showed significant swelling and tenderness around the left ankle and difficulty bending the foot downward (plantarflexion) . He had no sensory deficits and no overlying skin changes or open wounds.
The on-call ED consultant performed a POCUS. The patient was lying prone with his feet hanging off the bed. A high-frequency linear probe was selected and placed on the posterior ankle in the long axis in a neutral position, which showed the disruption of the typical linear tendon fibers. Dynamic testing revealed the movement of the distal stump of the Achilles tendon adjacent to hypoechoic fluid, most likely reactive edema or blood from the acute rupture. Hyperechogenicity was also noted at the proximal end of the Achilles tendon, with acoustic shadowing probably representing an avulsed fragment of the calcaneum .
His foot was splinted in the plantar flexion position, and an orthopedic follow-up was arranged in two days. His MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) of the foot was done on an outpatient basis as advised by the orthopedic consultant, who was reported as an “avulsion fracture of the calcaneum at the attachment site of the Achilles tendon with retraction of the partially ruptured Achilles tendon. The retracted ruptured end of the Achilles tendon is at the level of the distal articular margin of the tibia and is approximately 47mm from its attachment site. Significant surrounding soft tissue edema and hematoma are noted.” He was treated conservatively with analgesics and non-weight-bearing status.