A 68-year-old woman presented with a 1-year history of chronic pain in both hips. Pain was dull aching, progressive, and insidious in onset. For 3 months, she used a stick for weight-bearing until a day after a trivial fall, she developed acute, sharp shooting pain over the left hip region. Due to financial constraints, the patient remained bedridden for the next 9 months. She used to take some medication in the form of pain killers. About a month before, the patient visited a local doctor who took a “plain pelvic with both hips” radiograph which revealed displaced bilateral femoral neck fracture.
Patient’s medical history included ST-elevation myocardial infarction 2 years back, for which she was taking cardiac medications. There was no history of smoking or alcohol intake, Koch’s disease.
On examination, both active and passive motions were restricted with contracture of adductor musculature on both sides. Fixed flexion deformity was noticed on the left side. Active straight leg raise (SLR) was not possible on either side. No limb-length discrepancy was observed due to the symmetrical nature of the deformity.
Laboratory tests revealed serum calcium 7.0 mg/dl (8.5–10.5 mg/dL), serum phosphorus 2.3 mg/dl (2.5–4.5 mg/dl), alkaline phosphatase 180 IU/L (44-147 IU/L), and 25 hydroxy-Vitamin D 9.8 ng/ml (<20 ng/ml is considered as deficiency). Serum parathyroid hormone level was 90 pg/ml, pointing toward hyperparathyroidism (15–65 pg/ml). Her serum iron levels were normal.
Due to the low socioeconomic status, bone densitometry was not obtained. However, an upper gastrointestinal endoscopy was done to rule out celiac disease which can lead to intestinal mal-absorption resulting in Vitamin D deficiency, leading to bilateral femoral neck fractures.
The patient was diagnosed with bilateral fracture neck of femur secondary to osteomalacia and decision to operate was taken. Due to the cardiovascular risk, the anesthesia team preferred to do staged hemiarthroplasty rather than single-stage hemiarthroplasty which was our initial plan.
The patient was operated under regional epidural anesthesia. Hemiarthroplasty with bilateral modular prosthesis was performed in a lateral position with one hip at a time (, ). The cartilage of the acetabulum was intact, and the heads of the femurs were decided to be replaced with bipolar prosthesis.
Post-operative radiographs were obtained on the 1st post-operative day. The patient was encouraged to do static quadriceps and active-assisted/active SLR exercises once the patient feels comfortable. The patient was made to sit on the bedside and full bearing walking with walker was started 24 h after the surgery. The patient was discharged from the hospital 7 days after surgery after confirming healthy wound status.
The patient was given subcutaneous enoxaparin for deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis and injection of Vitamin D supplementation to correct the deficiency followed by oral Vitamin D sachets per weekly for 2 months.
At 1-week follow-up, sutures were removed. Four weeks later, the patient was able to walk without support. After a follow of 1 year, she was walking comfortably without the support and her serum Vitamin D had returned to normal levels.