A 65-year-old well-nourished Ghanaian female presented to the orthopaedic clinic of our hospital with a 2-year history of a progressively enlarging mass over the volar aspect of the right wrist and palm. It was associated with pain around the wrist: which initially responded to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs until a month before she presented to the hospital. She also had stiffness at the wrist joint and paraesthesia involving the distribution of the median nerve (radial three and half fingers). These symptoms occasionally woke her up at night.
There was no history of a traumatic injury to the wrist, no contact with a patient with tuberculosis, and no symptoms suggestive of rheumatoid arthritis. The patient is a known diabetic of 10 years, which is well controlled by diet alone. She was HIV negative and has not had any vaccination against tuberculosis for the past 25 years as far as she could remember.
Examination revealed an 8 cm × 4 cm swelling on the volar aspect of the right wrist, doughy in consistency, compressible and extended about 5 cm from the wrist creases proximally, across the flexor retinaculum of the wrist into the mid-palm distally . There was cross fluctuancy, wasting of the thenar muscles with associated numbness along the distribution of the median nerve. The superficial lymph nodes were not palpable. Examination of the chest and spine were essentially normal.
X-ray of the wrist showed localized osteopenia around the radio-carpal joint . Chest X-ray was normal. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was raised (94 mm fall/h) and Mantoux (purified protein derivative) test was strongly positive (more than 15 mm). However, examination of the sputum did not yield any tuberculous bacilli.
At surgery, the mass extended across the flexor retinaculum and contained yellowish fluid with multiple rice bodies. The flexor tendons sheaths were also thickened . The median nerve was found to be pale: flattened in its course through the carpal tunnel and was dumbbell shaped in appearance. Total tenosynovectomy was done and the forearm subsequently placed in a below elbow volar plaster slab for 2 weeks. The specimen sent for histopathology, culture, and sensitivity. Histopathology showed specimen with granulomatous lesions with Langerhans giant cells. Culture was positive for acid-fast bacilli. Anti-tuberculous chemotherapy was started on the second postoperative day on account of the clinical findings and appearance of the specimen at surgery. The antituberculous chemotherapy comprised of isoniazid, ethambutol, pyrazinamide, and rifampicin for the first 3 months and isoniazid and rifampicin for another 6 months.
Full occupational activities were allowed after 3 months when she has regained full strength in the hands. There was no recurrence at 1 year follow up .