A 24 years old female delivered a female baby at 38 weeks through cesarean. The baby’s appearance, pulse, grimace, activity, and respiration (APGAR) score at delivery, and at 5 min was normal. Postpartum, a pulmonary systolic murmur was detected during a routine clinical exam. An echocardiogram was performed and showed the presence of a tumor in the right ventricle. The baby was kept under supervision. Her hemodynamic parameters remained stable and presented no symptoms, hence, she was discharged. Nine days later, while the baby was being breastfed, she had a presyncopal episode, shortness of breath and grunting. All of which suddenly resolved after a few minutes. She was brought to the emergency room where she had a second episode.
During examination, her oxygen saturation was 24% in room air. She was resuscitated with mask and balloon until she stabilized and was subsequently hospitalized. The intensivist decided to do a cardiac and cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) when a third presyncopal episode occurred on the table. She was resuscitated for a second time with success. An echocardiogram was performed and for the first time, it showed cyclic complete obstruction of the right ventricular outflow tract. The recorded echocardiogram is shown in Additional file : Video S1.
Furthermore, the MRI showed a mobile and large mass in the right ventricle which measured 13 mm × 9 mm. The mass was attached to the baso septum of the right ventricle and moved completely to the pulmonary trunk during systole. Pulmonary artery flow measurements showed the presence of pulmonary insufficiency. We observed a patent foramen oval (PFO) and a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), both of which had right to left shunts. In terms of the global kinetics of the left ventricle, it was homogeneous compared to a slight dilation in the right ventricle. Because of the previous clinical description, and more predominantly the repeated syncopal episodes that only appeared after 9 days postpartum, urgent surgery was indicated.
The surgical procedure was performed under standard cardiopulmonary bypass at systemic hypothermia. A right atriotomy was performed parallel to the atrioventricular groove which exposed the tricuspid valve. Through the valve, we exposed a right ventricular large mass attached to the septum. The mass was removed by excision of the foot like structure in the right ventricular outflow tract septum. The PFO and the PDA were surgically closed.
The macroscopic exam revealed that the tumor resected was a nodular mass of white discoloration which measured 1.5 cm of larger diameter for a total height of 1.7 cm. The body showed two small protuberances measuring 0 .1cm larger diameter . Histopathology revealed fragments of a pseudo nodular structure composed of fibrous stroma axis which contained numerous glandular structures. An epithelial coating of variable histology was observed. Some mucosecretant glands suggested a digestive epithelium. Others had a cylindrical epithelium mucocilia, others a transitional or even squamous epithelium. There were no immature structures. The findings were consistent with a mature teratoma. .