A 48-year-old female with progressing symptoms of dyspnea and palpitations for over 2 months was referred to cardiologist. Her medical history was unremarkable, she only had allergy to various chemical substances as she was working as a tailor. Auscultation of the heart revealed a loud systolic murmur throughout entire precordium with irradiation to the left shoulder blade. Hemodynamic parameters were normal, while the ECG showed left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). Laboratory findings revealed a normocytic normochromic anemia (Hb 104 g/l, normal values 119-146 g/l) and elevated level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) without liver or renal dysfunction.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was performed. Several large masses in the left ventricle (LV) close to anterior and anterolateral mid-ventricular and apical segments were observed with one tumor (approximately 2.0 cm in length) partially obstructing LV outflow tract. Additional smaller tumor was seen in left atrium (LA) attached to the interatrial septum (IAS).
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed to assess specific characteristics of masses using a 1.5 T scanner (Siemens Magnetom Aera, Siemens AG Healthcare Sector, Erlangen, Germany) with an 18-channel phased array coil. Cine images showed a 71 × 45 × 21 mm tumor with irregular borders in the LV attached to anterior and anterolateral walls. The mass was partially infiltrating LV myocardium and was isointense on non-contrast T1W spin-echo images . On T2W spin-echo images the tumor appeared hyperintense , early gadolinium enhancement was similar to myocardium. The tumor heterogeneously enhanced after administration of full dose of contrast agent . The diagnosis of malignant cardiac sarcoma was suspected. Also computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen was performed, but there were no signs of other origin of malignancy or metastasis.
Open biopsy and cytoreductive surgery were performed. The masses from LV cavity, outflow tract and LA were removed, apical trabeculae were infiltrated by the tumor and complete resection was not possible. Histology revealed UPS. Cardiomyocytes were infiltrated with tumor cells. The tumor was composed of pleomorphic cells with abundant mitoses and area of necrosis. Focal positivity of CD34, CD99 and TLE-1 were not specific. Tumor cells were negative for actin, desmin, CD34, CD117, S100P, EMA and panCK immunomarkers.
Postoperative CMR revealed no masses in the LA and LV outflow tract. Tumor related to the LV cavity was still present . Additionally, there was a pericardial effusion of 12 mm localized at LV inferior wall and right ventricle.
Chemotherapy with doxorubicin and ifosfamide was initiated. The scheme was: ifosfamide 3 g/m2/day 1-3 days, Mesna 100% ifosfamide dose, doxorubicin 75 mg/m2/day 1 day. Granulocyte-colony stimulating factors (GCSF) were given. According to CTCAE (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events) only I grade neutropenia and thrombocytopenia were observed. Totally, 7 cycles were completed (total cumulative doxorubicin dose 525 mg/m2). Echocardiography and CMR were performed to assess the results of chemotherapy treatment and revealed a complete response – only signs of fibrosis without any signs of tumor were visible in CMR images . The chest and abdomen CT were repeated and did not demonstrate any findings suggesting metastasis.
Follow ups with TTE, CMR and chest, abdomen and pelvic CT is performed every 3 months. Twenty-six months from initial diagnosis the patient is still free of recurrence of tumor with no compromises of the quality of life.