A 21-month-old female patient was admitted to the hospital due to “recurrent blood in the stool for 1 year and anemia for 5 months.” There was no apparent trigger for the onset of bloody stools a year ago. Initially, the stools were tarry and persisted for about 2 days, occurring approximately 2 times a day, before transitioning to yellow sticky stools. Subsequently, the child experienced this approximately 2-3 times a month without any associated discomfort and did not receive any specific treatment.
Five months prior to admission, the patient was taken to a local hospital again due to “blood in the stool.” At that time, her hemoglobin level was measured at 63g/L, and stool occult blood test was positive. Following oral iron treatment for 3 months, the hemoglobin level increased to 119g/L, after which the medication was discontinued. Approximately half a month before admission to our hospital, the patient sought medical attention at a local hospital due to “fever,” during which her hemoglobin was found to be 49g/L. She received hemostatic treatment, red blood cell transfusion, and other interventions to correct the anemia. After 5 days of treatment, her hemoglobin level rose to 95g/L. The current admission to our hospital was prompted by continued blood in the stool, following an outpatient clinic visit. Previous History: There were no significant findings in the personal or family history. In addition, the child was born at term with no history of perinatal hypoxia.
Physical Examination: The patient had a flat abdomen with no signs of gastrointestinal or abdominal wall varicose veins. There was no tenderness, rebound pain, or muscle tension across the entire abdomen, and no obvious masses, liver, spleen, or subcostal lesions. Additionally, there were no skin rashes or hemorrhagic spots on the body. Laboratory Examination: Blood cell analysis revealed a red blood cell count of 3.68×1012/L, hemoglobin content of 87.00g/L, and reticulocyte count of 0.15×1012/L. Blood biochemistry showed a total protein level of 56.3g/L, globulin level of 16.3g/L, white bulb ratio of 2.5, total bilirubin level of 5.2μmol/L, direct bilirubin level of 2.6μmol/L, and cholinesterase level of 7603U/L. Serum tumor markers were not tested. Imaging Examination: Abdominal color ultrasonography revealed segmental asymmetrical tube wall thickening in the left upper small intestine of the umbilical part in the abdomen. The layers disappeared, and there was a honeycomb echoless area inside measuring approximately 6.0cm in length and 1.2cm in thickness, with patchy blood flow signal shown inside. This section of intestinal tube was stiff, and the passage of contents was slightly blocked. However, the rest of the intestine peristalsis was normal without signs of dilation or fluid accumulation. There was no significant thickening of the mesentery, and no echo of an abnormal mass was detected. These findings were suggestive of a left upper jejunal segmental venous malformation (cavernous hemangioma) of the umbilical cord . Abdominal CT plain scan and enhanced scan showed that the local lumen of the left upper abdomen jejunum was stiff, and the tube wall was thickened. After enhanced scan, tortuous and chaotic blood vessels were seen in the intestinal wall, with the blood supply artery coming from the superior mesenteric artery. The preliminary diagnosis was a local intestinal wall thickening in the left jejunum of the upper abdomen with multiple tortuous vascular shadows, suggestive of an intestinal venous malformation . After detailed preoperative physical examination and auxiliary examination (abdominal color ultrasound or CT), we found no hemangioma in other parts of the child’s body.
Based on the medical history, physical examination, and auxiliary examination, we considered the possibility of small intestinal hemangioma. Due to the patient’s young age and the size of the tumor, we decided to perform a minimally invasive transumbilical laparoscopic surgery. The surgical procedure was carried out as follows: 1)The patient was properly anesthetized and positioned horizontally. The operative area was disinfected, and a sterile towel was placed. 2)A 2.0cm longitudinal incision was made on the skin of the umbilical cord. The subcutaneous tissue was separated on both sides of the incision until reaching the muscular layer. 3)A 5mm Trocar was inserted on each side to establish CO2 pneumoperitoneum, with a pressure of 6mmHg and a flow rate of 2L/min. 4)We put the laparoscope on the child’s head and the surgeon stands on the right side of the child. Then change the child from a horizontal position to a head low and feet high position. Laparoscopic light source was placed in the right Trocar for observation, and laparoscopic intestinal forceps were placed in the left Trocar . We used laparoscopic intestinal forceps to push up the colon, exposing the duodenal Treitz’s ligament. After locating the Treitz’s ligament of the duodenum, the probe was conducted from the proximal end of the duodenum to the distal end. In particular, laparoscopic procedures are performed by the surgeon alone. In particular, laparoscopic procedures are performed by the surgeon alone.5)The small intestine was explored from the duodenal Treitz’s ligament to the distal end. An abnormal dark red vessel, measuring approximately 6cm×2.5cm×1.2cm, was found on the wall of the small intestine, 20cm away from the Treitz’s ligament . The lesion was mainly located at the mesangial margin. No abnormalities were observed in the rest of the small intestine during further exploration. 6)The diseased segment of the small intestine was grasped and fixed with forceps. The umbilical Trocar and endoscope were then withdrawn. 7)The umbilical incision was enlarged to access the deep tissue. The diseased segment of the small intestine and the adjacent normal segment were removed. The mesenteric vessels were ligated and sutured . 8)The diseased segment of the small intestine was completely removed, and an end-to-end intestinal anastomosis was performed using discontinuous sutures with a 5-0 absorbable suture. 9)The anastomosis was carefully checked for patency and absence of leakage. The mesenteric hematoma was repaired. 10)The small intestine was returned to the abdomen. No bleeding was observed, and the umbilical incision was closed layer by layer . The operation was successfully completed.
Upon visual inspection, a section of the intestinal duct measuring 8.0cm in length and 2cm-2.5cm in diameter was observed. On the serosal surface, there was a slightly raised purplish red area measuring 4.5cm×2cm. The incisal margin, located 1cm away, revealed a granular intestinal mucosa measuring 4.5cm×1.5cm. The purplish red area appeared slightly spongy and soft in texture. Histopathological analysis revealed that the tumor was a cavernous hemangioma that had invaded the entire intestinal wall. Ganglion cells were detected in both the muscle and submucosa layers. No hemangioma components were identified at the incisal margins on both sides of the intestinal duct . Immunohistochemical staining showed positive expression of the vascular endothelial biomarker CD31 . Three months after the operation, there were no reports of hematochezia (bloody stools), and abdominal color ultrasonography did not reveal any abnormalities. Blood cell analysis indicated a red blood cell count of 4.77×1012/L and a hemoglobin level of 129g/L .