A young 15-year old African boy presented to the emergency centre with sudden onset shortness of breath without any chest pain or associated symptoms. This was preceded by a 2-week history of progressive decline in his functional baseline with a history of exertional dyspnoea (without orthopnoea or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea) and malaise. He reported having lost >6 kg (>10%) of weight during this period but did not report fever or any other constitutional symptoms. He was previously well, and his family history did not include any chronic conditions.
Clinical examination revealed a thin boy who appeared acutely unwell. He was tachycardic (116 beats per minute) and tachypnoeic (36 breaths per minute), but otherwise had normal vitals. He appeared pale, with no evidence of clubbing and no evidence of lymphadenopathy. Chest auscultation revealed scattered crackles throughout both lung fields. In addition, there was clinical concern about a left-sided pneumothorax. His examination was otherwise unremarkable.
An urgent chest radiograph confirmed a left-sided pneumothorax. In addition, extensive, bilateral nodules highly suggestive of metastases were noted . A left-sided intercostal drain was inserted, with improvement in his respiratory status.
Laboratory investigations revealed a haemoglobin of 4.7 g/dL (reference range 13–17 g/dL) [iron 2.3 µmol/L (reference range 11.6–31.3 µmol/L); transferrin 2.42 g/L (reference range 2–3.6 g/L); transferrin saturation 4% (reference range 20–50%); ferritin 110 µg/L (reference range 14–152 µg/L)—a combination of iron deficiency and anaemia of chronic disease] with normal white cell and platelet count. Blood smear suggested an iron-deficiency anaemia with no atypical cells noted. Tumour markers (alpha-feto protein, beta-HCG, and CA 19-9) were not elevated and his human immunodeficiency virus test was negative.
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen revealed diffuse, solid, well-defined pulmonary nodules throughout both lung fields ( and ). A filling defect was also noted within the right atrium (RA) and the atrial wall was not clearly identified. The other solid organs were normal. An ultrasound of his thyroid and testes were normal and a skeletal survey did not identify any pathology.
Echocardiography revealed a large inhomogeneous and broad-based mass at the transition between the inferior vena cava (IVC) and RA with frond like projections prolapsing in-and-out through the tricuspid valve (, Videos 1 and 2) with minimal tricuspid regurgitation. The IVC was non-dilated with no obvious extension into the IVC noted. A small, circumferential pericardial effusion (not amenable to aspiration) was noted. No attachment points of the mass to the atrial septum were noted. There was otherwise normal cardiac structure and function.
Unfortunately, none of the lung lesions were amenable to transthoracic needle aspiration and his health state was deemed too poor for open lung biopsy. Urgent transfemoral, fluoroscopic and transthoracic echocardiography guided endomyocardial biopsy of the right atrial mass was performed (Video 3).
Macroscopically, the specimens were pale-white to translucent with a papillomatous appearance. Intraoperative frozen section revealed sheets of atypical epithelioid cells with hyperchromatic nuclei and areas of necrosis with mitotic activity. Permanent paraffin sections showed a single, small fragment of cardiac muscle and cellular, polypoid tissue fragments with papillary-like projections. Some regions appeared solid, while others had a reticulated pattern. Irregular, vascular-like spaces were also noted, lined by a relatively flattened, single layer of neoplastic cells . The neoplastic cells had predominantly round to occasionally spindled, hyperchromatic nuclei. Cells demonstrated moderate to abundant amounts of clear to light eosinophilic cytoplasm, some with a foamy quality. Karyorrhectic debris was present throughout the tumour, and a focal area of frank necrosis was observed . Mitotic activity was focally seen . The neoplastic cells showed immunohistochemical reactivity for CD31, CD34, FLI-1, and ERG, confirming endothelial differentiation . HHV-8 did not demonstrate immunoreactivity. A diagnosis of angiosarcoma was made.
The young patient’s clinical condition deteriorated in the ward and he demised 3 days after the procedure, prior to exploration of any further palliative options.