A 40-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital in October 2021 with localized pain from an arteriovenous fistula. 2015, the patient was clearly diagnosed with end-stage renal disease due to glomerulonephritis, and in the same year, she underwent left forearm arteriovenous fistuloplasty and regular hemodialysis. Since 2019, the patient presented with no obvious cause for the formation and gradual increase in size of a mass near the left forearm arteriovenous endovascular fistula with pulsating sensation and local pain, which was tolerable. There was also high venous pressure during dialysis and difficulty in hemostasis after the patient being punctured, which suggested that the vein was chronically under high pressure. The patient was not further treated during this period because of poor compliance. Physical examination revealed a hemangioma-like mass formation at the endovascular fistula of the left forearm, about 5 × 6 cm in size , with palpable tremor and pulsation, and audible vascular murmur. After admission, the patient underwent surgical treatment, resulting in the removal of the mass while preserving the functionality of the arteriovenous fistula in the left forearm . The following describes the detailed surgical procedure. The result of Allen test of the patient’s left upper extremity was negative and the patient was treated with symptomatic support before the surgery. In combination with the patient’s physical examination and ultrasound findings, the AVF vein stenosis was considered to be the cause of the mass formation, and the distance between the stenosis and the fistula was about 3 cm. After local anesthesia and routine disinfection of the surgical area, 2 longitudinal incisions, each approximately 8 to 10 mm, were made approximately 1 cm distal to the AVF and approximately 3 cm proximal to the AVF. The distal end of the internal fistula and the proximal radial artery were separated , and the artery was ligated to control blood flow to reduce the pressure at the aneurysm, and then the incision was enlarged to approximately 7 cm to separate the AVF anastomosis and the area of the mass, and the coexistence of true and pseudo aneurysms was seen intraoperatively .
Intraoperatively, the stenotic segment of the cephalic vein was separated , and the true pseudoaneurysm and the stenotic segment of the cephalic vein were excised . To prevent possible ischemia at the end of the limb due to excessive blood flow in the dilated cephalic vein, the proximal dilated cephalic vein was locally narrowed by applying 6-0 Prolene , which was approximately 1 cm in length, and later anastomosed with the proximal radial artery . Postoperative AVF venous tremor was evident, and the patient was dialyzed with an internal fistula the next day without clinical manifestations related to end-limb ischemia. The patient was followed up 1 month after the operation, and dialysis was smooth and blood flow could meet the dialysis requirements.