A 27-year-old G1 woman with 18th weeks of gestation came to our obstetrics and gynecology policlinic with chief complaint of abnormal vaginal discharge since a day prior. There was no complaint of vaginal bleeding, urinary problem, nor defecation problem. Previously, she had her routine antenatal care at an obstetrician located in another city. Previously, she thought she had normal pregnancy. However, it was known that her pregnancy was an abdominal pregnancy since 3 weeks ago (15th weeks of gestation). Afterward, she was referred to other hospital in our city. She then routinely took her antenatal examination every 2 weeks.
Previously, her husband and she were suffering from 3 years of primary infertility. She had never used any kind of contraceptive. Her prior medical condition and her family history were also unremarkable.
The patient's vital sign was stable at the time of arrival. Physical examination revealed her fundal height matched the gestational age. Her fetal heart rate was 145 times per minute, while her vaginal discharge was identified as flour albus, suspected to be caused by bacterial vaginosis. Her laboratory results revealed mild microcytic hypochromic anemia and mild hypokalemia.
Ultrasonographic examination revealed singleton abdominal pregnancy with normal biometry and normal activity. The gestational sac was located in the pouch of Douglas, while the placenta was implanted at the omentum. There was no congenital anomaly identified on the fetus .
A family meeting consisting of the patient, her husband, and the obstetricians was commenced following the examination. She was told that abdominal pregnancy was a highly morbid form of ectopic pregnancy; thus, there were significant risks associated with it. However, she was also told that there might be hope for satisfactory maternal and fetal outcomes. She told the obstetricians that her husband and she were suffering badly due to her previous infertility. They also experienced being gossiped by their families and neighbors. Therefore, she hoped that she can retain her pregnancy as they were unsure if she could have any other pregnancy. Eventually, the meeting ended with agreement of trying expectant approach for the pregnancy.
She was a housewife, while her husband was a merchant at a traditional market. Although they are suffering from their previous infertility, they could not afford to seek out medical help due to financial problem. Moreover, there was no sufficient medical infrastructure to address their problem in their city. On the third day following the meeting, there was no complaint remained. She was then discharged and planned to have antenatal care every 2 weeks at our center.
She had her antenatal care on our center. There was no sign of complication on the examination. Ultrasonographic exam showed estimated fetal weight of 297 g and placenta was implanted to omentum. It corresponded to 19 weeks of gestational age. During US Doppler examination, there was a absent end diastolic in the umbilical artery. Based on the data, additional heparin was initiated.
During her 25th gestational week, reverse A wave ductus venosus with brain sparing effect and reverse end diastolic umbilical artery was found. It was decided to deliver the fetus via laparotomy. Due to placenta implantation on the mesenteries, the laparotomy was done with assistance of digestive surgeons.
During the surgery, abdominal gestational sac was seen, covered by the right broad ligament, behind the uterus, filling the Douglas cavity. The uterus was slightly enlarged in front of the abdominal gestational sac. After delivering the baby, the placenta was seen to be implanted on the lateral side of the posterior uterine. Thus, placenta was left in site in order to prevent massive hemorrhage. The abdomen was then closed .
The baby was sent to neonatal intensive care unit for further evaluation and treatment. Meanwhile, the mother was observed for 24 hours at intensive care unit and discharged two days following the surgery. Two days later, the baby died due to respiratory distress.
A year after the surgery, the mother was alive and well. Upon follow-up examination, the placenta left was already reduced in size, while the mother had started another pregnancy program.