We describe the case of a 54-year-old Japanese woman.
She went to a nearby clinic to get a check-up for abdominal distension. A large quantity of pleural and ascitic effusion was recognized and a blood test showed high CA125 (209 U/mL), and she was suspected to have a malignant tumor. She was admitted to a cancer center in our hospital, and we carried out a close examination. We found a tumor in her right breast and we performed a core needle biopsy. A diagnosis of primary breast cancer (solid tubular carcinoma) was made; estrogen receptor (EgR) and progesterone receptor (PgR) were positive, and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) was negative. Cytology of pleural and ascitic effusion revealed cells similar to the breast cancer, and she was diagnosed as having inoperable breast cancer, stage IV, according to TNM classification: T2 N1 M1, pleura, peritoneum. After these results, weekly paclitaxel therapy was started for our patient. The protocol of this therapy, as a cycle, was that paclitaxel (90 mg/m2 based on body surface area) was intravenously infused every week for 3 weeks followed by 1 week for rest. After three cycles of weekly paclitaxel, the primary tumor had reduced and subsequently the pleural effusion disappeared but the ascites did not change. Because only the ascites did not decrease, other cancers such as a peritoneal carcinoma were suspected and we performed diagnostic laparoscopy. A large amount of transparent and viscous ascites was detected in her abdominal cavity. Her small intestine, omentum, and transverse colon had become grouped into a dumpling form, and the whole peritoneum was thickened and hyperplasic. We excised a peritoneal sample and submitted it to histopathological examination. The histopathological examination revealed that the peritoneum was not the primary peritoneal cancer but the peritoneal dissemination of breast cancer because the peritoneal cells were similar to the cells of the primary breast cancer and there was no Wilm's tumour tumor suppressor gene1 (WT1) staining . On the basis of these results, paclitaxel and bevacizumab combination chemotherapy was started as a second-line treatment and the ascites decreased. The protocol of this combination therapy, as a cycle, was that paclitaxel (90 mg/m2) was infused every week for 3 weeks followed by 1 week for rest. And bevacizumab (10 mg/m2) was infused following paclitaxel treatment on weeks 1 and 3 of every cycle. On the 26th day of the second cycle of this therapy, she had stomachache and abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed intraabdominal free air ; she was diagnosed as having a digestive perforation and an emergency operation was performed.
She underwent bilateral total hip replacement arthroplasty because of congenital hip dislocation 30 years ago. She was continuously medicated because of severe depression.
The state of septic shock was recognized with clear consciousness, high body temperature (38.5 °C), tachycardia (160 beats per minute), low blood pressure (61/35 mmHg), and high respiration rate (24 per minute). Her abdomen was tympanic and hard with whole abdominal tenderness and muscular defense.
Her levels of leukocytes and C-reactive protein were elevated, and her renal function had degenerated. A blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis, vicarious respiratory alkalosis, and hyperlactacidemia .
Ascites and intraabdominal free air were shown.
Abundant dirty ascites was detected. The omental cake was resolved, and we were able to search the full length of the gastrointestinal tract. At the time of diagnostic laparoscopy, her small intestine, her omentum, and her transverse colon formed part of the omental cake, but the adhesion was separated in this emergency operation and all intestinal searches were enabled. Thus, it was considered that digestive perforation was caused by the strong efficacy of bevacizumab combination chemotherapy. Two small perforations of her small intestine were seen; they were located at a distance of 120 cm from the Treitz ligament. We performed simple closures of perforations, and peritoneal lavage and drainage.
Before the emergency operation, septic shock was recognized, and after the operation, in addition, she developed disseminated intravascular coagulation and oliguria due to acute renal failure. We used continuous venous injection of noradrenaline and vasopressin together, and under artificial breathing management in our intensive care unit she gradually improved. She was removed from the respirator 3 days after the operation and gradually weaned from the vasopressor until it was discontinued. However, her nutritional status progressed to bad, and her level of activity decreased from crutch walking until she became approximately bedridden. Depression contributed to a decrease in our patient’s will for treatment. These were judged generally and on enough informed consent she received anticancer therapy of only orally administered aromatase inhibitor and died from the original breast cancer 9 months after surgery.