A 58-year-old woman was admitted due to acute kidney injury (AKI) under the care of the internal medicine department, their treatment plan was based on resuscitation with intravenous isotonic fluids and monitoring the urine output in response to the fluid replacement.
Five days after admission, a general surgery consultation was requested because of a plain computerized tomography (CT) scan of the kidneys, ureters and bladder (KUB), which revealed that the stomach and small bowel loops, likely jejunal loops, were filled with heterogeneous hyperdense material. The proximal small bowel loops were dilated with multiple air-fluid levels. A transition zone was observed in the small bowel in the pelvis. The large bowel was collapsed. The solid abdominal organs appeared unremarkable on nonenhanced CT. Both kidneys had a normal size, shape and parenchymal density with no stones or hydronephrosis. The urinary bladder was partially distended with a Foley catheter in situ. No free fluid or free air was observed. The scanned part of the chest appeared unremarkable. The diagnosis of a bezoar causing SBO was established (, ).
The patient was not known to have any medical illness except for being mentally ill. In addition, there was no history of any previous surgeries or drug abuse and no previous similar complaint. The vague abdominal pain started two days prior to presentation to the hospital, it was not radiating or shifting and started two days prior to presentation. For the previous two days, the patient had a decrease in oral intake, which was not associated with nausea or vomiting. The patient had a positive minimal amount of loose stool. Regarding vital signs, the heart rate was 110/bpm, blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg, respiratory rate was 13/bpm, temperature was 37 degrees Celsius and oxygen saturation was 99 % on room air.
On examination, the patient was conscious but disoriented. The abdomen was distended, the patient was guarding her abdomen all over and she had exaggerated bowel sounds.
The initial nasogastric tube (NGT) output was 500 cc and brown in color. Digital rectal examination showed only loose stool. The urine output was minimal and concentrated. The decision was made to undergo emergency exploratory laparotomy with the impression of small intestinal obstruction due to a foreign body. Consent was obtained. The laboratory investigation showed a white blood cell count of 12,500/μL, a serum creatinine level of 492 mmol/L, a blood urea nitrogen (BUN) level of 40 mmol/L, a serum potassium level of 5 mmol/L and a serum sodium level of 125 mmol/L. Resuscitation with intravenous isotonic solutions, anti-hyperkalemia measures and renal doses of tazobactam were started (this is the pre-operative patient optimization that was done).
The external findings on the exploratory laparotomy were that the small bowel was distended but viable with a collapsed cecum and colon. An intraluminal foreign body was identified 90 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve; the foreign body was approximately 13 cm in length and 4 cm in width; and another was noted in the stomach with approximately the same dimensions (, ). The one in the small bowel was in the form of multiple folded sheets of plastic table cover that were extracted through a transverse enterotomy just proximal to the area of obstruction. Closure of the enterotomy was achieved in a hand sewn transverse fashion with two layers. The one in the stomach was similar and was extracted through an oblique gastrotomy incision on the anterior wall of the body of the stomach just proximal to the bezoar, and the gastrotomy incision was closed in the same fashion as the enterotomy. Examination of the rest of the bowel did not reveal any other lesions.
Postoperatively, the patient remained in the intensive care unit (ICU) due to difficult weaning from the ventilator and the presence of acute kidney injury requiring multiple renal replacement therapies. She was extubated successfully and transferred to the ward.
During her hospital stay, she was diagnosed with separation anxiety and was started on mirtazapine. Delightfully, the patient recovered well with no sequelae.