A 48-year-old man complained of a twitching feeling on the left side of the face for more than 3 years. He had been treated with botulinum toxin (BTX), although there were no clear symptoms of HFS. He was then referred to our outpatient clinic for diagnosis and further treatment. He complained of twitching that mainly affected the infraorbital region of the left face, however, HFS was not apparent by inspection. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with fast imaging employing steady-state acquisition (FIESTA) showed that the left anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) compressed the root exit zone (REZ) of the left VIIth nerve . At his request, we repeated treatment with BTX five times at the region where he had a twitching sensation because he noted disappearance of the twitching sensation after treatment. We decided to record abnormal muscle responses (AMR) for differential diagnosis of HFS. AMR were recorded from the orbitalis oculi and mentalis muscles using surface electrodes (located 1 cm apart) placed on cleaned and degreased skin over the muscles, with the stimulus intensity adjusted to that of the frontalis muscle. With stimulation at 6.5 mA, we obtained clear AMR at 15 ms, and HFS was induced which lasted for approximately 1 minute after stimulation .
The patient eventually agreed to surgical treatment due to severe discomfort. Microvascular decompression (MVD) was performed via left retrosigmoid lateral suboccipital craniotomy with intraoperative monitoring of AMR. Electromyograms (EMG) were recorded directly from the muscles with needle electrodes under intravenous general anesthesia using propofol and fentanyl. The AMR detected at 20 ms disappeared just after transposition of the AICA to relieve firm compression of the VIIth nerve REZ . Twitching completely subsided by 4 weeks after MVD, and AMR were not recorded at 5 weeks postoperatively. Decompression of the REZ after transposition of the AICA was confirmed by MRI FIESTA . He was satisfied by the complete improvement of symptoms without adverse effects of MVD.