On Aug. 8th, 2023, a 74-year-old Asian man presented to the local oncology center due to dysphagia and underwent esophageal endoscopy. Biopsies taken during the scope revealed ESCC in the mid-esophagus. The patient has no comorbidities and no long-term treatments. The following evaluation including Positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) suggested the stage of cTxN2M0. The oncology center recommended neoadjuvant therapy, which consisted of tislelizumab 200 mg on day 1 + albumin-bound paclitaxel 156 mg on days 1, 8, and 15 + carboplatin 400 mg on day 1. The patient completed the first cycle of therapy (day 1: Aug. 23rd, 2023). After the rescue of thrombocytopenia, it was scheduled to start the second cycle on Sept. 20th. However, on arrival at the clinic on Sept. 20th, the patient was found to have slightly elevated liver enzymes (Alanine transaminase (ALT) 89 U/L (reference range 7-40 U/L), Aspartate Aminotransferase (AST) 68 U/L (reference range 13-35 U/L)), with total bilirubin at 136.11 µmol/L (reference range 3.4-17.1 µmol/L), Direct bilirubin (DBIL) at 90.6 µmol/L (reference range 0-5 µmol/L), Serum creatinine (SCr) at 304 µmol/L (reference range 41-81 µmol/L), and Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) at 19.2 mmol/L (reference range 3.1-8.9) . The patient also had jaundiced skin and sclera. The patient reported no abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhea, vomiting, oliguria, skin rashes, joint pain, or photosensitivity. The patient also reported that in the past 3-4 days, the stool had been light-colored. Then the patient was referred to the nephrologist in Naval Medical Center of PLA. The latest biochemistry results (Sept. 9th) were also provided. Physical examination was unremarkable other than jaundice. The patient was diagnosed with AKI stage 3 and acute liver injury and was hospitalized. The following examinations including abdominal ultrasound, renal vascular ultrasound, urine routine test, blood lipid profile, Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP), and viral hepatitis screening were ordered to figure out the causes of renal and liver injury. The results suggested generally normal blood routine tests and urine routine tests (except for positive urinary bilirubin). No evidence of glomerular diseases, pre-/post-renal diseases was detected according to the clinical features, normal urine routine test, urinary system and renal vascular ultrasound examination. Acute tubulointerstitial disease was suspected. The most possible reason would be nephrotoxic exposure. In terms of liver injury, liver enzyme tests suggested cholestatic pattern abnormality (R<2) [(ALT/Upper limit of normal ALT)/(Alkaline phosphatase/Upper limit of normal Alkaline phosphatase)] . No evidence of extrahepatic cholestasis was found through ultrasound and MRCP. Viral hepatitis screening results were all negative. Drug-related intrahepatic cholestasis was suspected.
Then we reviewed the history of immunotherapy and chemotherapy. Four weeks before the onset of kidney and liver injury, the patient was administrated tislelizumab, carboplatin, and albumin-bound paclitaxel. Two more doses of albumin-bound paclitaxel were administrated in the following two weeks. No other medications or herb supplements were taken. Nephrotoxicity of platinum agents is well established while AKI from platinum typically manifests with a rise of SCr after three to seven days of exposure (–). Carboplatin is significantly less nephrotoxic than cisplatin (, ). Paclitaxel undergoes minimal renal excretion. It is usually safe for the kidneys. Limited data on animals showed acute (24-48h) renal toxicity . It is unlikely for the patient to experience acute renal dysfunction after weeks of platinum/Paclitaxel administration. It should be noted that tislelizumab falls under the category of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), which allows us to draw some inferences regarding its potential side effects. After excluding other causes of abnormal liver/renal tests, ICI hepatotoxicity and nephrotoxicity were confirmed clinically. According to the guideline on ICI adverse events management , we gave methylprednisolone 48 mg qd from Sept. 27th. Basic metabolic panels were monitored closely. After 7-day treatment, renal function was restored somewhat, while there was no improvement in liver enzymes and bilirubin . Dual plasma molecular adsorption system was applied four times from Oct. 3rd. Mycophenolate mofetil 0.5g bid was also started to treat the refractory hepatotoxicity. On Oct. 7th, the patient was referred to a hepatologist with expertise in ICI hepatitis. Phone call follow-ups were conducted regularly after that. In the following days, basic metabolic panels were also showed in . Mycophenolate mofetil was discontinued at Oct. 23 while methylprednisolone was still keep going. At Nov 1st, the patient developed signs of hospital-acquired pneumonia. Invasive gillosis was confirmed based on the chest imaging and airway specimen. The patient did not respond to the antifungals and died at Nov. 5th.