A 38-year-old Caucasian male with Williams syndrome (established at the age of three) had suffered from a severe headache, which interfered with his sleep and daily functioning. Six months prior to the manifestation of the headache, the patient was prescribed candesartan 4 mg for hypertension. After 2 weeks of suffering with the headache, the patient sought emergency care. Physical and laboratory examinations did not reveal any signs of serious somatic or neurological disease; the results of a computed tomography scan were normal. The patient was diagnosed with tension headache and was provided with proper self-treatment instructions and medication (paracetamol, ibuprofen). Soon after his first visit to emergency care, the patient reported feeling a “trembling blood vessel” in his head. During the following 2 months, the patient experienced only slight relief from the headache and complained of a “pulsing” feeling in his head. Additional magnetic resonance imaging did not reveal any pathological changes in the brain structures. More recently, the patient had complained of tinnitus and “hearing his own pulse” in his ear. Trials of betahistine and tizanidine were provided with no effect. The patient was highly concerned about the cause of the headache and “pulsation feeling” and became anxious to an increasing extent. Eventually, the patient presented with an intense delusion of having a worm in his brain. As a consequence, the patient suffered from severe anxiety and psychomotor agitation. With the assistance of his mother, the patient sought emergency psychiatric care. He was prescribed olanzapine 5 mg two times a day and oxazepam 7.5–15 mg 1–3 times a day. During the clinical examination, the patient was clearly anxious, although no signs of depression emerged. Based on the clinical picture, the patient was referred to the First-episode Psychosis Outpatient Clinic.
In addition to neuroimaging tests, the patient underwent an exhaustive laboratory examination during the initiation of psychiatric treatment. A full blood count, electrolytes and C-reactive protein showed normal values. Tests also showed normal levels of plasma calcium and albumin. No abnormalities emerged in the liver, renal (creatinine and glomerular filtration rate), thyroid (thyroid-stimulating hormone and free thyroxine) and parathyroid functions. During olanzapine monotherapy, the drug's serum level remained within the therapeutic interval. The only abnormality found in the laboratory tests was hyperprolactinemia (serum prolactin 695 mU/l), which did not require any interventions according to the endocrinology consultant.
There was no evidence of prior psychiatric illness or symptoms, aside of occasional anxiety, which did not require a medical care, however. There was also no case of mental or neurological disease in his family. Patient was granted a disability pension. Prior to COVID pandemic lockdown, patient attended communal workshop center three times a week and played in a musical band. Patient enjoyed social interactions in workshop center. Patient had his own apartment but spent much time at his parent's house.
During lockdown, workshop center visits and band rehearsals were discontinued. Patient was only able to maintain contact with his parents, not always face-to-face. Patient was frustrated and stressed by social isolation, as, in his own opinion, he had strong need for social contacts.
Initially, the symptoms of anxiety and feeling of “pulsation in the ear” resolved within 2 weeks after initiation of antipsychotic medication. However, the patient still had a somatic delusion about a worm in the brain, or at least certainty about severe brain pathology that needed to be treated. The patient felt that this problem was not being taken seriously and was quite disappointed and anxious about it. One month after the introduction of antipsychotic medication, his anxiety and delusions again increased, and he presented with lassitude and frustration. The dose of olanzapine was increased to 15 mg daily. Overall, olanzapine was used for 6 weeks in therapeutic dose of 10–15 mg, but patient still experienced anxiety and delusions. Thus, response to olanzapine considered as sub-optimal. Dose increase was not conducted to avoid possible olanzapine-related metabolic side-effects. After six weeks of olanzapine-treatment, it was cross-taper switched to lurasidone 74 mg within 2 weeks.
However, 2 weeks after lurasidone initiation, the patient presented with severe muscle rigidity, tremor, elevated blood pressure, urinary retention, a fluctuating level of consciousness, and elevated creatine kinase (CK). Despite the absence of hyperthermia, these symptoms were interpreted as neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS). The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit and lurasidone was immediately discontinued. The patient recovered from NMS within 4 weeks, during which time he did not receive any antipsychotic agent and only used trazodone 50 mg for insomnia. Surprisingly, during the “antipsychotic-free” period, the patient did not report any psychotic symptoms, including “worm in the brain” delusions. However, he was extremely worried about his physical condition. After somatic recovery, the patient began to express feelings that something was wrong with his head again. This time, he was not convinced about the worm in his head, but rather reported weird feelings in the parietal area. After four weeks of hospitalization, the patient was discharged in a relatively stable condition. The patient still referred to an aberrant feeling in his head, although this feeling no longer interfered with his affect. For a short period of time, patient has moved to his parents, as he was concerned about his functional level after discharging. However, no signs of functional impairment emerged, and patient was able to rebuild his routine and daily activities within several weeks, as COVID-related restrictions began to loosen.