A 62-year-old female presented with nausea, vomiting, melena, and left lower extremity pain. Her medical history was significant for peripheral vascular disease, liver cirrhosis, chronic pancreatitis, and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). She had a 25 pack-year smoking history, and a prior history of chronic alcohol use. Physical exam revealed a thin, frail, and malnourished woman in overall poor health. Upon initial questioning, she endorsed dysphagia with recurrent gagging, regurgitation of solid food, and unintentional weight loss for over 5 years. She denied any pain with mastication, or odynophagia, but for the last 2 years, she had mostly been restricted to a pureed diet as a result of her symptoms. Additionally, her family history was significant for colon cancer. The initial laboratory exams exhibited an elevated aspartate aminotransferase (71 u/L), alanine aminotransferase (122 u/L), alkaline phosphatase (356 u/L), and a low hemoglobin (5.6 g/dL). EGD and colonoscopy were planned for workup of her anemia, melena, and dysphagia. Initial EGD using GIF HQ 190 (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) displayed severe stenosis in the upper portion of the esophagus due to a stricture measuring 3 mm in diameter . The esophageal stricture was subsequently dilated using a 5.5 cm long, 8–10 mm CRE Wireguided Ballon Dilatation Catheter (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA) to 8 mm. However, significant narrowing distal to the stenosis was discovered and it was noted that the stricture was longer than 5.5 cm, therefore, the endoscope could not be advanced to measure the stricture length. At this point, the EGD was aborted and barium esophagram was ordered to determine the extent of the stricture. The esophagram displayed stenosis measuring 7 cm in length along with numerous small collections of contrast in the upper portion of the esophageal submucosa, consistent with EIP findings . Additionally, colonoscopy performed during the initial workup was negative for a source of bleeding, therefore, her profound anemia was likely secondary to a combination of her poor oral intake, cirrhosis and an open, weeping ulcer on the foot. A repeat EGD was performed for subsequent dilatation with a Savary-Gilliard dilator (Cook Medical, Bloomfield, IN), 24 French (Fr) and 27 Fr dilation was completed without complications . Post dilation stenosis was measured in the upper third of the esophagus from 17 cm to 24 cm from incisors . A total of two sessions of dilatation therapy were performed during her hospitalization and were tolerated well. She was sent home on a proton-pump inhibitor (PPI) and within 4 weeks switched to a Histamine-2 (H2) receptor antagonist due to persistent hypomagnesemia. Three weeks after dilatation, on follow-up examination, she reported significant improvement in her dysphagia and was tolerating a full regular diet for the first time in 2 years. A repeat endoscopy was not indicated at follow-up examination as she reported no dysphagia or related issues. The patient was contacted 2 years later and reported no recurrence of dysphagia while tolerating a full solid and liquid diet.