A 67-year-old male patient reported that he suffered from patellar ligament rupture due to an accidental fall more than 20 years ago, and he did not receive any formal treatment. Later, the knee strength gradually decreased, and left quadriceps muscle atrophy appeared. The patient developed pain and swelling in the left knee 6 months ago, and needed a walking stick to assist walking (supplemental video ). The VAS score was 5 points before surgery. The patient described that he could not tolerate the pain caused by walking. Three months ago, joint cavity paracentesis was performed to extract joint fluid to reduce joint swelling. However, the swelling of the joint recurred after a week. Physical examination revealed a small amount of fluid in the left knee joint, and the patella was displaced upward by approximately 5.5 cm . The quadriceps were atrophic and weak. There was significant tenderness on the medial side of the left knee joint. Passive motion of the left knee joint ranged from full extension to 120° of flexion with discomfort during excessive flexion. Active flexion of the knee joint to 120°, and extensor lag was approximately 90°. The patient could not actively straighten the knee. We did not find any significant knee instability or observe patella tracking when flexing and straightening the knee joint. The Lachman, McMurray, and anteroposterior drawer tests were negative. There was grade 0 strength during extension of the left knee, and grade V strength during extension of the right knee. Before the operation, we routinely performed tests for biochemical indicators such as routine blood, C-reactive protein (CRP, 2.4 mg/L, normal, < 5 mg/L), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 10 mm/h, normal, < 43 mm/h), procalcitonin (PCT, 0.12, normal, < 0.5) and other biochemical indicator tests to exclude knee infection. Full-length films of the lower limbs, three-dimensional computed tomography (3D-CT) of the knee joint, and positive and lateral radiographs of the knee joint were also performed before the operation. X-ray photographs showed advanced degenerative arthritis of the left knee with significant involvement of the medial compartment but less significant lateral compartment changes, and the knee joint had mild varus deformity. We could see patella alta in this image . 3D-CT showed cystic changes under the medial tibia of the left knee joint . According to the typical left knee pain and disability of the patient, we offered three options: TKA and reconstruction of the patellar ligament, nonoperative treatment, and knee fusion. The patient strongly demanded the first option. Informed consent was obtained from the patient.
We chose the GENESIS◊ II Cruciate Retaining Total Knee Replacement prosthesis (Smith & Nephew, Memphis, Tennessee, USA) to perform this surgery. Total knee replacement was performed with a medial parapatellar approach. When we opened the knee capsule, we found more joint fluid in the joint cavity, synovial hyperplasia, degeneration of the medial and lateral menisci, osteophyte formation around the joint, articular cartilage degeneration and wear, and subchondral bone exposure, especially of the medial compartment . We found that the patellar ligament was ruptured about 1.5 cm below the inferior patellar pole, and the termination of the patellar ligament on the tibial tubercle was complete. The ruptured tendon was flocculent, with irregular broken ends and atrophy of the patellar ligament . The patella was displaced upward approximately 5.5 cm, consistent with preoperative examinations. The distance of patellar displacement was measured after the connection of the patellar ligament to the patella, and then the length of the quadriceps snip was determined . We performed osteotomy according to the joint prosthesis instructions and installed the prosthesis . We chose femur (5#) and tibia (3–4#) prosthese and a sacral gasket test pattern (3–4#, 11 mm). After assembling the components, the articular surface of the patella was resurfaced. Finally, we performed a V-Y quadricepsplasty to lengthen the quadriceps tendon . We drilled four parallel bone tunnels approximately 2.5 mm in diameter under the patella. The locking suture knots were placed into the patellar tendon with nonabsorbable sutures. The two ends of the same suture were passed through adjacent tunnels via the Krakow suture technique. The suture was tied over the superior pole of the patella . We used a knee external fixator to fix the knee joint in a 30° flexion position after surgery.
After 1 week, he started knee function exercises from 0° to 30° with a joint loosening trainer and walked with the help of crutches. The patient’s VAS score decreased from 5 points before surgery to 1 point after surgery. One week later, the range of joint motion increased to 90° (supplemental video 2). X-ray examination showed no obvious unequal lengths of the lower limbs or varus or valgus deformity after 1 week. Ten months after the operation, the active ROM was 0°-30°-120°, the passive ROM was 0°-10°-120°, and the extension lag was improved. The knee strength during extension of the left knee increased to grade IV. We will further track the postoperative recovery of the patient.