The 52-year-old Caucasian male leisure time runner (height 179 cm, training load 1–2 h per week, for further anthropometric characteristics see table ) presented to our institute for a preventive checkup with a significantly elevated ferritin value (1,276 μg/l, fig. ). No previous disease was known and the subject did not take any medication. Diagnosis of hemochromatosis was made by an elevated transferrin saturation (58%, table ) and HFE gene diagnostics (63HD/282CY, compound heterozygote). Liver biopsy showed a slightly elevated iron content of the liver (2,646 µg/g), a slight siderosis (stage 1) and a slight fibrosis (stage 1C). Additionally, the diagnosis of NASH (alcohol consumption about 50 g/day, four times per week) and type II diabetes mellitus was made (HbA1C 6.2%, fasting glucose 153 mg/dl). The diagnosis of a metabolic syndrome was made based on increased waist circumference (95 cm) and the presence of arterial hypertension (blood pressure 140/90 mm Hg), based on the IDF criteria . hsCRP was normal (2.66 mg/l).
The subject did not report any symptoms at the time of the diagnosis. The family history was unremarkable for hemochromatosis or elevated ferritin levels.
No medication was started after the diagnosis had been established. However, dietary recommendations were made (nutrition poor of iron and suitable to diabetes). The subject did not manage to reduce alcohol consumption under 15 g/day, 3 times per week.
The application of the CO-rebreathing method was approved by the institutional ethics committee at the University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. Written informed consent was obtained from the subject before follow-up.
Therapeutic phlebotomy was started 2 months after diagnosis of hemochromatosis. 500 or 1,000 ml of whole blood were withdrawn every 1–5 weeks, respectively . Before each therapeutic phlebotomy tHb, body weight and resting heart rate, as well as a laboratory profile were determined. Body composition was determined by densitometry (Bod Pod, Life Measurement, Inc., USA) in study week 1, 18 and 71. After having reached a normal ferritin level, the subject received a maintenance therapy with a recommended phlebotomy interval of every 2–4 months. The general condition and physical performance were regularly followed up to evaluate the response to therapy.
tHb was determined as described by Schmidt and Prommer by the optimized CO-rebreathing method. We used a standard spirometer (Spico-CO Respirations-Applikator, Universität Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany). Carboxyhemoglobin content was determined with an OSM 3 Hemoximeter (Radiometer, Copenhagen, Denmark).
The loss of tHb (tHbloss) through each phlebotomy was calculated from current [Hb] and the volume of blood withdrawn.
The reproduction rate of tHb per day (RRtHb) was calculated as follows:
RRtHb (g/day) = [tHbloss + (tHbactual – tHblast)] × [dateactual – datelast (days)]–1
Peak oxygen consumption (VO2peak) was inferred from treadmill incremental exercise testing according to the formula as proposed by the American College of Sports Medicine :
VO2peak (ml/min/kg) = (0.2 × S) + (0.9 × S × G) + 3.5 ml/min/kg
where S = speed and G = percent grade expressed as fraction.
The subject was followed for 91 weeks since the initiation of therapy. The therapeutic target of ferritin was reached after 10 phlebotomies, equivalent to 7.5 l of whole blood, in study week 26 (53 µg/l) . During the whole study course, 14 phlebotomies were conducted, equivalent to 9.5 l of whole blood. Before therapy, tHb was 847 g. After an initial decline to a minimal tHb of 718 g, tHb was reestablished during therapy, with a maximum RRtHb of 10.8 g/day . tHb reached the pretherapy level in week 10 after 6 phlebotomies. At the end of follow-up and during maintenance therapy, tHb was not lower than before therapy (837 g in week 91) .
[Hb] did not decline to anemic levels at any time during therapy . Body weight, LBM and BMI were essentially unchanged between the beginning and the end of therapy.
The subject did not report any adverse events during therapy. Subjectively, physical performance was not affected during maintenance therapy. VO2peak was unaltered (49.8 ml/min/kg) in study week 91 compared to before therapy.