A 27-year-old woman without past medical history in her 37th week of pregnancy was the victim of a gunshot wound to her lower abdomen while being robbed and attacked by two unidentified burglars. The patient was brought by paramedic personnel to the emergency room 30 min after the violent attack. Upon arrival, a tachycardic and hypotensive patient was encountered. On examination, she presented a 50/30 blood pressure without palpable peripheral pulses; nonetheless, the fetus was noted to be active. The women’s abdomen was diffusely tender and rigid, and a single bullet entrance wound, without an exit wound in the lower left abdomen was seen (A). The cervix was closed, and no blood was found on rectal examination. Patient was reanimated and transported immediately to the operating room for an emergency laparotomy by a team of general surgeons, obstetricians, pediatricians, and pediatric surgeons.
Under general anesthesia at laparotomy, a 1 × 0.5 cm gunshot injury to the uterine fundus along with 300cc of clear amniotic fluid with whitish lumps and 700cc of blood clots were discovered in her abdomen. After a thorough exploration, no other injury was identified, and no bullet or fragment was found. An extensive peritoneal lavage was completed and an emergency cesarean section was performed (B).
A 2600 g male infant with a 6 Apgar score was delivered. During reanimation, the infant presented with severe respiratory distress and a penetrating entry wound in the infant’s right thoracoabdominal region without an exit wound was seen (C). Due to the nature of the injuries, an emergency consultation with the pediatric surgeon was required. A right posterolateral thoracotomy was performed. A 5 × 5 mm laceration to the inferior lobe of the right lung and a 1 × 0.5 cm right diaphragmatic injury were discovered (A). However, the bullet was nowhere to be found in the thorax. A diaphragmatic lesion was noticed, and the abdominal cavity was explored. Intestinal fluid (50 cc) was found in the infant’s abdomen along with a 2 cm bowel injury, 50 cm distal to the ligament of Treitz that encompassed 30% of the intestinal circumference. (B). The rest of the abdomen appeared normal, and the 2 × 1 cm bullet was found near the root of the mesentery between the intestinal loops (C).
With these findings, surgery was straightforward. Primary closure of the infants’ pulmonary and diaphragmatic injury was completed, and a right chest tube was set up. The extraction of the bullet was accomplished without difficulties. After that, a thorough lavage of the baby’s peritoneal cavity was performed, followed by debridement of the injured bowel and a primary closure in a single layer fashion with an absorbable suture (Vicryl, Ethicon, Johnson & Johnson, Seoul, Korea) . Following surgery, the mother was stable and transferred to the ward for postoperative care and recovery while the neonate was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further postoperative care and respiratory support.
Breast milk diet was initiated on the second postoperative day, and as the infant showed a good clinical development, thoracic drainage was removed on the 6th postoperative day, and the infant was transferred from the ICU to the general ward with his mother. After a 2-week cycle of broad-spectrum antibiotics, our patient and her newborn were discharged in good health and no further treatment was prescribed. In follow up controls, after 5 months, the two patients were doing well.