A 27-year-old Chinese male was defined as the proband, and his family members were investigated. The chief complaint of the proband was feeling weak for 6 days. His parents were first cousins and both of them were healthy. The proband’s fraternal twin did not display any biochemistry or imaging abnormalities. Six years previously, the proband’s elder sister died due to kidney failure at 23 years of age. The family tree is depicted in Fig. .
The clinical, biological and radiological features of the proband and his healthy fraternal twin are presented in Table . Briefly, the height of the proband (159 cm) was shorter than that of the average adult male. Laboratory investigations revealed significant elevations in the levels of serum creatinine (420.0 μmol/L), cystatin-C (2.83 mg/L) and parathyroid hormone (83.38 pmol/L). The estimated glomerular filtration rate was 14.84 ml/min.1.73m2. Ultrasound scans showed the size of right kidney size to be 9.1 × 4.3 × 4.2 cm and that of the left kidney size to be 9.0 × 3.7 × 3.3 cm. Both kidneys were of nearly normal size and each had a cortical microcyst (less than 1.5 cm) respectively. Blood pressure, urinalysis, serum liver enzyme levels, lipid metabolism makers, serum uric acid level, electrolytes and immune system makers were normal. Computed tomography scans revealed normal abdominal and cerebral structures. Renal biopsy was not performed because of deteriorated kidney function. The proband denied any medical history involving urinary, visual or auditory systems, including polydipsia, polyuria and secondary enuresis. After follow up for one year with treatments including medicinal charcoal tablets and rocaltrol, the serum creatinine level was 414.0 μmol/L, the estimated glomerular filtration rate was 15.77 ml/min.1.73m2 and the parathyroid hormone level was 19.21 pmol/L. According to the clinical presentations and family history, genetic kidney disease was suspected and whole-exome sequencing was performed on close family members to make a molecular diagnosis.
The study protocol was conducted based on the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from all participants.
Peripheral blood samples of the proband and close family members (his parents and fraternal brother) were collected and whole-exome sequencing was performed according to standard protocols. Briefly, samples were extracted using a Qiagen genomic DNA isolation kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany); genomic DNA samples were sheared by sonication. The sheared genomic DNA was then hybridized with NimbleGen 2.0 probe sequence capture array Roche, to enrich the exonic DNA (Joy Orient, China). The libraries were first tested for enrichment by qPCR and for size distribution and concentration using an Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100. The samples were then sequenced on an Illumina Hiseq2500. Two parallel reactions were done for each sample.
A novel homozygous mutation, c.2089 G > T in exon 20 of NPHP1 was identified in the proband, resulting in a nonsense alteration of p.E697X,37, which led to a truncation of 37 amino acids. Both the proband’s parents and his fraternal brother were heterozygous for this mutation. All the variants were verified by Sanger sequencing . The mutation was not reported previously in the public domain single-nucleotide polymorphism databases: dbSNP , ExAC (The Exome Aggregation Consortium; ), and control exome sequencing data of 1000 ethnic Han. Moreover, another novel homozygosis mutation c.2073 C > G in exon 20 of NPHP1 was detected, resulting in p.F691 L, which was predicted to be deleterious by the Sorting Intolerant from Tolerant algorithm (SIFT; ). The proband’s parents and his fraternal brother were also heterozygous for this mutation.