A 40-year-old man was admitted to our clinic with acute left flank pain. His past medical history included a right ureteral stone and intestinal injury due to a car accident. His vitals were stable. Physical examination revealed isolated left costovertebral angle tenderness. His body mass index was 21.8 kg/m2, he was not taking any medications and worked as a truck driver.
Urinalysis revealed microscopic hematuria (5–9/high power field). Laboratory investigations revealed impaired renal function (serum creatinine, 1.13 mg/dL) and raised D-dimer levels (4.9 μg/mL). Doppler USG revealed compression of the LRV between the abdominal aorta and SMA, as well as an LRVT.
CTA was performed for better visualization and revealed compression of the LRV between the aorta and the SMA with an LRVT which was found distal to the compression . Increase in CT-value around the left kidney indicated congestion caused by the thrombus. Furthermore, CTA revealed bilateral PTE . There were no findings of deep vein thrombosis or thrombosis other than the LRVT on USG and CTA. Therefore, the pathogenesis of PTE was most likely the LRVT. Laboratory data and imaging studies excluded the presence of other thrombogenic factors such as malignant neoplasm, vascular malformation, trauma, heritable thrombophilia, protein C/S deficiency, and antiphospholipid syndrome. Thus, his only risk factor for venous thromboembolism was his sedentary job as a truck driver. Based on the above, he was diagnosed with PTE caused by LRVT.
The patient was reviewed by a cardiology team, and an anticoagulant, rivaroxaban 30 mg daily, was initiated. Since the PTE was mild, an inferior vena cava filter was deemed unnecessary. His left flank pain improved in 3 days. Ten days after the initiation of rivaroxaban, a blood test revealed improvement in renal function (serum creatinine was 0.8 mg/dL) and normalization of D-dimers (1.0 μg/mL). CTA revealed resolution of PTE and a decrease in LRVT size. Twenty days after initiation, CTA confirmed complete disappearance of the PTE and LRVT . Thereafter, rivaroxaban was decreased to 20 mg daily. USG and CTA, repeated 3 and 6 months later, showed no recurrence of PTE and LRVT. We used USG and CTA to examine the cause of the LRVT after the PTE and LRVT had completely disappeared. The CTA indicated that the distance between the Ao and SMA at the level of the LRV was 2.5 mm and sagittal CTA showed that the angle between the Ao and SMA was 22° . We also measured the PV at the hilar portion of the LRV (18.7 cm/s) and at the LRV between the aorta and SMA (107 cm/s) using USG . The ratio of PV in the LRV between the aorta-SMA portion and hilar portion was 5.7. Based on the above findings, the patient was diagnosed with NCS, which was also suspected to be the main cause of the LRVT. Rivaroxaban was continued for more than 12 months as PTE carries the risk of recurrence.