A 16-year-old female patient was referred from the Department of Plastic and Burn Surgery for the fabrication of nasal stent. Patient had a history of congenital cleft lip and cleft palate since birth and had undergone surgical reconstruction for the same at 1.5 years of age. No rhinoplasty was done at that time and the surgical reconstruction of cleft nasal deformity was deferred till the teenage. The patient underwent cleft septorhinoplasty with Potter's V-Y plasty and was referred for nasal stent after 1week postoperatively .
For intranasal impression, the patient was advised to sit upright in the dental chair. Petroleum jelly was applied to the internal surface of anterior nares to facilitate the comfortable removal of the impression. The nostrils were packed with petroleum jelly coated gauze attached to thread to prevent the impression material from being displaced posteriorly. To confine the impression material in the nasal vestibule, a 19 gauge stainless steel wire was adapted as U-shaped frame across the columella to hold the impression material. Tray adhesive was applied over the wire and elastomeric impression material (Impregum Soft, 3M ESPE AG, Dental Product, Germany) was loaded around the loop. Unset impression material was molded to the desired shape. Additional material was added around the alae of nose for simultaneous nasal impression. The intra- and extranasal combined impression was retrieved . Impression was inspected for completeness, disinfected, and poured with dental stone.
Master cast was obtained using three-pour technique. The increments were separated from each other using base plate wax. A base plate wax was placed through the center of left nostril impression, separating the impression into one-third and two-third sections. Four linear grooves, two on each side of the wax sheet, were engraved before pouring of the impression and elevations with corresponding depressions were obtained in sections of nasal moulage . Wax sheet was removed and petroleum jelly was applied over the first segment to act as separating media. The second and third segments of the split cast were poured with grooves for proper orientation of the sections . Wax pattern for nasal stent was fabricated. A suction tip segment was used to provide for nasal patency. The rubber suction tip was cut, tried on model, length was adjusted, and positioned centrally in the left nasal cavity on the working cast using modeling wax to make the stent hollow. A stainless wire hook was adapted over the columella and embedded in the stent wax pattern. Split mold was assembled and autopolymerizing acrylic resin was flown in the mold. The prosthesis was retrieved after completion of polymerization. The stent was characterized to match the color with adjoining skin . All sharp edges and projections were smoothened and the surface was highly polished to prevent injury to the nasal mucosa and the growth of microorganisms. The nasal stent was delivered to the patient and its accuracy was checked by asking the patient to close right nostril and breathe forcibly though the left nostril . The stent was retained in situ and the inhalation and exhalation process occurred without hindrance. Instructions were given regarding the use and maintenance hygiene of the stent. After insertion, the patient was recalled at 48 h and 1, 3, and 6 months for periodic follow-up .