A 65-year-old previously healthy Sri Lankan woman was referred for the management of progressive painless obstructive jaundice of 1-month duration. She had two episodes of cholangitis which had been managed with antibiotics administered intravenously. There was loss of appetite and loss of weight (12 kg/month). Her premorbid metabolic equivalent of task (MET) score was >6, but was only 3 when she was referred. She was icteric and had mild dependent edema. Her body mass index (BMI) was 17. There were no palpable abdominal masses.
She had biochemical evidence of obstructive jaundice: total bilirubin 3.4 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 3.0 mg/dL, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 624 IU/dL. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) only identified a 26×37 mm tumor in the pancreatic tail with a mildly dilated common bile duct (CBD) without an apparent cause for it. Since she was unfit for major surgery an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was performed, which demonstrated a stricture with smooth tapering at the distal end of her CBD. The ampulla was prominent but there was no evidence of a mass lesion from which to take a biopsy. Brush cytology from the stricture was negative for malignant cells. A 6 cm self-expandable metal stent (SEMS) was inserted. Following the endoscopic intervention, her icterus disappeared and her liver profile improved. In order to find out the cause for the distal CBD stricture, a second computed tomography (CT) scan combined with multimodal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her abdomen was performed. This combined CT/MRI of her abdomen detected a second tumor in her pancreas; it was a mass with ill-defined margins of 17×19 mm, which invaded adjacent pancreatic tissue just inferior to the distal end of her CBD. Her superior mesenteric artery or vein was not involved .
Her American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stage was 2A for both tumors (ampullary tumor T3, N0, M0 and the tumor of the tail T2, N0, M0). The decision to offer total pancreaticoduodenectomy was taken in a multidisciplinary team (MDT) meeting because of the anatomical location of the two tumors. She was referred to a nutritionist and was optimized with supplementary parenteral nutrition for 3 weeks. She was also vaccinated to prepare her for a possible splenectomy. Her performance status improved within 3 weeks and a total pancreaticoduodenectomy and splenectomy were performed. Her postoperative period was complicated by a lower respiratory tract infection, superficial surgical site infection, and poor glycemic control. She was managed in a surgical ward with the support of endocrinology, microbiology, and nutrition teams and was discharged on the tenth postoperative day. She was discharged on insulin and oral penicillin for prophylaxis. She lost 7 kg of weight postoperatively but her weight stabilized after the introduction of a special dietary regimen which included six to eight small frequent meals with energy-dense snacks and limitation of food rich in carbohydrates and fat.
A macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed two distinct tumors in her pancreas. One was an ampullary tumor measuring 30×30×28 mm. The second tumor was found at the tail and measured 50×42×40 mm. The distance between the two tumors was 40 mm.
An histologic examination of the ampullary tumor showed a moderately differentiated ampullary adenocarcinoma of pancreaticobiliary type. This tumor had invaded the muscularis propria of her duodenum and the pancreatic parenchyma. Her CBD was not infiltrated by the tumor. Vascular and perineural invasion were not seen. The tumor at the pancreatic tail showed a moderately differentiated non-cystic mucinous (colloid) adenocarcinoma. Perineural invasion was seen, but vascular invasion was not detected. A few areas of chronic pancreatitis were noted in the rest of the pancreas but largely the morphology of the pancreas was normal. Immunohistochemistry findings are shown in Table .
She had good quality life after surgery reaching her premorbid MET score of 6 and had a stable weight. However, her serum albumin level was persistently low (median 26 mg/dL). She died of severe pneumonia 8 months after surgery.