A 28-year-old professional male footballer with 18 training years and with body mass index of 23.2 presented with complaints of atraumatic left anterior knee pain for 6 months. He had intermittent disabling pain, aggravated on training and playing which limited his field time, and significantly affected his performance. The athlete had no complaints of knee swelling, instability, or mechanical symptoms. On examination, a visible and palpable, immobile hard bump on the superolateral aspect of the patella was present . It was tender to touch, and terminal extension was restricted due to pain. Radiographs of the bilateral knee revealed a bipartite patella, Saupe type three variant (Superolateral) . Further, magnetic resonance imaging was done to rule out associated meniscligamentous pathologies ( and ).
In season, the player had significant symptoms for 6 months. The anterior knee pain was more predominant following the training sessions and matches significantly limiting performance and field time. He was conservatively managed with oral analgesics, Kinesio offloading taping, bracing, interferential therapy, cryocompression, and intermittent immobilization with a mild reduction in symptoms during the early presentation.
Arthroscopic surgery was advised during the off-season. Arthroscopic superolateral bipartite patella excision with ablation chondroplasty was done. Three portals anteromedial, anterolateral, and superolateral were used. The findings were firm attachment of bipartite patella with chondromalacia – II changes in the superomedial and inferolateral aspect of the articular surface. The arthroscopic steps and findings are shown in . The excised fragment along with fibrocartilaginous tissue measured 4 × 2 cm . The athlete’s post-operative course was uneventful.
Postoperatively, an accelerated rehabilitation protocol was tailored for the athlete.
Phase 1 (Week 1): Cryotherapy, patellar mobilization, quadriceps strengthening, straight leg raises, range of motion, and weight-bearing as tolerated Phase 2 (Week 2): Isometric cocontraction exercises, Hamstring and quadriceps stretches, active-assisted range of motion exercises, resistance band, and Thera-tube exercises to improve terminal extension Phase 3 (Week 3–4): Straight leg raises in all planes with weights, Aqua therapy inclusive of pool walking, step-ups and stretches, core strengthening, balance, and proprioceptive exercises Phase 4 (Week 5): Progression of open and closed kinetic chain exercises depending on the pain intensity.
After strict adherence to phased rehabilitation, the footballer was escalated to a high-performance strength training during the last phase of rehabilitation. Exercises were focused to improve his core strength, agility, explosive power, and aerobic capacity. Resistance training resorted to the last phase of the strength and conditioning program. A return to sports assessment both indoors and on-field was performed by a bio kineticist supervised by a sports physician. Box jumps, hurdle hops, quadrant pattern hops, football drills, tackling, change of direction speed, and agility were tested at varying intensities . The player was cleared to return to sports 6 week after the arthroscopic procedure and was followed up for 1 year.