A 4-month-old Asian girl was transferred to the previous hospital due to fever and episodic seizure after vaccination. She was asystole on arrival, and after intravenous administration of adrenaline and cardiac resuscitation, she had ventricular fibrillation requiring several defibrillations. She was transferred to our hospital on suspicion of myocarditis. She had no family histories of arrhythmias, cardiomyopathies, or sudden cardiac death.
The clinical course is shown in . Her heart rate was elevated to 140 beats per min (sinus rhythm), blood pressure was 84/56 mmHg, and percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 96%. On physical examination, she had no external malformations, inspiratory retraction, nor heart murmur. The echocardiography showed no anomalies of the heart nor the great vessels. Her blood test showed no abnormalities of electrolytes including potassium, calcium, and magnesium. C-reactive protein was elevated to 7.03 mg/dL, but leucocyte count was normal and there was no elevation of creatinine kinase. For definitive diagnosis, myocardial biopsy was performed on Day 1. During biopsy ventricular tachycardia (VT) was easily induced by catheter manipulation, and intermittent sustained or non-sustained VT was observed in the critical care unit ; therefore, continuous intravenous infusion of amiodarone, landiolol, and deep sedation was started. Histological work-up using a light microscope showed large, round polygonal cells (histiocytoid cells) clustered under the endocardium, and the examination with electron microscope revealed numerous enlarged mitochondria in the histiocytoid cells . From these findings and clinical course, she was diagnosed as histiocytoid cardiomyopathy. Since VT disappeared on Day 15 with oral amiodarone and bisoprolol, an implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD) was implanted for secondary prevention on Day 63.
On Day 73, however, the ICD systems had to be removed due to infection of the device pocket. Frequent VT or fibrillation recurred during and after the operation, and intravenous amiodarone, landiolol, and sedatives were administered again. A month later with tapering the sedatives, various types of VT manifested, including junctional tachycardia, torsade de pointes, and short-coupled variant of torsade de pointes (–) therefore, oral verapamil was added on, and amiodarone was weaned off. On Day 132 with tapering the sedatives, however, VT recurred and required sedation and intravenous amiodarone again. Oral verapamil and bisoprolol were thought to be ineffective and were stopped. Under deep sedation, the arrhythmias were completely controlled with intravenous amiodarone and landiolol. Since sedatives appeared to be more effective than anti-arrhythmic drugs for her arrhythmias, cardiac sympathetic denervation therapy was scheduled.
Due to a lack of experience with ganglion blockade and sympathetic denervation for the refractory ventricular arrhythmia of children (including the other hospitals in our country), the aorta and pulmonary artery were divided and each anastomosed, and the ICD system was re-implanted on Day 213 after approval from the hospital ethics committee. She developed frequent VT for 2 weeks after the surgery because of systemic or local inflammation. Intravenous magnesium sulfate and potassium chloride were partially effective but could not control her arrhythmias completely.
From Day 253, oral carvedilol 0.05 mg/kg/day, an inhibitor of store-overload-induced Ca2+ release (SOICR) in the myocardium, was started and was increased gradually, while the sedatives were concurrently tapered. When carvedilol was increased to more than 0.8 mg/kg/day, VT decreased significantly, and no PVCs were seen at the dose of 1.5 mg/kg/day. Finally, oral carvedilol 1.5 mg/kg/day and amiodarone 13 mg/kg/day completely controlled her VT without ventricular dysfunction and bradycardia (with a help of AAI pacing).
Other than arrhythmias, she suffered from severe hypoxic encephalopathy, epilepsy, and liver steatosis. After epilepsy was controlled with phenobarbital and levetiracetam, she was discharged on Day 393. She readmitted because of pneumonia several times but VT has not been recorded since discharge.