A 28-year-old immunocompetent woman with advanced keratoconus underwent DALK in her left eye using the big-bubble technique. The surgical technique has previously been described in detail. Briefly, the periorbital skin was scrubbed with 10 % povidone iodine solution and the 5% solution was applied into cul-de-sacs for 1 minute before starting the operation. The recipient trephine size was 8.0 mm. The operation was uneventful, a bare Descemet’s membrane (DM) was successfully achieved, and a 0.25-mm larger donor cornea devoid of endothelium and DM was fixed to the recipient bed using 16 separate 10-0 nylon sutures. The donor cornea, rated only for lamellar keratoplasty, was preserved at 4˚C Optisol-GS (Bausch & Lomb, Irvine, CA, USA) containing gentamicin and streptomycin for 3 days. No cultures of the donor corneoscleral rim were taken following use of the donor tissue. At the conclusion of the operation, betamethasone 4 mg and cefazolin 50 mg were injected subconjunctivally.
On postoperative day 1, near-total epithelial defect and mild graft edema (due to low graft quality) were noted; the recipient DM was completely attached to the overlying stroma. Topical betamethasone 0.1%, chloramphenicol 0.5%, and hypertonic sodium chloride 5% eye drops every 6 hours together with preservativefree artificial tears every 3 hours were started. The postoperative course was initially uneventful with gradual resolution of the epithelial defect and stromal edema together with an increase in visual acuity until postoperative day 4 when subtle infiltrates were noticed at the inferonasal margin of the graft, an area which was last to be re-epithelialized. The infiltration involved the anterior and middle stroma with an extension of about 90 degrees.
Within just four hours, the condition deteriorated rapidly to involve the adjacent recipient cornea (A). Confocal scan, which was performed immediately, revealed several high contrast hypha-like structures measuring 3.6 μm in width and branched at 45˚ angles within the anterior and middle stroma . With a diagnosis of filamentous fungal keratitis, topical betamethasone was discontinued; natamycin 5% eye drops every 30 minutes and oral fluconazole 100 mg twice a day were initiated.
Due to the progressive nature of the infection we decided to proceed with graft exchange. The infected graft was simply removed after cutting the sutures and replaced on the same day with another 0.5 mm larger full thickness donor cornea. During regrafting, the recipient DM appeared clear and intact. The involved recipient rim was removed, followed by irrigation with balanced salt solution and 5% povidone iodine solution. At the conclusion of surgery, subconjunctival amphotericin B 1500 micrograms in 0.5 cc was injected in the inferonasal quadrant. The removed donor lenticule was bisected; half was embedded in Blood agar for microbiologic culture and the other half was fixed in 10% formalin and sent for histopathology.
Postoperatively, topical and systemic antifungal agents were continued, while topical betamethasone 0.1% was withheld for two weeks and then resumed twice a day. Antifungal agents were gradually tapered off over the next 6 weeks as the epithelial defect and stromal edema gradually reduced and active infiltration was no longer observed. At final follow-up, 2 months after graft replacement, best-corrected visual acuity had increased to 20/60 and the second graft was clear with no evidence of recurrence (B). Based on postoperative eye bank reports, the recipient of the fellow cornea from the same donor, maintained a clear graft with no infectious complications.