A 27-year-old Japanese male patient without a history of any allergic syndromes was admitted to our institute with bilateral peripheral edema, proteinuria, and swelling of the right parotid gland. Cytology of the parotid gland and lymph node biopsy showed no malignancy, though eosinophilic infiltration in the lymph node was observed. He was diagnosed with nephrotic syndrome with 11.9 g/g of creatinine of proteinuria, 1.2 g/dL of serum albumin, and 420 mg/dL of low-density lipoprotein. Mild peripheral eosinophilia (790 /μL) and elevated immunoglobulin E (6896 IU/mL) were also present. Immunoglobulin G was 294 mg/dL, soluble interleukin 2 receptor was 457 U/mL, C3 was 102.9 mg/dL, C4 was 43.1 mg/dL, and total complement activity was 39 U/mL.
Kidney sizes were 112 mm (right) and 119 mm (left). We performed a kidney biopsy to further investigate the mechanism of the observed nephrotic syndrome. On light microscopy, the glomerular basement membrane exhibited mild diffuse thickening with spike formation . Eosinophilic interstitial infiltration was also seen . Immunofluorescence staining showed diffuse granular deposits of immunoglobulin G and C3 along the glomerular capillary walls . Immunoglobulin G4 was not predominant for immunoglobulin G subclass, and kappa and lambda light chains had equal intensity in the immunofluorescence staining. Immunofluorescence staining for the phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) and the thrombospondin type 1 domain-containing 7A (THSD7A) were negative. The electron microscopy showed global subepithelial electron-dense deposits and spike formation of the glomerular baseline membrane . He was diagnosed with stage II secondary membranous nephropathy.
Computed tomography showed a 40 mm of tumor in the right parotid grand, accompanied by a 23 mm lymphoid focus , both of which showed uptake by fluorodeoxyglucose-position emission tomography. We at this point suspected malignant disease, instead of an alternative benign presentation such as Kimura’s disease. Repeat biopsies eventually demonstrated carcinoma and lymph node metastasis (T3N2M0, stage IVa).
Before surgical excision, steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone 500 mg × 3 days) was performed, leading to the partial reduction of proteinuria and eosinophilia. At one month following pulse therapy, the patient underwent successful right parotidectomy with neck dissection. The resected specimen was consistent with the diagnosis of sclerosing mucoepidermoid carcinoma with eosinophilia, a variant of mucoepidermoid carcinoma (pT3N2b) . The proteinuria achieved complete remission and eosinophilia normalized without steroid therapy during the 12-month follow-up with concomitant post-operative radiation therapy (60 Gy /30fr). He has had no recurrence of disease over two-year follow-up.