A 12-year-old girl presented to an ophthalmologist complaining of a rapid decrease in her vision. An ophthalmological examination showed low visual acuity (OD = 0.03, OS = 0.09), bitemporal hemianopia, and ophthalmoscopy revealed no pathology. The brain MRI showed a symmetrical suprasellar tumor lesion, evenly intensely enhanced in postcontrast sequences .
The tumor appears isointense in T1 and T2 and a slightly high signal of tumor mass in the DWI sequence. Unusually for visual pathway glioma cases, the chiasm, both optic nerves and optic tracts are dislocated rostrally. Also notable are intact pituitary gland and infundibular stalk flattened and pushed backwards by the tumor that is unlikely to correlate with pituitary adenoma. Neither any pathological changes in hormone blood tests nor any endocrine symptoms were detected: the results of the investigations of the hormonal profile of the blood at the administration are shown in Table compared with those after surgical treatment and after a 6-month follow-up. Neurofibromatosis of all known types was excluded before administration of the patient to neurosurgeons.
In this case, the 12-year-old normally developed girl, having a good general state of health and non-significant medical history, is diagnosed with a suprasellar tumor causing bitemporal hemianopia and reduced visual acuity. Regarding the patient’s age, differential diagnoses include optic pathway glioma, craniopharyngioma, germinoma, pituitary adenoma, intracranial mesenchymal tumor, or meningioma. Optic pathway gliomas are known to cause ophthalmologic symptoms such as eye movement impairment, papilledema, or optic nerve pallor and the patient had none of these symptoms. AFP and b-HCG in the blood are within the normal range. The absence of endocrine disorder and MRI features of the tumor also disprove craniopharyngioma and pituitary adenoma . In addition, it seems impossible to identify the structure tumor originates. All the supposed diagnoses require at least morphological verification, and most of them require gross total resection. The developing visual disturbance forced the parents and neurosurgeons to choose a surgical treatment to remove the tumor and obtain morphological verification.
Having selected a surgical strategy, we considered a minimally invasive trans-eyebrow supraorbital keyhole approach. All basal brain structures including the cranial nerves, third ventricle floor and blood vessels are pushed upwards from the skull base by the tumor’s mass, the visual acuity is lower in the right eye, so the right-sided supraorbital keyhole approach becomes the safest one in this case.
Intraoperatively, the tumor was found to be totally covered with arachnoidea, leaving the dissection plane between the tumor and the basal brain structures. The tumor was of a dirty-pink color and a soft crumbling texture that appeared to be easily removed piece by piece. The optic nerves, chiasm and pituitary stalk were found intact, as well as the sellar diaphragm and all the underlying dural surface. Endoscopic assistance was used for additional visual control to verify that there was no occurrence of hemostasis. The procedure ended uneventfully with the GTR of the tumor. A postoperative CT scan showed no surgical complications .
The histological examination showed a tumor mostly formed by uniform meningothelial cells. The cells demonstrated a “salt and pepper” nucleus, with a relatively dispersed chromatin pattern and inconspicuous nucleoli. Focally, cells were smaller, with an increased nuclei-cytoplasmatic ratio and uniform nuclei with hyperchromatic chromatin. The cells were arranged in fascicles and whorls with various amounts of intercellular collagen. Focal stromal microcystic degeneration was found. There was a mitotic count of 3 mitoses per 10 high-power fields. The tumor was diagnosed as transitional meningioma, WHO grade I.
Improvement in the visual function was noticed on the first day of the postoperative period, with increasing visual acuity (OD = 0.1, OS = 0.4) and partial reduction of bitemporal hemianopia. The girl was discharged from the neurosurgical department on the 5th day after surgery with the near-complete recovery of visual acuity (OD = 1.0, OS = 0.8) and persisting moderate bitemporal color vision deficiency. From the first day after surgery, the patient developed diabetes insipidus, conventionally manifesting as polyuria and transitional hypernatremia, and required specific replacement therapy with desmopressin. The dosage of desmopressin was reduced 3 weeks after discharge and after a 1.5-month follow-up, replacement therapy was no longer required. No apparent tumor recurrence or delayed complications were observed during follow-up MRI after 6 months . In addition, the patient and her parents mentioned a favorable cosmetic outcome.