A 33-year-old nulliparous divorced PCOS woman was admitted to the surgical emergency department complaining of 15 days of abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting that had worsened within the 3 h prior to presentation. An appointment for a gastroenteroscopy was made a week ago complaining of digestive symptoms. The patient was admitted to the gynecological department for multidisciplinary consultation.
The woman reported that her last menstrual period occurred 37 days ago lasting 8 days long. Her next most recent menstrual period occurred 3 months more ago, presenting as a small amount of brown vaginal bleeding over the course of 1 month. She was diagnosed as PCOS 8 years ago. Her menstrual history had been significant for bleeding that lasted for 8–20 days, with irregular periods, 30–90 days apart.
She revealed a 4-year history of primary infertility with her ex-husband for which she had undergone IVF and failed to obtain a clinical pregnancy after three times of freeze–thaw embryo transfers in total with six good quality embryos on day 3, which could be diagnosed as repeated implantation failure (RIF) .
The patient denied the possibility of pregnancy. As a “self-identified” infertile woman, she divorced with her ex-husband one year ago, and started intercourse with her new boyfriend six month ago without contraception.
Her pulse rate was125 bpm/min and blood pressure indicated 99/50 mmHg. She was pale, lethargic, and demonstrated abdominal tenderness.
A rapid urine pregnancy test was administered, and the positive result was unexpected. Other significant laboratory values included those for hemoglobin (59 g/L) and beta-hCG was more than 10,000 m-international units per milliliter. Sonogram findings were significant for the absence of intrauterine gestation; a placenta and well-formed living fetus were seen in the abdomen, to the upper right of the uterus, accompanied by moderate free fluid within the abdomen . The fetus had a crown-rump length of 6.1 cm, corresponding to 12 weeks and 4 days of gestation, the fetal heart rate was176 bpm. A spontaneous conceived AP was ensured.
The patient underwent an emergency laparotomy . The hemoperitoneum (3000 mL) was visualized and evacuated. Mostly dissected placental tissues and a fetus in an intact amniotic sac (9 cm × 6 cm × 5 cm) were seen in the upper part of the abdominal cavity. Part of the placenta had implanted into the omentum. The ampulla of the right fallopian tube was obviously thickened and congested, with a 4 cm rupture and some residual placental tissue along the ruptured tube. Persistent oozing of blood was also observed. Except for the PCOS appearance of both ovaries, slight inflammation had been seen on their surface. The uterus and left fallopian tube were normal. There was no obvious evidence of endometriosis. Moreover, there was no evidence of damage to the other organs in the pelvic and abdominal cavities. A surgery performed successfully with removal of abdominal gestation tissue, resection of partial omentum and right salpingectomy. Intraoperative infusions of 910 mL of autogenous blood and 2 units of concentrated red blood cells were required.
Five days after laparotomy, the patient’s serum hCG level had declined to 696 IU/L and was normal 1 month after the operation.
Postoperative pathological results confirmed the secondary abdominal pregnancy because decidua tissue and chorionic villi both implanted into the right tube and omentum. Seven days after the operation, she was discharged. Two weeks later, during an outpatient follow-up visit, the patient was doing well, without complaints. Till now, one year past, she was married again but has weak fertility awareness because of her catastrophic experiences, and she was experiencing anxiety, depression after pregnancy loss.