This report presents a case of 28-year-old male, who was referred to the Department of Orthopedic Surgery in the Jordan University Hospital complaining of right gluteal pain and feeling of unusual hard mass for 2 years. The pain was insidious and increased over time, he described it as a burning sensation that radiates from the gluteal area to the posterior side of the thigh, which was exacerbated on walking but relief with rest and there was no night pain. He also reported a progressive limitation of right hip extension which significantly interfered with his daily activities.
Through the 2 years before the presentation, the patient was assessed by multiple general physicians one of them diagnosed him as a muscle stiffness and another one ordered a lumbosacral magnetic resonance image (MRI) to rule out disc prolapse. For that, the patient had been receiving several courses of para spinal muscle strengthening physical therapy and core body exercises, but with minimal benefit. The patient visited a general orthopedic surgeon 1 month before the presentation which ordered a pelvic radiography that showed an osseous mass related to the right femur neck . Therefore, the patient was transferred to our hospital for further evaluation.
On physical examination, there were multiple tender points in the gluteal area and over the greater trochanter, with restricted passive and active extension of the right hip joint, but there was no weakness and symmetric power 5/5 in both lower limbs. The results of the laboratory tests (complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, kidney function test, and electrolyte) were within normal limits.
Computed tomography scan (CT scan) was ordered and showed a right femoral neck posterior-inferior osseous mass with cortical and medullary continuity on the axial view . MRI – sagittal short tau inversion recovery fast spin-echo (SAG STIR fast IR) showed the posterior relation of the OC to the femur neck, and the high intensity cap which goes with the diagnosis of OC . MRI – sagittal view T1 in (a) and T2 in (b), showing the posterior relationship of the OC to the right femur neck . MRI – axial views show the cartilage cape low enhancement in T1(a) and high enhancement in T2(b) .
The plan was to remove the mass, and the risks of intra-operative femur neck fracture, sciatic nerve injury and incomplete resection were discussed with the patient. The operation was in lateral position through a lateral approach to the hip. The hip capsule was stretched and the mass was intra capsular in posterior relation to the femur neck with a stalk. It was removed as close as possible to the femur neck using the saw and osteotome. It was completely removed without a fracture to the femur neck (, ). Then, we fixed the femur neck with two fully threaded cannulated screws as a prophylactic fixation (, ). The mass was sent for histopathology evaluation , which confirms the diagnosis of OC.
The patient started full weight bearing and hip range of motion rehabilitation program in supine and prone position directly on the next day of the operation. After 4-months of out-patient follow ups, the patient reported a significant improvement in his hip extension and a complete resolution of the burning sensation in his gluteal area.