Our patient was a 41-year-old Japanese man who had had occasional discomfort in the right knee since elementary school. He had no pain at rest, but he experienced occasional pain when moving the knee. The pain had made it difficult for him to sit on his heels (Japanese seiza position) for the past year. Although he had undergone radiography and MRI examinations at several hospitals since childhood, no issues were reported; subsequently, he consulted our hospital.
At the time of his consultation, physical examination showed mild swelling and a loss of range of motion. The active range of motion of the knee was 30 degrees of extension and 120 degrees of flexion, improving to 10 degrees of extension when relaxed in a recumbent position. He had no instability of the knee. He had an intense fear of a sensation that something was caught in his knee joint. Blood test results were unremarkable. There was no tenderness at the femorotibial (FT) joint level. However, he complained of discomfort proximally, near the patellofemoral (PF) joint to the medial pouch. Careful palpation revealed an elastic soft tissue mass measuring about 3 cm. When his lower leg was hanging down while he was in a seated position, the blood vessels centered on this area became engorged.
X-rays showed no obvious findings. MRI showed a mass measuring about 40 × 12 × 15 mm . The mass was homogeneous with a low intensity on T1-weighted sequences and high intensity on T2-weighted sequences adjacent to the medial femoral condyle. The shape of the medial femoral condyle presented with a concavity in axial images, with irregular margins from the PF to the medial femoral condyle. There were no abnormal signals in the intraosseous tissue. Suspecting a hemangioma, we performed MRA of the patient’s leg. The results showed a hyperintense region on the medial side of the knee joint, consistent with that seen on an MRI scan . Moreover, another hyperintense region measuring about 2 cm was also observed near the lateral femoral condyle and was suspected to be an extra-articular hemangioma. All evidence suggested intermediate-type hemangioma.
We performed surgery with the patient under general anesthesia. When his lower leg was hanging down on an operating table, remarkable engorgement of the blood vessels was observed. Arthroscopic examination was performed to confirm the nature, location, and extent of the mass . The findings revealed a soft tissue mass that had grown from the PF to the medial pouch; the mass had spread from the medial epicondyle to the medial articular surface and was pinched by extension of the knee. The hyperintense region revealed by MRA was found at the lateral femoral condyle. There was no damage to the meniscus. A small incision to the lateral mass for subcutaneous access revealed a multilocular soft tissue mass measuring about 2 cm penetrating through the fascia of the vastus lateralis; the mass had the obvious appearance of a hemangioma. Because some of the engorged blood vessels were connected to the joint, we added an incision into the articular capsule. The mass infiltrated the synovial wall of the suprapatellar pouch; thus, the mass, measuring about 20 × 18 × 10 mm, was excised en bloc. On the basis of a report of synovial hemangioma occurring outside the knee joint , our patient’s case was considered to be a synovial hemangioma of the intermediate type originating from the intra-articular synovia, which was connected from the intra-articular region to the extra-articular region. With regard to the medial mass, because of its very large size, we decided to perform open surgery and visually identified the mass. The size of the mass was about 40 × 16 × 7 mm, and it spanned from the medial epicondyle to the medial articular surface. A part of the mass was attached to the cortex of the medial femoral condyle. We detached the mass from the bone surface and excised it. Upon resection, the medial condyle was observed to be dimpled with the shape of a crater . The spread of the mass suggested a diffuse-type synovial hemangioma. Under direct observation, we performed complete hemostasis and sutured each layer. Histopathological diagnosis indicated a hemangioma originating from the synovial membrane or subsynovial connective tissue, as well as irregular arteriovenous connections . Ultimately, the diagnosis of this patient was a diffused intermediate-type synovial hemangioma. The patient became asymptomatic after surgery, with no recurrence for more than 4 years.