We report the case of a 56-year-old man of asian origin presenting to ED with dyspnea and high fever. He had a history of psoriasis treated with low-dose corticosteroids (Methylprednisolone 4 mg every other day). Three days before admission, he started having chills and became progressively unwell. Vitals upon admission: blood pressure 70/30 mmHg, pulse 145 bpm, temperature 39,5°C, respiratory rate 28 per minute, O2 saturation 95%. The abdomen was soft to palpation yet mildly tender in the right upper quadrant. There was no sign of peritonitis. Laboratory investigations showed marked inflammation (C-reactive protein 32 mg/dl), leucocytosis (20 200 WBC/μL, 18 300 neutrophils/μL), thrombocytopenia (platelets 52 000/μL), coagulation disorder (INR 1.5) and elevated liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase 538 IU/mL, alanine aminotransferase 384 IU/mL, LDH 1138 IU/mL). Plain radiograph of the chest revealed right inferior lobe shadowing suggesting a possible pneumonia.
After ICU admission, a contrast enhanced CT-scan of the abdomen was performed since it revealed a left-sided solid liver abscess (Figure ). There was no free liquid in the abdominal cavity, and no signs of pneumoperitoneum or perforation. The diagnosis at that point was of septic shock secondary to a liver abscess of unclear aetiology, complicated by acute lung injury and disseminated intravascular coagulation. The patient was started on an antibiotherapy course (Amoxicillin-Clavulanic acid), low-dose steroids and recombinant activated protein C, and improved during the first 48 hours.
On day 3 the patient’s condition deteriorated. Abdominal CT scan was repeated. This time, the attention was drawn to a calcified density at the centre of the liver abscess not previously noticed (Figure ). The structure was linear, measured 27 mm in length, and was in the left lobe of the liver protruding outwards, close to the duodenum.
An upper gastro-intestinal endoscopy showed no perforation, on foreign body. An exploratory laparoscopy was carried out. The left lower lobe of the liver was found to adhere closely to the anterior aspect of the lesser curvature of the stomach. A small quantity of pus was extracted from under the adherences, but the foreign body could not be reached by laparoscopy. The surgery was therefore converted to a laparotomy and a calcified foreign object measuring 3 cm in length removed from in the liver (Figure ). This object was subsequently identified as being a fish bone. Upon careful retro anamnesis, the patient remembered having felt severe epigastric pain during a meal eaten seven days prior to admission, pain which had rapidly resolved without any specific treatment.
Drainage tubes were placed in the abscess for postoperative drainage. Blood cultures taken on admission grew Streptococcus hemolyticus (group G) and Streptococcus sanguis. The antibiotherapy was therefore shifted to Penicillin. The patient was discharged from the Intensive Care Unit 11 days after admission.
On day 13, he became pyrexial again. Imaging showed a slight enlargement of the collection with a heterogeneous liquid component, occupying the entire left lobe of the liver. A percutaneous drain was inserted under ultrasound-guided control. Culture of material grew Staphylococcus coagulase negative. Intravenous antibiotherapy with Penicillin was administered during the entire stay, and shifted to Amoxicillin-Clavulanic acid for another ten days upon discharge from the hospital, on day 43. Subsequent controls of the CT-scan confirmed a slow regression of the collection. The patient was last seen six months after the episode; he had remained symptom-free.