An 18-year-old male was brought by the ambulance to the emergency department (ED) after a road traffic accident. He was unrestrained and driving at speed of 160 kilometers per hour. There was no history of rolling over or ejection from the car. Three months prior to this presentation, he was investigated for recurrent abdominal pain associated with bloody diarrhea and underwent colonoscopy and abdominal computed tomography (CT). He was diagnosed to have CD with ileocolic stricture, based on the endoscopic finding of terminal ileitis and deformed ileocecal valve. According to Montreal classification, he was classified as A2 L3 B2 . He was kept on azathioprine and infliximab to control his CD activity. Upon ED presentation, ATLS protocol was conducted. Initially, he was tachycardic (119 beats per minute) with maintained blood pressure. He was conscious and oriented with a Glasgow coma score of 15. He had a decreased air entry with hyperresonance over the right hemithorax. He had mild tenderness over his right iliac fossa with no signs of peritonitis. Apart from these findings, he had unremarkable primary and secondary surveys.
His chest X-rays revealed right-sided pneumothorax. Focused assessment with sonography in trauma (FAST) showed no hemoperitoneum. According to our hospital protocols, the patient underwent pan-computed tomography including head, chest, abdomen and pelvis. The CT revealed enhanced thickened terminal ileum with surrounding fat stranding and minimal collection between the intestinal loops . These findings were compared to his previous CT findings and interpreted as interval regression of his Crohn’s disease. His laboratory investigations were unremarkable, with a hemoglobin level of 14.2 g/dL and lactate level of 1.7 mmol/L.
The patient was resuscitated and a chest tube was inserted in the right hemithorax for his right-sided pneumothorax. He was admitted for observation and was kept on a regular diet. He remained hemodynamically-stable and his examination was unremarkable with no signs of peritonitis. He underwent daily chest X-rays to assess the right-sided pneumothorax. On the second day, his chest X-rays showed air under diaphragm. A repeated CT showed pneumoperitoneum, multiple air foci around the terminal ileum and mild free fluid .
The patient underwent diagnostic laparoscopy, converted to exploratory laparotomy that demonstrated turbid fluid all over the abdomen and confirmed presence of ileal perforation. The ileal perforation was two centimeters and located around 25 cm from the ileo-cecal valve and extending to the mesenteric border. The distal ileum was diseased with extensive fat creeping around the friable inflamed walls. The involved ileal segment was completely resected (around 40 centimeters). Both proximal and distal ends were exteriorized as double-barrel ileostomy.
Postoperatively, the patient had uneventful smooth course and was discharged on sixteenth postoperative day. Six weeks later, he was electively readmitted for ileostomy closure procedure. He had a smooth postoperative course. He was followed up in the out-patient clinic of gastroenterology and colorectal surgery.