A 50-year-old man presented to our out-patient department with complaints of intermittent pain and swelling over the left knee associated with difficulty in performing his daily activities. The knee pain started following the cerclage wiring for fracture left patella done 8 years back. A longitudinal surgical scar of 8 cm healed by primary intention was present over anterior aspect of knee . The proximal tibia was thickened and broadened. The medial and lateral joint lines were tender. He had diffuse swelling over the left knee and fixed flexion deformity of 5°. He was able further flex the knee up to 70°. His quadriceps and calf muscles were wasted ( and ).
Radiographs ( and ) showed extensive degenerative change at the knee with a large, multilocular expanding lytic lesion involving the epiphyseal and metaphysical regions of proximal tibia. In some areas, the cortical margin was interrupted. Because of the aggressive appearance of this lesion, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with computed tomography (CT) screening was performed.
The CT scan demonstrated large well defined irregular expansile lytic lesion of size 8.5 × 4.5 × 6.2 cm in proximal tibia and a well-defined irregular lytic lesion of size 2.5 × 2.1 × 2 cm over medial condyle of distal femur. MRI demonstrated a large well circumscribed cyst with septations, marrow edema, and subchondral edema in proximal tibia (, , , ) and medial condyle of femur (, , , ). Considering that the lesions were epiphyseal, diagnosis of multi centric giant cell tumor was thought of even though the radiologist felt that there was no solid component of the tumor to suggest giant cell tumor. Based on this suspicion, we decided to do a biopsy of the lesions.
After getting informed consent, using Jamshedi 13-gauge needle core needle bone biopsy was taken from distal femoral condyle and proximal tibia under C arm guidance and spinal anesthesia. About 4–5 samples of tissue were taken from each site at the margins of the lesion and were sent for histopathological evaluation. Histopathological examination showed fibrocollageous tissue with bone fragments and lymphocytes with no evidence of tumor tissue or granulomas.
As tumor was definitely ruled out, patient was treated conservatively with analgesics and physiotherapy. The patient is managing well with his activities of daily living with moderate relief of pain. He has been advised total knee replacement if pain becomes severe. The necessity to use stemmed tibial components during knee replacement in view of the large subchondral proximal tibia cyst has been explained to patient.