An eighteen-year-old female presented to the clinic with a six-month history of progressive exertional dyspnea, weight loss, and loss of appetite. The patient's BMI was 15. She had no relevant personal or family history, no reported allergies, and never smoked. Chest examination revealed dullness to percussion, markedly absent breath sounds to auscultation and absence of respiratory vibrations to palpation over most parts of the left and right hemithoraces. The patient had no clinical signs of myasthenia gravis.
Chest CT demonstrated a giant bilateral non-cystic mass with a heterogeneous enhancement in the thoracic cavities that presses posteriorly and superiorly against the lungs. It had no calcification . Laboratory studies were unremarkable. A transthoracic needle biopsy was performed, which revealed thymic hyperplasia. Thymoma was suspected, and surgical resection was recommended.
A median sternotomy incision was our first choice as surgical access in order to isolate the mass from the innominate vein. The left part of the tumor was resected from outside the pleura. Bleeding occurred during this approach, and three units of blood were transfused. Due to the difficulties and the excessive blood loss with the first excision through a median sternotomy, we used the hemiclamshell approach to resect the right part of the tumor, in which we extended the median sternotomy through the 5th intercostal space to the right pleural cavity in order to make an additional anterolateral incision. This approach provided a very good exposure, through which a total resection of the right part was performed. Using this approach, we managed to perform the operation in less time, and it was easier to detect the right phrenic nerve and the right lung hilum while causing less bleeding than with the median sternotomy approach alone.
The resected specimen was 36 × 29 × 10 cm in size and weighed about 4500 g , and showed well-circumscribed contours and slightly lobulated yellow cross-sections with scattered foci of ischemia. Microscopic examination revealed diffuse proliferation of thymic epithelial cuboidal cells with Hassall corpuscles and a large amount of mature mainly T-lymphocytes (, ). The diagnosis indicated by the histopathological findings as lymphocyte-predominant thymoma (Type B1 according to the World Health Organization classification). The patient got weaned off after three days from mechanical ventilation, and the postoperative course was good.