An 18-year-old man was admitted to hospital with a chief complaint of a lump on his left forehead, which had been detected during physical examination. He stated that the lump appeared without obvious inducement 1 month previously. It was flat mound-shaped, protruded the skin, and was approximately 2 × 3 cm in size. It had clear borders, a tough texture, and was non-movable. It was not red, swollen, painful, and local skin ulcers or sinus formation were not observed.
Body temperature was normal at the time of hospital admission. Skin abnormalities on other parts of the body were not found during physical examination. He had no swelling of the liver, spleen, or lymph nodes. He had no history of skin diseases or other diseases.
A routine blood test upon hospital admission showed a hemoglobin level of 156 g/L, as well as counts (×1012/L) of 5.47 for red blood cells, 5.55 for white blood cells, 2.99 for neutrophils, and 120 for platelets. Coagulation function, liver function, kidney function, electrolyte levels and the level of C-reactive protein were normal.
CT of the head after hospital admission showed that the left frontal bone was damaged, but an obvious abnormal-density shadow was not seen in brain parenchyma. The midline structure was centered, and the sub-tentorial cerebellum/brainstem was normal. MRI of the head showed the left frontal bone to be destroyed and to have grown inwards and outwards into a flat mound-like mass. Furthermore, the T1-weighted signal was slightly longer and the T2-weighted signal was altered in the plain MRI scan. The signal was uniform, and the inner and outer plates of the skull were incomplete. Contrast-enhanced MRI showed obvious enhancement of the lesion at approximately 1.6 × 2.0 cm. The adjacent dura mater was thickened, the brain parenchyma was slightly compressed, the soft tissues of the scalp were swollen outwards, and the tumor was strengthened . We carried out whole-body positron emission tomography (PET)–CT preoperatively and found no metastatic lesions. CT of the chest and abdomen were reviewed postoperatively. Metastasis was not found, so radiotherapy or chemotherapy were not initiated.
Following the induction of general anesthesia, the patient was placed in supine with the head tilted to the right. An arc-shaped incision centered on the mass was made according to the skin level. The lesion was located under muscle, had a soft texture, as well as a clear boundary that separated gradually along the skull surface. The skull had been invaded, part of the defect, enlarged along the edge of the defect to bite off the invaded skull, the tumor was tightly adhered to the dura, and the dura was completely removed from the edge of the tumor. The defect in the dura was repaired using an artificial dura mater. The skull defect was repaired using a titanium mesh and by suturing each layer of the scalp.
The intraoperative specimens obtained were examined. Staining (hematoxylin & eosin) showed left frontal LCH, active proliferation of tumor cells in the focal area, and visible nucleoli. We suspected that the malignant tumor had become LCS. Immunohistochemical analyses showed positivity for cluster of differentiation (CD)1a (++), S100 protein (++), P53 (++), CD68 (+), cyclin D1 (+), cyclin A (+), cyclin B1 (+), IGF2BP3 (+), and Ki-67 (45%–50%) .
Postoperatively, the patient was discharged from hospital. Gradually, his life returned to normal (including limb movement). Consultation at 1-year follow-up involved re-examination of the head using CT and MRI: recurrence and metastasis had not occurred .