A 64-year-old immunocompetent Caucasian man with no history of cardiac disease presented with chest pain, dyspnea and edema of his lower limbs associated with a degeneration of his general state. On physical examination he had a temperature of 37°C, blood pressure of 100/74 mmHg, and heart rate of 30 bpm. His jugular venous pressure was high. The first and second heart sounds were normal without any audible murmurs, rubs or gallops. His chest was clear to auscultation. His hemogram, hepatic enzymes and inflammation markers were all normal. The patient was HIV-negative. His chest X-ray revealed cardiomegaly as well as bilateral pleural effusion. The standard 12-lead ECG indicated an atrioventricular block of the third-degree. It returned to normal spontaneously one hour later. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) , demonstrated not only a pericardial effusion of 23 mm by 35 mm with signs of tamponade but also the presence of a large mass at the level of the right ventricle. The mass had a wide base and was heterogeneous. It appeared lobulated with a tissular echo texture that measured 5.5 cm by 5 cm. It was also attached to the tricuspid valve creating a right ventricle inflow obstruction. The tumor spread over the right atrium. He underwent an urgent pericardial drainage which returned 600 cm3 of hemorrhagic liquid. Bacteriological and cytological analyses revealed large cells suggestive of a lymphoproliferative disorder. A computed tomography scan showed the presence of a right heart tumor on both sides of the tricuspid valve as well as peritoneal effusion. No other organ involvement was observed . Coronary angiography accentuated an increase of a myocardial blush in favor of the highly vascular nature of the tumor . This examination was performed because the patient was more than 40 years old. It was thought that emergency surgery might be necessary at any time because of size of his tumor.
Due to the rapid impairment of his cardiac function and the life-threatening hemodynamic instability, an echocardiography was performed which showed an obstruction of the right ventricle inflow.
He underwent an emergency thoracotomy. The purpose of this surgery was not to remove the entire tumor. It was limited to freeing the tricuspid valve and the intra-right ventricle obstruction. Surgical resection of the mass was difficult and incomplete. The tumor had infiltrated his right atrium, the atrioventricular septum and the proximal side of the right ventricle. Surgical removal was laborious but without complications.
The tumor was submitted to the pathology laboratory as white and red soft fragments measuring 3 cm by 3 cm by 2 cm . Histological analysis revealed non-Hodgkin large B-cell lymphoma (CD45+ CD20+ CD3- BCl2+ CD20- CD10- BCl6-). The lymphoma was classified as IE, according to the Ann Arbor staging classification.
Chemotherapy with the R-CHOP (Rituximab, Cytoxan, Hydroxydaunorubicin (Adriamycin), Oncovin (Vincristine), Prednisone/Prednisolone) regimen began immediately after resection.
After the first course of chemotherapy TTE demonstrated a reduction in the size of the mass .