A 57-year-old woman, presenting with a dilated left ventricle, reduced ejection fraction, and chronic bifascicular block, was referred to the cardiology department, West China Hospital, on December 10, 2019.
She occasionally experienced mild chest pain and paroxysmal palpitation during activity in the past 2 years. Her exercise capacity was also mildly reduced. She did not manifest symptoms of fatigue, dizziness, syncope, peripheral edema, and abdominal distention.
The patient had neither prior medical comorbidities nor addictions.
Her father had a premature sudden cardiac death at the age of 40.
The patient showed good nutrition, active position, clear mind, fluent language, and was cooperative in examination. Examinations on her whole skin and mucous membrane revealed no yellow staining, cyanosis, and bleeding spots. She had a blood pressure and resting heart rate of 120/68 mmHg and 60 beats per min, respectively, and auscultation of both lungs was normal with neither dry nor wet rales. The apical pulse was located 0.5 cm lateral to the midclavicular line on the left side of the fifth rib, while her heart rhythm was regular. The first and second heart sounds were basically normal, without extra and splitting of the heart sound. No valvular murmurs were detected in any of the auscultation areas. In addition, she did not exhibit any physical signs of heart failure, including edema, ascites, jugular venous distention, and hepatojugular reflux.
Results from the routine blood test and plasma biochemical examinations, including kidney and liver function, glucose, lipid, and electrolyte, were normal. Similarly, thyroid function, kappa and lambda urine free light chains as well as coagulation profile and autoimmune antibodies were also within the normal range. The plasma N-terminal fragment of the pro-brain natriuretic peptide was 325 ng/L.
The electrocardiogram revealed left anterior branch block, complete right bundle branch block (RBBB), high sidewall abnormal Q wave, and left chest leads (V4-V6) low voltage with poor R wave progression. On the other hand, Holter monitoring revealed sinus arrest with a 1.74 s R-R interval, multisource premature ventricular beats, non-sustained ventricular tachycardia with an RBBB pattern, and f-QRS in leads V3-V6. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a dilated LV with a diameter of 60 mm as well as a reduced LV ejection fraction of 35% and a left ventricular apex cystic outpouching (12 mm × 13 mm) that displayed synchronous contractility . Myocardial contrast echocardiography revealed contractile outpouching without obvious filling defects . Coronary computerized tomography angiography (CCTA) revealed right dominant coronary artery circulation without obvious stenosis, LV multiple outpouchings, uneven thickness of the LV wall , hypodense region (CT value -90~-114 HU) at localized myocardium of LV septum , and free wall . These findings were consistent with profiles of fatty tissue infiltration. In addition, we used cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) to evaluate the cardiac structure, bilateral ventricular function, segmental movement, and tissue characterization in the patient. CMRI results revealed LV dilatation, abnormal activity of the LV wall , an outpouching at the LV apex, and a low signal in the septum myocardium midwall after contrast injection . Moreover, late gadolinium enhancement in the midwall of the left ventricular septum and free wall myocardium were also evident .
High-throughput sequencing revealed no genetic variation with high clinical phenotype correlation and sufficient evidence of pathogenicity.