A 45-year-old Chinese male presented with six months history of an anterior neck swelling that gradually enlarged over two months. It was painless and not associated with any disturbance in deglutition, breathing or speech production. There were no other related symptoms that were suggestive of infective aetiology. Physical examination revealed a 3cm-by-3cm anterior midline neck mass at the level of the thyroid gland .
The mass moved with tongue protrusion and swallowing. A flexible fibreoptic nasolaryngoscopy revealed an obliterated left pyriform fossa. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of the midline mass reported atypical mononucleated cells suggestive of neoplastic lesion. An ultrasound (US) guided tru cut biopsy was carried out to get further tissue for confirmation. Formal results reported back as reactive plasmacytosis. The contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a homogenously enhancing lesion at the left supraglottic region measuring 2.3cm x 1.7cm x 2.5cm, extending from the level of the hyoid bone to the level of the false cord inferiorly and posteriorly to the anterior commissure, causing widening of the paraglottic fat with medialisation of the mucosal space .
The plane between the left strap muscles with this mass at hyoid and infrahyoid bone level is lost, displaying erosive changes involving the left thyroid cartilage .
The inferior aspect of the left aryepiglottic fold is thickened, obliterating the left piriform sinus. Another well-defined homogenously enhancing lesion at the anterior midline neck at thyroid cartilage level measures 1.3cm x 2.5cm x 2.1cm. Subcentimeter cervical lymph nodes bilaterally were present at levels Ia, Ib, II and III. There was no prominent lymphadenopathy seen in the mediastinum.
He underwent a direct laryngoscopy (DL), anterior neck dissection and selective neck dissection. DL revealed an oedematous left epiglottis and arytenoids, and a biopsy was taken .
Intraoperatively, there was a mass at the anterior neck 4cm x 3cm below the skin (with skin tethering) and anterior to strap muscles. The anterior neck mass, fibrofatty tissue, and bilateral level 1b was removed en bloc .
Histopathology examination (HPE) of the supraglottic mass reported infiltration of deep subcutaneous tissue with dense lymphoid infiltrates composed of varying sizes of lymphoid follicles with hyperplastic germinal centres. The interfollicular area was expanded with numerous reactive plasma cells .
The Ki67 proliferative index was ~5%. The lymphoid cells are positive for cluster of differentiate 20 (CD20). The germinal centres are highlighted by CD 10. The follicular dendritic cell (FDC) meshwork is highlighted by CD21.
He has recovered well after surgery and remains in remission on further follow-up. In addressing the remaining supraglottic mass, he was counselled for partial pharyngectomy for therapeutic purposes. However, the patient’s immense concern about the potentially associated surgical morbidities has hindered him from pursuing further completion of the resection of the supraglottic mass. He remains well today.