An 88-year-old Asian female was referred to our hospital for evaluation and treatment of a tumor in the right lateral thoracic region. One month prior, she had a feeling of fullness and complained of localized pain and warmth in the right lateral thoracic wall. However, she did not present with fever, dyspnea, cough, hemoptysis, fatigue or weight loss. Pain and warmth gradually resolved without intervention; however, the fullness was getting worse. The doctor whom she visited previously examined the lesion by ultrasonography and estimated it as a soft tissue tumor. She was under medication for Alzheimer’s disease, hypertension, and chronic heart failure, and had a 25 pack-year smoking history but she had already quit smoking 3 years prior. And she did not have any immunosuppressive condition except the senility. On admission, she was afebrile with stable vital signs and had a lump in the right lateral thoracic region. The lump was non-tender, soft, and immobile. Lymphadenopathy or palpable lymph nodes were not detected. Laboratory examination showed white blood cell counts of 7200 μL and C-reactive protein level of 5.03 mg/dL. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a mass of approximately 65 × 30 mm with an osteolytic change, involving the right 8th rib , while there was no remarkable intrathoracic pulmonary lesion. Based on the rapid growth rate and CT findings, we strongly suspected a malignant chest wall tumor. Therefore, en bloc tumor resection with the 8th rib was performed. Macroscopically, the specimen contained a grayish-white solid mass 7.5 × 5.5 × 4.0-cm in size. When the specimen was cut, a large amount of viscous pus was drained. Microscopically, the specimen was characterized by a necrotic focus and non-caseating epithelioid cell granuloma with multinucleated giant cells . The granulomatous lesions extended into the rib, infiltrating the bone cortex . Ziehl-Neelsen staining of the pus smear revealed the presence of acid-fast bacilli, and its culture showed growth of Mycobacterium avium. Finally, the definite diagnosis was M. avium abscess involving the 8th rib. After the operation, she did not receive any antibiotic treatment for NTM because of her senility and completeness of anatomical resection of the lesion, and she was discharged uneventfully on postoperative day 12. On follow-up 1 month after discharge, there were no signs of infection or other adverse events associated with the surgery.