A 28-year-old man referred to our department with a 7-week history of left hip limping, difficulty walking, and inability to bend forward. He had aided waddling gait and poor tolerance of weight bearing. There was no history of any major trauma. His vital signs were normal. The examination of the hip elicited an impaired restriction of flexion and both internal and external rotation, with a 2-cm shortening of the left leg. A Harris hip score of 65.5 was achieved by the patient. His distal neurovascular status was intact .
Other examinations showed poor secondary sexual characteristics with a Tanner’s pubertal and axillary stage of 2. He worked in an automobile repair shop and had normal social activities. A survey of his past medical history showed that at age of 17 years, blurred vision, meningeal signs, and abnormal secondary sexual development were noted; and after investigations, brain magnetic resonance imaging showed a lobulated intra- and suprasellar mass, 38 × 32 × 24 mm in diameter, with extension posteriorly into the interpeduncular cistern and extension superiorly and insinuation into the third ventricle. Consequently, in December 2001, he underwent brain surgery for craniopharyngioma. Ten years later, his previous symptoms recurred, and in April 2011, he underwent a second brain surgery for tumor recurrence. At the meantime, he had been followed up by an endocrine clinic.
According to the patient’s past history, he was born full term with a birth weight of 3.5 kg and his early development was described as normal (menarche was at age of 14 years). Since that age, he had always weighed between 49 and 57 kg. During these years, he was under medical therapy for hormonal disorders. There was no history of delayed dental maturation, hyposmia, or a family history of delayed puberty. He had no midline defects. Complete pituitary evaluation is depicted in .
In 17 July 2013, the patient was admitted to our hospital, and we performed the standard treatment for SCFE: fixation with a single screw and a prophylactic fixation in the contralateral hip .
Postoperatively, the patient had an uneventful recovery and was discharged 2 days after surgery with instructions for weight-bearing status and followed up through both orthopedic and endocrine clinics. He came on regular follow-up visits, and based on clinico-radiological evidence of union, full weight-bearing walk was advised in the fourth month.