A 47-year-old woman was diagnosed with anaplastic thyroid carcinoma. She came to our hospital with a huge mass in her neck. She had no remarkable past medical history or family history. In 2002, the patient was found to have a thyroid mass, and then underwent a total thyroidectomy and central neck lymph node dissection. Postoperative pathology revealed that the right thyroid mass was classic papillary carcinoma . Three lymph node metastases were identified and she did not receive postoperative iodine 131 therapy after the operation. The patient’s review indicated tumor recurrence in 2008 and she received right neck lateral lymph node dissection. A total of 4/11 lymph nodes dissected during surgery were diagnosed with metastatic carcinoma. The patient refused iodine-131 therapy due to financial problems. The patient was reexamined regularly after surgery, and no signs of tumor recurrence were found. Unfortunately, the reexamination of the patient in 2013 showed tumor recurrence and she was given four sessions of radioiodine therapy with iodine-131. The dose ranged from 150 to 200 mci per session. At the last treatment, the tumor did not uptake iodine, suggesting that the tumor did not respond to iodine-131 therapy. The patient went to a hospital in Shanghai for consultation on treatment in 2016, and right lateral cervical lymph node dissection was performed. The patient was treated with oral Chinese medicine after surgery. In 2019, the patient again had a mass in the right neck, which gradually increased rapidly in size. The patient was not suitable for surgery because the tumor was encased in blood vessels, of severe trauma and higher risks. Pathological results of core needle biopsy confirmed that the right neck mass was undifferentiated thyroid carcinoma, CK(+),TTF-1(focal +),TG(focal +),PAX8(+),CD117(-),CD5(-),CgA(-),Syn(-),Calcitonin(-)PTH(-),P63(-), Ki-67 60%. The results of genetic testing showed that BRAF V600E was negative and TERT gene was positive. No targetable gene mutation was found in the patient and the immune index PDL1 was positive (PDL1 22C3, CPS=10). Because the mass continued to bleed, she did not receive antineoplastic therapy. The patient presented to our hospital with a large, locally ruptured and bleeding thyroid mass in June 2021.The bleeding volume of the mass was approximately 100 ml per day, resulting in severe anemia . Routine blood tests showed hemoglobin 48 g/L. Physical examination revealed a hard mass on the right neck, approximately 26 cm*18 cm*15 cm in size, with local skin ulceration and bloody secretion. The patient had anemic appearance and pale complexion, lips, eyelids and conjunctiva. The results of general examination showed that the patient had multiple metastatic tumors in both lungs. After comprehensive evaluation by multiple disciplines (including thyroid surgery, oncology, radiotherapy, nuclear medicine, etc.) in our hospital, a comprehensive treatment strategy was developed. The surgeon considered that the patient had undergone several previous neck surgeries and that complete resection of the tumor would be difficult with reoperation. Radiotherapy was recommended for the patient. The patient received radiation therapy with a prescription of 4500 cGy in 15 fractions to the right neck mass and 6750 cGy in 15 fractions to the tumor boost (the target area of radiotherapy shrunk the edge of the mass by 1 cm and avoided the large blood vessels and nerves and other tissues) using a simultaneous integrated boost technique, IMRT IGRT . Subsequently, tislelizumab immunotherapy was recommended as a treatment choice. The patient has been treated with tislelizumab at a dose of 200 mg every three weeks from July 2021. Tislelizumab immunotherapy was well tolerated and almost no adverse reactions were observed in the patient. Her neck mass was gradually reduced in size after radiotherapy and tislelizumab immunotherapy. . Serial CT images of the patient are shown in . The lung metastatic lesions were smaller than before, and the efficacy evaluation was partial response. To date, no tumor recurrence has been observed. The blood test revealed that the hemoglobin level gradually increased (97 g/L). At present, the patient can move the neck freely and no longer bleeding. The patient’s physical discomfort such as fatigue and neck pain disappeared. The patient was highly motivated to receive maintenance treatment and follow-up due to the excellent curative effect. She felt energetic and was able to go to work as normally.