In March 2018, a 52-year-old Caucasian man presented at Schwerin hospital emergency room with headache that had been increasing for three days (left frontal region, pain scale 9 of 10), as well as nausea and photosensitivity, but no fever.
Lumbar spinal canal stenosis was diagnosed one year prior. In addition to conservative therapy, periradicular infiltrations were repeated for pain relief, most recently in an outpatient setting one month before admission. The patient, working in the field of landscaping, had no known previous diseases apart from one episode of acute schistosomiasis and dengue fever after a visit to Africa six years earlier and in particular no immunosuppressive diseases or therapies.
On admission, the patient was in severe pain (back pain and headache pain scale 9 of 10). Apart from meningism and lumbar pain on percussion, there were no further internal or neurological abnormalities. The cranial CT scan was normal, as were systemic inflammation parameters (CRP 6.3 mg/L [norm < 5 mg/L], no leucocytosis).
Due to a rising body temperature (38.1 °C) and the urgent suspicion of meningitis, a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) puncture was done. Upon macroscopic examination, the CSF was slightly cloudy; accompanied by a mild leucocytosis of 251 × 106/L (normal: < 5; differential blood count: 60% lymphocytes, 38% neutrophil granulocytes, 1% monocytes, 1 lymphoid cell) with significant lactate increase to 4.2 mmol/L, pronounced barrier disturbance (CSF/serum albumin ratio of 226; normal: < 8.0) and intrathecal immunoglobulin synthesis. No pathogen was detected initially (Gram and Auramine screening stain negative, no growth in conventional bacterial cultures after 7 days of incubation and in mycobacterial cultures until discharge, HSV and VZV PCR negative, syphilis serology negative). The cerebral MRI showed normal brain structures.
Empiric meningitis therapy was started with ceftriaxone 2 × 2 g daily (initially combined with ampicillin 6 × 2 g and acyclovir 3 × 700 mg daily, which were stopped after negative detection of Listeria spp. and HSV). The headaches subsided with this and the patient’s fever abated. In the follow-up CSF puncture after 7 days of ceftriaxone therapy, the lactate decreased slightly to 3.1 mmol/L. However, CSF pleocytosis persisted at 464 × 106/L (86% lymphocytes, 8% neutrophil granulocytes, 4% lymphoid cells, 2% monocytes), as well as the pronounced barrier disorder with a CSF/serum albumin ratio of 114 and a three-class immunoglobulin reaction. CSF was positive in the tuberculosis liquid culture 6 days later and showed growth of dark-yellow colonies after 15 days of incubation on the tuberculosis solid culture media. This was assessed as contamination due to a negative M. tuberculosis complex PCR (including negative Auramine screening stain).
Exacerbations of the known, chronic, recurrent sciatica symptoms occurred repeatedly during the inpatient stay. An MRI of the lumbar spine (see Fig. b) showed multisegmental degenerative changes to the lumbar spine with progressive herniated disc at the level of L3/4 with emphasis in the right paramedian region and severe spinal narrowing with coiling of the caudal fibres at this level as the cause of the radicular symptoms. However, initially this was not interpreted as spondylodiscitis. After 14 days of ceftriaxone therapy, the patient was discharged in improved general condition.
In April 2018, one month after the initial visit (14 days after the end of ceftriaxone therapy; see also antibiotic history Fig. ), nightly febrile episodes of up to 39 °C occurred again with chills, night sweats with laundry changes and progressive headache while lying down. Within one month, the patient had lost 5 kg in weight. At the time of rehospitalisation, the internal and neurological status was unremarkable except for the known radicular symptoms. There was no meningism, so another CSF puncture was primarily foregone. The laboratory tests on admission revealed leucocytosis of 12.4 × 109/L and an elevated CRP of 93 mg/L with normal procalcitonin (0.1 mg/L). Due to a history of repeated stays in Africa, most recently in 2016, malaria was ruled out. The dengue, hepatitis, HIV, syphilis and rheumatoid serology as well as the QuantiFERON test were negative. There was no clear clinical improvement during calculated therapy with intravenous ampicillin/sulbactam. The patient continued to have a fever up to 39.6 °C, so antibiotic therapy was discontinued after 6 days in the absence of relevant pathogen detection.
The search for a focus initially did not reveal any ground-breaking findings: the abdominal ultrasound and whole-body CT scan were unremarkable. Echocardiography revealed no evidence of endocarditis. In the PET/CT performed 3 days after the repeat admission, increased focal radionuclide uptake was noted in the region of the small vertebral joints, the escaping spinal nerves and the adjacent vertebral bodies (see Fig. c), so the MRI of the lumbar spine was repeated four weeks after the one performed during the previous stay. In the examination without contrast medium, for the first time bony oedemas suggested haematogenous spondylitis, while repetition with contrast (see Fig. d, e), revealed progressive oedema and contrast enhancements with evidence of small abscesses in the autochthonous back muscles.
In the blood cultures taken on readmission, Gram-positive rods were grown after 5 days of incubation in one of four bottles, which could be identified as Nocardia nova using MALDI-TOF but were initially considered to be contamination from the environment. The other eleven blood culture bottles collected over the following 12 days remained negative (7 days of incubation).
CSF puncture was repeated 6 days after the end of antibiotic therapy due to an increase in fever up to 39.2 °C: cell count at 464 × 106/L (61% neutrophil granulocytes, 2% lymphoid cells, 35% lymphocytes, 2% monocytes), lactate at 3.1 mmol/L still elevated, marked barrier disturbance of 282 and intrathecal immunoglobulin production. Due to the possible infectious aetiology, ceftriaxone 2 × 2 g daily was started again on the same day (see Fig. ), with which the patient’s fever abated over the subsequent 3 days.
On 02 May 2018, after convening an interdisciplinary case conference (antimicrobial stewardship, internal medicine, microbiology, neurosurgery, neurology, neuroradiology) the “contamination” of the cerebrospinal fluid (dated 21 March 2018! during the first stay in hospital) was further differentiated as Nocardia nova using MALDI-TOF (matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation time-of-flight mass spectrometry) and parallel bacterial 16S rDNA-PCR with subsequent sequencing. More than seven weeks after the first visit to the emergency room, meningitis and spondylitis due to Nocardia nova were favoured as the main cause of the symptoms (see Fig. ). Remarkably, Noccardia ssp. had been detected on both, standard media and mycobacterial cultures.
According to the general resistance situation of Nocardia nova , ceftriaxone was combined with amikacin 7.5 mg/kg once daily (see Fig. ). Once resistance testing was present (in the absence of EUCAST limits, it was performed according to the CLSI standard M24-A2), ceftriaxone was replaced by imipenem/cilastatin 4 × 0.5/0.5 g after 14 days of therapy due to the lower minimal inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of imipenem/cilastatin (0.012 mg/L) compared to cefotaxime (1 mg/L; tested representative for ceftriaxone). Combination therapy with amikacin was continued for up to 14 days. There was a significant drop in inflammatory parameters (CRP of a maximum of 122 mg/L at the start of therapy within the normal range of < 5 mg/L 14 days later) (see Fig. ). The headache stopped. The patient remained fever-free and with stable circulation throughout the rest of the hospital stay. A follow-up CSF puncture was not performed at the patient’s request. Persistent radicular pain symptoms could not be clearly differentiated from the pre-existing degenerative changes. No predisposing underlying disease could be determined (no evidence of a tumour disease despite comprehensive imaging and laboratory analysis, immunodeficiency screening negative, no diabetes mellitus) nor pulmonary involvement (chest CT, PET/CT and BAL negative). After a total of four weeks of intravenous therapy, co-trimoxazole (MIC 0.032 mg/L) was administered orally at an increased dose of 3 × 1,920 mg regarding the severity of the disease and the patient was discharged home. Due to initial gastrointestinal complaints, the dose was reduced to 3 × 960 mg 2 weeks later. Due to CSF space and bone involvement, we recommended continuation of therapy for at least around 12 months, but it was discontinued by the patient after 9 months. In the follow-up MRI after two months of therapy, the soft tissue oedema had already subsided, while the osseous structure reaction, as is known with other forms of osteomyelitis, lagged behind the clinical course, see Fig. g. The CRP remained within the normal range and the patient did not experience any new episodes of fever or headaches until now. However, after 6 months of therapy, he suffered from severe back pain partly due to a psoas abscess and to instability of the spine corresponding to massive bony lesions (see Fig. h, i). The abscess was drained without any pathogen detection by culture or molecular techniques. Since he refused surgical stabilisation, he was treated by physical therapy in combination with pain relief.