A 67-year-old man was involved in a motor vehicle accident and sustained a comminuted mid-shaft fracture of his femur and ipsilateral patella. After being admitted to the hospital, his injuries were treated using a retrograde femoral nail and tension band wiring of the patella. However, postoperative radiographs revealed a previously undiagnosed fracture of the femoral neck, which was subsequently stabilized with a four-hole 135° dynamic hip screw (DHS). Three months later, radiographs showed that the DHS had cut out of the femoral head while both the femoral shaft and patella fracture were solidly united. Figure A, B & C. Clinically, the patient was in severe pain with limited knee movement (10°-90°) and a preoperative EuroQol-5 D (EQ-5D) and EuroQol-Visual Analogue Scores (EQ-VAS) scores of 0.312 and 20, respectively. To address this issue we advised the patient to undergo conversion total hip arthroplasty. The patient gave informed consent for his anonymized information and photographs to be used in the preparation of this case report.
Before surgery we conducted a comprehensive preoperative workup to exclude infection and carefully examined the patient’s recent radiographs to identify failed implants, particularly broken screws or the intramedullary nail which can present additional challenges to remove.
We performed the operation as a single-stage, two-part procedure. The first part involved removing all implants and thorough debridement of the bone and soft tissues. The second part involved the total hip arthroplasty. Both parts were carefully choreographed so that there was no need to re-prep or change the patient’s position during surgery. This created a smooth, coordinated workflow in the operating theatre.
The patient received a spinal anesthetic and was placed in the lateral decubitus position. We cleaned and prepared the limb for surgery, allowing access from the hip to the mid-leg. Prophylactic antibiotics and tranexamic acid were administered. The surgical technique consisted of a series of logical, well-coordinated steps.
First, we removed the distal locking screws from the retrograde femoral nail. To prevent damaging the hex of the screw head, we made sure that the screwdriver was firmly engaged in the hex. This is important to avoid iatrogenic stripping, which can complicate the removal process.
Second, we directed our attention to the hip; using a modified Hardinge approach, our incision began 8 cm proximal to the tip of the greater trochanter and extended down the line of the femur incorporating the surgical scar. A generous incision permits good visualization. Our deep dissection was carried out by separating the fibres of gluteus medius longitudinally then extending distally into vastus lateralis, where the DHS side plate was identified and exposed. After releasing all adhesions we were able to easily dislocate the hip by gentle external rotation. The trauma implants were then removed, including the proximal locking bolts of the retrograde femoral nail, which are readily accessed under the anterior part of vastus lateralis Fig. .
Third, with the hip dislocated, we covered the soft tissues with a moist lap sponge and flexed the knee to approximately 30°. Using a midline incision, we split the patella tendon and excised any remaining fat pad or fibrous tissue to access the femoral notch. We located the end of the nail, which was then easily removed using the extraction device, and the knee joint was irrigated before closing the skin Fig. .
Finally, we performed a standard hip arthroplasty with a few key technical considerations. First, the acetabular bed must be carefully prepared to support an uncemented acetabular shell, as the bone may have become soft. We used two screws to enhance the primary stability of the implant. As the surgery progresses, it is important to maintain good exposure and visualization of the femoral entry point to prevent iatrogenic fracture of the malunited greater trochanter Fig. . After creating the entry point, we used a long drill bit to find the center of the femoral canal. This is crucial, as intramedullary bone bridges may block or misdirect the hip reamers, leading to perforation or fracture of the femur. We then exchanged the drill bit for a guidewire and used flexible reamers to enlarge the femoral canal. Trial components were used to assess hip stability and leg length and we cemented the femoral stem using a third-generation cementation technique. Our operating time was 127 mins with an estimated blood loss of 400mls. The patient was able to bear full weight the day after surgery and was discharged on the third day Fig. A & B. One year after surgery the patient was walking unassisted and has returned to work as a mason. The postoperative Oxford Hip Score, EQ-5D, EQ-VAS are 43, 0.864 and 84 respectively.