A 16-year-old male Chinese presented with severe neck pain, rigidity, and obvious cervical deformity. His height and weight were 175 cm and 58 kg (BMI 18.9 kg/m2) and the visual analogue scale (VAS) for neck pain was 9.0 on admission. The underlying cause was linked to his unusual postural reading habit. As most kids do in this part of the world, he developed a strong passion for reading. He started reading comic books as soon as he could read and understand language. Although the specific number of hours spent reading could not be quantified, his mother estimated 6 h of reading time daily. He seemed to be comfortable reading in his unusual postural habit. He was left alone to go on with his reading posture because both his parents and teachers alike were afraid of discouraging him from reading.
He preferred sitting and placing the book on the floor with his head and neck in a flexion position between his thighs instead of sitting in a chair. All efforts by his parents to modify his postural reading behavior were futile. They were oblivious to the gradual changes of his cervical spine until the deformity became obvious to ignore. The deformity affected his forward gaze, his neck could no longer return to a neutral position at will affecting his ability to walk safely, and the unbearable neck pain ensued almost rendered him incapacitated. His neck pain exacerbated in flexion posture. The pain became constant and the acupuncture, massage treatment he received before reporting to the hospital only provided episodic pain relief. He had no history of trauma, surgery, or a family history of spinal conditions.
Severe cervical kyphotic deformity, thick, and tight neck muscles were noticed on examination. He was neurologically intact and his deep tendon reflexes were normal. Assessments for possible muscle hypertonia/hypotonia, laxity of joints, mental disorder were negative.
A conventional X-ray indicated cervical spine flexion deformity with Cobb angle of 70.5°, 87.6°, 51.8° on neutral, hyperextension, and hyperflexion respectively.
CT scan revealed the bony anatomy of the cervical spine with no obvious osteophyte formation and MRI findings were normal without any significant spinal cord compression .
An angiography was obtained to ascertain any potential vertebral artery and other vascular anomalies to prevent vascular trauma during surgery. Vascular anatomical anomalies were ruled out after evaluation.
Before surgery, skull traction (5 kg) was applied for 7 days and a significant reduction in the kyphosis was obtained Cobb angle of 33.9° . However, the patient developed mild pressure sores and could not tolerate further traction even if it was necessary. His preoperative VAS score was 7.
A week after cervical traction, an anterior fusion, and posterior screw fixation were performed to correct the deformity.
An electro-physiological spinal cord monitoring was installed intraoperatively to observe motor-evoked potentials. After a single general anesthetic, the anterior fusion was performed first. The C2-5 intervertebral disc was resected and removed. A subtotal resection of C3 vertebral body was performed, cortical bone harvested from the iliac crest was grafted into the C2-C4 and C4-5 intervertebral spaces, and correct sized titanium with screws was installed. A posterior C2 pedicle screw and C3-C5 lateral mass instrumentation were performed after the anterior fusion.
The general anesthesia was successfully reversed, the patient was extubated on the operation table, and did not require intensive care. Postoperative radiology showed a Cobb angle of 17.6 . His pain improved significantly with a VAS score of 1 at POD 2.
A Philadelphia collar was put in place for neck support, and he was able to sit up straight in bed without neck pain. He was discharged without complications.
His VAS score at 3 months follow-up was 0, the Cobb angle on X-ray at 30 months follow-up was 18.2° , and the posterior internal fixation was removed after a satisfactory bone fusion was achieved with improved cervical sagittal alignment.
At eight and a half years follow-up, the patient was in perfect health with no discomfort or disability with a Cobb angle of 18.6° and complete bone fusion was attained.
The last follow-up was at 10 years after the surgical deformity correction and the patient was doing well in all aspects of life and he still enjoyed reading with modified reading habits. The VAS score at the last follow-up was 0. He had a great cervical range of motion with left and right neck rotatory function of 90°, 55° on flexion, and 45° on an extension. Further radiological assessments were then discouraged to reduce potential radiation exposure and avoid unnecessary financial burden.