In February 2007, a 15-year-old Caucasian French boy with CF (ΔF508, M1V heterozygote genotyping pattern) was admitted to the CF center in Marseille, France. He presented with fever (39°C), fatigue, haemoptysis, bronchial syndrome, and respiratory decompensation. His chest X-ray showed multiple bilateral bronchial thickening. He has had a history of persistent colonization of the respiratory tract since childhood with Staphylococcus aureus and Haemophilus influenzae. He also had a primary colonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa at the age of 10 and with Aspergillus fumigatus and Candida albicans at the age of 13. Our patient received inhaled fluticasone (1500 μg/day) on several occasions in 2006.
On admission, his laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 25.63 × 109/L with 87% polymorphonuclear cells (PMNs). His C-reactive protein (CRP) was at 92 mg/L. A direct Gram-staining of his sputum taken at the time of his admission showed the presence of many polymorphonuclear leukocytes without squamous cells. The presence of Gram-positive branching filamentous bacilli and Gram-positive cocci was also noted. A standard culture and conventional identification of his sputum sample yielded 104CFU/ml of S. aureus, 104CFU/ml of Nocardia sp. that was isolated from Columbia colistin-nalidixic acid (CNA) agar (BioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France) after three days of incubation. Accurate identification at species level was achieved after 16S rDNA amplification and sequencing leading to the discovery of N. farcinica (GenBank accession number , 100%). The sequence of our isolate has been deposited in GenBank under accession number . The phylogenetic position of N. farcinica (strain 7400458) among closely related bacteria is presented in Figure . Using the disk diffusion method we found out that the isolate was resistant to rifampicin, erythromycin, gentamycin, doxycycline, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole and vancomycin. Meanwhile, we found it susceptible to amoxicillin, imipenem and ciprofloxacin.
Our patient subsequently received a three-week course of intravenous ciprofloxacin, amikacin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. One month later, his leukocyte count decreased to 6.4 × 109/L (50% PMNs), the culture was found negative, and our patient was declared clinically cured. During a follow-up examination after one year, N. farcinica was cultured four, six and nine months later and was not cultured at two and three months and one year later.
In December 2007, our patient was started on a six-month course of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg, 1.5 tablets, b.i.d.) and nebulized amikacin (500 mg, b.i.d., one month/two during six months) in order to eradicate the bacterium. However, because of the difficulty in isolating Nocardia species in sputum samples, as well as the poor sensitivity of the culture method, we decided to investigate retrospectively all sputum samples available for our patient using a more sensitive assay (molecular detection). For this purpose we used a specific putative non-ribosomal peptide synthetase sequence [,] to develop an original real-time PCR assay with Taqman* probe. The primers designed for this RT PCR were as follows: NFF1 (5'-ACCGATCCGCCGTCAAATC-3') and NFR1 (5'-TCGGTCGTCCGGTGTGGA-3') that amplified a 147 bp of this gene with a probe of NFP1 (5'-CACATACCCCAACGCCAGCTGA-3'). The DNA from his sputa was extracted in a MagNa Pure LC instrument (Roche Diagnostics GmbH, Mannheim, Germany) according to the manufacturer's instruction.
Using our PCR assay, all investigated negative and positive N. farcinica culture sputa were positive in PCR even in sputa recovered one year before the first culture detection . Retrospectively, our patient's medical record was rechecked as his clinical condition, including cough, haemoptysis, purulent mucoid expectoration, and elevated CRP and leukocytes (> 80% PMNs) worsened at that stage.