On October 6, 2004, a 31-year-old Korean male was admitted to the hospital with a fever, chills, general fatigue, cough, dyspnea, night sweats, and a weight loss of 2 kg, all of which he had experienced over the previous four weeks. The patient had smoked half a packet of cigarettes per day for the past 10 years and had been diagnosed four years previously with adrenoleukodystrophy. During August and September of 2004, the patient travelled to Corona, California. The symptoms began while at this location, and he was subsequently treated for bacterial pneumonia at an area hospital. However, his symptoms worsened rapidly and he returned to Korea.
On admission to the hospital, the following vital signs were observed: temperature, 37.8°C; blood pressure, 130/70 mmHg; pulse, 92 beats/min; and respiratory rate, 24 breaths/min. A clinical examination revealed a moderately ill-appearing male with multiple, encrusted, erythematous, papular nodules on the face and trunk. There were no other remarkable findings on examination. Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis with eosinophilia (white blood cell count 23,460 cells/μl; eosinophils 22%), an increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (100 mm/h), and increased levels of C-reactive protein (24.7 mg/dl). A chest X-ray (CXR) and computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed tiny, multiple nodules in both lung fields . Sputum acid-fast bacillus stain and tuberculosis culture were both negative. The patient underwent a bronchoscopy and a skin punch biopsy. The biopsy revealed the presence of a chronic granuloma with thick-walled, mature spherules containing endospores. A subsequent skin tissue culture grew Coccidioides immitis. The patient's serum complement fixation (CF) titre was 1:16, and a serum coccidioidal immunodiffusion test for IgG antibody was negative. (All coccidioidal CF antibody testing was carried out at the laboratory of Lynn A. Cheryk, Mayo Clinic, Minnesota, USA). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed no evidence of meningitis.
The patient was diagnosed with diffuse coccidioidal pneumonia with skin involvement and was treated with amphotericin B deoxycholate (total dosage, 1970 mg; ~1 mg/kg) for 40 days (day five to day 45 of hospitalization). However, the patient still complained of night sweats and a cough. Physical examination revealed a persistent fever (temperature of 38.6–39°C) and no improvement of the skin rash. His general condition progressively deteriorated. The patient developed a right pleural effusion and miliary shadows on the CXR did not improve. A follow-up CF titre performed on day 27 of hospitalization had increased to 1:64. On day 45 of hospitalization, the therapy was changed to caspofungin (initially 70 mg and then 50 mg/day, given intravenously) and fluconazole (400 mg/day, given orally). Sixteen days after the combination treatment (day 60 of hospitalization), a CXR revealed a reduction in both the miliary nodes and the pleural effusion. The patient improved initially, developing only occasional fevers. Forty-nine days after the combination therapy, the patient's peak body temperature fell below 38°C, and the dyspnea had subsided. The serum CF antibody titre had decreased to 1:8. However, the cough remained. By day 125 of the combination treatment, the patient had defervesced, and all of his respiratory symptoms subsided. Although some skin lesions still remained on his face, most were nearly resolved. The serum CF antibody titre was undetectable, and on day 131, caspofungin therapy was discontinued. The patient was subsequently treated with only fluconazole at a dose of 400 mg/day. There were no drug-related side effects noted from the use of the caspofungin and fluconazole. On day 194, his follow-up CF antibody titre increased to 1:256. However, the patient did not experience respiratory symptoms, develop a skin rash, or develop abnormalities on CXR. A follow-up examination five months following completion of the combination treatment revealed minimal residual nodules visible on CXR and CT scan . The patient's CF antibody titre was 1:128. As of September 2005, the patient was clinically healthy and without any respiratory symptoms and/or fevers. However, he is still receiving suppressive treatment with fluconazole.