A 31-year-old female patient accidentally sprained her right ankle while walking 5 d before hospitalization in our hospital.
She felt pain and gradual swelling in her right ankle and could not stand or walk normally. No significant relief was found after rest. The patient was admitted to the emergency department of another hospital for X-ray examination, which indicated a fracture of the right medial malleolus. The patient received manual reduction and external fixation with braces. Two days before hospitalization, the patient was reviewed in the outpatient department of our hospital. The patient complained of extensive pain around the ankle joint. The patient was admitted to our hospital for further examination and treatment.
She had no other history of past illnesses.
She had no genetic or familial disease history.
Physical examination revealed a closed ankle injury with extreme tenderness, swelling and subcutaneous ecchymoses around the ankle joint. There was also tenderness and subcutaneous ecchymoses at the proximal fibula. Neurological examination showed no obvious abnormalities. The dorsalis pedis pulse and posterior tibial artery pulse were palpable.
Laboratory examinations revealed no obvious abnormality.
Full-length radiographs of the lower leg revealed proximal fibula fracture, inferior tibiofibular joint separation, and medial malleolar fracture involving the posterior malleolus , which was also revealed on computed tomography (CT) scans . The proximal fibula fracture was located approximately 7 cm from the distal end of the fibula head, and the fracture line was long and oblique, which is similar to a Maisonneuve fracture and belongs to pronation external rotation fracture according to the Lauge-Hansen classification. The medial malleolar fracture was a vertical fracture, which is similar to supination adduction fracture according to the Lauge-Hansen classification. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed rupture of the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament and anterior talofibular ligament, surrounded by areas of high signal representing edema and hemorrhage .