On January 6, 2023, during the COVID-19 epidemic in this region of China, a 76-year-old woman, with known co-morbid type 2 diabetes mellitus, presented to the emergency room of our hospital, the Third Grade First Class Hospital, with complaints of weakness and paraesthesia in both her legs and arms for four days, and fever and dry cough for the past 5 days. A nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2 returned positive. The patient had received the inactivated COVID-19 virus vaccine one year ago, and had not been administered any other specific antiviral therapy for a COVID-19 infection.
On admission, baseline laboratory investigations were performed . A nasopharyngeal swab was repeated for COVID-19 PCR testing. The result of which was negative. However, the serologic test result was positive. A brain MR was performed prior to the patient’s onset (2022.11), and no abnormal signals were detected (–). Following admission, the patient underwent a subsequent cerebral MRI re-examination, which revealed slightly elevated signals (T2) and low signals in the right thalamus (SWI) (,). However, no hyperintensity was observed in T1 or DWI (,). The patient was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG 0.4 g/kg·d) for 5 days.
On further investigation, the neuro-electrophysiology examination on January 8, 2023 showed a decreased compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude and sensory nerve action potential (SNAP) amplitude in the left median and ulnar nerves. Based on these results, AMSAN was suggested. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was performed and the results demonstrated elevated protein levels (1871.9 mg/dL, normal 150–450 mg/dL) while the leukocyte level was normal (2/mm3), Based on the clinical findings, neurophysiological studies, CSF analysis, and cervical MRI, the patient was diagnosed with AMSAN, a GBS variant associated with COVID-19. The MRI of the patient’s cervical spine revealed no abnormal signals in the cervical spinal cord, ruling out the possibility of limb numbness and weakness caused by lesions in the cervical spinal cord. Although we considered COVID-19-related AMSAN based on patients’ history of COVID-19 infection, acute limb movement, sensory disturbance, protein cell isolation, and EMG results, there are limitations due to the lack of proximal CMAPs and the timing of the EMG study. Furthermore, despite the patient’s history of diabetes, there were no neuropathic symptoms (sensory or motor) related to diabetes. Therefore, considering the distal axonal sensory and motor changes caused by AMSAN.
After some improvement of the limb weakness following treatment with IVIG, the patient experienced aggravated symptoms including choking on water, slurred speech, weakness during chewing, reduced muscle strength, and urinary retention. The neurological examination on day 11 reported the patient as conscious, with dysarthria, bilateral eyelid closure weakness, a left eye fissure of 6 mm and a right eye fissure of 4 mm, a flattened left nasolabial fissure, tongue deviation towards the right side on attempted protrusion, grade 3 upper limb muscle strength, grade 1 lower limb muscle strength, negative patellar reflex (−), and negative Babinski sign (−). The above symptoms continued to aggravate. On January 19, 2022, a re-examination with cerebral MRI revealed that the right thalamus had T1 hypointensity and a more pronounced T2 hyperintensity than before. Moreover, hypointensity was detected on the susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI), while no hyperintensity was noted on the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) (–). After 16 days of hospitalization, the patient underwent a continuous plasma exchange (PE) treatment for a duration of 3 days. On February 3, 2022, the patient had grade 4 muscle strength in the upper limbs and grade 2 muscle strength in the lower limbs. Another re-examination with cerebral MRI revealed a loss of both T1 hypointensity and T2 hyperintensity in the right thalamus. Only the hypointense lesion on SWI was visible (–). Two weeks after the follow-up, the lower limb muscle strength of the patient improved to grade 4. The patient continued rehabilitation by OT/PT cotreatment sessions . One month after the follow-up, the patient demonstrated stable walking ability and overall improvement of her condition.