An 18-year-old male, without previous medical history or family history of heart disease, was referred to our department due to the incidental finding of heart murmur during routine check. He was totally asymptomatic. Physical examination revealed a grade II-III/VI continuous heart murmur over his left upper sternal border. Transthoracic echocardiography showed dilated ostia of left coronary artery (LCA) and right coronary artery (RCA) with diameter of 8.8 and 8.3 mm, respectively . Coronary arteries were found diffusely dilated and tortuous with extensive collateralization within ventricular septum and apex . Additionally, the left ventricle was slightly increased . Coronary CT angiography revealed dilated and tortuous RCA, about 10 mm in diameter at proximal segment and 15 mm in diameter at its widest part, arose from the main pulmonary artery . Laboratory tests were unremarkable and electrocardiogram showed no evidence of myocardial ischemia. The patient was finally diagnosed as ARCAPA.
The patient was scheduled for RCA ligation with coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG). Intraoperatively, coronary arteries were found dilated, tortuous and with thrill on palpitation. RCA arose from the main pulmonary artery and shared collateralization with left coronary system which was consistent with preoperative diagnosis . Because of the huge mismatch between the luminal caliber of RCA (10–15 mm) and internal mammary artery (2–3 mm), CABG was considered technically difficult. Simple RCA ligation was assessed whether it was suitable.
The proximal segment of RCA was then exposed. No obvious changes were observed neither on electrocardiogram or cardiac contractility after RCA was temporarily clamped. Cardiac arrest was achieved by the antegrade perfusion of cold cardioplegia via cannula at the aortic root. During perfusion, the whole course of RCA was fully filled and the heart was completely arrest. Due to the sufficient collateralization and satisfactory cardiac arrest, simple RCA ligation was considered acceptable. The proximal segment of RCA was cut off and both stumps were closed by continuous suture with 5–0 prolene. After de-clamped the aorta, the heart re-beat automatically without obvious ischemic changes on electrocardiogram or abnormal segmental wall motion on transesophageal echocardiography. A line diagram of the diagnosis and therapy is presented in Fig. . The patient had an uneventful recovery except for a transient increased serum troponin (1.782 ng/ml). The patient had been followed up for about 5 years. No evidence of myocardial ischemia was detected. A 5-year postoperative coronary CT angiography showed the left ventricle as well as whole coronary system decreased in size: the left ventricle size decreased from 52 to 31 mm , the ostium of LCA decreased from 9 to 6 mm, the proximal left anterior descending artery decreased from 10 to 6 mm . No abnormal vessel was detected arising from the pulmonary artery .