A 24-year-old male was brought to the emergency department (ED) immediately after suffering a stab injury in his left thigh which he alleged to be produced during a neighborhood altercation. A kitchen knife entered from the anterolateral aspect of the upper third of his left thigh, leaving a 3 cm × 0.7 cm entry wound which penetrates into the deep tissues; no exit wound was found. On admission, tachycardia (120 beats/min) and mild arterial hypotension (80/50 mmHg) were observed. On the injured limb, physical examination showed a painful and swollen tight. He was able to move the entire limb; however, he noted numbness of his leg. Below the knee, skin color was mildly pale and temperature was slightly diminished. A prolonged capillary refill time was observed in his foot. Common femoral artery pulse was normal, while diminished pulses were palpated in popliteal, tibial anterior and tibial posterior arteries. A point-of-care DUS showed a large hypoechoic slightly pulsating hematoma in the subfascial compartment , which filled with a turbulent flow on color Doppler , consistent with a pseudoaneurysm. On spectral Doppler, common femoral artery and superficial femoral artery proximal to the hematoma showed a high velocity low-resistance profile , while popliteal, tibial posterior and tibial anterior arteries showed low-velocity biphasic waveforms , consistent with a proximal blood leak and reduced distal blood supply. Common femoral and femoral veins were patent and compressible.
Given that arterial injury sounded unequivocal based on clinical examination and DUS findings, the patient was immediately transferred to the operating room for surgical exploration. A 1-cm longitudinal laceration was found in the anterior aspect of the superficial femoral artery ; deep veins were not compromised. The injured vessel was successfully repaired and then the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for postoperative care. On the next day, skin color and temperature of the affected limb were normal, the patient indicated disappearance of his leg numbness, and distal pulses were full. DUS showed normal velocity triphasic waveforms in the proximal and distal arteries . Patient follow-up was uneventfully and he was discharged from the hospital on day 5.