We report the case of an 11-day-old boy (height, 49 cm; weight, 3.65 kg) with a prenatal diagnosis of HLHS. He was born via spontaneous vaginal delivery (gestational age, 40 weeks; birth weight, 4.00 kg; Apgar scores, 8/8 [1 min/5 min]) and diagnosed with HLHS with mitral atresia and aortic stenosis without abnormalities involving organs other than the heart.
In the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU), he received continuous alprostadil and dobutamine infusion to maintain systemic blood flow using a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) secured in the right upper limb. Balloon atrial septostomy was not performed because there were no signs of a restrictive patent foramen ovale. On day 1, bilateral pulmonary artery banding (PAB) was performed. HFNC therapy (Optiflow Junior 2TM, prong size M, Fisher and Paykel Healthcare, Auckland, New Zealand) was applied following extubation on day 3 and nitrogen (N2) therapy on day 6 owing to persistent pulmonary overcirculation symptoms (tachypnea and low arterial blood pressure) despite bilateral PAB.
Cardiac catheterization was scheduled for day 11 of life, for preoperative evaluation for a Norwood procedure. Before this procedure, he received dobutamine 6.7 μg/kg/min, milrinone 0.73 μg/kg/min, alprostadil 5 ng/kg/min, and dexmedetomidine 1.25 μg/kg/h through the PICC. Vital signs were as follows: transcutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2), 80–85% (HFNC air 10 L/min + N2 1 L/min, FIO2: 0.19; no difference between the upper and lower limbs); respiratory rate, 80–100 breaths/min; heart rate, 145 beats/min (sinus rhythm); and blood pressure, 77/40 mmHg. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a pH of 7.429, PaCO2 of 43.9 mmHg, base excess of 4.0, and PaO2 of 39.7 mmHg. The cardiothoracic ratio on chest radiography was 55%, and tricuspid regurgitation was trivial on echocardiography.
Considering the risk of cardiovascular collapse (e.g., hypotension due to pulmonary overcirculation) associated with general anesthesia and positive pressure ventilation and potential complications due to prolonged mechanical ventilation, after consultation with the surgeon, we decided that HFNC would have significant advantages from scientific and clinical perspectives and selected this modality for our patient.
For the management of anesthesia without intubation using HFNC, the following two strategies were performed to secure stable spontaneous ventilation: (1) the patient’s head was extended, with a shoulder roll used to maintain the upper airway and (2) the patient underwent capnography through a sampling line connected to an 8-Fr suction tube tip inserted in the pharynx to detect any airway obstruction or respiratory depression during the procedure.
Midazolam (total 0.27 mg/kg) and fentanyl (total 4.1 μg/kg) were titrated to safely increase the sedation level while considering the respiratory rate, chest wall movement, and SpO2 level. Following sufficient sedation and stable spontaneous ventilation (respiratory rate 30–40 breaths/min), the surgeon anesthetized the insertion site with 1% lidocaine. A 5-Fr sheath was placed in the right femoral vein, followed by an examination. The arterial blood gas analysis at treatment initiation revealed a pH of 7.378, PaCO2 of 44.9 mmHg (EtCO2, 42 mmHg), base excess of 0.9, and PaO2 of 48.3 mmHg. Cardiac catheter examination showed the following: Qp/Qs, 1.72; Rp, 2.39 Wood units・m2; and Rp/Rs, 0.14. No body movement was observed during the examination. Cardiac catheterization was completed without upper airway obstruction, apnea, or substantial oxygen desaturation . Approximately 5 h after the examination, the respiratory rate returned to 80–100 breaths/min. Respiratory support with HFNC therapy was continued in PICU after the catheter examination until the day of the Norwood procedure.