A 19-year-old male patient with no significant medical or surgical history presented to the emergency department complaining of a 1-h history of sudden onset severe stabbing epigastric pain that then became generalized, radiated to both shoulders and back, associated with nausea but no vomiting, increased upon movement and while in the supine position but that was not related to food. The patient said they had no history of preceding trauma, vomiting episodes, hematemesis, melena, or changes in bowel habits. He also outlined that he had not had similar previous episodes, postprandial pain, alcohol consumption, and chronic analgesia ingestion. He worked as a construction worker and had no encounters with animals or sick contacts.
Upon examination, he was mildly hypotensive with a blood pressure of 106/72 and tachycardic. Capillary refilling time was 2 s; he was conscious and alert, lying in bed motionless in pain. He was pale and sweaty. Abdominal examination revealed voluntary guarding with generalized tenderness maximum on the epigastric area, questionable costovertebral angle tenderness, and hypoactive bowel sounds, and rectal examination revealed no blood or black tarry stools. Chest and heart examination revealed no abnormalities.
Initial laboratory tests showed a hemoglobin level of 14 g/dL, a white blood cell count of 8 WBCs per microliter (8 × 109/L), a platelet count of 254 platelets per microliter, normal liver enzymes, normal kidney and liver function tests, and normal lipase and amylase levels. Abdomen x-ray showed no bowel dilatation or air-fluid levels. Chest x-ray showed no subdiaphragmatic free air. Abdomen ultrasound showed normal internal organs of the abdomen except for moderate amounts of free fluid and no signs of cholecystitis, biliary dilatation, hydronephrosis, or splenic abnormalities. He underwent contrast-enhanced abdomen and pelvic computed tomography that showed moderate amounts of free fluid around the spleen, in the pelvis, between the stomach and spleen, and in Morison's pouch (, ); fluid density was >40 IU, suggestive of blood. No definite bleeding source was identified, so the patient was urgently transferred to the operating room for exploratory laparoscopy as a case of acute abdomen and hemoperitoneum; embolization was not attempted due to ongoing hemorrhage with peritoneal signs on examination and due to lack of definitive diagnosis. The exploration began laparoscopically, but the perisplenic, perihepatic, and pelvic areas were filled with bloodf and the source could not be identified, so it was converted to laparotomy through a midline incision where massive hemorrhage was encountered; 2 L of fresh blood was hardly suctioned, and multiple pads were required to control bleeding. The gastrocolic ligament was dissected widely, and a huge amount of coagulated blood was evacuated, allowing the identification of a bleeding arterial source that was clamped just behind the distal pancreas near the splenic hilum that was diagnosed to be an actively bleeding ruptured hilar splenic artery aneurysm measuring almost 2.5 cm. At the pancreatic upper border, the splenic artery was dissected and fixed with nonabsorbable sutures for the proximal control of the hemorrhage, effectively decreasing its volume. Hemorrhage was completely controlled via splenectomy en bloc. Running of the bowel and other internal organ examination was also done, and the result was normal with no other abnormalities. Hemostasis was secured, and the patient received two packed red blood cell units intra-operatively. Then, he was transferred to the intensive care unit for close monitoring with no immediate or early complications.
Postoperatively and after resuscitation, hemoglobin decreased to 11 g/dL, but white blood cell count, platelet count, lactic acid, and C-reactive protein were normal. The patient recovered well in 4 days with no events and was discharged home in excellent condition.
At 2-week follow-up after discharge, the patient reported no complaints, was vitally stable with normal physical examination, had a hemoglobin level of 12.7 g/dL, and had taken recommended postsplenectomy vaccinations including pneumococcal, meningococcal, and Haemophilus influenzae vaccines and annual vaccination as scheduled.
Pathologic examination of the resected specimen showed a 2.5-cm true splenic artery aneurysm with normal histology, excluding secondary pathological causes of the aneurysm.