A 30-year-old Chinese male patient presented with acute blurred vision in both eyes that had persisted for 2 months. The patient’s condition was painless with no photophobia, headache, or other irritating ocular symptoms. The patient had poor vision at birth; however, he was capable of walking and managing everyday life independently. He had minimal visual acuity, and his exact visual acuity before the onset of UES was unknown as the patient had no reliable record of his vision despite knowledge that his eyes were abnormal. The patient attended primary school for only 3 years before his vision loss prevented him from continuing schooling. He estimated that his best lifelong VA was 0.05–0.1, and this value was assumed to represent his normal vision before the occurrence of UES. The patient was admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of retinal detachment in both eyes, and his treatment was provided at minimal cost due to the new antipoverty funding movement in China. There were no other obvious medical conditions or finding relevant to the patient’s ocular condition. There was no family history of any similar eye disease.
Examination of the right eye (OD) revealed a VA of FC/20 cm with a best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 0.03 (+16.00DS/+1.25DCX75 = 0.03); the VA of the left eye was FC/20 cm and was not improved by correction. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 15 mmHg (OD) and 17 mmHg (OS). A-scan revealed an OD eye axial length of 15.88 mm and an OS eye axial length of 16.21 mm. No conjunctival hyperemia was observed, but the deep conjunctival vessels were engorged and distorted, and the cornea was transparent . The patient was negative for keratic precipitates and flares, and no cells were observed in the anterior chamber (AC). The depth of the central anterior chamber was 2.9–3.0 mm in both eyes as measured by A-scan. The pupils were round and 3 mm in diameter. Direct and indirect pupil reactions existed but were remarkably reduced; lenses were clear in both eyes. In the right eye, the vitreous cavity was clear, there was no visible inflammation, and the optic disc was slightly dysplastic and crowded with normal color. The ratio of cup/disc is 0.3 and artery/vein is 2/3, and the foveal reflection disappeared with a mild fold appearance at the macula. Partial peripheral choroidal detachment was present; the middle and far peripheral retina was detached . The left fundus was not visible because of the total retinal detachment located just behind the lens that could be clearly observed directly using a slit lamp .
There was also no obvious sign of uveitis or scleritis in either eye. The intraocular pressure was normal even with severe detachment of the retina and choroid. Considering the patient’s extremely short eye axial length and after excluding the other possible conditions, the diagnosis of UES associated with congenital nanophthalmos was established.
Taking into consideration that nanophthalmos was present in both eyes and that the patient had had very poor vision since childhood, an aggressive surgical intervention was not considered to be capable of significantly improving visual acuity. Additionally, the patient was unwilling to risk further vision loss as, with his minimum VA, he was able to lead a relatively independent life. We decided intravitreal injection of the anti-VEGF agent ranibizumab 0.5 ml in both eyes instead of performing multisclerectomy, which is a more widely applied technique but represented a higher risk of complications in this case. Other auxiliary medicines administered for UES include vitamin tablets and steroid eye drops.