A 68-year-old, Japanese, female, ex-smoker (approximately 48 pack-years) was admitted to the emergency ward because of worsening breathlessness and general fatigue for 1 week.
Five months before this admission, she had been diagnosed with non-resectable advanced non-small cell lung cancer presenting as a 4 cm-diameter right hilar mass with involvement of mediastinal lymph nodes and liver metastasis. Because the tumor was an adenocarcinoma with no PD-L1 expression or targetable gene alteration, she had received four cycles of immuno-chemotherapy (pembrolizumab, carboplatin, and pemetrexed) followed by three cycles of maintenance therapy with pembrolizumab and pemetrexed. She had an uneventful treatment course and a partial response was documented, the primary lesion having shrunk to less than 2 cm in diameter at the last visit . As instructed, she had not smoked since the diagnosis.
There was no evidence of tumor progression or any other lung lesions on chest computed tomography (CT) performed in the emergency unit. Laboratory testing showed normal liver and renal function, electrolyte balance, and blood cell counts, but a high alkaline phosphatase concentration (1,515 IU/L). Two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated right atrial and ventricular dilatation, tricuspid regurgitation, and a high trans-tricuspid pressure gradient of 65 mmHg. Because right heart strain and pulmonary hypertension were strongly suspected, a repeat chest CT was performed with an iodine-based contrast medium; however, this showed no evidence of embolism within the pulmonary arteries. We assumed that many micro clots in small pulmonary arteries could not be found in the CT scan because of their small size and started anticoagulation therapy including unfractionated heparin. Despite her percutaneous oxygen saturation having been 96% on room air at the time of admission, it worsened so rapidly that she required 8 L/min of oxygen within 4 h. She developed progressive respiratory failure that was unresponsive to optimal cardio-pulmonary supportive therapy and died 20 h after admission.
Postmortem pathological examination revealed tumorous clusters in pre-capillary lung vessels , evidence of severe right heart strain, including a dilated right atrium and ventricle, severely increased central blood volume (725 mL), and congestion of the liver, resulting in a definitive diagnosis of PTTM. The autopsy also revealed multiple vertebral bone metastases but no tumor re-growth in the primary lesion in the right hilum or mediastinal lymph nodes ; only scattered tumor cells being identified. The liver metastases had resolved. No tumors were found in any other location.