A 67-year-old man was brought to emergency room with vertigo and ataxia 8 hours prior to admission. His head CT showed hypodencity in the left side of the medulla. His old chart showed that the basilar artery had 90 percent stenosis in a 4-vessel angiography.
Following this, he has been scheduled for stent placement but it had been canceled because of the inability to intubate the patient after general anesthesia. He was subsequently referred to an optional ENT visit, which didn’t show any problem in indirect laryngoscopy, and a fibroptic evaluation of the lower airway was recommended. The following day, he developed dense right sided hemiplegia and respiratory distress and it was decided to intubate the patient; however, it was not possible to pass the 8.0 mm endotracheal tube (ETT) beyond the vocal cords. A smaller diameter tube (inner diameter, 6.5 mm) was placed in the larynx; however, the ETT was no able to advance but for a few centimeters from the vocal cords and it was fixed at 18 cm from the lips. The patient was transferred to an intensive care unit while he was conscious with right-sided weakness and had a massive air leak around the ETT during mechanical ventilation.
Direct laryngoscopy was performed and the ETT was changed to a larger one; however, it was not possible to advance the ETT deeper into the trachea. Fibroptic bronchoscopy (FOB) showed nodular mucosal hypertrophy, all over the trachea extending to the carina and main bronchi, which spared the membranous part; therefore, TPO was diagnosed bronchos- copically as the reason for difficult intubation .
An Armored ETT (size 8) was passed into the trachea. Spiral chest CT showed that the trachea had very irregular borders (,).
In the following days he had a drop in his consciousness and repeat head CT showed more hypodencity in the pons and new hypodencities in the cerebellum. He was scheduled for surgical tracheostomy. During the open surgical tracheostomy, which was done by a thoracic surgeon, the trachea was stony hard and a tissue was sent for pathology from the tracheal wall, which showed fibrofatty tissue with bone formation .
Another issue was repeated perforation of the tracheostomy tube cuff, which occured even after changing the tube 3 times during the tracheostomy procedure. There was a massive air leak around the tracheostomy tube after transferring the patient to ICU. Because of the inability to ventilate the patient, a laryngeal mask airway (LMA) was placed and the distal end and was clamped as a way to prevent massive air leak. Then the tracheostomy tube was removed and another one was passed into the trachea and this time the ETT cuff showed no perforation.