A 9-year-old boy who suffered from recurrent aseptic pyogenic arthritis triggered by minor trauma or few obvious predisposing causes for more than 3 years.
At the age of six, the patient developed pain in his right knee joint after a fall, which lasted for 5 d without remission. He was admitted to our hospital for further treatment. His right knee was markedly swollen with movement limitation. A large number of neutrophils and red blood cells were found through joint cavity paracentesis. However, repeated bacterial cultures of synovial fluid were negative. Inflammatory indices, such as serum C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and procalcitonin, increased significantly. Immune-related examinations, such as antistreptolysin O, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, human leukocyte antigen-B27, and anticardiolipin antibodies, were normal. The incision and drainage of the abscess was performed. With a 20-d treatment of anti-infection and joint cavity irrigation after the surgery, the symptoms were relieved. However, the arthritis flared up again about 6 mo later. Over the next 2 years, pyogenic arthritis occurred every 3-5 mo, affecting his knees, elbows, and ankle joints.
The patient had a nonspecific previous medical history.
Similar symptoms were present in his younger brother but not his parents. As his father recalled, his grandfather might also have similar symptoms .
On physical examination, body temperature was 36.2 °C; pulse rate was 112 beats per min; respiration rate was 22 breaths per min; and blood pressure was 107/75 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa). Vital signs were stable. The right knee joint was swollen and deformed, and two 10 cm incision scars were visible. The skin temperature of the right side was higher than that of the left, with marked tenderness and without obvious fluctuation feeling. The knee movement was limited; the flexion was limited to 40°, and the intorsion and extorsion were slightly limited. The floating patellar test was negative.
Routine test results for complete blood count, liver and kidney function, and electrolytes were normal. Serum C-reactive protein, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and procalcitonin were increased significantly. Serum interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, or tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α levels were elevated. Serum inflammatory factors of the recent examination are shown in Table .
Whole-exome sequencing of the proband was performed and the mutations were further analyzed in DNA samples from his relatives (Joy Orient Translational Medicine Research Center Co., Ltd. Beijing, China). This revealed that heterozygosity for a glutamic acid-to-glutamine substitution at amino acid position 748 (p.Glu250Gln or E250Q) encoded by exon 11 of the PSTPIP1 gene . Both brothers and their father showed a missense mutation of the PSTPIP1 gene, which was autosomal-dominant, but their father did not show clinical symptoms.