The patient is a 27-year-old White male with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), and chromosome 13q12 deletion who initially presented to the emergency department with his parents for worsening functional status. He is an only child with no family history of autism, born at full term without complications.
Prior to hospitalization, he was on escitalopram 20 mg, lamotrigine 200 mg, and ziprasidone 40 mg, which his parents noted became ineffective over the previous 5 years. Regarding prior diagnoses, the patient was diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder in early childhood after neuropsychiatric testing and held this diagnosis when he was first evaluated by our psychiatrists in his 20s. Obsessive–compulsive disorder was also diagnosed prior to hospitalization based on his rigid routine and only eating prepacked foods. The diagnosis of schizophrenia was made in the months prior to hospitalization as the patient developed paranoia and isolation over the previous 6 years, with a significant decline in executive, social, and occupational function over the last year. In high school, he was noted to be social and cheerful, and he gradually became more isolated and withdrawn, stopped using technological devices such as a TV or phone, and had a 70 lb weight loss over 1 year as a result of eating only small portions of prepackaged food from a particular store and skipping dinner. He had not showered or changed clothes in several months. When he arrived at the psychiatric unit, he displayed paranoia, poverty of speech, perseveration, poor hygiene, and regimented routine.
While the patient exhibited a decline in oral intake with eating selective meals, we doubt medication nonadherence during the period preceding his hospitalization for several reasons. The patient is conserved by his parents who facilitate his appointments with his psychiatrist and keep track of his medication refills, which ran out at the expected time. The patient also followed a strict regimen with medication administration at specific times of the day. Additionally on intake labs, the lamotrigine level was within therapeutic range at 6.3 mcg/mL, with a negative urine drug screen.
While on the ward, he was hypervigilant, most notably when engaging in conversation, as he would look over his shoulder when doors opened or others walked by him. He displayed poverty of thought and often responded with “I don’t know” or “I’m alright” in an echolalic manner. Focus was placed on changing the medications for psychosis management given the patient’s worsening functional status. Ziprasidone was ineffective prior to admission, likely as a result of poor oral intake, and was transitioned to risperidone. Additionally, risperidone’s potential for long-acting injectable via paliperidone would have lowered his oral medication burden. Risperidone was trialed for 3 weeks, titrated to 4 mg twice a day (BID), and also deemed to be ineffective as the patient’s paranoia and functional status remained unchanged. As risperidone was decreased, olanzapine was started for psychosis; it was titrated to 20 mg BID. During this time, old records, including a CYP450 genotyping panel, were brought in by the family, and showed that the patient was an ultrarapid metabolizer of CYP1A2, the primary metabolic pathway for olanzapine, so aripiprazole was cross-titrated after 2 weeks of olanzapine trial. In total, he was on olanzapine for 4 weeks without significant clinical improvement. Aripiprazole was increased to 20 mg daily. Mild improvement in paranoia was noted on aripiprazole, as evidenced by his willingness to allow the treatment team to assess a chronic leg wound that he had previously kept hidden, although his mental status examination was otherwise unchanged. His home medication of escitalopram was continued and ultimately increased for treatment of OCD. Lamotrigine was also continued for mood stabilization throughout his hospital course.
With his known history of a chromosomal deletion, a microarray was performed. Results were significant for a pathogenic 9.5 Mb 13q13.2q14.11 deletion, which included the Nbea gene. Despite having tried multiple antipsychotics and increasing escitalopram over the course of his hospitalization, he continued to exhibit features of OCD and avoidance of certain textures (for example, water from shower, soft foods and vegetables), and continued to display heightened sensitivity and paranoia to his surroundings (for example, looking over shoulder to passersby or when doors open). These fear and paranoia symptoms seemed to be refractory despite trials of adequate doses of multiple antipsychotics for the first 2 months of his hospitalization, leading the treatment team to consider if the gene deletion was a possible explanation. Based on the published data on the effects of the Nbea deletion as outlined previously, in combination with the proposed mechanism of action of prazosin, the alpha-1 antagonist was started at a low dose, with noticeable improvement in paranoia within 2 days of initiation. The marked improvement in a short period provided a possible link to the exaggerated fear response seen in Nbea haploinsufficiency models. He became more conversational, disclosing more details about his day and mood, and engaged in more regular hygiene (showering, shaving, changing clothes). He was also noted to begin engaging with other peers on the ward, initiating conversations with others in a manner he had not previously displayed.
Prazosin was chosen as a potential treatment regimen due to its well-studied effects on alpha-1 adrenergic antagonism. While this patient did not have a triggering stressful event to lead to a diagnosis of posttraumatic stress disorder, his rare gene deletion may have been involved in diminished fear response extinction, creating a PTSD-like effect. A dose of 1 mg was initiated with no adverse effects including orthostatic hypotension, and the final dose of 2 mg was started 3 days later. Prazosin was well tolerated and continues to be a part of the patient’s regular medication regimen.
After a 7-month inpatient hospitalization, he was discharged to live in an apartment with a 24/7 caregiver. The lengthy hospitalization was due to discharge planning as his conservators were hesitant to discharge to independent living, but he did not qualify for an acute level of care and his medication regimen remained stable. At the time of this case report, the patient has been seen in the outpatient setting twice, and noted to be stable in his mental health with escitalopram 40 mg, lamotrigine 200 mg, and transitioned to aripiprazole long-acting injectable 400 mg monthly. He self-adjusted prazosin to 4 mg nightly and was evaluated in the interim without adverse effects, so he is continued at 4 mg as the current dose. The patient has been on prazosin nightly for 7 months with near-resolution of paranoid behavior. Now he initiates and engages in conversations, dances with others, showers and changes clothes without prompting, is less suspicious of his surroundings, and eats a wider variety of foods, resulting in appropriate weight gain from 65 kg to 72 kg since prazosin initiation. His affect has also improved from flat to reactive.