A 75-year-old male was hospitalized for acute heart failure symptoms [New York Heart Association (NYHA) Class IV]. Two years ago, he was diagnosed with aortic regurgitation. Comorbidities were hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, renal insufficiency, and cerebral infarction. His cardiovascular medications included spironolactone 20 daily, furosemide 20 mg daily, and sacubitril/valsartan 100 mg daily. Heart rate was 71 beats/min, blood pressure was 116/49 mmHg, and respiratory rate was 16 breaths/min. Physical examination revealed a harsh holodiastolic murmur at aortic valve area, scattered rales in the lungs, and moderate peripheral oedema. The patient was quickly transferred to the coronary care unit and received urgent treatment: intermittent ventilation and intravenous bolus of cedi-lanid (0.2 mg) for 6 days and furosemide (20 mg) for 14 days.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated severe aortic regurgitation ( and , ), severe mitral regurgitation, and a dilatational atrioventricular structure, with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 30%. The left ventricular diameter in diastole was 64 mm . The colour Doppler regurgitation jet of the aortic valve showed a width of 78%; additionally, the Doppler vena contracta was 1.1 mm wide. The laboratory chemistry revealed NT pro-BNP of pg/mL（normal ＜125 pg/mL）. Computed tomography angiography (CTA, ) showed dilation of the aortic annulus (perimeter 83.8 mm, average diameter 26.8 mm) and lack of calcium. The left ventricular outflow tract (distal to the annulus, 4 mm) perimeter and average diameter were 92.5 and 29.2 mm, respectively. The sinotubular junction height and average diameter were 29.5 and 37.8 mm, respectively. Sinus of the Valsalva dimensions (35.4 mm×37.7 mm×40.9 mm) and coronary ostia (left 13.4 mm, right 20.6 mm) suggested the low risk of coronary obstruction.
The Society of Thoracic Surgeons (STS) score was 11.3%. Poor physical conditions resulted in the patient being ineligible for SAVR and transapical TAVR, and the heart team decided to perform transfemoral TAVR. Based on the CT measurements, a 32 mm retrievable VenusA-Plus valve (Venus Medtech, Hangzhou, China; ) was chosen. The procedure was performed under general anaesthesia via femoral access. A 20 Fr sheath was placed into the right femoral artery as the main access, and a 7 Fr sheath was placed into the left femoral artery as the auxiliary access. The pigtail catheter passed through the auxiliary access into the non-coronary cusp. After delivery through main access to the annular plane , the valve was deployed under rapid pacing (180 beats/min) ( and , ). However, the entire valve jumped up to the ascending aorta ( and , ). The patient was ineligible for removal of the dislodgement of the valve via surgery. Therefore, a valve-in-valve (VIV) strategy was performed for entrapment of the dislocation valve. A steerable ablation catheter (APT Medical Inc., Shenzhen, China) was delivered to the ascending aorta and shaped into an L-shape. The head of the ablation catheter crossed the mesh of the valve. Subsequently, the dislocated valve was delicately pushed towards the sinus of Valsalva and fixed firmly with the help of the ablation catheter ( and , ). The upper crown of the second 32 mm VenusA-Plus was anchored at the narrowest part of the first valve ( and , ). Angiography ( and , ) and TTE ( and , ) at the end of the procedure showed a well-functioning prosthesis with trivial perivalvular leakage (PVL). No new conduction block was observed in the post-procedural electrocardiogram. The patient was discharged in a stable condition on postoperative Day 12. At the 6-month follow-up, cardiac function was improved to NYHA Class I, and echocardiography confirmed trivial paravalvular leakage without valve migration. The LVEF further improved from 30 to 48%, and mitral regurgitation was improved from severe to mild ( and , ).