The patient, female, 24 years old, self-reported that she had repeated vomiting without obvious inducement 5 d ago.
The vomit was food, occasionally bloodshot, accompanied by abdominal pain, and alleviated after eating, no acid reflux, no belching. Gastroscopy in the outside hospital indicated that the Gastric occupying lesions. Laboratory examination: Blood and biochemical test index are close to normal, Tumor indicators and coagulation function are negative; Helicobacter pylori staining was positive.
During the course of the disease, there was no fever, no chills, no diarrhea, no hematemesis, no cough or sputum and good spirits, good diet and sleep, normal stools, and no significant weight loss.
No history of cancer in individuals and families.
The skin and sclera were not yellowish, the liver and spleen were not touched under the ribs, the abdomen was soft, no tenderness, no rebound pain, and mobile dullness was negative.
The blood analysis revealed that the average hemoglobin was a mild decreased, the test result was 26.7 pg (normal range 27-34 pg), and the reticulocytes were slightly decreased, the test result was 0.023 × 1012/L (normal range 0.024 × 1012/L-0.084 × 1012/L) Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin times were normal. The blood biochemistries, as well as urine analysis were normal. Electrocardiogram, chest X-ray and arterial blood gas were also normal.
Plain computed tomography(CT) scan and contrast enhancement CT scan examination showed that the gastric body, stomach fundus, and gastric antrum were diffusely and uniformly thickened, showing gyrus-like changes, focusing on the greater curvature side. After enhancement, it was significantly enhanced. The plain scan, arterial phase and venous phase CT values were about 50 HU, 129 HU, and 113 HU, respectively. The serosal surface of the gastric wall showed smoothness and the density of perigastric fat was clear . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the gastric body, fundus and gastric antrum were diffusely and uniformly thickened, showing slightly longer T1 and T2 signal shadows. DWI showed high signal. The measured ADC value ranged from 1.387 × 10-3 mm2/s-1.467 × 10-3 mm2/s. The mucosa showed smoothness .
Gastroscopy and pathological: The cardia extends to the stomach, fundus and antrum, with irregular mucosal bulges, medium texture, poor peristalsis, and narrow gastric cavity. The pylorus is round and can be opened and closed . The diagnosis suggests that the Gastric occupying lesions, possibly gastric cancer. The pathological results showed: Chronic inflammation of the gastric mucosa, hyperplasia and lengthening of the gastric pits, and a small number of glands with mild atypical hyperplasia .
Gastric lymphoma: It is a tumor originating from the lamina propria and submucosal lymphoid tissues of the gastric mucosa. This case is characterized by a small number of CD45-positive lymphocytes scattered among the hyperplastic glands , while the lymphoma is characterized by uniform round tumor cells diffusely distributed under the pathological microscope, so this case does not match.
Gastric cancer: It is a malignant tumor that originates from the gastric mucosa, the structural and cellular atypia of the glands are very obvious, accompanied by obvious invasive growth, so this case does not meet. Figure is an immunohistochemical picture of CK, showing that the hyperplastic glands are arranged regularly.
Gastric polyp: It is a benign tumor derived from gastric epithelium or gastric interstitium. The characteristics of lesion distribution and enhancement characteristics are not consistent with this disease.
Stomach stromal tumor: In gastric stromal tumors, proliferating spindle cells can be seen arranged in bundles and weaves. In this case, only a few proliferating spindle cells are seen between the hyperplastic glands, which is not consistent with this case. The immunohistochemical marker DOG1 was negative , which ruled out the possibility of gastric stromal tumor.
Gastric mucosal prolapse: It refers to the abnormally loose gastric mucosa passing through the pylorus or cardia, protruding into the duodenal ampulla or protruding into the esophagus, which can be distinguished by observation of different positions of upper gastrointestinal angiography.