An 11-month-old boy presented with the acute onset of progressive bilateral upper extremity weakness. The previous evening, he had fallen backward, but had not sustained a loss of consciousness or shown an focal neurological deficit. However, by the next morning, he showed diminished hand movement and was unable to grasp toys. By the time he was seen in the emergency department, he was unable to raise his arms above his shoulders. On examination, the cranial nerves were normal, but both upper extremities were flaccid, and he had absent upper extremity reflexes. Notably, he retained normal motion and reflexes in both lower extremities. Laboratory studies and infectious markers were negative, for example, white blood cell of seven and ESR of eight.
The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed that the ventricles were of normal size without hydrocephalus [-]. The brain and cervical MR studies, however, showed crowding of the craniocervical/cervicomedullary junction with cerebellar tonsillar descent of 7 mm below McRae’s line [ and ]. Phase-contrast cerebrospinal fluid flow studies revealed significantly reduced flow through the cerebral aqueduct . In addition, there was swelling of the cervical cord (on T1 and T2 images) from C2 to C6 consistent with cord edema (e.g., central cord injury) without bony or soft tissue trauma [ and ].
Within 6 h of admission, after having received given 6 mg of dexamethasone, and using intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring (IONM: somatosensory evoked potentials and motor evoked potentials monitoring), the patient underwent a partial C1/2 laminectomy with suboccipital craniectomy extending to/through the foramen magnum. At surgery, there were thick fibrous bands of connective tissue that had to be dissected/excised until the superior aspect of C1 was visualized. Next, a C1 laminectomy was completed and decompression was taken laterally to the lateral masses; no duraplasty was performed. Intraoperatively, the motor evoked potentials partially recovered in both the upper and lower extremities.
Postoperatively, the patient was extubated and was taken back to intensive care unit, moving all four extremities. He was treated with 3 mg of dexamethasone every 6 h for 3 days; this was tapered off over 5 days. On postoperative day 2, he was discharged home in a stable condition. Within 1 month, he had fully recovered. Further, the repeat MRI demonstrated total resolution of the cervical presyrinx, although the original CM-I remained stable without a change in tonsillar position . Six months postoperatively, the patient remained neurologically intact.