A 5-year-old girl was referred to our hospital, because a multiseptate gallbladder had been incidentally detected on abdominal ultrasonography when she presented for transient abdominal pain at the age of 4 years.
Her vital signs were normal, and physical examination revealed no abnormalities. Laboratory tests showed no elevation of the white blood cell count, and all serological findings, including liver function parameters and biliary enzymes, were within normal limits. The abdominal pain receded within a few days and was suspected to be due to constipation.
Ultrasonography showed hyperechoic septa throughout the lumen of the gallbladder, giving it a honeycomb appearance. The position of the gallbladder was normal, and there were no findings suggestive of a gallbladder stone or tumor formation; however, the wall was uneven. The atrophied gallbladder was 20 × 15 mm in size, and its size did not change during ultrasound follow-up; this suggested that the gallbladder had weak or no contractility .
Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography was performed to search for other biliary and hepatic diseases. This imaging examination revealed a PBM with a 1-cm common channel without dilatation of the intrahepatic or common bile duct .
Based on the imaging findings, the patient was diagnosed with a multiseptate gallbladder. In addition, the multiseptate gallbladder involved PBM without bile duct dilatation; therefore, cholecystectomy was recommended to prevent future cancer development in the gallbladder. We performed laparoscopic cholecystectomy when the patient was 5 years of age.
The gallbladder was 20 mm in length and 15 mm in diameter with no adhesions to surrounding tissue. The surface of the gallbladder was uneven and had the appearance of a bunch of grapes . The cystic duct was partially excised, and insertion of a 5-Fr feeding tube was attempted for intraoperative cholangiography; however, the tube was unable to be passed, and no intraoperative images could be obtained. No bile leakage was observed at the incision site.
The resected gallbladder was soft and multiple septa were observed in the lumen, which was divided into variously sized compartments, resulting in a honeycomb structure . A small amount of brownish bile had collected in the gallbladder, and its biochemical profile was as follows: total bilirubin, 17.9 mg/dL; direct bilirubin, 16.9 mg/dL; and amylase, 3.0 IU/L. These findings indicated that the gallbladder had formed a microchannel with the cystic duct and that there was no reflux of pancreatic juice into the gallbladder.
Microscopically, the septa were covered with normal mucosal epithelium, and the intrinsic muscular layer of the gallbladder wall continued to the septa. There were no inflammatory changes or atypical cells in the epithelium .
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the third postoperative day. The patient thereafter developed no onset of abdominal pain associated with cholangitis, pancreatitis, or biliary dilatation due to PBM.