A 19-year-old male with no past medical history presented to the emergency department (ED) with the complaint of six days of sore throat, primarily on the right side. He also had fever and chills, otalgia, and odynophagia. On physical exam the patient’s voice had a muffled tone, he felt warm to touch, and there was swelling next to the right tonsil with uvular deviation. He was not having any difficulty breathing, and no stridor was noted. Computed tomography (CT) had been ordered, which returned showing a right peritonsillar abscess measuring 23 × 32 × 45 millimeters, enlargement of Waldeyer’s ring, and right-sided level II and III lymphadenopathy. A POCUS using the endocavitary probe with sterile cover demonstrated encapsulated, swirling echogenic debris approximately 3 centimeters (cm) deep. This was used to clearly mark the location for needle aspiration.
Needle aspiration was performed with removal of 10 milliliters (mL) of purulence, and the patient started to have significant bleeding, approximately 200 milliliters of both blood and saliva in the suction cannister within a few minutes. A solution of 4% cocaine was soaked onto long cotton tips, and pressure was held for 10 minutes. Repeat ultrasound was performed every two minutes, which showed a hyperechoic pocket, likely representing fresh hematoma, not expanding. Two physicians were in the room, with one physician continuing to hold pressure, although moving slightly laterally at each two-minute interval to allow space for the second physician to perform a repeat ultrasound. Each repeat ultrasound demonstrated stability of the hematoma, and at 10 minutes the hematoma was considered controlled. Clinically at this point, the patient had no further oropharyngeal bleeding.
Otolaryngology was consulted regarding the findings and recommended additional incision and drainage (I&D) given the initial size of the abscess found on CT. In addition, they recommended intravenous (IV) antibiotics, IV dexamethasone, soft diet, and admission. The I&D was performed in the operating room, and the patient was discharged the following day on clindamycin, orally and a medrol dose pack.