A 69 year old man was admitted to an external hospital due to jaundice. On the basis of cholestatic laboratory findings with elevated lipase and concomitant abdominal pain, an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was performed. Trapped air in CT scan indicated a small perforation after papillotomy. In addition the patient developed post ERCP pancreatitis with signs of peritonitis. He was therefore admitted to our intensive care unit. At admission the following laboratory parameters were out of range: ALT 1637 U/l (normal range < 45 U/l), AST 717 U/l (normal range < 40 U/l), and bilirubin 19 mg/dl (normal range < 1 mg/dl). During the following days, his prothrombin time dropped to 34%. He was subsequently shown to be positive for HCV-RNA (genotype 3a) and diagnosed with acute hepatitis C. Other coexisting infections, metabolic or toxic liver diseases were ruled. The patient recovered from the perforation and pancreatitis without surgical intervention.
Six weeks after onset of acute hepatitis, he was negative for serum HCV RNA . At this time, he was diagnosed with hyperthyreosis and started on propylthiouracil 50 mg three times daily. The patient developed leucocytopenia, followed by worsening of liver function, 10 weeks after the onset of acute hepatitis . His AST and ALT were normal, but his bilirubin had increased. Propylthiouracil treatment was stopped and his leukocyte count recovered at week 12. Twenty weeks after onset of acute disease, HCV-RNA was detected, at a concentration of 140,000 IU/ml, at which time his AST (388 U/ml) and ALT (371 U/ml) were increased markedly. Seven weeks later, he was again negative for HCV-RNA without antiviral treatment, and his liver enzymes had again normalized. 47 weeks after onset of acute hepatitis HCV-RNA was still negative indicating sustained spontaneous viral clearance.
Retrospective our diagnosis of acute hepatitis C was therefore supported by several data. Patients wife was diagnosed with acute hepatitis C two weeks later. During follow-up both had a documented spontaneous viral elimination. As a possible mode of infection both had made an ozone therapy at an alternative practitioner several weeks before onset of acute disease.