A 62-year-old Dutch male was diagnosed with a T3N2M0 diffuse type gastric cancer in 2017. His initial symptoms were weight loss and dysphagia. Imaging and gastroscopy showed an ulcer in the gastric antrum and positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET–CT) showed negative lymph nodes in the omentum. The histological diagnosis was diffuse type adenocarcinoma. The patient was treated in a curative setting with neoadjuvant chemotherapy (epirubicin, oxaliplatin, and capecitabine) followed by laparoscopic gastrectomy. Postsurgery staging showed ypT2N3M0R0. Adjuvant chemotherapy was not administered after very careful consideration because of persistent nausea and poor intake postsurgery including antiemetics, antidiarrheals, and additional nutrition. He did not have the right physical condition to endure adjuvant chemotherapy and its possible side effects. Therefore, the oncologist decided not to pursue adjuvant chemotherapy.
During follow-up at 11 months, a CT-thorax-abdomen was performed due to weight loss. The CT showed multiple mesenterial (maximum 11 mm), multiple retroperitoneal (maximum 14 mm), a few mediastinal (maximum 11 mm), and one left retroclavicular (11 mm) lymphadenopathy. No mass was identifiable as recurrence in the gastric region and no distant metastasis were seen. None of the masses were technically suitable for biopsy (to obtain histology). The recurrence of cancer could therefore not be established but was still suspected, and follow-up was planned after 2 months.
After 2 months, the patient slowly developed abdominal pain, edema of the legs, and dyspnea. CT scan showed pleural effusion but insufficient amount for thoracentesis.
A few months later the patient developed progressive weakening and edema of the left arm with shoulder pain. Table presents the laboratory findings. Another CT scan was performed showing bilateral pleural effusion , with more pronounced pleural effusion on the left side, thrombosis of the jugular vein up to the subclavian vein (see Fig. A, B), and diffuse osseal masses in the vertebral column and pelvis (see Fig. ). Pleuritic carcinomatosis was suspected, and therefore thoracentesis was planned before starting anticoagulation.
An uncomplicated thoracentesis was conducted on the left side, removing 20 mL milky fluid. Analysis of the fluid revealed elevated levels of triglycerides (3.3 mmol/L) without malignant cells . The milky/yellow aspect of the fluid, in combination with the increased level of triglycerides, confirmed the diagnosis of a chylothorax. Anticoagulation was started along with a MCT diet. A biopsy of one of the osseal masses was planned.
Histology of one osseal mass confirmed the recurrence of gastric cancer, showing a poorly differentiated carcinoma. After considering the possible benefits and side effects of palliative chemotherapy, and taking the clinical condition of the patient into consideration, chemotherapy was not considered feasible and the patient was referred back to the general practitioner with best supportive care. The patient passed away a few months later.