A 50-year-old woman was referred to our hospital due to a dark pigmented tumor over the superior optic disc area of the left eye noted from a recent physical exam. She denied any visual symptoms. The patients’ medical and family histories were unremarkable.
Initial examination revealed visual acuity in both eyes of 20/20, and the intraocular pressure was 17 mmHg in the right eye and 18 mmHg in the left. Slit-lamp examination revealed no abnormal findings in the anterior segment and lens in both eyes. Funduscopy showed a dome-shaped, pigmented lesion extending from the optic disc to the superior pole in the left eye. The macular area showed no edema but tortuous cilioretinal arteries . On ocular ultrasound, no detection of tumor lesions or invasion was noted for OS . FA showed blockage of fluorescence in the topography of the lesion without any dye leakage or vessel density throughout all phases . Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) showed hypofluorescence from the initial to the late phase within the lesion . Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT; Spectralis; Heidelberg. Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) imaging showed a dome-shaped mass with a brightly reflective anterior surface and posterior optical shadow . Blood vessel networks were observed in the tumor region on OCTA (PLEX Elite 9000; Carl Zeiss Meditec, Inc., Dublin, USA) and were most prominent in the deep retina layer . Intact blood vessel networks were observed in the macular region. For potential effects on the visual field, the Humphrey visual field (HVF) central 30–2 threshold test showed no specific visual field defect’s . The patient was diagnosed with optic disc melanocytoma OS and was followed up with no treatment. Three months later, her BCVA remained at 20/20, and her IOP was 19 mmHg.
To quantitatively examine ocular blood flow, LSFG measurements using LSFG-RetFlow (NIDEK Co., Ltd., Gamagori, Aichi, Japan) were obtained at the first visit and 3-month follow-up visit. The optic disc and macular region were measured five consecutive times in the affected eye and the fellow eye. The pupils were dilated with 1.0% tropicamide and 10% phenylephrine 30 minutes prior to the exam. During each testing period, eye movement and focus adjustment were monitored by an experienced technician using real-time captured images. To evaluate the blood flow velocity, the measurement circles were manually managed according to color fundus photographs and LSFG color maps. The MBR, a quantitative index of relative blood flow velocity, was calculated in each circle using LSFG Analyzer software (version 3.0.47; Softcare). During follow-up, each circle was automatically set by the software at the same site as the previous baseline measurement.
A previous study revealed a bilinear relationship between choroidal blood flow and ocular mean perfusion pressure (OPP) in healthy eyes . To evaluate the possible influence of such a physiological response on our results, we calculated the patient’s blood pressure and IOP to obtain OPP. As defined, the mean blood pressure was calculated by the following equation: BPm = BPd + 1 / 3(BPs - BPd). (BPm: mean blood pressure, BPs: systolic blood pressure, BPd: diastolic blood pressure). OPP was calculated using the following equation: OPP = 2 / 3 BPm - IOP.
In the affected eye, LSFG demonstrated markedly reduced blood flow in the tumor and adjacent parapapillary region at the initial and 3-month follow-up visits . A lower MBR was noted in the optic disc all area (MBRa) and tissue (MBRt) compared to the contralateral eye (MBRa: 23.0 ± 0.8 vs. 26.5 ± 1.9, OS vs. OD; MBRt: 12.7 ± 0.5 vs. 15.3 ± 1.1, OS vs. OD) at the initial visit . Three months later, slight decreases in MBRa (16.9 ± 0.4 vs. 21.7 ± 0.4, OS vs. OD) and MBRt (10.5 ± 0.2 vs. 14.0 ± 0.2, OS vs. OD) were detected. The rate of change in the MBRa was 26.5% in the left eye and 18.1% in the right eye, while the MBRt was 17.3% in the left eye and 8.5% in the right eye. A relatively low MBR (23.6 ± 0.3 vs. 27.2 ± 1.4; 18.8 ± 0.2 vs. 22.3 ± 1.1; 0 vs. 3 M, OS vs. OD) was also detected in the macular area of the affected eye and the tumor itself (MBR = 5.8 ± 0.2) .
The measured OPP was 57.8 and 61 mmHg in the affected eye at the initial visit and 3-month follow-up, respectively. In the contralateral eye, the measured OPP was 58.8 mmHg at the initial visit and 61 mmHg at 3 months. These measurements were comparable without obvious alterations in values.