A 35-year-old Korean man visited our hospital with a chief complaint of chest pain (Canadian Cardiovascular Society Grade II). The patient had Behçet's disease and aortic regurgitation, which is one of its cardiovascular manifestations. For Behçet's disease, the patient had received anti-inflammatory medications–sulfasalazine (1,000 mg/day); prednisolone (5 mg/day); and colchicine (0.6 mg/day) with high adherence. In the outpatient clinic, laboratory blood parameters including inflammatory markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate) were routinely checked, which is illustrated in . He underwent three cardiothoracic surgeries: aortic valve (AoV) replacement (in 2006) with a 21-mm St. Jude Medical AoV prosthesis (St. Jude Medical, Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA), aortic root replacement (in 2007) with an Edwards Prima stentless porcine prosthesis (Edwards Lifesciences Corp., Irvine, CA, USA) for AoV detachment, and the modified Bentall procedure (on 7 March 2017, ~4 years ago from the time of presentation) for prosthetic valve failure and moderate aortic regurgitation. During the last surgery, a Cabrol-type aortocoronary anastomosis was performed. Because his anginal symptoms gradually deteriorated, the patient visited our cardiovascular center for diagnosis and management.
His vital signs were as follows: temperature, 36.3°C; heart rate, 75 beats/min; respiratory rate, 20 breaths/min; and blood pressure, 110/80 mmHg. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with a right bundle branch block. However, the electrocardiogram also revealed ST-segment elevation in aVR and V1, with ST-segment depression in lead I, II, and aVL and precordial leads V4–6, suggesting LMCA occlusion . Chest radiography showed mild cardiomegaly and definite evidence of prior median sternotomy and valvular replacement . Laboratory tests showed elevated levels of troponin I (0.887 ng/mL; reference: 0–0.050 ng/mL) and pro-brain natriuretic peptide (1,549 pg/mL; reference: 0–300 pg/mL). The patient was administered warfarin, therefore, the prothrombin time–international normalized ratio was estimated to be 1.90. A two-dimensional transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a well-functioning AoV with akinetic movement at the anterior and anteroseptal parts of the myocardium, and a left ventricular ejection fraction of 36.3%. We reviewed the findings of previous coronary computed tomography angiography to obtain detailed anatomical information about the focal stenosis at the anastomotic site between the LMCA and the aortocoronary graft (, ). Since the patient was diagnosed with non-ST-segment elevation acute coronary syndrome, PCI was performed.
Coronary angiography (CAG) was performed through the right femoral artery during cardiac catheterization. Critical stenosis was observed at the anastomotic site between the LMCA and the conduit . Right-sided CAG showed no significant stenosis, with collateral flow toward the left coronary artery . After a 6F Judkins guiding catheter was engaged at the ostium of the left Cabrol-type composite graft, a 0.014-inch guidewire (Runthrough®, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) was crossed through the LMCA to the left anterior descending coronary artery. Pre-PCI IVUS was performed using a guidance system (Eagle Eye® Platinum RX Digital IVUS Catheter, Volcano Corporation, Rancho Cordova, CA, USA), and a focally kinked and narrowed lesion with a minimum lumen area of 2.9 mm2 was observed . In the VH-IVUS, fibrotic plaque was seen with mainly fibrous tissue but without a confluent necrotic core . Thereafter, PCI was performed using a drug-eluting stent (4.5 × 12 mm, SynergyTM, Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA) (; and ). Immediately after the stent deployment, IVUS demonstrated an under-expanded stent strut with a minimum stent area of 18.4 mm2 . Repeated CAG showed improved stenosis but under-expanded stent strut . For this reason, the lesion was post-dilated using a noncompliant balloon (5.5 × 8 mm, Raiden 3TM, Kaneka Corporation, Osaka, Japan) to mitigate stent under-expansion . A repeat IVUS revealed well-apposed and optimized deployment of the drug-eluting stent with full lesion coverage . The final CAG also showed optimal angiographic results .
After the PCI procedure, the patient received optimal medical therapy, including dual antiplatelet agents–aspirin (100 mg/day) and clopidogrel (75 mg/day), an oral anticoagulant–warfarin (1 mg/day), a high-intensity statin–rosuvastatin (20 mg/day), a beta-blocker–bisoprolol (2.5 mg/day), and an angiotensin II receptor blocker–valsartan (40 mg/day). The post-PCI coronary computed tomography angiography demonstrated a well-expanded and well-apposed stent strut at the anastomotic site . His anginal symptoms dramatically improved, and he was successfully discharged from our hospital.