A 51-year-old Caucasian woman complained of fatigue, epigastric discomfort, a left neck mass, and a 10-pound weight loss over the previous six months. Her physical examination revealed supraclavicular lymphadenopathy.
A cervical lymph biopsy revealed moderately well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, possibly of pancreatic origin. A metastatic workup including positron emission tomography (PET) scan, computed tomography (CT), bone scan, and breast and pelvic ultrasounds was done. Significant cervical, retrosternal and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy were seen. A 3.5 × 5-cm pancreatic head mass which blended into the porta hepatis was also noted. The mass encased the left gastric artery and involved the portal vein margins. Multiple liver lesions were also seen. Except for a fibroid uterus, her pelvic CT and ultrasound were unremarkable.
A percutaneous liver biopsy of our patient revealed a moderately well-differentiated adenocarcinoma consistent with pancreatic origin. Her CA-19-9 level was 171.5.
Our patient was then entered into a trial for advanced pancreatic adenocarcinoma using the tyrosine kinase inhibitor Dasatinib. Her response to the trial, however, was poor and a CT scan two months later showed no reduction in her tumor burden. She was removed from the Dasatinib trial and was started on Gemzar (gemcitabine) and Tarceva (erlotinib).
Over the next seven months, our patient developed a moderate response to chemotherapy. However, she developed abdominal fullness and shortness of breath. In just a four-month interval between scans, her CT revealed a new 19 × 18 × 9 cm pelvic mass, ascites, and a large right-sided pleural effusion. A CT-guided biopsy revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Metastatic malignant cells were also found in her pleural fluid.
Because our patient experienced significant discomfort due to the effects of her pelvic mass, a palliative resection was performed. She had a transient response to chemotherapy, but her disease continued to progress with worsening ascites and pleural effusion.
Pathology revealed that her pelvic mass measured 19.0 × 18.0 × 9.0 cm. Sectioning revealed a multi-loculated cystic mass involving her entire ovary . No normal ovarian tissue was identified on gross examination. On histology the tumor was found to consist of a complex formation of dilated cystic glands filled with mucin. The mucinous cysts were lined by a layer of columnar mucinous cells with pale to clear cytoplasm and a small, bland, basally situated oval nuclei. This finding was consistent with a borderline mucinous tumor. There were areas of invasion of her fallopian tube and lymphatics . The tumor was also found surrounding her residual ovarian stroma at the periphery.
In view of the presence of metastatic adenocarcinoma to the liver and a cervical lymph node , as well as the pancreatic mass found on CT, we initially identified the primary tumor as pancreatic. Unfortunately, a fine needle aspiration of the pancreas was not diagnostic.
When her ovarian mass stained positive for CK7 but negative for CK20 and estrogen receptor, we repeated the stains on her liver and lymph node biospies, which proved to be a match to the ovarian tumor.
The histologic and immunohistochemical findings of our patient's ovarian mass are consistent with the results of her lymph node and liver biopsies. We concluded that the mass was most likely from the ovary and not the pancreas, with the pancreatic mass representing another metastasis of her ovarian adenocarcinoma.