A 64-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the emergency department of our hospital with chest pain, a productive cough, and three days of untreated progressive dyspnea. Five years earlier, he had been admitted to a local hospital for treatment of cerebral hemorrhage, right rib fractures, large pleural effusion, and a left femur fracture resulting from a traffic accident. Although he showed good recovery, the patient continued to have a chronic cough and intermittent chest tightness. Upon initial evaluation in the emergency room of our hospital, the patient was drowsy, and his body temperature, pulse rate, blood pressure, and respiratory rate, were 36.8°C, 110/min, 86/50 mmHg, and 32/min, respectively. An analysis of arterial blood gases in room air showed pH 7.52, PCO2 31 mmHg, PO2 52 mmHg, SaO2 85%, and a high level of lactate (4.6 mmol/L). A chest radiograph showed right lung consolidation and possible pleural effusion . Computed tomography (CT) revealed multiloculated pleural effusion on the whole right side and right lung atelectasis, with an enhanced thickening and calcification of pleura, and a foreign body in the right intermediate bronchus . The patient’s condition was rapidly deteriorating, and he was intubated and supported by mechanical ventilation. Following initial hemodynamic stabilization, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU).
On physical examination, the patient was afebrile with a blood pressure of 108/67 mmHg under the support of intravenous norepinephrine (6 μg/kg/min). On auscultation, moist rales and wheezing sounds were heard in both lung fields, with decreased breath sounds in the right lower lung. A complete blood count showed an elevated white count of 27.7 × 109/L with a high percentage (94.6%) of neutrophils. Concentrations of C-reactive protein (patient level 433.1 mg/L v.s. normal range of 0 ~ 8 mg/L) and serum procalcitonin (patient level 5.44 ng/mL v.s. normal range of 0 ~ 0.05 ng/mL) were markedly elevated. The patient was supported with mechanical ventilation. Chest tube drainage was performed under ultrasound guidance, and the effusion appeared as a cloudy fluid consistent with pus, with total nucleated cells of 920 × 106/L. Additionally, the effusion was positive in Rivalta’s test. The results of a Gram stain and acid fast stain for the fluid were negative.
Based on these findings, a diagnosis of empyema accompanied by acute respiratory failure and septic shock was considered. Samples of pleural effusion, blood and sputum were sent for aerobic and anaerobic cultures, and empirical treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics (imipenem-cilastatin (0.5 g, q6h) and linezolid (0.6 g, q12h)) was initiated. Resuscitation with fluids was initiated based on guidelines in the Surviving Sepsis Campaign, 2012 (Dellinger et al. ). On the second day of treatment, the patient’s hemodynamic parameters had stabilized and the intravenous norepinephrine was withdrawn. A flexible bronchoscopy performed at bedside revealed an irregular foreign body lodged in the right intermediate bronchus. As the size was too large to pass through the tracheal tube (internal diameter = 8.0 mm) and the texture was too hard to clamp or cut into small pieces, repeated attempts to remove the foreign body with forceps were unsuccessful. We then attempted and were successful in removing the foreign body using a 1.9 mm cryotherapy probe provided with the ERBE cryotherapy system (Erbokryo CA, ERBE Cryosurgery, Tubingen, Germany). The tracheal tube was removed in conjuction with the foreign body. The foreign body was a hard T-shaped bone measuring ~ 1.3 × 1.7 cm . After removing the bone, the patient was re-intubated for mechanical ventilation under the guidance of bronchoscopy.
Following FB removal, the initial antibiotics treatment was continued for five days, even though the culture results of blood, sputum, and pleural effusion were negative. The patient rapidly improved and was successfully extubated one week later. When asked about the circumstances of the FB aspiration, the patient stated that 3 months earlier, he had choked while eating the meat of a soft-shelled turtle; however, he did not see a doctor or take medicine at any time. Thus, the foreign body was confirmed as a bone from a soft-shelled turtle. The patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged from the hospital 4 weeks after admission. A follow-up chest CT scan conducted one month later showed almost complete absorption of the pleural effusion . The patient was then followed up for 6 additional months, and showed an uneventful recovery.