The patient, male, 61 years old, with MGA, was diagnosed with HCM by echocardiography in 2000, and he underwent the Morrow procedure to resect the sub-aortic valve and the surrounding hypertrophic myocardium in 2007. In September 2020, he visited our centre due to worsening symptoms of chest tightness and shortness of breath and reported a 5-year history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation and a history of pre-syncope during postural changes. The patient’s regular use of metoprolol succinate (47.5 mg daily) was ineffective. Our ultrasound examination suggested congenital MGA and post-operative changes after sub-aortic myocardial resection , the patient’s maximum septal thickness was 26 mm (anterior septal base) , the left ventricular outflow tract pressure gradient (LVOT-PG) was 12 mmHg at rest, the stress echocardiography suggested the LVOT-PG increased from 27 to 77 mmHg during the experiment, which proved he had occult obstructive HCM. Electrocardiography suggested the presence of second-degree type I atrioventricular block, complete right bundle branch block, and left anterior branch block. New York Heart Function Class III. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance suggested that the LVOT was narrowed, and the thickened myocardium around it had an uneven signal, which was considered as partial myocardial fibrosis .
After multi-disciplinary discussion, the risk of damage to the conduction bundles was higher with Morrow procedure or alcohol ablation, and the patient was eligible for ultrasound-guided PIMSRA. The cool-tip RF™ radiofrequency ablation system was chosen to perform the PIMSRA treatment.
The patient was in the left lateral position after general anaesthesia with endotracheal intubation, continuous electrocardiogram, blood pressure, and oxygen saturation monitoring were performed. Under the real-time guidance of transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), the radiofrequency electrode needle (ACT1520) was inserted percutaneously through the myocardium into the hypertrophied interventricular septum ( and ). Intra-operative colour Doppler TTE guidance was used to avoid vascular injury at the point of needle placement. If persistent heart block or tachyarrhythmia occurred, the ablation procedure would be suspended until normal rhythm was restored spontaneously or after lidocaine treatment. The entire ablation procedure lasted 1 h and 40 min, with a total of six ablations of the more hypertrophic locations of the septum. The radiofrequency energy was started from 50 W and increased slowly to avoid arrhythmias. The maximum energy for ablation was 130 W ( and ).
The patient had no serious adverse events during the operation and 1 month after the operation. The patient was maintained on routine metoprolol succinate (47.5 mg daily). At 6 months after the operation, the patient’s symptoms improved significantly compared with the pre-operative period, atrial fibrillation had no more episodes, and the quality of life was significantly improved; echocardiography showed that the patient’s maximal septal thickness was 18 mm (middle of the anterior septum), and the LVOT-PG was 9 mmHg at rest and 21 mmHg after exercise load without LVOT obstruction ( and ). Electrocardiography suggested a complete right bundle branch block. The left bundle branch block disappeared when compared with the pre-operative period . New York Heart Function was upgraded to Class I. Myocardial three-dimensional strain suggested that there was no decrease in the global longitudinal strain (GLS) . Echocardiography at 1 year post-operatively suggested that the patient had a maximum septal thickness of 11 mm (posterior septal base) ; myocardial three-dimensional strain suggested improvement in GLS compared with 6-month follow-up. The improvement was more noticeable in the basal of the left ventricle.