The patient was a 37-year-old smoker, who had a six-month job in a hospital mattress and bedroom workshop, where he was exposed to glass wool. He also noted the history of drug addiction, such as crystal, heroin, and opium, which he abandoned them in the past two years. According to the patient's remarks, the patient in the addiction treatment camp contacted a person with tuberculosis, and after a while he suffered from blood-sucking, night sweats, and severe weight loss and did not refer to any health center. After a while, the patient goes to the hospital with complaints of swelling and severe pain in the left testicle as well as mild right testicular involvement. The person was diagnosed by an infectious disease specialist as an extrapulmonary tuberculosis. The patient denies the history of any sexually transmitted diseases and urology. The color Doppler ultrasound of the testicles revealed that the right testicle was 29*27*29 mm in diameter and the testicle on the left measured 23*30*42 mm. The testicle on the right side in terms of the size and parenchymal echo was normal. The left testicle had a heterogeneous parenchymal echo, and multiple hypo-echo and ill-defined areas were evident in the left testicle.
Both sides of the epididymis were larger than normal and the echo was completely heterozygous. In the Color Doppler Ultrasound, the left testicle with the epididymis on both sides was completely hyperemic. There was also a thick and edema scrotal wall (swollen). Image of the collection with approximately 32*23 mm size was observed in the scrotal wall, which was linked through the tract (duct) internal space scrotum. The findings were primarily in the favor of extrapulmonary tuberculosis and there was no evidence of torsion in the testicles. The patient was also negative in terms of hydrocele and varicocele and space mass .
Also, PCR of the patient's urine was positive for tuberculosis, and in addition, it indicates that the patient is not resistant to anti-tuberculosis drugs. The patient did not have any history of TB treatment. Therefore, after a 2-month first-stage treatment with four-drug therapy of anti-TB drugs such as rifampin 150 mg((8-12)mg/kg), isoniazid 75 mg ((4-6)mg/kg), pyrazinamide 400 mg((20-30) mg/kg) and ethambutol 275 mg((15-20)mg/kg), considering the weight of the patient (56 kg), 4 pills per day and the second phase with two-drug therapy , rifampin 150 mg((8-12)mg/kg) and 75 mg((4-6)mg/kg) of isoniazid, 4 pills per day for 4 months, extrapulmonary tuberculosis symptoms improved to a large extent.
The testicular swelling also decreased with the perforation of the material on both sides and greatly improved. To find other tuberculosis lesions in other parts of the body, the culture, smeared sputum, PPD, and chest x-ray, were performed; the results are as follows: Chest x-ray showed turbidity and systematic changes on the peaks of both lungs with different sizes; these findings, along with changes in bronchiectasis, and the creation of numerous cavities suggested old tuberculosis. The lateral angles of the two sides were open and the size of the heart and mediastinum was normal and the pathologic point was not seen in the chest wall . Patient PPD was 20 mm, and smear three pluses (more than ten acid-fast bacillus in each microscopic field) and patient culture were also positive. Also, with the examination of the patient's relatives, the patient's father developed positive culture. Therefore, the patient had pulmonary TB in addition to extrapulmonary tuberculosis. Laboratory data revealed a white blood cell count of 8100 cells per µl with 60% neutrophil, 35% lymphocyte and 4% monocyte, hemoglobin concentration of 14.7 g/dl, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 11 U/l, alanine aminotransferase) ALT) 10 U/l, alkaline phosphatase concentration 184.4 U/l, ESR 62 mm after one hour and fasting blood sugar 89 mg/dl. Retroviral screening and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) tests were non-reactive. The urinalysis revealed 4–6 erythrocytes per high-powered field, no seen bacteria and positive protein and glucose was negative.