A 60-year-old Hispanic woman was diagnosed with generalized MG. Her clinical symptoms included right ptosis, diplopia, dysarthria, dysphagia, and muscle weakness that had progressed for three months. Her laboratory workup showed an elevated acetylcholine receptor binding antibody titer of 252.45 nmol/L (normal < 0.30 nmol/L). Repetitive nerve stimulation at a frequency of 2 Hz showed a 48% decremental response of the median nerve compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude, supporting a post-synaptic neuromuscular junction dysfunction. Striational muscle antibody titers were negative, and computed tomography of the chest revealed the absence of anterior mediastinal mass. Her treating neurologist gave her pyridostigmine and mycophenolate mofetil, and she was discharged after improvement of her myasthenic symptoms.
One month following the diagnosis of MG, she presented to our emergency department with severe mid-sternal chest pain and shortness of breath shortly after a personally significant stressful life event. On admission, she appeared to be in mild distress. Pertinent neurological findings showed bilateral facial weakness and right ptosis. Her troponin I level was elevated at 2.5 ng/ml (normal: < 0.1 ng/ml). Her electrocardiogram (ECG) on presentation showed sinus rhythm with 2 mm ST elevations in V2 and V3 leads with q-waves . Cardiac catheterization revealed no significant coronary artery disease. The left ventriculogram showed apical ballooning with hyperdynamic proximal segments with sparing of the apex. The pattern of wall motion abnormality did not fit any single coronary artery distribution and was consistent with TC, also known as stress cardiomyopathy or broken heart syndrome. Left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) was calculated as 32% on a cardiac catheterization and 40% on a transthoracic echocardiogram.
Shortly after cardiac catheterization, she developed bilateral ophthalmoparesis, significant bulbar muscle weakness with worsening dysphagia and dysarthria, respiratory muscle weakness with hypoventilation and generalized weakness, and evolving respiratory failure requiring endotracheal intubation. She underwent six plasmapheresis sessions on an every other day regimen. She was started on prednisone 20 mg daily with gradual titration to 60 mg daily. Pyridostigmine dosage was adjusted and titrated slowly. Her clinical course improved gradually, and at the end of her 17-day hospitalization, she was weaned off the ventilator and later discharged home.
She has been regularly followed by our neuromuscular service since discharge. Her myasthenic symptoms continued to improve requiring a low dosage of pyridostigmine and prednisone tapered slowly to a minimal every other day dosage of 10 mg. She also has been seen by the cardiology service, where a repeat echocardiogram 10 months later revealed a normal left ventricular chamber size and a normal ejection fraction.