A 59-year-old female was diagnosed with early-stage gastric cancer during health screening and admitted to our hospital for radical surgical treatment.
Physical examinations and blood tests revealed nothing of note, including tumor markers. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGDS) revealed that the type 0-IIc gastric cancer was located in the posterior wall of the mid-body of the stomach . The histological type was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. EGDS and CT suggested that the depth of tumor invasion was the submucosal layer without lymph node swelling. The clinical stage according to the TNM 7th edition was cT1b N0 M0, cStage I.
Based on preoperative examinations, we planned laparoscopic distal gastrectomy with D1+ lymph node dissection and Billroth-I reconstruction.
The surgery progressed without any problems on dissection around the left gastroepiploic vessels. During the dissection of the infrapyloric area , a part of the pancreatic head showed unusual adherence to the first part of the duodenal wall . This made it difficult to safely separate the pancreatic head from the first part of the duodenal wall . Since we should dissect and mobilize the duodenal bulb as long as possible for Billroth-I anastomosis (delta-shaped anastomosis using linear staplers ), we converted our reconstruction plan of the Billroth-I method to Roux-en-Y. For safe and accurate lymphadenectomy without causing pancreatic injury, we deliberately focused on tracing the dissectible layer between the pancreatic parenchyma and fatty tissues, including lymph nodes .
After distal gastrectomy, we could not find the ligament of Treitz or jejunum on the left side, below the transverse colon. Furthermore, the right-side colon had been completely mobilized to the left-side abdomen , and the small intestine was located in the right-side abdomen with a completely mobilized duodenum without duodeno-jejunum loop . We reviewed the CT image carefully during surgery, and the right-side small bowel, left-side colon sign , and superior mesenteric vein (SMV) inverse position were confirmed. Based on these findings, we diagnosed this patient with intestinal malrotation.
Although we encountered the intestinal malrotation during surgery incidentally, we could complete radical gastrectomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction laparoscopically. We closed the defect between the Roux limb and retroperitoneum to prevent possible internal herniation. Because there was no Ladd’s ligament, we did not add Ladd’s operation. We also did not perform prophylactic appendectomy due to marked adhesion around the vermiform appendix.
Upon reconstruction, it was straightforward and safe to perform gastrojejunostomy by creating a Roux limb. Furthermore, there was no transverse colon or mesentery behind the Roux limb. Therefore, we closed the defect behind the Roux limb by delicately suturing the Roux limb mesentery and retroperitoneum covering the pancreas. We also closed the mesenteric defect of the small intestine as performed in normal cases. We carefully checked and confirmed that there was no other peritoneal defect.
The type of malrotation was non-rotation (90°). This patient was discharged from our hospital without any complications. According to the TNM 7th edition, the final pathological stage was pT1a, pN0(0/54), M0 pStage IA. Histological analysis revealed signet ring cell carcinoma. After a one-year outpatient follow-up, she was alive without any cancer relapse or complications.