A 38 year-old Caucasian male presented with a swelling on the lateral and posterior aspects of his left thigh and buttock, complaining also of leg weakness. He admitted using nasally insufflated recreational drugs resulting in loss of consciousness for about eight to ten hours on a staircase. He was aware of the symptoms upon regaining consciousness. His past medical history included chronic intravenous drug use and hepatitis C.
On examination, the lateral aspect of the left thigh was markedly swollen along with the left buttock. They were no signs of redness or skin injury. Left ankle dorsiflexion was weak, with a muscle power grade (MRC) of 3/5, whereas vascular supply was intact. Sensory and motor assessment revealed a left lateral leg deficit indicating left peroneal nerve palsy.
Patient’s biochemistry on admission showed high levels of creatine phosphorkinase (CPK) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH). Both suggested muscle death and tissue breakdown . Imaging with an ultrasound (US) showed non-uniformly swollen left buttock muscle compartments. A CT angiogram was performed to rule out hemorrhage or infection and it revealed signs of muscle and subcutaneous tissues oedema. Moreover the intramuscular fat planes were obliterated. No active arterial or venous bleeding or any abscess was detected. Subsequently, the patient became anuric with high levels of urea and creatinine, suggesting acute kidney injury (AKI), which was managed with temporary hemodialysis. Later on, he lost the ability to plantarflex and dorsiflex his left ankle suggesting sciatic nerve palsy. In light of the sciatic nerve palsy and the AKI a diagnosis of GCS made.
He immediately underwent hemodialysis and an urgent fasciotomy to decompress the muscle compartments was performed as soon as the patient was stabilized (12 hours post admission). Post- operatively he required eight units of blood, five units of fresh frozen plasma and five units of platelets. No further hemodialysis was required and the wounds were closed with split skin grafts. Its biochemistry markers (Urea, CPK, Cr, LDH) normalized within the following 15 days and the patient was then discharged. The patient was last seen in the outpatient clinic one year later and the sciatic nerve palsy was still present. He had limited mobility using walking aids and his main complaint was severe neuropathic pain, which was managed with daily Pregabalin intake.