A 34-year-old man, known case of Marfan syndrome, presented with three episodes of non-massive hemoptysis. Seven years earlier, he had undergone Bentall operation and arch replacement with E-vita graft using frozen elephant trunk (FET) technique with a stent-graft in the descending aorta due to acute aortic dissection and aortic arch aneurysm. Six years later, he had returned with a thoraco-abdominal aortic aneurysm and a huge pseudoaneurysm around the distal part of the descending aorta. An extensive surgery with thoracoabdominal incision replacing all the thoracic and abdominal aorta by Dacron graft had been done, and the proximal part of the graft had been sutured to the distal end of the stent-graft.
Finding out the cause of hemoptysis, he was admitted and a comprehensive evaluation including computed tomography angiography (CTA), bronchoscopy, and transesophageal echocardiography set out. The CTA showed a new collection, most probably a pseudoaneurysm sized 4 × 6 × 9 cm around the ascending aorta extending to the posterior border of the manubrium at the maximum diameter . Therefore, we focused on the ascending aorta as the source of bleeding into the mediastinum, which could have caused an aortobronchial fistula and ultimately the hemoptysis. The source images of a CTA belonging to 6 months earlier were reviewed. We noticed a sternal wire applied with the figure-of-eight technique in the first surgery in close contact with the Dacron graft, and it seemed to have penetrated the graft . We also spotted a fracture line on the wire without any displacement. Viewing a large space between the wire and the graft occupied by a pseudoaneurysm in the latest CTA corroborated the assumption that the graft erosion was established by the wire.
The episodes of hemoptysis decreased to only one in his admission course, but the patient progressed with a fever. Work-ups ruled out COVID19 infection but revealed a positive Enterobacter blood culture for which the patient received wide spectrum antibiotics for two weeks. Even though later cultures were negative and transesophageal echo did not indicate endocarditis, a low-grade fever was still running. The mediastinal hematoma and perhaps its connection to the respiratory system was presumed to be the main reason for the fever. Endovascular approach and stent grafting was excluded because of the possibility of the presence of an infection. So, our team decided on surgical treatment.