A 32-year-old female with no history of hypertension, diabetes, pregnancy induced hypertension, smoking, drinking or drug abuse, fell from bed 3-months postpartum and landed on her head, immediately experiencing global aphasia, dizziness, and paralysis of right limbs for 10 min. After 2 h, the patient continued experiencing anomic aphasia, repetition impediment, and dyslexia. No cerebral hemorrage was found by computed tomography (CT), and thrombolysis was not performed because of the recent head trauma. Due to the mild symptoms, aspirin (100 mg/day) and clopidogrel (75 mg/day) were given, and no emergency endovascular treatment was performed. Twenty-four hours later, Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed moderate-sized infarcts involving the left frontal-parietal cortex , and magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed that there was no development from the petrous segment of the left ICA to the lacerum segment . The basilar artery was connected to the left cavernous ICA through the tentorial artery, and the distal part of the internal carotid artery is developed lightly.
Because pregnancy will lead to the occurrence or aggravation of connective tissue diseases and endocrine diseases, we have improved the relevant laboratory tests to exclude the vasculitis caused by such diseases, so that it is more likely to have dissection in trauma. Complete blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine, glucose, total protein, albumin, thyroid function tests, antinuclear antibody (ANA), antiextractable nuclear antigen (ENA) antibodies, anti-double stranded DNA (dsDNA) antibodies, complement, immunoglobulins, and rheumatoid factor (RF) were normal.
Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) was performed 6 days after stroke onset. Arch aortography showed aberrant right subclavian artery, right vertebral artery arising from right CCA, and left vertebral artery arising from the aortic arch. Left CCA angiography showed dissection forming in the proximal initial segment of left ICA with severe local stenosis. Right vertebral artery angiography showed a collateral pathway from the basilar artery to the cavernous sinus of ICA through the lateral pontine and tentorial arteries, and another collateral pathway from left posterior cerebral artery to distal ICA through the posterior communicating artery. Based on this information, medication was continued without interventional therapy, and, 10 days from onset, clinical symptoms improved significantly.
Repeat DSA was performed at 3-month follow-up. Left CCA angiography showed residual aneurysm in the area where carotid dissection occurred originally, with no significant stenosis. A small artery originated from the posterior vertical segment of cavernous ICA, and the distal segment was not clearly visible. Additionally, the posterior communicating artery originated from distal left ICA. Subsequently, 3DRA of left ICA was performed, and the tentorial artery course was clearly visualized, starting from the cavernous ICA and circumscribing retrogradely and superiorly, ending at the cerebral tentorium with several branches. No collateral pathway supplying blood to ICA was seen with right vertebral artery angiography . The patient remained clinically stable with no further treatment, and the patient was very satisfied with the treatment.