An 83-year-old man (weight 60 kg, height 165 cm) was admitted to our hospital for laser TURP due to recurrent prostate adenoma. Past medical history included hypertension, peptic ulcer bleeding and C6–C7 disc herniation.
At preoperative evaluation, he had good exercise tolerance without chest pain, syncope, shortness of breath or palpitations on exertion. Chest X-ray (CXR) revealed a normal cardiac silhouette and no pulmonary lesions. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm without left ventricular hypertrophy or left atrial enlargement. Laboratory studies, including blood chemistry and coagulation profile, were within acceptable limits. In the operating room, initial routine monitoring showed sinus rhythm with a heart rate (HR) of 76 beats per minute, blood pressure (BP) of 140/63 mmHg, respiratory rate of 15 per minute, and 94% pulse oxygen saturation on room air. After adequate hydration with intravenous administration of 5% dextrose and 0.45% sodium chloride, spinal anesthesia was achieved with an injection of 0.5% hyperbaric bupivacaine 9.5 mg and fentanyl 15 μg into the subarachnoid space via a 26-gauge spinal needle at the L3/L4 level. Surgery commenced when the sensory block reached the T10 dermatome (assessed by pinprick sensation). With spinal anesthesia, his BP was still relatively stable around at 120/60 mmHg, while his HR gradually increased to 90 beats per minute. One hour after anesthesia, the patient became uncomfortable and restless. His cardiac rhythm changed to atrial fibrillation with a moderate ventricular response of 100 beats per minute. He therefore received intravenous midazolam 0.5 mg and fentanyl 25 μg in an attempt to alleviate his distress, and intravenous digoxin 0.125 mg was administered for rhythm control. However, his condition did not improve, and he became acutely dyspneic with pink frothy secretions. 100% oxygen was administered via the face mask, but his oxygen saturation decreased to 88%, while his BP increased to 145/65 mmHg. Crackles were heard on chest auscultation. The impression at this stage was acute pulmonary edema or TURP syndrome. Therefore, intravenous furosemide 5 mg and sublingual nitroglycerin 0.6 mg were given. However, his systolic BP dropped to 87/50 mmHg, and he became less alert. Surgery was discontinued and general anesthesia was conducted with tracheal intubation. An arterial line was inserted and with a fraction of inspired oxygen at 50%, his arterial blood gas showed pH 7.21, pCO2 46 mmHg, pO2 83 mmHg, with severe metabolic acidosis, but no hyponatremia. He remained hypotensive and significant ST depression was noted. Thus, a titrated infusion of fluid and dopamine 5 μg/kg/min was initiated on suspicion of acute myocardial infarction. Unfortunately, his hypotension worsened and atrial fibrillation ventricular response rate increased to 160 beats per minute. Bedside TEE was promptly performed, which revealed a small hypercontractile left ventricle (LV), mosaic flow signal in the LVOT and a significant jet of MR (see Additional movie file ), which are highly suggestive of SAM of the mitral valve, but his extreme tachycardia made it difficult to confirm this. Nevertheless, aggressive fluid resuscitation was administered, with improvement in his BP to 150/60 mmHg, and HR to 92 beats per minute. He was then transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further evaluation.
Upon arrival at ICU, CXR showed pulmonary infiltrates, and his serum troponin I level was elevated at 2.338 ng/mL (reference range < 0.1 ng/mL), suggesting mild myocardial injury. After he became hemodynamically stable, a repeat TEE showed mild concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, SAM of the anterior mitral leaflet into the LVOT with subaortic obstruction and resultant severe eccentric dynamic MR on color-flow Doppler mapping (see Additional movie file ). LV systolic function was preserved without regional dyskinesia. He was weaned from the ventilator 7 days later and transferred to the general ward on day 9.