A 60 year old Caucasian male patient was referred to general surgery for multiple unrelated complaints including umbilical hernia and left arm lipoma. The patient also had an additional complaint of a fast-growing right leg mass located on upper lateral right calf distal to the knee. The patient had no other suspicious skin lesions and admitted to having the lesion shave biopsied two years prior by dermatologist with benign findings. No picture was taken of the lesion prior to surgical intervention as it was expected to be benign based upon prior dermatological findings. The patient stated that the leg lesion was non-painful in nature but was concerned that it may have increased in size over the previous 2 months and had a brown-gray discoloration. No prior imaging was obtained for the leg lesion. A wide margin elliptical excision was performed with a minimum goal of 1 cm margins on all sides of the lesion and the depth was resected to the muscle layer. The full specimen was marked for orientation and submitted to pathology. The excised elliptical portion measured 4.3 cm in length and 2.5 cm in width at widest points. The nodular lesion measured 2.4 × 1.8 × 0.9 cm. Ancillary studies showed that the lesion was CD31 positive, CD34 positive, and negative for cytokeratin markers. The pathology report confirmed EHE with tumor close to circumferential margins and present at the deep margin. The lesion was staged as pT1a pNX in accordance with AJCC staging. Given the deep margin extending to the thin layer of muscle just distal to the knee, the patient was referred to orthopedic surgery for further evaluation and operative intervention. The mainstay of treatment for invasive sarcoma is surgery often coupled with radiation and/or chemotherapy. A second surgical excision 19 days later following the original surgery was performed into deeper tissue. The second lenticular ellipse measured 8.1 cm in length and 2.1 cm in width at widest points at a depth of 1.4 cm. Multiple frozen sections were examined and clean margins of a minimum of 1 cm was determined in all directions.
Due to the diagnosis of EHE, it was prudent to obtain additional imaging to determine if the malignancy had metastasized. Although incredibly rare, there have been documented cases of pulmonary epithelioid hemangioendotheliomas, as well as cases of tumors found on the liver. A CT scan was performed with IV and oral contrast of the chest and abdomen. The findings were unremarkable for the chest but multiple hepatic cysts and an enhancing lesion in the right lobe of the liver were identified. A follow up MRI with and without gadolinium confirmed a 2 cm well-defined focal area of delayed enhancement within the posterior segment of the right lobe of the liver corresponding to the CT findings, likely representing a cyst and not a metastatic lesion. These findings suggest that no metastasis had occurred and that the leg skin lesion appeared to be the primary site of EHE.