A 63-year-old female patient was admitted to our hospital with intermittent epigastric abdominal pain for the past three months. Results of the physical examination on admission indicated no icteric sclera. The abdomen was soft with no palpable abdominal mass. The patient had experienced a weight loss of about five kg in the past two months and had no history of hepatitis B or C. She had been exposed to dogs and sheep and denied any history of exposure to infected cases from the epidemic area. After admission, CA19-9 was measured and was 796.20 U/mL. No serological examination for echinococcosis was performed because of the limited conditions of our hospital. Test results from pelvic ultrasound indicated menopausal uterus and uterine fibroids. Test results from gastroscopy showed chronic non atrophic gastritis. Colonoscopy revealed multiple polyps in the large intestine (basically removed); intestinal histopathology (cecum, biopsy) showed severe chronic inflammation of the mucosa and adenomatous hyperplasia of the individual glands. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the upper abdomen revealed a more homogeneous thickening of the gastric wall in the antrum. Round unenhanced low-density foci with a diameter of 4.6 cm was seen in the S7 segment of the liver. Nodular calcifications were also observed. No significant dilatation was noted in the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts. The size and shape of the gallbladder were normal, the wall was not thick, and no significant abnormal density was observed in the cavity. The pancreas, spleen, and adrenal glands showed no significant abnormalities. Test results from computed tomography indicated liver cyst and intrahepatic calcifications. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the liver and gallbladder revealed a normal size and shape of the liver and proportion of each lobe, and the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts and flow vessels ran naturally. A long T1 and long T2 cystic signal with a diameter of about 4.7 cm was observed in the right lobe of the liver, with liquid level, short T1 high signal intensity in the lower layer, high signal intensity on diffusion-weighted imaging sequence, and enhancement of the cyst wall on the enhanced scan. Test results from magnetic resonance imaging showed that the space-occupying lesion of the right lobe of the liver had been considered to be more likely a hepatic hydatid cyst. Preoperatively, three-dimensional reconstruction demonstrated the location of the tumor and its relationship with the surrounding vessels .
The patient underwent laparoscopic S7 segmentectomy. Intraoperative findings showed that the tumor was located at the S7 segment of the liver and was about 5 × 4 cm in size and partially protruding from the surface of the liver, with an intact capsule and clear boundary with normal liver tissue. The tumor compressed the right hepatic vein and its tributaries and densely adhered to the right hepatic vein . On postoperative pathology, a mass was observed immediately adjacent to the liver capsule, with a volume of 5 × 5 × 4.5 cm. The section surface showed a brown turbid fluid, a smooth inner wall, and greyish red, greyish yellow, and soft section surfaces of other liver tissues. The pathological section showed a low-grade mucinous cystic neoplasm (volume 5 × 5 × 4.5 cm) in the S7 segment of the liver, with steatosis in the surrounding hepatic tissue area, chronic inflammatory cell infiltration in the portal area, and no tumor cell involvement in the margin of the liver resection.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated tumour cells CK7 (+), CK19 (+), and CEA (−); stromal cells ER (+), PR (+), α-inhibin (a small amount +), vimentin (+), desmin (+), and actin (+) . This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Yantai Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical University.