A 15-year-old Japanese boy was referred to our hospital for rapidly progressive psychiatric and neurological symptoms. His growth and development had been normal until the age of 11, when he began to experience academic difficulties.
At the age of 13 years, he visited a local hospital because of a 6-month history of slowly progressive difficulty in walking. Neurological examination revealed a spastic gait and marked lower limb hyper-reflexia. However, brain and spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no abnormalities. His total plasma homocysteine level was 216 nmol/ml (normal, 3.7-12.5 nmol/ml); and serum folic acid and cobalamine levels were 1.7 ng/ml (normal, 3.6–12.9 ng/ml) and 397 pg/ml (normal, 233–914 pg/ml), respectively. The plasma concentrations of very-long-chain fatty acids were all within normal limits. Based on a tentative diagnosis of subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord secondary to folic acid deficiency, folic acid (15 mg/day) therapy was started. However, his gait disturbance gradually worsened.
At the age of 15 years, he began to show deficits in motivation and effort. One week later, he was immediately admitted to a hospital because of a high fever and acute diarrhea with vomiting caused by viral gastroenteritis that had started the previous evening. After admission, he rapidly developed psychotic symptoms, particularly delusions and auditory hallucinations. His general condition was improved by rehydration, and he was discharged 3 days later with a diagnosis of hospital-induced delirium. However, his psychotic symptoms, such as depression, delusions, hallucinations, and anorexia, worsened over the next 2 weeks. Furthermore, he experienced several episodes of generalized convulsions, for which levetiracetam was prescribed (1000 mg/day). He was repeatedly in and out of another local hospital because of dehydration due to a refusal to eat caused by his psychotic state or convulsions. He was treated with risperidone for a month, but still suffered from delusions, hallucination, and failure to eat. A brain MRI showed generalized atrophy and hyperintensity in the white matter around the posterior horns of the lateral ventricles on T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images . An electroencephalogram showed a diffusely low-amplitude background activity without epileptic discharge. The results of a nerve conduction study and biochemical examination including lysosomal enzymatic activities were both normal. He became severely apathetic and bedridden within two months after infectious gastroenteritis. Therefore, he was transferred to our hospital for further investigation.
On admission, no abnormal facial appearance or skeletal anomalies were noted. Neurological examination revealed a fluctuating level of consciousness with confusion, delusion, and abnormal behavior. Cranial nerves were normal. Marked spasticity of the lower limbs was noticed, with hyper-reflexia in both arms and legs. There was also sustained clonus at the ankles following sudden passive dorsiflexion of the foot. However, pathological reflexes (Babinski and Chaddock signs) were negative. Serum folic acid and cobalamine levels were elevated (more than 20 ng/ml and 1120 pg/ml, respectively). Plasma amino acid analysis showed an elevated level of total homocysteine (229.9 nmol/ml) and a decreased methionine level (10.9 nmol/ml; normal, 19.2-32.7 nmol/ml). Cerebrospinal fluid analysis indicated normal values. Gas chromatographic-mass spectrometric urinary metabolome analysis revealed a markedly elevated urinary homocystine level of 19.7 mmol/mol total creatinine (normal, not detected) and undetectable urinary methionine levels (−3.0 standard deviation; SD). His urinary methylmalonic acid level was normal (−0.3 SD). These results of the amino acid analyses were highly suggestive of MTHFR deficiency. Therefore, MTHFR gene sequencing was undertaken; and the results showed compound heterozygous mutations c.446_447 del GC ins TT (p.Gly149Val) and c.137G > A (p.Arg46Gln). In addition, heterozygous c. 665C > T (p.Ala222Val) polymorphism was noted. Multivitamins including vitamins B1, B6, and B12 (750 μg/day) as well as folic acid were administered. Subsequently, oral substitution treatment with betaine was initiated at a dosage of 3 g/day, which was slowly increased to 9 g/day. Over a few months, consciousness, delusion, and abnormal behavior dramatically improved, and he became able to sit in a wheelchair. After 8 months of therapy, the earlier white matter hyperintensities on T2-weighted and FLAIR images had resolved . Moreover, his total plasma homocysteine level had decreased to around half of its initial value (91.2 nmol/ml); and the plasma methionine level had normalized (20.4 nmol/ml). Thereafter, low specific activity of MTHFR was observed in skin fibroblasts cultured from the patient (2.8 nmol/h/mg protein; normal control values in 75 normal subjects, 25.3 ± 8.9 nmol/h/mg protein). MTHFR gene sequencing of his mother revealed mutation c.137G > A and polymorphism c. 665C > T, both in the heterozygous state. Following 2 years of clinical follow-up, the patient had no psychiatric symptoms (apathy, delusion or hallucination) or relapse, and he became able to stand up and walk with the aid of a walker.