Subject: A 37-year-old male; BMI 27.7 (Height = 1.98 meters, weight = 109 kg); right-handed; self-employed cable worker (i.e., heavy manual labor); reported daily tobacco and alcohol use. The patient reported 6-year history of CTS worse on right. Prior treatments included night splints and chiropractic 94 care. The patient denied prior injection or surgery to either wrist/hand.
Following clinical and NMUS examinations, the patient consented to undergo EDX testing, which confirmed bilateral CTS and excluded other neuromuscular conditions. The patient consented to study participation and was offered PRP injection in wrist that received saline if PRP proved more effective at 6-month follow-up.
The study conducted in private outpatient orthopedic and sports medicine clinic from early April 2018 to late March 2019. The patient provided written informed consent before baseline data collection, which included numeric pain rating scale (NPRS) and Boston carpal tunnel questionnaire (BCTQ) scores for each wrist/hand along with neurography and median nerve CSA measurements of both wrists/hands. The patient instructed in active tendon and nerve gliding exercises and provided a detailed exercise handout and journal for immediate post-injection period.
Blood drawn and PRP prepared. Wrists randomly assigned to receive PRP or equal volume saline and blinded injections prepared. US-guided injections performed including median nerve hydrodissection. Following injections, wrists splinted and the patient provided verbal and written instructions for symptom management, avoidance of NSAIDs, and to begin prescribed exercises when symptoms allow.
Initial follow-up 2 months post-injection patient’s exercise journal collected and exercises discontinued. NPRS and BCTQ scores, neurography, and median nerve CSA measurements performed for each wrist/hand at 2, 4, and 6-month follow-up visits. Following data collection at 6-month follow-up wrists unblinded and injectate revealed. As previously discussed, if wrist that received PRP showed more improvement than wrist that received saline patient could elect to have PRP injection and encouraged to follow-up 6 months later (1 year since beginning of study). The patient would be prescribed same post-injection tendon and nerve gliding exercises.
Eleven-point pain scale with scores ranging from 0 “no pain” to 10 “worst imaginable pain” for current, best, and worst levels of pain over previous 24 h. Minimal clinically important difference (MCID) for NPRS is ~2.0 points . Separate ratings collected for each wrist/hand.
CTS-related disability questionnaire consisting of an 11-question Symptom Severity Scale (SSS) and an 8-question Functional Status Scale (FSS). Scores in both scales range from 1 to 5 points with higher scores equating to more 120 severe symptoms or higher levels of dysfunction and a value of 1 equating to the absence of symptoms or dysfunction. BCTQ has been shown to have good reproducibility, internal consistency, and validity in patients with CTS [, , ]. MCID for SSS is ~0.8 points and for FSS ~0.5 points [, ].
NMUS was conducted by a regenerative medicine physician with 30 years of clinical experience and who is registered in Musculoskeletal® sonography by the Alliance for Physician Certification and Advancement and was blinded to neurography findings and injection assignment throughout study. NMUS performed using GE Logiq P9 system (GE Healthcare, Chicago, IL, USA) with 12–15 MHz linear transducer. Short- and long-axis images obtained in each wrist and digitally stored including flexor retinaculum, flexor tendons, median nerve, carpal joints, and ulnar nerve in Guyon’s canal. Short-axis images stored of median nerve proximally at level of pronator quadratus muscle and distally at level of maximum enlargement for calculation of CSA using direct trace method inside echogenic epineurium .
For the purposes of classification, increase in median nerve CSA of >2 mm2 comparing distal to proximal values considered diagnostic of CTS with 99% accuracy . In addition, increase of median nerve CSA of ≥6 mm2 suggests “moderate” disease and ≥9 mm2 suggests “severe” disease.
EDX testing was conducted by a physical therapist with 20 years of clinical experience and who is Board Certified in Clinical Electrophysiology by the American Board of Physical Therapy Specialties and was blinded to NMUS findings and injection assignment throughout study. EDX testing was performed using Cadwell Sierra Wave system (Cadwell Laboratories, Kennewick, WA, USA). The patient underwent standardized peripheral sensory and motor neurography of median and ulnar nerves including F waves . Monopolar needle EMG was performed in both upper extremities analyzing resting and volitional muscle activity representing C5-T1 nerve roots.
For the purposes of classification, prolonged distal sensory latency (DSL) only considered “mild” CTS; prolonged DSL and distal motor latency (DML) considered “moderate” CTS; and significantly prolonged or absent DSL and DML and abnormal EMG activity in the abductor pollicis brevis muscle considered “severe” CTS.
Thirty milliliters (mL) whole blood drawn from antecubital vein using ENDORET® Technology (BTI Biotechnology Institute, Blue Bell, PA, USA) yielding 8.0 mL of plasma-rich growth factors containing 2–3 times baseline concentration of platelets with low red and white blood cell counts. Calcium chloride (0.02 cc/mL) added to preparation before injection.
The patient seated with forearms supinated, palms facing up, and wrists extended over towel roll. Using in-plane approach, median nerve identified at inlet of proximal carpal tunnel at a level of pisiform bone and ulnar artery identified using Doppler imaging. A 25-gauge needle passed from ulnar side of wrist toward median nerve. Each wrist received 8 mL total injection volume and underwent median nerve hydrodissection from superficial flexor retinaculum and underlying sub-synovial connective tissue. Median nerve in the right wrist adhered more strongly to surrounding soft tissues and required 6 mL of injectate to achieve hydrodissection, whereas the left wrist median nerve required 3 mL of injectate to achieve hydrodissection. Following injection, carpal tunnel visualized in long-axis ensuring proximal-to-distal diffusion of injectate occurred. The patient observed post-procedure for 20 min and provided verbal and written instructions to avoid use of NSAIDs, apply ice for 10–15 min hourly as needed for pain relief, and begin prescribed exercises when symptoms allow.
The patient provided verbal and written instructions along with printed illustrations for performance of the following exercises in each wrist/hand: Index and middle finger tendon gliding and median nerve gliding ; cervical retraction and scapular retraction . The patient instructed to perform exercises until 2-month follow-up visit and was provided an exercise journal to record compliance.