A 62-year-old male underwent ABO blood-type-incompatible living kidney transplantation in November 2020. Diabetic nephropathy is the primary cause of end-stage renal disease. Maintenance immunosuppressive therapy comprised tacrolimus, MMF, everolimus, and prednisolone. He received two doses of the COVID-19 messenger ribonucleic acid vaccine in July 2021.
In May 2022, the patient was admitted to our affiliated hospital with the chief complaint of high fever and watery diarrhea persisting for 5 days. Thoracic CT revealed an irregular frosted glass area in the right lower lung . As both polymerase chain reaction and antigen tests were negative for COVID-19 on admission, tazobactam and piperacillin were initiated following a diagnosis of infectious enteritis and bacterial pneumonia. MMF was discontinued, and other immunosuppressive doses were maintained according to their blood concentrations. Four days of antibiotic therapy failed to resolve the symptoms, and a repeat CT showed aggravation of pneumonia . In addition, the patient's renal function deteriorated rapidly in this short period, from a sCr level of 1.42 mg/dL at baseline to 6.93 mg/dL . The patient was referred to our hospital on day 10 for further examination and treatment.
On admission, the patient was re-tested for COVID-19, this time showing a positive result. He presented with a wet cough and high fever and complained of fatigue and shortness of breath. Although his SpO2 level decreased to 92.3%, oxygen administration was unnecessary. Sotrovimab (500 mg/body weight) and remdesivir (200 mg loading dose, followed by 100 mg) were administered; however, renal function continued to deteriorate rapidly (sCr 7.59 mg/dL), and doppler ultrasonography of the graft showed a significant loss of diastolic blood flow. As acute rejection was suspected, graft biopsy and single-antigen panel-reactive antibody bead tests were performed. As an empirical treatment, steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone 500 mg/body, 3 days) followed by low-dose IVIg treatment (100 mg/kg, 5 days) was administered. The patient's diabetes was poorly controlled with an HbA1c of 8.0% and was strictly controlled with insulin.
Pathological examination of the graft biopsy revealed diffuse flattening of the tubular epithelial cells and extensive loss of the brush border in proximal tubular cells . Cellular debris and cast formation were observed within the lumina; however, thrombi were not observed in the glomeruli. Some glomeruli showed segmental shrinkage of the tuft with wrinkling of basement membranes. No findings were related to rejection. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed diffuse positive C4d staining in the peritubular capillary without inflammation, which was compatible with ABO-incompatible transplantation. We did not observe any other specific deposition on immunofluorescence staining.
Donor-specific antibodies were not detected serologically. Although sCr level peaked at 8.53 mg/dL on the 16th day after onset, his renal function gradually improved without requiring temporary dialysis. The patient was discharged on the 28th day after onset .