A 44-year-old man presented to the outpatient department with a 12-month history of low back pain. His back pain had increased progressively. At the time of presentation, his back pain VAS score was 7/10 and his ODI score was 44. He had received non-steroidal anti-inflammatories for more than 6 months and an epidural injection elsewhere with minimal relief from symptoms. On physical examination, power in the lower limbs was 5/5 as per the MRC grading, and deep tendon reflexes were normal too. The past, personal, addiction, or familial history was not significant. The magnetic resonance (MR) images showed a single fluid-containing lesion with a hyperintense zone at the L4–5 levels . After adequate counselling with an explanation of the pros and cons of the procedure and its probable complications, the informed consent of the patient was taken, and the patient was planned for the SELD procedure.
The procedure is performed under local anesthesia using lidocaine over the sacral hiatus, with monitored vital signs by an anesthesiologist. The patient was awake throughout the procedure and conversed with the team, giving input about the pain responses. The patient was positioned in the prone position on a radiolucent table with Wilson’s frame . The Wilson frame helps to decrease lumbosacral lordosis and intra-abdominal pressure. Two vertical foam bolsters can also be used if the Wilson frame is not available. A 5 mm small skin incision was made on the sacral hiatus with a stabbing knife. A trocar is used under fluoroscopic guidance to puncture the sacrococcygeal ligament, the trocar was advanced to the S2-3 level, then a video-guided catheter of 3.3 mm in diameter (Myelotec) containing two lumens (1.15 mm lumen for the epiduroscope and 1.75 for the instruments) was inserted through the trocar into the sacrococcygeal ventral epidural space ( and ).
Verification of the position of the catheter in the ventral epidural space is of the highest importance , and a C-arm fluoroscope with image intensification should be used to provide images in both the anterior/posterior and lateral planes . Through the video-guided catheter, an epiduroscope and the Ho: YAG laser were advanced into the end of the catheter to visualize the epidural space and perform cauterization of the sinuvertebral nerve, adhesiolysis of nearby the nerve roots, and irrigation of inflammation. The Ho: YAG laser is of high quality in the ablation of the disc, and it also does not cause significant thermal injury to the neural structures as compared to other lasers. Continuous, slow, and smooth irrigation with cool saline also helps visualization of the anatomical structures and helps prevent thermal damage to the nerves. Irrigation also helps reduce bleeding by its hydrostatic pressure during the procedure. The target area of annulus disc bulge ablation is ideally limited between the posterior longitudinal ligament (PLL) and the posterior annulus to reduce damage to the posterior annulus. Radio-opaque dye was introduced between the dura and bulging PLL with an underlying herniated nucleus pulposus (HNP), which did not cross the pathological L4-5 site due to adhesions and bulging PLL . As the surgeon decompressed the disc bulge below the PLL by Ho: YAG laser, the epidural space between the dura and bulging PLL with an underlying HNP became wider and confirmed by a repeat epidurogram showed a flattened outline of herniation and free flow at the previous pathologic level . Steroid and normal saline irrigation was performed before the incision closure with adhesive glue and sutures were taken.
The patient’s pain and neurological symptoms kept improving on post-procedure days 1, 2 weeks, 1 month, and 6 months. There was a rapid relief of pain on day 1, and VAS improved from 7 to 1. At 6 months of follow-up, the VAS score was 0 and the ODI improved from 50 to 19. These results were maintained at a 2-year follow-up with a telephone conversation. Patient satisfaction was surveyed using Odom’s criteria at each follow-up visit (at 1 week, 1 month, 6 months, and 2 years) and found to be excellent. These cases demonstrated no early or late complications in terms of neurologic deficits, infection, or epidural hematomas.