A previously healthy, immunocompetent 43-year-old woman presented to the emergency department (ED) with a 2-month history of progressive headache, behavioral changes, facial paresis, and left-sided paresthesia. She denied any history of fever, and no signs of meningism were evident. Hematological studies demonstrated normal findings. Radiological investigations revealed a hypointense lesion with significant perilesional vasogenic edema in the right frontal lobe, with partial effacement of the lateral ventricle on the same side (A). The lesion did not exhibit any diffusion restriction on the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) studies (B). Axial precontrast T1-weighted imaging (C) and axial postcontrast T1-weighted imaging (D) demonstrated a large irregular and thick ring-enhancing lesion in the right frontal lobe. Arterial spin labeling (ASL) MR perfusion studies showed increased relative cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in the periphery of the lesion (E). Dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC) MR perfusion studies demonstrated significantly elevated cerebral blood volumes (CBV) in the boundaries of the lesion (F). Further investigations using magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) demonstrated an increase in the choline-to-creatine ratio with a decrease in the NAA peak over the marginal component of the lesion, with an inverted lactate/lipid peak (A, B). Additionally, an increased ratio of choline-to-creatine with decreased NAA peak and inverted lactate/lipid peak were also noted in the peritumoral area of the FLAIR abnormality beyond the lesion-associated enhancing component (C, D).
Based on these findings, a preliminary diagnosis of glioma was made. Given that the patient was relatively young with a Karnofsky performance status (KPS) score of 60 (requires occasional assistance but is capable of caring for most of her needs), the patient underwent a right awake pterional (frontosphenotemporal) craniotomy, via which a good exposure of the lesion was achieved, and approximately 85–95 % of the lesion was safely resected. The surgery was uneventful and a biopsy specimen of the lesion was sent for histopathological examination , which reported that the lesion was grade IV astrocytoma (glioblastoma) positive for wild-type isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 (IDH1) and alpha-thalassemia/mental retardation syndrome X-linked (ATRX) genes, with an associated atypical cystic component, consistent with the diagnosis of cystic glioblastoma. The patient was discharged two days later in a good general condition with a KPS score of 90, and subsequently referred to a radiation oncology specialist to start her regimen of chemoradiation. She tolerated a complete course of radiotherapy with concomitant temozolomide, followed by adjuvant temozolomide for five days a week every month. She recovered well and began to exhibit an improvement in her headaches, sensory functions, and facial expressions, and she was instructed to maintain regular follow-ups at the outpatient clinic for regular monitoring.