A 39-year-old man presented with a lump in the right medial malleolus of 11 months duration. The diameter of the lump gradually increased from ~1–6 cm, and the lump caused obvious pain . He visited our institution in January 2019 and underwent a biopsy. The biopsy results suggested fibrosarcoma [French Federation of Cancer Centers (FNCLCC) grade 3, and Enneking grade IIB]. Physical examination revealed a tough mass with a clear demarcation from the surrounding soft tissues and significant pain on the application of pressure. The mobility of the right ankle and muscle strength and sensation in the right foot were not affected. In March 2019, after two cycles of chemotherapy, the lump had softened, but had not changed in size. As the tumor invaded only a small amount of bone within the medial malleolus and did not metastasize, we planned to only remove the medial malleolus with the standard resection boundary and customize a personalized 3D-printed prosthesis for replacement, to preserve the patient's normal bone and function.
Our clinical team designed the prosthesis, which was manufactured by Chunli Co., Ltd., Tongzhou, Beijing, China. The goal of our design process was to improve the matching degree of the prosthesis and maximize the recovery of joint function. In the first step, we built virtual 3D tibia models based on computerized tomography (CT) data using Materialize Mimics V20.0 (Materialize Corp., Leuven, Belgium) software. We then built a virtual tumor model using an image fusion technique integrating magnetic resonance imaging data. We determined the osteotomy plane based on the model . In the second step, we designed a preliminary model of the prosthesis. The shape of the endoprosthesis was optimized via computer simulation to ensure a satisfactory fit with the tibia. The surgical approach and the specific anatomy of the patient's osteotomy determined the position of the eight screw holes and suture holes that were added to enable us to obtain a stable fixation. The surface of the prosthesis was designed as a trabecular structure with porosity to facilitate the formation of a well-integrated implant–bone interface. The articular surface was designed to maximize joint function. To reduce the wear of the prosthesis and protect the talus, a portion of the articular surface was made of polyethylene. The endoprosthesis was made of a titanium alloy (Ti6Al4V) and fabricated using the electron beam melting technique using an Arcam EBM Q10plus machine (Arcam EBM, Mölndal, Sweden) . The yield strength of the prosthesis is about 550 Mpa, according to mechanical testing.
The senior surgeon at our institution (C. T.) performed the surgery. According to the preoperative plan, the osteotomy length was measured with Vernier calipers and marked. The proximal osteotomy was performed first, followed by the lateral osteotomy. The custom-designed 3D-printed prosthesis was implanted into the osteotomy site and fixed with six screws. Owing to the presence of small gaps, the uninvaded bone cortex of the resected portion of the tibia was filled with autogenous bone between the upper end of the prosthesis and the host bone to assist bone healing. The deltoid ligament was repaired by fixing it to the surface of the prosthesis. As the tumor resection caused a large area of skin and soft tissue defects on the surface of the prosthesis, we performed transposition of the peroneal nerve via a pedicled fascia flap to cover the surface of the prosthesis and, used a vacuum-assisted closure . The patient underwent necrotic tissue debridement 15 days after the first surgery, repeat transposition of the skin flap, and skin grafting 21 days after the first surgery due to partial epidermal necrosis on the surface of the skin flap. The last two surgeries were performed by microsurgical experts at our institution .
The patient was hospitalized for 37 days and underwent three surgeries. After the last operation, the patient's skin flap and surrounding skin recovered well, and the patient was discharged from the hospital. The patient's right ankle function was satisfactory seven months postoperatively. Dorsiflexion and plantar flexion of the right ankle joint were 20° and 45°, respectively. The range of motion for inversion and eversion was 30°. The ranges of motion of the left and right ankles were comparable, with the exception of eversion, which was slightly less than that of the left ankle. The patient could walk independently and had a normal gait . The patient did not complain of any pain in the ankle or surrounding area. Radiography showed that the prosthesis fits well with the distal tibia, and the position of the prosthesis was normal. No obvious complications were observed. The tomosynthesis-Shimadzu metal artifact reduction technology scan showed that the 3D-printed prosthesis was well integrated with the distal tibia , The Musculoskeletal Tumor Society (MSTS) score was 96.6% (29/30). Three years after the surgery, the patient was not able to return to our institution for review. Therefore, we followed up with the patient telephonically. Examination at the local hospital did not reveal any obvious signs of tumor recurrence, and the patient reported no complications during the 3-year period. The patient's ankle function was the same as that at 7 months postoperatively, and the patient was able to perform daily activities and work independently.