A 48-year-old man presented to the emergency department with cluster seizures. Following intravenous injections of diazepam and valproate, the patient gradually became fully oriented, alert, and afebrile. Cranial computed tomography (CT) and CT angiography performed in the emergency department were normal. The patient was admitted to the neurology department to evaluate the etiology of the first-ever seizures.
Neurological examination was unremarkable on admission; however, binaural deformation was present . In the past year, the patient experienced recurrent auricular pustules, which improved after treatment at another hospital, but auricular hypertrophy and deformation remained. Laboratory examination results were as follows: 6,900/μl of white blood cell count (neutrophils 75.2%), 26.8 mg/L of C-reactive protein (reference value < 6.0 mg/L), 315.8 IU/mL of thyroglobulin antibody (TGAb) (reference value 0.0–4.1 IU/mL), and 245.20 IU/mL of thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb) (reference value 0.0–5.6 IU/mL). Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), T3, T4, tumor markers, and hepatic and renal functions were normal. The antinuclear antibody series, antiphospholipid antibodies, vasculitis series, serum human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) serology, and rapid plasma reagin (RPR) tests were negative. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without contrast and EEG were unremarkable. On the fourth day of hospitalization, the patient developed a transient low fever with spontaneous remission the next day. Lumbar puncture was suggested but refused by the patient, who was then discharged with oral valproate therapy.
After 18 days of initial discharge, the patient was readmitted because of fever, headache, and left arm paresis. During the past half a month, the patient had recurrent mild fever, with a body temperature fluctuating between 37 and 38°C, accompanied by headache. The patient reported no cough, expectoration, frequent urination, urgency, abdominal pain, diarrhea, or seizure recurrence. The white blood cell count was 12,100/μL (neutrophils 83.1%), and the C-reactive protein was 18.3 mg/L, as tested in another hospital. Ceftriaxone was intravenously administered for more than 4 days without any relief. On the day before admission, left arm numbness and weakness occurred, which lasted for half an hour, followed by slurred speech and difficulty in expression. Considering that stroke could not be ruled out, aspirin and clopidogrel were administered along with ceftriaxone, acyclovir, and valproate.
Upon admission, vital signs were as follows: body temperature 38.9°C, pulse 83 bpm, respiratory rate 19/min, and blood pressure 123/72 mmHg. The patient was somnolent but arousable and responded slowly. The cranial nerve examination was normal, except for red eyes. Motor system examinations revealed left arm paresis graded 4+ on the Medical Research Council (MRC) scale. Kernig's signs were positive, with no neck resistance. There were no abnormalities in the reflex, sensory, or coordination systems. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 14,300/μL (neutrophils 88.6%), C-reactive protein of 17.6 mg/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 60 mm/h, and procalcitonin within the normal range. Aspirin and clopidogrel were discontinued upon admission to the hospital ward. Ceftriaxone and acyclovir were continued. Lumbar puncture was performed the day after admission, with an opening pressure of 175 mmH2O. CSF analysis showed 2 leukocytes/μL, 736.5 mg/L of protein, and 50.0 mg/dL of glucose (103 mg/dL of simultaneous blood glucose). CSF adenosine deaminase, occult blood, Gram stain, acid-fast staining, ink staining, tuberculosis, and herpes virus antibodies were all negative. CSF cytology revealed a mixed-cell inflammatory response. CSF metagenomic next-generation sequencing revealed the presence of streptococcus. Contrast-enhanced brain MRI demonstrated an increased enhancement of the pia mater , with no abnormal signals in the brain parenchyma. Abnormal DWI signals were observed in the bilateral auricles . EEG revealed a moderate slow-wave change, which was more pronounced on the right side. Both peripheral blood and CSF autoimmune encephalitis antibody spectrum tests, including anti-N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (anti-NMDAR), anti-leucine-rich glioma-inactivated 1 (anti-LGI1), anti-contactin-associated protein-like 2 (CASPR2), anti-gamma aminobutyric acid-B receptor (GABABR), anti-α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor 1 (anti-AMPAR1), anti-AMPR2, anti-immunoglobulin-like cell adhesion molecule 5 (anti-IgLON5), anti-dipeptidyl-peptidase-like protein 6 (anti-DPPX), anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase 65 (anti-GAD65), anti-metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (anti-mGluR5), anti-glycine receptor (GlyR), and anti-R2R, were all negative. The T-SPOT.TB test and IgG4 were also negative.
Although ceftriaxone was administered before admission, consultation with the Infectious Disease Department suggested that bacterial meningitis was not considered. Therefore, meningoencephalitis secondary to RP was suspected. Consultation with the Rheumatology Department yielded a similar opinion as ours.
The patient gradually became drowsy during hospitalization. The paresis of the left arm became severe. His son, who was taking care of him, also developed fever. The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) nucleic acid test results were positive. Considering the COVID-19 infection, dexamethasone (10 mg/day) was administered intravenously, along with symptomatic treatment for COVID-19. After 2 days of steroid therapy, there was a significant improvement in drowsiness and paresis, with no seizure recurrence. Dexamethasone (10 mg/day) was given for 2 weeks, followed by methylprednisolone at 56 mg/day, which was gradually tapered during follow-up. A follow-up EEG performed 6 months after disease onset was normal, and valproate was therefore discontinued. During the 9-month follow-up, the patient remained well without neurological disorders while continuing with methylprednisolone (current dose, 12 mg/day).