A 70-year-old Caucasian man, who was being treated for a Staphylococcus aureus infection of a hip prosthesis in the Orthopaedic Surgery Department, was found to have anemia. His skin was pale, blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg, hemoglobin (Hb) had dropped to 9.4 g/dl (normal: 13.017.0 g/dl) but his mean corpuscular volume was normal.
A few days later, the patient complained of nausea and vomiting after meals; his Hb had decreased to 7.6 g/dl and he was given a blood transfusion. A fecal occult blood test was positive, an abdominal X-ray was unremarkable showing no air fluid levels, and an endoscopic examination of his stomach was inconclusive, showing only food remains. Bilious postprandial vomiting ensued and melena appeared. The patient's Hb level continued to fall, and repeated blood transfusions were required. A new endoscopic examination of his stomach was scheduled to evaluate his duodenum, but no pathology was found. Total colonoscopy, including visualization of the terminal ileum, was performed but found no lesions. The patient developed severe vomiting.
An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan was carried out, revealing one thickened ansa in the proximal jejunum, which suggested an invagination. There was also intense intravenous contrast uptake at this location .
The patient underwent laparotomy and, during surgery, it was discovered that in fact a jejuno-jejunal invagination was present at the location of an intestinal tumor. Reduction was impossible and resection was performed, followed by an end-to-lateral mechanic anastomosis with CEEA 25 .
In the anatomopathological examination, a malignant neoplasm was found. It had undifferentiated characteristics, large cells with bizarre nuclei and abundant granulocytic infiltrate. Histochemical markers revealed epithelioid features of an undifferentiated tumor, pointing to ES .
Serum tumor marker levels for carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) were normal, but CA 125 was elevated (41 U/ml; normal <27 U/ml). Both the thoraco-abdominopelvic CT scan performed with intravenous contrast and the positron emission tomography (PET), performed 1 month after surgery revealed no remaining or new lesions.