A four-year-old female, medically free, presented at our centers otolaryngology clinic with a non-resolving facial palsy and ear discharge. The patient had a history of left facial nerve paralysis for more than six months accompanied by left ear yellowish foul-smelling discharge. No other aural complaints were identified, and the right ear was normal. Upon otoscopic examination, the left ear canal had an aural polyp with pus precluding full visualisation of the tympanic membrane. The right ear showed intact tympanic membrane and external auditory canal. The patient had left-sided lower motor neuron (LMN) facial nerve weakness, grade five on the House-Brackmann scale.
On further evaluation, conditioned play audiometry CPA using supra-aural headphones revealed hearing loss in the left ear mild to moderately severe and normal hearing sensitivity in the right ear. CPA with bone conduction testing resulted in masked bone conduction thresholds on the left ear within the normal range of 500–4,000 Hz, except for slight evidence of decreased hearing sensitivity at 2000 Hz. Auditory brainstem response confirmed the left-sided conductive hearing loss. Tympanometry revealed a type C tympanogram in the right ear, indicating negative air pressure in the middle ear. The left could not be tested due to active discharge. Bilaterally, the speech reception threshold SRT was consistent with pure tone averages.
A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a lack of ossicles and three hyperdense calcified densities, almost filling the left middle ear cavity. This was consistent with the characteristics of odontomas. One of the densities was compressing the tympanic segment of the facial nerve and the lateral semi-circular canal. Another mass was anteriorly in direct contact with both the carotid canal and the eustachian tube, and posteriorly compressing on the jaguar bulb (A–C). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed signs of left chronic suppurative otomastoiditis with no evidence of cholesteatoma.
After thorough counselling with the family, the patient was transferred to the operating theater for the following surgical interventions: left ear exploration with odontoma removal, decompression of the facial nerve’s tympanic segment, and cartilage tympanoplasty. Pre-operatively, prophylactic Cefazolin was administered to prevent operative infections. The patient was arranged in a supine position under general anaesthesia with endotracheal intubation. The procedure was undertaken in sterile conditions with continuous monitoring of the facial nerve.
Intra-operatively, through a retro-auricular incision, the operation started with periosteal flap elevation followed by anterior tympanotomy. This enabled the surgeon to lift the tympanomeatal flap. After initial ear exploration, examination of the middle ear cavity revealed keratinised tissues and a firm fibrotic aural polyp. These extruded into the external auditory canal, covering the odontoma, and were initially cauterised and debrided. No ossicles or stapes suprastructure were observed as they appeared to have been eroded by the odontoma. However, the head of stapes was noticed. After polyp removal, canaloplasty, and atticotomy, the surgical team noticed three embedded teeth surrounded by a fibrotic soft tissue. The first tooth, found in the attic, was compressing the tympanic segment of the facial nerve. This was fully drilled to decompress the facial nerve. The second tooth, covering the promontory and extending into the hypotympanum, was extracted completely . Once we reached the jugular vein, the third tooth was found occupying the eustachian tube orifice and firmly attached to the carotid canal. This tooth was kept in place since opening the eustachian tube could have led to carotid artery injury. After removing most of the odontoma, the facial nerve’s swollen tympanic segment was fully exposed, and its sheath was incised to relieve the edema. Finally, the attic and the perforated tympanic membrane were reconstructed using temporalis facial and conchal cartilage.
The patient tolerated the surgery well. Post-operatively, on day one, the patient did not present with pain complaints. During examination, she was vitally stable, with no active bleeding or oozing on the left ear. In addition, the Weber test was lateralised to the operated ear. The patient was discharged on oral Cefuroxime for one week. At six-month follow-up, the patient’s condition was stable with no deterioration, relapse, or active complaints. Moreover, the patient noted improvement in her facial palsy, which was apparent on examination (grade three left facial palsy on the House-Brackmann scale). Ear evaluation by otoscopy showed bilateral intact tympanic membranes. Tuning fork examination on the operated ear demonstrated negative Rinne and lateralisation during the Weber test. Audiological tests reported the same mild to moderately severe conductive hearing loss on the left side. These results were expected, and so a hearing restoration procedure was planned for the second stage of the intervention.