A 33-year-old male presented to the emergency department with a history of blurred vision in both eyes. The patient started experiencing blurred vision in the morning after using a computer during the night before. The patient did not feel any pain or other symptoms and the patient had never worn glasses. The medical history of the patient revealed uncontrolled hypertension that had lasted for several years for which he had started taking medications recently. He was taking Triplixam (amlodipine 5 mg, indapamide 2.5 mg, perindopril arginine 5 mg) (Les Laboratoires Servier, France) once per day, prescribed by his physician for his systemic hypertension. He started this medication 4 days prior to the appearance of vision blurring. The visual acuity at presentation was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 14.6 mmHg in both eyes (determined by using a Schiøtz indentation tonometer). The results of slit lamp biomicroscopy showed that the cornea, lens, and vitreous were normal, however, a retinal striae radiated from the fovea in the both eyes. Fundus photography was performed to document the retinal striae . After performing a refraction test, the visual acuity of the patient improved to 20/20 in both eyes with a spherical correction of − 1.75 dioptre sphere (DS) in the right eye and − 2.00 DS in the left eye. Objective refraction was − 1.75 DS/− 0.50 dioptre cylinder (DC) × 21° in the right eye and − 2.00 DS/− 0.25 DC × 165° in the left eye. A cycloplegic refraction revealed a value of − 1.50 DS/− 0.25 DC × 36° in the right eye and − 2.00 DS/− 0.25 DC × 136° in the left eye. The central corneal thickness and corneal endothelial morphology were evaluated using non-contact specular microscopy and there were no pathological changes observed. The initial B-scan ultrasonography showed diffuse choroidal thickening . Optical biometry was performed to measure the axial length which was 23.70 mm and 23.76 mm in the right and the left eye, respectively. The lens thickness was 4.19 mm and 4.18 mm in the right and the left eye, respectively. The anterior chamber depth was similar in both eyes at 3.60 mm. An optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed a mild thickening of the macula at 240 and 243 μm in the right and the left eye, respectively .
The patient was advised to stop taking a triple drug combination, Triplixam, and was referred to a cardiologist for a further investigation. The patient reported that blurred vision reversed 4 days after discontinuing the medication. After 16 days, the patient was examined once again as he was travelling abroad due to a planned vacation. His visual acuity had improved to 20/20 without any refractive error. Intraocular pressure was 15.9 mmHg in both eyes (determined by using a Schiøtz indentation tonometer). Refraction results revealed a value of 0.00 DS/− 0.25 DC × 15° in the right eye and 0.00 DS/− 0.25 DC × 165° in the left eye. Repeated measurements of endothelial morphology and corneal thickness showed no significant differences. Optical biometry revealed no difference in axial length. The lens thickness decreased to 3.97 mm and 3.96 mm in the right and the left eye, respectively. The anterior chamber depth increased to 3.68 mm and 3.69 mm in the right and the left eye, respectively. Fundus examination revealed the disappearance of retinal striae at the macula and peripheral choroidal effusion had also resolved in B-scan. . The OCT was repeated which showed a reduction in the thickening of the macula, 230 μm in both eyes . A presumptive diagnosis of drug-induced acute myopia due to an ingredient of Triplixam – diuretic indapamide – was made.
Electrocardiography, veloergometry and echocardiography tests were performed, and no pathology was revealed. Patient was prescribed by a cardiologist to take 1 mg of Rilmenidine per day to control arterial hypertension.