A 16-year-old girl presented with complaint of epigastric pain that had persisted for several days.
The patient reported experiencing hiccups, nausea, and vomiting. She did not exhibit fever, abdominal pain, or airway symptoms.
The patient had no history of past illness.
The patient had no relevant personal and family history.
The patient did not exhibit fever, abdominal pain, or airway symptoms.
Blood test revealed elevated serum IgG4 concentration (244 mg/dL; normal range: 3-201 mg/dL).
Endoscopy was first ordered and revealed a submucosal mass with intact mucosal appearance at the gastric fundus. Subsequent magnetic resonance imaging showed a calcifying submucosal tumor extending from the gastric fundus to the greater curvature of the upper body and a hypodense lesion in segment IV of the liver. Abdominal ultrasound revealed a 2.72-cm poorly defined hyperechoic tumor in segment IV of the liver. Finally, additional magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the gastric tumor but showed no space-occupying lesion in the liver. According to the image report, the differential diagnosis of the gastric submucosal mass included gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), leiomyoma, lipoma, schwannoma, etc.
Owing to the ongoing uncertainty of the etiology, the patient underwent pure laparoscopic wedge resection of the tumor. A biopsy of the liver lesion was also performed and frozen section histology was negative for malignancy. Histopathological examination of the gastric specimen demonstrated prominent lymphoplasmacytic infiltration and increased proliferation of spindle myofibroblasts in the fibrotic stroma with focal storiform pattern. Immunohistochemical analysis showed 25-35 IgG4-positive plasma cells/high-power field with an IgG4+/IgG- ratio of 50% . Positive staining for smooth muscle actin was observed, but the tumor cells showed negativity for staining of c-kit, anaplastic lymphoma kinase, desmin, and S-100. Neither obliterative phlebitis nor tissue eosinophilia were present. Liver biopsy specimens revealed fatty changes. The patient made an uneventful postoperative recovery. Subsequent blood tests revealed elevated serum IgG4 concentrations (244 mg/dL).