A 15-y-old female, suffering from common B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) with t(1;19)translocation was enrolled in a pediatric protocol AIEOP-BFM LLA 2009. After an initial period of remission, she relapsed during the maintenance phase. Leukemia was consequentely classified as high risk and the patient was treated with AIEOP REC2003 protocol (Italian pediatric protocol for ALL relapsed, LLA REC 2003).
Since chemotherapy alone was considered insufficient and unsafe, bone marrow transplant was performed. The myeloablative conditioning regimen consisted of fractionated doses of total body irradiation (total dose 12 Gy), thiotepa (300 mg/m2), cyclophosphamide (1800 mg/m2) and rabbit antithymocyte globuline (2.5 mg/kg/day), followed by infusion of non-manipulated bone marrow HSC from HLA matched unrelated donor (MUD). Graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis was performed with FK-506 and MMF.
Quantitative RT- PCR for BKPyV detection was carried out by using the Euro-RT BKV kit (Eurospital, Trieste, Italy), which amplifies a region localized in BKPyV antigen-T gene. Pre-transplant screening for BKPyV was positive resulting in a viremia of 8.3 × 104 cp/ml and a viruria 1.9 × 1010 cp/ml, without any clinical signs of infection. PCR screening tests for other virus (CMV, EBV, VZV, HSV, HHV-6, Adenovirus, TTV and JCV) were otherwise negative.
At day +15, neutrophil and platelet engraftment occurred regularly, while lymphocytes were still depleted with only 0.4% out of 600 total WBC. BKPyV viral blood load rose up to 4.4 ×105 cp/ml, with a simultaneous mild decrease of viruria (1.8 × 109 cp/ml). At day +20, the patient developed haemorrhagic cystitis with a rapid exacerbation of symptoms, ureteric bilateral occlusion and, consequently, dilatation of calico-pyelic ducts.
At day +24, absolute lymphocyte count was 11 cell/μl and immunophenotyping showed a predominant CD3−CD16+/56+ cell population (92%), a very low percentage of CD3+ T cells (2%), distributed between T CD3+CD4+ cells (1%) and T CD3+CD8+ cells (1%) and almost complete depletion of CD19+ B lymphocytes (0.6%).
Since cidofovir, one of the few drugs with proven efficacy against BKPyV infection, was unavailable, immunosuppressive therapy was reduced trying to control the disease.
At day +90, two months after immunosuppression reduction, the patient’s bone marrow biopsy revealed the presence of 5% B-lymphoblasts, confirming the morphological relapse of leukemia. On the contrary, there was complete remission of hemorrhagic cystitis, both BKPyV viruria and viremia were unchanged and cytometric analysis showed a severe T and B lymphocyte depletion (CD3+ 7%, CD19+ 0.1%, absence of CD20, NK cells 91%, among 786 total lymphocyte/μl), confirming a delay of bone marrow reconstruction after HSCT.
At day +107, IgM abruptly increased up to 185 mg/dl . Patient’s serum k free light chains measured 160 mg/L (ref. val. 6.7-22.4 mg/L) and λ free light chains 211 mg/L (ref. val. 8.3-27.0 mg/L). The ratio κ/λ was 0.76 (ref. val. 0.31-1.56). Urinary protein electrophoresis showed mixed proteinuria with predominance of tubular components. U-Albumin was 5.09 mg/dL (ref. val. <3), U-alfa1 microglobulin 13.3 mg/dL (ref. val. < 1.2) and U-IgG 0.944 (ref. val. < 0.85). Testing for urinary Bence Jones protein was positive: k light chains were 5.73 mg/dL and λ light chains 2.89 mg/dL.
The hypothesis of lymphoproliferation as a consequence of viral infection was taken into account due to the delay of T-cells reconstruction. Therefore, patient’s blood samples were analyzed by quantitative PCR for the presence of EBV, CMV, Adenovirus, HSV-1, HSV-2, HHV-6, HCV-RNA, HBV-DNA and resulted negative. A leukemic gammopathy was then suspected. A further evaluation of blast immunophenotype did not show significant differences compared to the onset of the disease. Moreover, using flow cytometric analysis, leukemic lymphoproliferative disease was ruled out since no monoclonal B cells were present and, at the same time, there was no evidence of plasmacytosis, neither in peripheral blood nor in bone marrow samples. We also excluded polyclonal gammopathy caused by autoimmune diseases. All serological tests resulted negative (antinuclear antibodies, anti–doublestranded DNA and anti-Smith antibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, anti–glomerular basement membrane antibodies, complement levels of C3 and C4, rheumatoid factor).
After few days the patient’s renal function worsened, while urinary cytology showed abundant Decoy cells and big clusters of viral particles in the nucleus of uroepithelial cells were detected by electron microscopy .
A subsequent kidney biopsy showed a diffuse inflammatory infiltration of the interstitial medullary area mainly represented by plasma cells associated with edema without signs of immaturity. Tubular epithelium showed moderate-to-severe atrophy and lesions due to viral cytopathic effect. Confirmation of the identity of the virus was made with immunohistochemical detection of SV40 T-antigen .
The diagnosis of polyomavirus BK-associated nephropathy (PVAN) was then made and the immunosuppression therapy was discontinued. Despite that, renal function did not improve after the complete interruption of immunosuppressive therapies and viremia and IgM levels remained high .
At day +129 the patient underwent another myeloablative conditioning in order to perform a second HSCT from an haploidentical family donor. At day + 135 bone marrow biopsy showed complete aplasia with no blast cells. IgM levels slowly decreased, probably due to the complete depletion of B cells induced by myeloablative conditioning. Unfortunately, as BKPyV's viremia rose back to high levels as well as the immunoglobulins and eventually, three weeks after the second HSCT the patient died. Death was ascribable to a multiple organ failure due to chemotherapy toxicity after second transplant conditioning regimen, rather than just PVAN.