A 26-year-old healthy male patient was referred to us presenting acute scotoma and metamorphopsia in OD. He had been recently diagnosed with bilateral angioid streaks and presumable choroidal neovascularization and submitted to intravitreal treatment with aflibercept with no response.
At presentation his best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) using the ETDRS score was 85 letters (20/20) in OD and in OS. The anterior segment examination was unremarkable and his intraocular pressure was 12 mmHg in both eyes. Dilated fundoscopy revealed bilateral angioid streaks (AS) and peau d’orange, as well as a small serous neurosensory retinal detachment in the macula of OD . A multimodal retinal analysis including fundus photography, infra-red and fundus autofluorescence imaging, spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT), fluorescein (FA) and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) was performed using the Spectralis system (Spectralis +HRA; Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany). An optical coherence tomography angiography (OCTA) (AngioPlex CIRRUS HD-OCT Model 5000, Carl ZeissMeditec, Inc., Dublin, OH) was also used with a scanning area of 3 mmx3 mm, centered on the macula. SD-OCT was performed with and without the enhanced-depth imaging technique (EDI), presenting a small serous macular detachment overlying a small retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) detachment in OD, near to an angioid streak, with no signs of chronicity in the outer retina or underlying RPE . No sub or intra-retinal fluid was detected in OS. The subfoveal choroidal thickness was measured using the software manual caliper, presenting 308 μm in OD and 411 μm in OS. Pachyvessels were identified bilaterally, compressing the choriocapillaris . The FA revealed an active leaking spot near but not contiguous to an angioid streak, with no leaking in the ICGA . No signs of choroidal neovascular complex were detected on the OCTA, presenting no flow underneath the small RPE detachment on the structural OCT but some minor vascular network irregularities were detected at the choriocapillaris layer in both eyes . The diagnosis of acute central serous chorioretinopathy was made, and he was submitted to half-dose photodynamic therapy (HD-PDT) with verteporfin. One month later, he reported no visual complaints, his vision ETDRS score was 85 (20/20) in OD and a complete resolution of the sub-retinal fluid was registered . No signs of choroidal neovascularization were detected on the OCTA.
A complete medical workup evaluation was made to exclude systemic diseases usually associated with the AS, including the evaluation by a dermatologist, cardiologist and geneticist. No systemic disease was detected so far, but the genetic study result is still pending. The family history was negative for angioid streaks.