A 30-year old male was admitted to our hospital with the complaints of epigastric pain, vomitting and swelling of his left limb for past six days. He was also having diarrhea for the last several months. Detailed history revealed that he had been reasonably evaluated for chronic diarrhea and ascites for the last six months before he sought the current consultation. There was no history of fever, jaundice, blood in the stool or any bladder symptoms. He was non- alcoholic and had no personal or family history of any allergy or asthma. On admission, the patient looked emaciated with dry skin, had oral temperature of 98 0 F, pulse - 90 beats/min and blood pressure of 130/90 mmHg. Abdominal examination revealed periumbilical tenderness with appreciable ascites and there were no signs suggestive of chronic liver disease. He had edematous and tender swelling of his left leg with limited passive mobility. His peripheral pulses were normal. Laboratory investigations showed hemoglobin -10.7 g/dL , total leukocyte count - 10,800/mm3 with predominant eosinophils (22%), absolute eosinophil count - 2,376/mm3 (normal range, 0 to 500/ mm3) and platelet count - 2.5 lakh/cumm3. Serum amylase measured 650U/L (reference range: 0-200 U/L), serum lipase -150 U/L (reference range: 30-110 U/L), serum bilirubin - 1.0 mg/dl, serum albumin - 4.5 mg/dl, aspartate transaminase - 46 IU/L, alanine transaminase - 80 IU/L and alkaline phosphatase - 42 U/L. He was tested negative for HIV-1 and 2 (ELISA), HBsAg and anti-HCV antibody. Routine stool examination and fecal fat estimation of the stool was normal. Ultrasound showed moderate ascites with normal echotexture of the liver and mild oedematous pancreas. Ascitic fluid study revealed high SAAG ascites with total leukocyte count-1000/ mL, 90% of which were eosinophils , adenosine deaminase (ADA) - 18 IU/L and amylase - 28U/L ( range, 0 - 100 U/L). Serum IgE level was elevated at 548 IU/mL (normal < 180 IU/mL). Duplex color doppler of left limb showed thrombotic occlusion at the level of distal calf vein suggestive of deep vein thrombosis (DVT). Contrast enhanced CT imaging of abdomen done two days later revealed thickening of duodenum, proximal jejunal wall and presence of ascites with mildly enlarged pancreas .
Once the patient was stable, upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed mild hyperemia of antral mucosa of stomach, and duodenum. Duodenal biopsy showed normal villous pattern with mild inflammation and eosinophilic infiltration (12/HPF). To ascertain other causes of HE, bone marrow biopsy was done which revealed erythroid hyperplasia with normoblastic erythropiesis and prominent esonophilic infiltration (25%) .
The constellation of clinical presentation, hypereosinophilia, CT and biopsy findings and an avid clinical response to steroids was suggestive of EGE. Acute pancreatitis was managed conservatively while DVT was treated with low molecular weight heparin and oral anticoagulants. To treat EGE and manage HE, the patient was put on oral prednisone (20mg/day) for four weeks and tapered slowly. The patient’s diarrhea settled and ascites resolved completely. At follow-up, a repeat peripheral blood count showed a considerable fall in the absolute eosinophil count (300/μl) and the patient was doing well.