A 20-year-old teenage boy with abrupt fever, confusion, and epileptic seizures was referred to the Department of Neurology of the Guangzhou General Military Hospital. The patient was otherwise a healthy boy until he had an unusual health status prior to 5 days. Cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) analysis was performed on admission, and the result showed negative Pandy test with a predominance of lymphocytes. Besides, CSF test for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, herpes simplex virus (HSV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and rubella virus revealed negative results. Two days later, antibody analysis of autoimmune encephalitis was also shown to be normal. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed hypersignal intensity in bilateral frontal as well as temporal lobe.
Next, the patient was diagnosed with encephalitis due to unidentified etiology, and then systemic administration of steroids was given without antiviral treatment. He was prescribed with intravenous methylprednisolone, 1 g/d for 3 consecutive days, followed by 0.5 g/d for 3 days, and then was maintained on 80 mg/d for 2 weeks. Two weeks after admission, the boy showed no sign of improvement. A second brain MRI showed much worsened manifestation of hypersignal in both bilateral frontal and temporal lobe, and a second CSF analysis showed negative results of the pathogen as shown in the first CSF analysis. He was therefore presumed to have “autoimmune encephalitis” by primary neurologists and was prescribed with gamma globulin 25 g/d for 5 days. Later, he had less fever and seizures, and improvements were observed in his oral expression. So, intravenous methylprednisolone administration was gradually reduced and replaced it by oral prednisone of 60 mg/d and then was discharged. One day after being discharged, he had sudden vision loss in his right eye, and then the boy was urgently referred to our hospital.
After admitting in our hospital, the patient’s physical and neurological exams were found to be unremarkable. His best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) showed light perception with correct light location in the temporal region of the right eye (OD), and 20/20 with that of the left eye (OS). Ophthalmological examination of his right eye revealed positive Tyndall (+) and cell (++) in the anterior chamber, with obvious opacity (+++) in the vitreous chamber. The fundus of his right eye showed yellow-white lesions, with narrowing retinal vessels and white-sheath and peripheral hemorrhage. Also several tiny retinal holes that lead to retinal detachment (RD) were observed in the peripheral retina . No remarkable changes were observed in his left eye.
New brain MRI performed in our hospital suggested multiple abnormal signals in the brain parenchyma, which were in accordance with the manifestations of viral encephalitis . So, viral-related retinal disorders were highly suspected in our case. Vitreous humor was obtained through vitreous chamber tapping to perform polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis. DNA of HSV-1 virus (9.0 × 106/ml) was identified 5 days after intravitreal antiviral treatment, and the positive results of IgG and IgM antibodies in the blood serology also supported HSV-1 infection, thus confirming the diagnosis of ARN by HSV-1.
Intravitreal administration of ganciclovir (0.4 mg/ 0.1 ml) was immediately performed following vitreous chamber tapping at the time of admission to our hospital. Two days later, the boy was relieved from vitreous opacities (+). Antiviral treatment was therefore considered to be effective, and broad-spectrum antiviral medicine (ganciclovir 250 mg every 12-h) was started intravenously, and then replaced with intravenous acyclovir (500 mg every 8-h) after confirmation of HSV pathogen. As the patient also suffered from RD, his right eye was treated by pars plana vitrectomy (PPV), endolaser and silicone oil tamponade 3 days after admission. During the surgery, a second time intravitreal ganciclovir (0.4 mg/0.1 mg) was given.
The patient received intravenous antiviral treatment for 2 weeks and was discharged with oral antiviral medicine (famciclovir 375 mg twice a day) as planned for 3 to 4 months. On the day of discharge, BCVA was 20/80 OD and retinal edema in his right eye has been greatly relieved . At 5 weeks of follow-up, recurrent vision declination occurred with 20/500 OD due to recurrent RD . Therefore, silicon oil displacement and endolaser were performed to repair the retina, as well as intravitreal ganciclovir (0.4 mg/0.1 mg) was given for third time. The BCVA of his right eye was increased to 20/80 within 3 days after the surgery. Six months later, after removing the silicone oil, the BCVA was shown to be 20/200 OD with complicated cataract.