A three-month-old baby girl presented with CBHV. She was the only child of non-consanguineous parents, born by vaginal delivery with no antenatal or postnatal concerns and birth weight 2.95 kg. There was no family history of skeletal abnormalities. Her mother was concerned by the toe shape from birth. She was referred to our expert bone centre to explore the possibility of FOP. On examination the baby was well, thriving, weight 6.48 kg (75th-91st centile), length: 59 cm (50th centile) and head circumference 39 cm (50th centile) with bilateral hallux valgus . There was no facial dysmorphism, subcutaneous lumps, nor bony deformities elsewhere in the lower limbs, upper limbs, spine, or torso. The baby had a full range of movement at all joints of the trunk and limbs, except reduced flexion-extension of the interphalangeal joint of both great toes. The musculoskeletal examination was otherwise normal, including the absence of any ligamentous laxity. Biochemical bone profile was unremarkable. A skeletal survey confirmed bilateral hallux valgus, small square shaped proximal phalanx of the great toes, tapered distal phalanges with lateral deviation and no evidence of soft tissue heterotopic ossification . The antero-posterior skull x-ray was reported to be normal. Minimal thoracolumbar spine curvature was attributed to a positional effect and not scoliosis. Incidental physiological periosteal reaction in the humeral and femoral shafts were also noted.
The new Genomic Testing Directory for England provides testing of ACVR1 only within a large gene panel rather than via single gene sequencing. WGS libraries were prepared from blood DNA and sequenced commercially by Illumina. Data was processed via the Genomics England Rare Disease Pipeline v2.0, with reads aligned to reference build GRCh38 and variants called, using the DRAGEN software v3.2.22. Variants were then filtered using the virtual panel Skeletal dysplasia v2.2 . Detailed information on the variant prioritisation process and quality metrics used is in the Rare Disease Genome Analysis Guide v2.1 published by Genomics England .
Coverage of the BMPR1A gene was 100% at ≥15x calculated from reads with mapping quality >10 and >85x10^9 bases with Q≥30, after removing duplicate reads and overlapping bases after adaptor and quality trimming.WGS data analysed from the Skeletal Dysplasia Panel (R104 ~450 genes, including ACVR1 which causes FOP) demonstrated a heterozygous variant of unknown significance (c.1460T>A, p.(Val487Asp)) in BMPR1B . The variant was not recorded in the GnomAD database v4.1 . Monoallelic pathogenic BMPR1B variants cause autosomal dominant brachydactyly (types A1, A2 and D) and biallelic pathogenic variants of BMPR1B cause acromesomelic dysplasia 3. Parental testing showed her mother had no BMPR1B gene changes and her father carries the same BMPR1B variant. Although the father has normal toe shape, he subsequently learnt that his predeceased mother, his older brother and his older brother’s three children had had the same abnormal toe shape as his daughter. These individuals were not available for genetic testing or detailed clinical examination, although on report the toe abnormality was an isolated clinical finding and not accompanied by additional musculoskeletal abnormalities, but this phenotypic history suggests this BMPR1B variant is of variable penetrance and in keeping with Autosomal Dominant Brachydactyly Type A.