A 54-year-old female patient was admitted to the outpatient department of Abdominal Radiotherapy of our hospital due to intermittent stool bleeding in April 2021. Physical examination found that the appearance of the anus was normal, a mass could be touched in the site of 5 cm from the anus (6-12 o’clock) during digital rectal examination, the anal sphincter contracted normally, and the gloves were slightly stained with blood after the fingers were removed. Electronic fiber colonoscopy showed that the rectal mucosa was rough, the tumor protruding into the rectum, 5-10 cm from the anus, and the lower pole of the mass was located 1cm above the dentate line . Biopsy of the lesion is SCC . The results of immunohistochemistry showed that AE1/AE3 (+), P40 (+), CK5/6 (+), Ki-67 (70%), MLH1 (+), FMS2 (+), MSH2 (+), MSH6 (+), PD-L1 (VENTANA SP263) (CPS:60), PD-L1 (DAKO 22C3) (CPS:50) . Gene detection showed that no mutation sites were found in KRAS, NRAS and BRAF and Microsatellite-instability (MSI) status was microsatellite stable (MSS). Abdominal MRI found that carcinoma invaded the posterior wall of the uterus, and the distance between the distal end of the tumor and the anal margin was 6.3 cm . The SUVmax of primary lesions was 13.8, and of lymph nodes of mesentery, iliac vessels, abdominal aorta, mediastinum, left neck and bilateral supraclavicular were all above 2.0 in 18F-FDG PET/CT scanning. Of these suspected lymph nodes, para-aortic lymph nodes at the level of the second lumbar spine had the strongest uptake capacity for 18F-FDG, with a SUVmax of 8.0 .
Up to now, there is no effective treatment strategy recommended for patients with RSCC. This patient has a particularity, that is, her husband is an oncologist in our center, and he participated in the formulation of the initial treatment plan with great weight. Considering the high expression level of PD-L1, immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs) was selected as the initial treatment. After received 2 cycles of Pembrolizumab immunotherapy, the patient’s symptoms did not significantly relieve and the size of the tumor has not shrunk in imaging . Re-examination of electronic sigmoidoscopy revealed a protuberant mass 5-10cm from the anus, with surface congestion . In view of the above, and the fact that no new suspicious lesions were found in the reexamination imaging, we assessed the efficacy at this stage as stable disease (SD).
Given the less sanguine efficacy of the application of single pembrolizumab, a discussion was conducted by the multidisciplinary team (MDT) (Incl. Medical imaging specialist, Gastrointestinal surgeons, Gastroenterologists, Oncologists, Pathologists, Radiotherapy specialist, et al.). In view of the less sanguine efficacy of this patient after 2 cycles of PD-1 inhibitor, the treatment was adjusted to pembrolizumab combined with mFOLFOX6 (fluorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin) for 4 cycles from June 21 to September 29, 2021. The patient’s compliance was good during the whole treatment process, and the adverse reactions were mild. Laboratory tests showed no obvious hematological toxicity and the monitoring of cardiac function, pituitary function, BNP, troponin, and thyroid function showed no abnormal changes. After this course of treatment, the symptoms of blooding in stool basically disappeared, but tenesmus still exist. A second PET/CT was performed, at which the SUVmax of the primary lesion was 10.2. Although most of the abnormal lymph nodes founded on the baseline scan had disappeared, the para-aortic lymph nodes at the level of the second lumbar spine has not changed and with SUVmax of 4.1 .
Therefore, at the time of the second MDT, experts agree that most of the metastatic lymph nodes have disappeared, and the remaining lesions are mainly concentrated in the primary lesions and paraaortic lymph nodes. Next, local treatment (Incl. surgical resection, radiotherapy) should be strongly recommended. Since the patient refused to operate, we performed pelvic IMRT (PTV: 50.4Gy/28F, 1.8Gy/F) and abdominal lymph nodes SBRT (PTV: 42Gy/7F, 6Gy/F). The radiotherapy process was smooth and the patient had no obvious discomfort. The findings of efficacy evaluation of 2 weeks after the end of radiotherapy showed that the symptoms of tenesmus and blooding in stool disappeared, the lesion was significantly smaller, and no new suspicious lesions were found. we assessed the efficacy at this stage as partial response (PR).
Considering that the therapeutic effect of mFOLFOX6 to this patient is not optimistic, the third MDT was carried out, and then the chemotherapy regimen was changed to PC (Albumin-binding Paclitaxel and Nedaplatin), which is effective in the treatment of esophageal, lung and other SCC, and pembrolizumab was continued. A total of 6 cycles of this regimen were performed from November 13, 2021 to March 25, 2022. The treatment process was smooth and the patient showed no significant blood toxicity or liver and kidney function damage. At last, there was only mild numbness in the feet without pain and other discomfort, which was considered as neurotoxicity of the chemotherapy drugs. After this stage treatment, the patient’s efficacy was evaluated in detail. Re-examination by electronic sigmoidoscopy showed that the tumor was 5cm from the anus with scar changes after radiotherapy, the mucosa was smooth, and no obvious new organisms were observed . Colonoscopy showed that the rectal mass disappeared and the intestinal mucosa showed scar changes. No occupying lesions were found in abdominal and pelvic MRI scans . PET/CT showed mild uptake of 18F-FDG at the primary tumor site with SUVmax of 1.6, and all abnormal uptake of 18F-FDG in lymph nodes seen at baseline scans disappeared . Within 12 months after the end of the overall treatment regimens, four follow-up visits for the patient were conducted and no recurrence lesions were found . Therefore, we believe that this patient has obtained NED status.