A 19-year-old male patient, with body mass index (BMI) of 8.45 kg/m and previous diagnosis of cerebral palsy, was admitted due to upper gastrointestinal bleeding Blatchford score of 10. Upon initial assessment, the patient required a blood transfusion due to hemoglobin level of 5.48 g/dl. The upper gastrointestinal endoscopy reported an esophageal ulcer Forrest IIC and esophagitis. Given the symptoms associated with chronic malnutrition and severe deconditioning, a gastrostomy was recommended. Initially an endoscopic gastrostomy was decided as the ideal approach, which was unsuccessful due to suboptimal translumination. Despite considering a new attempt to perform endoscopic gastrostomy at a later date, the patient´s nutritional and metabolic condition could worsen in case it failed a second time. Thus, an open gastrostomy was considered by the gastroenterology department to ensure an early start of the enteral nutritional route. The institutional anesthesiologist considered the patient’s high risk would be reduced once he was in adequate nutritional and metabolic so the surgery was performed without any initial complications. An upper gastrointestinal endoscopy on the third postoperative day revealed adequate positioning of the gastrostomy and enteral nutrition was initiated and well tolerated.
Ten days after surgery, patient in-hospital presented diffuse abdominal pain and multiple diarrheic episodes, of insidious origin, referring it began two days after surgical procedure and gradually increased its intensity. Laboratory results were within normal limits, and the abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed extensive pneumatosis from esophagus, stomach, small intestine and partial colon. Additionally, moderate pneumoperitoneum and gas in the venous portal system were also reported (, ). The CT scan showed no evidence of an intra-abdominal collection or abscess that could otherwise explain the findings, as there was also no clinical or laboratory signs of systemic inflammatory response syndrome or infection. Medical management was initiated with intravenous fluids and nasogastric tube, while suspending the enteral nutrition. Patient showed improved outcome regarding symptomatology 24 h later. One month after the surgery, the patient was discharged in good conditions, with nutritional supplement via gastrostomy and integral rehabilitation.