A 49-year-old Caucasian woman affected by SLE and APS presented to the Emergency Department complaining of acute onset of abdominal pain. She denied fever, nausea or vomit. Two months earlier, the patient, with no previous medical history, had been hospitalized for deep vein thrombosis. Her vaccination history was as follows: diphtheria, polio, smallpox and tetanus; she had never been vaccinated for chickenpox, measles, mumps or rubella. During that period, she had been diagnosed with both SLE —positive homogeneous antinuclear antibody titer of 1:320 with a homogeneous pattern— and APS —positive lupus anticoagulant—, with multi-organ dysfunction consisting of lupus nephritis with nephrotic syndrome, lung serositis, hemolytic anemia and arthritis. Consequently, the patient had been treated with MMF (1.5 g qd) and prednisone (50 mg qd) by nephrologists. On hospital admission, vitals were normal except for heart rate at 120 bpm. Physical examination revealed petechiae at thorax and limbs. Complete blood count showed low lymphocyte [0.50 × 109/L] and platelet (58 × 109/L) counts. Other serum abnormal laboratory data included decreased levels of immunoglobulin (Ig) G [118 mg/dL (NR:700–1600)] and increased values of aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) [22x and 13x upper limit of normal (ULN), respectively] and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) [13x ULN]. Activated partial thromboplastin time [1.5x ULN] and international normalized ratio (INR) [5.9] were prolonged, whereas renal function was normal. At peripheral blood smear, a number of echinocytes and 2–3 schistocytes/high-power field were detected; platelets were normal-sized but decreased (5/high-power field).
All these findings led to the suspicion of catastrophic APS (CAPS). Therefore, methylprednisolone (1 g qd) was started, but the patient’s conditions worsened dramatically as blood tests revealed persistent decrease in platelet count [23 × 109/L] and substantial increase in INR [7.75], LDH [25x ULN] and D-dimer [71x ULN], consistent with a possible disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Therefore, platelet transfusions and fresh frozen plasma were administered. Later on, plasmapheresis and immunoglobulin infusion became necessary. The patient began to show signs of multiple organ failure (MOF) such as acute kidney injury, increasing elevation of liver function tests, glycemia and troponin I, appearance of confusion and, finally, respiratory distress that required intubation. During the procedure, pseudo-membranes, white exudates and diffuse petechiae were detected in the pharynx (consistent with a possible infective exudative pharyngitis). Later on, hypotension and acute onset anemia appeared, and the patient eventually died a few hours later.
At autopsy, diffuse skin petechiae were present. No significant small vessel occlusions could be observed. Pharyngeal mucosa showed ulcerative lesions associated with cytopathic effects of the squamous epithelium (including acantholysis, intranuclear inclusions and cytoplasmic vacuolization), which were suggestive of viral infection . The liver parenchyma contained areas of coagulative and hemorrhagic necrosis, and hepatocyte nuclei had a diffuse ground-glass appearance, suspicious for viral inclusions. Moreover, occasional multinucleated hepatocytes were observed . No other significant alterations were present. Being the morphological picture at pharyngeal and liver level consistent with herpesvirus (HV) infection , immunohistochemistry was performed with locally available antibodies [i.e. herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) and 2 (HSV-2) and cytomegalovirus (CMV)], but it resulted negative both in liver and in pharynx.
In light of these findings and after a multidisciplinary discussion of the case, it was opted to perform virological tests taking in due account the interpretative limitations related to hypogammaglobulinemia and quantitative real-time polymerase-chain reaction assays (PCR; ELITe MGB Kits, ELITech, France) for HV on the plasma samples that had been harvested on the day of death. The most relevant data was a strong VZV positivity (19,600,000 copies/mL) in the absence of concomitant immune activation [IgM index = 0.3 (cut-off > 1); IgG < 10 mIU/mL (cut-off > 150)]. Furthermore, it was found positivity for CMV [serological pattern of reactivation with DNA at 3240 IU/ml], Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) [serological pattern of reactivation with detectable DNA below the lower limit of quantitation (LLQ) of 256 IU/mL] and human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) [DNA below the LLQ of 350 IU/mL], whereas samples were negative for HSV-1 and HSV-2 DNA .