We present a 23-year-old African-American female who was gravida 5 para 4, postpartum Day 14, who presented to the emergency room for severe sub-sternal chest pressure without radiation. The patient also complained of associated shortness of breath which was aggravated by exertion and partially relieved by rest. Upon arrival, the patient was haemodynamically stable. Examination of vitals revealed blood pressure was 127/83 mmHg, heart rate was 72 b.p.m., respiratory rate was 16 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. Cardiac auscultation revealed normal heart sounds. The patient had a past medical history significant for pre-eclampsia in a previous pregnancy, asthma, and bipolar disorder. Differential diagnoses included ACS (which could be secondary to acute myocardial infarction), aortic dissection, costochondritis, and gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Initial electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ST depressions in inferior leads and lateral leads V5–V6 with inverted T waves in leads V1–V2. Initial troponin was normal but serial troponin I was elevated to 1.13 ng/mL (reference range 0.000–0.029 ng/mL). Two-dimensional (2D) echocardiography demonstrated globally reduced left ventricular function with an ejection fraction of 40% . In the setting of alarm symptoms with signs of acute myocardial injury, cardiac catheterization was urgently performed. Catheterization displayed triple vessel SCAD involving the left main trunk extending into mid-LAD, dissection in the ostium of the left circumflex artery into the large first obtuse marginal branch and dissection involving distal right coronary artery (RCA) ( and Videos 1 and 2).
The patient remained haemodynamically stable with improved Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction III flow and resolution of her symptoms, which dictated medical management. The patient was started on aspirin, heparin drip, blood pressure management, and heart rate control and moved to the coronary care unit. After 48 h, clopidogrel loading was initiated. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) of coronary arteries was then performed confirming dissection .
For screening purpose, CTA of head, neck, abdomen, and pelvis was done which showed a constellation of findings compatible with fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) including irregular calibre and wall thickening of bilateral common iliac arteries, focal intimal defect and ectasia of the very distal infrarenal abdominal aorta and vague abnormality of the left renal artery probably representing wall thickening.
Revascularization was considered but since she became haemodynamically stable with complete regression of her symptoms, conservative management was indicated and preferred by the patient as well and she was managed with dual antiplatelet therapy for 12 months and lifelong aspirin 81 mg. She was also initiated on a beta blocker therapy on discharge as well since beta blockers reduce shear arterial stress and have been presumably beneficial in reducing coronary arterial wall stress. The rationale behind initiating dual antiplatelet therapy for this patient included potential help with inflammation since SCAD is a prothrombotic state. The addition of clopidogrel in SCAD patients not treated with stents is of unclear benefit. The role of anticoagulation for SCAD is also controversial with potential risk of dissection extension but also has a benefit of resolution of overlying thrombus and improving the lumen patency. In our patient, heparin drip was briefly started at outside hospital but was stopped after clopidogrel initiation at our facility. Prior to discharge she was extensively counselled by the primary team and obstetrics and gynaecology team that in the setting of a SCAD, another pregnancy could be life-threatening. She was advised that were she to desire another pregnancy it should be after lengthy consultation with her cardiology team and with maternal foetal medicine team. She was recommended for long-term birth control and opted for nexplanon implant. The patient is alive at 6 months follow-up with her rheumatologist but she has not followed up with cardiology team. There has been no documentation of repeat echo or CTA at 6 months follow-up.