A seventy year old Caucasian male, who had no significant previous medical history, was admitted to a local hospital with a history of sudden onset jaundice and weight loss. There was no previous history of jaundice or hepatitis. There was no significant history of alcohol in-take or exposure to arsenic, vinyl chloride, or Thorotrast. He never used any hepatotoxic or herbal medications and his mother died of undiagnosed liver disease.
Upon examination the patient was jaundiced without encephalopathy or focal neurological findings. He had bilateral pedal oedema and hepatomegaly. The patient did not have any other signs of liver failure. Liver function tests at admission revealed a total bilirubin of 203 mmol/dL (normal, 5–17 mmol/dL), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 52 IU/L (normal, 4–44 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase 170 IU/L (normal, 67–213 IU/L), albumin 2.0 g/dL, PT 22 seconds, APTT 51 seconds and platelets 113,000/cm3.
An urgent ultrasound scan demonstrated hepatomegaly with significant liver paranchymal alteration. A subsequent contrast enhanced abdominal CT showed gross replacement of liver with tumour tissue suggestive of a primary liver tumour . The patient was at this point referred to our centre.
The patient's initial evaluation in our Unit showed further derangement in the patients liver functions tests; total bilirubin had risen to 401 mmol/dL, AST to 132 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase to 370 IU/L and INR to 2.1. A local review of his CT scan raised the possibility of angiosarcoma. To confirm the diagnosis a transjugular biopsy was arranged as the clotting abnormality had been resistant to correction with fresh frozen plasma at the referring centre. Before this could be carried out patient rapidly deteriorated after admission and became progressively encephalopathic, consistent with FHF. He was treated conservatively with dextrose and broad spectrum antibiotics but deteriorated further and died two days after admission to the liver unit.
A post mortem liver biopsy was carried out confirming initial suspicions that this was a primary angiosarcoma of the liver. Microscopically, tumour was composed of poorly cohesive cells, oval to spindle shaped with high grade cytological atypia. The tumour had a sinusoidal growth pattern surrounding clusters of hepatocytes forming cholestatic rosettes . Immunohistochemistry staining was strongly and diffusely positive for vascular endothelial markers (CD31, CD34) and for vimentin. Stains for the cytokeratins and hepatocyte specific antigen highlighted the presence of entrapped non neoplastic hepatocyte and bile ducts. Staining for smooth muscle actin appeared to be confined to areas of fibrotic tissue.