A 50-year-old male with no significant systemic comorbidities presented with complaints of a sudden loss of vision in the left eye of 2 weeks duration. He was earlier diagnosed as a primary angle-closure glaucoma suspect in both eyes and had undergone Yag peripheral iridectomy in both eyes. Three weeks before the symptoms, he was diagnosed positive for COVID-19 by RT-PCR with mild respiratory symptoms requiring hospitalization and recovered without other complications. On examination, the BCVA was 6/6 in the right eye and light perception in the left eye. The intraocular pressure was 20 mm of Hg in both eyes. Anterior segment examination showed bilateral patent peripheral iridotomy and grade 2 RAPD in the left eye. Gonioscopy examination showed an open anterior chamber angle without peripheral anterior synechiae or neovascularization. Dilated fundus evaluation in the right eye was unremarkable except for a dull foveal reflex while the left eye revealed arterial narrowing with faint retinal opacification . Fundus fluorescein angiography revealed microvasculitis, perifoveal hyperfluorescence, and disc leakage in the right eye suggestive of nonocclusive retinal vasculitis with macular edema and delay in the filling of the retinal arteries with a delayed arteriovenous transit time suggestive of CRAO in the left eye . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed cystoid macular edema with submacular detachment in the right eye and inner retinal atrophy with small subfoveal pigment epithelial detachment in the left eye ( and ). Optical coherence tomography (OCT) retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) was normal in the right eye and abnormal in the left eye . The visual field was recorded in the right eye, which was normal . He was started on topical steroids in the right eye. Left eye ocular massage was done. He was sent to the physician for a thromboembolic workup including carotid Doppler, routine blood investigations, a workup for coagulopathy including D-Dimer levels and ANA profile, all of which were normal. Two weeks later he presented with significant corneal edema with gonioscopic evidence of angle neovascularization in the right eye while the left eye remained so. The intraocular pressure recorded was 44 mm Hg in the right eye and 18 mm Hg left eye. OCT of the right eye however revealed a spontaneous decrease in CME . The right eye secondary glaucoma was managed with oral Acetazolamide, a topical combination of Brimonidine with Timolol and Dorzolamide followed by pan-retinal photocoagulation. Three weeks after treatment he had well-regressed angle new vessels, normal IOP, and no macular edema in the right eye with 6/6 vision and continues to be on follow-up. The left eye revealed resolved CRAO (PL vision) with normal IOP and no new vessels.