A 56-year-old Chinese man was admitted with the chief complaint of foamy urine for 1 year and hematuria for 3 months. Medical history was notable for hypertension for 5 years; the highest blood pressure was 180/110 mmHg. His blood pressure was poorly controlled, 140–150/90–100 mmHg, while he took candesartan irregularly.
He denied diabetes, hepatitis, tuberculosis, and coronary heart diseases. His medical family history was unremarkable. He denied use of illicit drugs and exposure to pesticides and other toxins. Medications included an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor. His weight was 79 kg, blood pressure was 170/90 mmHg, and physical examination was otherwise unremarkable.
On admission, laboratory data showed urinary total proteinuria (URTP) 3.4 g/d, serum total protein 75.3 g/l, serum albumin (Alb)33.5 g/l, serum creatinine (Cr) 86 umol/l, (suggesting an eGFR of 87 ml/min/1.73m2 by the CKD-EPI equation) , and C-response protein (CRP) increased at 21.90 mg/l. Urinalysis showed hematuria with 482 red blood cells (RBC) per high-power field, with 80% dysmorphic RBC.
Clinical immunology tests revealed the following: anti-nuclear antibody (+), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (−), IgG4 3.68 g/l, IgG 25.70 g/l, IgA 5.96 g/l, IgM 1.41 g/l, IgE 1586 IU/ml , complement 3 (C3) 0.99 g/l, C4 0.20 g/l, CRP 46 mg/l, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 58 mm/h. Serum immune electrophoresis, glucose, thyroid function, and tumor markers were all normal.
Evaluation for infectious disease was negative, including serologies for hepatitis, HIV, and syphilis. Chest computerized tomogram (CT) scan and enhanced abdominal CT scan were normal. Renal ultrasound showed left kidney dimensions was 12.61 cm in height 5.58 cm in width and 5.43 cm in depth, while the right kidney dimensions were 11.22 by 5.62 by 7.86 cm. Both kidneys were slightly enlarged and hyperechoic .
On periodic acid Schiff (PAS) staining under light microscopy, one out of fourteen glomeruli showed global sclerosis. The mild to moderate mesangial proliferation was present. The two glomeruli showed ischemic shrinkage . There was no endocapillary hypercellularity, fibrosis of Bowman’s capsule wall, or glomerular crescents. A few glomeruli manifest adhesion of the capillary tuft to Bowman capsule.
Renal tubules exhibited multifocal atrophy and proteinaceous casts. Renal tubular epithelial cells showed granular and vacuolar degeneration. Focal interstitial fibrosis and interstitial edema with significant inflammatory cell infiltration, including lymphocytes and plasma cells were present, . Occasional hyaline degeneration in arteriolar walls was observed.
On immunofluorescence staining, a pattern of lumpy-like deposition was seen in the mesangium (for the following: IgA was 3+, C3 was 3+, while immunostaining for C1q, fibrinogen, IgG, IgM was negative .
The elevated serum IgG4 level led us to further examine the infiltrated monocytes in renal biopsy. The absolute number of positive IgG4+ cells per high power field> 10 . As surface biomarkers of plasma cells, positive staining of CD38, CD138, CD56, and MUM1 were seen in the interstitium .
Electron micrographs also revealed immune complexes deposited on tubular basement membranes .
This patient manifested typical features of IgAN, including hematuria, proteinuria, mesangial cell proliferation, mesangial matrix expansion, and positive immunofluorescence staining of mesangial IgA and C3 deposits . Plasma cells were identified on PAS-stained sections and EM demonstrated immune complexes on basement membranes. CD38+/CD138+ plasma cells in kidney expressed IgG4. The absolute number of IgG4+ cells per high power field was > 10. Serum IgG4 level was elevated, with values of 3.7 g/l. The size of kidney was enlarged.
In summary, the combination of clinical, serologic, radiologic, and pathologic data, in this patient fulfilled the 2019 American College of Rheumatology and European League Against Rheumatism (ACR/EULAR) criteria for the diagnosis of IgG4-renal disease .
After the diagnosis of IgAN and IgG4-TIN was made, prednisolone (45 mg/d) therapy was initiated, based on the KDIGO guideline for IgAN therapies included the Chinese herb Tripterygium wilfordii, angiotensin converting enzyme-inhibitor was replaced by an angiotensin receptor blocker, together with amlodipine to maintain his blood pressure below 130/80 mmHg. After 12 weeks, the prednisolone reduced gradually and proteinuria level reached complete remission (< 0.3 g/d), and Tripterygium wilfordii was administered for 18 months maintenance .
From the 15th month on, serum IgG4 and IgA re-elevated as well as serum albumin dropped. Tacrolimus was put on the patient as immunosuppresent based on a Cochane systematic review . Before tacrolimus was chosen, other traditional immunosuppressants were also considered. The patient declined intravenous cyclophosphamide due to the inconvenience of hospitalization and concern for tumor occurrence. Mycophenolate mofetil was excluded because the increased local risk for Pneumocystis carinii infection which requires sulfamethoxazole, which can also cause interstitial nephrititis. Rituximab therapy was not available for this patient because of his financial reasons.
After 3 months of tacrolimus treatment, kidney disease activity and immune indices were remitted again for 8 months . When the COVID-19 pandemic emerged and the patient was no longer able to travel to our hospital. His local physician stopped tacrolimus from the 30th month and replaced it with leflunomide for 2 months. Both renal diseases relapsed. When he was able to return to our clinic at 32th month, tacrolimus was administered again. After 3 months treatment with tacrolimus, he again entered complete remission and the remission remains over 45 months of follow up as of this writing.
At the most recent visit in June 2021, URTP remained < 0.3 g/d, IgG4 plasma was negative . In addition, the IgG4-RD Responder Index (RI) was calculated and revealed the suppression of IgG4 production . Although abnormalities in renal function was present with normal size and cortical thickness of the kidney, but no extrarenal lesions appeared, such as gland swelling, lymphadenopathy and retroperitoneal fibrosis compared to those images at the initial presentation of the kidney disease was diagnosed.