A 35-year-old, 52kg Chinese woman with acute myelomonocytic leukemia (M4) was admitted to our hospital with fever. Our patient had been diagnosed as having leukemia seven months previously and had received only three cycles of standard induction chemotherapy (cytarabine 100mg/m2 on days one to seven and with idarubicin 10mg/m2 on days one to three) due to difficulty in paying for the treatment. At the time of her admission she was initially treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics (cefoperazone-sulbactam and levofloxacin).
The results of a physical examination revealed superficial multiple lymphadenectasis, and our patient’s general condition was good. A full blood count revealed a neutrophil count of 940 cells/mm3. Urine analysis, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdominal ultrasonography results were normal. Blood, urine and stool cultures were also negative. Bone marrow cytomorphology showed that monoblasts and promonocytes comprised 48.6 percent of non-erythroid cells. Subsequently, our patient received fludarabine, cytarabine, and granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (FLAG) chemotherapy (cytarabine 1g/m2 on days one to five, with fludarabine 25mg/m2 also on days one to five). After five days of chemotherapy, the neutrophil count had fallen to 150 cells/mm3 so she was treated with granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor. At day 7, high pyrexia was evident, but the results of a repeat chest CT scan was normal and blood cultures were sterile. Empiric therapy with imipenem/cilastatin and vancomycin was started. On day 13, high pyrexia recurred and subsequently two separate peripheral venous blood specimens grew Candida krusei, which was sensitive to itraconazole, voriconazole and amphotericin B, but resistant to fluconazole and 5-fluorouracil. Intravenous itraconazole (400mg loading dose for the first two days followed by 200mg daily) was started . On the 15th day our patient reported right upper arm pain with signs of erythema, swelling and hyperalgesia; ultrasonography revealed a hypo-echoic lesion within the right biceps brachii, 19×55mm in size, in which blood flow could be detected by color Doppler flow imaging . By day 17, her temperature had gone down to 38.0 to 38.5°C, but at day 25 a low grade fever persisted and the biceps lesion had not changed, although the blood cultures no longer grew Candida. Histopathological examination of a biopsy specimen from the lesion showed dense fungal spores, no hyphae, but evidence of focal myocyte necrosis and inflammatory cell infiltration . Spore morphology, as demonstrated by periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and Grocott’s methenamine silver (GMS) staining, was characteristic of fungi. The muscle specimen was inoculated on medium and the culture grew C. krusei, confirming the histopathological diagnosis. Anti-fungal susceptibility tests found sensitivities similar to that of the blood culture. Consequently, intravenous itraconazole was substituted with voriconazole (200mg twice daily) for seven days (days 28 to 34), as antibiotics were gradually discontinued. However, the pyrexia persisted and the lesion had not diminished in size. Our patient declined the offer of excision, so intravenous itraconazole was initiated once again and the decision was made to inject itraconazole 5mg daily into the lesion. Her fever gradually subsided within 48 hours of commencing intra-lesional itraconazole. Then, 10 days later, a further ultrasound scan demonstrated almost complete resolution of the lesion. Once the neutropenia had resolved, the intravenous and intra-lesional itraconazole were discontinued in favor of oral maintenance therapy with itraconazole 200mg twice daily. A follow-up ultrasound scan one month later showed complete resolution of the muscle lesion.