A 51-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our gastroenterology clinic for a routine screening colonoscopy. He had no complaints.
He was otherwise healthy and denied having bloody stools, fevers, chills or unintentional weight loss.
He had no significant past medical history or surgical history and was not taking any medications.
Father had a history of hypertension. No family member had a history of cancer.
Temperature was 37 °C, heart rate was 75 beats per minute, respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute, blood pressure was 129/72 mmHg and body mass index was 23.4 kg/m2. Physical examination was normal. His abdomen was soft with no tenderness or palpable masses. He had no skin lesions, pigmented or hypopigmented spots.
Laboratory testing including complete blood count, basic metabolic panel, liver function tests and coagulation profile were all within normal limits. Hepatic serology was also negative.
He underwent a screening colonoscopy and was found to have a 3-cm submucosal pedunculated polyp about 15 cm from anal verge adjacent to the second rectal fold . Mucosal biopsies were obtained during the procedure. The specimen included fragments of colonic mucosa and a spindle cell tumor. As the mucosal specimens were unrevealing, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging of the pelvis which showed a 2.3 cm × 1.4 cm lesion in the submucosa with no adenopathy. A subsequent endoscopic ultrasound revealed an ill-defined avascular lesion of mixed echogenicity measuring 2.8 cm × 15.2 cm in the submucosa with no communication with muscularis mucosa or propria . Fine needle biopsy, with 19G SharkCore™ needle (Covidien), was obtained for pathology assessment . The tumor showed bland spindle cell proliferation in a uniform fascicular pattern with edematous stroma . The cells were elongated, with oval/wavy nuclei. No mitotic figures, necrosis, or tumoral hemorrhage were seen. The tumor showed strong and diffuse S100 staining, with rare penetrating axons deep within the tumor . Tumor cells were negative for c-kit, desmin and had low Ki-67 index.