A 40-year old male patient of Moroccan origin was admitted in 2012 for diffuse lymphadenopathy confirmed with ultrasound. Blood tests revealed renal insufficiency (serum creatinine: 1.6 mg/dL, eGFR: 48 ml/min/1.73 m2), low serum C3 and C4 levels and hypergammaglobulinemia (4250 mg/dL with oligoclonal banding). Anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA) were positive at 1/640. Anti-dsDNA were negative. Urine tests showed proteinuria (444 mg/L). A thoraco-abdominal computed tomography and positron-emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) were performed. The images were compatible with a lymphoproliferative disorder. Heterogeneous uptake was also noticed in kidneys. Lymph node biopsy was performed and ruled out a hematologic malignancy. Immunohistochemistry showed more than 10 IgG4+ plasma cells per high powered field (HPF) of biopsy sample with more than 40% of IgG+ plasma cells being IgG4+ . Serum IgG4 level was then measured at 2790 mg/dL (N < 201 mg/dL).
This episode was not the first in patient’s medical history. In 2004, the patient had been admitted for lower-limb edemas and diffuse lymphadenopathy. Renal insufficiency (serum creatinine: 3.51 mg/dL, eGFR: 24 ml/min/1.73 m2), low serum C3 and C4 levels and hypergammaglobulinemia (4590 mg/dL) had already been found. Urine tests showed high proteinuria (13800 mg/l) with hypoalbuminemia characteristic of a nephrotic syndrome. Renal ultrasound showed diffuse kidney enlargement. PET/CT showed the same results as the one performed in 2012. A lymphoproliferative disorder was excluded by whole skeleton X-Ray, bone marrow and lymph node biopsy. A renal biopsy was then performed and showed membranous glomerulonephritis (MGN) with IgG and C3d deposits . Severe tubulo-interstitial nephropathy (TIN) with lymphoplasmocytic infiltrate (CD20+, CD3+, CD5+) was associated. Secondary causes of MGN were rejected by appropriate tests. ANA were negative at the time. The proposed diagnosis was a dysimmune state of unknown origin with secondary MGN and reactive lymphadenopathy. Treatment with glucocorticoids (GC) was started with an excellent clinical and biological response.
In 2005, a cutaneous rash appeared on the left arm and was biopsied, showing IgG and C3d deposits. GC were stopped in 2006 given the recovery of renal function. A few months later, the patient started to complain of pain, redness and swelling in small joints of the feet and hands.
In 2008, the first relapse occurred with the same clinical picture that in 2004 (nephrotic syndrome and lymphadenopathy). Full assessment was repeated yielding similar results except for renal biopsy: MGN with IgG and C3d deposits was found again but chronic interstitial nephropathy replaced the severe TIN. Indeed, a mononuclear infiltrate was present in the interstitium without clear sign of tubular involvement. A severe thrombocytopenia (platelets: 8.103/mm3) developed a few weeks later with anti-dsDNA found on blood sample (1/80). Thrombocytopenia was refractory to perfusion of immunoglobulins, GC and cyclophosphamide (CYP). Plasmapheresis and splenectomy were then performed. CYP was next continued for 6 cycles (500 mg/cycle) with good efficacy. Relapsing thrombocytopenia was successfully treated by additional regiments of immunoglobulins and GC. The last cycle of CYP was completed at the end of 2008. Thereafter, the patient experienced a long period without any problem until the next hospitalization in 2012.
In 2012, a renal biopsy was not performed again despite a new relapse of nephrotic syndrome; indeed, the 2008 biopsy had led to a macroscopic urinary hemorrhage which had required embolization. MGN was assessed again and anti-phospholipase A2 receptor (PLA2R) antibodies were negative. Diagnosis of IgG4-RD was finally made on the basis of the lymph node biopsy, with IgG4-related generalized lymphadenopathy and IgG4-related MGN (associated with IgG4-related TIN in 2004). The patient was given GC again at high dose (methylprednisolone 96 mg daily) for 1 month followed by a progressive decrease of the dose. Rituximab use was discussed in 2013, due to a new relapse in spite of maintenance low dose GC therapy and development of side effects; unfortunately, the patient failed to obtain the reimbursement and the medication could not be given in this context. For now, the patient is well stabilized with low dose GC. Rituximab in compassionate use could be reconsidered in case of a new relapse. Figure shows the evolution of various biological markers and serum creatinine during 2013.