Our patient is an 11-year-old girl of double first-cousin parents (first cousins from both maternal and paternal sides), from Muthanna, Southern Iraq. Since the first 2 years of her life, she had a history of food allergy (egg and peanuts), and severe eczematous skin lesion which was resistant to local and systemic steroids. She also had repeated sinopulmonary infections and were often treated in an outpatient setting. Moreover, recurrent infection with molloscum contagiosum and flat warts on the face, neck, behind ears, axillary area and genitalia, were encountered. Notably, she had a history of dental problems related to malocclusion and retention of primary teeth, necessitating dental intervention, in addition to mucocutaneous candidiasis. Vaccinations were given according to schedule in Iraq. At 9-year-old, the patient presented with a slowly growing right jaw mass and toothache, with no history of fever, headache or bone pain. Antibiotics were used, yet the mass continued to increase slowly in size over several months without a change in the overlying skin. Upon examination, she had coarse facies with eczematous scaly itchy skin lesion distributed over her face, scalp, and body as well as genitalia. A non-tender right jaw swelling was evident, with a right submandibular lymph node (2.5 cm), and bilateral cervical and axillary lymphadenopathy (1.5–2 cm). Oral examination showed a fungating mass related to right mandible with a bad odor. Otherwise, no dysmorphic facies, jaundice, fever, café au lait spots, or edema was observed. Scattered crepitation, and a palpable liver were evident by chest and abdominal examination, respectively, whereas, neurological and musculoskeletal examination was normal. Her growth parameters were below 3rd-centile, yet her school performance was good. Although, not genetically determined, her older brother shared with our case similar but milder clinical features of DOCK8 deficiency. On the other hand, her younger brother was phenotypically diagnosed with Crigler–Najjar syndrome.
During the assessment for the jaw swelling, laboratory investigations in Iraq showed a marked eosinophilia and lymphopenia, along with Ig assays of 20, 3.3 and 1.7-fold above maximum normal level for age of IgE, IgA and IgG, respectively, whereas IgM was low . She also had hypercellular BMA with eosinophilia, iron deficiency anemia, reactive thrombocytosis, and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate and lactate dehydrogenase levels, as well as deranged liver function, and a high anti-tissue transglutaminase (anti-tTG) of 10-fold above normal. Meanwhile, two-biopsies were taken from the jaw mass, and NHL was suggested in Iraq. One of the biopsy specimens was re-evaluated in Japan. The immunostaining in Japan revealed that most of the tissue was plasma cells with positive-CD138, along with Ig-kappa and lambda chain expressions, and few small lymphocytes showing the polyclonal pattern . Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) was undetectable by in situ hybridization (ISH) in Japan. Furthermore, no other significant etiological microorganisms including human herpes virus 8, bacteria, or fungi were detected in the tissue after using immunohistochemistry, Gram staining, Grocott staining, and acid-fast staining. Based on the finding that neither light chain deviation in plasma cells was apparent , nor PCR clonality in Ig-heavy chain complementarity determining region (CDR)-III was disclosed, the lymphoplasmacytic proliferation in the mass was interpreted as non-neoplastic/reactive process. Thus, the diagnosis of a polyclonal reactive proliferation spectrum of lymphoproliferative disease (LPD) complicating PID was made in Japan. Concurrently, FTA cards were used to transfer a few drops of the patient’s BMA to Japan, where the DNA was extracted from the DBS on FTA filter-paper and was subjected to WES . A DOCK8 homozygous frameshift deletion (NM_203447:c.3332delT, p.Phe1113Leufs*2) was detected in a region of run of homozygosity in chromosome 9p, suggesting that the mutation became homozygous because of consanguinity .
Therefore, the patient was diagnosed as DOCK8 deficiency, and the jaw swelling was managed conservatively, through applying strict oral hygiene measures as recommended by the maxillofacial surgeon, who also performed frequent superficial debridement to remove any necrotic tissue, along with extraction of any deciduous tooth that was badly carious. Moreover, antimicrobial agents (amoxiclav and co-trimoxazole, in addition to metronidazole and nystatin oral drops) were used. Concomitantly, a gluten-free diet was firmly introduced for the management of autoimmune enteropathy (Celiac disease) that was diagnosed serologically in accordance with World Gastroenterology Organization guidelines in countries with limited resources .
Eventually, her jaw mass regressed gradually over several months using neither steroid nor chemotherapy . Considering the difficult socioeconomic status of the family and the unhealthy condition of the 2 brothers, the option of HSCT was excluded (Additional file ).