A 45-year old white Caucasian female, with American Society of Anesthesiology (ASA) physical status 1 (57 kg, 169 cm), presented for elective laparoscopic hysterectomy. After premedication with midazolam 1 mg intravenously, anesthesia was induced with fentanyl 100 μg, propofol 180 mg and rocuronium 60 mg. Tracheal intubation was easily performed (Cormack and Lehane grade 1). Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane in O2/Air (50%:50%) and intermittent doses of fentanyl 50 μg. Muscle relaxation was achieved with 10 mg of increments of rocuronium. Standard monitoring included electrocardiography, non-invasive blood pressure, oxygen saturation (SpO2) and end-tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2). Multigas analysis was used throughout the operation.
The patient was hemodynamically stable throughout the operation. The abdomen was insufflated blindly with carbon dioxide at a pressure of 15 mmHg. SpO2 was 98–99% and ETCO2 was maintained at less than 40 mmHg with peak inspiratory pressure between 18 and 27 cm H2O. Tidal volume was set at 570 mL and 14 breaths per minute respectively. The surgical procedure was prolonged, lasting 240 minutes. The patient was extubated without difficulty.
The patient was not mobilized on the first postoperative day due to pain; pain was alleviated with paracetamol 1000 mg and diclofenac 75 mg and the patient was able to walk on the next morning. Three hours after mobilization, the patient became dyspnoic; dyspnoea was worse in the supine position and by the next 15 minutes, she could maintain an SpO2 of 93%, only by Venturi mask of 30% FiO2 at an oxygen flow rate of 12 litres per minute and only in the sitting position. The patient readily developed dysphonia, neck and face edema that were initially treated as anaphylactic reaction. No improvement was seen, and the patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Crepitus could be felt in the neck, thorax and lower limb area. Chest X-ray was not diagnostic. The patient rapidly developed cardiovascular and respiratory impairment and was transferred to the operation theatre under inotropic support for emergency laparotomy. Intubation was achieved with an endotracheal tube of 5.5 mm internal diameter. Mechanical ventilation was copious with the patient deteriorating; suspected tension pneumothorax was treated with immediate decompression of the pleural space with needle thoracocentesis. Faecal odour was noticed on thoracocentesis and surgical exploration revealed sigmoid perforation which had taken place during the laparoscopic hysterectomy. The ruptured sigmoid was closed and a diagnosis of septic shock with subcutaneous emphysema caused by colon perforation was retained. The patient was transferred to the ICU, where she developed high fever and mediastinitis, 7 hours after surgery. Aggressive intravenous antibiotic therapy was started with clinical improvement during the next 3 days. The patient was extubated on the second postoperative day and was dismissed from hospital 10 days later, after the resolution of mediastinitis and infectious pneumonia. The patient suffered recurrent mild pneumonias over the next period and was completely symptom-free from the respiratory tract, two months after surgery.