A 24-year-old female was presented with pain and swelling over dorsum of the left foot from the past 8 months. The pain was insidious in onset and dull aching in nature. The swelling was insidious in onset and slowly increasing in size to attain the present size. There was no history of injury, infection, sinus, or other swellings on her left foot. On examination, there was a diffuse round shaped, solitary swelling measuring about 3.5 cm × 2.5 cm (approx.) with its surface smooth, edges being indistinct, non-pulsatile, non-fluctuant, non-transilluminant, non-compressible and non-reducible present over dorsum of left foot. Muscle wasting was present. There was no arterial bruits and venous hum on auscultation. The distal neurovascular status was intact. The range of motions of left foot was painful and restricted. There was no regional lymphadenopathy.
Plain radiograph of left foot revealed osteolytic lesion over the base of 3rd, 4th, and 5th metatarsals, middle and lateral cuneiforms and cuboid bones along with soft tissue swelling and diffuse transient osteopenia as shown in . Magnetic resonance imaging of the left foot (T1 SE, T2 TSE and STIR sequences of sagittal, coronal and axial sections) revealed osteomyelitis involving base of 4th and 5th metatarsals, lateral aspect of lateral cuneiform and cuboid with hypointense signals on T1W images and hyperintense signals on T2W images within the tarsal and metatarsal bones which show homogeneous enhancement after contrast. Multiple erosions are seen with the evidence of joint effusion and soft tissue abscess formation on the antero-lateral aspect of the tarso-metatarsal joint. The soft tissue component also shows homogeneous enhancement with two pockets of central non-enhancing necrotic component in them. Evidence of tiny sclerotic bony fragment within the soft tissue which was consistent with chronic osteomyelitis .
Under spinal anesthesia, trucut biopsy of the mass was taken along with the drainage of the pus with an uneventful postoperative period. Gene Xpert of the pus sample revealed no resistance to either isoniazid (H) or rifampicin ®. AFB staining revealed paucibacillary type of TB. Histopathology of the biopsied mass revealed lymphocytic infiltration along with caseating necrosis and with an occasional langhans giant cells scattered in between the lymphocytic infiltrates . The culture of pus was attempted and found to be positive for MOTS group of mycobacteria. The patient was provided with high protein diet, Vitamin D and calcium supplementation and ATT drugs in the form of intensive phase drugs (HRZE) daily for 4 months according to the weight of the patient. The patient was followed up with erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) every 2 months once. During intensive phase, the patient experienced pain relief and decrease in the size of the swelling. The patient achieved a normal range of movements in the midtarsal joints except for the painful terminal range of movements. The continuation phase drugs (HRE) daily for 12 months have been given with ESR and CRP follow-up once in every 2 months. No recurrence of pain and swelling were reported during the continuation phase follow-up. The patient was still under our follow-up.