An 82-year-old Japanese woman with bilateral hearing loss and musical hallucination was admitted to our hospital for transient ischemic attack (TIA) 3 times from 17 to 7 months before acute multiple cerebral infarctions occurred. Each time she underwent a workup including transthoracic echocardiography (TTE), which showed nothing appeared to be remarkable .
Six months later since the last admission, that is, 1 month before the infarctions, the patient saw a dentist for implant replacement. Starting the treatment, she developed fever over 38 °C. In a few days, she also noticed the degree and frequency of musical hallucination worsened in the left ear. She visited a nearby clinic, complaining of continuous fever, chill, and loss of appetite. Laboratory findings there showed elevated levels of 12,600 /μL in white blood cell count and 1.37 mg/dL in C-reactive protein. A whole body computed tomography scan, urinalysis, and chest X-ray were unremarkable. 2 separate sets of blood cultures were negative. Ceftriaxone and levofloxacin were administered, and the body temperature turned to normal in 1 month, whereas the worsened musical hallucination persisted.
The patient was then presented to our hospital for workup. Neurologic examination confirmed bilateral hearing loss, which was dominant in the left. She had no general signs and symptoms of vasculitis. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed acute-stage multiple cerebral infarctions on diffusion-weighted imaging sequence . Magnetic resonance angiography and computed tomographic angiography demonstrated regular vascular walls; they showed no luminal narrowing or obstruction of the cerebral arteries, or no other embolic lesions. A whole body computed tomography was unremarkable. Laboratory findings showed D-dimer elevated to 1.51 μg/mL and C-reactive protein to 1.39 mg/dL, whereas a white blood cell count was 8400 /μL, blood urea nitrogen 15.0 mg/dL, and serum creatinine 0.77 mg/dL all within the normal range. All the other laboratory findings, including those on calcium and phosphate metabolisms, blood coagulation system such as hypercoagulation, antibodies associated with vasculitis, and common tumor markers, were unremarkable. TTE and transesophageal echocardiography showed no vegetations or thrombi but revealed an immobile hyperechoic 14.9 × 12.1 mm mass , which was suspected as a CAT. The mass had an acoustic shadow arising from a posterior cusp of the mitral valve with MAC. Carotid artery ultrasound and Holter electrocardiography were unremarkable. Repeated blood cultures during hospitalization were negative. Mini-mental status examination score was 29/30. The past medical history, besides TIA, included Ménière's disease and hypertension; there was no history of hyperlipemia, diabetes mellitus, atrial fibrillation, or psychiatric diseases.
The patient was admitted for the treatment of acute multiple cerebral infarctions, and apixaban 5 mg/day and aspirin 100 mg/day were administered. On the 9 th day of admission, follow-up MRI showed several newly-developed cerebral infarctions; at the same time, follow-up TTE showed the mass from the mitral valve diminished to 13.8 × 9.7 mm . The degree and frequency of the musical hallucination decreased and returned to those before developing the fever. 1 month after the admission, a surgical resection of the mass and replacement of mitral valve by bioprosthetic valve was performed. Intraoperatively, a calcified mass was confirmed at the posterior leaflet, along with MAC and an additional subvalvular lesion. The pathological findings showed calcifications surrounded by amorphous fibrous tissue, including fibrin; lymphocyte infiltration and hemosiderin deposition in the fibrous tissue; and neoangiogenesis in the mitral valve. They showed no evidence of valve destruction or previous infective endocarditis . Four months after the infarctions, follow-up brain MRI revealed no further infarctions.