A 57-year-old woman with type 2 diabetes mellitus presented to another hospital for evaluation of melena. Her clinical evaluation findings were unremarkable; however, laboratory examination demonstrated a low hemoglobin level of 9.9 g/dL. All other routine hematological and biochemical profiles were within the reference ranges. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed extravasation arising from a mass of high signal intensity in the second part of the duodenum . Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed bleeding from the exposed blood vessels at the top of the submucosal tumor, which was approximately 20 mm in size and located in the second (descending) part of the duodenum; the bleeding was controlled with electrocoagulation . Endoscopic ultrasonography showed a 16.6-mm hypoechoic lesion arising from muscularis propria layer on the posterior wall of the descending duodenum . Fine needle aspiration biopsy was not performed because of the risk of rebleeding. A GIST was suspected, and the patient was referred to our hospital for surgical intervention. The tumor was detected on the posterior wall of the descending duodenum, protruding outside the serosal surface. After mobilization from the first to third portion of the duodenum using the Kocher maneuver, wedge resection was performed, and the duodenal wall was closed with sutures. The operation time was 110 min, and the blood loss volume was 50 mL. The resected specimen contained a 16- × 12-mm white submucosal tumor. Histopathological evaluation showed that the tumor was composed of spindle cells with a mitotic count of 4 per 50 high-power fields (HPFs) and that a histologically negative margin had been achieved. Hemorrhage and necrosis of the tumor were also observed. Immunochemical analysis revealed positive tumor staining for c-kit protein and alpha-smooth muscle actin and negative staining for CD34, desmin, and S-100 protein . Therefore, the tumor was diagnosed as a very-low-risk duodenal GIST based on the Fletcher classification and the modified Fletcher classification (Joensuu classification). Furthermore, the tumor was classified as no-risk according to the Miettinen classification. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 11.
Follow-up included physical examination every 3 months, and abdominal ultrasonography and CT scan every 6 months. At the follow-up visit 2 years postoperatively, abdominal ultrasound showed two heterogeneous hyperechoic lesions in the liver: a 25-mm mass in S8 and a 10-mm mass in S6. There was no increase in the tumor markers for hepatocellular carcinoma or gastrointestinal cancer. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed liver tumors in S8 and S6 measuring 26 × 24 mm and 10 × 10 mm, respectively . Both lesions showed peripheral dominant hyperenhancement with hypoenhancement inside, indicating tissue degeneration within the tumors. There was no local recurrence in the duodenum after surgery. Magnetic resonance imaging showed hypervascular tumors with restricted diffusion and low apparent diffusion coefficients; they contained tissue degeneration within them, and they measured 25 × 21 mm and 10 × 8 mm in S8 and S6, respectively. The imaging findings of both tumors closely resembled those of the duodenal GIST. Hence, the patient was diagnosed with liver metastases of GIST 2 years postoperatively. She was subsequently started on treatment with 400 mg of imatinib. At the time of this writing (2 months after diagnosis), the patient was clinically well and asymptomatic and was continuing the imatinib therapy.