A 72 year old lady presented with complaints of difficulty in passing stools. On evaluation by primary physician alarge appendicular mass compressing the sigmoid and the upper third of the rectum was found(.a). She was then referred to us and on initial evaluation in June 2018, she had BMI of 22.5 kg/m2 with Eastern Co-operative Oncology group Performance status (ECOG PS) Grade 1. Clinical examination revealed moderate ascites and mass in epigastrium probably due to omental caking. Serum tumor markers were as follows CA 125 – 73.8 IU/mL, CEA -7.1 ng/mL and CA 19-9- 453 U/mL. Imaging suggested a massively dilated appendix filled with mucinous material (15 × 7 × 7 cm) compressing the sigmoid colon. There was omental caking and multiple areas of loculated mucinous ascites suggesting Pseudomyxoma Peritonei (PMP) probably arising from appendicular pathology (.b).
Exploratory Laparoscopy was performed and following findings (.c) were noted – a. 2000 mL of ascites b. 15 × 20 cm Omental cake compressing on small bowel c. large perforated appendicular mass occupying the right iliac fossa and pelvis c. Mucinous tumor deposits in abdominopelvic quadrants 0,1,2,5,6,7 and 8 as described by Sugarbaker and surgical Peritoneal carcinomatosis Index (PCI) was 19.
Ascites was evacuated and Ileo-caecal resection was performed through a limited right iliac fossa incision. Laparoscopic resection was technically not feasible due to the bulky disease and dense mucinous adhesions of cecum to posterior abdominal wall. Involvement of the cecum by tumor and tumor perforation precluded the performance of simple appendectomy (d). Following resection, Extensive Intraperitoneal lavage (EIPL) was done with 10 L of physiological saline and an Intra-peritoneal (IP) port system (Bard, Salt Lake City, USA) was placed in the abdomen with tip of catheter in cul-de-sac.
Gross pathological examination revealed perforation of tip of appendix (.d) and microscopic examination showed clusters of tumor cells in background of mucin with increased cellularity and high atypia. MIB-1 index was 22 % and a diagnosis of high grade mucinous appendicular neoplasm was made (.a).
NIPT was initiated with Cisplatin 30 mg/ m2 and Docetaxel 30 mg/ m2 in 500 mL of physiological saline through IP port system every 3 weeks. After 6 cycles, an interim analysis showed clinical resolution of ascites, decrease in the serum levels of tumor markers and partial response in imaging. IP therapy was further continued with the same agents and overall she received 12 sessions of NIPT. There was complete clinical resolution of ascites and imaging resolution of omental mass (a). Tumor marker levels also normalized – CEA- 3.3 ng/mL, CA 125 – 25 IU/mL and CA 19-9 – 14.9 IU/mL.
In March 2020, she underwent a laparotomy and the following operative findings were noted (b& c) – a. Complete resolution of ascites. b. Omentum, stomach, small bowel and large bowel were normal with no evidence of tumor c. Liver, gall bladder, Spleen and uterus was normal with no evidence of tumor. d. Nodules in right paracolic gutter (2 × 2 cm) and pouch of douglas (multiple; each of size 1–1.5 cm). Both of the above contained only mucin and were negative for tumor metastasis in frozen section and e. rest of the peritoneal surfaces was clear of disease.
We performed CCRS with Total Anterior Parietal peritonectomy, Total omentectomy, lesser omentectomy, Pelvic peritonectomy including hysterectomy (sparing recto-sigmoid) and a completion right hemicolectomy. After EIPL with 10 L of physiological saline, HIPEC was performed with Oxalipatin (300 mg) and 5-Flurouracil (500 mg) in 4 L of saline by open “colosseum” technique. Intra-peritoneal temperature was maintained at 42.5–43.5 °C and HIPEC treatment time was 40 min.
Pathologic examination revealed no viable tumor cells in omentum, peritoneum, uterus and colon. Only mucin deposition without cellularity was found on microscopic examination. Intense staining with Alcian blue indicating mucin deposition is shown in the picture (, ). Post operatively she recovered well without complications and was discharged after 10 days in stable condition. She continues to be in regular follow-up with us.