A 45-years-old Asian male patient came to our academic general hospital outpatient clinic, referred from a countryside hospital. The patient suffered from weakness on all extremities for 3 months before admission. Patient realized the symptoms got worse when driving a car and he was unable to walk for 1 month. Two weeks later, patient felt weakness on upper extremities, alongside a tingling sensation. Patient also complained of neck pain. Pain was radiating to both hands and legs. There was no history of fever, decreased body weight, long period of cough and contact with TB patients. However, there was night sweating for 5 months before admission. History of trauma was denied. There were no disturbances on urination and defecation.
From physical examination, we found normal vital sign. Neurological examination showed tetra-paresis with motoric power of 3 on all extremities, hypoesthesia on C4 level and below, increased physiologic reflexes and positive pathologic reflexes (Babinski and Chaddock) on both sides with normal anal sphincter tones and bulbocavernosus reflex.
We did several radiologic examinations for attaining a diagnosis. Cervical x-ray showed destruction on C4, 5 and 6, kyphotic curvature with Cobb's angle of 8.5° . Cervical MRI with contrast showed three-level vertebral bodies and disc destructions at C4, C5 and C6 with hypointense mass on T1 and isointense on T2 at anterior C3, 4, 5, 6 and Th1, suspected as a cervical tuberculosis infection , and regiment of TB drugs was subsequently given to the patient.
As the cord compression is located anteriorly and the aim was to correct kyphotic of the cervical curvature, we decided to do debridement, corpectomy on three-levels of C4, 5, and 6, fusion with cage and anterior plating from C3 to Th1, all with a one-stage anterior approach. After dissection was done, we found bony destructions on C4, 5, and 6, with the abscess flowing . Abscess was evacuated and specimen was sent to microbiology for further examination (gram and specific staining for TB, culture), showed MTB with no Rifampicin resistance, thus, medication for extra pulmonary TB was continued until 9 months.
Corpectomy on three-levels on C4, 5, and 6 was done. Furthermore, instrumentation for anterior column reconstruction with cylindrical cage, bone grafting, and cervical plate was applied. A post-operative cervical x-ray showed the return of cervical lordosis curvature, placement of anterior instrumentation with hollow cage, screw and plating (a).
Immediately after the surgery, the patient had no complaints of pain, and he was able to walk on his own. One year follow-up after the surgery, no residual neurological impairment is detected, patient is able to run and had no limitation in daily activities. One year following the surgery the patient still had no complaints and able to conduct rigorous physical activity. Cervical x-ray and MRI were done and showed good ossification and improvement of lordotic curvature (b, c).