A 30-year-old male farmer hailing from a small village in Rajasthan, India presented to the out-patient department with complaints of intermittent seropurulent discharge from a sinus tract wound on the posteromedial aspect of the proximal right arm adjacent to the base of the axilla. The patient was apparently alright 3 years ago when he sustained injury to the right shoulder axillary region, where he was struck with a leather ball while playing cricket. He was evaluated at a local hospital with X-rays which did not show any acute bony injury and was informed that there might be a localized soft tissue injury. He was treated with an arm-sling, ice-packs, and pain-relief medications. Initially, the patient responded well and had symptomatic pain relief; however, the swelling still persisted. Approximately a month after the injury, he developed a discharging sinus from the posteromedial aspect of the proximal right arm just adjacent to the base of the axilla. This was associated with severe pain in the right shoulder and restriction of movements. The patient was referred to a tertiary health-care center, where he was, further, evaluated to determine the source of the discharging sinus. The patient did not possess any of these tests final reports which were done at this tertiary center. As per the patient, he first underwent an MRI which revealed an infectious origin of the discharging sinus originating from the right scapula. Next a swab-stick and a tissue sample from the sinus tract were sent for culture/sensitivity and biopsy, respectively. However, the final growth culture report and the biopsy report were inconclusive, as the tests were negative. The patient was diagnosed (most likely by a method of exclusion) as a case of “Right Scapula Tuberculosis” and was started on anti-tubercular medications for a duration of 9 months. The patient responded well to the anti-tubercular medications and the sinus tract healed within a few months. The patient had complete relief of pain and his right shoulder range of movements was back to normal. The patient was doing well for approximately 2 months after he stopped the anti-tubercular medications, when he again noticed seropurulent discharge from the sinus tract. However, this time the pain was relatively less in intensity with no restriction in movements of the affected shoulder. The patient only complaint was an intermittent on-off discharge from the sinus tract, which was usually for 2–3 days every few weeks.
The patient presented to us at this stage of his disease. On taking a further detailed history, the patient informed us that he has pets and farm animals at his hometown – dogs, sheep, and goats. On examination, there was a sinus tract in the posteromedial aspect of the proximal right arm just adjacent to the base of the axilla which, on presentation, was dry. The right shoulder movements were within normal range and not associated with any pain. The only complaint the patient had on presentation was the intermittent seropurulent discharge from the sinus tract which was affecting his daily living condition. The patient was first evaluated with X-rays of the right shoulder which showed multiple well-defined lytic lesions within the body of scapula, as shown in . Blood investigations demonstrated a slightly raised ESR (13 mm/h) with a negative CRP (5.9 mg/L), a negative Mantoux test, and normal WBC counts (4,800/mm3). Liver and renal function tests were also within normal limits. The CT scan revealed expansile lytic lesions involving the lateral aspect of the body of scapula, extending into the coracoid process and up to the base of the spine with multi-focal areas of destruction along the lateral border of scapula and coracoid process. On the MRI scan , a sinus tract was noted with enhancing granulation tissue from the lateral border of the scapula at the infra-glenoid region, which extended inferiorly along the tendon of the long head of the triceps muscle and opened into the skin surface at the posteromedial aspect of upper arm.
A decision was made to obtain a direct biopsy from the lesion in the scapula to reach a final diagnosis. The patient was positioned in lateral position , and the scapula was exposed via posterior approach. A vertical skin incision of size 10cm was made starting at the tip of the posterolateral corner of the acromion toward the scapular angle, parallel to the lateral border of the scapula. The deltoid muscle was dissected and retracted superiorly. Inter-muscular plane interval was developed between the infraspinatus and the teres minor muscle to expose the axillary and lateral border of the scapula . The lesion was identified and a small bone window of size 1 × 1 cm was initially made to extract the tissue from within as depicted in and . However, the posterior wall of the scapula at the site of the lesion was extremely thin and brittle leading to an irregular bony window . Gray-white flaky soft-tissue mass was curetted out of these lesions, as shown in . The tissue sample and bone were sent for culture/sensitivity tests and biopsy. Wound was closed in layers over a drain. Postoperatively, the right shoulder was immobilized in an arm sling. Suture line dressings were done in the ward which was clean and the drain was removed on the 3rd post-operative day.
Tissue culture and sensitivity tests were negative (Final report; No Growth). However, histological examination showed a cystic lesion composed of trilaminar membrane consisting of dead and degenerating scolices consistent with “Hydatid Cyst of Bone.” General medicine team and infection diseases team were consulted and the patient was started on tablet Albendazole 10 mg/kg daily. The abdomen and thorax were screened with a CT scan to determine a spread of the parasite to the liver or the lungs. The CT scan showed no spread to either of these organs. The patient was counseled regarding the severity of the diagnosis and the complications of the disease. The patient was planned for total scapulectomy with scapula-humeral reconstruction. However, the patient was not willing for the procedure and requested that he wanted to go back to his hometown to make a decision regarding the same. The patient was lost to follow-up and did not return for further management.