The patient is a 24-year old male who was diagnosed with right distal thigh MLS in 2018. He had wide local excision with neo-adjuvant radiation (50 Gy/25 fractions).
In February 2019, an MRI of the femur was obtained for restaging. The MRI did not show any signs of local tumor recurrence but was highly suspicious for an intramedullary enhancing osseous lesion involving the proximal right femur. A follow-up positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) was performed and revealed a mildly hypermetabolic intramedullary lesion within the proximal shaft of the right femur that was suspicious for malignancy.
In May 2019 the patient was given 2 cycles of chemotherapy (ifosfamide and doxorubicin), and later in the same month, an MRI for the thigh showed further progression in the proximal right femoral osseous lesion.
In June 2019, a biopsy was performed and was negative for any features of malignancy. Definitive radiotherapy (70 Gy/35 fractions) to the right femoral lesion was delivered to the patient by October 2019. The patient was then observed by regular follow up.
In November 2020, the patient presented to the emergency department with a decreased level of consciousness, headache and vomiting. The patient also had a gross lesion in his forehead which he neglected for a while. CT scan was performed and showed a left frontoparietal mass measuring 6 × 5.4 cm with vasogenic edema. The patient was admitted and treated conservatively without any surgical interventions as he was COVID-19 positive with mild symptoms. Chest, abdominal and pelvic CT scans were done and were negative respectively.
In December 2020, the patient was re-admitted with lethargy, drowsiness and decreased level of consciousness. Brain MRI showed a large contrast-enhancing left frontal intracranial mass with mass effect and uncal herniation . His Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score dropped during hospitalization to 6/15 and the pupil response was sluggish with left pupil dilation. He underwent left frontal craniotomy urgently with tumor resection including the affected bony involvement , except for a small part invading the superior sagittal sinus, followed by cranioplasty with of the methyl acrylic bone.
Histopathological analysis showed metastatic myxoid/round cell LPS. The tumor cells are negative for GFAP, S100, WT1, BCOR, SATB2, CD99 and cyclin D1.
The tumor had infiltrated the skull bone and extended the peripheral margins . The case was discussed with the multidisciplinary clinic and the patient received stereotactic radiosurgery for the resection cavity. On week 6 follow up, there was no evidence of residual or tumor recurrence in the surgical bed. A new right parietal bone with soft-tissue component metastasis was treated with radiotherapy.
A follow-up staging CT scan showed a soft-tissue mass at the suprasternal notch related to manubrium sterni and an anterior peritoneal with involvement of linea alba metastatic deposit was found. Palliative external beam radiotherapy to the sternu was completed by January 2021.
Four months later, follow-up brain MRI revealed a right occipital condyle lesion, mostly correlating with osseous metastasis. There was no evidence of recurrence at the surgical bed , and no significant change in the previously treated right parietal lesion. The patient was treated with radiotherapy for the right occipital condyle lesion.
The patient was observed by regular follow-up imaging. On his 6th month follow up, he was alive and all lesions were stable except the peritoneal lesion was slightly progressive. He was placed on single-agent dacarbazine.