A 68-year-old man presented with an asymptomatic solid and multi-cystic mass in the uncus of the pancreas, incidentally detected on abdominal enhanced CT during a health examination. The patient had no relevant medical history, including chronic pancreatitis. The tumor was demonstrated to be a well demarcated solid and cystic lesion, measuring 4.2 × 3.9 cm in diameter by enhanced CT . The tumor consisted of a cystic lesion with iso- to low-density surrounded by an extremely low-density area similar in density to adipose tissue. MRI and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed multilocular cysts ranging in size from one to several millimeters in the pancreas uncus. The main pancreatic duct (MPD) showed no dilation and the evidence of communications between the tumor and MPD was not found . The morphological feature of the tumor was completely different from pancreatic adenocarcinoma and the tumor was initially diagnosed benign tumor such as lipoma, dermoid cyst or the other rare benign tumor . During the first enhanced CT examination, the patient developed an allergic reaction to contrast medium so that the patient was followed-up regularly with plain CT and MRI.
The patient visited for re-examination 21 months after the initial visit because he had no symptoms. The size of the pancreatic tumor had become smaller, measuring 3.9 cm in maximum diameter, and the internal structure showed morphological changes with smaller cysts and a larger solid lesion by plain CT and MRI/MRCP . The tumor displayed a honeycomb-like appearance by EUS. At 28 months after the initial visit, the tumor showed an increase in size by plain CT. MRCP showed an increase in the size and number of the cysts, with no infiltration into the pancreatic ducts . The multi-cystic lesion displayed low intensity on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI), iso-intensity on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and high intensity on T2-fat saturation (FAT-SAT) by MRI. The solid lesion surrounding the multi cystic lesion displayed iso-intensity on T1WI, iso- to high intensity on T2WI and low intensity with complete fat-tissue suppression using T2-FATSAT conditions . These findings demonstrated that the cystic lesion consisted with pancreatic juice and the solid lesion was a fat tissue.
On coronal T2WI imaging, ringed-multilocular cysts with high intensity were surrounded by a smooth superficial mass, and a small nodule was observed inside of the cyst ring . These images suggested the possibility of IPMN malignant transformation. At 31 months after the initial diagnosis, the patient underwent surgical resection. There were no symptoms or abnormal levels of tumor markers (carcinoembryonic antigen [CEA], carbohydrate antigen 19-9 [CA19-9]) during follow-up.
A soft and elastic tumor was confirmed in the uncus of the pancreas. The tumor was not exposed and there were no inflammatory changes around the pancreas. Intraoperative ultrasound showed a well demarcated honeycomb-like cystic lesion in the pancreatic uncus, and there was no evidence of venous or ductal invasion . Pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy was performed. The operation was completed without any complications.
A solid tumor consisting of yellow adipose tissue with a smooth thin capsule measuring 40 × 40 × 28 mm in size was confirmed in the pancreatic uncus. The inner structure of the tumor consisted of multiple cysts, and a white nodule was found between the cysts .
The solid part of the mass consisted of mature adipose tissue, and the cystic lesion consisted of colonization of the dilated pancreatic ducts with mild fibrosis and infiltration of monocytes in the circumference. There was no evidence of mucinous products in the cysts, and no evidence of malignancy in the epithelial cells of the cysts. A few normal scattered acini were observed in the solid portion of the lesion, and the nodule located between the cysts consisted of stromal fibrosis without atypical cells .
The epithelial cells of the ducts expressed cytokeratin 7 and cytokeratin 19, but were negative for cytokeratin 20. The adipose tissue was positive for S-100 protein, and mostly negative for MIB-1 (Ki-67). These results suggest that the tumor was non-proliferative . Based on these findings, the tumor was determined to be composed of a mixture of differentiated cell types that are normally present in the pancreas. It was therefore regarded as a malformation rather than a neoplasm. Giving these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as a pancreatic hamartoma.
After surgical resection, the patient received follow-up examination with plain CT every three to six months and there was no recurrence for 50 months.