Herein, we report on a 57-year-old Caucasian woman, who presented to our emergency department on July 30th 2011 with severe abdominal pain and a palpable lower abdominal tumor. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a 14 × 10 × 12 cm mass with close relation to the uterus . Multiple pulmonary and peritoneal nodules consistent with metastatic disease were seen. Blood counts revealed massive leukocytosis (WBC 96,910/μl) and anemia with a hemoglobin concentration of 8 g/dl. A differential hemogram revealed immature precursor cells such as promyelocytes and myelocytes as well as pronounced neutrophilia with 88% neutrophils. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was slightly elevated (260 U/l), but the remaining laboratory values were within normal limits . A bone marrow biopsy was performed at the same day. Figure A shows the trephine biopsy at 400x magnification stained with hematoxylin & eosin (H&E). Figure B reveals marked hypercellularity due to granulocytic proliferation (naphthol-ASD-chloroacetate esterase stain, 400x). Immunohistochemistry with anti-CD34 stained vascular endothelium as positive control, but there was no detecteable increase in CD34+ cells . Moreover, there were no signs of myelodysplasia. Cytogenetic and molecular analyses revealed neither translocation t(9;22) nor a BCR/ABL fusion gene. In addition, analysis of JAK2-V617F mutation was performed and showed a negative result.
Simultaneously, the general condition of the patient rapidly worsened over night and a further hemoglobin decline was diagnosed. Another CT scan on the following day confirmed abdominal bleeding (white arrows, Figure ). An emergency operation including hysterectomy and bilateral adnexectomy was performed. Intraoperatively, a grossly enlarged, partly ruptured uterus with spontaneous intraperitoneal bleeding was found. A concurrently causative bleeding disturbance was excluded by routine laboratory examinations. Histology revealed undifferentiated endometrial sarcoma (FNCLCC grade 3).
Only few hours after tumor resection, leukocyte and platelet counts decreased rapidly. Within one week, blood counts returned to near normal levels. Figure depicts the rapid decline of WBC immediately after surgery.
Unfortunately, the first postoperative CT scan documented rapid progression of bilateral disseminated pulmonary metastases . In parallel, WBC increased, and chemotherapy with gemcitabine and docetaxel was initiated . Temporary stabilization was achievable, and WBC correlated strictly with tumor burden, showing a significant increase after 5 cycles of chemotherapy. At that time, another CT scan confirmed considerable growth of all preexisting and multiple new tumor manifestations. Because paraneoplastic G-CSF secretion was suspected, G-CSF plasma levels were analyzed by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA, RnD Systems) and found to be enormously increased to 1,270 pg/ml, corresponding to about 10 times the upper limit of normal (range 12,5 – 142 pg/ml). At the same day, WBC had reached almost 200,000/μl . The performance status of the patient worsened rapidly, certainly due to the massive tumor growth with organ infiltration but also due to a developing leukostasis syndrome. Second-line chemotherapy with doxorubicin was initiated, but proved to be ineffective in controlling the disease. After 2 cycles, chemotherapy was discontinued. The patient passed away within few weeks due to fulminant disease progression.