A 45-year-old female was referred from the emergency room to hepatopancreatobiliary clinic for evaluation of liver lesions. She described several weeks of weight loss, decreased appetite, early satiety, fatigue, and right upper quadrant abdominal pain.
The patient was initially evaluated in the emergency room, where she reported a 15 lb weight loss secondary to abdominal pain and anorexia. The patient denied any change in bowel habits, sick contacts, or recent travel. The patient reported that her partner had immigrated from West Africa and that she had traveled there with him approximately 5 years earlier. She had also lived for several years in South Carolina, where Strongyloides may be endemic.
The patient had a history of hepatic steatosis, uterine fibroids, and morbid obesity. Upper and lower endoscopy had been performed 3 years earlier and were both found to be within normal limits.
The patient denied any family history of malignancy.
The vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.5°C; blood pressure, 136/76 mmHg; heart rate, 82 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 12 breaths per min. Abdominal exam was notable for tenderness in the right upper quadrant. There was no hepatosplenomegaly. There were no skin lesions present.
Laboratory examination was notable for marked eosinophilia [0.9 × 103/mL (range 0.0-0.40)] and an elevated sedimentation rate (Westergren; 94 mm/h). Tumor markers were normal (alpha-fetoprotein < 1.8 ng/mL; carbohydrate antigen 19-9 16 U/mL; carcinoembryonic antigen 2.1 ng/mL). Liver function tests were normal, and hepatitis serologies were consistent with previous hepatitis B immunization. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody (Ab)/p24 antigen screen, rapid plasma reagin, coccidioides Ab panel, cryptococcus antigen, and quantiFERON-TB Gold Plus were negative. Autoimmune markers were negative (anti-myeloperoxidase Ab < 0.2 units; anti-proteinase 3 Ab < 0.2 units; cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic Ab (ANCA) < 1:2 titer; perinuclear ANCA (p-ANCA) < 1:20 titer; atypical p-ANCA < 1:20 titer; angiotensin converting enzyme, serum 42 U/L; anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide Ab, immunoglobulin G (IgG)/IgA 2 U; rheumatoid factor < 10.0 IU/mL; antinuclear Ab direct-negative).
An abdominal ultrasound performed in the emergency room noted a focal hypoechoic area within the right hepatic lobe centrally measuring 2.5 cm × 1.6 cm × 1.3 cm. Subsequently, a gadolium-enhanced magnetic resonance image demonstrated a non-cirrhotic liver with a peripherally T2 hyperintense and centrally T2 hypointense 3.7 cm × 3.2 cm × 3.7 cm lesion . Signal characteristics raised suspicion for a malignancy, but the rapid interval growth (from ultrasound-estimated size) suggested possible infection. A computerized tomography scan through the abdomen demonstrated a low-density mass within the right hepatic lobe measuring up to 4.5 cm × 4.9 cm in the largest dimensions. There was peripheral enhancement with centripetal filling atypical for a hemangioma.