A 91-year-old woman presented unconscious after experiencing a heat stroke while working outside. Her health was normal before the onset of heat stroke; she was transferred to our hospital 5 h after the onset. She was undergoing hyperlipidemia treatment with 5 mg/day of atorvastatin calcium hydrate. Physical examination of the patient revealed a deep coma; the blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory rate were 73/48 mmHg, 135 bpm, and 24 breaths/min, respectively. Her axillary body temperature was 40.7°C, while the core temperature was 39.8°C in the bladder; she weighed 45 kg. Laboratory investigations revealed elevated lactate levels and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) due to heat stroke; however, infection-related tests, such as white blood cell count, C-reactive protein, and procalcitonin were normal . A computed tomography (CT) scan of the head, thorax, abdomen, and pelvis with contrast indicated cerebral atrophy and dilatation of the gallbladder and digestive tract; it did not identify emphysematous changes. Consequently, the patient was diagnosed with a heat stroke.
We immediately performed tracheal intubation and cooled the body by spraying cold water and cold fluid infusion. The patient’s core temperature lowered to <38°C, while the systolic pressure recovered to >100 mmHg for 90 min. Although the immediate cooling and stabilization of circulation was successful, the lactate level improved only marginally. We treated her with massive fluid infusion and anti-DIC therapy (17,100 U/day of thrombomodulin alfa and 1,500 U/day of antithrombin III) due to the prolonged shock and DIC. The patient was treated for 24 h with 6,200 mL of fluid infusion; the total urinary output was 1,800 mL with acute diarrhea .
After 22 h of arrival at our hospital, the patient’s blood pressure decreased to 72/50 mmHg, while her fever increased to 40.6°C . Although the physical examination of right upper quadrant abdominal pain and signs of peritoneal irritation was unclear, an abdominal X-ray examination indicated emphysematous cholecystitis . We diagnosed the patient with septic shock resulting from emphysematous cholecystitis and performed emergency cholecystectomy. During the surgery, the gallbladder revealed ischemic changes, including edema, dark red coloration, and emphysematous changes on its wall. Inflammation of the gallbladder affected the neighboring liver and duodenum .
Although stable following the cholecystectomy, the patient experienced disuse syndrome. She suffered from DIC and acute kidney and hepatic injury presented as complications of heat stroke. She recovered as a result of anti-DIC therapy and massive fluid infusion until day 5 of hospitalization. As the bile culture was positive for Clostridium perfringens, we continued to administer 1.5 g/day of meropenem starting from the day after cholecystectomy to day 7 and 9 g/day of sulbactam/ampicillin until day 14. On day 12, the patient indicated signs of Clostridium difficile colitis and was administered 0.5 g/day of oral vancomycin, which was continued until day 25. On day 13, mechanical ventilation management was terminated; on day 32, the patient was transferred for rehabilitation.