A 49-year-old Chinese man was referred to our hospital due to chronic onset of numbness and weakness of the lower limbs for 6 mo, progressively worsening with abasia, blurred vision, and speech disorder for more than 2 wk.
The patient developed blurred vision and slight dysarthria after a 2-wk period of treatment for diabetes, corresponding to lesions in the brainstem were subsequently demonstrated on MRI. For further diagnosis and treatment, he was transferred to the emergency intensive care unit in Hangzhou Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine on June 8, 2020. At that time, he developed urinary retention and underwent indwelling catheterization.
Two weeks earlier, he was admitted to the local hospital due to big toe gangrene of his right foot associated with apparent thirst and urorrhagia. Initial laboratory examinations found an extremely high serum glucose (GLU) level of 450 mg/dL with a normal range of electrolytes, hematological parameters and biochemical markers of hepatic and renal function. Considering further possible examinations, as well as his unremarkable medical history, negative personal and family history, he was then diagnosed with type 2 diabetes. Treatment including hypoglycemic therapy [intravenous regular insulin (0.1 U/kg) and subcutaneous biphasic insulin aspart after which GLU was controlled in the normal range], toe amputation, and other symptomatic supportive therapies were underwent.
The patient had no previous medical history.
Neurological examination on admission showed normal vital signs, consciousness, depression, roughly impaired visual acuity of both eyes, dysarthria, decreased muscle strength (4/5, Medical Research Council scale), hypoesthesia, and the disappearance of tendon reflexes in all extremities. However, there was no pathological reflex.
Blood and biochemical evaluation showed a white blood cell count of 10/μL, C-reactive protein of 44 mg/L, GLU of 270 mg/dL, hemoglobin of 92 g/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 94, Hb1Ac of 8.9%, and osmolality of 327.66 mOsm/kg. Serum levels of sodium, potassium, calcium and magnesium were 140.8 mmol/dL, 3.81 mmol/L, 8 mg/dL and 1.9 mg/dL, respectively. Urine analysis showed the presence of GLU and protein without ketone bodies, and a later urine culture revealed Proteus mirabilis infection. Other tests including arterial blood gas analysis and hepatorenal function were within the normal range. Chest computed tomography revealed inflammatory areas in both lungs and bilateral pleural effusion. A lumbar puncture was performed and disclosed elevated levels of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein (1040 mg/L) and GLU (5.9 mmol/L), with normal pressure (150 mmH2O) and cellular (1/μL). The oligoclonal band, serum antibodies to aquaporin 4, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein and glial fibrillary acidic protein, as well as common antibodies to autoimmune encephalitis in CSF were all negative.
Brain contrast-enhanced MRI found diffuse lesions in the brainstem with inhomogeneous signal enhancement, which appeared like glioma and tumefactive demyelinating disease (TDL) after admission . MR spectroscopy revealed an elevated choline peak and lactate/lipid peak, and hypertonic demyelinating encephalopathy was considered. No lesions were observed on spinal MRI.