A one-year-old male patient with Down syndrome was in a late postoperative period of congenital cardiac disease correction. The patient had hypothyroidism and severe chronic malnutrition and had been hospitalized in a pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) since he was two months old.
After surgical cardiac disease correction, the patient evolved with limited nutritional reestablishment and recovery because of intolerance to enteral feeding and multiple infections associated with mechanical ventilation and invasive devices. He received broadspectrum antibiotics in a recurrent and prolonged manner. Therefore, the use of probiotics (Saccharomycesboulardii - 200 mg capsules) was indicated for four days at a dose of 200 mg, 12/12 h, via a nasogastric tube.
Two days after having finished receiving probiotics, the patient developed septic shock, resulting in the collection of cultures and the expansion of the antibiotic spectrum for vancomycin, ciprofloxacin, and amphotericin B. Initially, the central venous catheter was not replaced because of the small numbers of sites available (multiple strokes and previous phlebotomy). After five days of expanding antimicrobial therapy, and with the child stable from a clinical standpoint, the blood cultures (central and peripheral) identified yeast in a partial result, without the growth of aerobic bacteria. At that moment, Vancomycin and Ciprofloxacin were suspended and Amphotericin B was replaced by Fluconazole, with the hypothesis of Candida infection sensitive to Fluconazole.
After changing the therapeutic regimen, the patient’s clinical condition deteriorated, leading to an empirical extension of Amphotericin B, Vancomycin and carbapenem, in the absence of new blood culture results. Due to this extension, there was clinical and laboratory improvement of the infectious condition. The final identification of blood cultures, which were taken from central and peripheral sites, occurred on the seventh day of treatment and showed the presence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, without available antifungigram. This result led to the discontinuation of antibiotics on the tenth day of prescription and the maintenance of Amphotericin B for up to 14 days after obtaining negative blood cultures taken at the beginning of the extended antimicrobial therapy. The patient had a central venous catheter and nasogastric tube, which were replaced after the identification of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The peritoneal dialysis catheter and the tracheostomy tube were not replaced. It is worth noting that, at that moment, no other patient in the inpatient unit presented a Saccharomyces cerevisiae infection.
The patient remained hemodynamically stable, in nutritional rehabilitation therapy. The patient’s guardian signed the informed consent form and the institution’s Research Ethics Committee approved the report.