A 21-year-old male was admitted with fever without obvious cause for 2 months. After admission, the patient’s highest temperature was 38.3°C, accompanied by diarrhea. The patient did not have cough, sputum, chest tightness, chest pain, dizziness, drooping eyelids, limb weakness or dyspnea. Physical examination showed coarse breath sounds in both lungs, and no rales were detected. Chest enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a mass of mixed density shadow on the left side of the anterior mediastinum with a size of approximately 9.2 cm × 5 cm × 2.1 cm and a clear boundary mixed with a low fat density shadow . Uneven enhancement was revealed on enhanced CT. Lipofibroadenoma was considered during imaging diagnosis. Mediastinal tumors were removed under general anesthesia by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery.
The samples included the tumor and surrounding thymus tissue. The tumor was oval in shape, 8 cm × 6 cm × 2 cm in volume, solid in section, gray in color and hard in quality. Specimens were cut along the longitudinal axis and fixed with 10% neutral formalin buffer for 12 hours. Fifteen representative tissue blocks from different regions were successively dehydrated and embedded in paraffin. The section thickness was 4 μm.
Macroscopically, a clear boundary was shown between the tumor and the remaining thymus. Microscopically, the tumor contained a large amount of mature adipose and fibrous tissue with scattered cord-like epithelial tissue and a small number of lymphocytes scattered in the stroma . The tumor lacked thymic bodies. The neoplastic epithelial cells were oval or polygonal and arranged in fissures, the nuclei were uniform in size and mild in shape, and mitosis was rare.
The EnVision 2-step method was used for immunohistochemical staining. All primary antibodies were provided by Zhongshan Golden Bridge Company. The epithelial cells of the tumor were positive for AE1/AE3 and CK19, the lymphocytes were positive for CD3 and CD20, and the fat and fibrous tissue were positive for S-100 and vimentin, respectively. The Ki67 labeling index was approximately less than 5% . Based on histological features and immunophenotype, thymic lipofibroadenoma was diagnosed.
The patient was followed up 1 year after the operation, and no recurrence or residual lesions were found on the X-ray reexamination.