A 47-year-old woman visited to our institute with a history of chronic intractable headache. Ophthalmologic evaluation demonstrated bilateral papilledema. We examined magnetic resonance (MR) venography depicted stenosis in the right transverse-sigmoid sinus and SSS stenosis [ and ]. On MR imaging, hydrocephalus was considered unlikely [ and ]. However, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was revealed with the optic nerve sheath on both sides, and there was enlargement of the Meckel caves bilaterally [ and ]. We measured the CSF pressure by lumbar puncture demonstrated intracranial hypertension at 34 cm H2O. Since conservatively treatment could not relieve the headache, we suggested ventriculoperitoneal shunt surgery, but the patient declined surgical therapy. We, therefore, planned endovascular stent placement for venous sinus stenosis after CVPG evaluation. Our planned strategy is described herein. If there was evidence of a venous pressure gradient in crossing the stenosis, we assumed this could potentially raise the CSF pressure. If we detected the pressure gradient crossing the stenosis ≥8 mmHg, we planned to perform placement of a stent according to the previous report. Written informed consent form was received from the patient before the intervention.
Before endovascular treatment, the venous sinus pressure gradient was measured. The right internal carotid artery angiography revealed severe stenotic change in the right transverse-sigmoid sinus and SSS . Using a 6 Fr destination guiding sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan), an Excelsior SL-10 microcatheter (Stryker, Kalamazoo, Michigan, USA) was introduced to the parietal portion of the SSS, the TS, and the right internal jugular vein. The systolic venous pressure was 27 mmHg in the parietal portion of the SSS, 22 mmHg in the TS, and 8 mmHg in the right internal jugular vein. We placed sheaths in the artery and vein from a bilateral femoral approach. We placed a 6-Fr destination guide sheath in the right internal jugular vein. Percutaneous transluminal balloon angioplasty was carried out using a 4 mm × 40 mm Jackal (St Jude, Minnesota, USA) in the SSS. It was also performed using a 6 mm × 40 mm Jackal in the right TS. However, none of the venous pressure gradients improved, so we decided to place an 8 mm × 21 mm WALLSTENT (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA) stent in the right TSS at first. The venous pressure gradients indicated over 8 mmHg between distal and proximal of SSS stenosis after stenting in the right TS; however, we decided to place 8 mm × 29 mm WALLSTENT stent in the SSS [-]. The systolic venous pressure was smaller than that of pretreatment. It was 15 mmHg in the parietal portion of the SSS, 13 mmHg in the TS, and 10 mmHg in the right internal jugular vein. No perioperative complications were observed. Her headache and papilledema were completely disappeared after the stents placement. Cerebral angiography 6 months after the procedure demonstrated good stents patency [-].