Here we present a case of a 71-year-old woman, with a history of rectal adenocarcinoma. Initially treated with a local excision of the tumor, that was categorized T2N0 according to imaging done prior to the surgery (MRI and transrectal ultrasound). 6 days after the local excision, patient presented with signs of pelvic sepsis due to perforation of the surgical wound. Consequently, a diverting sigmoid-loop-colostomy and debridement was performed. The colostomy was closed 6 months later.
Almost 3 years after the colostomy closure the patient was diagnosed with a local recurrence and underwent a laparoscopic extralevator abdominoperineal resection (eAPR) with end colostomy. During the eAPR the pelvic floor was prophilactly closed using a biological, fast absorbable mesh in order to prevent future perineal herniation (GORE® BIO-A® Tissue Reinforcement, biosynthetic web scaffold, 67% polyglycolic acid, 33% trimethylene carbonate. Flagstaff, AZ, USA). Pathology samples revealed mucinous 2 cm diameter adenocarcinoma with circumferential radial margins of 6 mm and negative for metastasis in 14 lymph nodes.
After the eAPR, the patient was treated with chemoradiotherapy, with 27 rounds of radiation and oral treatment of capecitabine (Xeloda, Genentech, CA, US). During oncological follow up, the patient has no evidence of recurrence (2 years) as of writing this article.
About 2 years after eAPR, the patient presented to our outpatient clinic with complaints of a noticeable bulge in her perineum, which could be painful during standing and ambulating. Physical examination demonstrated a large, irreducible herniation of the perineal area. A CT scan was performed, showing a very large perineal hernia containing small intestine, with a hernia orifice measuring 4.7 cm and 7.5 cm in the sagittal and transverse aspects respectively . Due to her complaints and radiological findings, a corrective operation was indicated and performed. A three layer repair was considered appropriate considering the large and substantial cavity that would remain. The repair should withstand the high pressure of sitting and movement, and provide comfort in a seated position, especially considering the patient's complaints of discomfort. Because of significant thinning of the perineal skin, and in order to further fortify the closure, it was also decided to close the skin in a “vest over pants” formation.
The patient was placed in a jack knife position throughout the surgery. After herniation sac was identified and reduced , a three layered repair was performed together with surgeons from the plastic surgery department—a 15 × 20 cm synthetic Composite mesh was used to close and reinforce the pelvic floor (15 × 20 cm Symbotex™ Composite Mesh by Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA). The mesh was sutured to the coccyx, pubis, ischium, and cervix. The plastic surgeons assisted in forming a bilateral gluteal muscle flaps, approximately 3 cm from each side, which were sutured to each other, end to end, with interrupted 2–0 Vicryl sutures. The skin was then closed in a “vest over pants” formation after the underlying skin was de-epithelialized.
In post-operative-day 11, due to suspected surgical site infections, A CT-scan was performed showing a fluid collection. The fluid was drained in the operating theater. A drain was placed in the remaining space and antibiotic treatment was initiated. The surgical site showed signs of clinical improvement after the drainage, and fluid culture was negative for bacterial growth. The patient was eventually discharged on post-operative-day 23 after the herniation repair.
In a follow up imaging study 2 months after discharge, a CT-scan shows no recurrence of perineal herniation . Follow up examination done a year after the operation, showed satisfying surgical results, and no sign of recurrence has been found in a physical examination . Yet the patient still reports some discomfort while sitting on hard surfaces.