An extremely fit 84 year-old lady attended with acute coronary syndrome with a 6 h history of chest pain. She had a history of hyperlipidemia, hypertension with prior coronary artery bypass in 2004 with a left internal mammary artery graft to the left anterior descending artery and saphenous vein grafts (SVG) to the posterior descending and obtuse marginal arteries. ECG demonstrated inferior ST elevation MI. Preprocedural platelet inhibition with oral Ticagrelor 180 mg and Aspirin 300 mg was administered. Coronary angiography performed from a 6F left radial sheath confirmed severe proximal left coronary disease and patent grafts. The RCA was ectatic with subtotal occlusion of the proximal-mid RCA (see Fig. a asterisks) and a further lesion at the ostium of the posterior descending artery (PDA). The culprit lesion was an acute thrombotic lesion affecting the origin of the right posterior lateral artery (PLA) (see Fig. b white arrow).
Primary PCI was performed to the thrombotic PLA lesion with pre-dilatation and drug eluting stent (DES, 4.0 × 34 mm Onyx stent). The proximal-mid RCA lesion was predilatated and stented with a 5.0 × 34 mm Onyx.
Following stent deployment the RCA suffered a grade 3 perforation (> 1 mm perforation with streaming of contrast) (Ellis et al., ) within the stented segment. Initial management with intermittent prolonged balloon tamponade over 30 min failed. Dual access from the contralateral radial artery was gained to allow ‘ping-pong’ guiding catheters to facilitate rapid exchange of wires and devices minimising tamponade balloon deflation times. The largest coronary covered stent (4.0 × 18 mm Bentley BeGraft) was deployed within the initial DES and over-sized to 4.5 mm by post-dilation with a non-compliant balloon. There was persistent rapid extravasation secondary to an endoleak. Echocardiography confirmed a < 1 cm rim of pericardial fluid and the patient remained haemodynamically uncompromised therefore pericardiocentesis was not indicated. Only limited distal coronary ischemia was seen in view of a patent SVG to PDA supplying the PDA/PLA system via the distal RCA-PLA stent (see Fig. ).
Given the ectatic nature of the RCA and failed second line techniques, an emergency multi-disciplinary team meeting (MDT) supported from IR colleagues was arranged to consider management. Given the patent right SVG, coil embolization of the RCA was considered. Placement of a peripheral vascular stent-graft was favoured as embolization may have not provided immediate stasis and would leave limited back-up options. An 0.018 in. 300 cm guidewire (Advantage, Terumo) was placed through the stents and an 8Fr glidecatheter from the right radial artery was exchanged. A Viabahn 5 mm × 50 mm stent graft was then deployed within the RCA, through the lumen of the DES and covered stent after rapid removal of the tamponade balloon and wire from the second guiding catheter. The Viabahn was deployed with a proximal and distal flare. Completion angiograms demonstrated successful resolution with preservation of the acute marginal branch and forward flow to the PDA/PLA.
Twenty-four hours later repeat coronary angiogram was performed which confirmed stent patency, and a CT coronary angiogram at 1 month also shows excellent distal flow in the RCA and it’s branches (see Fig. ). The patient is asymptomatic at clinical review up to 6 months post-procedure. Repeat echocardiograms did not demonstrate any ventricular aneurysm.