A 69-year-old female was referred to the outpatient cardiology clinic due to concern for cardiac amyloidosis. She had a medical history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation requiring two prior catheter ablations and anticoagulation with apixaban. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated increased biventricular wall thickness, and subsequent cardiac magnetic resonance imaging suggested an infiltrative process with diffuse subendocardial late gadolinium enhancement and abnormal nulling of the myocardial signal. Therefore, she was referred to our Cardiac Amyloidosis Clinic for further evaluation.
Her review of systems was notable for fatigue, shortness of breath, and lightheadedness for more than six months. She mentioned having bruising around her eyes for many years, and although she previously sought evaluation for this symptom, she was told that she had fragile blood vessels with no further investigation. She denied ocular trauma, carpal tunnel syndrome, neuropathy, lumbar stenosis, biceps tendon rupture, or inflammatory arthropathy. The patient denied tobacco use or recreational drug use but consumed one–two glasses of red wine per week. Family history was significant for pulmonary sarcoidosis, unspecified heart failure in her father, and trigeminal neuralgia in her mother. The patient reported being of British, French, and Irish ancestry.
On physical examination, the patient had macroglossia with teeth indentation and scalloping along the lateral margins of the tongue. Ocular exam demonstrated periorbital purpura . The jugular venous pressure was elevated, and she had an irregular rhythm with a normal heart rate. The remainder of her physical exam was unremarkable.
Initial serologic workup revealed a normal complete blood count, renal function, and hepatic function profile. Repeat TTE was performed with longitudinal strain imaging and demonstrated increased biventricular wall thickness, thickened atrioventricular valves, biatrial enlargement (Video 1), Doppler haemodynamics with E velocity of 1.2 m/sec (reference range 0.4–0.9 m/s) and medial e’ velocity of 3 cm/sec (reference range ≥ 8 cm/s), and abnormal global longitudinal strain of −10.2% with relative apical preservation . Given these findings, there was concern for cardiac amyloidosis. Haematologic testing revealed a normal serum-free AL ratio of 1.45 (reference range 0.26–1.65) without evidence of monoclonal paraprotein on serum or urine immunofixation. However, given her unusual presentation of spontaneous periorbital purpura, which is often associated with AL amyloidosis, EMB was recommended.
Right ventricular EMB with Congo red staining revealed amyloid deposits within the myocardium and vessel walls. Low power images of the biopsy showed normal cardiac myofibres within the tissue, with amorphous extracellular deposits . On high power magnification, a pale-pink hyaline material was present that stained strongly with Congo red . Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS) detected a peptide profile consistent with ATTR amyloidosis and an amino acid sequence abnormality in the ATTR protein. Genetic testing confirmed a Thr80Ala (legacy nomenclature Thr60Ala, which omits the 20 amino acid peptide) mutation in the TTR gene.
After being diagnosed with hereditary ATTR amyloidosis, tafamidis therapy (61 mg capsule once daily) was started, which is currently the only therapy approved for cardiac amyloidosis by the Food and Drug Administration in the USA. Subsequent electromyography to assess for nerve involvement showed mild bilateral median mononeuropathies at the wrists consistent with bilateral carpal tunnel syndrome. Nerve conduction studies demonstrated decreased postganglionic sudomotor function in the hand and proximal leg, concerning for a small fibre neuropathy. Given the diagnosis of hereditary ATTR amyloidosis with cardiac involvement and newly diagnosed polyneuropathy, patisiran, a small-interfering RNA that targets TTR mRNA, was also initiated intravenously at a dose of 0.3 mg/kg every three weeks. The patient continues to be closely followed in the Cardiac Amyloidosis Clinic.