A 58-year-old Saudi male known case of diabetes, patient presented to the emergency department at King Abdulaziz General Hospital, Makkah, Saudi Arabia, complaining of fatigability and dizziness for the past two days associated with two weeks cramping abdominal pain and multiple episodes of bloody diarrhea. No history of surgical procedures or drug abuse.
The patient was diagnosed with UC 10 months ago and he was non complaint to his treatment. A positive history of an intermittent abdominal pain and cramping within the last 2-years associated with bloody diarrhea that was significant as patient needed to receive blood transfusions. The final diagnosis was made after colonoscopy, which showed chronic relapsing ulcerative colitis.
Examination showed a soft abdomen, nontender, nondistended, with no guarding or rebound tenderness. Digital rectal examination revealed stool mixed with blood. His laboratory investigation was unremarkable except for the hemoglobin (hgb) 3.1 g/dL, and leukocytosis 8.3 10^9/L.
The patient was admitted, and blood transfusion was initiated. After stabilization of the patient hgb, a search for the cause was started.
The upper endoscopy was unremarkable on the other hand the Colonoscopy described hyperemic rectal and sigmoid colon mucosa with ulcerated surface and multiple worm-like polyps started 20 cm from the anal verge, the scoop reached 38 cm from the anal verge to the descending colon and could not progress farther due to an obstructed colon with worm-like polyps . Multiple biopsies were taken.
The histopathologist verified the diagnosis, a chronic active colitis consistent with ulcerative colitis. An abdominal computed tomography scan (CT) was performed with Intravenous and oral contrast revealed the loss of the ascending and sigmoid colon with wall thinking and multiple tubular dissecting intraluminal filling defects in the ascending and sigmoid colon, likely polyps with filiform patterns .
A total colectomy with ileo-rectal anastomosis with circular end-to-end stapling devices as performed with no intra operative complications by the main surgeon Dr. Alkhuzaie.
Postoperatively the patient had no complications. He started an oral diet gradually from day one tolerated with no complains furthermore he was discharged three days later, the patient seen in the clinic 2 weeks later and one year later without any complications.
Regarding the colon specimen, grossly a display of multiple projections with a worm-like shape, and the longest one was 14 cm . The final histopathology report showed neutrophil infiltration of the mucosa and submucosa with crypt abscesses, and no signs of dysplasia.