A 47-year-old male, presenting a 32-year history of intermittent locking and loss of range of motion of the left elbow, with no recollection of associated trauma, was brought to our attention due to the considerable size of the elbow , which had begun interfering with his job as a taxi driver and daily life. Clinical examination revealed a significant increase in size of the left elbow compared to the contralateral. The elbow lacked 40° of full extension and 85° of flexion and crepitation was noted when the elbow was brought from flexion to extension. Pronation and supination were substantially complete. Palpation of the elbow highlighted the presence of floaters in both the superficial and deep planes of the left elbow joint. No neurologic or vascular compression symptoms were observed. Routine laboratory data were normal. Other joints were normal.
The simple radiographs of the left elbow showed multiple rounded, calcified bodies widespread throughout the elbow joint . Magnetic Resonance (MR) images showed the distribution of the calcified bodies spread throughout the elbow joint . Diagnosis of synovial osteochondromatosis was made.
Open synovectomy was performed (by author A.S.) through anterior and posterior surgical access to the elbow. At surgery multiple calcific bodies were found adherent to the thickened synovium and within the joint space . We removed and counted a total of 312 loose bodies, varying in size from a few millimeters to 3 cm . Histopathology confirmed the diagnosis.
Postoperatively, the elbow was supported in a sling for two weeks and then was mobilized progressively. The clinical and radiological evaluation at 6 months postoperatively showed marked reduction in the volume of the elbow, improvement of extension to 15° and flexion to 95°, no change in the preoperative prono-supination of the elbow, and no peripheral neurological deficits .
The patient was assessed using the Mayo elbow performance score before surgery and at 6 months postoperative, with an increase from 50 to 80 points.