An 83-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for evaluation and management of a symptomatic liver mass. His medical history included diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, which was treated with rituximab + pirarubicin + cyclophosphamide + vincristine + prednisone therapy at 81 years old, and had bladder cancer (resected at 67 years) on follow-up. After resection of the bladder cancer, no recurrence was detected for 16 years. Liver dynamic computed tomography (CT) showed a low-density mass in the segment (S) 4 area, measured 40 mm in diameter. The density of the tumor was well enhanced in the arterial phase and washed-out in the portal phase. (a–d). The hepatobiliary phase of Gd-EOB-DTPA-MRI shows tumor nodules in the liver with low intensity (e). On positron emission tomography (PET)-CT, the maximum standard uptake value of the tumor in S4 of the liver was 3.2 (f). MRI and PET-CT confirmed a single liver tumor that was 40 mm in diameter and located in the S4 region. Liver metastasis of malignant lymphoma was suspected because of the patient’s medical history. Therefore, we performed a liver biopsy preoperatively. The patient was diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) based on the biopsy results and imaging findings.
Upon presentation, the patient was afebrile, had no history of weight loss, and his appetite was good. His height was 166 cm, body weight 72 kg, and BMI 26.12. He has no drinking history. In a preoperative indocyanine green (ICG) test, the ICGR15 was 76.2%. The total bilirubin level was 1.1 mg/dL and the direct bilirubin level was 0.2 mg/dL. The serum albumin level was 4.7 g/dL and prothrombin activity was 96.3%. The Child–Pugh (CP) score was 5 points, which indicated a grade of A. The degree of liver damage was equivalent to A in accordance with the scoring system of the Liver Cancer Study Group of Japan. shows the patient’s laboratory data on admission. The hepatic uptake ratio of 99mTc-galactosyl human serum albumin (GSA) by liver scintigraphy (LHL15) was 0.931 and the heart uptake ratio (HH15) was 0.482. The maximal removal rate of 99mTc-GSA (GSA-Rmax) was 0.874 mg/min. GSA-Rmax in the predicted residual liver (GSA-RL) was greater than 0.765 mg/min, which was within the range considered safe for surgical procedures.
Despite this finding, Child–Pugh classification and 99mTc-GSA liver scintigraphy did not show any abnormal findings, and there was no background disease. Antibody against hepatitis C virus and hepatitis B virus surface antigen were negative. The serum anti-mitochondrial antibody and anti-nuclear antibody were negative. The serum tumor markers alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and cancer antigen 19-9 were within the and normal range, but the protein level induced by vitamin K absence-II levels was increased (92 mg/dL). Therefore, we diagnosed constitutional ICG excretory defect with HCC and decided to perform radical surgery. Therefore, the patient underwent partial hepatectomy (S4). Pathologically, the tumor was diagnosed as moderately differentiated HCC (a). There was expansion and bleeding of perisinusoidal cells and an atrophic hepatic cord in the background of liver tissue. Because of previous chemotherapy, the diagnosis of sinusoidal obstruction syndrome (SOS) of the liver was established (b). After partial hepatectomy (S4), the postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged on the 8th postoperative day. The patient remains in good general condition.