On August 23rd (day 3 of hospitalization) 2021, a 1.5-year-old girl underwent abdominal mass resection surgery after chemotherapy for neuroblastoma. Before surgery, the physical examination revealed that the patient weighed 10.0 kg, with a height of 82.3 cm. Level of systolic and diastolic blood pressure within the normal range (as shown in Fig. ). A transitory increase in blood pressure (BP) is observed following surgery, with a blood pressure of 101/57 mmHg, higher than the 90th percentile (100/56 mmHg) and less than 95th percentile (103/60 mmHg) for 1-year girl . After the operation, the child was given antibiotics, hemostasis, acid suppression therapy, and nutritional support. On August 30th, Facial Pain Scale (FPS) scores ≤ 2 was best described for child with postoperative pain as mild pain.
PN without lipid emulsion was administrated after surgery (on August 24th) with continuous infusion for about 20 h. Dextrose, amino-acids, electrolytes, vitamins, and trace elements were mixed in a well-defined order to prepare total nutritional admixture. Before starting nutrition therapy, levels of total cholesterol (TC), triglycerides (TG), low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) were tested and were within the normal range. On August 27th, 20% medium-chain triglycerides / soybean oil-based lipid emulsion was added to the PN solution, at a starting dose of 0.5 g/kg/day, gradually increased to 100 ml (2.5 g/kg/day). However, the blood pressure were increased to 125/95 mmHg. According to cardiology consultation, diuretic and benazepril hydrochloride were ordered, and the patient’s blood pressure tended to become stable gradually. During the therapy, the levels of serum lipids were normal. For total fluid output at 24 h after admission, urine output, abdominal drainage and stool, were all measured. then, as measures of fluid balance, we calculated the total fluid intake at 24 h after admission.
On September 25th, she suddenly developed a fever with shivering chills. The laboratory test demonstrated a high neutrophil count (4200/μL) and low white blood cell count (4300/μL). To ensure the effectiveness, preemptive treatment with i.v. ceftazidime (100 mg/kg/d) and vancomycin (40 mg/kg/day) were administered. Later that day she experienced a fever to 40.7 °C, hypotension, tachycardia and septic shock. Blood and peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) tip cultures grew Staphylococcus aureus. The patient was given broad-spectrum antibiotics and the PICC was removed. The patient’s condition was improved quickly. PN and antihypertensive agents were withdrawn during the period of therapy for PICC-related bloodstream infection. More importantly, the blood pressure level remained within the normotensive range. After infection symptoms getting better, the nutritional support was resumed because of the requirement for maintaining or improving the immune competence (the patient developed chylous ascites). However, once the PN was resumed, with lipid emulsion at dose of 100 ml (2.5 g/kg/day), the blood pressure began to fluctuate again, usually ranging from 120/90 to 134/95 mmHg, with the highest as 155/109 mmHg.
After consultation with clinical pharmacist, the PN was discontinued, and blood pressure subsequently decreased to 107/80 mmHg (on October 23rd). The blood pressure monitoring results showed that the patient’s high blood pressure was likely to be caused by the PN mixture or a certain component in the PN.
For the next two days, the PN without lipid emulsion was administrated as recommended by the clinical pharmacist. The patient's blood pressure remained stable (95/64 mmHg). We therefore conclude that the blood pressure fluctuations were associated with the lipid emulsion in the PN. However, considering the need for nutritional support of long-term treatment in children with chylous ascites, clinical pharmacist recommended starting with low-dose lipid emulsion and increased by 10 mL (0.25 g/kg/day) each time. However, when the volume of lipid emulsion in the PN was increased to 60 mL (1.5 g/kg/day), the blood pressure began to fluctuate from 120/78 to 122/99 mmHg. Tailoring the dose of lipid infusion at 45 mL, the patient could maintain stable blood pressure (92/53 to 101/70 mmHg). With continued such treatment, she eventually discharged from the hospital.