A 60-year-old woman with no history of systemic diseases presented with traumatic corneal laceration after being hit with a chestnut. Best-corrected visual acuity in the right eye was 0.4 (decimal value), and the intraocular pressure (IOP) was 19 mmHg. On slit-lamp examination, conjunctival injection, full thickness corneal laceration and anterior chamber reaction were found with positive Siedel’s test. In dilated eye examination, focal rupture of the anterior capsular bag and mild lens opacity were observed, but any visible foreign body was not detected in lens. There was no radiological evidence of intraocular foreign bodies on computed tomography (CT) or B-scan . Under the precise slit-lamp examination, no chestnut thorn was found in conjunctiva or cornea. A bandage contact lens was inserted, and treatment was commenced with both topical (moxifloxacin 5 mg/mL, fortified tobramycin 14 mg/mL) and broad-spectrum systemic antibiotics. Ten days after the trauma, the corneal wound was sealed, and there was no active anterior chamber inflammation, but the focal nodular conjunctival injection persisted . There was a possibility of accompanied scleritis; therefore, a topical steroid (prednisolone acetate 10 mg/mL) was prescribed. In the 6-week follow-up, subconjunctival foreign body was detected and surgically removed after conjunctival injection and edema being subsided (1st surgery). However, the conjunctival injection and anterior chamber reaction kept worsening.
In the 10-week follow-up, formation of a thick fibrotic membrane on the anterior lens capsule around the traumatic lens opacity and exudative material in the anterior chamber, suspected as a fungal ball, were observed abruptly . Diagnostic surgery including scleral exploration and anterior chamber paracentesis was planned because there was a possibility of fungal infection by vegetable matter or remnant intralenticular foreign body. As the foreign body was organic chestnut thorn, and the white fluffy exudative material in the anterior chamber suggested a fungal infection, intracameral and subconjunctival amphotericin B injections(0.01 mg/0.1 cc) were administered. The remnant scleral and anterior capsular foreign bodies were surgically removed, and the specimen was sent to the department of laboratory medicine for KOH smear and culture tests. (2nd surgery). MacConkey agar, blood agar plate (BAP), chocolate agar plate, and SDA plates were incubated for 16 h (overnight) at 37 °C in bacteriological incubator. Once colonies were grown on the plate media, they were gram stained and individual cells were observed under a microscope. Then we asked outside professional facility to perform an antimicrobial susceptibility test and identify the organism. After the second surgery, the patient was prescribed 1% voriconazole eye drops and systemic fluconazole but without the topical steroid as a fungal infection was highly suspected from the clinical presentation. The KOH smear test of scleral foreign body was negative for fungal hyphae. In contrast, unspecified mold form species were grown from SDA plate.
One week after the 2nd surgery, hypopyon and whitish plaque on the anterior lens surface progressed . Therefore, intracameral amphotericin B injection (0.01 mg/0.1 cc) and removal of the suspicious remnant corneal foreign body were performed (3rd surgery). Although antifungal drugs, including antibiotics, were administered continuously, the exudative material in the anterior chamber gradually increased in size .
Twelve weeks after the trauma, phacoemulsification through scleral tunnel incision (2.8 mm) without IOL insertion, repeated KOH smear and culture test of the anterior lens capsule, and intracameral amphotericin B injection (0.01 mg/0.1 cc) were performed (4th surgery). Fungal hyphae was detected on KOH smear and Aspergillus was grown on SDA plate from both anterior capsule and fibrotic membrane after the cataract surgery. Aspergillus infection was diagnosed 13 weeks after the trauma and 5% natamycin eye drop was prescribed additionally.
After the 4th surgery, the anterior chamber inflammation improved. Three months after the phacoemulsification, the patient underwent a secondary insertion of 3-piece hydrophobic intraocular lens (IOL) in the ciliary sulcus (5th surgery), and her postoperative best-corrected visual acuity in the right eye was 0.9 in decimal visual acuity values . The timeline for the disease progress and treatment is presented in Fig. .