An 8-year-old male child presented with a three weeks history of neck pain associated with neck stiffness that was temporarily relieved by analgesic medication and massage, followed by a one-week history of weakness of all four upper and lower limbs impairing his ability to sit and stand. This was shortly followed by bladder and bowel incontinence. There was no history of cough, loss of weight, fever, or night sweats. The child was seronegative for Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. The boy was previously healthy before the onset of the neck pain. He is the second born of three siblings and the rest of the children are in good state of health.
On examination, he was lying supine in bed unable to sit or stand. There was no cervical or thoracic vertebrae gibbus or kyphus deformity. The dermatomes were intact in the upper and lower limbs. The myotomes at C5 were 3/5 of the right and 2/5 of the left upper limbs. The perianal sensation was present. The myotomes at C6-T12 were 1/5 for both upper limbs and L2, L3, L4, L5, S1 were 1/5. The tone of upper and lower limbs was reduced. The muscle bulk and the reflexes were normal. Bulbocavernous reflex was positive. There were no enlarged cervical or inguinal lymph nodes. No clinical bladder or bowel disturbances were noted.
The complete blood count was normal (Hb-15.2g/dl, WBC-7300/mL, platelets 153,000/µL). The erythrocyte sedimentation rate and liver function test were normal. The abdominopelvic ultrasound was unremarkable with no evidence of enlarged para-pancreatic, para-aortic, pelvic lymph nodes.
Anteroposterior and lateral view (flexion) plain radiography of cervical spine was unremarkable. MRI of the cervical and thoracic spine demonstrated an infiltrating intradural extramedullary, isointense on T1 and hyper intense on T2, mildly enhancing spinal cord lesion involving C2-C4 with an extension to extradural space of C3-T2. The lesion also extended to the right semispinalis cervicis, semispinalis capitis, trapezius, lavatory scapulae, and the anterior scalene muscles. Severe spinal stenosis was demonstrated in a long segment from C3-T2. There were no cervical or thoracic vertebral marrow changes ( and ). Computed tomography (CT) myelogram demonstrated a complete absence of contrast in the leptomeningeal space from C2 to T1 while uniform opacification of the space below T1. MR myelogram confirmed the CT myelogram findings . There was no suspicious lesion in the bony cervical and thoracic vertebrae. There were no enlarged cervical lymph nodes noted. Hence, based on the imaging findings, the provisional diagnosis of intradural extramedullary spinal tumor with an extra spinal canal extension and a differential diagnosis of lymphoma was made.
The patient underwent laminectomy and decompression of the spinal stenosis. Jelly like extradural lesion extending below C3 to T1 was removed intraoperatively. The histopathology was consistent with a high-grade B cell lymphoma. The immunohistochemistry staining showed positivity for CD45, CD20, CD10, Bcl-2, and >99% positivity of Ki 67 (high proliferative index) . Epstein–Barr encoding region (EBER) in situ hybridization for EBV was negative. Cytogenetic analysis showed chromosomal translocations of 8q24.
The patient was put on radio-chemotherapy and clinically improved over 2 months period. The chemotherapy regimens were cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin hydrochloride, vincristine sulfate, and prednisone (CHOP) plus intrathecal cytarabine, methotrexate, and hydrocortisone for four cycles. The radiation dose was 1.8 grays (Gy) per fraction to the local area for an average total dose of 36 Gy, five days a week for four weeks. The upper and lower limb paresis improved significantly. Muscle power in upper limbs improved from 1/5 to 5/5 and those of the lower limbs improved from 1/5 to 4/5.