A 65-years-old female presented to our hospital complaining of pain in right knee joint on terminal extension since 6 months. The pain was aggravated with increasing activity. However, there was no history of significant trauma. She had past history of partial menisectomy on same side for a degenerative tear of the medial meniscus 1 year before and obtained full range of motion without pain thereafter. Physical examination revealed joint effusion in her left knee with limited range of motion. The range of motion was a flexion deformity of 5 degree and a further flexion of 150 degree with mild pain exacerbated by extension. No posterior sagging or knee instability was indicated by the results of anterior, posterior drawer and pivot shift tests. A plain radiograph of knee joint showed minute osteophytes and joint space narrowing at the medial side of the knee . MRI of the right knee joint showed a diffusely thickened PCL with increased intraligamentous signal intensity on T2-weighted images (, ). The fibers of the PCL were difficult to see in T1-weighted images but discernible in T2-weighted images, and the margin was continuous from origin to insertion. Medial meniscus was in partial menisectomy state and lateral meniscus was normal. Based on the patient’s history and the MRI findings, we suspected mucoid degeneration or an intraligamentous ganglion of the Posterior Cruciate Ligament as the cause of the patient’s symptoms.
Arthroscopic examination showed PCL was grossly thickened and colored with a yellowish hue in the ligament, and was filled with a yellowish substance . The yellowish hue was not liquid, but a fibrous tissue-like ACL mucoid degeneration as described in reports on ACL mucoid degeneration. Anterior cruciate ligament appearance and tension with probing was normal but was pushed towards lateral wall of the notch and was impinging on lateral wall in flexion and on roof on extension . On probing, tension of the PCL fibers themselves was normal suggesting the absence of PCL tear. We carefully split the fibers and curetted the yellow tissues preserving the PCL fibers as possible . We restricted curettage when the thickness of PCL decreased, because the extensive curettage would cause damage of PCL tensions. We did lateral wall and roof notchplasty and checked again for impingement in flexion and extension. After arthroscopic procedure, Lachmann and Pivot shift were negative ruling out instability. Medial meniscus was in partial menisectomy state and lateral meniscus was normal. Cartilage of femoral condyle and patella was normal. Histological examination of the biopsied tissue revealed mucoid degeneration of the ligament.
Early physiotherapy rehabilitation was started from the second post-operative day. Immediately after surgery, patient was pain-free and gained full range of motion. At one year follow up, patient remained asymptomatic. Informed Consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.