We report the case of a 72-year-old female patient, retired, right-handed, and non-smoker 1.62 m tall – 54 kg. This patient resided in an assisted living facility accommodating those with mental health disorders, presented with a history of osteoporosis, known chronic psychiatric illness with well-controlled symptoms, along with attempted suicide 12 years prior that led to forearm amputation in her left upper limb and transmetacarpal amputation of the right one (she threw herself under a train). Despite this disability, the patient used her arms every day to eat or do her hair, employing technical aids fabricated by an occupational therapist, which allowed her to secure cutlery, combs, and other items to her forearm . Due to the psychotic medication, she had a pre-operative estimated lack of extension of the elbow of 80° due to spasticity (fixed flexion deformity with further flexion).
She came to the emergency room after a fall from her standing height led to a complex, non-complicated, and supra- and intercondylar fracture of her left humerus . The treatment decision was difficult to make, and there was initially disagreement among our team. Since the fracture was not suitable for ORIF and difficult for spastic patients, one part of our team proposed conservative treatment, while the other part proposed arthroplasty. The arthroplasty procedure was done 5 days after the accident, under general anesthesia, in the right lateral decubitus position, with a tourniquet at the base of the limb. We used a single posterior approach, lifting the triceps through a reverse-V incision, the radial head was resected. We inserted the latitude total elbow prosthesis (Tornier, Montbonnot-Saint-Martin, France) which was cemented all at once. Passive rehabilitation was initiated since day one, and after 21 days of immobilization, active rehabilitation was initiated. Elbow flexion beyond 0° was not allowed for 6 weeks.
At 12 months post-operative, the patient had no pain (0/10 on a visual analog scale) and used her left arm as she did before her fall. QuickDASH score was the same 12 months after the arthroplasty as it was before the fracture (68, 2). The appearance of the scar was satisfactory. The patient had no functional complaints and was extremely satisfied with the outcome, given that she had regained her pre-trauma autonomy. She had the same range of motion as before the fracture: Extension −80°, flexion 140°, and full pronation-supination (80−80°). The implant was in the correct location on X-rays, with no signs of early loosening or periprosthetic fracture ( and ).