An 8-day-old full-term girl baby was referred to our center for evaluation and management of fetal and neonatal bradycardia. Our gastroenterology service was consulted due to generalized jaundice that started on her first day of life. She had no history of fever, vomiting, diarrhea, respiratory issues, or abnormal movements. There was no history of change in the color of her urine. Her stools were well pigmented. There was no history of phototherapy use. Perinatal history revealed a term infant, born to a healthy 40-year-old mother, gravida 3 Para 2, with no maternal history of infections, cholestasis, rheumatological, autoimmune disorders, or medications use during pregnancy. She was delivered via low segment cesarian section due to fetal bradycardia. Her prenatal ultrasound images were all unremarkable. Her birth weight was 2700 g. APGAR scores were 8, and 9, at 5, and 10 min respectively. She received positive pressure ventilation shortly after birth, and her heart rate was in the 60’s so she was electively intubated and mechanically ventilated at a community hospital prior to her transfer to our center on day of life 8. There was no similar history in her other siblings nor where there any history of fetal loss, or cholestasis in any family member. The baby was born to un-consanguineous parents. Examination was significant for bradycardia with heart rates in the 60 s while on therapy with isoproterenol (b adrenergic), generalized icterus, and a palpable liver 2 cm below the costal margin. Otherwise, her examination was unremarkable with stable vitals, growth parameters on the 25th centile for age, negative dysmorphism, normal tone and central nervous system examination, and no visible cutaneous legions. Workup revealed a transient thrombocytopenia at 62 K/uL (reference range 150–450) that resolved on subsequent samples, otherwise a normal complete blood count, chemistry panel, urea nitrogen, and creatinine. Her liver panel revealed a cholestatic picture with total protein at 49 g\L(reference range 57–82), albumin at 29.5 g\L (reference range 40.2–47.6), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) at 173 U\L (reference range 46–116), gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) at 61 U\L (reference range for adult males < 73 and adult females < 38), alanine amino transferase (ALT) at 44 U\L (reference range 10–49), aspartate amino transferase (AST) at 42 U\L (reference range 34–118), total bilirubin 331 at umol\L (reference range 5–21) (19 mg/dl), and a direct bilirubin at 245 umol\L (reference range 0–5) (14 mg/dl), and her coagulation profile was unremarkable with the highest international normalized ratio being 1.38 that responded to vitamin K therapy. Additional laboratory workup including serologies for toxoplasma, herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, syphilis (TORCH), human immunodeficiency virus, blood and urine cultures, thyroid function panel, and newborn screen, were unremarkable. Since gestational alloimmune liver disease (GALD) was in the differential; Ferritin was sent and came back high at 2772 ng/ml reference range13-150) along with triglycerides at 3.42 mmol\L (Normal < 1.7 mmol/L). Imaging including cardiac echo and liver ultrasound were unremarkable with a normal liver size and echogenicity, a normal common bile duct size, and a normal gallbladder with no sludge seen. Electrocardiography confirmed the presence of a third-degree atrioventricular block. Due to this history, NLE was highly suspected so autoimmune markers were sent that showed a positive SS-A/Ro antibodies, ANA at a titer of 1:640 and a speckled pattern, and SMA at a titer of 1:20, whereas Double stranded deoxyribonucleic acid antibodies, Smith extractable nuclear antigen (Sm-ENA) antibodies, SS-B/La antibodies, AMA, LKM, Parietal cell antibodies were all negative. Immunoglobulin levels were all within normal levels. Based on the autoantibody profile and the cardiac findings the patient was diagnosed with congenital heart block due to cardiac- NLE, as well as cholestasis due to NLE-liver disease. Our cardiac team placed a transvenous pacemaker, and we started the patient on oral prednisolone at a dose of 1 mg/kg for 6 weeks. While the patient’s heart condition was stable on temporary pacing and b adrenergics, her liver parameters showed a significant improvement only after steroids were introduced. Her liver parameters were all normalized within 4 weeks and continued to be within the normal ranges 2 weeks after steroids were tapered off as shown in Table . Her most recent liver parameters 8 weeks after discontinuation of steroids are all within normal limits as well. Her mother was later screened for lupus, for which she had a positive ANA, and rheumatoid factor.