An 88-year-old woman with a history of mitral valve repair for a P2 prolapse (quadrangular resection and annuloplasty with a 28-mm flexible band) 14 years before, paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, and pacemaker implantation for atrioventricular block presented to our institution with dyspnoea upon minimal exertion. Her medications included bisoprolol 1.25 mg once daily and Warfarin titrated to an international normalized ratio target of 2–3. Upon arrival, she was afebrile with a blood pressure of 93/60 mmHg, heart rate of 76 beats/min, and oxygen saturation of 90% on room air. Physical examination revealed jugular venous distension, coarse crackling in both lungs, and a Levine IV/VI systolic murmur radiating to the apex. The electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus rhythm with evidence of left atrial enlargement. Laboratory test results were normal except for a B-type natriuretic peptide level of 810.2 pg/mL (<18.4 pg/mL) and creatinine level of 1.65 mg/dL (<1.03 mg/dL). A chest radiograph revealed pulmonary congestion with an increased cardiothoracic ratio of 64%. Post-operative transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) conducted 2 years following the original mitral surgery had shown normal left ventricular function (ejection fraction 58.9%) with mild SAM and mild MR , while resting TTE on the current admission revealed somewhat hyperkinetic left ventricle (ejection fraction 66.2%) with significant SAM resulting in LVOT obstruction and severe MR . Although left ventricle was not hypertrophic with the posterior wall thickness of 8.7 mm and the intraventricular septal thickness of 9.0 mm, intraventricular septum bulging (the sigmoid septum) with narrow aorto-mitral angle was observed. The peak velocity of LVOT could not be precisely measured owing to the wide MR jet but was estimated to be ∼5 m/s. A dilated left atrium with a diameter of 50.2 mm was detected. A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) demonstrated significant SAM of the AML, resulting in the detachment from the PML in mid-to-late systole with severe MR (regurgitant volume of 83 mL and effective regurgitant orifice area of 0.47 cm2) ( and Videos 1 and 2). In particular, the medial portion of the AML was severely affected , where the peak velocity of LVOT of 5.4 m/s was detected . The mean transmitral pressure gradient (TMPG) was 5.0 mmHg at a heart rate of 60 beats/min , and the three-dimensional mitral valve area (MVA) was 2.36 cm2. Mild degenerative changes of mitral leaflets were detected with an AML length of 25.1 mm and a PML length of 11.2 mm. Aortic valve also presented mild degenerative changes with no more than mild to moderate regurgitation (vena contracta 4.7 mm) but without valvular or subvalvular stenosis.
The patient experienced heart failure attributable to severe MR due to significant SAM following mitral valve repair, without echocardiographic evidence of left ventricular hypertrophy. Increased dosage of bisoprolol to 2.5 mg per day and initiation of verapamil of 80 mg per day was tried but intolerant because of symptomatic hypotension without changes in SAM and severe MR. Disopyramide was avoided due to the multiple factors including a history of chronic kidney disease and glaucoma. Fluid administration and right ventricular pacing also had only limited effects. Therefore, an invasive treatment was considered necessary. The heart team dismissed the option of a second mitral valve surgery because of advanced age and high surgical risk (Society of Thoracic Surgeons Predicted Risk of Mortality of 12.015%). Instead, we opted to perform PMVR using the MitraClip to simultaneously address the issues of SAM and concomitant MR.
Under general anaesthesia and with TOE guidance, PMVR was performed on Day 16. After ineffective attempts to place the clip near the central portion of the mitral valve with an increased TMPG to 8 or 9 mmHg, we deployed a single NTR clip definitely at the medial edge of the mitral valve where the most severe SAM was detected. TOE confirmed displacement of the leaflets’ coaptation point towards the left ventricular inflow with resolution of SAM. As a result, MR decreased from severe to mild (regurgitant volume of 16 mL and effective regurgitant orifice area of 0.09 cm2) (, Video 3, and , Video S1) and the peak velocity of LVOT also decreased to 1.7 m/s . The post-procedural TMPG of 5.1 mmHg at a heart rate of 60 beats/min and three-dimensional MVA of 1.37 cm2, which indicated moderate mitral stenosis, was considered acceptable . Haemodynamic parameters improved immediately following the clip deployment. Invasive blood pressure increased from 79/37 to 117/40 mmHg, and mean left atrial pressure decreased from 21 to 14 mmHg . Pre- and post-procedural right heart catheterization showed an increase of cardiac index from 1.7 to 2.4 mL/min/m2 with no significant change of mean right atrial pressure (pre 12 mmHg, post 11 mmHg).
The patient’s post-operative course was uneventful, and she was discharged home 8 days after PMVR with good haemodynamic compensation. TTE at discharge showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction of 59.2% with no SAM, mild MR, and moderate mitral stenosis (TMPG 6.0 mmHg, MVA 1.50 cm2). At the 1-month, 6-month, and 1-year follow-ups, she had no cardiovascular symptoms and showed improvements in walking distance on a 6-min walk test. The 1-year follow-up TTE showed the lasting therapeutic effects with no SAM, mild MR, and moderate mitral stenosis (TMPG 6.1 mmHg, MVA 1.68 cm2).