An 81-year-old female with no significant medical history, presented to our Otolaryngology Department with a 2-month history of mild left otalgia, otic itching and otorrhea. During this period, she had been treated by her primary care physician without any improvement. She was prescribed oral amoxicillin 500 mg every 8 h for 1 week. As part of the topical treatment, she received ciprofloxacin, beclomethasone dipropionate/clioquinol, fluocinolone and dexamethasone/polymyxin B/trimethoprim. Each treatment was prescribed for 2 weeks. Otomicroscopy revealed erythema, edema and scant otorrhea in the anteroinferior part of the EAC. The tympanic membrane (TM) was intact. An area of bone remodeling with a small cavity anterior and inferior to the bony tympanic frame was observed, with accumulation of otorrhea in it. There was no evidence of granulation tissue or bone exposure .
No fever or facial palsy was noticed. Leukocyte count was 5930/mm3 (3.6–10.5 /mm3), C-reactive protein was 4,6 mg/L (0–5 mg/L) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 25 mm/h (0–30 mm/h). A culture of the otorrhea isolated multiresistant A. xylosoxidans, only susceptible to meropenem and cotrimoxazole . No cultures for fungal infection were needed as A. xylosoxidans was identified as the causal pathogen in the first conventional culture.
Temporal bone computed tomography (CT) showed a thickening of the left TM with tissue accumulation at its lower insertion and excavation of EAC floor compatible with osteomyelitis .
A multidisciplinary management approach was undertaken with the Infectious Disease Department. Given the compatible diagnosis of osteomyelitis, a treatment course of 6 weeks with intravenous meropenem was promptly started (2 g/8 h for the first week; 1 g/8 h for the next 5 weeks) followed by 4 weeks of oral cotrimoxazole (trimethoprim 160 mg/sulfamethoxazole 800 mg every 12 h). Topical antibiotic therapy (dexamethasone + polymyxin B + trimethoprim, 3–4 drops every 12 h) was continued throughout this time. She was hospitalized for the initial 3 weeks of treatment. Afterward, intravenous treatment was continued at home facilitated by our home hospitalization program. Symptomatology rapidly disappeared with treatment. Four months after completing the treatment, the patient remained asymptomatic. Upon otomicroscopy, the bony excavation in the lower tympanic frame persisted, stable and epithelialized, with no evidence of otorrhea or progression. A CT control also confirmed the absence of progression of the excavation of the EAC floor. Audiometry showed right normal hearing and left mild conductive hearing loss with a maximum speech discrimination of 100% in both ears, at 40 dB in the right ear and 50 dB in the left ear.