A 42-year-old Nepalese male, with an unremarkable medical and family history, presented with a complaint of sudden-onset bilateral painless blurred vision for 5 days. The blurring of vision was present in all eye fields, including near and far vision without redness, lacrimation, or double vision. There was no prior history of floaters in the visual field or the appearance of shade/curtain. Furthermore, the patient had no difficulty walking and speaking, and no headache, dizziness or loss of consciousness. In the past, there have been no such episodes or any symptoms necessary to seek any medical attention.
The systemic examination of the patient, including the neurological examination, was unremarkable except for pallor. Visual acuity was 6/60 bilaterally. The anterior segment of the bilateral eyes was normal. Fundus examination revealed bilateral, diffusely dilated tortuous retinal veins, and deep-blot intraretinal hemorrhages in all four quadrants of the retina in both eyes. An optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed significant central macular edema in both eyes, more prominent in the left eye. The clinical picture was consistent with simultaneous bilateral perfused CRVO and cystoid macular edema (CME) . The patient declined plasmapheresis due to financial constraints and was treated with aggressive hydration and intravitreal bevacizumab. With suspicion of hyperviscosity/thromboembolic phenomenon, further investigations were performed. Laboratory investigation showed persistent bicytopenia with normal white blood cell counts, and other laboratory parameters including blood glucose and CRP. Viral serologies [human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)] and Mantoux test were negative. Antinuclear, antiphospholipid, and antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies, and cryoglobulins, were negative. The Doppler study of bilateral carotid and vertebral arteries was normal. Serum electrophoresis showed hypoalbuminemia with an IgM kappa monoclonal spike (IgM percentage 56% corresponding to 29.6 g/L) in the gamma region . Bone marrow biopsy showed hypercellular marrow showing an increase in lymphoplasmacytic cells, features suspicious of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. On immunohistochemistry analysis, the tumor cells were positive for BCL2, CD20, MUM1, CD5, and CD138 in plasmacytoid cells and negative for CD10, CD23, and Cyclin D1 with Ki67 of 4%. .
The computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen showed splenomegaly with no evidence of lymphadenopathy. The patient received multiple episodes of blood transfusion during the hospital stay and was started on a bortezomib, dexamethasone, and rituximab (VDR) regimen for WM. After two doses of intravitreal bevacizumab and systemic therapy for WM, the vision of the patient improved to 6/18. He received a total of six VDR regimens following which his vision has improved bilaterally significantly to 6/9. The bone marrow biopsy after the completion of chemotherapy revealed hypercellular marrow with no evidence of lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma. Moreover, the M-spike has decreased to 34% (17 g/L) in serum electrophoresis . The patient is currently receiving maintenance rituximab every 2 months and is under regular follow-up.