A 63-year-old white male man with past medical history of hypertension presented to a hospital emergency department with a 4-month history of progressively worsening low back pain. Immediately prior to seeking emergency care, he reported an episode of fever, rigor, and generalized arthralgia. On initial presentation to the emergency department, his heart rate was 84 beats/minute, blood pressure was 130/65, respiratory rate was 20 breaths/minute, and oral temperature was 38.0 °C. A general examination was significant for a mildly distressed-appearing man and a musculoskeletal examination demonstrated diffuse tenderness in his lumbar spine area to percussive palpation without associated swelling, erythema, or evidence of trauma. The heart, lung, abdominal, and neurological examinations were within normal limits. Laboratory evaluation was significant for a leukocytosis (31,700 × 109/L) with 91% neutrophilia, hypokalemia (2.8 mmol/L), and elevated serum creatinine (1.6 mg/dL). Four sets of blood cultures were obtained from the antecubital area and rapid influenza A and B immunoassays were negative. Urine analysis was negative for nitrates and leukocyte esterase. A chest X-ray showed no evidence of an infectious process in his lungs. Non-contrast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his lumbar spine demonstrated a prevertebral and presacral fluid collection ventral to the L4 to L5 and L5 to S1 interspaces . The abscess extended into his right psoas musculature. There were findings of discitis involving the L5 to S1 interspace with associated edema of the endplates, although no frank destruction of progressive osteomyelitis was identified. Mild T2 hyperintensity at the L4 to L5 interspace in the presence of a ventral abscess and ventral epidural thickening indicated probable discitis involvement at this level. He was admitted to the hospital with a diagnosis of sepsis and piperacillin/tazobactam was intravenously administered. Blood cultures grew pan-sensitive Streptococcus intermedius in four of four bottles within 45 hours. Interventional radiology services were not available at the hospital and he was referred to our tertiary care institution for further evaluation.
Despite referral, he elected to delay further diagnostic evaluation and treatment for 2 months. On arrival to our tertiary care center, a lumbar spine MRI demonstrated progression of discitis now involving L3 to L4 through L5 to S1 . There was marked progression of the ventral epidural phlegmon with new development of a 2 cm epidural abscess . There was progression of mild enhancement of the L4 and L5 vertebral bodies indicative of osteomyelitis. An abscess involving the left side of L4 had developed. A computed tomography (CT)-guided biopsy was performed targeting the erosive abscess and 10 cc of fluid was aspirated. In addition, three core biopsies of the L4 to L5 interspace were taken and subsequent cultures were positive for Streptococcus intermedius. He had no signs of neurological impairment (that is, normal lower extremity strength and sensation) but a physical examination and dental panoramic radiograph demonstrated significant necrotic dentition . An examination of his oral cavity was negative for masses, lesions, or ulcerations involving the soft tissues, but several carious nonrestorable teeth were observed that were nontender to palpation or percussion and were nonmobile. He reported that his last episode of dental care occurred more than 20 years ago. As a part of treatment, ten teeth were extracted and the necrotic dentition was assumed to be the most likely source of infection. Other testing included a transesophageal echocardiogram which found no evidence of endocarditis. On hospital dismissal, he completed a 12-week course of ceftriaxone as well as extensive dental work to eradicate the source of infection. He remains on orally administered cefadroxil pending repeat imaging.