The proband was a 29-year-old male patient admitted to First Affiliated hospital of Dalian Medical University with severe jaundice. His parents claimed that he had icterus and pruritus from birth, without any treatment. He was 163 cm in height and 81 kg in weight. All hemolytic anemia parameters, including Hemoglobin, coagulation function, thyroid function, ceruloplasmin, and immunoglobulin was normal. Total bilirubin was 237.8 μmol/L, among which unconjugated bilirubin was 228.8 μmol/L, other parameters of liver function were all in normal range. Hepatitis, Epstein–Barr virus, and cytomegalovirus tests were negative. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed a low density and normal shape of the liver. The CT index was 50 HU, suggesting fatty liver . A hepatic biopsy showed bullous steatosis of the peri-central veins of the hepatic lobule, bile pigment sedimentation, and mild periportal inflammation with normal liver plate structure .
There is no consanguinity between the proband’s parents. To confirm the diagnosis of type II CNS, blood genomic DNA from the proband and his parents was routinely extracted and sequenced. The genetic test results showed two suspected homozygous pathogenic mutations. One mutation was the c.1456 T > G p.Y486D homozygous mutation. Y486D is located on exon 5, changing the 1,456 thymine (T) into guanine (G) and changing residue 486 tyrosine (Tyr) into aspartic acid (Asp). His parents were c.1456 T > G p.Y486D heterozygous carriers . The other mutation was the c.211G > A p.G71R homozygous mutation. G71R is located in exon 1, mutating the 211 guanine (G) into adenine (A) and changing residue 71 from glycine (Gly) to arginine (Arg). His father was a c.211G > A p.G71R homozygous carrier without any symptoms, and his mother was a heterozygosis carrier .
The patient was therefore diagnosed with type II CNS. He received phenobarbital treatment (180 mg/day) since then to reduce bilirubin levels associated with jaundice. After that, his mean total bilirubin levels fluctuated between 100 and 200 μmol/L during the next 6 months and without severe icterus and pruritus without severe side effects.