A 13-year-old boy presented to our OPD with complaints of difficulty in walking, pain in the neck and multiple swellings along with deformities over both the upper and lower extremities. Family members provide a history of insidious onset of multiple swellings over the body since 6 years of age which first appeared in the right hand and then progressed to the current situation. There was no relevant family history or treatment history.
On examination, the child had multiple swellings of varying sizes and shapes seen over the upper and lower limbs . Patient had a marked shortening of the left lower limb and walks with a short limb non assisted gait. Palpation revealed swellings to be bony hard in consistency and he was seen to have swellings over the hip, knee, ankle and feet bilaterally with similar findings. A shortening of 2 cm was found on the left lower limb which was infratrochanteric. Chest examination revealed similar swellings over the 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th rib bilaterally at the costochondral junction anteriorly. A thoracolumbar scoliosis with convexity toward the right side is seen. Movements were restricted in all the major peripheral joints (shoulder, knee, elbow, wrist, hip, ankle, hand, and foot) along with restriction of cervical spine arc of motion. However, pain was present on extremes of flexion and extension with no tenderness over cervical spine.
A thorough skeletal survey in the form of plain radiographs was performed, which showed multiple eccentric, expansile geographic lesions with stippled calcification in the metaphyseal region of the appendicular skeleton and ribs (, ). He was further investigated with computed tomography (CT) which revealed similar lesions in the right arch of C1 and C2 with no canal compromise . A core biopsy was done from one of the lesion and histopathological examination revealed hypercellular tumor composed of chondrocytes with mild anisonucleosis with peripheral rim of osteoid deposition suggestive of enchondroma . With proper counseling and explanation regarding the condition of the patient to the guardian, conservative treatment protocol with aim to improve patient function was taken for the patient. He is kept on observation with monthly follow-up for any new lesion or complaints with symptomatic treatment for pain in form of Paracetamol 500 mg SOS and Shoe raise on the shorter side. Patient completed 1-year of follow-up with no increase in any lesion and no pain. There is no neurological deficit and no respiratory symptoms in regular follow up. Patient is followed up on regular basis every month for any sudden increase in swelling, any respiratory complaints, any neurological symptoms and radiographic evaluation as monitoring protocol for malignant transformation of the benign condition.