A 78-year-old Asian woman visited our clinic complaining of a headache in her forehead. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated an enhanced mass in the sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses with invasion into cavernous sinuses . The skull base tumor was considered a cause of her headache, and endoscopic transnasal tumor resection was performed. The bone in the floor of the sella turcica was destroyed by the tumor, which impinged upon a small area of dura mater in the bottom of the sella. A large part of the tumor extended into the extradural space; however, the tumor could not be separated from the dura completely because of its strong adhesion and invasion to the dura. To avoid surgical damage to the internal carotid artery, the tumor invading the cavernous sinuses was not aggressively removed. Osteosarcoma was histologically diagnosed with the following characteristics: hematoxylin and eosin staining showed high cellularity of the tumor with pleomorphism , osseous tissue depositions were identified , and molecular immunology Borstel-1 (MIB-1) index was 15% . Definite residual tumor was recognized in the sphenoid and ethmoid sinuses in the postoperative MRI . Considering both the effectiveness of radiation therapy for sarcomas and the shape of the residual tumor, CyberKnife® radiation was applied 1 month after the surgery. The treatment was performed on the basis of the MRI planning with the following parameters: target volume, 11716mm3; collimator, 20mm; number of fractions, five; marginal dose, 39.38Gy; and site dose, 55.69Gy. Five months after CyberKnife® treatment, the patient was living a normal life in her home without demonstrating any neurological deficits, and follow-up MRI showed shrinking of the residual tumor . However, 1 month later, the patient was transferred to our hospital because of coma with high fever. Computed tomography (CT) showed multiple air pockets in the basal cisterns, the subarachnoid space, and lateral ventricles ; rhinorrhea was identified after admission. Emergency repair of CSF leakage was performed by an endoscopic transnasal approach. Compared with the endoscopic appearance of the residual tumor in the first surgery , the irradiated tumor tissue was whitish with a smooth surface suggesting hypovascularity . Under careful endoscopic observation, efflux of CSF synchronizing with pulsation was identified from two small dural defects where the osteosarcoma had invaded . Fat tissue was widely patched over the defects and fixed in place with fibrin glue . No rhinorrhea was recognized after the surgery, and follow-up CT showed complete disappearance of air from the cisterns 2 weeks after the surgery . The patient fully recovered her condition 1 month after the surgery.