A 56-year-old woman had a history of a severe symptomatic rheumatic aortic stenosis and underwent a mechanical aortic valve replacement with mitral and tricuspid annuloplasty 2 months before her admission to our department. She had no other past medical history.
Two months later, she presented with acute fever. Her vital signs were as follows: admission temperature of 38.8°C, blood pressure of 110/50 mmHg, regular pulse of 95 b.p.m., and respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute. On cardiovascular examination, the mechanical valves produced very audible opening and closing clicks with no new murmur and no signs of heart failure. There were no other anomalies on physical examination. A transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) was indicated since the transthoracic echo did not detect any abnormality and showed a periaortic echogenic mass which was initially diagnosed as an abscess . A chest computed tomography scan (CT scan) revealed an ill-defined heterogeneous mass at the level of the aortic ring . A complementary full body scan performed to assess an extension of the infective endocarditis did not reveal any abnormality. We did not perform an 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography with CT because its use may provide false positive findings caused by post-surgical inflammation. An assessment of inflammatory markers found high C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) levels of 55.8 mg/L and 30 mm at the first hour, respectively (for a normal CRP < 6 mg/L and a normal ESR < 20mm). White blood cell count, complement (C3, C4), and rheumatoid factor levels were normal. The blood culture was sterile. However, a midstream urinalysis was positive for urinary tract infection caused by a multisensitive strain of Escherichia coli. Therapeutically, intravenous antibiotics were administered to treat an early onset prosthetic valve endocarditis. An early clinical and biological improvement (noticed after 3 days), features of a chest CT scan, as well as a surgical correlation were able to rectify the diagnosis.
After 1 week of treatment, antibiotics were stopped. Urinalysis and CRP level controls were negative. Clinical course was favourable. The acute fever was linked to urinary tract infection, whereas the periaortic echogenic mass shown at the TOE corresponded to Surgicel. The patient was seen 3 months later, she was asymptomatic with negative infectious parameters. A TOE performed 5 months after the aortic valve replacement showed a decrease in size of the Surgicel appearance which could not be possible in the case of an untreated abscess . Indeed, our patient had a Surgicel packing around aortic prosthetic valve and was erroneously diagnosed with early onset prosthetic valve endocarditis.