A 44-year-old white man with a past medical history of viral myocarditis, reduced left ventricular function, and continuous beta-blocker therapy, collapsed on the street. Lay basic life support was initiated in less than 2 minutes by bystanders. Paramedics proceeded with CPR according to the current guidelines with a compression-ventilation ratio of 30:2 after approximately 5 minutes. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ventricular fibrillation (VF) as the primary rhythm which was refractory to defibrillations. An emergency physician reached the location 8 minutes after the initial incident. Administration of epinephrine (20 mg total), amiodarone (450 mg total), magnesium-sulfate (2 g), and sodium bicarbonate (100 ml of 8.4 %) via a peripheral venous route and repeated defibrillations at 200 to 360 joules did not restore a viable heart rhythm. An endotracheal tube (ID 8.0 mm) was inserted without complications and ventilation was continued with a resuscitation bag. Subsequently the patient was mechanically ventilated with a mobile respirator in a volume controlled mode (continuous positive pressure ventilation; CPPV) tidal volume 10 ml/kilogram bodyweight, PEEP 5 cmH2O, and fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) 1.0 at 12 breaths/minute. A second emergency physician (attending) equipped with an automated CPR device (LUCAS 2, Physio-Control, Redmond, USA) and an ultrasound unit was ordered to the site. Capnometry after endotracheal intubation showed a petCO2 of 20 to 25 mmHg . Pleural effusion, pulmonary-venous edema, and pneumothorax could be ruled out by lung ultrasound. Cardiac tamponade and burden on the right side of his heart were ruled out by focused cardiac ultrasound. His left ventricle was globally akinetic, his inferior vena cava (IVC) was not distended. CPR was continued using the automated CPR device, providing a constant high quality CPR. The ECG showed intermittent VF and electromechanical dissociation (EMD). Due to his history of myocarditis a rhythmogenic cause of the out-of-hospital cardiac arrest was suggested. The option of empiric thrombolysis for potential myocardial ischemia was abandoned due to lack of evidence of acute myocardial infarction or acute pulmonary embolism, as well as suspected craniocerebral injury after his collapse, since facial and periorbital lacerations were noted. After 80 minutes of CPR persistent EMD was recorded at a rate of 25/minute. The patient had fixed and dilated pupils, petCO2 had decreased to less than 10 mmHg, and left ventricular akinesis was unchanged. The team reached the unanimous decision to quit resuscitation efforts. The infusion of catecholamines, mechanical ventilation, and the automated CPR device were stopped. He remained on the ECG monitor according to current practice showing continuous slow EMD. The ventilator was disconnected from the endotracheal tube, the tube remained in situ. Five minutes after withdrawal of all supportive measures audible breathing resumed. A subtle bradycardic pulse was palpable at his carotid artery. QRS-complexes increased in frequency and appeared increasingly narrow. Capnometry showed a spontaneous increase of petCO2 to 30 mmHg. Focused cardiac ultrasound showed coordinated ventricular activity with reduced ventricular output. Catecholamine support was restarted; he was ventilated and hypothermia initiated. Shortly after he had a systolic blood pressure of 130 mmHg, a petCO2 of 35 mmHg, and a peripheral oxygen saturation of 99 % under FiO2 0.5. The ECG showed a supraventricular rhythm followed by sinus rhythm. His pupils were round, isocoric, non-dilated, and reactive to light.
He was taken to the Heart Center of the University Hospital Cologne. Coronary artery disease was ruled out by coronary angiography including left ventriculography; emergency echocardiography revealed severely reduced left ventricular function with an ejection fraction of 25 to 30 % and global hypokinesis of his ventricular wall with a basal septal ventricular wall aneurysm. His right ventricle appeared narrow; his IVC was found to be collapsing on respiration >50 % indicating fluid responsiveness. He was admitted to our cardiac intensive care unit; mild therapeutic hypothermia was maintained using an intravascular cooling device (Cool Line catheter with CoolGard System). The pH value was 7.32 in the first arterial blood gas analysis; his serum electrolytes were not significantly altered, specifically serum potassium was only slightly reduced (3.1 mmol/l). Inflammatory markers were not increased; levels of neuron-specific enolase (NSE) were 81.1 μg/l (upper reference limit 16.4 μg/l). A chest X-ray showed no pathologic findings and a toxicology screen was negative for illicit drugs. After fluid resuscitation the catecholamine infusion could be tapered. A cranial computed tomography (CT) scan revealed diffuse cerebral edema and decreased cortical gray matter attenuation with loss of normal gray-white differentiation. His NSE had increased to 313.5 μg/l indicating poor neurologic outcome . Bilateral absent cortical response on somatosensory evoked potential were recorded 3 days after the incident representing an unfavorable prognosis. According to the presumptive decision of the patient his therapy was limited to supportive measures.