A 60-year-old woman visited our clinic complaining of blurred vision in both eyes. The patient had been diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and had taken HCQ for the past 20 years. Her daily dose of HCQ was 400 mg, and her total cumulative dose was estimated to be 2920 g. The patient had first come to our clinic 7 months prior, at which time her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/30 in both eyes and fundus examination showed bilteral midperipheral retinal degeneration. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) showed defects in the paracentral photoreceptor layers. Consistent with this finding, a visual field test revealed dense paracentral ring scotoma with decreased foveal sensitivity in both eyes . The patient reported no family history of eye diseases and no visual symptoms before the initiation of HCQ therapy, and she had no auditory symptoms. At that time, the patient was diagnosed with HCQ-induced retinal toxicity, HCQ retinopathy, and HCQ treatment was discontinued. Four months later, BCVA was maintained as 20/30 in both eyes.
During the patient’s visit of visual complaint, slit lamp examination showed no specific findings and there was no inflammation in the anterior chamber or vitreous cavity; however, her BCVA had declined to 20/50. SD-OCT examination showed the presence of a cystoid space within the inner retina and fluorescein angiography (FA) showed leakage in the macular area, a presentation typically associated with cystoid macular edema (CME), as well as diffuse leakage in the midperiphery . Central macular thickness (CMT) was 245 μm and 335 μm in the right and left eyes, respectively. The patient was prescribed oral acetazolamide (250 mg) once a day.
After treatment with oral acetazolamide for one month, CME was resolved in both eyes on SD-OCT images . CMT was decreased from 245 to 177 μm and from 335 to 146 μm in the right and left eyes, respectively. BCVA was improved to 20/25 in both eyes. Follow-up FA showed decreased dye leakage in both the macular and mid-peripheral areas .