Our patient is a 53-year-old male with a two-year history of hypertension and a 5-year history of hepatic steatosis and hyperlipidemia. He presented initially with a two-year history of cough with recent aggravation. The patient did not report any sputum production and denied any worsening of the cough with seasonal or environmental triggers. He reported associated chest tightness and wheezing with his cough. The patient did not have any history of surgery, trauma, or tuberculosis. He is a 15-pack year smoker. He works as a bricklayer. The patient was evaluated initially for pulmonary interstitial inflammation and subsequently underwent a two-week course of cephalosporin (dosage: 2.0 g, q8h). This treatment was not effective at improving his condition. During this time, he reported additional symptoms of anorexia, malaise, insomnia, and weight loss.
He was admitted to the hospital with the diagnosis of type 1 respiratory failure, following his previous course of treatment. The patient underwent more diagnostic tests to determine the source of his symptoms. His physical examination was largely unremarkable, with the exception of coarse breath sounds auscultated in both lungs. Arterial blood gas (ABG) evaluation upon admission showed hypocapnia (33.9 mmHg, reference range: 35–45 mmHg) and severe hypoxemia (40.3 mmHg, reference range 80–100 mmHg). The patient’s complete blood count (CBC) revealed leukocytosis (12.32 × 109/L, reference range: 4.0–11.0 × 109/L) and neutrophilia (9.93 × 109/L, reference range: 2.0–8.0 × 109/L), otherwise unremarkable. The patient’s basic metabolic panel (BMP) was all within normal ranges. No abnormalities on screenings for hepatitis, HIV, syphilis, or rheumatoid arthritis. He additionally had an elevated carcinoembryonic antigen (21.77 ng/mL, reference range: 0–5 ng/mL).
Initial ultrasound of the spleen and kidneys was unremarkable, although he did have chronic signs of hepatic steatosis detectable in the liver. The patient’s chest CT showed bilateral lung interstitial inflammation with edema but did not specifically reveal the presence of any detectable solid mass. Pulmonary function tests revealed restrictive disease. The lateral basal segment of the patient’s right lower lung lobe was biopsied via bronchoscopy. Histological analysis revealed abundant basal cells, ciliated columnar epithelial cells, and mucous cells in a disorganized pattern, which is characteristic of CMPT. Immunohistology indicated that the tissue was positive for TTF-1, Napsin-A, CK7, CK5/6, P63, and P40 . Pathological analysis additionally indicates many lesions having features of adenomatous malignant transformation without breakthrough of the basement membrane. These findings lead to the diagnosis of ciliated muconodular papillary tumor accompanied with adenocarcinoma in situ.
The patient was encouraged to eat a low-sodium and low-fat diet due to his chronic hepatic steatosis and prescribed a statin medication for his hyperlipidemia. The patient was put on a ventilator until his oxygen saturation on room air reached 95%. This patient did not have a solid resectable lesion identifiable on CT scan; therefore, surgery was not performed. For the adenocarcinoma in situ, adjuvant chemotherapy was performed, as the lesion was disseminated in both lungs. The patient was treated with the chemotherapeutic drugs cisplatin and pemetrexed . A strategy of wait and watch was applied for CMPT. The patient’s symptoms improved, and he was discharged with close follow up.