A previously healthy 18-year-old African-American man suffered a high-cervical gunshot wound to the neck while driving. This injury resulted in quadriplegia at the C2 sensory level and ventilator dependence. Imaging studies demonstrated a retained bullet fragment in the spinal canal at the level of C1 . His initial care was received at another medical center where he was evaluated. No surgical intervention for the gunshot wound was pursued. He was ultimately discharged to a rehabilitation center after a tracheostomy was performed and a gastrostomy tube and inferior vena cava (IVC) filter were placed. His recovery was complicated by cardiac arrest, with successful resuscitation, and pneumonia.
Our patient and his family presented to our clinic 11months after the injury seeking removal of the bullet fragment for personal and forensic reasons. He remained without neurologic improvement, and the family was clearly counseled that such a procedure would be extremely unlikely to result in any neurological recovery.
After induction of general anesthesia, a Mayfield head frame was placed, and our patient was turned to a prone position on a standard operative table with a Wilson frame. The head frame was secured to the operative table, and the wound was prepared and draped in a sterile fashion. Fluoroscopy was used to determine the bullet location. An approximately 5cm midline longitudinal incision was created, centered over the level of the bullet fragment. Under fluoroscopic guidance, the METRx™ X-Tube Retraction System (Medtronic Sofamor Danek, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was placed, with sequential dilation of the muscle and exposure of the posterior arch of C1. The retractor was secured to the operative table and expanded to a working diameter of approximately 5cm. An operative microscope was then brought into the field for visualization. The posterior arch of C1 was removed using a Kerrison #2 bone punch, and the underlying dura was exposed. The dura was incised and found to be remarkably adherent to an underlying mass of granulation tissue. Rhoton™ microdissectors were used to carefully dissect the granulation tissue and expose the bullet fragment. The fragment was dissected free from the surrounding granulation tissue and removed . The dura was closed using a running 5-0 prolene suture and a custom needle driver and knot pusher (Scanlan International, Saint Paul, MN, USA). The wound was closed using deep and subcutaneous absorbable interrupted sutures, and the skin surface was covered with surgical glue.
The surgical time was approximately two hours and 20 minutes, and the estimated blood loss was 50cm3. The procedure and hospital stay were uncomplicated. At a 6-month follow-up, our patient remained at his pre-operative neurologic baseline and free from evidence of complications with only a small scar from the site of skin incision and bullet penetration .