A 74-year-old Caucasian male patient (weight: 80 kg, height: 173 cm), with hypertension, moderate carotid vascular atherosclerosis, and familiar thrombocytopenia (mean platelets count: 55 000 units/mL), presented at our outpatient office for dyspnoea. The clinical evaluation detected a paroxysmal non-valvular atrial fibrillation (CHADSVASC score: 3). The patient firstly received Warfarin therapy and then a direct oral anticoagulant for labile international normalized ratio (INR) was started. However, based on a history of macro haematuria, thrombocytopenia and an estimated HAS-BLED risk score of four, we identified the patient as a potential candidate to LAAO, in order to prevent subsequent bleeding events, following European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 2020 guidelines of atrial fibrillation management.
A transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) study assessed the feasibility of LAAO procedure, documented a ‘chicken wing’ left atrial appendage (LAA) morphology, and excluded any luminal thrombosis . LAAO intervention was TOE guided and it was performed with moderate sedation (midazolam), 8000 UI of heparin were administered after trans-septal puncture. The procedure was carried out through right femoral access using a 11-Fr delivery sheath and a Cardia Ultraseal (Cardia, Inc., Eagan, MN, USA) 22 mm (disc diameter 28 mm) device was successfully implanted . The early echocardiographic control did not report any device-related abnormality or any residual leak . The hospital course was uneventful and the patient received a dual antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel 75 mg o.d. and aspirin 100 mg o.d.) after discharge. We also scheduled the patient for a 1-month reassessment with platelet count and TOE.
After hospital discharge, no physical accident occurred to the patient, however unexpectedly, 26 days after the percutaneous intervention, the patient acceded to our emergency department complaining of dorsal inter-scapular pain. A computed tomography (CT) scan and a transthoracic echocardiography study ruled out aortic dissection, but detected a circumferential pericardial effusion of maximum 22 mm . No active bleeding was demonstrated after contrast administration. Even though haemodynamically stable at presentation, the patient entered the intensive cardiac care unit. In the first hours after admission, morphological and Doppler signs of cardiac tamponade suddenly occurred. An ultrasound-guided subxyphoidal pericardiocentesis drained out 500 mL of haematic effusion and a drainage catheter was placed. During the transfer to our referral hospital for urgent cardiac surgery, an episode of ventricular tachycardia evolving suddenly into ventricular fibrillation occurred and prolonged cardiac resuscitation was required, meanwhile 150 mL of haematic pericardial effusion were actively drained out. The advanced cardiac life support protocol restored the sinus rhythm. At the surgery department admission, the patient was stable and presented only a small pericardial effusion without compression of the right heart chambers as assessed by a new CT scan. Unfortunately, despite the early treatment, his neurological conditions were irreversibly damaged and he died few days later, with no more tamponade recurrences.