Ms. W, a 33-year-old Caucasian female had a past medical history significant for multiple sclerosis, chronic low back pain and migraines. She initially presented to a rural hospital emergency department with confusion and was diagnosed with substance-induced psychosis and discharged with an Ativan prescription. She returned within days via police and emergency medical services and was admitted to the county’s psychiatric observation unit at our hospital for paranoia, thought disorganization, irritability, and impulsivity.
Communication with her primary care provider, family and neurologist indicated a past medical history of multiple sclerosis (diagnosed three years prior), for which she has not been under treatment. She had recently also experienced significant weight loss that year, and anxiety, paranoia and hyperactivity were noted by her mother within the past month. Speech abnormalities were also noted, as she would stutter or stammer when trying to express herself. Particular themes from the patient’s thought content included: having a tampon blocking her vagina, being pregnant, being an immigrant, and a general sense of deserving punishment. Later, her speech abnormalities evolved to reduced verbal output overall. History of substance abuse informed a provisional diagnosis of substance-induced psychosis as urine toxicology was positive for cannabinoids. After 3 days of no improvement in symptoms, treatment with oral low dose atypical anti-psychotics was initiated; however adherence was infrequent due to paranoia.
No resolution of symptoms after 6 days led to reconsideration of her diagnosis. Given her history of multiple sclerosis, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain was obtained on day 7 of admission. MRI showed possible acute or subacute changes; particularly multifocal bilateral white matter lesions in the cerebral hemispheres and the signal characteristics of a few small lesions in the right posterior parietal and left occipital region that were suggestive of acute or sub-acute disease activity. However, this could not be confirmed as our radiologist did not have access to her previous scans for comparison. Internal medicine assessed patient and noted on exam diplopia on extreme gaze to the left side. Unfortunately, given the patient’s paranoia, she was unable to engage in cognitive screening tests such as a MOCA or MMSE. But staff observation of mental status fluctuation (waxing and waning of confusion) was considered. Extensive investigation for delirium was suggested and, on day 8 of admission, the patient was transferred to medicine to be under the care of the hospitalist.
Complete blood count, blood sugar, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, electrolytes, troponin, liver function tests, thyroid stimulating hormone, rheumatoid factor, human immunodeficiency virus were all within normal limits or negative. Serum antinuclear antibodies (ANA), extractable nuclear antigen screen (ENA) and anti ribonucleoprotein (RNP) were positive. ANA positivity was characterized by a titre of 1:80 and a nucleolar pattern, raising suspicion for a possible systemic rheumatologic condition. However, all other serum antibody screening was negative. On day 10, Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was pursued via lumbar puncture. The CSF protein level was within normal limits at 0.32 g/L and the CSF glucose level was within normal limits at 3.5 mmol/L. However, 39 total nucleated cells with 100% lymphocytes were noted. No organisms were noted on the gram stain. Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV) and Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) tests were ordered. Acyclovir IV was started as the differential remained broad. HSV, HIV and hepatitis paneling returned negative. A neurotropic virus such as syphilis was also considered, but antibody screening was non-reactive. On the date of her lumbar puncture, the patient had reported recent crystal methamphetamine use. Consultation-liaison psychiatry services were consulted on day 13 to assess for the possibility of a substance induced-psychosis versus primary psychosis, and need for inpatient psychiatry.
It was noted on psychiatric assessment that Ms. W continued to present with anxiety, fear, and confusion. She had insight into her confusion and remarkable distress about her memory loss. She required constant reminders and redirection. Themes of paranoia remained. She denied perceptual disturbances. Her symptoms did not improve in the absence of substance use and the administration of antipsychotics. A diagnosis of possible autoimmune encephalopathy was considered and admission to a psychiatric inpatient setting was deferred. Antibody panels for neuronal surface antigens were still pending. Lorazepam 2 mg by mouth or intramuscular every 4 h as needed was ordered for agitation, favored over antipsychotics due to risk of catatonia. Steroids were recommended in the absence of an infectious cause. Neurology consultation was recommended for guidance on immunotherapy recommendations.
Substance-induced psychosis versus primary psychosis remained the primary diagnostic consideration for her primary team for the following week and she was treated with risperidone, however her adherence to medication was sporadic. Her symptoms continued to fluctuate however she remained grossly thought disordered and anxious. Image records of previous MRI scans became available to us on day 18 from the outside facilities and radiology was able to compare those images to the MRI that the patient had received at our facility . An addendum was added post-comparison which indicated that other than one lesion in the splenium of the corpus callosum, white matter lesions were relatively unchanged from previous scans. Neurology consultation was obtained on day 19. Methylprednisolone 1 g intravenous (IV) every 24 h for three days was initiated for suspected autoimmune encephalitis now that progressive MS disease was not noted radiologically or clinically. A significant improvement in cognition was noted as she demonstrated improved arousal, attention, awareness, executive functioning and memory. Her paranoia of staff and overall fear also improved, however she remained somatically preoccupied with delusions of a damaged or blocked reproductive tract. On day 21, the results of her CSF antibody test (tested using EUROIMMUN cell-based assay in parallel with EUROIMMUN rat brain tissue IFA) returned positive for anti-NMDAR antibodies.
The diagnosis of Anti-NMDAR encephalitis was confirmed and she was transitioned to oral prednisone 50 mg daily. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) and plasmapheresis were also recommended. Computed tomography (CT) of chest and abdomen and ultrasound of pelvis ruled out malignancy. Ms. W received her first dose of IVIG and was subsequently transferred to the care of her primary neurologist outside of the county. There, she scored 27/30 on a Montreal cognitive assessment (MOCA), but some psychiatric symptoms remained. Prednisone was increased to 60 mg daily and IVIG was continued. At the time of writing this paper, she was scheduled for plasmapheresis and to initiate treatment with a monoclonal antibody to further treat her remaining symptoms. She was continued on an atypical antipsychotic.