An 81-year-old man was referred by an outside ophthalmologist with bacterial blebitis and perforated bleb, 10 years after trabeculectomy. Patient’s medical history was unremarkable. His ocular history includes radial keratotomy, penetrating keratoplasty (PKP), and the aforementioned trabeculectomy 10 years prior. Upon presentation, patient’s exam was notable for significant conjunctival injection, elevated cystic bleb, positive Seidel’s test with significant flow, and intraocular pressure of 4 mmHg . Best corrected vision was 20/100. Corneal exam revealed fine keratic precipitates (KP) and evidence of PKP with mild haze around the periphery of the graft. Anterior chamber exam revealed trace cell and flare. Fundus exam was unremarkable except for cup-to-disc ratio of 0.85. No cells seen in vitreous. Given exam findings and concern for infection, patient was given subconjunctival injection of vancomycin 25 mg and gentamicin 20 mg. Conjunctival samples and scrapings were sent for fungal and bacterial cultures. Patient was prescribed a prolonged course of moxifloxacin drops; initially every 1 h and eventually tapered to four times a day. Prednisolone acetate drops were added, and the patient was monitored regularly in clinic with improvement to his clinical condition.
Two weeks after initial presentation, trabeculectomy revision was performed involving closure of the bleb, excision of necrotic tissue and scleral patch graft . Several months after surgery, patient continued to be Seidel’s negative with normal intraocular pressure, and best corrected vision was 20/70 . Per standard protocol at our institution, samples were plated on sheep blood, chocolate, Mac Conkey agar, Brucella agar, phenyl ethyl alcohol agar, split plate (Bacteroides Bile Esculin, Laked Brucella agar with Kanamycin and Vancomycin), and thioglycolate. Given initial appearance as a rare bacillus species, cultures were sent to County of Orange, Health Care Agency, Public Health Laboratory for final identification of C. canimorsus species. Further details regarding identification and isolation were unavailable from the Public Health Laboratory — however, C. canimorsus has been known to grow on 5% sheep blood or chocolate agar in 5–10% CO2 at 37 C .
The diagnosis of C. canimorsus was initially suggested by appearance on Gram stain at our institution and final identification was made at aforementioned laboratory . Further confirmation of C. canimorsus was obtained through DNA sequencing from an outside laboratory. The diagnosis of Capnocytophaga canimorsus was also confirmed independently by the referring ophthalmologist’s cultures and testing. Fungal cultures were negative. Upon further questioning, patient revealed that he had a Dalmatian dog with poor dentition that frequently licked his face.