The patient was a 30-year-old male with painless macroscopic hematuria for 2 months. After examination, the patient had no hypertrophy of the prostate and normal sphincter tension. Meanwhile, the patient's external genitalia, bilateral spermatic cords, and testicles were normal. The urology color ultrasound showed hydronephrosis in the right kidney and dilation of the upper segment of the right ureteral canal. Intravenous urography showed no obvious abnormality in left renal function and morphology, decreased right renal function, and no obvious abnormality in the bladder. Computerized tomography of the urinary system showed that the upper 1/3 of the right ureter was occupied, and then the possibility of tumor lesions was considered. Meanwhile, the results showed that the peripheral lymph nodes were slightly enlarged, secondary right hydronephrosis, right renal parenchyma perfusion decreased, and right perirenal exudative changed . The urine cytology showed occasional nuclear abnormalities and many light-stained crystals in urine. Because of suspicious radiological and cytological findings, the patient underwent the right ureteroscopy and the laparoscopic right ureteral mass resection . A mass was visible on the ureteral wall during ureteroscopy, and the ureteral wall was smooth. Under laparoscope, a longitudinal incision was made along the ureter, and the mass was cut off along the tumor's base. After removal of ureteral masses, intraoperative frozen sections were performed. The first intraoperative frozen section report presented that fibrous tissue, necrotic tissue, and inflammatory exudates were found in the tissue, and no tumor components were found. The second intraoperative frozen section report presented that the mass was a mesenchymal tumor, which need to wait for paraffin and immunohistochemical examination to further clarify the diagnosis. We performed ureteral mass resection rather than radical ureterectomy in this case because the tumor was superficial, no malignant tumor was found in the frozen section, and no stenosis was found in the urinary tract after resection. Following the removal of the mass, the ureteral stent was placed in the ureter and intermittently sutured with an absorbable suture. The postoperative pathological report showed that it was a mesenchymal tumor. The morphological and immunohistochemical staining was consistent with that of hemangioma, tending to granulation tissue hemangioma. Meanwhile, some regional interstitial edema, surface necrosis, inflammatory exudates, bleeding, and fibrous tissue hyperplasia were found in the focal area . The patient recovered well from surgery, and the ureteral stent was removed one month later. Half a year after surgery, the patient reviewed a CT of the urinary system. The results showed there was no dilatory water accumulation in the right renal pelvis and ureteral canal, and no hemangioma recurrence . And the patient recovered well at the last follow-up.