We report the case of a 36-year-old French man, Caucasian truck driver, without any significant medical history. The clinical symptoms started in May 2012 with nausea and a dull abdominal pain. No sign of chronic liver disease or of portal hypertension was noted. High liver enzymes were diagnosed after assay for: alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 1707 µmol/L (normal range: N<78), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 554 µmol/L (N<37), gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase (GGT) 737 U/L (N<95) and alkaline phosphatase at 311 U/L (N<136). Total bilirubin level was at 54 µmol/L (N<17). There was no hepatitis A, B or C, no HIV and no sign of autoimmune disease. The immunological screening included antinuclear antibodies, anti-smooth muscles antibodies, anti-mitochondria antibodies, anti LKM antibodies, anti-hepatic cytosol antibodies, complement (C3, C4, CH50), rheumatoid factor, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), antiganglioside antibodies (GM1, GM2, GD1a, GD1b, GQ1b) and onconeuronal antibodies (Hu, Ri, Yo, PNMA2, CV2, Amphiphysine). Liver ultrasound was normal. The prothrombin time stayed within the normal range throughout the monitoring period.
Around one week after the first digestive symptoms, the patient felt an acute neuralgic pain involving both shoulders that lasted for 8 to 10 hours. Immediately after, the patient presented a severe bilateral muscular weakness of the proximal part of both upper limbs. Two days after the shoulder pain, the patient presented with hypophonia and dysphagia. The MRI did not show any brain abnormality. The spinal cord and the brachial plexus were unharmed. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was normal (2 white blood cells/mm3; CSF Protein= 0.37 g/L) and there was no intrathecal antibody synthesis, although it was not tested for the synthesis of specific anti-HEV antibodies. Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS) showed normal amplitudes and conduction velocity but bilateral denervation in the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, subscapularis and deltoid muscles. An acute hepatitis E infection was suspected due to the presence of IgM and confirmed by PCR (genotype 3f). The initial serum HEV RNA count was 5.2 log-copies/ml. The PCR was negative in the CSF and was not initially performed in stools.
A treatment with intravenous immunoglobulins (Tegeline
®, LFB laboratory, France; 0.4 g/kg/day) was given for 5 days. Ribavirin (600 mg/day) was also introduced. Nine days after ribavirin initiation, the PCR showed 2.02 log-copies/ml and was negative after 18 days in both blood and stools. Ribavirin treatment was discontinued after 35 days. After three weeks, the patient still required nasogastric tube-feeding and a gastric feeding tube was placed endoscopically. There was no contraction of the shoulder girdle muscles. Oral feeding resumed progressively after five months. After six months follow-up and intensive rehabilitation, there was a 3/5 muscular strength in the affected muscles, corresponding to a movement possible against gravity, but not against resistance by the examiner. The patient was fully independent for the activities of daily living but still unable to work.