Our patient was a 46-year-old Caucasian woman when she first noted a mass in her right breast in 2015. A screening mammogram at that time showed scattered fibroglandular densities as well as a skin lesion in the inner right lower quadrant of her right breast, categorized as a BI-RADS 2. No further work up was performed. In October of 2017, our patient noticed a skin tag over her right breast and presented to her primary care provider, who removed it . She subsequently underwent repeat diagnostic breast imaging with mammogram and ultrasound which showed a bulging 5.2 cm suspicious mass in the right lower quadrant composed of mixed cystic and solid components, classified as BI-RADS 4. She underwent an ultrasound-guided core biopsy of the right breast mass. The pathology specimen was initially read as metaplastic carcinoma of the spindle cell type. The report noted the specimen was negative for estrogen and progesterone receptors as well as the HER2-neu receptor. A computed tomography scan of her chest and abdomen noted no metastatic spread and a right axillary ultrasound showed no lymphadenopathy. She was diagnosed as having clinical T4 N0, stage IIIB metaplastic breast cancer. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was planned and was to be followed by mastectomy. Prior to this diagnosis, our patient had no significant past medical history. Her family history was significant for breast cancer in her paternal grandmother. Her social history was notable for a 30-pack year smoking history and no significant alcohol use.
Due to the rarity of metaplastic breast cancer, a second opinion was sought at our institution in January of 2018. Her physical examination at that time was notable for a 10.5 cm × 10 cm hard mass in the inferior right breast with associated hyperpigmentation and surrounding erythematous skin lesions. On re-examination of the biopsy specimen, the pathology report noted monomorphic spindle cell growth arranged in fascicles with minimal atypia and focal mitotic activity which was observed to arise from the dermis . These atypical cells infiltrated into the subcutaneous tissue and focally entrapped fat cells. By immunohistochemistry (IHC), the spindle cells stained diffusely positive for CD34 with focal weak p63 immunoreactivity while negative for CK5, CK7, CK19, CD20, pankeratin, CK5/6, CK903, SMSA, desmin, and S100 . Molecular testing revealed the presence of a COL1A1-PDGFB fusion transcript confirming the diagnosis of DFSP. She was subsequently seen by a breast surgeon and a medical oncologist specializing in sarcoma. Breast magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) measured the lesion to be 61 × 64 × 45 mm. Our patient desired breast-conserving therapy; however, with the initial size of the mass, this was not surgically feasible. She was started on neoadjuvant imatinib at 400 mg daily which she tolerated well with only some minor side effects noted which consisted of fluid retention most noticeable in her face and hands. She was monitored monthly; a repeat breast MRI 4 months after starting imatinib showed a 40% reduction in tumor size . She underwent wide local excision in August of 2018. Pathology revealed a 5.4 cm DFSP tumor with negative margins and evidence of treatment effect, with 5% tumor necrosis . No adjuvant therapy was recommended. Throughout the course of her treatment she experienced no other adverse or unexpected events. She continues to follow-up with medical and surgical oncology with annual mammograms and ultrasonography. A timeline of our patient’s clinical course is summarized in Fig. .