A 23-year old male with ESRD secondary to IgA nephropathy was brought to home hospital for generalized seizure activity. He was known to have poor compliance with his intermittent peritoneal dialysis (PD), administer four times per day, and had apparently missed his last two treatments. He did not have a recent peritoneal equilibrium test. On arrival to the hospital he was found to have a blood pressure exceeding 182/107 mmHg and was described as being combative and confused. Labetalol 20 mg IV, lorazepam 1 mg IV, and haloperidol 1 mg IV were administered by a nurse practitioner before being transferred to the nearest tertiary care centre. Collateral history obtained suggested that the patient was complaining of headache and blurred vision hours prior to seizing.
Other past medical history was significant for hypertension secondary to renovascular disease, as well as being a carrier of methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus. His medications included atenolol, amlodipine, ramipril, hydroxyzine, scheduled clonidine, erythropoetin, calcium, and Replivite tablets. There was no family history of epilepsy. Social history was significant for tobacco smoking and previous recreational cocaine use.
Examination at the tertiary centre revealed a temperature of 36.8°C and a still elevated blood pressure of 200/100 mmHg. Heart rate was recorded at 63 beats per minute and oxygen saturation was 98% on room air. General examination revealed a rousable individual who appeared somewhat confused, but was alert to person and place. The remaining neurological exam, including language assessment and fundoscopy, was normal. There was no meningismus. Cardiovascular exam was significant for a loud S2 heart sound, but no cardiac rubs or murmurs were appreciated. Respiratory and abdominal exams were non-contributory.
Admission blood work revealed a urea of 41 mmol/L, a serum creatinine of 1531 μmol/L, a WBC of 11.4, and hemoglobin of 99. Serum sodium was slightly low at 129 mol/L, and potassium was elevated at 6.3 mmol/L. Calcium was low at 1.93 mmol/L, phosphate was elevated at 3.57 mmol/L, and magnesium was 1.24 mmol/L. Liver enzymes were generally unremarkable. An EKG revealed tall peaked T-waves consistent with hyperkalemia. A CT-head showed multiple cortical and subcortical hypodensities involving the posterior parasagittal portions of both parietal lobes and the medial right occipital lobe, which was reported as being suggestive of PRES. A lumbar puncture for CSF analysis to rule out meningoencephalitis was not performed as the patient was afebrile with no signs of meningeal irritation.
The patient was admitted to hospital for further work-up and management. The hyperkalemia was medically treated. Phenytoin was initiated to prevent further seizures. An MRI brain was obtained and showed multiple regions of cortical and subcortical increased T2 signal, predominantly involving the posterior and paramedian parietal and occipital lobes with relative symmetry . There was no diffusion restriction. On the third day after admission the patient began to have episodes of headache and blurred vision associated with increased blood pressure, despite achieving good volume control through in-hospital PD and increasing his antihypertensive regimen. These episodes continued, and thus on the fifth day after admission he was transferred to the intensive care unit to receive continuous blood pressure monitoring and control through an intravenous labetalol infusion. Blood pressure was decreased to 160/80 mmHg and he was transitioned back to oral antihypertensive medication. He was subsequently discharged from hospital and follow-up MRI brain three months later showed complete resolution of previously noted findings .