A 71-year-old South Asian man who had under gone a right hemicolectomy for an adenocarcinoma of the colon was found to have a metachronous cancer in the sigmoid colon during surveillance colonoscopy. Following his primary surgery at another institution, he has developed an anastomotic leak during the immediate postoperative period, for which a second laparotomy had been performed on day 5 with a revision of the anastomosis. During the first postoperative week, he had developed an enterocutaneous fistula with primary wound failure. His case was then taken over by the authors for the management of the fistula, which was done nonoperatively. Spontaneous healing of the fistula took 10 months, after which the patient underwent an abdominal wall reconstruction with an inlay polypropylene/polyglactin 910 composite mesh. The reconstruction was done 16 months after the primary surgery, and the mesh was fixed using polypropylene sutures. The patient remained asymptomatic until he was diagnosed with a sigmoid cancer on the basis of surveillance colonoscopy 5 years after the primary event. Following histological confirmation and staging with contrast-enhanced computed tomography, he was scheduled for laparotomy with subtotal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis. During surgery, several loops of bowel were found to be tightly adherent to the anterior abdominal wall. On palpation, a hard, elongated mass was felt inside one of the bowel loops in the proximal ileum. After separating the loops from the posterior rectus sheath, an enterotomy was made to find the mesh inside the bowel lumen . The mesh was not adherent to the bowel wall and could be extracted without difficulty. It was heavily deposited with fecal matter, indicating that it had been in the bowel lumen for a long period . There was no evidence of an abscess, fistula, or sinus formation in the surrounding area. The enterotomy was closed with a side-to-side stapler anastomosis, and the patient underwent subtotal colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis with an uneventful recovery.