An 81-year-old man with a history of hypertension and dyslipidaemia was admitted to the hospital with acute chest pain. At presentation, the blood pressure and heart rate were 116/70 mmHg and 64 b.p.m. Physical examination revealed no heart murmur or pulmonary rales. Electrocardiography showed an elevated ST segment in leads V1–V4, and transthoracic echocardiography depicted severe hypokinesis of the anterior wall and septum. Coronary angiography showed complete occlusion of the proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery and significant stenosis of the left main coronary artery (LMCA) and proximal left circumflex (LCX) artery . The right coronary artery was hypoplastic . Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) was initiated considering the LMCA–LAD lesion as the responsible lesion. After performing the kissing balloon technique in both the LAD and LCX, successful PCI with implantation of a drug-eluting stent (everolimus-eluting stent, Synergy 3.0 × 38 mm) across the LCX bifurcation from the LMCA to the LAD . During PCI, the patient went into shock and required escalating doses of inotropes/vasopressors and an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP). These procedures, however, did not improve the patient’s haemodynamic condition, and VA-ECMO insertion was decided. After completing PCI, IABP was upgraded to an Impella device to unload the left ventricle (LV) and decrease its oxygen consumption. Creatine kinase (CK; 13 609 kat/L) and CK-MB (1512 kat/L) were at their peak levels for 9 h from onset.
During ECPELLA, the Impella device could not maintain sufficient flow and Impella suction occurred on Day 3. Transthoracic echocardiogram revealed a small LV and an enlarged RV, suggesting acute RV failure (see , ). We introduced 0.5 µg/kg/min of PDE3 inhibitor in addition to dobutamine and noradrenalin to manage RV failure. However, we were unable to achieve sufficient improvement in RV failure.
Inhaled nitric oxide at a maximum dose of 20 ppm was initiated to reduce RV afterload on Day 3. A decrease was observed in pulmonary artery pressure and vascular resistance from 34/20 to 27/13 mmHg and from 428 to 339 dynes/s/cm5, respectively. Furthermore, an improvement in the RV and LV sizes was noted (see , ) and the stabilization of the Impella support . Afterward, VA-ECMO could be withdrawn as the Impella device alone was sufficient for haemodynamic support. We successfully withdrew VA-ECMO on Day 4. Following withdrawal, the Impella device exhibited a cardiac output of 3.5 L in the P8 setting and the pulmonary artery pulsatility index was 1.2. The tendency towards hypotension, despite adequate maintenance of the intravascular volume and cardiac output, led to the conclusion that the patient was experiencing septic shock. Laboratory tests showed an increased white blood cell count (10 820/µL) and C-reactive protein level (22.67 mg/dL).
Intravenous vasopressin and antimicrobials were administered for alleviating septic shock. Gradually, the inflammatory marker levels decreased and the doses of vasopressin and catecholamines were reduced; however, alarms indicating increased purge pressure in the Impella device appeared on Day 7. The Impella device was at risk of stopping abruptly. At this stage, it was decided that the patient could not be weaned off the Impella device and the device was upgraded from IMPELLACP to IMPELLA5.0. The patient was changed the Impella to IABP on Day 12 and then successfully weaned off IABP on Day 15. Furthermore, the patient was weaned off the ventilator on Day 18, starting weaning rehabilitation. Finally, inotrope administration was eventually discontinued, and the patient was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital on Day 79. The patient was discharged home after about 1-month rehabilitation programme and is currently being regularly followed in the cardiological outpatient clinic: his condition appears stable.