A 64-year-old man was referred to our hospital for a middle mediastinal tumor detected incidentally by a CT scan. Chest CT showed an entirely cystic mass with a thick capsule slightly enhanced in the middle mediastinum between the bilateral brachiocephalic vein and trachea . At CT scan, the thymus is of normal size and located in the anterior mediastinum as a low-density triangle area. The mass had no solid component. T2-weighted MRI revealed that the main tumor had a heterogeneous isodense signal intensity and that the tumor was encapsulated by a low-signal area . There was no gadolinium-enhanced area in this tumor. This radiologic finding indicated the possibility of the mass being a hemorrhagic cyst, bronchogenic cyst, neurogenic tumor, or teratoma, with a small proportion of fat component.
The patient was placed in the left lateral decubitus position, and a right thoracic approach with three-port video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) was performed. The tumor was surrounded by the trachea, right main bronchus, brachiocephalic artery, superior vena cava (SVC), and left brachiocephalic vein. It was greatly adherent to the lateral trachea, right main bronchus, and recurrent nerve. Due to the complicated adhesiolysis in the anterior brachiocephalic artery and tumor involving the recurrent nerve, we decided to change the procedure to open thoracotomy. The tumor and recurrent nerve whose length was about 10 mm were removed while keeping them encapsulated. The tumor measured 45 × 35 × 30 mm and contained red–brown necrotic tissue surrounded by a fibrous capsule. Cross-sectional slices showed a small solid component (8 mm). The tumor nodule existed along a fibrous capsule multiply .
Microscopic findings showed a proliferation of markedly atypical polygonal epithelial cells having hyperchromatic nuclei associated with extensively necrotic and hemorrhagic areas . The recurrent nerve was involved with the carcinoma cells. Immunohistochemically, the carcinoma cells were positive for AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, p40, p63, CK34betaE12, CD5, and bcl-2 but negative for CK5/6, TTF-1, c-kit, AFP, and CD30. This feature indicated poorly differentiated, thymic squamous cell carcinoma in pathological T3N0M0 stage III. The margin of the resected tumor was free of disease.
Adjuvant concurrent chemoradiotherapy was performed. We administered monthly carboplatin plus paclitaxel for four courses, and the radiation therapy dose was 50 Gy. There was no recurrence 6 months after surgery.