A 47-year-old male patient with palliated pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect (VSD) presented with progressive fatigue and hypoxaemia to our outpatient clinic. He was no more able to perform his daily activities, such as washing himself and his walking distance was limited to 25 m. His peripheral oxygen saturation was only 69% (haematocrit 71%). As to his history, a modified BT shunt was performed between the left subclavian artery and the left pulmonary artery at the age of 7 years. At the age of 27 years, a WC anastomosis was performed to increase blood flow through the pulmonary circuit, because the still patent BT shunt was not sufficient for pulmonary blood supply. Surgical correction was not a preferred option because of the technical difficulties.
Since 1997, the patient did not need any further cardiac surgery or intervention and was able to carry out his daily routine activities until 3 months prior to hospital admission. In the preceding months, the patient received treatment for left basal pneumonia and pneumosepsis at another hospital. Presenting with atrial fibrillation and atrial flutter, the patient needed cardioversion twice to convert his heart rhythm to sinus rhythm. There was no history of dizziness or syncope at any time. In the presence of intermittent left thoracic pain, coronary angiography was performed to rule out any relevant coronary artery stenosis. Oxygen therapy was initiated 2 weeks prior to admission to our hospital, but did not significantly ameliorate the progressive desaturation.
On physical examination, distinctive cyanosis was notable (SpO2 69%). There were neither peripheral oedema nor heart murmurs or pulmonary crackles on auscultation present. Blood pressure was 140/100 mmHg, and heart rate was 90 b.p.m.
On admission, electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm and complete right bundle branch block. Echocardiography revealed the ventricular septal defect, occluded right ventricular outflow tract with hypertrophic right ventricle and dilation of both atria. Systolic function of the ventricles was preserved, and the aortic root was known to be ectatic. Computed tomography scans showed the occluded BT shunt and a reduced perfusion of the WC anastomosis ; besides that, many major aortopulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs) were detected.
Because of the limited pulmonary blood flow oxygen therapy did not elevate saturation. Therefore, possible therapeutic approaches such as an interventional re-opening of the BT shunt or the WC anastomosis as well as a new surgical aortopulmonary shunt or correction were discussed in our interdisciplinary Heart Team meeting. Surgery was ruled out due to the excessive risk. The WC anastomosis showed a small lumen and unfavourable angle for access and intervention. In this respect, the occluded BT shunt was addressed as an interventional target. Prior to intervention, we carried out a pulmonary function test. A restrictive lung function with a reduced forced vital capacity (FVC) of 2.75 L (= 51%) was documented. Lowest oxygen level of pO2 40.9 mmHg under room air and pO2 48 mmHg under 4 L oxygen were measured.
For re-opening the BT shunt, the left radial artery was punctured. The occluded BT shunt could be wired with a Radifocus®-wire with a flexible tapered tip and a Glide-Cath® (both Terumo). Then, we performed a rotational thrombectomy using a 6 Fr-Rotarex®-system (AB Medica, Duesseldorf, Germany). Afterwards, the shunt was dilated with a standard balloon. Due to significant recoil of both the proximal and the distal anastomosis, then two Genesis® Stents (6 × 25 and 7 × 25 mm) were deployed in the proximal and distal anastomoses of the shunt .
Finally, the shunt was patent with a rapid perfusion of the left lung. Immediately, the peripheral oxygen saturation increased from 69% to 82% under room air.
The day after, the patient noticed significant improvement of his physical abilities. Vascular access site showed no complications. The patient was discharged in a stable general condition.
At his 5-month and 1-year follow-up appointments in our outpatient clinic, the patient reported on an improved exercise tolerance. There was a reduction in peripheral cyanosis with improvement in oxygenation (79%) and haematocrit (66%).
Echocardiography demonstrated patent BT shunt. Clopidogrel treatment was stopped 1 month after bare-metal stent implantation. Anticoagulant treatment with rivaroxaban was continued for thrombo-embolic prophylaxis due to atrial fibrillation.