A 24-year-old male patient, without preexisting diseases, was admitted for 20 days of intermittent fever (up to 38.6°C), accompanied by headache and fatigue, but no chills, cough, sputum, abdominal pain, diarrhea, chest pain, or tightness. He denied a prior history of congenital heart disease, alcoholic drinking, cigarette smoking, and injection drug use. He had not recently undergone any sore throat, dental procedures, skin rash, or surgery. He had been prescribed a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug by his general practitioner but this provided no relief.
Before admission, the patient had been admitted to the respiratory department in the local hospital because of fever and the laboratory studies showed normal leukocytes but elevated C-reactive protein of 38.67 mg/l (normal range: 0–8 mg/l). A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) revealed vegetation on the anterior aspect of the mitral leaflet, measuring 1.3 × 0.7 cm. After following the treatment with intravenous amoxicillin (dosage unknown) only once during the emergency care for 1 day, the patient was then referred to our hospital and hospitalized for further examination and treatment.
On admission, with a presumptive diagnosis of IE, physical examination showed a grade 4/6 systolic murmur over the mitral area upon auscultation and obvious splenomegaly via palpation. No Janeway's lesions, Osler's nodes were observed. Laboratory studies revealed normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 10.8 g/dl, normal range: 13.0–17.5 g/dl), normal leukocytes but elevated C-reactive protein of 30.61 mg/l, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 38 mm in the first hour. TTE confirmed isolated vegetation of 2.24 cm2 on the anterior mitral valve leaflet, with valve perforation and severe mitral regurgitation .
Three sets of blood cultures were taken before the patient was commenced on empirical treatment with intravenous vancomycin (1 g every 12 h). After 31 h, his blood culture became positive for Gram-positive cocci, which was identified as Abiotrophia defectiva. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing revealed that it is susceptible to vancomycin, imipenem, and meropenem, but resistant to penicillin and levofloxacin. All outcomes of the three blood cultures presented the same bacteria—A. defectiva .
Three sets of blood cultures were taken before the patient was commenced on empirical treatment with intravenous vancomycin (1 g every 12 h). All three sets of blood cultures consist of one bacterial aerobic flask, one bacterial anaerobic flask, and one fungal culture flask. After 31 h, his blood culture became positive for Gram-positive cocci, which was identified as Abiotrophia defectiva (BACTEC FX400 Automatic Bacterial Cultivator). Within the next 1–2 days, all the flasks are positive for A. defectiva and mass spectrometry (VITEK MS) was used to identify its authenticity. Antimicrobial susceptibility testing (Epsilometer test, E-test) revealed it susceptible to vancomycin [minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) 0.32 ug/ml; breakpoint 100%], imipenem, and meropenem, but resistant to penicillin and levofloxacin. The MICs are assessed according to criteria listed in CLSI M45 (, ).
Until now, the patient met the modified Duke diagnostic criteria of IE, including two main criteria (positive blood cultures and evidence of endocardial involvement) .
While during the therapy, he developed progressively worsening abdominal pain with left upper quadrant tenderness to palpation. Contrast-enhanced abdomen CT demonstrated mesenteric arterial branch aneurysms and splenic and renal infarcts .
Later on hospital day 10, in case of severe complications, the patient underwent mitral valve replacement under pump . Intraoperatively, vegetations to the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve were seen with valve perforation. The native valve was successfully replaced with a mechanical valve (Carbomedics Prosthetic Heart Valve 27#, Sorin Group Italia Srl, Italy). Though both the cultures of vegetation and the blood after the surgery were negative, anti-infective treatment was continued with vancomycin for a planned duration of 8 weeks. The patient was started on warfarin 1.5 mg once daily for his mechanical valve.
During postoperative anti-infective treatment, repeated CT clarified no significant changes of organs' infarction but remarkable enlargement of the pseudoaneurysm with the thickened wall of the mesenteric arterial branch. To prevent the rupture of the aneurysm, two detachable coils were used to embolize the branches of the artery via digital subtraction angiography on hospital day 50 . The patient was discharged in a very good condition after 8 weeks' targeted antibiotic therapy.
Until 6 month-following up after discharge, he is currently symptoms free. Repeat TTE showed normal inner diameter and function of his heart. Abdominal ultrasound also showed that the spleen returned to normal size, and the infarcts gradually improved. Even with a long-term oral warfarin anticoagulation therapy, he lived a relatively healthy life. The progress and decision-making of the case above are reflected in the timeline .