A 34-year-old female patient at 24 weeks of gestation was admitted to the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology of our institution due to sudden right chest pain. She had no smoking history or addiction to drugs, such as methamphetamine. She also had previously delivered a female baby at the age of 27 years; however, she had no relevant medical history, such as congenital pulmonary anomalies or a history of undergoing an X-ray at the previous delivery. In the past, at the age of 25 years, she had undergone an X-ray; however, no abnormal changes were detected. Laboratory data at admission showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 16,000/mL (normal range 4000–9000/mL), C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 15.03 mg/dL (normal range < 0.03 mg/dL), and body temperature of 37.1 °C. Chest X-ray revealed a pulmonary cyst outline in the right lung field at admission . Although the origin of the pulmonary cyst was unknown, non-invasive treatment with intravenous antibiotics (sulbactam/ampicillin, 3 g every 8 h) was initially administered in an attempt to control the infection. However, a fever spike of 38 °C was observed 5 days after admission. The antibiotic regimen was subsequently changed to tazobactam/piperacillin (4.5 g every 8 h) due to suspected anaerobic bacteria infection, which was administered for 5 days. Despite antibiotic treatment, the pulmonary cyst continued to gradually grow and was complicated by massive fluid collection, as shown by chest X-ray and computed tomography . Thereafter, she was referred to our department. Conservative management was not effective at all and the patient’s infection was worsening, becoming complicated with pulmonary abscess. Therefore, we planned to perform an emergent right lower lobectomy via open thoracotomy to control the refractory, serious infection with the septic condition and to save the lives of both the mother and the mid-term fetus. In addition, pulmonary resection enabled a histopathological diagnosis to elucidate the etiology of the cyst. Preoperatively, as there was no definitive evidence to suggest a risk of fetal preterm delivery or abortion, informed consent from the patient and her family was obtained. During general anesthesia, the following drugs were administered: propofol (2 mg/kg) for inducing anesthesia (injected intravenously), sevoflurane 1.0–1.2% via inhalation, rocuronium bromide (total; 1.0 mg/kg) and remifentanil hydrochloride (0.1–0.2 μg/kg/min) intravenously, and levobupivacaine hydrochloride injected through an epidural catheter. When the blood pressure was below 80 mmHg, ephedrine hydrochloride (total: 12 mg) and phenylephrine hydrochloride (total: 0.1 mg) were injected temporally. At the end of general anesthesia, sugammadex sodium (total; 200 mg) was used for recovery. Intraoperatively, the right lower lobe of the lung was found to be filled with a massive abscess in the intrapulmonary cyst, which interfered with the surgical field; hence, we initially aspirated the foul-smelling infected fluid as much as possible . Subsequently, no interlobar fissure was seen due to the infection and adhesions; therefore, a fissureless lobectomy to resect the inferior pulmonary vein and lower bronchus was performed, and finally, resection of an interlobar fissure and the pulmonary artery was performed simultaneously using linear staples. During resection of the interlobar fissure, the right upper and middle lobes were partially resected for complete excision of the infected cyst. To allow perioperative monitoring of the fetus's heartbeat, a Doppler echo was performed by an obstetrician immediately preoperatively and postoperatively to monitor the heart rate and contractions. The operation time was 176 min with a total blood loss of 386 mL. The chest drain was removed on the 12th postoperative day due to excessive pleural effusion and risk of empyema. The patient was discharged on the 16th postoperative day on foot with controlled inflammatory findings (WBC count, 10,600/mL; CRP level, 1.164 mg/dL). As for postoperative pain relief, oral pain reliever, such as acetaminophen (2 g/day), which do not affect fetal ductus arteriosus closure based on our past experience, was prescribed; moreover, epidural anesthesia with an injection of levobupivacaine hydrochloride was also utilized for postoperative pain control. However, loxoprofen, one of the NSAIDs, which affect ductus arteriosus closure as well as pulmonary hypertension and fetal abortion, was not prescribed. Pathological examination revealed lung abscess with no infectious agents, malignancy, or congenital anomalies, such as congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation; a thick cyst wall, fibrin precipitation, and extensive neutrophils infiltrations with pulmonary infarction as well as obstructive pneumonia and diffuse alveolar damage were also ascertained. Furthermore, a fairly large lung abscess extensively invaded and eroded the normal pulmonary parenchyma; therefore, a possible congenital anomaly might have been destroyed, and consequently, those anomalies might not have been detected in the resected right lower lobe pathologically .
As for the result of the bacterial culture examination, the preoperative sputum culture detected Moraxella catarrhalis, α-streptococci, and Haemophilus spp.; however, postoperative bacterial culture of the abscess obtained from the right lower lobe intraoperatively revealed only white blood cell (neutrophils), although we suspected infection from anaerobic bacteria based on the foul-smelling. Specific agents, such as bacteria, including anaerobic bacteria, fungus, mycobacterium, and other organisms, were not detected on Gram staining and in bacterial culture tests postoperatively. Polymerase chain reaction tests for Mycobacterium tuberculosis, avium, and intracellulare were also negative. Since sulbactam/ampicillin or tazobactam/piperacillin was administered over 10 days postoperatively, the pathogenic bacteria may have been killed and a microbial substitution phenomenon may have occurred. Considering the pathological and negative bacterial examination, preoperative spike fever with higher inflammatory response might be attributed from peripheral obstructive pneumonia surrounded by large pulmonary cyst. Although the patient later became infected with coronavirus-19 at 29 weeks of gestation, her condition was not serious, and she delivered a male newborn uneventfully at 40 week gestation. One year postoperatively, both the mother and infant were living in healthy condition and chest X-ray showed an acceptable recovery status .