A 68-year-old man presented to the outpatient department (OPD) with chest computed tomography (CT) scan abnormality. He was an ex-smoker with 4.5 pack-years. His past medical history indicated that he had been taking medication for hypertension, but did not disclose history of diabetes mellitus or other cardiovascular disorders. A chest CT scan was performed at a local clinic before the patient presented to our OPD. He was suspected to have primary lung malignancy with metastasis to the lymph nodes.
His physical examination was unremarkable. Complete blood count was normal at 11,900/mm3, and C-reactive protein level, electrolyte panel, liver function studies, renal function tests, and coagulation profile were all within normal limits. Electrocardiography revealed normal sinus rhythm.
He was suspected to have primary lung cancer with metastasis to the intrathoracic lymph nodes. Lymphadenopathies were observed in the subcarinal, right hilar and bilateral interlobar areas on the chest CT scan performed at the local clinic. Because bronchoscopic findings were non-specific, an endobronchial ultrasonography (EBUS) was performed. Sufficient core samples were obtained from the subcarinal and bilateral interlobar lymph nodes using EBUS guided transbronchial needle aspiration (TBNA). Sampling at the right hilar lymph node was not possible via EBUS-TBNA as the position of the right hilar lymph node was too high for EBUS to reach. The pathologic findings showed noncaseating granulomas without malignant cells, consistent with sarcoidosis . As the patient intended to manage his pulmonary sarcoidosis at the local clinic, no further follow-up took place at the OPD. Five months later, however, he presented again to our OPD with aggravating right hilar lymphadenopathy . The patient had not been treated with corticosteroid since the diagnosis of pulmonary sarcoidosis. Assuming worsening of sarcoidosis, he was prescribed 30 mg per day oral prednisone for 3 months. At 3 months follow-up, chest CT revealed waxing and waning of the right hilar lymphadenopathy . We decided to increase the dose of oral prednisone to 40 mg per day. However, at 2 months follow-up, the chest CT scan showed a newly developed right lower paratracheal lymphadenopathy and worsening right hilar lymphadenopathy, despite improvement of subcarinal and both interlobar lymphadenopathies . Fiberoptic bronchoscopy and EBUS were performed again. There was no endobronchial mass or destructive mucosal lesion on bronchoscopy. Transbronchial lung biopsy from the right upper lobe and EBUS-TBNA from the right lower paratracheal lymph node were performed. The final pathologic results revealed adenocarcinoma from the lung . He was transferred to a cancer center for treatment of lung cancer.