A 64-year-old woman with chest pain and heart palpitations was referred to our hospital for further examination of a right atrial tumour. She had been prescribed oral medication for dyslipidaemia and hypertension. The tumour was diagnosed as an angiosarcoma, and surgical resection of the tumour was attempted. However, complete resection from the right atrium and area around the right coronary artery (RCA) could not be achieved because of its strong adhesion to surrounding myocardial tissue. Macroscopic residual disease was observed post-surgery, and adjunctive chemotherapy was started in the same year. Paclitaxel (100 mg/m2) and pazopanib (800 mg) were initially administered to the patient; however, computed tomography (CT) showed tumour progression in the anterior mediastinum. The patient was started on eribulin (1.4 mg/m2). During this period, the patient was diagnosed with sick sinus syndrome and underwent implantation of a leadless pacemaker. Three years after chemotherapy was started, the patient presented with chest pain and cold sweats at rest and was transported to our emergency clinic within an hour of onset. Although she complained of persistent chest discomfort, her vital signs were normal. Physical examination was unremarkable; there were no additional heart sounds on auscultation and no pulmonary rales. Jugular venous pressure was not elevated and no pitting oedema was present. Routine blood investigations on admission were unremarkable except for C-reactive protein 3.95 mg/dL (normal 0.0–0.14 mg/dL). Electrocardiogram showed worsening bradycardia , suggesting that the patient suffered from acute coronary syndrome. Emergency coronary angiography showed an isolated 99% ostial RCA stenosis with no other obstructive disease . Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) showed mild to moderate stenosis due to fibrous plaque formation with partial calcification of the vessels. We observed distortion of the blood vessel in the short-axis direction due to coronary artery compression at the tumour lesion (, Video 1). Additionally, the presence of extracardiac vascular blush was noted, supplied by right ventricular marginal branches. Initially, we suspected that the patient had coronary vasospastic angina, and repeatedly administered intracoronary nitroglycerine (10 mg) and isosorbide dinitrate (15 mg). Stenosis in the distal lesion was rapidly relieved by 2 mg of nitroglycerine, but treatment did not improve the ostial RCA stenosis . Next, we successfully performed IVUS-guided PCI with drug-eluting stent deployment (, Videos 2 and 3). The Xience Skypoint stent (3.25 × 33 mm, Abbott Medical Inc., Abbott Park, IL, USA) was deployed from the ostium of the RCA to the distal lesion. A postoperative coronary CT scan showed that the tumour had progressed in the last several months at the site where coronary compression was observed by IVUS .
The patient was taking aspirin 100 mg/day and clopidogrel 75 mg/day and was discharged from our hospital on postoperative day 7 without any further complications. The chemotherapy regimen was changed to trabectedin (1.0 mg/m2). Subsequently, her cardiac function was preserved, and no additional coronary events were observed after 7-month follow-up.