A female preterm infant weighing 824 g was born to a 37-year-old woman at 24 6/7 weeks of gestational age (GA) by induced delivery due to chorioamnionitis. Because of bradycardia and unstable respiration, endotracheal intubation was performed immediately after birth, and surfactant was administered under the diagnosis of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). The Apgar score was 3 at 1 min, 4 at 5 min. After admission to the NICU, the patient was put on mechanical ventilator support. At 4 days of age, a patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) was noted on echocardiography. Cardiac failure due to refractory PDA worsened in spite of the administration of catecholamine and diuretics. Therefore, PDA ligation was carried out at 24 days of age.
At 15 days of age, mild hyperbilirubinemia with total bilirubin level of 3.9 mg/dL and a direct bilirubin level of 2.8 mg/dL was noted. Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) and Inchinkoto (traditional Japanese herbal medicine) were administered; however, the conjugated hyperbilirubinemia worsened, and acholic stool was noted at 30 days of age. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a cystic structure at the porta hepatis with a diameter of 6.8 mm ; we therefore suspected BA with a type I cyst or congenital biliary dilatation (CBD). Since exploratory laparotomy (EL) and intraoperative cholangiography (IC) were essential for making a definitive diagnosis as early as possible, the operation was performed at 58 days of age, when the patient weighed 1336 g. During the operation, the liver was soft , and IC showed a cystic common bile duct that had no communication with the duodenum, with the intrahepatic ductules showing a cloudy pattern . These findings indicated BA with a type I cyst. Although we had initially planned to perform KPE for BA sequentially, we could only perform gallbladder drainage because the patient’s vital signs worsened during the operation. Since there were no significant bleeding or other intraoperative complications, the patient’s immaturity was considered to be the cause of this unstable condition.
After surgery, the color of the fluid drained from the gall bladder was yellowish, and the serum bilirubin level had improved but was not normal, which indicated that cyst-jejunostomy would be ineffective and that Kasai portoenterostomy (KPE) was necessary. We decided to wait for the patient to gain weight and to maintain her general condition. She was extubated at 72 days of age. At 122 days of age (corrected age: 16 days), we performed KPE, with the patient weighing 2296 g. The liver had become firm and cirrhotic , and portoenterostomy with Roux-en-Y reconstruction was completed without complications. The examination of a liver biopsy revealed bridging fibrosis and cholestasis. The postoperative course was good, and prednisolone was administered from postoperative day (POD) 7 to 31 in accordance with our institution’s routine practice . The serum bilirubin level normalized at POD 27. The patient’s body weight successfully increased .
Although a jaundice-free status was initially achieved, the serum bilirubin, aspartate aminotransferase (AST), and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) levels began to increase following the development of cholangitis at 157 days of age (POD 35). Secondary prednisolone therapy was performed; however, the liver function continued to worsen . Cholestasis, increasing ascites, coagulopathy, and gastrointestinal bleeding were noted subsequently with a pediatric end-stage liver disease (PELD) score 26 and Child–Pugh class C. At 221 days of age (corrected age: 133 days, 117 days after KPE), we performed living donor liver transplantation, with the patient weighing 4106 g. The donor was the patient's mother, who was 38 years of age and whose blood type was identical. The graft was a segment 2 (S2) monosegment graft and the graft-to-recipient weight ratio was 3.23%. Post-transplantation management was conducted as described in our previous report . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the serum bilirubin and liver function profiles normalized by the first postoperative month. Currently, at 14 months after LT, the patient is well and shows a normal liver function with relatively good growth in height (-1.7 SD) and weight (-0.9 SD).