A 41-year-old female patient, known to have Kartagener syndrome (SIT, chronic sinusitis, and bronchiectasis) , as well as asthma (on Advair 250/50), and a history of two C-sections (in 2003 and 2005), presented to the emergency department with left upper quadrant abdominal pain associated with fever, nausea, and vomiting. An ultrasound revealed acute cholecystitis, and the patient was taken to the operating room for laparoscopic cholecystectomy, performed by a practicing general surgeon. In the operating room, after gaining access to the abdomen, it was discovered that the patient had a severely inflamed gallbladder with a thickened wall (a). The surgeon attempted to provide a mirror image approach in the trocar position but was unsuccessful due to his hand position and function, as shown in the video of the operation (please see the ). The surgeon's hands were crossed, with the right-hand dissecting and the left retracting (b). The gallbladder was successfully dissected from the liver bed, and the surgery was completed. The patient was discharged home on post-operative day one after the removal of the abdominal drain, which contained serous non-biliary output.
On post-operative day five, the patient presented to the emergency room with abdominal pain, fever, and jaundice. Laboratory tests revealed an elevated white blood cell count (15,000/mm3) and direct hyperbilirubinemia (direct bilirubin 4.3 mg/dL, total bilirubin 5.4 mg/dL).
A series of images were obtained as follows:A non-contrast CT scan of the abdomen revealed a small perihepatic fluid collection (a). Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was obtained, revealing complete occlusion of the common hepatic duct (CHD) just below the bifurcation of the right and left hepatic ducts (Bismuth-Strasberg Type E3 bile duct injury) (b). Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was attempted, though cannulating the duct was challenging due to her abnormal anatomy. It showed complete occlusion of the CBD and CHD with multiple clips (c). Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC) was also performed, revealing biliary tree dilatation with complete occlusion of the CHD just below the bifurcation (Bismuth-Strasberg Type E3 bile duct injury) with multiple large clips at the occlusion site (d). A contrast-enhanced CT scan confirmed the appropriate positioning of the PTC catheters and identified abnormal arterial anatomy, including a replaced right hepatic artery (RHA) originating from the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) (a), a replaced left hepatic artery (LHA) originating from the gastroduodenal artery (b), and an accessory left hepatic artery originating from the left gastric artery (c).
Her hospital course was complicated with pneumonia on top of her pre-existing bronchiectasis (a) and a large subcapsular hematoma of the liver resulting from the PTC procedure (b), requiring multiple blood transfusions and IV antibiotics for the pneumonia. Four weeks later, her PTC stents were upsized from 10 Fr to 12 Fr. A follow-up CT scan revealed a resolution of the subcapsular hematoma, and the decision was made to proceed with a hepaticojejunostomy six weeks after her initial operation.