An 87-year-old male presented to emergency department with complaints of severe abdominal pain and distention for 5 days. The pain was described as diffuse, non-radiating, moderate in intensity and associated with distention and bloating. Patient denied nausea, vomiting, fever, chills, bright blood per rectum and melena. There was no history of shortness of breath, palpitations, anorexia or weight loss. Patient has a past medical history significant for hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, benign colon polyps and chronic constipation, for which he was on bisacodyl tablets and polyethylene glycol at home. The last colonoscopy was performed 2 years ago, which showed diverticulosis and hyperplastic sigmoid colon polyp. There was no history of prior abdominal surgeries. Other home medications include oxycodone and tramadol for chronic back pain, statins, atenolol and bumetanide. The patient was hemodynamically stable. On abdominal examination, there was moderate diffuse tenderness, but no rigidity or guarding. Rectal examination revealed impacted stool. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Laboratory studies included WBC 15,700/mcL, hemoglobin 14.0 g/dL, and platelet count 214,000/mL. Basic metabolic panel was significant for anion gap metabolic acidosis [AG: 24] with lactate level of 6.2. Glucose, liver and renal function were normal. Urinalysis and chest x ray showed no evidence of infection. Blood cultures were obtained, which were subsequently negative. Abdominal x rays were obtained in the emergency department showing a large amount of gas and fecal retention throughout the colon and rectum with no evidence of free intraperitoneal air. CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis with contrast was performed and showed a large amount of retained stool throughout the rectum and colon with bowel wall thickening in the area, and infiltration of the pericolonic fat. CT scan was negative for intramural or extra-luminal air loculi, gas bubbles, or an abscess that might suggest a perforation process .
In the emergency department, the patient was given milk of molasses enema and started on IV fluids, ciprofloxacin, and metronidazole. He was admitted in the inpatient unit and the gastroenterology team was consulted. The patient had several bowel moments afterwards. However, he still had a sensation of bloating and abdominal discomfort. White cell count and lactate trended down to 10,700/mcL and 4.3 respectively after fluid resuscitation and laxatives. Patient was taken to the endoscopic suit for colonoscopy after GoLYTELY bowel preparation. Colonoscopy showed a significant amount of solid stool in the rectal vault and left-sided colitis involving part of descending and recto-sigmoid colon with edema, erythema, and ulceration . Manual disimpaction of stool was performed during colonoscopy. Multiple biopsies were obtained that were significant for focal active colitis with regenerative glandular changes and neural hyperplasia. After colonoscopy and manual disimpaction symptoms of bloating and abdominal discomfort resolved gradually and a repeat lactate came back within normal limits. The patient was discharged home in a stable condition.