AK, a seventeen-year-old male presented to East Surrey Hospital Emergency Department on 14th May, 2020 with reduced range of movements in both shoulder joints. Five and a half weeks prior to presentation, on 6th April 2020, he had suffered an epileptic seizure sitting in an office chair, falling off the chair with both arms stuck in the spaces under each arm rest. At this time a paramedic crew attended to him and he was reassured at the scene. The next day, AK’s mother called for Paramedic assistance once more on account of his painful shoulders, and another Ambulance crew examined and reassured the patient.
AK experienced swelling and bruising in both shoulders in the days that followed the seizure, together with pain and reduced range of movement. AK attended a virtual GP appointment with regards to his poor shoulder function. The consultation was virtual due to the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, and he was reassured by the GP and no further action was taken.
Pain and stiffness in both shoulder joints further continued, and 5 weeks post-seizure AK presented to Hospital, was examined, and found to have bilateral “squared” appearance of both shoulders. Efforts by ED doctors to reduce the joints were unsuccessful with entonox, and the Trauma and Orthopaedic (T+O) team were called. On examination by the T+O on- doctor, AK was unable to flex or abduct each arm higher than 90°. AK could internally rotate both shoulders but was unable to externally rotate either shoulder. Sensation in both axillary nerve regions was normal. Plain film X-ray imaging confirmed bilateral anterior shoulder dislocations and bilateral greater tuberosity fractures .
AK’s case was discussed by the on-call team and consultant and plans made for urgent review at the upper limb clinic that week on the May 19, 2020. AK’s significant medical history included only epilepsy, for which he had been reducing his dosage of sodium valproate from January 2020 and the seizure on the April 6, 2020, was the first he had suffered whilst reducing the medication. After the seizure in April, AK had restarted his anti-epileptic medication and had had no further episodes.
AK was reviewed in the upper limb clinic and CT scan imaging confirmed the diagnosis as it appeared on plain films ( and ). It was decided that he could be offered surgical management.