A 52-year-old man was referred for evaluation of an optic disc abnormality. He was on a regimen of oral anti-hypertensive agents and had no other known medical disease. At the initial presentation, his blood pressure was 133/86 mmHg.
His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 in the right eye and 20/100 in the left eye. Fundus examination demonstrated a swollen optic disc, splinter hemorrhages, and radially oriented, dilated vessels over the optic disc in both eyes . Microaneurysms and dot-blot hemorrhages were also noted in the mid-peripheral retina, but no signs of hypertensive retinopathy were observed. FA showed an early hyperfluorescence that increased throughout the study, most likely due to telangiectasia of the optic disc . Humphrey central 30–2 visual field test showed normal findings in the right eye and mid-peripheral depression with high false negative rate in the left eye. Pattern visual evoked potential showed normal findings in both eyes. Clinical neurologic examinations and brain magnetic resonance imaging revealed no abnormal findings. Laboratory tests, including markers for inflammation, infection, and connective tissue disease, showed no abnormalities other than an elevated blood glucose of 217 mg per deciliter and glycosylated hemoglobin level of 10.2%.
This patient was newly diagnosed with DM and diabetic retinopathy of both eyes. To rule out NVD which suggests high-risk PDR, SS-OCTA (PLEX Elite 9000; Carl Zeiss Meditec, Inc., Dublin, CA, USA) was performed. The B-scan image displayed blood flow signals in the thickened retinal nerve fiber layer of the optic disc and not above the VRI (white dashed line) , and the correlating VRI slab (between white and red dashed line in Fig. c) image did not depict signal flow , which suggested the presence of DP rather than NVD. The patient was managed with blood glucose control and close ophthalmologic follow-ups. One month later, optic disc swelling and telangiectasia had decreased , and his final BCVA was 20/40 in both the eyes.