An 18-year-old woman survived an exercise-related SCA due to VF and immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Initially, an underlying myocarditis was suspected. No indication of heart insufficiency had been detected. The patient has negated other symptoms such as angina pectoris, dyspnea, or previous arrhythmic events, like palpitations or syncopes, before the first hospitalization . However, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging was not diagnostic but showed pathologic LV thickening of the anteroseptal and mid-anteroseptal and apical parts (, up to 21 mm), leading to the diagnosis of non-obstructive HCM. MRI functional parameters were nearly normal [ejection fraction 53.5%, end-diastolic volume (EDV) 79.1 ml/m2, end-systolic volume (ESV) 36.8 ml/m2, ejection volume 42.4 ml/m2, heart-minute volume 4.9 L/min, LV mass 83.3 g/m2]. In addition to the diagnosed non-obstructive HCM with pathologic LV thickening of the anterior, middle, and anterior-septal and apical parts until up to 21 mm, an obstruction in the LV outflow tract (LVOT) could not be confirmed. Gadolinium application showed myocardial late enhancement and fibrosis, particularly in the hypertrophied LV sections. Ajmaline testing was negative for Brugada syndrome. Initially, a subcutaneous ICD (S-ICD) was implanted. Striking was a post-shock pacing with 22 pulses of 26 s duration. We interpret this as a depression of the sinus node due to the 65-J shock. A medication consisting of 1.25 mg/day bisoprolol and 1.25 mg/day ramipril was initiated upon discharge. The baseline ECGs showed a normal but bradycardic sinus rhythm (45 bpm; ) and conduction at rest without any disturbances of repolarization or LV hypertrophy.
A stress-induced syncope event occurred 16 weeks after the first event. Interrogation of the S-ICD revealed a successful termination of VF by a single S-ICD shock, followed by a sinus node arrest of nearly 90 s hereafter. Subsequently, the S-ICD was replaced by a dual-chamber transvenous ICD system with correct positioning and regular function of the device leads. At discharge, the daily medication of the patient included 2.5 mg bisoprolol, 1.25 mg ramipril, and 300 mg magnesium and tromcardin.
After another period of 10 weeks, physical exercises again triggered another VF episode, which could be adequately terminated by the dual-chamber ICD. Subsequent device interrogation revealed adequate sensing of VF after a short period of previous ventricular tachycardia. Of note, atrial sensing (AS) showed an initially regular atrial activity aggravating into sinus bradycardia and cardiac arrest due to complete atrial asystole (AA) but still concurrent VF of low amplitude. This illustrates a rare ECG registration and co-event of VF and SAN arrest or AA (,).
Using a multi-gene-panel sequencing approach, a pathogenic and known heterozygous non-synonymous variant (p.Arg719Trp) (ACMG class 5: PS3, PS4_M, PM1, PM2, PP3) of the MYH7 gene was identified. This variant was reported in >10 unrelated HCM patients and is nearly absent in controls (gnomAD: MAF 0.003%), further supporting its pathogenicity. Other NGS panel genes for inherited arrhythmia forms or cardiomyopathies showed no further pathogenic variant.
A beta-blocker therapy was established to prevent exercise- or stress-induced fatal arrhythmic events. Nevertheless, another exercise-induced VF episode occurred when the patient was climbing stairs, 83 weeks after the first event. Device data initially demonstrated sinus tachycardia with cycle lengths from 385 to 400 ms in addition to ventricular extrasystoles (VES). Notably, interrogated ICD data again demonstrated a co-occurrence of ventricular tachycardia degenerating into VF and accompanying a decelerating AS to sinus bradycardia followed by asystole (,). Although this episode of VF was regularly terminated through the first ICD shock, VF re-occurred in the following minutes and was again accompanied by sinus bradycardia and finally sinus asystole. Another two ICD shocks, including ineffective defibrillation, were necessary to adequately terminate the VF/AA. However, fast shortening of the ventricular cycle length and severe degeneration of the signal amplitude in the EGM channel with partial undersensing of single events exposed an ineffective detection sensitivity. The dual-chamber ICD was reprogrammed to reduce the electrode threshold in the right ventricle to 0.3 mV because the minimum amplitude of the last VF episode was 1.4 mV.
Another VF episode occurred during a psychotherapeutic appointment 3 months later. Notably, it initially emerged during the resting phase without physical exercise, followed by inadequate termination via the ICD through several shocks. Altogether, three particular episodes of VF were registered in the ICD data. The first episode was defibrillated twice, the second one was successfully terminated through ATP, and the third was inadequately terminated by another single ICD shock. During the approximately 7 min of lasting arrhythmia episode, cardiopulmonary resuscitation was conducted until emergency physicians arrived. After intravenous administration of amiodarone (300 mg), the ICD effectively terminated the VF episode by a shock intervention, and a reprogramming of the dual-chamber ICD was conducted due to undersensing.
During hospitalization, amiodarone treatment was initiated (initial saturation treatment and then 200 mg/day). Furthermore, diltiazem therapy (2 × mg/day) was initiated. No further severe cardiac arrhythmic events have been detected since then .
Notably, since April 2022, the patient has suffered from the first symptoms of hyperthyroidism [thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) < 0.01 µIU/ml, anti-Tg-RO = 1,771.0 IU/ml, anti-TPO Roche = 312.0 IU/ml]. Although amiodarone-induced functional abnormalities in thyroid homeostasis are quite common, an autoimmune-induced hyperthyroidism could not yet be excluded. Nevertheless, thyreostatic therapy was initiated with thiamazole and Irenat. Considering the young age of the patient and the long-term toxicity of amiodarone, a transition to another less toxic antiarrhythmic medication such as sotalol would be preferable, especially to reduce the risk of hyperthyroidism. A medication change has not been conducted yet due to severe psychological concerns of the patient during the follow-up related to a replacement of amiodarone
The family history for HCM, SCD, or SCA was unremarkable; a cascade of clinical and genetic testing was offered to the family but was not completed.