The proband, a 1-day-old boy, was the first child of non-consanguineous, healthy 35 year-old parents. The couple had a past history of twice spontaneous abortions both occurred between 7 and 10 weeks of gestation, but product-of-conception (POC) samples were not analyzed. The cytogenetic analyses of the couple preformed at another hospital revealed apparent normal karyotypes. This pregnancy was uneventful, and there was no prenatal exposure to teratogens. However, the prenatal ultrasound examination showed an increased nuchal translucency (4.0 mm) at 12+ weeks of gestation. Taking into account of the advanced maternal age as well, interventional prenatal diagnosis was referred to the couple. After understanding detailed information about sampling procedures, the risk of fetal mortality and the limitations of the testing, the couple decided to receive an amniocentesis at 18 weeks of gestation for further diagnosis. Amniotic fluid cells were cultured in situ and their karyotypes were analyzed by using G-banding technique
, the cytogenetics revealed a apparently normal karyotype 46,XY (Figure ).
Following ultrasound examinations showed an increased size in dimensions of biparietal diameter and abdominal circumference, fetal cerebral ventriculomegaly, increased nuchal folder, polyhydramnios. However, given their past history of spontaneous abortions, the couple was eager to have children, and since the cytogenetic analysis result of this fetus was negative, they decided to continue the pregnancy. The proband was born at 39 weeks and 2 days of gestation by vaginal delivery. His birth weight was 2,688 g (25th centile), length was 47.5 cm (25th centile), and head circumference was 33.5 cm (75th centile). Apgar scores of the infant were 8 at 1 min and 8 at 5 min. Notable physical features included skull joint separation, single transverse palmar crease on both hands, craniofacial dysmorphism including round face, low-set and dysplastic ears (Figure ). Ultrasonic tests of brain/abdomen and cardiovascular examination were postponed according to the parents of the affected infant.
Peripheral blood samples were obtained from the proband and his parents for cytogenetic analyses. Sample collection procedures were approved by Guangdong Women and Children Hospital Institutional Review Board and Ethics Committee of Guangzhou Medical College, China. The family gave their written informed consent. Peripheral blood samples were cultured for 72 hours in RPMI medium, after that metaphase chromosomes were analyzed by the standard G-banding technique.
The cytogenetic analysis of the peripheral blood sample from the proband initially revealed a possible chromosome 18p deletion, but the breakpoint and the deletion region were difficult to determine with the limited resolution of chromosome banding technique (Figure ).
Genomic DNA from the proband was isolated from the whole blood by standard procedures using Fuji DNA Blood Mini kit. Array-based CGH analysis was performed using Agilent’s 8 × 60 K commercial arrays (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA), which consist of 60,000 oligonucleotide probes and evaluate the whole genome with an effective backbone resolution of roughly 50 Kb. 500 ng of experimental and gender-matched reference DNAs (Promega, Madison, WI) were digested with Alu I and Rsa I restriction endonucleases (Promega) and fluorescently labeled with cyanine 3-dUTP and cyanine 5-dUTP respectively. Labeled experimental and reference DNAs were purified, combined, denatured, pre-annealed, and hybridized to the microarrays in a rotating oven (20 rpm) at 65°C for 24 hours. The data was analyzed with Agilent Genomic Workbench Lite Edition 6.5.0.18 software (Agilent Technologies). Aberrations were identified using the Agilent Genomic Workbench Lite software via the Aberration Detection Method-2 algorithm with a sensitivity threshold of 6.0 and a data filter that rejected aberrations that did not include at least five probes with a log2 set of 0.25. All quality control metrics passed.
As shown in Figure , a combination of 18p deletion and 7q duplication was identified in the proband by array-CGH analysis. A deletion spanning approximately 14 Mb was detected at 18p11.32-p11.21, with the deleted base pair coordinate ranging from 4,316 to 14,216,904 (hg18). Array-based CGH analysis also identified a duplication of about 11.2 Mb that involving the 7q36.1- q36.3 region, with distal breakpoint falling between 147,580,628 bp (last duplicated oligomer) and 158,781,397 bp (first normal oligomer).
The array-CGH analysis results of the proband highly indicated that the unbalanced translocation could be inherited from a balanced translocation carrier parent. To trace the origin of the translocation, cytogenetic analyses were provided to the proband’s parents, even though they had received cytogenetic analyses before at another hospital and revealed apparent normal karyotypes. With the guidance of array-based CGH results of the proband, the cytogenetic analyses revealed an abnormal karyotype [46,XY, t(7;18) (q36; p11.2)] of the proband’s father (Figure ), and a normal karyotype [46,XX] of the proband’s mother. The cytogenetics suggested that the father of the proband was a carrier of the balanced translocation.