We first saw our patient in 1995 when she was an 11-year-old girl and she presented with fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, malar rash and swelling in the small joints of her hands. Laboratory investigations at that time revealed elevated antinuclear antibody titer (1/1000) and anti-dsDNA levels (124 IU/mL), anemia, decreased C3 (14.3) and C4 (8.1) and SLE was diagnosed. She was treated with azathioprine 100 mg for 3 months, hydroxychloroquine 400 mg for 9 months and prednisolone 10–32 mg daily. Her disease was in remission for 2 years. In December 1997, cyclophosphamide (50–150 mg/day) was added and hydroxychloroquine was restarted because of flare up of the SLE activity with direct Coombs positive hemolytic anemia and elevated sedimentation rate. Thereafter, there was no complete remission and she was continuously on immunosuppressive medications, with the dose regulations depending on her white blood cell count, and she also needed pulse methylprednisolone administration once a month. She also had frequent urinary tract infections with Gram negative bacteria which were treated with several antibiotics.
In November 2007, she presented again complaining of flank pain and bloody urine. Ultrasonogram revealed left-sided hydronephrosis and dilatation of the left ureter and a nephrostomy catheter was placed in her left renal pelvis. Cystoscopic examination was performed and a polypoid lesion in the bladder obstructing the left ureteral orifice was observed. Computerized tomography (CT) of the pelvis indicated diffuse thickening of the bladder wall throughout the organ and obscured fat planes between the bladder and uterus, arousing suspicion of perivesical tissue invasion by a malignancy . Biopsy with transurethral resection of the tumor showed a high-grade pleomorphic sarcoma infiltrating widely in mucosa and muscularis propria. A CT scan of her chest was unremarkable and a bone scan showed no evidence of metastatic disease in her skeleton. A radical cystectomy plus bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy, total hysterectomy and anterior vaginectomy were performed with ileal conduit urinary diversion.
On macroscopic examination of the radical cystectomy specimen, a large ulcerating exophytic polypoid nodular tumor, mainly located on the left lateral and posterior walls of the urinary bladder, was observed. It extended from the dome down to the urethra, involving the trigone and bladder neck plus both ureteral orifices, as well as the right lateral and anterior walls distally . It was a shiny gray to white infiltrative firm mass with areas of softening and necrosis. The tumor had invaded the whole thickness of the bladder wall and penetrated into the perivesical fat tissue, as well as the anterior wall of the vagina. The rest of the bladder mucosa was hemorrhagic and ulcerated. Microscopically, a highly cellular neoplasm composed of pleomorphic spindle or plump cells with a variable amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm was seen. Neoplastic cells formed large areas of malignant cartilage and lacelike osteoid in addition to short interlacing fascicles . There were also occasional osteoclastic-type multinucleated giant cells and the mitotic rate was in excess of 20 per 10 high-power fields. Lymphovascular invasion and large areas of necrosis were also common and the tumor extended to the resection margin at the distal posterior border of the specimen. Immunohistochemical stains performed on the paraffin-embedded material showed no reaction for pan-cytokeratin, cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, p63 or epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) . There was strong p53 nuclear staining in more than 90% of the neoplastic cells and extensive sampling of the rest of the bladder revealed neither papillary urothelial neoplasm nor flat carcinoma in-situ or epithelial dysplasia. The uterus was unremarkable and the bilaterally dissected pelvic lymph nodes showed reactive lymphoid hyperplasia without metastasis. Based on the morphology and negative immunohistochemical staining with epithelial markers, in addition to the clinical absence of another tumor focus elsewhere in the body, a diagnosis of primary osteosarcoma of the urinary bladder was made. There was no evidence of recurrence or metastasis 6 months after surgery.