A 19 years old girl from the remote village of Nepal with body mass index (BMI) of 19.5 presented to Kathmandu University Hospital, Dhulikhel Hospital complaining of exercise intolerance for several months and bluish discoloration of extremities and lips. She also noticed bilateral bulbous enlargements of the distal end of the fingers and toes. However, there were no significant clinical events during birth, post-natal and childhood periods.
Clinical examinations revealed central and peripheral cyanosis with grade III clubbing of all extremities and plethoric lower conjunctiva. However, other systemic examinations showed no abnormal findings.
Investigations showed oxygen saturation at 60 % at room air, which was not corrected by oxygen support. The arterial blood gas analysis report showed the partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) at 44 mmHg, venous haemoglobin and haematocrit were 18.6 gm% and 62.2 %, respectively. Transthoracic echocardiography depicted mosaic flow from the right pulmonary artery to the left atrium (RPA-LA), and grade I pulmonary regurgitation. Chest radiograph and pulmonary function test were normal. Computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed enlarged left atrium and the direct communication from the posterior part of the right pulmonary artery into the left atrium, approximately 25 mm in size . There was an additional angiolipoma (77–55 mm) on the right posterior chest wall between the scapula and the chest wall, which we consider an incidental finding . We performed pulmonary arteriogram, which demonstrated the flow of the contrast from the abnormal branch of the right pulmonary artery to the left atrium . The PaO2 in the pulmonary trunk and the right pulmonary artery, close to the shunt were 32 and 34 mmHg, respectively.
After confirming the diagnosis of the right pulmonary artery to the left atrial fistula, she underwent open heart surgery in National Heart Centre. Intra-operative finding showed a direct connection between the right pulmonary artery to the left atrium approximately 1.5–1.3 cm in size, which was closed using polytetrafluoroethylene patch. Immediately after closer of the shunt, her condition improved with adequate oxygen saturation at 95 % at room air. Her post-operative course was uneventful and discharged. She is now on regular follow up.