A 46-year-old female patient was admitted to out hospital with a 2-month history of chocking, coughing, and a 12 kg drop in weight. The patient presented with no symptoms of fever, chest pain, difficulty breathing or history of esophageal tumors, inflammation, and trauma. Bronchofiberscopy revealed a double-opening fistula in the posterior-interior wall of the trachea . Gastroscopic examination also demonstrated a 2 cm defect in the frontier wall of the esophagus arising 27 cm from the incisor teeth. Chest CT confirmed three-way BEFs and pneumonia in the lower lung field .
She was put on supportive therapy with nutritional support, respiratory function training, and anti-infection treatment, all of which improved her physical condition allowing for surgical treatment. During preoperative anesthesia, a sengstaken-blackmore tube was inserted. We used the esophageal sac to block the esophageal fistula and form a complete airway circuit. In addition, the stomach sac was used to seal the cardia thereby prevent gastrobronchial reflux. Subsequently, ordinary tracheal intubation was performed to improve ventilation.
During surgery, we first created a tubular stomach through laparoscopy and performed jejunostomy to ensure adequate postoperative nutrition. Then, a left neck incision was made through which the tubular stomach was lifted towards the neck via the retrosternal passage. This allowed gastroesophageal anastomosis to be performed to rebuild the continuity of the digestive tract. Finally, thoracotomy was conducted through the right-side incision. The thoracic segment of the esophagus was mobilized above and below the fistula, approximately 2 cm away from the fusion of the trachea with the esophagus . The remaining esophagus around the fistula was cut from the middle 2/3 to form a short muscle flap and a long one . The short flap was first used to suture the edge of the corresponding fistula , covered with the long flap and finally fixed with sutures to form a double-layer repair .
The postoperative course was uneventful. A chest CT performed on the 5th day after surgery showed that the fistula had disappeared . Barium esophagogram conducted on the 11th day after surgery confirmed the absence of anastomotic leakage and the patient was allowed to drink water . Bronchoscopy was performed on the 12th day after surgery and the result showed that the fistula was repaired well . Two years postoperatively, the patient showed satisfactory progress without any respiratory or swallowing problems.