A 66-year-old woman was admitted to the psychiatry department of our university hospital with a diagnosis of mania. There was no family history of psychiatric disorders. She had had a history of Crohn's disease for 34 years and unmedicated chronic kidney disease (serum creatinine levels, 1.96 mg/dL). Once in the past she had experienced mood elevation during corticosteroid treatment for Crohn's disease. However, its dose and durations were unknown. After a long period of remission, the Crohn's disease had flared up approximately 6 months prior to admission. Prednisolone 10 mg/day was initiated, with resulting remission of the Crohn's disease. After 6 months on this dose of prednisolone, she experienced an abnormally elevated mood, flight of ideas, and decreased need for sleep. There was no personal or family history of substance abuse, diabetes, or thyroid dysfunction.
In the hospital, she showed increased mental activity and agitation. Her memory and orientation were intact, but she exhibited distractibility. She scored 35 on the Young Mania Rating Scale. Head MRI and blood tests showed no abnormalities. The diagnosis of a manic episode was made. Olanzapine was started at 5 mg/day and increased to 20 mg/day over 10 days. Lithium was avoided because of her chronic kidney disease. However, the patient's manic symptoms did not improve after 3 weeks. Therefore, 600 mg of sodium valproate was initiated, and the dose was increased to 1000 mg because the blood concentration of sodium valproate was 41.1 μg/mL (therapeutic range, 50.0–100.0 μg/mL). The manic symptoms did not improve after the dosage increase. Acting on the hypothesis that the low-dose prednisolone appeared to be a factor in the manic episodes, a diagnosis of manic disorder secondary to corticosteroids was made. The prednisolone was reduced from 10 mg/day to 8 mg/day after gastroenterology confirmed that the Crohn's disease was in remission. The dose was then further tapered down to 6.5, 5, and 4 mg approximately weekly, with caution to avoid flare-ups of Crohn's disease and the appearance of acute adrenal insufficiency. With tapering, mania improved, and the Young Mania Rating Scale dropped to 8 points . With improvement, olanzapine was tapered, and prednisolone was reduced to 3 mg/day without relapse of mania. The patient was discharged from the psychiatry department. Since then, she has been off prednisolone, sodium valproate, and olanzapine for more than 4 years and is doing well with no flare-ups of Crohn's disease or manic episodes.