A 49-year-old male was admitted to our hospital in November 2012, with a two-month history of a sore throat and difficulties in swallowing. The oropharyngeal inspection revealed the presence of an ulcerated mass of the right tonsil extending to the base of the tongue, to the epiglottis and to the right pyriform sinus. In addition, bilateral neck lymphadenopaties were palpable. A biopsy was performed and an HPV- negative squamous cell oropharyngeal carcinoma was diagnosed. The patient was a heavy smoker (20 packs/year) but denied alcohol intake. Head and neck computed tomography (CT) scan and whole body fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG PET/CT) scan confirmed the presence of tumor in the right tonsil area with bilateral lymph nodes involvement in levels I-III. The largest nodes measured 2-4 cm in maximum diameter. No distant metastases were found. The TNM clinical stage was cT3N2c. Following a multi-disciplinary discussion, the patient was judged suitable for concomitant chemoradiotherapy (CRT) and underwent protective tracheostomy; then, from April to May 2013, he was treated with a combination of intensity-modulated radiation therapy (IMRT) for a 70 Gy total dose, and weekly cisplatin for a total dose of 280 mg/m2.
The course of treatment was poorly tolerated, due to hematologic toxicity (grade 2 neutropenia) and grade 4 oropharyngeal mucositis, eliciting severe pain and requiring the placement of a percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) feeding tube. One month after the end of concomitant CRT, the patient’s clinical conditions slowly improved.
The CT scan performed at the end of treatment was negative, and a right tonsil biopsy did not reveal any residual cancer cell.
In July 2013, the patient was hospitalized because of the sudden onset of dysphagia, oral pain and extensive oral mycosis. Fiberoptic endoscopy revealed erosions and ulcerations of the tracheal, hypopharyngeal and esophageal mucosa, with fungal colonization. Biopsies confirmed the presence of Candida species hyphae and the absence of cancer cells, suggesting the diagnosis of a post-radiation tracheo-esophagitis with fungal colonization.
A few days later the patient, still in treatment with analgesic and antifungal drugs and fed through the PEG, reported a stabbing right hemithoracic pain. A plain chest X-ray showed the occurrence of a spontaneous pyo-pneumothorax that was treated by pleural purulent fluid drainage and broad-spectrum antibiotics. During the following days, as a persistent discharge of dark purulent fluid from the pleural drainage was noted, enteral nutrition reflux from the stomach to the esophagus, and then along the upper airways to the mediastinum and the pleural cavity, was suspected, possibly due to the formation of a tracheo-mediastino-pleural fistula. The diagnosis was confirmed by a CT scan and the fistula was treated with the endoscopic insertion of a silicone stent.
In October 2013, a total-body CT scan was performed; it showed no evidence of malignant disease and the resolution of the fistula. Two months later, the patient was urgently hospitalized for loss of consciousness secondary to hypotension. Anemia (hemoglobin 8 g/dL), probably caused by a minor oropharyngeal bleeding from the tracheostoma, was observed in blood tests. A thoracic CT scan, the electrocardiogram and a two-dimensional echocardiogram (ECHO) revealed normal findings with the exception of the presence of sinus tachycardia. The patient died suddenly two days after hospitalization.
The autopsy revealed sparse tumor cells in the oropharyngeal and tracheal mucosa, a minimal residual tracheo-esophageal fistula, and a large number of epicardial and myocardial metastases from oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma .