In November 2010, a 63-year-old Saudi man with background diagnoses of bronchial asthma and type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM I) of 47 years, presented to our facility with a five-day history of swelling on the right side of his neck and fever. The swelling progressively increased in size and was associated with pain, dysphagia, odynophagia, change of voice ('hot potato voice'), and reduced appetite. There was no prior history of shortness of breath, upper respiratory tract infection (URTI), dental problems or procedures. On examination our patient was found to be febrile (38.8°C), diaphoretic with a pulse rate of 115 beats per minute, a respiratory rate of 20 cycles per minute, BP of 119/69 mmHg and oxygen saturation of 99% at room air. There was a right submandibular swelling (5 × 5 cm) with all the cardinal features of acute inflammation (rubor, calor, tumor, dolor, and functio laesa). The first four of these signs were named by Celsus in ancient Rome (30-38 B.C.) and the last by Galen (A.D 130-200) .The right tonsil was enlarged and the uvula medially displaced. Examination of the respiratory system did not reveal any abnormalities.
Laboratory investigations revealed a white cell count of 10.5 × 109 cells/L (neutrophils 80.8%), hemoglobin 13.9 g/dL, platelet count 479 × 109 cells/L, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 44 mm/hour and international normalized ratio (INR) of 3.1. Serum glucose was 23 mmol/L, total cholesterol 2.9 mmol/L, low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol 1.79 mmol/L, high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol 0.5 mmol/L and triglyceride 1.42 mmol/L. Hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 9.9% on admission. Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) was 21 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 6 U/L, uric acid 246 μmol/L, urea 5.5 mmol/L, creatinine 90 μmol/L, and total bilirubin 10.5 μmol/L. Abscess content culture and sensitivity testing yielded K. pneumoniae; however, blood culture results were negative. Serotyping of the K. pneumonia isolate from our patient was not performed.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the neck region showed a multiloculated abscess (circle of arrowheads) with irregular peripheral enhancement in the right carotid space extending from the second to the fourth cervical vertebrae. The right sternomastoid muscle was swollen with surrounding inflammatory changes as well as multiple enlarged cervical lymph nodes. The fluid tracked through the pre-vertebral space from the C2 down to the C6 level, with a maximum anteroposterior (AP) diameter of 7 mm. It tracked into the right parapharyngeal space down to the supraglottic region. The palatine tonsils were enlarged, more significantly on the right side, and showed small areas of low attenuation. The right internal jugular vein (IJV) showed thrombosis and enhancement of its walls (single arrow in Figure ) that extended intracranially into the right sigmoid and transverse venous sinuses. The thrombus also extended inferiorly down to the C7 level. Other features noted on the CT included a mass effect on the oropharynx and hypopharynx as well as the larynx. A CT scan of the chest was normal.
Our patient underwent incision and drainage of the abscess with no complications. He was treated with a combination of clindamycin and cefuroxime in addition to warfarin for six weeks. These interventions resulted in complete resolution of the thrombus. Normoglycemia was achieved before his discharge from hospital, and subsequent follow-up was uneventful. He was finally discharged from the clinic after complete wound healing and the return of his biochemical parameters to normal levels.