A 50-year-old Hispanic male was referred to the colorectal clinic with a 9-month history of perianal itching and pain. He reported developing a rash as a result of severe itching. He was previously diagnosed with diabetes insipidus (DI) of unknown etiology and complained of frequent urination. He did not have any complaints of diarrhea, constipation, melena, hematochezia, changes in appetite, or weight loss. He had no family history of cancer. The patient had brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in November 2017 that showed the absence of a hyperintense T1W signal of the neurohypophysis. He also had a colonoscopy in December 2019, which revealed a polyp in the transverse colon and perianal inflammation, which prompted his referral to the colorectal clinic. The polyp’s biopsy confirmed a benign adenomatous polyp. Surgical and medical history was otherwise negative.
On examination in the office, he was found to have a small amount of thick mucoid fluid around the anus, and significant inflammation of the perianal skin with radial excoriations involving the anal verge and extending 4 cm in radius. He also had nonblanching induration of the skin of his right leg below the knee and desquamation of his right hand.
A punch biopsy was obtained at the intersection between the normal skin and the perianal rash during this initial visit. He was prescribed 1% zinc oxide cream to apply to the perianal skin for symptomatic management of pruritus three times daily. Pathology showed atypical plasmacytoid appearing cells in the deep dermis layer with mild-to-moderate nuclear atypia, mixed with a benign-appearing lymphoplasmacytic population with occasional eosinophils. The atypical cells were positive for S-100, CD1a, CD68, and Langerin, with a Ki-67 index of 50% . These cells were negative for BRAF V600E mutations, CD3, CD20, carcinoma, and melanoma markers. Based on these results, he was diagnosed with a Langerhans cell neoplasm.
Three weeks later, the patient reported reduced pain and itching in his right lower extremity (RLE) and perianal area after using the topical zinc oxide cream. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan was also ordered to evaluate for any metastatic disease and failed to show any disease spread. Given the extent of disease that involved the anal margin, the patient would not have been a candidate for local excision as this would cause an anal stricture. The only surgical option would have been an abdominoperineal resection, committing the patient to a permanent end colostomy.
Given the localized nature of the disease, the patient was evaluated by an oncologist, who recommended local therapy with imiquimod. Of note, the patient lives in a medically underserved area, which presented specific challenges that have altered the patient’s care. This included delays in seeking and obtaining care as well as having limited resources available to facilitate surgical and medical care. Unfortunately, despite many attempts to contact the patient and prescribe this treatment, he was not able to follow up.