A 48-year-old woman in early 2004 developed increasing abdominal girth associated with discomfort and pain. A CT scan was performed and a right pelvic mass was visualized. In April 2004, she underwent a debulking procedure which included a right hemicolectomy and omentectomy. Her pathology showed a high grade mucinous epithelial malignancy of the appendix with peritoneal metastases. Because of the extent of disease the patient was referred to the Washington Cancer Institute. In November 2004 she had a 12-hour cytoreductive procedure with hyperthermic (41.5°C) intraoperative intraperitoneal mitomycin C. Early postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy with 5-fluorouracil was also used. An end ileostomy was created at the time of her procedure to protect a low colorectal anastomosis and reversed in 2005.
At the time of this operation at our institution, the mid-portions of both right and left hemidiaphragms were resected because of cancer invasion. Visual inspection through the open hemidiaphragm of the pleural space on the left side was clear and remained clear by CT scan. On the right side there were approximately 50 mucinous tumor nodules visualized within the pleural space which were positive by histology for mucinous adenocarcinoma. The patient remained asymptomatic.
In March 2006 chest CT showed obvious progression of disease in the right pleural space . She had a right thoracotomy with complete stripping of the parietal pleura, partial removal of the visceral pleura and hyperthermic (41.5°) intrapleural chemotherapy with doxorubicin and mitomycin C plus intravenous 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin for 90 minutes. Postoperatively, the patient had an air leak requiring prolonged chest tube drainage. Pathology reported the findings as adenomucinosis .
In April 2006 she began to develop progressive dyspnea at rest and increased with exertion. She was unable to take a deep breath without coughing. Her first postoperative CT scan in August 2006 showed minimal visceral cortical scarring on the right with a vague peripheral right mid-lung field opacity.
A CT-guided core needle biopsy of the right upper lobe was performed in April 2007 which demonstrated benign densely fibrotic pulmonary parenchyma with chronic inflammation and entrapped alveolar spaces without evidence of malignancy. The patient was placed on daily prednisone with improvement of her respiratory symptoms. The symptoms remained steroid-dependent with exacerbation on attempted steroid reduction.
In early 2008 the patient was functionally performing the normal activities of daily living but had limited respiratory reserve. A persistent cough was present without associated sputum production or fever. A chest radiograph showed contraction and fibrosis of the right upper lobe . A CT scan demonstrated a persistent interstitial fibrosis without evidence of progression . Abdominal CT showed a 1.9 cm × 2.6 cm mass anterior to the superior mesenteric vein associated with an increased CA 19-9 level compatible with progressive intraabdominal disease causing gastric outlet obstruction. No recurrence of disease in the right pleural space was seen. The patient died 28 months after the pleurectomy with progressive fibrosis and infection of the right lung causing sepsis unresponsive to intensive systemic antibiotics. Intestinal obstruction had caused severe nutritional deprivation.