A 66-year-old woman presented to our hospital complaining of whole-body edema and general malaise.
The patient’s symptoms started 6 mo prior, with recurrent episodes of epigastric discomfort after meals. These symptoms gradually improved spontaneously.
The patient had a medical history free of illness.
The patient had no family history of familial adenomatous polyposis.
Physical examination revealed pallor but no tenderness or palpable tumor in the abdomen.
Blood analysis showed severe microcytic anemia (hemoglobin level 3.6 g/dL) and cholestasis. The type of anemia was iron deficiency, as revealed by a serum iron level of 5.0 μg/dL (normal range: 45-170 μg/dL) and a serum ferritin level of 0 ng/mL (normal: 5-152 ng/mL). In addition, the patient had a serum gamma-glutamyltran-speptidase level of 187 IU/L (normal: 5-30 IU/L) and a serum alkaline phosphatase level of 851 IU/L (normal: 100-300 IU/L), though her serum total bilirubin level was normal. Amylase was also not elevated. Although these factors did not lead to jaundice, the cholestasis gradually worsened until surgery (serum gamma-glutamyl-transpeptidase level 614 IU/L, serum alkaline phosphatase level 3515 IU/L).
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) on admission demonstrated a 4.5 cm tumor at the proximal jejunum. The whole structures surrounding the ampulla, including the common bile duct (CBD) and the major pancreatic duct, deviated in the left-lower direction. Intussusception was not identified . Furthermore, drip infusion cholecystocholangiography-CT showed dilatation of the CBD-intrahepatic bile duct and marked left-lower deviation of the CBD and ampulla . The tumor was further evaluated by endoscopy, revealing a pedunculate papillary polyp with minor bleeding located on the second part of the duodenum that migrated distally with mucosal elongation . Biopsy material from the tumor indicated an adenoma without malignancy. Because the ampulla was not identified by endoscopy, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography was not performed.
Because of the progression of cholestasis, we conducted follow-up CT of the abdo-men 3 d after admission, and the scan revealed duodenal intussusception . A tumor as the lead point and retroperitoneal structure, including the head of the pancreas and fat, was observed to invaginate beyond the duodenojejunal flexure to the jejunum. The target sign appeared when the CT beam was perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of the intussusception. The whole structures surrounding the ampulla were further deviated toward the left-lower direction. Ischemia of the bowel was not observed.