A 60-year-old man presented with a 2-month history of cognitive impairment. He had hypertension and a history of early gastric cancer surgery 10 years previously. There were no abnormal radiological findings on abdominopelvic or chest computed tomography (CT). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large contrast-enhancing (67×48×60 mm) lesion in the left temporal lobe, invading the transverse and sigmoid venous sinuses .
Suspecting glioma, a craniotomy and gross total tumor resection were performed. At surgery, an infiltrating mass was found invading the dura mater, including a sinus wall component. The pathologic diagnosis was isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH)-wildtype glioblastoma with O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation. Tumor cell invasion of the dura was confirmed histopathologically . The patient underwent concurrent chemoradiation therapy (60 Gy) and three cycles of adjuvant TMZ. Unfortunately, two remote meningeal enhancing lesions in the left frontal and parietal convexity were found on follow-up MRI 5 months after surgery and the patient was treated with metronomic TMZ plus radiation therapy (RT, 50 Gy). Since there was no overlap of the radiation fields compared to the initial RT plan, there was little possibility of radiation necrosis . At that time, the patient had intermittent right shoulder and back pain. Chest and shoulder x-rays were performed, but there were no specific radiologic findings.
Due to progressive shoulder and back pain, systemic evaluations including spine MRI, positon emission tomography (PET)-CT, and chest and abdomen CT were done 9 months after surgery and revealed widespread metastases to the chest & cervical lymph nodes and multiple bones, including the vertebrae, scapula, and pelvis . The largest vertebral lesion was biopsied and diagnosed as metastatic glioblastoma as evidenced by glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunopositivity . Despite spine RT (24 Gy), the patients became paraplegic, was admitted to palliative care, and died 1 year after surgery.