Our patient is a 73-year-old Caucasian female with medical history of hypertension and type 2 diabetes. She had been treated for invasive ductal breast cancer 7 years ago with lumpectomy of the left breast and axillary lymph node dissection. Radiation therapy and seven cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy were administered to her postoperatively, and Anastrozole was prescribed to her for 5 years. She underwent regular annual follow-up for 5 years with chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scanning with no signs of recurrence or metastatic disease. Seven years after the initial treatment for breast cancer, abdominal CT revealed a solid hepatic lesion at segments VI and VII measuring 7 cm in diameter as well as a 1 cm calcified lesion at the tail of the pancreas (, left). Tumor markers AFP, CA 15–3, CA 19–9, and CEA were all within normal limits and the patient did not have any symptoms or signs of abdominal mass apart from mild tenderness on palpation of the right subcostal region. Moreover, biochemical markers of liver and pancreatic function were normal.
Subsequently the patient went through oncologic consultation, and both lesions were considered to be resectable, although controversy arose whether they were metastatic or second primary malignancies. CT-guided percutaneous biopsies or laparoscopic biopsies were proposed as minimal invasive methods of diagnosis. The patient rejected both of them due to the risk for possible complications and cancer spillage and decided to undergo laparotomy, open rapid biopsy, and excision of the lesions in one procedure. After accessing the peritoneal cavity through an extended right subcostal incision, we performed hepatic mobilization and exposure of the right hepatic lobe. A solid mass was recognized at hepatic segments VI and VII and rapid biopsy was taken which showed primary HCC. Moreover, after entering the lesser sac, a second rapid biopsy was taken from the lesion at the pancreatic tail which showed chronic fibrosis without elements of malignancy . We decided to perform resection of hepatic segments VI and VII since intraoperative hepatic ultrasound also confirmed that the mass was resectable with safe oncologic margins. Hepatic segmentectomy was achieved using a microwave tissue coagulator to mark and coagulate the margins of hepatectomy and ultrasound harmonic scalpel to transect the hepatic parenchyma with a minimal blood loss of 40 cc . Moreover, argon beam coagulator and fibrin glue were used to seal the raw liver surface and prophylactic cholecystectomy was also performed. Finally, the pancreatic lesion was left intact since malignancy was not confirmed with rapid biopsy.
Pathology report described a hepatic mass with maximum diameter of 6.5 cm which consisted of malignant cells with mild to severe atypia and low to medium mitotic rate. Immunohistochemistry showed that cancer cells highly expressed keratins 8/18, Hep-Par 1 and AFP and did not express keratin 7 and GATA-3 . Endothelial cells within the mass were positive for CD 34. The gallbladder along with the cystic lymph node was normal. The final diagnosis was low-grade HCC with liver margins widely free from malignant infiltration.–
The postoperative course of the patient was uneventful. The subdiaphragmatic and subhepatic drains were removed on the third postoperative day without signs of hemorrhage or bile leakage and the patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. Follow-up abdominal CT scanning on the first and sixth month after the operation showed subcapsular hepatic fluid collection without recurrence of the HCC (, right). The patient remains disease free 2 years after the hepatic segmentectomy without any adjuvant therapy.
Written informed consent obtained from the patient is for publication of the case details and any accompanying images.