A 39-yr-old virgin female gynecologist presented at Hazrat-e Rasoul Hospital, (Tehran, Iran) in December 2020 with a localized pain in the right inguinal area. The pain had started four yr previously and at this point was very tender, especially during the first to fifth days of her menstrual cycle. The participant had no specific medical or abdominal surgery history. She did not have any family history of endometriosis or hernia; she had regular menstruation at 26-day intervals without any abnormal uterine bleeding. Her menstruation period was 3-4 days. Physical examination four yr previously showed a tender mass measuring approximately 11 cm located on the right, superior to the pubic tubercle. The size of the mass was larger after four yr (31 cm). The position of the mass remained unchanged and was not related to cough or force.
An ultrasound had been performed four yr before in Tabriz, Azerbaijan, which showed a small inguinal hernia on the right. After four yr, a transabdominal ultrasound was repeated by two expert radiologists and they reported a uterus volume of 364273 mm3 with a normal myometrium; endometrial thickness of 3 mm; and a right ovary of 7 cc and left ovary of 5 cc. The two adnexa were normal. According to an ultrasound of the inguinal canal, there was one hypoechogenic mass with a size of 3014 mm in the right inguinal; a color Doppler showed minimal vascularity and so an inguinal hernia was ruled out . The following tumor markers were measured: cancer antigen 125: 33.3 u/ml, cancer antigen 19-9: 12.3 u/ml, and human epididymis protein 4: 63.9 u/ml. The risk of ovarian malignancy algorithm index was 13.2. Transvaginal ultrasonography was not performed because of her virginity. After providing informed consent, the participant opted for surgical excision of the inguinal mass by laparoscopy . The inguinal mass was excised by an expert laparoscopist and the diagnosis of endometriosis was established through the final pathology after surgery. The participant was well and has not had any pain during her menstrual cycle since the surgery. The most important reason for reporting this case was that the individual did not have a history of abdominal surgery and was misdiagnosed for four yr .
Written consent was obtained from the participant for reporting the case.