A 65-year-old man visited the emergency department with sudden onset of abdominal pain that started about 12 h before. He also presented watery diarrhea. He had an 8-year history of follicular lymphoma, and he had undergone various chemotherapy treatments. There had been no sign of recurrence for 8 months owing to response to the chemotherapy. Four months before his current episode, he was diagnosed as treatment-related myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and he was prepared for allogenic hematopoietic stem cell transplant. His baseline neutrophil count was 50–200/μL. He was administered oral prednisolone (30 mg/day) for 2 months.
On arrival, his vital signs were febrile (body temperature = 38.5 °C) with tachycardia (heart rate = 132 beats per minute). His blood pressure was 108/83 mmHg and respiratory rate was 31 per minute. Upon physical examination, the patient’s abdomen was flat and hard, and moderate tenderness in the middle right abdominal quadrants was noted. Laboratory examinations revealed white blood cell count of 380/μL, neutrophil count of 250/μL, C-reactive protein level of 24.4 mg/dL, and lactate level of 2.6 mmol/L. Plain abdominal computed tomography showed abdominal free air with a small amount of effusion to the surrounding edematous small intestine, but there were no signs of bowel ischemia such as pneumatosis intestinalis or portal venous gas. Based on these findings, we excluded ischemic disease of bowel including non-occlusive mesenteric ischemia or mesenteric arterial thrombosis. The preoperative diagnosis was panperitonitis due to small bowel perforation, and we decided to perform emergency exploratory laparotomy .
During operation, we found multiple bowel perforations (20-cm, 50-cm, 70-cm, 80-cm, 270-cm, 350-cm, and 360-cm perforations of the jejunum, ileum from the duodenojejunal flexure, ascending colon, and transverse colon near the hepatic flexure) with patchy necrotic lesions. There were no signs of bowel ischemia. We performed small bowel resection and right hemicolectomy including all of the lesions. The postoperative diagnosis was panperitonitis due to multiple bowel perforations.
The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit with respiratory support because he presented fever and hypotension, which suggested septic shock. He also presented watery diarrhea postoperatively. The two sets of blood culture collected on the day of operation showed Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Both urine culture and ascites culture were negative for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. No other bacterial culture was collected preoperatively. The patient fasted and we started intravenous antibiotics (tazobactam/piperacillin 13.5 g/day) and intravenous prednisolone (30 mg every other day). On the 4th postoperative day, his general condition got better, and the patient was extubated. On the 7th postoperative day, the patient started oral ingestion.
On the 8th postoperative day, the patient complained of right lateral abdominal pain with sudden onset. He was febrile and the abdominal drain tube showed turbid drainage. The diagnosis of postoperative anastomotic leakage was made, and we performed emergency exploration again. During the re-operation, we found anastomotic leakage with two bowel perforations in the remaining ileum and descending colon. We performed small bowel resection and left hemicolectomy with ileostomy and colostomy. After re-operation, the patient showed signs of septic shock and his general condition got worse. On the 12th postoperative day, the patient died due to multiple organ failure.
The pathological examination of the resected intestine showed multiple ulcer and perforation with proliferation of rod-shaped bacilli. Though it suggested the proliferation of Pseudomonas aeruginosa, we could not identify the species.