This is a case report of a 3 year old female child presented with chief complaints of swelling in the right side of neck for around 1 ½ years in ENT OPD of Universal College of Medical Sciences, Bhairahawa, Lumbini zone. The onset was insidious and gradually progressive, painless and without aggravating and relieving factors. On examination, there was a 8 X 6 cm, ovoid, nontender, soft swelling, nonpulsatile, mobile in all directions, not fixed to overlying skin, smooth surface and prominent superficial neck veins and the transillumination test was positive. The swelling was extending superiorly at level of right angle of mandible, inferiorly 2 cm below the suprasternal notch, laterally 1 cm behind the posterior border of right sternocleidomastoid muscle and medially in the midline of neck .
The oral cavity, oropharynx and larynx examination were unremarkable. Hence, a provisional diagnosis of neck haemangioma/arteriovenous malformation was made. Ultrasonography with 9 MHz probe showed a large globular swelling nearly 10X8 cm filling right half of neck, multiple circumscribed primarily anechoic structures with appreciable fine internal echoes size varying from 0.87 to 3.67 cm, well marginated and the loculations are separated by thick intervening septa containing various sized vessels. Doppler couldn’t show flow in the swelling but the intervening tissue show larger blood vessels. Feeding vessel was not found and the whole large swelling was placed over the carotid sheath. FNAC showed only polymorphs, lymphocytes and macrophages in a background of RBCs suggestive of vascular lesion (Haemangioma). It was negative for malignancy. Plain and contrast enhanced CT was suggestive of high flow vascular malformation . MRI was suggestive of high flow vascular malformation or neoplastic mass having high vascularity in it .
CT neck angiography was also suggestive of vascular malformation- giant haemangioma or arteriovenous malformation (AVM) .
She underwent excision of the mass under general anaesthesia. Preoperative endovascular embolisation would have been better anticipating the blood loss during surgery but it’s not available locally. Hence, we solely depended upon the ligatures and electrocautery. Intraoperatively, the mass was adhered to sternocleidomastoid muscle extending upto hyoid bone level superiorly and extended inferiorly upto the supraclavicular fossa, feeding vessels from right subclavian, external carotid, common carotid artery, thyrocervical trunk were ligated and also the draining vessels towards internal jugular vein were also ligated and the entire mass was removed in toto . Haemostasis was secured and closed with Romovac drain number 10 .
Postoperatively she was free of complications and also at her subsequent follow ups . Histopathology showed capsulated structure comprising of tumour cells arranged predominantly in solid sheets and nodules interrupted by variable sized vessels; many of which show staghorn like appearance. Few of the areas showed tumour cells arranged in nests and cords. Individual tumour cells revealed round to oval nuclei, bland dispersed nuclear chromatin, discernible nucleoli and moderate amount of cytoplasm. At the periphery of the sheets and nodules, many cells were spindled with elongated nuclei and bipolar eosinophilic cytoplasm resembling smooth muscle differentiation blended into tumour cells. Areas of necrosis were also evident. However, no overt atypia/atypical mitosis evident . It was suggestive of perivascular tumour; glomangiomyoma with haemangiopericytoma like features.