A 20-year-old white woman, para 1 + 0, presented to our institution with a history of sudden onset of severe lower abdominal pain and nausea. The pain was described as constant, sharp, radiated to her back, and associated with episodes of vomiting after a few hours. Similar episodes of pain were experienced in the previous few months and diagnosed as a case of bilateral dermoid in another hospital but the case was not documented. These episodes of pain were, however, shorter in duration and resolved spontaneously. She was otherwise well and there were no other associated gastrointestinal or genitourinary symptoms. She had no previous history of any illnesses or allergies. She denied the use of any medications. She had one pregnancy, usual course, and delivered normal spontaneous vaginal delivery. There was no family history of malignancies. There was no significant family or psychosocial history. Her menarche commenced at the age of 11 years with subsequent regular cycles.
On physical examination, she was alert, in mild distress, and her vital signs were within normal limits. An abdominal examination showed lower abdominal tenderness, with muscle guarding to palpation but there was no distension. Intestinal sounds were normal. An external genital examination was normal. A pelvic examination revealed bilateral adnexal tenderness on vaginal touch. Her full blood counts, serum biochemistry, and tumor marker were within the normal ranges. Urine analysis and pregnancy test were negative.
An ultrasound examination was performed bedside demonstrating bilateral ovarian cystic masses, on the left side around 14 × 11 cm and right side 8 × 6 cm with negative Doppler flow in the ovarian tissue with evidence of solid components. On the basis of these findings, ovarian torsion caused by adnexal mass was the likely diagnosis. Our patient was counselled and signed informed consent for laparoscopic ovarian detorsion, cystectomy, possible oophorectomy, and laparotomy if needed.
Intraoperative findings confirmed a bilateral ovarian torsion that was the same size as that found by ultrasound. Our patient’s left ovary looked necrotic and was found to be twisted twice over. Detorsion of both ovaries were performed but the necrotic appearance of her left ovary did not improve and bleeding was observed from the necrotic ovary but her right ovary improved in color . The decision was made by the surgical team to perform a left-sided salpingo-oophorectomy and right cystectomy. There were no major intraoperative complications. The pain resolved completely after surgery and the final pathologic diagnosis was mature ovarian teratoma (dermoid). She was discharged on the second postoperative day and advised to follow up after 4 weeks. Her postoperative period was uneventful. She recovered completely from her surgery and has gone back to her normal daily activity.