The patient is a 73-year-old man who complained of sudden incomprehensible speech and the inability to move his left limb for 2 h. He suffered paroxysmal atrial fibrillation but never used anticoagulants. Neurological examination of the patient indicated motor aphasia, left central facial paralysis, grade 1 left limb muscle strength, a positive pathological sign of the left, and shallow sensory loss of the left limb. The initial National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 15. Brain computed tomography (CT) showed a high density sign of the right MCA . Alberta stroke program early CT score (ASPECTS) was 2. Head and neck computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed embolisms in the right M1 MCA , and electrocardiographic findings were normal. At 109 min after onset, the patient was given IVT with alteplase at a dose of 0.9 mg / kg. We urgently reviewed the brain CT to exclude off secondary cerebral bleeding after the patient became unconscious during IVT with a Glasgow coma score of 5.
MT was performed 205 min after onset. An 8F sheath was inserted into the right femoral artery of the patient, and cerebral angiography showed bilateral occlusion of the MCA in the M1 segment . A 5F 125-cm Navien (EV3, Irvine, USA) was placed at the end of the right internal carotid artery with a 90 cm Max Neuron (Penumbra, Alameda, USA) sheath. Through the Navien catheter, a Synchro2 microguide (Stryker, Fremont, USA) and Rebar-18 microguide (EV3, Irvine, USA) were carefully placed in the M3 segment of the right MCA through the M1 occlusion segment of the right MCA. Subsequently, angiography confirmed the occlusion in the true lumen. Solitaire FR (6 mm × 30 mm) (EV3, California, USA) was placed in the occluded segment and the right MCA was unobstructed. After 10 min of observation, the stent was removed and Navien catheter aspiration was performed. A large amount of thrombosis was removed. Angiography showed that the blood flow of the main branch of the right MCA was not obstructed with mTici grade 3 . The same method was then used to remove left MCA M1 thrombosis. Angiography showed recanalization of the trunk and branches of the left MCA with mTici grade 3 .
On the second day after the operation, the patient regained consciousness and was accompanied by motor aphasia. His right limb muscle strength was level 5, and his left limb muscle strength was level 2 with sensory loss of the left limb. Brain CT showed a small amount of bleeding in the right basal ganglia . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a new cerebral infarction in the bilateral basal ganglia and bilateral cortex . Pathological examination of bilateral thrombosis showed mixed thrombosis . The patient has been followed up at the local hospital postoperatively and his mRS score was 2 at our 90-day telephone follow-up.