A 23-year-old male professional hockey player suffered a fall on ice during a game, which resulted in a flexion-external rotation injury to his left lower extremity. At the time, he felt a pop and developed immediate onset of the left knee pain. Plain films and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed anterior dislocation of the proximal tibiofibular joint . The patient had subsequent spontaneous reduction while entering a car the following day. 3 days after injury, the patient had persistent the left knee pain and difficulty with the range of motion to terminal flexion and extension and presented to clinic. At presentation, the patient was unable to comfortably bear weight on the extremity. On examination, he had tenderness to palpation at the fibular head but no tenderness over the ankle. His left knee had a range of motion comfortably from 10 to 90° and full strength in all muscle groups, as well as intact sensation in all nerve distributions in the lower extremity. Initially, the patient elected for nonoperative treatment and was advised to remain non- weight- bearing for 1week followed by a repeat MRI. This study revealed a small amount of lateral subluxation of the left fibular head. At this point, the patient had persistent pain and difficulty with extension, and so elected to undergo surgical treatment. 12 days after injury, the patient underwent ORIF of the proximal tibiofibular joint. The joint was noted to be resting in a laterally subluxed position. It was manually reducible but unstable . A single 3.5 mm cortical lag screw was inserted from the fibula to the tibia parallel to the knee joint, after which the joint remained anatomically reduced. Postoperatively, the patient remained non-weight-bearing with passive range of motion limitations for 4 weeks, after which weight-bearing and active range of motion were allowed. At 8 weeks, his physical examination included minimal edema about the head of the fibula; active range of motion from 0° to 135° without pain and equal to the contralatera l side; and no instability or pain with stress applied to the syndesmosis. He resumed hockey practice after 8 weeks and resumed competition 3 months following the injury. At 5½ months, the patient had minimal leg pain only with push off and the screw was removed to allow for return of physiologic motion .