A 34-year-old woman of South Asian descent with a past medical history of obesity [body mass index (BMI) 41.6], polycystic ovarian syndrome, psoriasis, horseshoe kidney with uric acid kidney stones, and hypothyroidism, was diagnosed at age 3 with GSD-Ia. As an infant she had hypoglycemic episodes resulting in seizures. A liver biopsy showed decreased G6PC enzymatic activity of 0.45 μmol/min/g tissue (N 3.50 ± 0.8 μmol/min/g tissue) with increased glycogen content. Gene analysis revealed a mutation of the G6PC gene homozygous for 50delGT, thus confirming the diagnosis of GSD-Ia.
Initially, our patient was managed with frequent feedings and by the age of 9, a night-time cornstarch regimen was initiated to prevent hypoglycemia. She had expected complications of the disease, including uric acid kidney stones, lactic acidosis, hepatic adenomas with hepatomegaly, and diffuse steatosis.
At the age 31 years, our patient became pregnant and did not undergo routine gestational diabetes screening due to her underlying GSD. Three days prior to delivery, she was incidentally noted to be hyperglycemic for the first time, with a blood glucose more than 300 mg/dL (N 70–140 mg/dL). The elevated glucose was attributed to gestational diabetes for which she was started on insulin. Treatment was complicated by severe hypoglycemia with a blood glucose of 32 mg/dL, and she subsequently refused all forms of insulin.
Thereafter, our patient was lost to follow-up for 2 years. At the age of 33 years, she sought care when she had continued hyperglycemia and a hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) of 13% (N 4.3–6.0%). On social history, our patient was working at an office job; she denied any toxic habits including smoking or alcohol use. There was no family history of consanguinity nor birth defects; her young child was healthy. She had a maternal grandmother with diabetes, and her mother had prediabetes. On examination, our patient had a BMI of 41.6, short stature, and generalized obesity. Her heart and lung examinations were unremarkable; she had an obese abdomen with hepatomegaly. A skin examination was notable for acanthosis nigricans, with scattered psoriatic patches. Neurologically, she was alert and appropriate, and her examination was non-focal. Laboratory tests were significant for elevated triglycerides of 960 mg/dL, with microalbuminuria, and otherwise normal liver function tests. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her abdomen showed multiple liver adenomas with diffuse steatosis. Further investigation of her diabetes showed an insulin level of 32 μIU/mL (n 1.9–23 μIU/mL), and a high c-peptide of 5.2 ng/mL (N 0.8–3.1 Ng/mL), with a fasting blood glucose of 311 mg/dL (N 70–140 mg/dL). A homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance (HOMA IR) calculation to determine insulin resistance was calculated as 24.6 (N <2.5), thus indicating severe insulin resistance . Despite the diagnosis of diabetes, our patient continued her regimen of 5 tablespoons (tbsp) of uncooked cornstarch at night to prevent hypoglycemia from her underlying GSD.
With initial lifestyle modifications, including a lower carbohydrate diet, exercise, and attempting weight loss, our patient’s HgA1c improved from 13% to 11.9%. It was clear medication initiation was needed, however this was a challenge due to the patient’s underlying chronic liver disease, lactic acidosis, and refusal of insulin. Due to liver dysfunction, a sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) inhibitor, a renally cleared medication, was trialed first. Our patient was treated with canagliflozin, with uptitration of the dosage to 300 mg daily. She concomitantly decreased her bedtime cooked cornstarch from 5 tbsp to 3 tbsp. With these interventions, after a few months, her HgA1c improved from 11.9 to 9% without episodes of hypoglycemia but notable elevation in lactate levels from 3.2 to 5.6 mmol/L (N 0.6–2.5 mmol/L).
For more effective glycemic control, an alpha glucosidase inhibitor was added. A dose of acarbose 50 mg was started three times a day with meals. A continuous glucometer monitoring system (CGMS) 1 week after starting acarbose showed downtrending night-time blood glucose with an episode of hypoglycemia in the morning (see Fig. ). Omission of acarbose at dinner-time effectively eliminated fasting hypoglycemia. Overall, it took approximately 1 year to control her blood glucose, and at the age of 34 years, her diabetes was at goal, at which point our patient was concomitantly able to lose 11 lbs. A combination of canagliflozin, acarbose, and weight loss decreased her starting HgA1c from 13 to 6.5%. HOMA IR was reduced from 24.6 to 1.9, indicating significant improvement in insulin sensitivity.