The patient was a 17-year-old Iranian girl with OPPG born of a consanguineous marriage with no history of OPPG in parents. The patient was born as full-term by cesarean section, and she was the second child of the family. Her birth weight, height, and head circumference were 3.1 kg, 52 cm, and 35 cm, respectively. Soon after birth, the parents noticed her visual impairment. The ophthalmologist identified high intra-ocular pressure, bilateral microphthalmia with corneal opacities, congenital phthisis bulbi, and retinal detachments.
At the age of two years and during occupational therapy due to developmental delay, she experienced a fracture in her right femur. One year later, another fracture occurred on her wrist as she fell off a bike. After examination, she was diagnosed with OPPG and treatment with pamidronate was initiated with 1 mg/kg daily infusions for three days every three months up to age 11 years and six months. Despite several years of treatment with pamidronate, she had multiple bone fractures. During treatment with pamidronate, BMD was assessed twice (eight years and three months, ten years and six months), the results of which are shown in . The BMD was performed by absorptiometry method (DEXA) and HOLOGIC machine (model: discovery W S/N 83407).
The patient had multiple tibial fractures without any obvious trauma in earlier years of life. The fractures were fixed using internal fixators, but the patient was bedridden, and further hip fractures happened despite several years of bisphosphonate therapy . The patient had autism and was unable to communicate or attend school. At age 11 and during treatment with pamidronate, while both upper limbs were in plaster due to previous fractures, the patient fell over again while using toilet and got multiple fractures in femur and pelvic bones. At this time, liver, kidney, and thyroid function tests, calcium, phosphorus, and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels were normal, and only vitamin D levels were below normal (15 ng/mL; normal range > 30 ng/mL).
Due to the patient's poor physical condition, disability, a lack of response to conventional pamidronate therapy (as mentioned above), and given the patient's critical condition, a course of treatment with teriparatide was initiated at the age of 11 years and nine months; however, her epiphyseal plate was not closed. We had no other options but to start teriparatide while informing the mother and receiving a consent letter. Due to the openness of the growth plates, we prescribed a short period of teriparatide to prevent possible side effects.
The patient received teriparatide (Forteo, Eli Lilly, Indianapolis, IN, USA) 20 µg daily (the same standard dose in adults) by subcutaneous injection during a four-month period sequentially. The patient was receiving 500 mg oral calcium and vitamin D 1000 IU concurrently, followed by 35 mg oral alendronate once a week. The results of the BMD showed significant improvement, and she became ambulant. One year after treatment with teriparatide, fractures were completely healed, and the patient was able to walk independently. One year after teriparatide treatment, BMD increased by 33.5% in the lumbar region and 70.7% in the femoral region . Routine test outcomes, electrolytes, lipids, and vitamin D levels were normal during and after treatment with teriparatide, and no side effects have been observed so far. One year after receiving the last dose of teriparatide, the treatment with oral alendronate (35 mg) weekly began, which is still ongoing. Since then, she has not had a broken bone.
The results of bone densitometry measurements before and after treatment are presented in . Current weight and height are 54 kg and 134 cm. Menarche was at age 12 years and it was regular thereafter. The height of the mother was 167 cm, and the father’s height was reported 174 cm by the mother.
His older brother also had OPPG. He was blind and had severe osteoporosis, but by the age of 26 he had no bone fractures. Genetic testing was performed for the patient and her mother, and a novel homozygous nonsense mutation (c.351G>A) in exon 2 of the LRP5 gene was reported.