A 57-year-old man presented to the emergency room with sudden onset of severe epigastric pain with nausea and vomiting for less than one day.
The patient’s initial symptoms consisted of sudden onset of severe epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting. His consciousness was unaffected. The pain did not radiate along his back and was without paroxysmal exacerbation. He denied chill, fever, cough, and expectoration.
He had no history of essential hypertension, diabetes mellitus, or relevant cerebrovascular disease. There was no previous history of gastrointestinal disease or biliary system symptoms. He had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption.
His temperature, blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate were all normal on admission. There was mild upper abdominal tenderness, rebound tenderness, and no apparent muscle tension in physical examination.
After admission, the patient completed a series of laboratory examinations. Blood tests revealed the following inflammation markers: White blood cell count, 26.71 × 109/L (4-10 × 109/L)(94.9% neutrophils); C-reactive protein, 35.5 mg/L (0-10 mg/L); hemoglobin, 152.0 g/L; platelet count, 433 × 109/L; glutamic-pyruvic transaminase, 15 µ/L; glutamic-oxalacetic transaminase, 13 µ/L; alkaline phosphatase, 121 µ/L; urea, 8.48 mmol/L; and creatinine, 127.0 µmol/L. The representative diagnostic markers of pancreatitis were as follows: serum amylase 1091 µ/L; serum sodium, 152.2 mmol/L; serum potassium, 4.01 mmol/L; serum calcium, 4.67 mmol/L; and serum PTH level, 95.8 pmol/L.
B-mode ultrasound showed mild fatty liver and no obvious gallbladder or pancreas abnormalities. Electronic gastroscopy revealed esophagitis, chronic superficial gastritis with bile reflux and duodenal bulb inflammation. Electrocardiography and contrast echocardiography showed no special heart symptoms. Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging of the abdomen revealed pancreatic tail contusion, exudative changes around the pancreas, and double kidney stones. Gallstones or correlative biliary system diseases were not observed .
In order to confirm the diagnosis, thyroid ultrasound was undertaken in this patient. It showed bilateral thyroid nodules on the right neck mass originating from the inferior thyroid gland or parathyroid .