A 78-year-old man had undergone a right radical nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma 14 years previously. The renal tumor measured 32 × 31 mm and was found in medium. The tumor was classified as grade 2 in the Fuhrman nuclear grading system (large clear granular cells). No capsular involvement was seen, and the ureter and hilar lymph nodes were tumor-free. Staging investigations, including a computed tomography (CT) scan, revealed no obvious metastasis. A bone scan was not carried out. The tumor was staged as T1, N0, and M0. He underwent a biannual medical examination and monitoring with regular CT scans. He remained well and asymptomatic until May 2010. When on surveillance CT scan, the patient was found to have a multiple enhancing lesion in the head (40 × 50 mm) body (35 × 42 mm) and tail (30 × 3 5 mm) of the pancreas. Due to his medical history of a right nephrectomy 16 years ago owing to renal cell carcinoma, a CT scan of the brain and the thorax was performed, which was negative for metastases. To asses diagnosis, a CT scan-guided biopsy was performed. Pancreatic biopsy showed neoplastic cells present singly and in loosely cohesive clusters. The cells were round to polygonal with clear cytoplasm. The nuclei were enlarged, round to oval. Mitotic index was low activity. Immunostaining was performed. The tumor cells were strongly positive for CD10 antibody, epithelial membrane antigen, and vimentin, which were consistent with metastatic renal cell carcinoma to pancreas . In view of metastatic RCC with multifocal disease in pancreas, surgery was not accepted by the patient. He was therefore referred for systemic treatments. We decided to start a watchful waiting, considering that the disease was asymptomatic with low mitotic index. Heng risk was favorable. On active surveillance (AS), we perform a contrast-enhanced CT scan of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis every 4 months. In February 2014, abdominal CT scan demonstrated an increase in the size of pancreatic lesions. Baseline cardiac evaluation was normal. So, the patient started medical treatment with sunitinib, 50 mg/day 6-week cycles of sunitinib, 4 weeks on and 2 weeks off. Evaluation of the tumor response was done according to response evaluation criteria in solid tumors by spiral CT scan, after three cycles of sunitinib observe a partial response (30 % reduction in size and 50 % density of pancreatic lesions) . Due to the onset of grade III skin and mucosal toxicity and gastrointestinal toxicity, adverse events were managed through supportive care and dose interruption. Sunitinib rechallenge dosing schema was changed to 37.5 mg/day 2/3 schedule for other cycles. The patient tolerated this alternative Sunitinib schedule fairly well, but did develop grade II hypothyroidism managed by l thyroxin supplementation, and restaging CT scan after three cycles of this regimen continued to show stable disease consistent with partial response per response evaluation criteria in solid tumor. He is presently on the 12th cycle of oral sunitinib and is doing well with clinically asymptomatic status. Nowadays, the patient is under oncological follow-up, he was in a good state of health, and disease-control under active surveillance was 48 and 20 months from the start of sunitinib treatment.