A 65-year-old woman was treated with radical left nephrectomy and lymph node dissection in 2018. The pathological diagnosis was clear cell renal carcinoma, grade 2, pT3a-pN0. The full-body CT showed no metastatic lesions at baseline (cM0).
After 3 months, the full-body CT showed progression in multiple lung and abdominal lymph nodes; she therefore started first-line systemic therapy with nivolumab and ipilimumab for 3 months, followed by nivolumab as maintenance therapy. Because of the progression of lung, wedge resection was performed for two pulmonary lesions in 2020 after multidisciplinary board decision.
In October 2021, brain MRI revealed two brain metastasis, one was in the right frontal lobe (3 mm) and the other in the left occipital lobe (18 mm), both associated with extensive brain edema . The patient was admitted to the hospital for headache and asthenia, limiting deambulation. Stereotactic radiotherapy was performed on both lesions. The frontal lesion was treated with 20 Gy/1 fraction on PTV (planning tumor volume) and 25 Gy on GTV (gross tumor volume), with respect to V12 Gy of brain including target < 5 cm3 and V14 Gy < 5 cm3; the occipital lesion was treated with 27 Gy/3 fractions on PTV and 33 Gy on GTV, with respect to V20 Gy of brain including target < 20 cm3 and V14 Gy < 20 cm3 ; nivolumab was reestablished soon after the tapering of corticosteroids. A 3-mm GTV–PTV margin was considered appropriate by physicians and physicists as voluminous edema and high-dose corticosteroids could dislocate the GTV, and because of setup accuracy when performing SRS with adapted LINAC. The specific prescription to GTV/PTV with respect to radiation necrosis constraints, as described, was done according to the institute’s clinical practice.
The 1-month (November 2021) and 3-month brain MRI (January 2022) showed reduction of the occipital lesion but increased contrast enhancement area of the frontal lesion associated with edema in T2-FLAIR (Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery) sequence: being symptomatic with headache and cognitive-motor slowing, mannitol and high-dose corticosteroids were administered in Day Hospital.
As for extracranial single-site disease progression, stereotactic radiotherapy was delivered to a pancreatic lesion (35 Gy/5 fractions on PTV) in February 2022, in addition to nivolumab.
In April 2022, the brain MRI revealed partial response of the occipital metastasis and suspected frontal radionecrosis (mismatch T2/T1, necrotic and bubble-like lesion in T1-contrast sequence) and no new lesions.
In July 2022, the brain MRI showed increased contrast enhancement of the central lesions, both suspected for brain radionecrosis. The case was discussed several times at the neurooncological multidisciplinary team: surgery was not suggested as it was neither considered safe (deep parenchymal lesions) nor advisable considering the clinical partial benefit obtained by corticosteroids. Therefore, pathological confirmation of the diagnosis was not possible to achieve. A radiological diagnosis of brain radiation necrosis was maintained considering the radiological and clinical evolution of the lesion during the 8-month follow-up period. A neuro-radiologist was always present at multidisciplinary team meetings for a qualified review of images (DWI, T2, T1 with contrast, FLAIR, STIR, ADC, and perfusion with CBV sequences).
In September 2022, abdomen and thoracic CT scan pointed out a renal and pulmonary disease progression and the patient started second-line therapy with cabozantinib.
After only 2 months from second-line systemic therapy, the brain MRI showed excellent reduction of the two areas of brain radionecrosis with a surprising shrinkage of the associated edema . The patient is still alive and is being treated with cabozantinib when this article is sent to publication.
The patient has given written consent to the publication of images and personal clinical data for this case report description.