A 49-year-old male with metastatic colon adenocarcinoma presented with several days of fever, nausea, vomiting, jaundice and hyperbilirubinemia. His past medical history includes right hemicolectomy, right adrenalectomy, partial right hepatectomy and hepatic arterial infusion pump (HAIP) placement 4 years ago. He had received systemic and hepatic arterial pump chemotherapy. Six months prior to this admission he underwent endoscopic placement of two metallic stents across the proximal duodenal obstruction and common bile duct (CBD) obstruction from infiltrative metastases. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed bilobar biliary ductal dilatation due to stent occlusion. Portal vein was patent. Endoscopic biliary drainage failed as the CBD stent could not be accessed due to the presence of duodenal stent. Percutaneous biliary drainage was requested. Informed consent was obtained for all interventions. Cholangiography confirmed obstruction of the CBD stent and an internal-external biliary drainage (IEBD) catheter was placed via a segment 3 duct . Needle access to segment 3 duct was performed under ultrasound guidance. The patient was readmitted 2 days following discharge due to chills, bacteremia, persistent hyperbilirubinemia, right upper quadrant pain, hematochezia, and bleeding inside and around the IEBD catheter. Culture results from the implantable port showed E. coli, other enteric bacteria, yeast and candida similar to bile and peripheral blood samples confirming biliary source of infection. Patient remained afebrile on antibiotics. Intermittent peri catheter bleeding, hemobilia and hematochezia persisted. Antegrade visceral angiography was performed on post-operative day 9. This showed complete obstruction of the common hepatic artery and recanalization of the left hepatic artery via small tortuous collaterals from the left gastric artery. No significant supply was seen from the superior mesenteric artery. The segment 3 branch of the left hepatic artery could not be separated from the biliary catheter on any oblique views confirming it as the source of hemobilia. Retrograde cannulation of the left hepatic artery via the collaterals was not possible . The IEBD catheter was upsized from 8.5F to 12F in attempt to tamponade the injured vessel. Peri catheter bleeding and hemobilia persisted and 5 days later, he underwent repeat hepatic angiography. The common hepatic arterial occlusion was crossed with a 2.4 French microcatheter and 0.018-in. hydrophilic guidewire coaxially. This demonstrated multi-level occlusion of the hepatic arterial branches. The left hepatic artery could not be cannulated antegradely or retrogradely .
The indwelling IEBD catheter was exchanged over wire with a 10 French vascular sheath. Sheath cholangiography showed opacification of the segment 3 hepatic artery. This artery was successfully accessed via the vascular sheath both distal and proximal to its communication with the bile duct using a 5 French directional catheter and hydrophilic guidewire. Both areas of the artery were successfully embolized using a total of ten 0.035-in. and three 0.018-in. metallic coils of different lengths and diameters. Final sheath cholangiography showed no flow in the embolized artery . The peri catheter hemorrhage and hemobilia resolved over the next 2 days. Secondary biliary stenting was performed successfully 6 weeks later. The patient remained asymptomatic and expired 2 months later due to progression of disease.