A 25-year-old unmarried Japanese man presented to our hospital with a mass in his left testis. He underwent orchiectomy of his right testis 5 years earlier, and histopathological diagnosis revealed immature teratoma of the testis. No salvage chemotherapy was performed. He discontinued follow up several years after the surgery on account of moving away. Five years after the orchiectomy, his residual left testis was noted to be slightly enlarged, and a nodule was palpable. The volume of normal testicular was not measurable due to replacement by the tumor. Ultrasonography revealed a mass with a heteroechoic pattern and 4-cm diameter . Laboratory blood tests revealed elevated alfa-fetoprotein (AFP, 484 ng/mL) and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG, 643.4 mIU/mL) levels. Computed tomography revealed a partially enhanced localized tumor in his left testis, without any distant metastasis or lymph node swelling . We diagnosed a testicular tumor in his residual left testis without distant metastasis, and a second orchiectomy was planned. Semen analyses were performed twice prior to surgery, and both test results indicated unobstructed azoospermia. No physical findings or complaints regarding varicocele were recognized. Because of the patient’s desire for future fertility, we opted for simultaneous orchiectomy and onco-TESE from the normal tissue of the resected testis. Immediately after the removal of the testis, we sampled the normal testicular tissue that was macroscopically divided from cancer tissue . Rapid microscopic observation of the normal testicular tissue revealed a few motile sperms, and the tissue was immediately cryopreserved after separation into 41 samples. The pathological diagnosis was a germ cell tumor comprising tumors of more than one histological type (pT1N0M0; embryonal carcinoma 50%, immature teratoma 30%, yolk sac tumor 10%, seminoma 5%, and choriocarcinoma 5%; Fig. ). The macroscopically normal testicular tissue obtained through TESE contained numerous seminiferous tubules, including Sertoli cells, spermatogonia, spermatocytes, and several early round spermatids but no late spermatid. The histological diagnosis was late maturation arrest (Johnsen score, 6; Fig. ). His serum testosterone, AFP, and hCG levels decreased to normal levels after surgery, and testosterone enathate (250 mg) was intramuscularly injected once per month. He received two cycles of BEP (bleomycin, etoposide, and cisplatin) and has had no recurrence to date. Three years after surgery, he was married and opted for ICSI using his preserved sperms. The cryopreserved testicular tissue was partially thawed at the time of use for multiple cycles of ICSI. In 6 of 14 ICSI cycles, morphologically normal and motile sperms were injected, and fertilized eggs developed into blastocysts. To date, conception has not yet been achieved. However, the 27 samples of testicular tissue remain, and the couple is willing to continue attempting conception with ICSI.