A 20-year-old woman with insignificant medical history was referred to our emergency department from another hospital for vomiting, fever, and impaired consciousness with a tentative diagnosis of bacterial meningitis. She had taken an over-the-counter antihistamine for pollinosis. Her vital signs on arrival were as follows: blood pressure 175/84 mmHg, heart rate 134 b.p.m., respiratory rate 28 breaths/min with an oxygen saturation of 96% on room air, and body temperature 38.0°C. Her Glasgow Coma Scale was 11 (E4V1M6), and we could not detect any significant neurological signs such as weakness of her limbs. Her pupils were bilaterally dilated to 5 mm. No nuchal rigidity or other meningeal signs were observed. Laboratory tests revealed glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase 30 IU/L, glutamic pyruvic transaminase 14 IU/L, C-reactive protein 0.43 mg/dL, white cell count 17,180/μL, (band cells 6.4%, segmented cells 89.4%, lymphocytes 2.2%, and monocytes 1.8%), and PCT over 10 ng/mL. Urine test, chest X-ray, computed tomography of the head, and cerebrospinal fluid test showed normal findings. We initially suspected systemic bacterial infection because of her fever and impaired consciousness, which is why we tested PCT. Although the cerebrospinal fluid test was normal, we cannot completely rule out bacterial infection due to the PCT elevation; therefore, we started treatment with empiric antimicrobials. Gradually, her level of consciousness improved; she confessed that she had taken 100 tablets of an ephedrine extract (Lipodrene, Hi-Tech Pharmaceuticals. Inc., Norcross, GA, USA), which contains caffeine (10 g), theophylline (amount unknown), yohimbine (amount unknown), and ephedrine (2.5 g), intending to commit suicide. We speculated that her low Glasgow Coma Scale on arrival was due to selective mutism because she had suicidal ideation and mood disorders. Her general condition stabilized, and blood tests showed no aggravation. Blood and cerebrospinal fluid culture results were negative on day 4. The PCT level decreased to 0.32 ng/mL on day 5, and she was discharged from hospital on the same day.