A 47-year-old male was referred to our centre following recurrent monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (MMVT) and device therapy.
The patient had no known comorbidities prior to 2015, when he underwent dual-chamber pacemaker implantation for sinus node disease at another centre. No family history of cardiac disease or sudden cardiac death was identified. Late gadolinium-enhanced cardiac MRI (LGE-CMR) was reported as normal at the time. The patient subsequently presented to our centre in the same year with fast symptomatic MMVT. Routine blood tests including electrolytes and thyroid function were normal. Troponin I levels were marginally elevated. Coronary angiography and echocardiography were normal. Drug provocation tests, including Ajmaline and Adrenaline challenges for inherited cardiac conditions, and exercise stress testing were all inconclusive. The patient’s pacemaker was explanted, and a secondary prevention ICD was implanted. He was discharged on Bisoprolol 5 mg once daily.
He subsequently presented with recurrent fast symptomatic MMVT (300 ms) in 2016, when the dose of Bisoprolol was maximized to 10 mg once daily. He re-presented with VT storm in 2017, during which the patient was loaded with intravenous Amiodarone and discharged on 200 mg once daily in addition to Bisoprolol.
The LGE-CMR scans in 2016 and 2017 at our centre were uninterpretable due to the ICD artefact. In the absence of a clear underlying diagnosis, an endocardial VT ablation was performed in 2018. No LV low-voltage regions were identified on bipolar voltage mapping, and VT was non-inducible; therefore, ablation was not performed.
In the absence of further VT, Amiodarone was stopped in 2019. However, the patient re-presented in March and April 2020 with VT and ICD shocks associated with significant anxiety and depression. Oral Amiodarone was recommenced, but symptomatic non-sustained VT persisted. A repeat LGE-CMR scan, using a different manufacturer and additional imaging techniques, proved successful at providing diagnostic images . The LV ejection fraction was calculated at 48%, with the basal to mid-lateral wall LV epicardial scar extending anteriorly and inferiorly, suggestive of prior myocarditis.
The patient underwent percutaneous epicardial VT ablation under general anaesthesia (GA). Despite a BMI of 31.6 and multiple attempts by two trained epicardial operators, percutaneous access was unsuccessful with the use of the standard length (110 mm) and longer length (120 mm) 16-gauge Tuohy needles. Anatomically, a steep rib-to-subxyphoid angle was observed, making epicardial reach challenging. On the final attempt, the needle just reached the epicardial space, as confirmed by contrast pericardiography. However, the wire would not pass freely in the pericardial space. No further attempts were made due to the suspected diagnosis of prior myocarditis and the possibility of pericardial adhesions.
Despite limitations posed by the COVID pandemic, the case was discussed within our multidisciplinary team including cardiac electrophysiologists, cardiac surgeons, anaesthesiologists, perfusionists, and allied health staff. The case was also discussed with the EP and cardiac surgical team at an external tertiary VT ablation centre.
Surgical hybrid ablation options using various minimally invasive surgical access routes were considered. However, the heart would require suspension from the apex for full and unrestricted access to the lateral inferobasal scar, close to the atrioventricular groove, for the delivery of safe and efficient ablation lesions . Two potential challenges were considered including the possibility of the presence of significant pericardial adhesions requiring resection and the high risk of arrhythmogenicity, posed by cardiac suspension, leading to haemodynamic instability. These risks would be best safely addressed by performing the procedure ‘on-pump’ during beating heart surgery, a view supported by the external, independent cardiac surgeon. Procedural risks included those routinely associated with sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass surgery including pain, <1% sternal wound infection, prolonged intensive care unit stay, renal failure, and bleeding. The risks, benefits, and potential challenges of minimally invasive vs. open-heart surgical access were discussed with the patient.
Risks were mitigated by close teamwork, precise surgical technique, meticulous haemostasis, and a formal pre-procedural risk assessment including EP lab sterility and air quality.