A 66-year-old male presented with the left cervical and submaxillary lymph node enlargement with size of 30 mm × 30 mm. The following lymph node biopsy was completed and the pathological evaluation showed reactive lymphoid hyperplasia characterized by vascular, atrophic germinal lesions with surrounding concentric “onion skin” layers of lymphocytes , defined as the hyaline vascular variant of CD. He denied weight loss, lymphadenopathy, tuberculosis, diabetes mellitus and hypertension. He gave no history of bone pain and drug abuse. The bone marrow (BM) cytology indicated no clonal plasma cell infiltration. Thereafter the patient was treated with irradiation dose of 30 Gy in 10 fractions with clinical response. The clinical evaluation remained stable in annual follow-up visits. In the 4th visit, the patient was diagnosed in an outside hospital with 2-diabetic mellitus on basis of increased blood glucose, C peptide release test and oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). The blood glucose was well-controlled by the hypoglycemic and diet therapy for three years when he presented to the previous hospital with progressive hand-foot numbness spreading from the proximal extremes to distal ends. The electromyography test confirmed the hampered nerve conduction velocity of bilateral ulnar, median and peroneal nerves. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biochemistry from lumbar puncture indicated the slightly elevated protein (1.1 g/L, normal, 0.1~ 0.4 g/L) with normal cell count. The blood monoclonal protein level and bone marrow cytology was normal. Based on the resultant diagnosis of chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP), the patient was treated with daily intravenous pulse methylprednisolone therapy of 1.0 g for three consecutive days. Due to the minor clinical response, the diabetic peripheral neuropathy was suspected with following insulin injection and oral mecobalamin therapy. However, the manifestation of hand-foot numbness remained constant. One and half years after the first sign of numbness, the muscular dystrophy of palms was noticed with finger fine hypoactivity. In the next 2 years, the patient was admitted to the previous hospital with the progressive muscular atrophy, numbness of hands and myasthenia of limbs along with interphalangeal deformity. The CSF test showed slightly elevated protein concentration (1.6 g/L) with normal pressure, cell count and the level of glucose and chloride. Other laboratory results were normal. The electromyography test was performed with severe neuro-electrophysiological damage in bilateral median, ulnar, peroneal and tibial nerves. Despite the intensive glucose control and oral mecobalamin therapy for the next seven years, the symptom of limb numbness and trembling was significantly worsened. In parallel, the skin pigmentation with increasing body hair and skin elasticity loss was also noted. He gave the history of insomnia for seven years but denied smoking and alcohol abuse history. Insulin and oral anti-diabetic drugs was thereafter withdrawn at the normal level of HbAlc and blood glucose.
The physical examination revealed that skin was thickened with hyperpigmentation over the toes . Other abnormal neurological examinations include the limb hypoesthesia, static tremor of hands, tendon hyporeflexia and positive Romberg sign. The thorax and abdominal CT scanning showed interstitial pneumonia and nodules located in right lobe, a small amount of pericardial effusion, hemorrhagic cyst on the pole of right kidney and splenomegaly . The pituitary gland MRI showed the shrunk size of pituitary gland concurrent with partial empty-sella and nasosinusitis. The ultrasonography excluded lesions of adrenal glands but discovered bilateral thoracic effusion post CT scanning. The electromyography test was repeated with severe to complete neuro-electrophysiological damage in bilateral median, ulnar, peroneal and tibial nerves and movement loss of tibialis anterior muscle and abductor muscle of right little finger. Laboratory investigations revealed a platelet count of 454 × 1012/L (normal, 125~ 350 × 109/L), triglycerides level of 1.8 mmol/L (normal, 0.5~ 1.7 g/L), albumin of 20 g/L (normal, 35~ 50 g/L), adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) level of 322.0 pg/ml which fell to 227.0 pg/ml (normal, 0~ 46 pg/ml) after one week. Her CRP level was 17.7 mg/L but rose to 21.3 mg/L (normal, 0~ 3.0 mg/L) within 2 weeks. The blood cortisol level in the morning was 220.3 nmol/l (normal, 138~ 690 nmol/L) within one week. The coagulation function showed PT-SEC of 15.6 s (normal, 10.0~ 14.0 s), PT% of 49.4% (normal, 70.0%~ 130.0%) and APTT-SEC of 44.2 s (normal, 20.0~ 40.0 s). The serum immunoglobin test indicated moderately increased IgG level of 11.9 g/L (normal, 7.6~ 11.6 g/L) and decreased complement C3 level of 0.5 g/L (normal, 0.8~ 1.4 g/L). Viral serology (EBV and HSV not included), urine free cortisol, tuberculosis antibody, sex hormone test, thyroid hormone and tumor biomarkers were undertaken and came back with normal value. BM cytology revealed significant hypercellularity and thrombocythemia. Genetic tests from BM biopsy showed negative expression of JAK-2 gene and BCR/ABL gene fusion, therefore the primary thrombocytosis was diagnosed instead of multiple myeloma. Abnormal hyperimmunoglobulinia appeared as minimal IgG-lambda monoclonal protein variant . The clinical presentation and investigations consisted with features of POEMS syndrome. The patient was managed with daily oral prednisone of 20 mg and azathioprine of 150 mg for 2 weeks. The numbness was apparently relieved with improved performance status. Thus, thalidomide with oral dose of 50 mg daily was taken as maintenance therapy. Clinical monitor of response and toxicity was evaluated periodically within the next 2 years and the patient rejected medical treatment and died of hypoalbuminemia, electrolyte disturbance and pneumonia.