A 16-year-old girl was referred to our institute due to repeated UTI. She had mild right hydronephrosis from birth without VUR. Thereafter, she was observed regularly and followed up by pediatrics, who also recognized right atrophic kidney gradually. However, a detailed urinary tract examination had not been performed. Physical examination at our department revealed no obvious malformations in other organs. Laboratory findings were within normal limits (serum creatinine, 0.63 mg/dL), except for mild bacteriuria. Enhanced CT and MRI showed an atrophied kidney and dilated ureter on the right side . In particular, the right ureter appeared as a giant ureter on the sagittal section of MRU . Technetium-99m DTPA renal scintigraphy showed no accumulation in the right kidney. VCG showed no VUR. The right ureteral orifice was displaced in the midline of the bladder trigone, and no abnormal morphological findings of the orifice were found on cystoscopy . RP showed that the length of the mid-ureter stricture was about 10 mm. Although the urinary tract above the stricture was markedly expanded, the lower ureter below the stricture was not dilated . We performed a right nephroureterectomy with a diagnosis of mid-ureter stricture with an ipsilateral non-functional kidney. We tried to perform reduced-port laparoscopic surgery for cosmetic purposes. A GelPOINT access platform was placed between the tip of the 12th rib and the iliac crest. The renal artery and vein were ligated by retroperitoneal approach. As the ureter was markedly adherent to the surrounding tissue at the stricture, we added a 5-cm incision in the right lower abdomen and extracted the right kidney and ureter . No abnormal blood vessels were found around the stricture site. Macroscopic findings revealed mid-ureter stricture and atrophic kidney . The lower ureter below the stricture did not dilate, similar to the findings on preoperative RP. Pathological examination findings confirmed that the mid-ureteral stricture was thickened due to hyperplasia of fibrous connective tissue and that the smooth muscle tissue and nerve fibers remained in place . Moreover, the muscular layer was maintained in ureteral dilatation, and mild inflammatory cell infiltration was observed . The renal tubules were almost completely atrophied, and glomeruli could not be identified. The patient was discharged without any notable perioperative events. Currently, 3 years have passed without a relapse of UTI.