A 58-year-old female patient with high blood pressure on amlodipine 10 mg (1cp/d), presented to our department of maxillofacial surgery in February 2021 for a left maxillary mass that had been evolving for 6 months. The history of the disease goes back to 6 months before his admission with the appearance of a left maxillary tumefaction progressively increasing in volume responsible for homolateral exophthalmos and partial nasal obstruction without any other associated thoracic or abdominal-pelvic discomforts, all evolving in a context of apyrexia and weight loss quantified at 8 Kg in 6 months.
The clinical examination revealed a hard, painless and deep fixed left maxillary mass filling the upper oral vestibule, with no skin or mucosal signs, partial left nasal obstruction and left exophthalmos with no decrease in visual acuity or oculo-motricity disorders. Examination of the lymph nodes did not reveal any palpable cervical or axillary adenopathy. The thoracic and abdominal examination did not find any palpable mass or inflammatory skin signs on the surface.
Facial Magnetic resonance imaging revealed an expansive process with a polylobed contour centred on the left maxillary sinus in T1 isosignal and T2 hypersignal, heterogeneously enhancing after injection of contrast, measuring 32×20×38 mm with extension towards the corresponding jugal soft tissues, the left nasal cavity and the left orbital cavity reaching the contact of the inferior right muscle .
A biopsy of the mass was performed under local anesthesia via the left superior vestibular approach and the anatomopathological result came back in favour of a monophasic synovial sarcoma with positivity of the Epithelial Membrane Antigen (EMA) on immunohistochemistry .
A thoracic-abdominal-pelvic CT scan was performed to evaluate the extent of the disease, which revealed a tissue mass in the right anterior chest wall measuring 58×43×35 mm with extension to the adjacent lung . A surgical biopsy under general anesthesia of the thoracic mass by anterior transcutaneous approach was performed and the anatomopathological result was similar to the left maxillary mass. Given the similar anatomopathological findings of the two maxillary and chest wall masses and the impossibility of identifying the primary location, the diagnosis of synchronous double location of synovial sarcoma was retained.
A multidisciplinary consultation was held to discuss the case and the decision to treat with chemotherapy was indicated. The patient was referred to oncology for curative chemotherapy and then followed as an outpatient at a rate of twice a month for the first three months and then once a month for one year.