A 47-year-old male was admitted to our hospital for evaluation of abdominal distension, and difficulty exhaling and defecating for > 1 mo.
The patient had repeated intestinal obstruction for > 1 mo. Plain abdominal radiographs and an enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) indicated a low intestinal obstruction. A gastroendoscopy did not reveal abnormal findings. The patient was treated with fasting, fluid rehydration, and enemas. The symptoms improved and the patient was discharged to home; however, the symptoms recurred again 1 wk before admission in addition to vomiting. The patient was re-admitted to our hospital for further evaluation and treatment. The patient underwent a right hemi-colectomy under general anesthesia with an ileointestine-transverse colon anastomosis and laparoscopic exploration. The operation was completed without complications. On day 4 postoperatively the patient developed restlessness and gradually exhibited a disturbance of consciousness on day 6 postoperatively. Laboratory testing and imaging studies did not reveal the underlying cause. Based on our experience and a review of the literature, this case appeared to be unique.
The medical history was negative for cancer, surgery (other than the right hemi-colectomy with ileointestine-transverse colon anastomosis), hypertension, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia.
The patient admitted to smoking five cigarettes daily for > 20 years. The remaining personal and family histories were non-contributory.
The abdomen was flat and no peristaltic wave was observed. The right lower abdomen was tender without rebound pain or muscle tension. No obvious air or water sounds were heard during auscultation; the bowel sounds were approximately 6 times/min.
The routine hematologic and biochemistry profiles, and the tumor marker, carcinoembryonic antigen, were all in the normal range. The gamma interferon release test results were as follows: McCl-ifn (N): 24.52 pg/mL; McCl-ifn (T): 39.6 pg/mL; McCl-ifn (P): 5000 pg/mL; γ-interferon (IFN) (T-N): 15.08 pg/mL; γ-IFN (P-N): 4975.48 pg/mL; TB-TGRA (+); PPD (-); and TB antibody (-). On day 2 postoperatively, routine hematologic testing revealed the following: White blood cell, 12.38 × 109; and neutrophils, 85%. The blood gas analysis and electrolytes were normal. On day 4 postoperatively, electroencephalogram (EEG) with epileptic or slow-wave activity involving the temporal lobes.
When transferred to West China Hospital of Sichuan University, antibodies against intraneuronal antigens (INAab), a well-characterized autoantibodies was found in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Colonoscopy revealed no abnormalities in the ileocecum , but multiple ulcers were noted in the distal ileum , consistent with inflammation on pathologic evaluation. A whole-abdominal enhanced CT indicated that the wall of the distal ileum was thickened with abnormal enhancement with multiple enlarged lymph nodes . The possibility of neoplastic lesions involving the serous surface and the fat space were considered .
The postoperative pathologic evaluation indicated high-grade goblet cell adenocarcinoma of the appendix, invasion of the mesangium of the appendix, and involvement of the cecum wall. Metastases were noted in six of 21 peri-ileal lymph nodes and one of two peri-ileocecal lymph nodes . The terminal ileum was characterized by chronic active inflammation, necrosis, granulation tissue hyperplasia, and chronic ulcer formation . A cranial CT scan showed no abnormalities. A cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated abnormal symmetric signals of the bilateral para-median thalamus, and midbrain aqueduct and brain stem adjacent to the fourth ventricle, which was consistent with a metabolic encephalopathy; however, the cranial CT and MRI did not fully explain the consciousness disorder.