A 60-year-old male presented to the clinic via ambulance complaining of a gradually increasing lump on the left side of the anterior abdominal wall for the last 3 years. Initially it was painless. However, for the last 6 month he was having a dull ache constantly with occasional exacerbations in between. He had a small lump at the same site 5 years back for which he had undergone excision. The patient did not have a biopsy at that time. On examination 10 × 10 cm non tender lump with firm to hard consistency was found on the left side of the anterior abdominal wall in between costal margin and iliac crest. The mass was found to be fixed to the abdominal wall muscles. The overlying skin showed scars of previous surgery. There were multiple small hard nodules in the vicinity of the main lump. Rest of the physical examinations were unremarkable.
Multi-phase computed tomography (MPCT) scan of abdomen was done, and it showed features suggestive of desmoid tumor . In addition, this patient had concurrent bilateral renal cortical cysts, umbilical hernia, and degenerative changes of lumbosacral spine as identified by MPCT scan. He was taken for surgery and wide local excision with 2 cm margin away from tumor border was conducted under general anesthesia. The mass was found to be arising from external and internal oblique muscles and aponeurosis which too were excised. The satellite nodules were also exercised. The defect was repaired with 20 × 20 cm prolene mesh and a surgical drainage was kept. Post operative care of the patient was done, and he was in good condition during follow up.
Histopathological examination of the tissue samples obtained from surgery showed well circumscribed mass consisting of spindle cells, adipocytes, and ropey collagen bundles in underlying fibromyxoid stroma. Individual spindle cells were bland, arranged randomly, and in short fascicles. Nuclei were uniform and elongated with bipolar eosinophilic cytoplasmic processes. Many hyperchromatic bizarre looking stromal cells, mature adipocytes and skeletal muscle bundles were seen . Atypical cells, mitotic figures and necrosis are however absent in the entire section examined. These features were consistent with atypical spindle cell/pleomorphic lipomatous tumors. On follow-up after 2 weeks of surgery he was recovering well and upon two subsequent follow-up he had no complications.