A 56-year-old woman was diagnosed with vulvar melanoma and pulmonary, hepatic and pelvic nodal metastases . She initially underwent two cycles of combination ipilimumab (anti-CTLA-4) and nivolumab (anti-PD-1) with staging CT scans one month later showing progression of metastatic disease. This prompted a transition to nivolumab monotherapy combined with palliative radiation; ipilimumab was discontinued due to its toxicity with concurrent radiation. She underwent 7 additional cycles of nivolumab, 24 Gy to the vulvar mass and pelvic adenopathy, and 72 Gy total to tibial, T-spine and sacral lesions without apparent complication. Her 8th cycle of nivolumab was delayed for two weeks due to subclinical elevations in liver transaminases. When she re-presented to resume immunotherapy, the patient reported one week of fatigue, nausea and vomiting, along with cough and congestion. Laboratory studies performed at the time were notable for an AKI with a serum creatinine of 4.5 mg/dL, up from a baseline of 0.5 mg/dL. She was admitted to Massachusetts General Hospital for further evaluation and management.
On admission she was given two liters of normal saline for possible dehydration, and despite this, her creatinine rose to 4.8 mg/dL. She was noted to be non-oliguric with a urine output of over 2 liters on the first day of hospitalization. Her other medications included omeprazole 40 mg daily and aspirin 325 mg daily, along with oxycontin and oxycodone for cancer pain. She denied use of any over-the-counter medications, specifically use of any nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or herbal medications.
Initial laboratory testing is shown in Table . Urinalysis showed only 1+ blood and 1+ leukocyte esterase, and was otherwise unremarkable; sediment was bland without erythrocytes, nucleated cells, or cellular casts. Urine protein-creatinine ratio was mildly elevated at 331 mg/g and microalbumin/creatinine ratio was also mildly elevated at 72 mg/g. Serologic workup for other etiologies of AKI was negative . Ultrasound of her kidneys performed on admission was notable for increased echogenicity of the kidney parenchyma bilaterally, but with no evidence of hydronephrosis or obstruction. Her right kidney measured 11.8 cm and left kidney measured 12 cm. Because she was taking aspirin 325mg daily until the day of admission, kidney biopsy could not be safely performed on presentation.
Given the high probability of ICPI-related AIN and inability to perform kidney biopsy in a timely manner, she was started on pulse dose intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg daily for 3 days, followed by a prednisone taper starting at 40 mg daily. Her home omeprazole was changed to an H2 blocker, given its known association with AIN . Her creatinine quickly improved from a peak of 4.8 mg/dL on the day steroids were initiated, to 2.7 mg/dL on the fourth day of steroid treatment . One month after steroid initiation, her creatinine had stabilized at a new baseline of 1.1–1.2 mg/dL. Given the lack of clinical response of her metastatic disease to ICPI-therapy, she was not re-challenged, and was instead treated with paclitaxel and carboplatin.
We noted that 10 days prior to the diagnosis of the patient’s AKI, she had an FDG PET-CT performed for routine cancer staging. At the time of the scan, the contrast-enhanced CT portion of the exam demonstrated multifocal patchy bilateral heterogeneous enhancement in her kidneys, without mass lesions or evidence of obstruction; however, at the time, elevated FDG uptake in the renal cortex was not specifically interpreted. Retrospectively, the FDG PET-CT scans were re-evaluated by a nuclear radiologist (PH) in light of the clinical suspicion for ICPI-AIN. The scans demonstrated increased FDG uptake in the renal cortices bilaterally with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 4 at the time of AKI . These findings were compared to the FDG uptake in PET-CT scans performed on the same patient on three other occasions: prior to initiation of checkpoint inhibitor therapy, after ICPI initiation but before onset of AKI (2 months before AKI), and after recovery from the AKI (3 months after AKI diagnosis). Fig. shows the relationship of FDG PET-CT scans to clinical course of AKI. Compared to baseline and follow-up, the FDG uptake in the renal cortices on the PET-CT scan just before AKI diagnosis had the highest SUVmax .
In order to further evaluate whether enhanced FDG uptake could differentiate AIN from other causes of AKI in patients taking ICPIs, we evaluated 3 patients who had FDG PET-CT performed within 2 weeks of AKI diagnosis and in whom a non-inflammatory etiology of their AKI could clearly be established. Each patient also had a separate PET-CT performed prior to AKI which served as a baseline image. We assessed control and AKI images for SUVMax, with the results demonstrated in Table . For all 3 patients with non-AIN AKI, including pre-renal azotemia or cardiorenal syndrome, SUVMax at the time of AKI was stable or slightly decreased as compared to baseline FDG PET-CT.