A 30-year-old Japanese woman with type 2 diabetes mellitus and without reproductive or birth history has a familial history of breast cancer but no familial history of ovarian cancer. The patient was admitted to our hospital because of lower abdominal pain. A pelvic ultrasound revealed a cystic and solid mass with a diameter of approximately 120 mm in her right ovary. Total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and omentectomy was performed. The patient was followed up without any sign of recurrence for 2 years after surgery.
Representative cytological findings for the peritoneal washing and touched tumor specimens are shown. We found many flat, sheet-like, and micropapillary clusters of atypical glandular cells. Neoplastic cells displayed a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic content ratio, peripherally located nuclei, three-dimensional irregular nuclear contours, and increased fine chromatin. Additionally, psammoma bodies were occasionally observed. Moreover, when compared with control HGSC samples , the neoplastic cells had uniform medium-sized nuclei; they also did not display pleomorphic nuclei, which were scattered across in the HGSC tissues.
The surgically resected right ovary contained a cystic lesion with a yellowish-white solid component. Histological examination revealed both papillary and micropapillary structures with invasive lesions in the solid component . Psammoma bodies were found to be scattered across these samples and neoplastic epithelial cells presented with a high nuclear-to-cytoplasmic content ratio, uniform medium-sized nuclei, coarse nuclear chromatin, and conspicuous nucleoli. Immunohistochemical evaluation revealed that approximately 20% of the neoplastic cells were weakly positive for p53 , whereas 40% of these cells were weakly positive for p16 . The surgically resected left ovary had a cystic lesion classified as a serous borderline tumor (SBT). We also found disseminated tumors in the right pelvic peritoneum, left fallopian tube, and omentum. Based on the histological, immunohistochemical, and genetic findings, we settled on a diagnosis of ovarian LGSC.
To investigate KRAS and BRAF genetic mutations, we extracted DNA from tumor cells obtained from the peritoneal washing cytological specimen. We identified a KRAS mutation at codon 12/13, but no BRAF mutation using an i-densy™ IS-5320 (Arkray, Kyoto) based on quenching probe method . We confirmed the same genetic mutation at both LGSC cells of the right ovary and SBT cells of the left ovary, which were obtained from the surgical histological sections.