A 22-year-old male presented to our institution's emergency room with decreased hearing on the right side, ataxia, nausea, and vomiting. On physical examination, an occipital painless subcutaneous mass was noted and audiogram revealed non-serviceable hearing on the right side. A magnetic resonance image (MRI) of brain with contrast demonstrated two separate lesions with similar signal characteristics. A subcutaneous occipital mass measuring 4.8 × 2.9 × 4.1 cm was noted as well as an intradural extraxial 2.6 × 2 × 5.2 cm CP angle mass. There was extension of the CP angle mass into the enlarged jugular foramen and invasion of the internal jugular vein. Both lesions were T1 hyperintense enhancing lesions with a mixed iso and hypointense signal on T2 [Figures and ]. A cerebral angiogram confirmed obstruction of the right sigmoid sinus and jugular vein at the level of the jugular foramen with recanalization distally . Imaging of the spine by MRI did not reveal other lesions.
Surgical resection of the two lesions was performed at our institution. The posterior fossa mass was approached through a right translabyrinthine approach and the subcutaneous lesion was resected in the same setting with a separate incision. Electrophysiologic monitoring with cranial nerve monitoring was performed. The extracranial lesion was resected first and did not show any continuity to the intracranial lesion.
A posterior petrosal translabyrinthine approach was utilized for the intracranial lesion which permitted presigmoid access as well as exposure of the sigmoid sinus and jugular bulb. The dura showed extensive patchy areas of melanocytic coloration over the entirety of the surgical exposure. The intradural lesion was readily visible with invasion of the sigmoid sinus. The sigmoid sinus was opened and found to be occluded with tumor. The sinus was ligated on either side of the tumor invasion and sacrificed. The mass was debulked using a combination of ultrasonic aspiration and suction. The capsule was dissected-off of the lateral cerebellum, brainstem, and cranial nerve 7 despite its adherence. Dissection of the tumor to the lower cranial nerves could not be completely achieved and a subtotal resection was performed. Closure was performed with a dural onlay followed with the use of abdominal fat graft after waxing the surrounding bony structures. A lumbar drain was used postoperatively for 5 days. The patient postoperatively was noted to have nystagmus and a facial nerve function consistent with a House–Brackmann grade 2 which recovered within a month. The patient was discharged home on postoperative day 6. The patient was treated with stereotactic radiosurgery at 6 months (22 Gray in three fractions) and has been stable on MRI imaging for 12 months .
Gross and microscopic examination of both of the lesions demonstrated similar histomorphological features and immunohistochemical profile confirming the melanocytic origin. The tumor cells were arranged in a nested pattern and showed mild pleomorphism, although rare mitotic figures were noted. Marked intracellular and extracellular melanin deposition was noted . No evidence of high grade features were noted and both the lesions were classified as melanocytoma with intermediated grade.