A 38-year-old Indian woman presented in our hospital with a two-year history of swelling and pain in her left thigh and hip. The swelling was progressive in nature. She had no history of trauma prior to the swelling. No significant personal or family history was present. On examination, there was a 20 × 10 cm soft tissue swelling involving the anterolateral aspect of her left thigh and extending to her hip. There was mild tenderness over the swelling and movements at her hip joint were painfully restricted. Results of systemic examination, however, were unremarkable.
Routine haematological and biochemical investigations, including alkaline phosphatase, were within reference ranges. Radiological investigations, such as computed tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), revealed a diffuse, irregular, ill-defined heterogeneous altered marrow signals in our patient's left upper femoral metaphysis and extending into the epiphysis and diaphysis. The altered marrow signals were seen to extend up to the lower shaft diaphysis and metaphysis. Similar signals were also noted in her left pelvic bone (acetabulum and pubic). There was anterior and posterior cortical disruption in her upper femoral metaphysic with extension into the adjacent soft tissues. The altered marrow signals were hyperintense on T2-weighted and short inversion recovery (STIR) images. On the other hand, the signals were low on T1-weighted images .
A bone scan confirmed these findings. No other skeletal lesions were likewise detected. The radiological features were suggestive of a malignant neoplasm. A core biopsy from the soft tissue swelling, which was performed at another hospital, was reviewed at our institute and showed a spindle cell tumour with focal nuclear pleomorphism, intercellular collagenous stroma, and occasional mitotic figures. With an initial diagnosis of malignant mesenchymal tumour, our patient underwent proximal femoral resection and prosthesis reconstruction.
We received our patient's proximal femur measuring 13 × 9 × 7 cm with a fusiform swelling, with 8 × 7 × 4 cm of the femur involving metaphysis. The tumour was seen to destroy the cortex and was extending into the soft tissue . Multiple sections from the tumour showed a spindle cell lesion composed of hypercellular fascicular and hypocellular fibrous areas . The hypercellular foci showed spindle cells arranged in short fascicles and focally in a storiform pattern. The spindle cells had abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and elongated nuclei. It also had finely dispersed chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli. There was moderate nuclear pleomorphism and some nuclei showed indented nuclear membranes . Occasional bizarre nuclei and a mitotic count of 1 to 2 per 10 high power fields (HPF) were also seen . There was no osteoid deposition, necrosis, or multinucleated giant cells in the numerous sections studied.
The spindle cells were found to be positive for vimentin and smooth muscle actin and negative for desmin, S-100 protein, myogenin and CD68 on immunohistochemistry. MIB-1 labeling index was low at 1% to 2%. Ultrastructural examination showed spindle-shaped cells with abundant rough endoplasmic reticulum, scattered mitochondria, and longitudinally arranged microfilaments. This was suggestive of a myofibroblastic nature .
The histomorphological, immunohistochemical and ultrastructural features suggested a final diagnosis of low-grade myofibroblastic sarcoma of the left upper femur. Our patient is currently on follow-up with no appreciable increase in the residual tumour.