A 49-year-old Caucasian man was referred to the emergency department in December 2014 for gradually worsening dyspnoea and haemoptysis. The patient was obviously an active smoker and heavy drinker and was socially isolated. At admission, the patient exhibited a respiratory rate at 17/min with peripheral arterial oxygen saturation at 94% in room air, no haemodynamic compromise (BP 145/120 mmHg, HR 157/min) and central temperature at 37.2 °C. ECG showed a sinus tachycardia at 120 bpm, without conduction or ST abnormalities. Platelet count was 202 G/L. The thoracic computed tomographic angiography exhibited bilateral subsegmental pulmonary embolism with multiple pulmonary infarcts. Ultrasonography of the lower limbs was normal. Treatment including enoxaparin, amoxicillin and clavulanic acid was initiated, and he was transferred to the medical ward. Recurrence of haemoptysis with persistent tachycardia led to his prompt transfer to the ICU on the next day. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated severe cardiac dysfunction with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 15%, left ventricle dilation (left ventricle end-diastolic diameter at 59 mm), no right ventricle enlargement, aortic velocity time integral (VTI) at 5 cm and systolic pulmonary hypertension (PAPs 30 mmHg). Because of circulatory failure and hyperlactatemia related to obvious cardiogenic shock, the patient was given dobutamine and noradrenaline and was intubated and mechanically ventilated. Coronary angiography resulted normal; infectious screening and immunological tests for thrombophilia were negative. Additional tests reported various abnormalities with low plasma selenium at 0.77 μmol/L (Nl 0.81-1.38), zinc 10.6 μmol/L (Nl 12.4-18.3) and vitamin PP (B36) 32 μmol/L (Nl38-58). Alcohol-induced dilated cardiomyopathy decompensated by subsegmental pulmonary embolism was the final clinical diagnosis. Despite the pharmacological treatment optimization, the patient remained in poor clinical and haemodynamic conditions leading to right femoral-femoral veno-arterial ECMO implementation on day 2.
Clinical course was marked by transient atrial fibrillation and thrombopenia reported to 23 G/L on day 8 versus 83 G/L on day 3 (see Fig. ), leading to platelet transfusion. The level of anti-PF4 antibodies measured by ELISA (IgG) was 0.775 (positivity threshold value at 0.146). Platelet aggregation test was subsequently positive on day 10. The diagnosis of type 2 HIT was established, and parenteral anticoagulant treatment required for on-going ECMO replaced by argatroban at the initial dose of 0.2 μg/kg/min. Change of extracorporeal circuit (catheters, membrane and lines) was not required. Biological and clinical outcome was good with platelet recovery being effective on day 6 after UFH removal and weaning from ECMO initiated on day 8 to be completed on day 12 after admission in ICU. The patient was extubated on day 20. Complementary myocardial MRI confirmed dilated left ventricular cardiomyopathy with dilatation of the left atrium and a medial strip of fibrosis. Transition treatment with danaparoid followed by vitamin K antagonist was provided so that the patient could have been transferred to the cardiology ward before rehabilitation. He finally was discharged to home 2 months after initial admission. Six-month follow-up with alcohol withdrawal and angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor and beta-blocker treatment demonstrated a 50% LVEF.