A twenty-six-year-old male presented to our emergency department after sustaining a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the abdomen thirty minutes prior to arrival. His past medical history was noted for bipolar disorder. Upon arrival by Emergency Medical Services (EMS), trauma code was activated. On primary survey, patient was hemodynamically unstable. His blood pressure was 90\65 mmHg, heart rate was 121 beats\minutes, and was maintaining his airway with a saturation of 98% on oxygen face mask with good bilateral air entry. He scored 14\15 in Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS), with bilaterally reactive three-millimeter pupils. Examination of the abdomen showed an entry wound midline, about ten centimeters above the umbilicus with no exit wound on logrolling. Focused Assessment with Sonography for Trauma (FAST) was positive for free fluid in Morrison’s pouch, spleno-renal and suprapubic regions. Patient received two liters of normal saline, two units of Packed Red Blood Cells (PRBC) class I, and one gram of Tranexamic acid. After that, the patient was intubated, with trauma line inserted, and immediately pushed to the Operating Room (OR) as first-level emergency case within fifteen minutes. A midline exploratory laparotomy revealed large amount of hemoperitoneum and active bleeding which was controlled by packing all four-quadrants of the abdomen. One bleeder was identified to be coming from the lesser curvature, most likely from the right gastric vein, which was controlled with a figure-of-eight PDS stich. After opening the lesser sac, there was another expanding hematoma posteriorly. Decision was made to kocherize the duodenum to reach the retroperitoneum, where another two bleeders were identified. One of which was from one of the supra-renal tributaries of the Inferior Vena Cava (IVC) at its lateral wall and the other coming from the SMV just inferior to the pancreas . The site of SMV injury was in the mid-third point, around 3–5 cm from the IVC. The SMV injury was less than 1 cm in size, with a low-flow bleeding. Therefore, we cleared the bleeding vessel above and below the injury, identified the lesion, applied proximal and distal pressure, and a couple of stiches were taken in a figure-of-eight manner using PDS sutures (, ). Then, we released proximal and distal pressure, and hemostasis was effectively achieved with our stitch. Multiple pellets were found, and we were able to remove around seventy-five of them. Exploration of major vessels using Mattox and Kocher maneuvers revealed a pocket of pellets next to the aorta, without other injuries . Therefore, we proceeded with irrigation and partial closure of the abdomen with a Bagota’ bag. A total of eight units of PRBC and three units of Fresh Frozen Plasma (FFP) were given during the operation. The patient was shifted to the Surgical Intensive Care Unit (SICU), and post-operative CT scan and CTA run-off were done, showing patent vessels and no extravasation of contrast, with only minimal irregularity at the IVC injury site. The patient was taken back to the OR in less than forty-eight hours for a second-look laparotomy, which showed no active bleeding or other injuries. There was a concern for bowel viability, however, there was good supply as there was no ischemia or dusky bowel. Therefore, the packs were removed, irrigation and permanent closure of the abdomen were performed, and patient was sent back to the SICU. Two days later, the patient was extubated and started on oral feeding. Psychiatry consultation was made, and the patient was started on Olanzipine and Valproic acid. Close observation of the patient’s safety was ensured, with suicide precautions and one-to-one monitoring. The patient was then transferred to the general surgical ward the following day where he was observed daily by both the psychiatry and surgery teams. After two weeks, the patient was transferred to a local hospital specialized in mental health. Last follow up of the patient was in the surgery clinic, after one month from his first presentation, where he was in good health with no active issue.