A 29 year-old man was referred to our hospital with a 2-year history of paroxysmal attacks of dyspnea, dry cough and wheezing. He had smoked 2 packs/day cigarettes for 3 years and has been ex-smoker for 5 years. He experienced frequent sudden-onset coughing episodes followed by the development of dyspnea and wheezing a year ago. He was previously diagnosed with difficult asthma and treated with high dose inhaled corticosteroids (1600 μg budesonide) and bronchodilators. Since he was unresponsive to the therapy, he has applied to several institutions for multiple times to seek medical attention.
On admission, no stridor, wheezing and cyanosis were present and the general appearance was good. Vital signs were as follows: temperature 37°C, respiratory rate 20/min, pulse 96 beats/min, blood pressure 140/70 mmHg. The chest examination was unremarkable. The results of the routine laboratory analysis, including complete blood cell count, chemistry, arterial blood gas, urinalysis and chest x-ray were within normal ranges. On spirometric examination, flow-volume curve displayed suggestive fixed airway obstruction. Forced vital capacity (FVC) was 122 % of predicted, forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) was 31 % of predicted and FEV1/FVC was 21 % . In order to exclude the possibility of upper airway obstruction, a work-up of computerized tomography (CT) of the chest and fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB) was obtained. The CT scan illustrated a solid, polipoid intratracheal mass originating from the right side of the trachea at 4 centimeter proximal of the carina . FOB revealed a smooth, round mass of 2 cm in diameter originating from the right lateral side of the trachea. The lesion was occupying approximately 50 % of the lumen . It localized at 4th centimeter distal to larynx. Histopathological diagnosis was adenoid cystic carcinoma of the trachea.
The patient underwent resection surgery. At the operational site, there were severe adhesions between the mediastinal surface and the trachea. Therefore, a conservative surgery was performed. The tumor was seen on the right anterolateral wall of the trachea being expanded submucosally from the carina to the proximal end of the trachea.
The patient underwent adjuvant radiation therapy after the operation. CT scan of the neck revealed resolution of the tumor . Now, 3 months after the operation, the patient has remained well.