The patient was a previously healthy 10-year-old boy presenting with progressive truncal instability, gait difficulty, and frequent falls from 2 months ago. He was born to healthy consanguineous Balooch parents, an ethnic group living in the southeast of Iran. His birth history was uneventful but a mild motor developmental delay was reported as he started to walk independently at the age of 2 years. Family history was negative for neurological or hematological diseases. The cognitive function was intact and his academic performance was average as he went to school until one month ago. On neurological examination, he had dysarthria, slowing of vertical saccades, ataxia, generalized rigidity (more dominant in lower limbs) and bradykinesia. Moreover, he had sustained four-limb dystonia, predominantly in the lower limbs, that was exacerbated by voluntary movement and fluctuated in severity over days. These twisting movements together with increased stiffness led to an abnormal posture. Lower limb dystonia increased during walking resulting in walking difficulty and a specific “cock-walk” gait. On systemic examination, his face and palms were plethoric but no other remarkable findings were noted.
Laboratory investigations showed polycythemia (red cell count: 10.73 × 103 / L, normal range [n.r.]: 4.1–5.3 × 103; hemoglobin: 20.1 g/dl, n.r.: 12–16; hematocrit: 67.1%, n.r.: 37–47), low serum ferritin (7 ng/ml, n.r.: 12–300), and a high total iron binding capacity (TIBC: 630 mcg/dl, n.r.: 250–450). Serum calcium, liver transaminases, ammonia, lactate, and pyruvate levels were within normal limits and amino acid chromatography was unremarkable. A diagnosis of Wilson disease was suspected according to the extrapyramidal symptoms; however, serum copper and ceruloplasmin and 24-h urine copper levels were normal, and abdominal ultrasound was unrevealing. Ophthalmologic examination was unremarkable for the Kayser- Fleischer ring. Echocardiography, electromyography, and nerve conduction velocities of the limbs were normal. A brain MRI showed symmetric hyperintensities in the caudate and lentiform nucleuses, tectum of the pons, and dentate nucleuses of the cerebellum on T1 images and a normal appearance on T2 images without restriction on diffusion weighted images . Neuroimaging findings were suggestive of metal deposition in the brain. As serum copper and calcium levels were normal, the serum manganese level was checked in two different laboratories by gas-chromatography and mass spectrometry (GC/MS) Agilent technology (Calif, USA). The serum level of manganese was above 3000 nmol/L, which was far beyond the reference value (less than 320). There was no history of environmental overexposure; therefore, an inherited hypermanganesemia was suggested. Key genes implicated in Mn homeostasis in humans are SL39A14, SL30A10, and SLC39A8 with 16, 6, and 16 exons, respectively . Sequencing all of these exons by Sanger sequencing is difficult, expensive, and time-consuming. Therefore, whole exome sequencing was done, which showed a homozygous missense variant in SLC30A10 (c.C1006T, p.His336Tyr). According to the Sherloc comprehensive variant classification, this variant may be classified as pathogenic because of at least 6 pathogenic points (PM2:1 point; PP3: 0.5; PS3:2.5; PP4:2). Sanger sequencing confirmed a homozygous and heterozygous state in the proband and parents, respectively. The pathogenic variant was not revealed in his younger asymptomatic brother.
Symptomatic therapy with Levodopa at an optimal dosage (10 mg/kg/day in three divided doses) was not effective. A combination of oral D-penicillamine 1000 mg daily (250 mg every 6 h), iron supplementation and levodopa (300 mg daily) was started and phlebotomy was done, but no clinical or laboratory responses were noted after 2 months. Then, disodium calcium edetate was administered as a chelation therapy at 1 g/m2 for 5 days infused every 4 weeks and oral iron compounds and levodopa were continued. After two cycles of treatment, the Mn level and Hb concentration decreased to 170 nmol/L and 14 g/dl respectively, and the serum level of ferritin increased, but minimal improvement was seen in motor function. At the 6th month of follow up, complete resolution of dysarthria and partial amelioration of bradykinesia, rigidity, and dystonia were seen resulting in a better motor function and gait. Repeated brain MRI revealed marked resolution of previous findings . The Mn and hemoglobin levels were in the normal range and the motor function improved steadily throughout the follow-up period until the time of preparing this report. No adverse effects of disodium calcium edetate such as hypocalcemia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia and renal or hepatic dysfunction were seen. The clinical course of the patient is shown in Fig. .