A 10-year-old boy presented at a community hospital due to intermittent epigastric pain and weight loss of 8 kg in a month. An initial chest radiograph showed massive left pleural effusion . He underwent thoracic drainage. Pleural fluid analysis showed exudative profile, and was positive for anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA). He was treated with intravenous antibiotics and retained chest tube drainage for 6 days, the left pleural effusion had decreased. However, 4 days later, he complained of chest tightness and dyspnea, and chest radiography showed massive right pleural effusion. He was again treated with right chest tube drainage. Contrast-enhanced chest CT revealed bilateral pleural effusion . Therefore, the patient was referred to Songklanagarind Hospital, a tertiary care, and teaching hospital of the Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai, to determine the cause of pleural effusion. We obtained written informed consent in writing from the patient's parent to publish the present case report and associated images, and the CARE reporting guidelines were used when writing the report . The patient information for this case was anonymized as far as possible to avoid identification of the patient or their family.
The patient's height was 145 cm and weight was 35 kg. He had no known underlying disease and no family history of pancreatitis. Physical examination revealed decreased breath sound on the right hemithorax. He had elevated serum amylase of 879 U/L and lipase of 817 U/L. Fasting lipids, blood glucose, and calcium levels were within normal range. The pleural fluid analysis revealed an elevated amylase level of 4079 U/L, but negative for ANA. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing for tuberculosis, and bacterial cultures were negative for pathogenic organisms. Serology for autoimmune and connective tissue disease including anti-ds DNA, anti-cardiolipin, anti-B2-glycoprotein, and anti-Sm (Sm, small nuclear ribonucleoproteins autoantibodies) was all negative. The chest CT from the community hospital was reviewed and we found features of chronic pancreatitis including irregular pancreatic duct dilatation with diffuse atrophic pancreatic parenchyma, and a small pancreatic pseudocyst . A diagnosis of pancreatitis was established and the patient was conservatively treated with fasting, parenteral nutrition, antibiotics, and octreotide for 10 days. The thoracic drainage was eventually removed. Subsequent MRCP performed on day 21 revealed evidence of chronic pancreatitis seen as thinning of the pancreatic parenchyma with irregular dilated upstream pancreatic duct and a focal disruption of the duct at the pancreatic genu-body connecting to a large pancreatic pseudocyst which extended upward to the mediastinum . Hence, we diagnosed PPF complicated by chronic pancreatitis. Then endoscopic ultrasound (EUS)-guided gastrocystostomy pseudocyst drainage was successfully performed by placing two 7-Fr, 5-cm double pigtail stents between the body of the stomach and the pancreatic pseudocyst. Subsequently, the patient was discharged from the hospital and scheduled for a followed-up out-patient appointment at 1 month later. However, he was lost to follow-up at his out-patient appointment. A chest-abdominal CT performed on day 90 showed interval increase in the size of the pancreatic pseudocyst. Three weeks later, the patient underwent an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), which confirmed the MRCP findings of ductal disruption with a disconnected pancreatic duct genu communicating with the pseudocyst . However, the endoscopic interventionist was unable to pass the ERCP wire distally beyond the disrupted pancreatic duct. A month later, a pancreatic sphincterotomy with rendezvous pancreatic duct intervention was performed. Pancreatography via the punctured upstream pancreatic duct revealed a complete cut-off at the duct genu with failure to cannulate the duct downstream . Thus, a 7-Fr, 7-cm double pigtail stent was placed across the fistula between the duct body and the stomach, creating pancreaticogastrostomy fistula. A rendezvous-assisted endoscopic retrograde pancreatography (ERP) via the matured fistula was performed 6 weeks later. A 10-Fr, 7-cm straight biliary stent was successfully inserted across the disrupted duct via the duodenal papilla. The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged from the hospital 5 days later. A follow-up CT 2 months later showed complete resolution of the pseudocyst and pleural effusions. Four months later, a follow-up ERP showed complete anatomical restoration of the pancreatic duct, and the duct stent was retrieved . The patient was well and symptom-free for at least a further 10 months of follow up since successful placement of a stent in the duct. The total length of care at our institution was about 426 days. The episode of care was summarized in . During this time, genetic testing was conducted, and we found a heterozygous missense substitution in SPINK1, c.101A>G (p. Asn34Ser), but otherwise negative for PRSS1 variants. Tests for other possible genetic variations related to chronic pediatric pancreatitis such as in CFTR, CTRC, or the gene for calcium sensing receptor (CASR) are not available in our institution. Family history investigations revealed no history of pancreatic diseases.