A 30 year-old male presented to Dental Surgery clinic, Jaipur, with a chief complaint of missing anterior teeth in upper and lower jaws. He told that he hadn't had any teeth in these regions of the jaws since childhood after his milk teeth shed away. Due to these missing teeth, he had an unpleasant smile that resulted in a psychological trauma to him while communicating with society members. He insisted for rehabilitation of his missing teeth and smile.
Examination of the oral cavity revealed multiple over-retained deciduous teeth and some missing teeth, particularly in anterior maxilla and mandible on right side . But, not much thought was given to these findings at the initial examination and it was decided that panoramic and bitewing radiographs were required to evaluate the patient's overall dentition.
On evaluating the panoramic radiograph, the classical signs of cleidocranial dysplasia were immediately recognized . The patient had approximately 64 teeth in his both of the jaws. Some of the teeth were erupted but most of them were unerupted and mimicking a premolar in shape. Gonial angles on both sides of mandible were missing and maxillary sinuses were underdeveloped.
The patient was then, asked to attempt to place his shoulders adjacent to each other to check for the incomplete clavicle bone formation and this attempt demonstrated more than normal mobility of the shoulder girdle . Upon re-examination of the face, it was found that he also had the classical symptoms of frontal bosselation, hypertelorism and mid face deficiency.
Chest radiograph (PA View) confirmed the clavicular hypoplasia and bell shaped rib-cage . Besides this, skull radiograph (Lateral view) demonstrated open skull sutures, delayed closure of fontanels and multiple wormian bones . It also showed poorly formed paranasal sinuses and zygomatic complex.
A diagnosis of cleidocranial dysplasia was confirmed and the patient was referred to prosthodontic department of Govt. Dental College & Hospital, Jaipur for prosthetic rehabilitation where he was given dentures for his missing teeth.