A 53-year-old female patient with hypertension, mild dyslipidaemia, chronic stress, nicotinism, and menopause was referred to the County hospital with suspected ACS. Physical examination revealed normal respiratory auscultation sounds, regular heart rate and rhythm, no murmurs or rubs, abdomen soft to palpation, and palpable peripheral pulses. There were no significant ST-T changes in repeated ECGs and no signs that would suggest coronary artery spasm and ischaemia. The patient had chest pain for 3 h before coming to the emergency room, which she characterized as chest discomfort, tightness and heaviness in rest, without radiation, with no progression in physical activity, that regressed gradually (did not respond to nitroglycerine spray), but the patient was hospitalized due to elevated troponin I of 1359 ng/L with a diagnosis of non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTE-ACS). There was no change in troponin concentration on the second day of treatment. Echocardiography showed normal left ventricular ejection fraction and no regional wall motion abnormalities.
Coronary angiography was then performed and verified left anterior descending (LAD) and right coronary artery (RCA) without stenosis, no signs of coronary artery spasm, but borderline 70% stenosis of the left circumflex artery (LCx) in the proximal segment. Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of LCx with drug-eluting stent implantation was done. Patient was discharged on Day 7 with an uncomplicated hospital course. Three weeks later, she was hospitalized because of recurrent chest pain which had the same characteristics as the first time. There were no ischaemic changes on the ECG, but due to significant elevation of troponin I, urgent coronary angiography was performed. There was no in-stent thrombosis/restenosis in LCx and no stenosis of LAD and RCA. Troponins remained elevated throughout the hospitalization.
The patient was then referred for cardiac rehabilitation. On the fifth day of rehabilitation, after a disturbing telephone conversation with her family, the patient had chest pain similar to the previous hospitalizations (chest discomfort in rest, without progression in physical activity) accompanied by elevated blood pressure. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm without significant ST-T changes. Applied therapy (diazepam 5 mg and amlodipine 10 mg) quickly normalized the blood pressure and symptoms resolved, but troponin I was significantly elevated (1111 ng/L). When measured again, three hours later and the next morning, troponin I was at a similar, ‘plateau’ elevated level. In view of this finding, the patient’s stable clinical state, our previous experience and the recent literature data, we suspected the existence of heterophile antibodies in the patient’s serum causing a chronic elevation of troponin.
The next day a new blood sample was taken, in which our laboratory tested the concentration of high-sensitivity (hs) troponin I and simultaneously the collaborative laboratory at an external institution tested the concentration of troponin T. The concentration of hs-troponin I was 1254 ng/L while hs-troponin T from the same sample was within the normal range 0.007 µg/L (normal value <0.1 µg/L), . With such laboratory findings and the additional anamnestic data that patient breeds rabbits, there was no doubt that the sustained ‘plateau’ elevated level of hs-troponin I was caused by heterophile antibodies. The further course of rehabilitation went without complications, and the patient’s discharge medical records emphasized the presence of chronically elevated troponin caused by heterophile antibodies which is extremely important for further monitoring and evaluation.