A 22-year-old previously healthy female came to hospital emergency room with multiple fractures following fall from height. She had closed femur shaft fracture (AO 32B2) and comminuted patella fracture on the left side (AO 34C3), type IIIA open femur shaft fracture on the right side (AO 32B2), and undisplaced mandible fracture . A whole body computed tomography (CT) scan revealed no other injuries. She was planned for the early total care with definitive fixation since she was a borderline patient (ISS score 17). Before taking up for fixation, a repeat CT scan of brain was done at 8 h post-injury as she was noticed to have disconjugate eye movements and monosyllable speech. The repeat CT also showed no cerebral bleed. About 10 h post injury, she was taken to the operating room. She underwent debridement of the right thigh wound, bilateral femur antegrade nailing with minimal reaming and tension band wiring of the left patella fracture . Surgery lasted for 5 h with no hypotension or hypoxia intraoperatively. She was ventilated overnight and on reassessing her on 1st post-operative day (POD), she was not responding to commands and not moving her limbs. Her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was E1VTM1 and remained until POD5. Her chest X-ray and CT brain were normal. On POD 1, she had pyrexia, tachycardia, anemia, and thrombocytopenia. On POD 3, she developed features of decerebrate rigidity and later generalized tonic clonic seizures. Fundoscopic examination showed multiple fat globules along the vessel in the entire field of both eyes. Since there were no pulmonary or dermatological signs of FES, an MRI of brain was done which revealed hyper intensive starfield pattern on diffusion-weighted image, suggestive of FES . Supportive treatment with antiepileptics, antibiotics, and anticoagulants was given.
After 2 weeks, her sensorium improved and gaze became normal with grade 3 power of upper and lower limb muscles and was subsequently extubated. And by 4 weeks, she was able to sit with support and was able to swallow. By 2 months, she was mobilized with support. Her Mini-Mental State Examination showed no cognitive impairment. By 6 months, she had complete recovery and started attending classes for her higher education. At the latest follow-up at 1 year, her fractures healed completely and she was able to perform all her daily life activities independently and has no neurological deficit (, ).