A 51-year-old woman was admitted with progressive shortness of breath. She had a 1-year history of rapidly progressive pulmonary restriction of unknown cause. A high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scan revealed bilateral fibrotic changes, with traction bronchiectases, focal ground-glass opacities and honeycombing . In addition, her medical history included polyneuropathy, fibromyalgia, hypercholesterolemia and recurrent urinary tract infections. The recurrent urinary tract infections had been treated with nitrofurantoin, prescribed at 15 mg daily for many years, resulting in a cumulative amount of over 140 g. Urological examination conducted 4 years prior to the current admission had not revealed any abnormalities of the bladder. Clinically, the differential diagnosis of the pulmonary fibrosis included an adverse reaction to the long-term use of nitrofurantoin, the result of an undiagnosed collagen-vascular disease or end-stage usual interstitial pneumonitis (UIP) (cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis/idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis). Although the patient was taking many other drugs at the time, none of these has previously been shown to cause pulmonary fibrosis. Autoimmune serology, including assays for auto-antibodies against nuclear antigen, SS-A/SS-B, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP), anti-ds-DNA, Rnase protection (RNP), sphingomyelin (SM), antineutrophil cytoplasmic auto-antibodies (c-ANCA, p-ANCA), anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA IgA and ASCA IgG), was negative. Further blood chemistry analysis revealed no abnormalities; in particular there was no eosinophilia. Because of the severity of the pulmonary fibrosis, lung transplantation was considered. The screening examinations, performed 1 month prior to the current admission and including urological examinations, revealed no contraindications for transplantation. After the screening procedure the patient was discharged on glucocorticoids (prednisolone) and azathioprine. She was readmitted with sinusitis, onychomycosis and elevated liver enzymes [γ-glutamyl transferase (γGT) 363 U/l, aspartate-aminotransferase (ASAT; or glutamate-oxaloacetate-transaminase (GOT)) 45 U/l, alanine-aminotransferase (ALAT, or glutamate-pyruvate-transaminase (GPT)) 75 U/l and alkaline phosphatase (AP) 90 U/l]. On admission the chest X-ray (not shown) showed diffuse bilateral reticular nodular opacities. A liver biopsy showed mild hepatitis consistent with drug-induced hepatic injury. She died of respiratory failure after a febrile episode 16 days after admission. Permission for autopsy was obtained.
All clinical reports were collected and all previous histology was reviewed. A literature search for pulmonary fibrosis and nitrofurantoin therapy was performed. The post-mortem examination was performed according to the department's standard protocol. Samples from all organs were selected for histology, and the lungs in particular were sampled extensively. Routine hematoxylin and eosin slides were prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue blocks. Special stains for connective tissue (resorcin-fuchsin) and fungi (Grocott) were performed on selected blocks only. At post-mortem examination adhesions of the pleural membranes were noted both over the chest wall and diaphragmatic surfaces of the lung. There was no evidence of active pleuritis and there was no pleural effusion. Both lungs were firm with similar gross external appearances and with a similar aspect of the cut surface. Together the lungs weighed 1060 g. Macroscopically, irregular but sharply defined areas of residual spongy parenchyma, were surrounded by extensive areas of abnormal parenchyma. Here the lung tissue was firm and fibrotic with loss of spongy consistency and with extensive cystic changes, with cysts measuring up to 1 cm in diameter. The abnormal fibrotic parenchyma was evenly distributed over the upper and lower lobes . Parenthetically, the fibrotic areas were not distinctly located in sub-pleural or para-septal regions but were scattered throughout the lung lobes. There was no obvious peribronchial distribution of the inflammation. In the upper lobe of the right lung a sharply defined 1.5 cm cavity was observed filled with friable yellow tissue .
Microscopically, there was a combination of diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) superimposed on end-stage interstitial fibrosis . In non-fibrotic lung tissue the alveolar septae were edematous with sloughing of pneumocytes. Hyaline membranes on denuded alveolar septae were readily identified. No granulomas were identified. Small intra-alveolar hemorrhages were present .
The fibrosis appeared temporarily homogenous and mature, and composed of deeply eosinophilic staining collagen. Fibroblast foci were not seen. Within the fibrotic areas of the lungs extensive remodeling of the parenchyma was obvious, with cystic dilatation of bronchiolar structures and transformation of the alveolar architecture in which the residual alveoli were distended and lined by bronchial-type epithelium, consistent with honeycombing . Squamous metaplasia was present in larger bronchioli. Within the cystically dilated air spaces inspissated secretions were present with an associated inflammatory histiocytic infiltrate admixed with neutrophils . In the fibrotic interstitium the inflammatory infiltrate was composed of lymphocytes and histiocytes and patchy in its distribution. Reactive hypertrophy of bronchiolar smooth muscle was evident in areas of fibrosis; the inflammatory infiltrate frequently involved the walls of the bronchioles . The pulmonary arteries showed mild to moderate medial hypertrophy and intimal thickening in the fibrotic parenchyma. There was no evidence of vasculitis. Outside the areas with fibrosis the vascular changes were minor . The infiltrate was slightly more dense and diffuse in non-fibrotic lung tissue with features of diffuse alveolar damage. Eosinophils were not an important feature of the inflammatory infiltrate. In the right upper lobe an aspergilloma was seen . In the pulmonary arteries fatty streaks were present, consistent with pulmonary hypertension.
The heart showed hypertrophy of both ventricles (right ventricular wall thickness 9 mm). The liver was congested and microscopic findings were similar to those seen in the biopsy. In the urinary bladder a large diverticulum of the posterior wall was observed with acute and chronic inflammation.
In summary, the post-mortem findings in this case show DAD superimposed on end-stage pulmonary fibrosis with signs of associated pulmonary hypertension and right-sided heart failure. In addition, an aspergilloma was present, which developed secondary to immunosuppressive therapy for pulmonary fibrosis. Finally, the DAD may well have been caused by urosepsis with its focus in the infected urinary bladder diverticulum. This diverticulum must have been the cause of the recurrent urinary tract infections for which long-term nitrofurantoin had been prescribed.