An 8-year-old Hispanic boy attended our center to receive a follow-up medical examination because his mother had stated that he was diagnosed as having AgCC during the neonatal period. He was the product of her first gestation, delivered by caesarean section at 36 weeks due to hydrocephalus, with an Appearance, Pulse, Grimace, Activity, and Respiration (APGAR) score of 8/10 at 1 and 5 minutes after birth, and no perinatal complications. His mother denied history of congenital infection and teratogenic exposures during pregnancy. The child was subjected to a postnatal cranial ultrasonography (USG) that revealed total AgCC; thus, a computed tomography (CT) scan of his brain was performed which confirmed the diagnosis. Further genetic screening and metabolic screening were not performed, but the child did not present any unusual craniofacial, digital, or neurocognitive feature suggestive of a congenital syndrome or any other non-cerebral structural abnormality. Also, no evidence of visual or hearing impairment was observed. His pattern of postnatal growth and neurocognitive development was normal. Furthermore, he did not show any neurological sign, behavioral or psychiatric disorder, or intellectual disability during his early childhood and school age. His school performance was not affected, and he was able to practice taekwondo. The rest of his past medical history was relevant only for allergic contact dermatitis. At the age of 4, he was subjected to a control magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain that showed total AgCC, as well as enlargement of the lateral ventricles with dilated occipital horns (colpocephaly; Fig. ). However, he did not present any clinical data of intracranial hypertension.
During the medical examination he was alert, aware, oriented, and asymptomatic. His language was fluent, and his posture was normal with no abnormal movements. He was able to follow simple commands and to name objects. He did not present evidence of any apraxia or agnosia. A physical examination revealed normal gait, and no alterations in cranial nerve reflexes, muscle strength, deep tendon reflexes, and plantar reflexes. An examination of the cerebellum did not show any abnormality, and no clinical features of intracranial hypertension and meningism were observed. The child scored normal in the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) test, and his IQ was within the normal range. His weight and height were in the 50th percentile according to his age and gender. Blood tests, including thyroid, liver, and renal function, as well as electrolyte and vitamin panel were normal. Finally, non-pharmacological management was prescribed, and he was scheduled for annual follow-up medical appointments for future neurocognitive screenings at our center. The legal guardian of the patient provided written informed consent for the publication of the case.