A 15-year-old female patient (bodyweight 50 kg, height 160 cm) presented with syncope. Severe arterial hypertension was diagnosed (178/147 mmHg left arm, 102/83 mmHg left leg). She reported previous episodes of exercise independent headaches and nose bleeds. Auscultation revealed no cardiac murmurs, but an accentuated second heart sound and reduced pulses in the lower limbs. There were no clinical signs to suggest Alagille or William’s syndrome or clinical evidence of neurofibromatosis. Blood tests showed normal inflammatory markers and normal creatinine. The urine dip showed no markers for blood or protein. No regular medication was taken at the time she presented. The electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm, no significant signs of left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy or abnormal repolarization. Echocardiography detected a severe concentric LV hypertrophy (14 mm diastolic septal diameter, 15 mm diastolic diameter of the LV posterior wall) and a long hypoplastic segment in the abdominal aorta with massive arterial collateralization. Cardiac catheterization confirmed the diagnosis of a midaortic syndrome with a minimum diameter of <1.5 mm and a gradient of 50 mmHg between the aortic arch and the femoral arteries . The narrow part began directly under the diaphragm above the truncus coeliacus and continued down to the bifurcation of the arteriae iliacae including the renal arteries, with reversed flow in the caudal aorta up to the renal arteries. Because of the extraordinary length of the hypoplastic segment of 23 cm, we decided for a stepwise interventional therapy with a paclitaxel covered balloon. No additional computed tomography scan or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. Consultation with our surgeon, supported the interventional approach. The proposed procedure was reviewed and approved by our institutional review board, extensively discussed with the patient’s family, and informed consent was obtained before proceeding.
After balloon interrogation of the long stenotic abdominal aorta using a 6 × 20 mm Tyshak balloon (NuMED Inc., Hopkinton, NY, USA) to differentiate between rigid stenosis and hypoplastic parts, serial balloon dilation with a 7 × 40 mm paclitaxel covered In.Pact balloon (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) (3 µg/mm2 Paclitaxel on the balloon) was performed from end to end of the stenosis. Planned redilations, to stepwise improve the aortic compliance and reduce the risk of dissection, were performed after 2, 4, and 8 months with Elutax balloons ranging from 8 mm to 12 mm diameter (Aachen Resonance, Düsseldorf, Germany) (2 µg/mm At the end of the last interventional procedure, a mild endothelial lesion at the former narrowest point of the aorta was noticed . This lesion healed and after 2.7 years MRI showed a stable and adequate result . Today the girl is in unrestricted physical condition. The blood pressure has markedly improved (139/64 mmHg right arm and 127/65 mmHg right leg) under therapy with atenolol and amlodipine.
The patient and patient’s family consented to the publication of this case’s history and the images presented.