A 23-year-old, Middle Eastern primigravida presented to our Emergency Department at 14 weeks gestation with a two-week history of intermittent suprapubic pain associated with dysuria. On examination, she had a heart rate of 102 beats/min, her blood pressure was 109/71 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 15 breaths/min and temperature of 37.4°C. Examination of her cardiac and respiratory systems was unremarkable. Her abdomen was soft, but with mild suprapubic tenderness. Her laboratory results showed a hemoglobin level of 7.9 g/dL, hematocrit 25.7%, white blood cells 9700 cells/mm3, platelets 367 cells/mm3, serum urea 14.8 mmol/L and serum creatinine 47 μmol/L. Her serum electrolytes, coagulation profile and liver function tests were all within normal limits. Her serum β-human chorionic gonadotropin level was 75,542 IU. A bedside urine analysis showed pus cells and a urine culture subsequently grew Streptococcus agalactiae, which was sensitive to penicillin and amoxicillin. An ultrasound examination in our Emergency Room showed a single viable fetus with a crown-rump length corresponding to 13 weeks and five days gestation, the anterior placenta and a normal amount of liquor. A significant amount of localized fluid in the left side of her abdomen was also noted and was thought to be either ascites or blood. Our patient received intravenous amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (1 g) and 500 mL of normal saline; her pain subsided, and she was admitted to the ward for follow-up and further investigation. Iron deficiency anemia was diagnosed based on a negative sickle cell test, normal hemoglobin electrophoresis, a serum iron level of 32 μg/dL, serum ferritin of 89.7 μg/dL and a total iron binding capacity of 117 μg/dL. Our patient was placed on iron supplements. Four days later, repeat abdominal ultrasound examination suggested the presence of a bicornute uterus with the fetus in the left horn, and free fluid was noted in her pelvis . Her liver, spleen, kidneys and urinary bladder appeared normal. A speculum examination indicated the presence of a single cervix. An abdominal fluid tap was offered to our patient but she declined and she was discharged home on iron supplements and requested to attend outpatient follow-up. At 20 weeks gestation, our patient's hemoglobin was 9.5 g/dL and a follow-up abdominal ultrasound examination performed by a more experienced radiologist showed similar findings to the previous examination with a vertical pocket of amniotic fluid that measured 4.2 cm . At 40 weeks gestation, a follow-up ultrasound examination showed breech presentation with a highly vascular placenta. An external cephalic version was offered to our patient but she declined. She was admitted to the hospital for an elective Cesarean delivery. She opted for general anesthesia which was induced with propofol and suxamethonium chloride, and was maintained with sevoflurane and an oxygen/air mixture. A Pfannenstiel incision was made and her uterus was found to be intact and small on entering her abdomen. The fetus was found in her abdomen surrounded by an amniotic membrane filled with liquor. The amniotic membrane was dissected and incised and the fetus was extracted (see Additional file : Movie 1 showing delivery of the baby). The fetal Apgar scores were 6 and 10 at one and five minutes, respectively. The placenta was attached to the posterior aspect of the left broad ligament. During its removal, massive bleeding from the placental bed occurred and our patient became hypotensive. She was aggressively resuscitated with a total of 4000 mL of Ringer's lactate, 7 units of packed red blood cells, 4 units of fresh frozen plasma, 10 units of cryoprecipitate and 2 units of platelets. She continued to bleed and was administered 90 units/kg of intravenous Factor VII, which controlled her bleeding. Her left ovary and tube were found to be distorted while the right ones were normal. A hemostatic suture was applied on the distorted tube which was left, together with the ovary, in situ. An abdominal drain was inserted and our patient was extubated on the table and transferred to our Intensive Care Unit for monitoring. She was discharged to the ward on the following day and went home with her newborn 10 days after surgery.