A 36-year-old woman underwent a routine prenatal examination at 26 weeks of pregnancy at the Women and Children's Hospital, Qingdao University. Fetal echocardiography indicated severe pulmonary stenosis with IVS and moderate TR with a jet velocity of 4.7 m/s . Four weeks later, the woman (at 30 weeks of pregnancy) underwent fetal echocardiography; the results showed a TR jet velocity of 2.56 m/s, pulmonary stenosis, and reversed flow in the ductus arteriosus. The predictors of non-BV outcome related to the degree of RV development with no RV sinusoids are shown in . The fetus had not reached the point of necessitating intrauterine invasive procedures in accordance with the standards put forth by Gómez-Montes et al. in 2011 . Fetal echocardiography was repeated every 2–3 weeks and the relevant indicators are detailed in . All indicators can be summarized by the following characteristics: the severity of RV hypoplasia did not worsen and failed to meet the indicators for an intrauterine intervention; and the degree and velocity of TR decreased significantly.
A female infant was delivered at 38 weeks with a birth weight of 3,100 g, heart rate of 128 beats/min, respiratory rate of 45 breaths/min, and percutaneous arterial oxygen saturation (SPO2) of 93%. A bedside echocardiogram was immediately conducted on the infant, which showed the small RV cavity ; the foramen ovale measured 6.4 mm and the pulmonary valve annulus measured 7.6 mm. There was no obvious blood flow through the valve during systole. The patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) measured 4.3 mm and supplied the pulmonary circulation . The tricuspid valvular annulus was 10 mm with a TV-Z score of −1.13, with a slight amount of blood flow in diastole and mild regurgitation in systole, and no severe abnormalities observed . The morphology and structure of the aorta (AO) and pulmonary artery (PA) were normal. The female infant was definitely diagnosed as PA/IVS.
On her first day of life, the SPO2 of the infant decreased to 85%, and the echocardiography showed that the PDA tended to close. The prostaglandin E1 (1–3 ng kg−1 min−1) was administered and SPO2 was maintained to 92% of the total. The following problems were evaluated repeatedly before the operation: no severe TV malformation (Ebstein's anomaly); the TR jet velocity was maintained at 2.0 m/s; no myocardial sinusoids; and the coronary artery was normal. Radiofrequency-assisted perforation is a feasible valvotomy option in catheterization laboratories with proper equipment; cost limitations and a considerable success rate are essential in developing countries, explaining the decision to opt for balloon catheter dilation. In addition, the possibility of ductus-dependent pulmonary blood supply is low after percutaneous balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty.