We present the case of a 74-year-old Caucasian man with a medical history of ischemic heart disease, atrial flutter, arterial hypertension, severe aortic stenosis, chronic lymphocytic leukemia and related immune thrombocytopenia periodically treated with steroids (every 28 days). He was referred to our Emergency Room for fever and an altered state of consciousness. During the clinical examination, his temperature was 40°C, his blood pressure was 120/80mmHg, pulse 89 beats per minute, arrhythmic and his initial oxygen saturation checked by pulse oximetry was 95% in room air. He was somnolent but easily aroused and on examination presented pulmonary bibasal crepitations, heart murmur and a hematoma on his left foot. A laboratory evaluation revealed an increase in white blood cell (WBC) count (15.0×103/μL; reference value 4.00 to 11.00×103/μL), platelet count of 56×103 cells/μL (reference value 150 to 450×103 cells/μL), and C-reactive protein 6.6mg/dL (reference value 0.0 to 0.5mg/dL). Four days before hospital admission, while fishing, his left hand had been scratched by the dorsal fin spine of a black bullhead (Ameiurus melas, catfish); no physical signs in situ were present on initial examination. He was hospitalized in the Clinic of Infectious Diseases, Ferrara. On admission, an empiric antibiotic treatment with ampicillin-sulbactam (3g every 8 hours, intravenous) was initiated intravenously; blood cultures were performed. The day after admission, his vital signs and body temperature were normal but he began to complain of muscle weakness and of severe pain in his lower extremities, radiating to his knees. A neurological examination revealed an asymmetric hyposthenia and hypoesthesia of his lower limbs, bilateral areflexia of his Achilles tendon, lower extremity acute paresis, and bladder dysfunction. A spine magnetic resonance imaging excluded cauda equina syndrome, while the vascular surgeon excluded an acute ischemic peripheral event. To exclude endocarditis an echocardiography was performed, revealing a global cardiac contractile dysfunction with a severe reduction in ejection fraction (35%). Antibiotic therapy was changed to ceftriaxone (2g every 24 hours, intravenous) and levofloxacin (500mg every 12 hours, intravenous) because of the further increase in his WBC count (24.3×103 cells/mm3), and blood cultures revealed an increase in Gram-negative bacilli that were later confirmed to be A. sobria, the latter being identified by Vitek® II method.
After 48 hours, his clinical condition deteriorated and he developed severe sepsis with hypotension (systolic blood pressure was 80mmHg) and peripheral vasoconstriction, acute renal failure with oliguria (urea: 159mg/dL and creatinine: 2.55mg/dL), and severe metabolic acidosis. He was therefore transferred to our Intensive Care Unit (ICU). At this time, laboratory values were as follows: WBC count of 17.4×103 cells/mm3, platelet count of 38×103 cells/mm3, procalcitonin 99.3ng/mL (reference value <0.05ng/mL), and C-reactive protein 46.9mg/dL (reference value 0 to 0.5mg/dL). An antimicrobial regimen was promptly implemented with meropenem (1g every 12 hours, intravenous) and linezolid (600mg every 12 hours, intravenous). Laboratory data suggested a diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis (creatinine phosphinase 5013U/L; reference value <190U/L), myoglobinemia 13270ng/mL (reference value 28 to 72ng/mL), lactate dehydrogenase 673U/L (reference value 240 to 480U/L) and, on physical examination, his lower limbs were warm in presence of erythema. After 12 hours, the swelling of his legs and progression of skin lesions (circumferential erythema developed in bullae formations) increased until a compartment syndrome developed, rapidly requiring surgical treatment with bilateral fasciotomy (Figures and
).
Blood culture results were available 3 days after ICU admission. The strain was identified as Aeromonas sobria. The isolate was susceptible to amikacin, cefepime, cefotaxime, ceftazidime, levofloxacin, ertapenem, gentamicin, and piperacillin-tazobactam. Resistance to meropenem and imipenem were also observed. Antibiotics were adjusted in relation to blood culture and sensitivities. Consequently, meropenem was discontinued and he was given ceftazidime (2g every 8 hours, intravenous).
On ICU day 7, due to return of spiking fever and leg pain, computed tomography (CT) scans were performed. CT scans of his lower extremities showed progression to overt fasciitis with gaseous infiltration in the soft tissues (Figure ). In view of the CT scan images and microbiological results, the surgeon was consulted and amputation for necrotizing infections of the extremities was performed. Deep wound cultures yielded growth of Gram-negative bacilli, which were identified as A. sobria. No anaerobes were detected from necrotic tissue. After surgical and medical treatment, his clinical status showed progressive improvement in renal, cardiocirculatory, splanchnic and metabolic function. Laboratory findings revealed no further signs of rhabdomyolysis (creatinine phosphinase 97U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 378U/L); a progressive reduction in WBC count (13.7×103 cells/mm3), a platelet count of 122×103 cells/mm3, procalcitonin 0.88ng/mL, urea 58mg/dL and creatinine 0.78mg/dL were observed. Over the course of weeks, consecutive blood cultures showed Aeromonas microorganisms were no longer isolated.
Although surgical wounds following bilateral amputation presented no further signs of necrosis, frequent surgical debridements were still necessary. In order to perform these painful procedures he was heavily sedated and required mechanical ventilation, which prolonged his stay in the ICU. Despite the aggressive treatment and administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics, including antifungal prophylaxis, the coexistence of immunocompromised host and comorbidities induced during his ICU stay, caused the development of an invasive candidemia (Candida albicans) which was ultimately responsible for his death.