A right-handed 9-year-old boy fell on an outstretched hand two weeks before admitted to the hospital. The patient presented with a right wrist-drop and right elbow flexion stiffness. On the physical examination, the patient cannot extend his right wrist and thumb. There was also sensory deficit, anaesthesia sensation over the radial nerve distribution and hypoesthesia sensation on the ulnar nerve distribution. The median and ulnar nerve examinations were standard. The distal pulsation is solid and regular. The right elbow joint was stiff with a limited flexion-extension range of motion (60–90°). Radiographs showed a displaced SCF classified as Gartland type III. The parents first sought treatment from a traditional bonesetter before came to the hospital (, , ).
Surgical management is preferred for this case, and we decided to explore the nerve while simultaneously reduce and stabilize the fracture. First, we explored the ulnar nerve with a medial approach and found the ulnar nerve was entrapped in fibrous tissue and carefully released it. Then the lateral approach is utilized to explore the radial nerve. We found the radial nerve has lost its continuity and interposed by fibrotic tissue. The scar and fibrous tissue were carefully resected, leaving a 2 cm gap in the nerve. We approximate the nerve with end-to-end neurorrhaphy after the fracture was reduced and stabilized with 3-Kirschner wire. Postoperatively, the elbow was kept in long-arm cast with elbow flexed 90° to avoid nerve stretching for six weeks. The distal vascular status is good after the operation and cast application (, , , ).
At the 4-month follow-up, the fracture was united. The elbow range of motion has improved; 20° to 115° elbow flexion is seen. The neurological status showed an improvement. The patient could extend his right thumb and wrist but developed a tingling sensation in the posterior forearm, extending to the dorsum of the hand and lateral three and a half fingers; the tingling was triggered by full extension of the elbow. Concerning the radial nerve condition, we did not release and manipulate the elbow. At 1-year follow-up, the motor and sensory function fully recovered (, , ).