A 27-year-old white-British female (Patient 1) born to non-consanguineous parents developed intermittent episodes of diarrhea, vomiting and abdominal cramps aged 18, associated with significant weight loss. Symptoms were initially presumed to be post-infectious, given her extensive travel history to Sub-Saharan Africa, South America and South-East Asia. This first episode resolved spontaneously.
Aged 25, she represented with diarrhoea, vomiting, abdominal pain and bloating. Family history was notable for an elder sister (Patient 2) with a diagnosis of Crohn’s disease. Faecal calprotectin was significantly raised (> 600; ref. 0–50⎧g/g). Tissue transglutaminase IgA antibody, serial stool samples for faecal culture, ova, cysts and parasites, and Clostridium Difficile toxin testing, were negative. Gastroscopy revealed appearances consistent with a dilated second part of the duodenum in keeping with possible small bowel obstruction. Colonoscopy was challenging due to a sharply angulated sigmoid colon and significant patient discomfort. Despite multiple attempts, it was not possible to intubate and biopsy the terminal ileum. Colonic biopsies obtained showed a panproctocolitis compatible with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) . Magnetic resonance (MR) enterography identified a 2 cm segment of terminal ileum with mural thickening and oedema and intermediate enhancement. There was separation of bowel loops in the distal ileal mesentery suggestive of fat proliferation. The remainder of the small bowel and large bowel were normal, with no enlarged nodes, free fluid or fluid collection .
A diagnosis of Crohn’s disease was made based on clinical, radiological and pathological findings. Treatment with budesonide and, subsequently, azathioprine was initiated. Four weeks after commencing azathioprine, the patient developed sore throat, headache, myalgia, and pyrexia of 41.1 °C.
On examination, she was of short stature with generalized sarcopaenia. BMI was 16.5 kg/m . Cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal examinations were normal with no extraintestinal manifestations of IBD. Higher cognitive function was normal. Cranial nerve, upper and lower limb, and cerebellar examinations were all normal except for depressed reflexes.
She was treated for presumed meningoencephalitis with empirical broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics and aciclovir, which were stopped following receipt of sterile blood, urine and cerebrospinal fluid cultures. Echocardiography and CT chest/abdomen/pelvis were unremarkable. Withdrawal of azathioprine during admission led to rapid clinical improvement and apyrexia.
Persistent headaches during the episode led to an MRI brain examination , revealing extensive white matter changes that persisted six weeks after stopping azathioprine . Subsequent metabolic investigations identified elevated plasma lactate (5.2 mM), plasma ammonia (56 mM), plasma thymidine (10⎧M) and deoxyuridine (15⎧M), and elevated urine thymidine (0.228 mM) and deoxyuridine (0.203 mM), consistent with thymidine phosphorylase deficiency. Genetic testing revealed two heterozygous TYMP variants: c.401C > A p.(Ala134Glu) [reported previously ] and c.845G > A p.(Gly282Asp) [novel variant], confirming diagnosis of MNGIE. Two years after stopping azathioprine, the patient is well with no active neurological or gastrointestinal symptoms.
Her elder sister (Patient 2) had a longstanding history of diarrhoea with nocturnal symptoms, lethargy, loud borborygmi after eating and difficulty maintaining weight. She too had been diagnosed with Crohn’s disease aged 34 following a colonoscopy that had identified aphthous ulceration in her descending colon and biopsy findings consistent with inflammatory bowel disease . She had also been treated with budesonide and azathioprine with no improvement in her symptoms. Additionally, she had undergone brain MRI as a healthy control subject for a clinical trial, which identified an incidental leukoencephalopathy . Examination at age 38 revealed bilateral ptosis, reduced upwards gaze and lateral eye movements, generalized sarcopaenia, a mild waddling gait and modified Gowers’ manoeuvre. Speech and cognition were normal. Peripheral tone and power were normal. She was areflexic. There were no cerebellar signs. Her BMI was 14.9 kg/m .
Subsequent investigations identified elevated plasma thymidine (15⎧M) and deoxyuridine (21⎧M) and elevated urine thymidine (0.6 mM) and deoxyuridine (0.634 mM). Genetic testing identified the presence of the same two TYMP variants c.401C > A p.(Ala134Glu) and c.845G > A p.(Gly282Asp). In the context of having identified TYMP variants, and the common absence of specific histological features of Crohn’s disease, a further retrospective review of colonic biopsies from both patients identified features also suggestive of MNGIE .