A 79-year-old Caucasian woman reported for an outpatient consultation, presenting with urgency (12–15 times/day), nocturia (3 times/night), inability to fully empty her bladder, and reoccurring UTIs (three times in the past 3 months). Our patient was declared cardiopulmonary stabile with blood pressure of 130/90 mmHg and a pulse of 67 beats/min. A detailed medical history revealed a multidrug regimen (bisoprolol 5 mg, candesartan cilexetil 16 mg, lercanidipin hydrochlorid 10 mg) controlled her hypertension for 15 years with the use of no diuretics, and the presence of open-angle glaucoma, which contraindicated the use of anticholinergic therapy. She took no other medications on a regular basis. Our patient had had three deliveries, including one vaginal birth and two cesarean deliveries. Previous operations included the following: benign left ovarian cystectomy, right nephrectomy after a vehicle accident, abdominal herniotomy, and anal abscess extirpation. Our patient was married, a retired elementary school teacher, with a history of no regular alcohol or drug consumption or smoking. Any allergy was not known. A blood test revealed normal liver and kidney function, and no sign of generalized infection (glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase [GOT]: 40 U/L, glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase [GPT]: 25 U/L, gamma-glutamyl-transpeptidase [GGT]: 43 U/L, amylase: 56 U/L, alkaline phosphatase: 91 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase [LDH]: 180/U/L, creatinine: 0.93 mg/dL, sodium [NA]: 138 mmol/L, potassium [K]: 4.1 mmol/L, calcium [Ca] 2.52 mmol/L, haemoglobin 13.9 g/dL, leukocytes: 6.6/nL, thrombocytes: 301/nL, erythrocytes: 4.8/pL, C-reactive protein [CRP]: 23. mg/L). On admission, a urine dipstick tested positive for nitrite, leukocyte esterase, and blood, with alkaline pH (8.5). Microbiology revealed ongoing Escherichia coli UTI, which was treated with oral cefuroxim 2 × 250 mg for 7 days. On urogynecological physical examination, we found no signs of urogenital prolapse (pelvic organ prolapse quantification [POP-Q] scores Aa: − 3, Ap: − 3, Ba: −3, Bp: −3, C: −7, GH: 2, Pb: 2, TVL: 9, D: −8), vaginitis, and vaginal or cervical erosion. Pelvic ultrasound confirmed no altered pelvic anatomy, with an atrophic 5.18 × 2.8 × 2.4 cm-sized uterus, with an endometrial thickness of 3 mm, sharp endomyometrial borders, with no sign of adnexal pathology, and no presence of free abdominal fluid. The introitus ultrasound found the urethral length to be 3.66 cm, with a significant visible stenosis at the middle segment of the urethra (0.4 mm). During catheterization, 150 mL post-void residual urine was detected . A neurologic examination included the assessment of the tone, the strength, and the coordinated movements of the lower extremities, especially focusing on the abduction and the spreading of the toes, proving intact S3 innervation. The bulbocavernosus reflex and the anal sphincter reflexes were also found to be normal (intact S2˗S4 innervation). The preoperative urodynamic examination resulted in detrusor pressure at maximum flow ranges of 40 cm H2O with maximum flow rates (Qmax) of less than 10 mL/s. After the informed consent of the patient, we carried out urethral dilation with ascending Hegar sticks ranging from 3 to 13 mm (Ch9 to Ch39) in diameter in general narcosis. Before each dilatator insertion, lidocaine jelly was administered transurethraly . All metallic dilatators were inserted 4 cm deep in the long axis of the urethra, and then gently pulled saggitally downward till they met resistance. Intraoperative cefuroxime 1500 mg, and metronidazole 500 mg antibiotic prophylaxis was given to our patient to avoid postoperative uretrocystitis developing. Before and after the dilatation, cysto-urethroscopy was carried out, to confirm preoperative urethral stenosis, and no urethra or bladder injury postoperatively . Six months after our patient’s surgery, she was reported her to be symptomless, continent, and the post-void residual urine volume was found to be completely eliminated, with no sign of UTI.