A hitherto healthy 23-year-old Caucasian male student reported a history of several intermittent episodes of absence for over a year. According to his family, such episodes recurred every 2 months. During the episodes, he was conscious, but felt sleepy, his vision was blurred and he was unable to talk. In addition, he suffered one episode of concomitant jaw paralysis. These episodes happened most frequently upon awakening, but sometimes also late in the afternoon. The family had noticed that his symptoms improved continuously within 30 minutes of having eaten honey, sugar or fruits. Every episode was usually followed by headaches. He also mentioned a weight gain of 6kg over the past year. His physical examination was normal and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalogram with sleep deprivation failed to demonstrate any abnormality. However, never was the patient evaluated while symptomatic. He was referred to our endocrinology out-patient clinic to exclude a metabolic disorder. He had no family history of any metabolic or endocrine disorders.
In the meantime, his general practitioner taught the patient to self-monitor his capillary blood glucose levels. While completely asymptomatic, his fasting glucose levels ranged between 2.3mmol/L and 3.0mmol/L. None of the blood glucose measures was done during an episode of absence.
Laboratory findings on two different occasions revealed low venous fasting plasma glucose concentrations (2.6mmol/L and 1.6mmol/L) with high insulin (15.5mU/L and 55.3mU/L) and C-peptide (0.762nmol/L and 0.53nmol/L) levels. A 72-hour fasting test had to be stopped after 18 hours because of a glucose level of 1.8mmol/L and a mini-mental state score (MMSE) of 24 out of 30. After an intravenous injection of 1mg of glucagon, the glucose level increased to 4.7mmol/L and the MMSE to 29 out of 30. A plasma sulfonylureas screen test at the beginning and at the end of the fasting study was negative. Anti-insulin antibodies were negative. Insulin and C-peptide levels increased during the fasting test. These results confirmed our clinical suspicion of an insulinoma.
An abdominal computed tomography (CT) and MRI did not reveal any lesions. A subsequent somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (SRS) performed 4 hours and 24 hours after injection of 190MBq 111In-pentetreotide (OctreoScan®) showed a faint but definite, albeit discrete, focal abnormality at the junction between the head and body of the pancreas, compatible with an insulinoma . Nevertheless, endoscopic ultrasound of the pancreas failed to confirm this finding. We decided not to perform selective intra-arterial calcium stimulation with hepatic venous sampling at this stage because we relied on the results of the SRS. We initially planned to complete the investigations by performing a glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor scintigraphy to confirm the lesion found only on SRS. The patient, nonetheless, refused this supplementary imaging procedure. After a multidisciplinary discussion, a 111In-pentetreotide radio-guided surgery was performed. The day before surgery, the patient received 200MBq of 111In-pentetreotide and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) CT, which confirmed the focal uptake located between the head and the body of the pancreas described above. During surgery, the nuclear gamma probe detected the increased uptake that was suspected to be the lesion within the head and the body of the pancreas, but intraoperative ultrasound failed to detect any morphological abnormality. Biopsies were undertaken in the area of this maximal signal intensity detected by the gamma probe. However, the frozen sections were not conclusive for an insulinoma. Metallic clips were put around the biopsy site and the abdomen was closed. Another SRS was performed 2 weeks after this first intervention and confirmed that the uptake was located between the surgical clips, exactly at the same location as it had been seen on the first SPECTCT. As the tumor was located deeper in the head of the pancreas, a pylorus preserving duodenopancreatectomy was performed after having obtained the patient’s consent. Macroscopic examination of the resection specimen identified no tumor. Microscopically, the lobular architecture of the exocrine pancreas was preserved and no ductuloinsular complexes were observed in any specimens. Some of the islets were enlarged and varied in size; some measuring 0.2cm and randomly scattered throughout the pancreatic parenchyma. The outlines of the islets were more irregular than normal . A consistent finding in all specimens was the presence of multiple enlarged islet cells showing increased nuclear size with prominent nucleoli and clear cytoplasm . There was no mitotic activity. The enlarged and irregular islets were highlighted with immunohistochemical staining by using antibodies against chromogranin and synaptophysin . Approximately half of all cells within the pancreatic islets were stained with insulin . By contrast, glucagon and somatostatin cells did not have any cytologic abnormalities. Insulin-positive cells were also scattered throughout the parenchyma. These features, combined with the clinical and radiological findings, are consistent with diffuse nesidioblastosis.
Noting that multiple endocrine neoplasia mutations were described in conjunction with nesidioblastosis, a menin gene mutation with polymerase chain reaction enzymatic amplification was performed and was found to be negative. Calcium, prolactin and insulin-like growth factor 1 levels were within normal values.
Postoperative recovery was complicated by a wound infection. Following surgery, the hypoglycemic episodes continued and a diffuse nesidioblastosis of the pancreatic distal body and tail was suspected. The patient’s diet was adapted to provide regular intake of carbohydrates, especially early in the morning, but the patient’s symptoms persisted. To avoid further pancreatic resection in such a young patient, a verapamil treatment was initiated (40mg twice daily, increasing up to 80mg three times daily, over 1 week). The patient, however, experienced severe headaches and palpitation after 3 weeks and stopped the medication. Diazoxide was then introduced; initially 100mg twice daily, increasing to 100mg three times a day, which resulted in a normalization of his glucose level with peaks of up to 7.2mmol/L. A 72-hour subcutaneous glucose monitoring testing, undertaken through a glucosensor (CGMS Sensor®), revealed normal glycaemia levels.
Four months after surgery, the patient experienced abdominal pain, more frequent stools (three times a day) and weight loss (1kg/week). Stool examination showed high fat levels of 89g per 24 hours (normal value 5g to 7g per 24 hours). Therefore, an enzyme substitution was initiated and dietary advice provided in order to treat the postoperative malabsorption.