A 60-year-old man presented with a two-week history of myalgia, progressive distal limb weakness, head drop, and dysphagia. He had no other significant symptoms. Past medical history revealed that four months prior, he was hospitalized for severe COVID-19 infection confirmed by a positive SARS-CoV-2 polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test, complicated by a superimposed bacterial infection which requiring a short stay in the intensive care unit for mechanical ventilation, corticosteroid and antibiotic therapy. He had no other medical illness and was not taking any medications. Clinical examination revealed symmetrical weakness of bilateral elbow, wrist, knee, and ankle movements with Medical Research Council (MRC) muscle power of grade 3/5 and extensor neck muscle weakness with no apparent muscle atrophy or fasciculation. The reflexes were reduced in both upper and lower extremities with down going plantar responses. His swallowing was impaired, and he required nasogastric tube feeding. The sensory, cranial nerve and other systemic examinations were normal. There was no autonomic dysfunction.
Routine blood investigations including complete blood count, renal profile, metabolic profile, infective markers, urinalysis, electrocardiogram (ECG), and echocardiogram were all normal. Chest X-ray showed opacities at bilateral upper lobes (left > right), and lower lobe. He had a raised Creatinine Kinase (CK) level of 13671 U/L and a positive anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) titre greater than 1:1280 with cytoplasmic dense fine speckled pattern. Rheumatoid Factor, complement levels, Hepatitis and HIV screening were all negative. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis of pathogens and autoimmune antibodies were also negative. Initially, the clinical myopathy was thought to be attributed to rhabdomyolysis; however, despite aggressive fluid hydration, the CK level remained consistently above 10,000 U/L. Electromyography (EMG) over bilateral deltoid and tibialis anterior muscles, revealed predominant fibrillation and positive sharp waves, consistent with electrophysiological evidence of myositis. Myositis-specific autoantibodies test panel were strongly positive for anti-signal recognition particle (SRP) and anti-Ro52 antibody. The muscle biopsy from the vastus lateralis demonstrates a pauci-inflammation necrotizing myopathy with randomly distributed necrotic fibres with no specific features, such as perifascicular atrophy, lymphocytic invasion in myofibers or rimmed vacuoles, to suggest dermatomyositis, polymyositis or inclusion body myositis, respectively . Computed Tomography (CT) scans of the thorax, abdomen, pelvis, and esophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGDS) were normal, excluding malignancy as a possible cause of immune-mediated necrotizing myopathies. However, the High-Resolution CT thorax revealed bilateral lower lobes reticulation with traction bronchiectasis suggestive of progressive lung fibrosis.
In view of the involvement bulbar and neck muscles, he was commenced on intravenous methylprednisolone 500 mg daily for 3 days and intravenous immunoglobulin 2 g/kg over five days followed by an immunosuppressant, Azathioprine 150 mg daily (2 mg/kg), and oral prednisolone 60 mg daily (1 mg/kg of prednisolone. On follow-up, he continued to improve clinically and biochemically. His steroids were tapered gradually, and he responded well to treatment. His CK levels significantly decreased, nasogastric tube removed, and he could ambulate independently and resumed to his baseline by 6 months of treatment.