A 58-year-old Taiwanese female with diabetes mellitus and occupation-related contact history of feline came to our outpatient department to seek medical help for progressively decreased vision in the past year. On examination, the distant BCVA was 20/20 in the left eye but the best-corrected near visual acuity showed a poor value of J10 (equal to 20/65 at near vision); presbyopia was then diagnosed. Prophylactic antibiotic with topical moxifloxacin four times per day was prescribed before the clear lens extraction procedure, and the patient received phacoemulsification with intraocular lens (IOL) implantation on July 10, 2015, without intraoperative complication. One day after surgery, she complained about blurred vision and ocular pain in her left eye under the use of topical levofloxacin four times per day as a postoperative prophylactic agent. An ocular examination revealed a BCVA of 20/40 in the left eye, conjunctival injection, corneal edema, multiple anterior chamber cells 4+ by Standardization of Uveitis Nomenclature (SUN) grading score and a full-patency nasolacrimal duct. With suspected acute postoperative endophthalmitis, emergency admission was suggested and she was admitted to our hospital on July 12, 2015. On the day of admission, a further decreased BCVA to light perception, hypopyon formation and vitreous opacity were observed.
After the subject was hospitalized, a needle tap was performed and fluid from the vitreous and anterior chambers was obtained and sent for culture. We continued administering topical levofloxacin accompanied with intravitreal vancomycin (1 mg/0.1 mL) and amikacin (0.4 mg/0.1 mL) injection every 2 days without systemic antibiotic therapy, but hypopyon remained and vitreous opacity was found by B-scan ultrasonography . For the deteriorating lesion, trans pars plana vitrectomy (TPPV) and anterior chamber irrigation were performed on July 13, 2015. In all, 23-gage trocars were inserted at the pars plana region after aseptic procedures. Diffuse vitreous haze without vitreous hemorrhage or retinal break was found during TPPV , and the vitreous cavity was cleared by vitrectomy and examined by indirect ophthalmoscope to ensure media clarity. In addition, dexamethasone was injected into the vitreous to retard the inflammation. The specimen collected from the vitreous and anterior chambers yielded the growth of circular whitish-yellow colonies with smooth edges, which turned out to be S. hyicus. The microorganism susceptibility test revealed responses to amikacin, vancomycin, ceftazidime, cefepime, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin, piperacillin plus tazobactam, teicoplanin and daptomycin and resistance to penicillin, cefazolin, gentamicin, cefuroxime, ceftriaxone and ofloxacin was observed. The hypopyon improved under combined antibiotic treatment with amikacin and vancomycin. The patient was discharged on October 8, 2015 with BCVA by counting fingers at 30 cm, and blood sugar level did not exceed 200 mg/dL throughout the admission. In the follow-up visit, the BCVA of the left eye remained around 20/200, with anterior chamber cell of 1–2+ and remnant vitreous opacity. No intravitreal injection of antibiotics was arranged after the discharge. Then, the patient failed to visit our clinic for a short period and was back to our clinic on October 16, 2015 for the mild blurred vision; vitreous haze was observed via indirect ophthalmoscope. As a result, another TPPV without intravitreal injection was performed on October 20, 2015. During the surgery, only mild vitreous haze was found, similar to the condition at the previous visit, and vitrectomy was performed to clear the vitreous again. The vitreous opacity had vanished postoperatively, and the patient was discharged on October 29, 2015 . Skin specimens from one of the feline the patient bred grew the same pathogen of S. hyicus. The anterior chamber cell had diminished to a score of zero, and the BCVA recovered to 20/32 at the last visit on January 20, 2017 .
All the procedures and managements performed in the current case report involving the human patient adhere to the Declaration of Helsinki of 1964. A written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images.