A 64-year-old male patient was admitted to the emergency ward for severe occipital headache, visual disturbances and new-onset severe hypertension. The symptoms were initially noted three days before admission. His medical history was notable for hypercholesterolemia with atorvastatin therapy. Thirteen months before admission, an EVAR operation was performed to repair a rapidly expanding AAA with a diameter of 53 mm. EVAR with Endurant endograft (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN) was combined with a Chimney procedure into the left renal artery, using a balloon expandable covered stent-graft (7 × 38 mm Advanta V12; Atrium Medical Corp). The Chimney technique was used due to irregular aortic neck with posterior ulceration and high difference of right renal artery origin, 10 mm above the left renal artery origin. Antiplatelet therapy with clopidrogel (75 mg/day) was initiated after the surgery. During the 6th month follow-up an abdominal computed-tomography angiography (CTA) revealed a well functioning aortic stent and a patent CG (Figure A-B). One month before presentation with hypertension, clopidrogel therapy was temporarily stopped for six days, in order to undergo an elective laparoscopic bilateral inguinal hernia repair (IHR) surgery. The immediate-post operative follow-up after the IHR was uneventful with normal blood pressure measuring.
At admission, the patient was without abdominal or flank pain. Blood pressure was 224/113 mmHg, heart rate 91 beats per minute. Ophthalmology examination including optical coherence tomography (OCT) revealed retinal detachment and a large accumulation of subretinal fluid in the right eye. There were no murmurs or bruits over the renal arteries. Laboratory results at admission with comparison to values taken five weeks before admission are summarized in Table .
Renal duplex ultrasound failed to detect blood flow into the left renal artery. CTA demonstrated an abdominal endograft that was patent without a leak, dissection or migration. However, a total occlusion of the CG to the left renal artery was noted without stent kinking (Figure C-D). The left renal parenchyma was smaller compared to the previous CTA, with decreased contrast media uptake and hypodense wedge areas, indicative of multiple infract (Figure E).
Medical therapy to reduce blood pressure was initiated with intravenous nitroglycerine and subsequently with maximal dosage of oral ramipril, amlodipine and hydrochlorothiazide. Blood pressure was lowered gradually and the patient was discharged with improvement of ophthalmological findings and serum creatinine levels of 1.5 mg/dL. Eight months after discharge, the patient was asymptomatic with only ramipril 2.5 mg/day as antihypertensive medication. At that point of time, office blood pressure was measured 128/81 mmHg and serum creatinine levels were of 1.3 mg/dL. The protein excretion in urine was of 280 mg/day.