A 78-year-old woman was emergently transferred to our hospital with fever and abdominal pain. The patient was generally ill and almost immobile. Her medical history included a total abdominal hysterectomy for uterine fibroids. Her body temperature was 37.6 ℃, white blood cell count was 16,700 cells/µL, and C-reactive protein level was 19.33 mg/dL. Computed tomography (CT) revealed sigmoid colon cancer with a huge intra-abdominal abscess approximately 13 cm in diameter . No diverticula was observed in the patient. While the exact location of perforation was unclear, the perforation seemed to be at a micro level within the tumor, mainly affecting the mesenteric and/or retroperitoneum side, suggesting that diffuse peritonitis was likely avoided. Therefore, we performed emergent percutaneous drainage in addition to bowel rest and antibiotics. Inflammation was well-controlled within a week. Cytological analysis of the drained fluid revealed inflammation without significant malignancies.
Colonoscopy revealed circumferential advanced cancer in the sigmoid colon, and a biopsy revealed tubular adenocarcinoma . Tests for both RAS and BRAF showed wild-type status, and those for tumor markers showed negative results. Follow-up CT for re-evaluation revealed a bulky tumor that possibly invaded the adjacent organs (such as the bladder, ileum, and ovary), with enlarged regional lymph nodes . Although distant metastasis was not suspected, the diagnosis was LACC, stage IIIC (T4bN2aM0), according to the 8th Union for International Cancer Control classification. The tumor was complicated by inflammation, including a residual abscess. The patient also exhibited pleural effusion, primarily due to undernutrition, with a serum albumin level of less than 2 g/dL, lymphocyte count of 835 cells/µL, and total cholesterol level of 160 mg/dL. Immediate curative surgery including multivisceral resection was inappropriate from the viewpoint of both local tumor progression and the patient’s frailty; therefore, we decided to perform preoperative chemotherapy first.
We performed laparoscopic loop colostomy construction in the right transverse colon and initiated chemotherapy. Pmab monotherapy (6 mg/kg intravenously on day 1 every 2 weeks) was selected for this frail patient, and seven cycles were completed without significant adverse events. After chemotherapy, the tumor shrank with flattening on colonoscopy . The tumor and enlarged regional lymph nodes also shrank significantly on CT. While the possibility of left ovary involvement still existed, invasion of the bladder and ileum was no longer suspected . Magnetic resonance imaging and cystoscopy were performed, showing that invasion of the bladder was negative . Radiological assessment revealed a partial response, according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in the Solid Tumors guidelines. Notably, the previously observed intra-abdominal abscess and pleural effusion disappeared, and the patient’s frailty, including nutritional status, was improved, with serum albumin level increasing to approximately 3 g/dL, lymphocyte count increasing to 1,750 cells/µL, and total cholesterol level increasing to 284 mg/dL. Therefore, we decided to perform curative surgery.
Curative open sigmoidectomy with regional lymphadenectomy (high ligation of the inferior mesenteric artery), combined resection of the left ovary, and stoma closure were performed . Notably, the abscess had completely disappeared in the surgical finding. The operation time was 264 min, and estimated blood loss was 130 mL, with no need for blood transfusion. The postoperative course was uneventful. The final pathological finding was well and moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, T3N0M0, stage IIA, and complete resection with a sufficient resection margin had been achieved. Although the radiological response was significant, the pathological assessment indicated only minimal tumor regression . The patient preferred ACT with oral fluoropyrimidine for 6 months, which was completed without significant adverse events. The patient was recurrence-free and had shown no significant organ dysfunction 21 months after the curative surgery.