In January 2017, a Saudi male aged 18-year old presented to our diabetes center in Abha City, Saudi Arabia, with uncontrolled diabetes. He was diagnosed 6 years earlier by a primary care physician to have type 1 diabetes mellitus, totally based on being a diabetic child.
The patient was kept on “Lantus Solostar,” a single dose at night before bed, and “Novorapid” with meals. However, he was not compliant to treatment and his blood glucose kept on fluctuating and not controlled.
In October 2016 (3 months earlier), he almost stopped taking treatment for type 1 diabetes. He came to our diabetes center for management of his uncontrolled diabetes and to explore the possibility of using insulin pump for management of his condition.
A thorough history was taken from the patient. There was no history of hospitalization for ketoacidosis, hyperglycemic, or hypoglycemic coma. His father was type 2 diabetic, but none of the siblings were diabetic. He was physically inactive and frequently on fast foods with daily several intakes of soft drinks and power drinks. His height was 170 cm and his weight was 135 kg, with body mass index of 46.7 kg/m2, i.e., morbid obesity.
The patient's vital signs were within normal range. His glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level was 9.9% . Immune dysfunction was evaluated using serum antibodies levels of glutamic acid decarboxylase, which proved to be negative (0.7 U/mL), whereas serum C-peptide level was not low (2.2 ng/mL). Therefore, the patient was diagnosed as early onset type 2 diabetic.
Our patient was advised to completely stop fast foods, soft and power drinks, and to start physical exercise through daily walking for at least 1 h.
The dietitian planned a strict diet plan for him to follow. He was instructed to resume using “Lantus Solostar,” a single dose at night before bed and “Metformin” 500 mg tablets once daily with the evening meal was started.
The patient received detailed health education on nature and management of his condition, as well as the importance of compliance to treatment, diet, and physical exercise. He was also advised to keep daily self-monitoring of his blood glucose level and to maintain regular monthly visits to his physician at the diabetes center for follow-up.
After 4 months (May 2018), his body weight became 114 kg (body mass index = 39.4 kg/m2). His HbA1c became 6%.
Therefore, insulin was stopped, and he was advised to continue on metformin, the diet, and daily walking. Two months later (July 2018), his body weight was 109 kg (body mass index = 37.7 kg/m2) and his HbA1c became 5.41% .