A 3-d-old female neonate was referred to our hospital with anorexia, poor reactivity for 2 d, and shortness of breath for 1 d.
The 3-d-old female infant was born at 38 wk and 3 d of gestation. At birth, she weighed 3300 grams, with a normal amniotic fluid, umbilical cord, and placenta, and achieved a perfect score of 10 on the Apgar scale. One day after birth, she was sent to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) because of anorexia and poor reaction. At first, she was suspected to have "neonatal pneumonia" and was provided with non-invasive ventilator support. She was also treated with an antibiotic combination of ceftazidime and penicillin. The patient was then sent to our facility because her symptoms did not improve and she continued to experience breathing difficulty.
No specific past medical history.
The patient was the family's third child. The first child had died because of an illness, within a month of delivery. Both parents and her elder sister (the family's second child) did not show any disease symptoms. The family did not have any significant medical history of a similar disease. The maternal age at delivery was 24 years. There was no history of the mother being exposed to quinolone antibiotics, pesticides, hormone medicines, or radiation, and she was a non-smoker and non-drinker. However, the mother had been exposed to mosquito repellents during pregnancy. A week before delivery, the mother suffered a respiratory illness and was treated with cefazolin.
The patient’s vitals at admission were as follows: Axillary temperature, 36.8 ℃; respiratory rate, 58 beats/min; pulse rate, 150 times/min; BP, 64/32 mmHg; and transcutaneous oxygen saturation, 90%.
Physical examination showed evidence of DS phenotype, namely simian crease, hypertelorism, and hypotonia. The trunk skin had developed red maculopapular rashes. Heart and lung auscultation did not reveal any murmurs or rales. Both the liver and spleen could be easily palpated at 3 and 5 cm below the costal border, respectively.
The results of complete blood analysis were as follows: Total leukocyte count, 79.37 × 109/L; neutrophils, 17.40%; lymphocytes, 8.40%; monocytes, 71.10%; hemoglobin, 16.2 g/dL; and platelet count, 514 × 109/L. Fifty-eight percent of the total cells in the peripheral blood smear were primitive and naive cells. The reticulocyte counts were 126.80 × 109/L (2.99%).
After testing the blood solution, the concentration of potassium ions was 7.44 mmol/L. All the body fluids of the patient, including the cerebrospinal fluid, blood culture, and urine, were within the normal range.
Details of the bone marrow smear are shown in Figure . Hyperplasia of the bone marrow was clearly observed in the bone marrow smear, and approximately 35% of the bone marrow cells were classified as primitive. These cells showed the following morphological characteristics: (1) Rounded nuclei, fine and loose nuclear chromatin, and the presence of 1-3 nucleoli; (2) dynamic proliferation of myeloid cells; (3) suppressed growth of new erythroblasts; (4) 8% of the total bone marrow cells were lymphocytes; and (5) megakaryocytes were rare and primordial cells.
The results of chromosome analysis showed DS. The karyotype was 47, xx, + 21. GATA1 mutation was identified based on gene sequencing analysis. The variation information was NM_002049: exon2: c.1A>G: p.M1. The chromosome position was chrX: 48649517A>G with a mutation frequency of 99.4%.