A 74-year-old Japanese man presented to the previous hospital complaining of right hip pain. There was no history of trauma. His history included appendicitis and hypertension. X-rays showed no obvious abnormalities , so further examinations were performed. The computed tomography (CT) scan showed evidence of sclerosis with a periosteal reaction in the right supra-acetabulum . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with T1 weighting showed a linear low signal and an equivalent signal surrounding it at the right supra-acetabulum, and the linear low signal and high signal surrounding it were seen on the T2-weighted image. The lesion was not suppressed by short TI inversion recovery. Contrast-enhanced MRI showed the lesion gradually enhanced . A malignant bone tumor at right supra-acetabulum was suspected by CT and MRI, and he was referred to our department. Blood testing was carried out for differential diagnosis considering bone metastasis from carcinoma or secondary osteoporosis. There were no inflammatory findings in the blood results, nor were there any abnormalities in his electrolytes, thyroid hormones, or tumor markers. Moreover, nuclear examinations were performed to distinguish between benign or malignant and to check whether there were other bone lesions. A bone scintigram showed accumulation in the right supra-acetabulum. Positron emission tomography showed accumulation of standardized uptake value (SUV)max3.5 in the right supra-acetabulum.
The differential diagnoses considered were a primary malignant bone tumor such as osteosarcoma, a right supra-acetabular metastasis, and a right supra-acetabular IF. A bone biopsy was performed for diagnosis. The CT-guided needle biopsy showed no tumor cells, but there was formation of osteoids and infiltration of inflammatory cells, indicating the healing process after a fracture . The pathology confirmed an IF of the right supra-acetabulum.
We performed some follow-up imaging to examine the patient for osteoporosis. The L2–L4% young adult mean (YAM) was 66% (normal value ≥ 80%), which suggested osteoporosis. Blood results included alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level at 558 IU/L (normal value 50–350), and the total type I procollagen N-terminal propeptide (totalP1NP) was 115 µg/L (normal value 18.1–74.1). These results are compatible to a healing fracture.
The patient was started on oral bisphosphonate once a month from 2 months after the first visit. Four months after the first visit, he no longer complained of hip pain and sclerosis could be seen on images of the right supra-acetabulum . X-ray at 2 years after the first visit showed the shadow of the sclerosis faded.
No adverse and unanticipated event occurred.