We report a 12 year old girl, who first presented at the age of 8 years for evaluation of recurrent episodes of chest pain not associated with exercise and lasting for several minutes. Echocardiography showed AAOLCA from the right aortic sinus . The coronary artery took a caudal course below the right ventricular outflow tract. In the absence of signs of myocardial ischemia and since the episodes of chest pain had the characteristics of idiopathic chest pain we decided to monitor the patient in the first decade without invasive diagnosis. When she was referred again at the age of 12 years she still had short episodes of chest pain but otherwise she was asymptomatic. To exclude possible myocardial ischemia in the presence of the coronary anomaly we now proposed a full cardiac work up. Cardiac MRI showed normal cardiac function. Treadmill testing revealed good exercise capability without signs of myocardial ischemia while bicycle-stress echocardiography showed normal left ventricular function without any regional wall motion abnormalities. 48-h Holter-monitoring showed sinus rhythm without any arrhythmias. Selective coronary angiography, performed under deep intravenous sedation, confirmed origin of the left coronary artery from the right aortic sinus . The left coronary artery did not take an interarterial but rather an inferior, subpulmonic course. This was further clarified by contrast-enhanced computed tomography (Somatom Force, Siemens) which clearly demonstrated the intramuscular nature of this coronary arterial course . Furthermore the CT-scan revealed that the anomalous left coronary artery had neither a slit like opening nor an acute angle of take-off from the aorta which have been identified as possible risk factors for myocardial ischemia in patients with interarterial course . Since the episodes of chest pain had the characteristics of idiopathic chest pain and since prophylactic surgery appeared not justified in the absence of documented ischemia we opted for a conservative approach without restriction of exercise or sports activities and recommended annual follow-up visits . During a follow-up of 2 years the patient remained asymptomatic.