A 45-year-old male patient reported weakness onset for two years in the lower limbs, progressing to the upper limbs and later tetraparesis, severe bone pain, especially at the lumbar level, and anserine gait, with significant functional limitation. He reported foamy urine, edema in the lower limbs and a recent fall from his own height due to muscle weakness – at that moment, already hindering his walking.
On physical examination, the patient was oriented, hemodynamically stable, normotensive, afebrile, normal cardiovascular examination and without visceromegaly. He reported pain in the costal arches, diffuse thoracolumbar pain that worsened with movement, breathing and walking. His extremities showed edema in the lower limbs (3 +) extending to the pretibial region, well perfused. Neurological examination revealed Gowers' sign, proximal tetraparesis, hypoactive osteotendinous reflexes in the lower limbs, preserved pale and arthrostatic sensitivity, anserine gait and right foot valgus.
The laboratory study revealed polycythemia in the blood count, in the biochemical alterations in renal function, hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia, hypouricemia and secondary acidemia, metabolic acidosis. These findings, added by the summary of urine with proteinuria (2 +) and glycosuria (2 + ; without dysglycemia), topographed a proximal tubulopathy. Serum calcium levels were normal but with an elevated alkaline phosphatase and a history of calcitriol replacement since admission to another institution (one year ago, calcitriol treatment was later suspended). The 1,25 dihydroxyvitamin-D was decreased and the viral serologies were negative. Proteinuria reached 4000 mg/24 h but always with normal serum albumin and renal ultrasonography showed no significant changes .
Chest tomography showed misaligned fractures in multiple costal arches, related to a fall from one's recent height. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a Rugger-Jersey pattern , X-rays of long bone, bone densitometry of the lumbar spine and femoral neck reported osteoporosis, compatible with osteomalacia.
In view of these findings, osteomalacia secondary to FS was suspected, and the search for the etiological diagnosis of FS was started. A 24-h immunofixation of urinary proteins was performed, which showed a monoclonal IgG lambda pattern, in the search for free light chains, a kappa of 14.4 mg/L (VR: 3.3–19.4 mg/L), lambda of 905.2 mg/L (VR: 5.7–26.3 mg/L) and kappa/lambda ratio of 0.02 . Myelogram and bone marrow biopsy were also performed, with cellularity between 10–40% and less than 10% plasma cells. Hypoplastic erythroid and granulocytic series with maturation delay, small and hypolobulated megakaryocytes, unaltered reticulin pattern. Screening for amyloid protein was negative and it should be mentioned that bone marrow flow cytometry analysis was not performed.
The renal biopsy showed only a fully sclerotic glomerulus on optical microscopy , in the immunofluorescence the panel of fluorescein antibodies revealed negative for IgA, IgG, IgM, negative kappa chains, lambda, C3, C1q and fibrinogen chains . In electron microscopy, no deposits were found in molecular aggregates and in the tubular epithelium, thinning areas were observed . The Olimpus BX51 optical microscope (10X, 20X, 40X and 100X magnification lenses), the Spot-Flex camera for image capture and the Image-Pro Plus Software version 6.3 were used. The inverted optical fluorescence microscope and Normaski interferential contrast with imaging camera model DMi8, Leica and the transmission electron microscope JEM-1230 JEOL were used for immunofluorescence and electron microscopy.
In view of the above findings, in the initial approach, replacement was started with potassium citrate 10 mEq 8/8 h, calcitriol 0.25 mg 12/12 h, phosphorus 100 mg 12/12 h, powdered bicarbonate two teaspoons 12/12 h and enalapril 5 mg/day.
The proximal weakness led to ruling out the possibility of POEMS (Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M-protein, skin changes), the electromyography showed no polyneuropathy, another laboratory was performed, the Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF), 103.4 pg/mL (VR: < 128.9 pg /mL), which was negative, ruling out the possibility of POEMS.
Given the above, our team's understanding was not to submit the patient to a new biopsy, maintain support, measures for osteomalacia and treatment for monoclonal gammopathy of renal significance – whose hematology option was bortezomib 1.3 mg/m2 (2.28 mg) for 09 cycles, dexamethasone 20 mg weekly and oral cyclophosphamide 50 mg per day, with follow-up, monitoring of electrolytes, renal function, proteinuria and free-light chain.
With the start of treatment for MGRS and osteomalacia, the patient improved his clinical status, with a significant functional improvement self-reported by the patient himself (suspension of the use of crutches), corroborated by the laboratories that revealed a decrease in 24-h proteinuria, kappa/lambda ratio within normal range, eliminating the need for bicarbonate replacement and electrolyte replacement. Once considered as in remission of the disease, the treatment of monoclonal gammopathy was suspended.