No obvious complaints.
A 47-year-old man underwent orthotopic LT due to hepatitis B liver cirrhosis with portal hypertension on September 19, 2015.
The patient had a history of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection for more than 30 years.
The patient had a history of smoking for nearly 20 years and drinking for nearly 15 years, but had no family history of gastrointestinal tumors before LT.
Physical examination showed no positive signs.
The blood concentration of FK506 was 3.3 ng/mL, and the tumor markers and graft function showed no obvious abnormalities, as the de novo MPCs were diagnosed.
In January 2019, the patient underwent electronic gastroscopy due to stomach illness . The results showed a 2.0 cm × 1.0 cm flat concave mucosa on the lesser curvature of the lower stomach, a rough mucosa of the central gastric angle, and a 0.5 cm × 0.6 cm flat concave mucosa on the anterior wall of the gastric antrum. Histopathological examination showed poorly differentiated carcinoma (signet ring cell carcinoma) of the gastric antrum, gastric horn, and gastric body with HP (+), and immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed CK (+) and CD56 (-). Given all these results, combined with the results of narrow band imaging and magnifying gastroscopy, the patient was diagnosed with early gastric cancer (IIb + IIc) in February 2019. So the patient underwent radical distal gastrectomy (Billroth II) in February 2019 (41 mo after LT). Postoperative histopathological examination revealed intramucosal signet ring cell carcinoma (1.5 cm × 1.3 cm; Lauren type: diffuse), without invading the muscularis mucosa and metastasis. IHC showed CK (+), Her-2 (+), TOPO2 (level I), CD31 detecting for intravascular tumor thrombus (D2-40, -), S-100 detecting for nerve invasion (-), Ki-67 (20%), PD-1 (interstitial lymphocytes +, < 1%), and thick-walled vascular invasion (-). TNM stage was determined as pT1aN0M0. Two months later, the patient underwent high-resolution computed tomography (CT) of the chest. The result showed a nodule in the lower lobe of the right lung, which might be lung cancer . Further examination by positron emission tomography (PET)-CT showed the ground glass and solid mixed density nodules in the posterior basal segment of the right lower lobe of the lung, around 15 mm in length, with slightly higher metabolism than the background of the lung and an SUVmax value of about 1.3, suggesting to be lung tumors, and no tumor metastasis was found in other sites. Therefore, the patient underwent thoracoscopic wedge resection of the right lower lobe of the right lung and localized lymph node dissection in April 2019 (43 mo after LT). Histopathological examination revealed adenocarcinoma in situ, without lymph node or distant metastasis. IHC results showed CK (+) and elastic fiber staining detecting for visceral pleura invasion (-).