A 45-year-old man with a right breast mass for 1 week and breast puncture biopsy of pathological diagnosis was breast malignancy in the local hospital. Subsequently, he was admitted to the breast surgery department of our hospital. The patient had no complaints of fever, weight loss, or night sweats and felt no itching, nipple depression or overflow or other discomfort. Blood testing revealed a lactate dehydrogenase level of 289 U/L. Other laboratory tests and tumor markers showed no abnormalities. There was no special medical history.
Ultrasound showed a hypoechoic mass behind the right nipple, approximately 3.53 cm by 1.07 cm in size, with clear borders, irregular morphology, and uneven internal echogenicity . Color Doppler flow imaging showed a peripheral blood flow signal , and category 6 was evaluated by the Breast Imaging-Reporting and Data System (BI-RADS) classification method. There was no obviously enlarged lymph nodes were observed in the bilateral axillae. The results of systemic positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) imaging showed abnormally elevated foci of right breast glucose metabolism , and the standardized uptake value (SUV) max was 21.74, indicating malignant lesions.
Based on the clinical imaging findings and puncture pathology from local hospitals, a right breast-conserving mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy were performed on November 16, 2021. Gross findings revealed a greyish-white mass with a size of 2 cm by 1.5 cm in the breast tissue section, with a greyish-white medium texture and clear borders .
Histological staining showed that the boundary of the mass was cleared, and small breast ducts were visible in the periphery ; tumor cells grew diffusely, and stainable vesicles were visible ; high magnification showed poor adhesion of tumor cells, a medium amount of cytoplasm, a high nucleoplasm ratio, obvious cell heterogeneity, deep nuclear staining , and some cells with obvious nucleoli and visible nuclear fission images .
mmunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells were positive for CD20 , CD79a, PAX-5, Bcl6 , MUM-1 , CD19, c-Myc (Y69) (40%) , and Bcl2 (80%) . In addition, the tumor cells were partly positive for CD5.
The Ki-67 proliferation index was high (80%). However, the tumor cells were negative for CD3, highlighting T cells in the background , and were negative for CK (AE1/AE3) and GATA3, highlighting the trapped ductal epithelium of the breast . The tumor cells were negative for estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), E-cadherin, P120, CD10 , CD21, CD23, Cyclin D1, P53, ALK, and TdT. The patient underwent a bone marrow histopathologic examination on December 9, 2021, and the results showed that bone marrow hyperplasia was normal, and the ratio and distribution of granulocytes and red blood cells were not significantly abnormal. The main components of granulocytes were myelocytes and metagranulocytes. The megakaryocytes were scattered, and special staining was normal. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with PB-DLBCL with a clinical stage of IEA, and the international prognostic index (IPI) score was 1.
To study the molecular features of PB-DLBCL in this male patient, we utilized an Illumina HiSeq/MiSeqDx/NextSeq assay to detect the DNA of lymphoma-related genes in paraffin-embedded tissue sample. Illumina high-throughput sequencing completely covered approximately 391,452 sites of exons, fusion-related intron regions, and variable shear regions of 121 genes associated with B cell lymphoma (Supplementary Table S ). Based on the authoritative The Cancer Genome Atlas database, National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines, and 2016 World Health Organization (WHO) consensus, this detection range comprehensively covers hotspot mutations, including point mutations, small fragment insertion, and deletion mutations, gene fusion and copy number variation in the diagnostic classification of B cell lymphoma. The test results showed that the tumor-specific mutations in this sample were as follows: BCL6, TNFAIP3, PRDM1, CREBBP, DTX1, and FOXO1 . No germline mutation was found in this sample.
In addition, the sample was negative for Epstein-Barr virus-encoded small RNA (EBER) by in situ hybridization (ISH). Given the dual expression of MYC and BCL2, the sample was tested for rearrangement of MYC, BCL2, and BCL6 by fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) using break-apart dual-color probes. The tumor cells were negative for MYC and BCL2 translocation. BCL6 translocation was detected in this sample. Moreover, MYD88 and CD79b gene mutations were wild-type by Sanger sequencing in this sample.
After six cycles of orelabrutinib plus R-CHOP chemotherapy, cytarabine was administered intrathecally twice on April 13, 2022. In addition to routine nursing, the patient received professional psychological counseling, which improved the patient's recognition of the disease and actively cooperated with the treatment and follow-up. A re-examination of PET-CT showed no recurrence or metastasis in this patient. As of the last follow-up on Apr 23, 2023, the patient had good disease control and no recurrence. The timeline of diagnosis and treatment is shown in Fig. .