A 29 year old Sinhalese Sri Lankan female, who was apparently well, presented with incidentally detected high blood pressure. She is a mother of two children, but had no history of pregnancy induced hypertension. She denied any family history of hypertension. She also complained of loss of appetite and subjective weight loss during the past few months.
Her physical examination revealed a blood pressure of 180/120 mmHg on two separate occasions, and was equal in both arms. Her pulse rate was 88 beats per minute, with no radio-radial or radio-femoral delay. There were no renal masses, and no carotid, renal or femoral artery bruits. Her cardiovascular and central nervous system examination was unremarkable, and had no evidence of retinopathy on fundoscopy. She had no peripheral stigmata of atherosclerosis, or endocrinopathies.
Her renal function tests, serum electrolytes, urine full report, full blood count, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and liver function tests were all normal. Her electrocardiogram and transthoracic echocardiogram were unremarkable.
As she was a recent onset young hypertensive, she was investigated with ultrasound scan of the abdomen which showed non visualization of the left kidney. Therefore, computed tomography angiogram (CTA) and diethylene triamine penta acetic acid (DTPA) renogram was indicated. DTPA renogram showed a small left kidney which was suggested to be either congenital, or due to RAS, with normal perfusion and function of the right kidney. CTA revealed significant stenosis of the left main renal artery, which was suggested to be due to FMD, and an accessory renal artery supplying the lower pole of the left kidney was detected . After evaluation of her renovascular hypertension, she was referred to a vascular surgeon and underwent left sided nephrectomy, and histology revealed features of FMD of left renal artery. She achieved full recovery with normalization of blood pressure following surgery, and is currently not on any antihypertensive medication.