A 50-year-old Chinese male presented with bilateral blurred vision for 3 months. Nine months earlier, he experienced pulmonary embolism and lower limb venous thrombosis, and was diagnosed with antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APS). He had lost 10 kilograms in the past 9 months. No other gastric or constitutive symptoms were reported.
On examination, his best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/200 OU. Anterior chamber was basically normal except for moderate cataract in both eyes. Fundus examination showed bilateral diffuse oval yellow patches in the posterior pole , corresponding to a classical giraffe sign, namely hypo-fluorescence in autofluorescence (AF, Fig. a and b, top middle) and hyper-fluorescence in the early and late phases of fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA, Fig. a and b, top right) and indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) , with late phase pinpoint leakage. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT, Fig. a and b, bottom right) B-scan well-depicted a mosaic pattern of RPE alterations between irregular thickening and atrophy. Blocked fluorescence on ICGA due to choroidal lesions was also noticed . Based on these typical findings, the patient was diagnosed with BDUMP, and malignancy screening was strongly recommended.
Blood tumor markers reported as: CA19–9795.0 U/ml, CA125 3770.0 U/ml, Cyfra 211 57.6 ng/ml, CA242 > 150.000 U/ml, NSE 46.1 ng/ml. 18F- fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET/CT) showed an FDG-avid lesion in the gastric antrum , and multiple hypermetabolic lymph nodes were also noted in perigastric, retroperitoneal, mediastinal and left supraclavicular region, suggestive of gastric malignancy with distant lymph node metastasis. Based on these findings, gastroscopy was ordered. Pathological diagnosis reported as poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. The patient was finally diagnosed with BDUMP and secondary APS due to gastric adenocarcinoma. Systemic chemotherapy was suggested, but after evaluation, the patient’s systemic condition was too poor to tolerate any chemotherapy. After consideration, the patient chose palliative care out of the late stage and unresectable nature of the malignancy and economic reasons.