A 13-year-old Caucasian boy presented to our department with recurrent pain in the left hypochondrium of his abdomen of two months’ duration. Laboratory tests showed no abnormalities. An ultrasound examination and computed tomography (CT) scan revealed the presence of a cystic mass (10x7x9cm) with multiple septums located in his splenic hilum, tightly adjacent to the pancreatic tail and the left kidney . A splenic cyst was suspected. Test results for Echinococcus antibodies were negative. Our patient was qualified for radical surgery. Before the operation, the patient was vaccinated with pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccines as recommended in cases of elective splenectomy. Operative findings showed a 10x10cm cystic mass with a thick, grey white wall, tightly connected and macroscopically invading his pancreatic tail and left colonic flexure, spleen, splenic vein and artery, but not his stomach and left kidney . Distal splenopancreatectomy with en bloc resection of the left colonic flexure was performed as a guarantee of radical tumor excision. The macroscopic examination revealed a well-circumscribed cyst with a thick wall and multiple septums, filled with white fluid . Histological analysis confirmed that the resection was complete. The mass had infiltrated the pancreatic parenchyma and consisted of fibroblastic cells with a regular nucleus with low mitotic activity, with abundant extracellular collagen matrix. The pancreatic tail ducts were dilated with nonspecific inflammation and calcification in its wall. All tumor cells were positive for anti-beta-catenin staining . No abnormalities or DT cells were found in the spleen and colon.
Postoperative course was complicated by pancreatic leakage successfully treated with endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography with Wirsung’s duct stenting. Because of the complete resection and sporadic origin of the tumor, no corresponding treatment was given. Bearing in mind that intra-abdominal DTs are commonly connected with FAP, our patient underwent colonoscopy, which revealed no changes in the colon wall.
After 19 months of follow-up, the clinical examination and ultrasonography (USG) are normal and show no recurrence of the DT.