A 24-year-old woman with chronic cholecystitis and episodes of biliary colic underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy at our hospital. Although preoperative computed tomography (CT) revealed a cystic duct calculus, the complete removal of the calculus could not be confirmed considering bile duct injury because there were moderate chronic inflammations around the cystic duct. The postoperative course was uneventful and without pain. Ten months later, the patient visited the outpatient clinic because of hypochondriac pain. Laboratory results showed normal liver function, and inflammation and jaundice were absent. CT revealed a cystic duct remnant calculus at the same site as before . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography revealed a 2 cm calculus in the remnant cystic duct and a normal pancreaticobiliary junction. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed no abnormalities. The findings were consistent with pain caused by the cystic duct remnant calculus. The patient wished to avoid a surgical scar and consented to laparoscopic resection, which was performed with NIR cholangiography to reduce the risk of bile duct injury. At the beginning of the procedure, 1 ml ICG (2.5 mg/ml Diagnogreen; Daiichi Sankyo, Tokyo, Japan) was injected intravenously. Four-port laparoscopy was performed via the scars remaining from the previous procedure. A 12-mm camera port was placed at the umbilical area by the open method, a 12-mm port was placed in the epigastric area, a 5-mm port was placed in the right hypochondriac area, and a 5-mm port was placed in the right lateral abdomen. Adhesions at the gallbladder bed and the lateral and ventral hepatoduodenal ligament were dissected. NIR fluorescence cholangiography was started using the fluorescent imaging system and a CLV-S200-IR/WAIR130A xenon light source (OLYMPUS, Tokyo, Japan) about 40 min after ICG injection. NIR fluorescence cholangiography visualized the common bile duct, remnant cystic duct, and cystic duct remnant calculus . An adhesion around the remnant cystic duct was identified by fluorescence imaging and was dissected. The remnant cystic duct stump was ligated by double end-loop sutures (Endoloop PDS II; Ethicon Inc., Cincinnati, OH, USA). The remnant cystic duct was resected. The procedure ended without intraoperative complications after 1 h and 17 min and a blood loss of 10 ml. Macroscopically, the resected specimen was 1.8 cm and the calculus was 1.0 cm long. The postoperative course was uneventful, the pain resolved soon after surgery, and the patient was discharged on day 3 after surgery. At the 6-month follow-up, there had been no recurrence of pain.