A 10-year-old boy presented to us with a history of painless swelling over the right upper back since 3 years of age and discomfort over the area while sleeping on his back for 6 months. The swelling was insidious in onset and very slowly increasing in size but was not associated with any impairment of function. The patient denied any history of similar complaints in past, trauma, fever, weight loss, cough, breathing difficulty, constitutional signs and symptoms, or any other known disease or any other swelling in the body. There was no other significant history.
Examination revealed a single smooth, ovoid swelling of size 5.5 cm × 4.5 cm on the dorsal aspect over right lower scapula . It was bony hard, non-tender with smooth edges, and was fixed to the underlying bone but free from overlying skin. There was pain free and full range of right scapulothoracic and shoulder joint motion with no neurovascular deficit in the right upper limb. There was no regional lymph node enlargement. No other similar or palpable swelling was found anywhere else in the body. QuickDASH© questionnaire (copyright property of the Institute for Work &Health) was used to analyze the Patient-Reported Outcome. It is a shortened version of DASH© Outcome measure and consists a subset of 11 items from the 30-item DASH© and is a self-reported questionnaire where the response options are graded as 5-point Likert scales. The scores range from 0 (no disability) to 100 (most severe disability). This score measures physical function and symptoms in people with any or multiple musculoskeletal disorders of the upper limb. Pre-operative QuickDASH© score was 6.818.
Diagnosis of pedunculated osteochondroma of lower end of dorsal right scapula was confirmed with X-ray and subsequently magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . As patient was symptomatic, surgical excision of tumor was decided upon.
Under general anesthesia and in prone position, an incision of 10 cm was made centered over the tumor along Langer’s line. Subcutaneous tissue dissection was done to reach the infraspinatus muscle. The muscle was split along the line of its fibers to expose the tumor and epiperiosteal elevation of muscle was carried out . The tumor was completely exposed and excised en masse along with a rim of normal scapular bone. The scapular bone edges were smoothened with a bone file. The wound was closed back in layers after achieving proper hemostasis. The postoperative neurological status was intact. Histopathological examination of the tumor confirmed it to be osteochondroma . Surgical scar was completely healed by 2 weeks after surgery , and upper limb was supported with an arm sling for 3 weeks, after which gradual shoulder mobilization and muscle strengthening exercises were initiated. Follow-up assessment of the patient is shown in . QuickDASH© score was zero at the end of 12 weeks. The patient is completely fine with no symptoms or signs of recurrence at 1 year of follow-up.