A 55-year-old woman showed a sudden onset of painless progressive vision loss in her right eye for 1 week. Six years ago, she underwent thymectomy for invasive thymoma (WHO classification B2) followed by chemotherapy (adriamycin, cisplatin, vincristine, and cyclophosphamide) and radiation therapy. The thymoma had completely regressed following chemoradiation, and no metastasis or recurrence were detected during follow-up examinations.On ocular examination, her visual acuities were hand motion in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye, with a relative afferent pupillary defect in the right eye. The anterior segment and media of both eyes were normal. Intraocular pressure of both eyes were 14 mmHg. Ocular motility was normal without any pain during extraocular muscle movements. Ptosis or exophthalmos were absent in either eye. Fundus examinations of the optic disc and retina were unremarkable. She could not recognize the demonstration plate of Ishihara color vision test and any of the Hardy, Rand, and Rittler (HRR) color vision test with the right eye, but could recognize all of the Ishihara color vision test and HRR color vision test with the left eye. Goldmann perimetry showed a small nasal island in the right eye. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an abnormal contrast-enhancement of the right optic nerve extending to the prechiasmatic portion, suggesting an acute inflammatory or demyelinating process . No treatment was administered owing to the patient’s refusal. After 2 months, visual acuity and visual field defects of the right eye showed a further gradual deterioration without recovery and the patient was lost to follow-up.
The patient returned to our hospital after 5 months, presenting with a sudden onset of visual acuity decrease in the left eye for 1 week. In the right eye, she had visual acuity of light perception, and the visual acuity of the left eye had reduced to 20/30 from 20/20. Color vision tests revealed a moderate red-green and blue-yellow color defect in the left eye. Visual field testing revealed a generalized reduction of sensitivity and a cecocentral scotoma in the left eye. The anterior segment and media of both eyes were normal. Funduscopy showed total pallor of the optic disc in the right eye, but a normal optic disc without edema or pallor in the left eye. Visual evoked potentials were delayed in both eyes. MRI of the orbit and brain revealed high signal intensities of both optic nerves on T2-weighted images and increased abnormal enhancement of the right optic nerve extending to the prechiasmatic portion. However, there was no evidence of brain metastasis or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) seeding.
Systemic evaluation was performed to investigate the presence of malignancy; chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a 4.7-cm nodule in the left lower lobe and lung biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of a malignant epithelial neoplasm with cytokeratin expression, no epithelial membrane antigen, no CD5 expression, and no neuroendocrine marker expression. It was histopathologically similar to her prior thymoma and the possibility of recurrent thymoma was considered. Whole body positron emission tomography showed no other areas of abnormal hypermetabolic lesions. Serological examination for major paraneoplastic autoantibodies revealed the presence of APQ4-IgG and ANNA-1, while anti-Yo antibody, ANNA-2, anti-Ri, anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies, anti-recoverin, anti-alpha-enolase, and anti-collapsin response-mediator protein-5 (CRMP5) antibodies were absent. Blood analysis, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, thyroid function tests, and angiotensin-converting enzyme levels were within normal range, and tumor markers (CEA, CA19-9, and CA125) were absent. Microbiological tests were negative for varicella zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, syphilis, and HIV. Antinuclear antibody, anti-double stranded DNA and anticardiolipin antibodies were negative. Cytological examination of the CSF showed no abnormal findings, including oligoclonal bands. Primary mutations for Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy of 11778/ND4, 3460/ND1, 14484/ND6 and 4171/ND1 were absent.
On the basis of the clinical presentation, neuroimaging, and presence of autoantibodies, her condition was diagnosed as NMO spectrum disorder associated with invasive thymoma. Intravenous methylprednisolone was administered, followed by oral prednisolone (60 mg) and oral cyclosporine (600 mg) daily for 2 weeks. However, her visual acuities continuously deteriorated to no light perception in the right eye and counting fingers in the left eye. After 6 weeks of onset in her left eye, optical coherence tomography showed diffuse atrophy of the retinal nerve fiber layers in both eyes, but the outer retina and photoreceptor layers were relatively intact. Standard electroretinograms (ERG) were normal in both eyes, but multifocal ERG (mfERG) showed a decreased response in the macula of both eyes. Follow-up MRI examination revealed increased abnormal enhancement of the left optic nerve. The patient received 6 cycles of chemotherapy with etoposide, paclitaxel, and prednisolone over the next 6 months and was maintained with azathioprine. The left lower lung mass had regressed on follow-up chest CT; however, visual acuities were unchanged. No evidence of tumor recurrence or neurologic signs of limb weakness and sensory abnormalities occurred up to 13 months after chemotherapy, when suddenly, she developed symptoms of lower limb weakness and tingling sense. Neurologic examination revealed proximal dominant weakness in both lower extremities of grade 4. Tingling sense below sensory level T10 developed with pain/temperature, vibration and positional sense hypesthesia. Whole spine MRI revealed longitudinally extensive transverse myelitis with central T2 high signal intensity of the spinal cord from level T3/4 to T11. She was diagnosed as definite NMO and her myelitis improved after administration of intravenous methylprednisolone.