An 18-year-old Japanese woman visited our hospital with a chief complaint of gingival swelling in the region of her upper right anterior teeth, midline diastema, and tooth crowding. Her main symptom was gingival swelling in the region of her upper right anterior teeth. She had no medical, family and psychosocial history, and she had not undergone relevant past interventions. A physical examination showed no problems. She had previously undergone root canal treatment for the remaining deciduous canine because of pus discharging from the root canal. An intraoral examination revealed a diffuse swelling around the deciduous canine, midline diastema, and tooth crowding. A panoramic radiograph revealed a round radiolucency with a diameter of 30 mm, with well-demarcated margins around the maxillary canine . Computed tomography (CT) revealed that the cystic cavity surrounded the maxillary canine and was filled with a homogeneous water-like fluid with density . Our clinical diagnosis was maxillary dentigerous cyst with an unerupted maxillary canine. Marsupialization was carried out under general anesthesia, and the unerupted canine was left in place . A histopathological examination revealed the diagnosis of dentigerous cyst. However, the marsupialization did not result in eruption of the canine. Three months later, orthodontic traction was applied to the unerupted canine, and simultaneously orthodontic treatment to correct the tooth crowding and midline diastema . The orthodontic traction of the maxillary canine failed, and the canine was then extracted. On the other hand, crowding and midline diastema were improved . The revised treatment plan was to undertake staged implant placement, because the alveolar bone at the implant site was inadequate, 2 mm alveolar width on CT . We were planning to bone graft after the mucosa completely healed up because severe scar tissue caused by the previous marsupialization was seen in the canine tooth extraction area. Bone augmentation was performed with an autogenous bone graft that was harvested from the mandibular ramus to widen the alveolar bone . While doing the implant placement in the second operation, a part of the grafted bone was exposed, and was trimmed with a bur, several times . The wound had completely healed up in 6 months. For her busy schedule, 11 months after the bone graft, the implant was inserted without any problems. The implant was uncovered, and the abutment was connected under local anesthesia . The occlusion was stabilized by the implant, following a screw-retained prosthodontic procedure performed with appropriate implant stability. The occlusion was successfully restored by the insertion of the implant . Good clinical results were achieved with no severe complications or recurrence of the cyst . Her postoperative course was uneventful for 7 years. A CT scan taken 7 years after marsupialization showed that the cystic cavity had been replaced by new bone, and that the implant was stable in the surrounding bone .