A 50-year-old man underwent 5 years ago a right nephrectomy for renal tumor diagnosed on the basis of total hematuria and Computed Tomography (CT) scan imaging. The pathological examination that time, concluded to a conventional clear cell RCC, Fuhrman nuclear grade 3. The tumor invaded the right renal vein, without other metastatic locations. All margins were free of tumor and it was staged pT3N0M0. The patient didn’t receive adjuvant chemotherapy after the surgery and was followed closely.
Four years after the first diagnosis and during follow up, a CT scan showed a tissue density mass in the gallbladder, measuring 30 × 31 mm, with lobulated contours retracting the gallbladder wall. An intense arterial enhancement after contrast injection was noted. Intraluminal gallstones were found . Clinically, the patient was asymptomatic. On physical exam, neither abdominal tenderness nor icterus was noted. Laboratory exams didn’t show biological cholestasis (total bilirubin 0.5 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 0.1 mg/dL, aspartate transaminase 16 IU/L and alanine transaminase 11 IU/L). Despite the lack of biliary symptoms and based on the radiologic appearance of the tumor on CT scan, we suggested a possible diagnosis of gallbladder primary carcinoma. A laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged two days after the operation.
The cholecystectomy specimen had a 3 × 2.5 cm polypoid mass protruding in the lumen located 4 cm from the fundus of the gallbladder. Cut surface of the mass was homogenous, yellowish and soft, with foci of hemorrhage. Microscopically, the polyp consisted of clear cell sheets, nests, and cords separated with a delicate capillary vascular network . Some areas of solid and alveolar pattern were seen. Tumor cells had an abundant, clear cytoplasm surrounded by a distinct cell membrane. The nucleus was round and uniform . The diagnosis of metastatic RCC was confirmed by immunohistochemical stains, which showed strong positivity for vimentin and PAX8, patchy positivity for CD10 and negativity of pancytokeratin (, ). The tumor involved mucosa with no invasion of the gallbladder wall. The cystic duct margin was free of tumor.
After 18 months period of regular follow up, CT scan showed no recurrence and the patient is free from disease.