A 69-year-old male patient was referred to our hospital for pain and decreased visual acuity in his left eye that started 10 days prior to his visit. Ten days prior to his referral, the patient had pterygium excision surgery in both eyes at an outside clinic. As the medical information from that clinic, complete resection of the pterygium was performed, leaving bare sclera exposed and suturing the conjunctival edge to the underlying sclera using #7-0 vicryl. Sponges soaked with 0.02% MMC were applied intraoperatively over the bare sclera for 2 min. His medical history was significant for well-controlled hypertension, a history of renal transplantation, and taking of the immunosuppressant drug, cyclosporin. There was no ocular history except cataract surgery about 10 years ago.
On initial examination, distant visual acuity with no light perception had an intraocular pressure of 10 mmHg in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination showed diffuse conjunctival injection, nonepithelialized thinned bare sclera over the pterygium excision site and diffuse corneal edema in the left eye, but there was no significant infiltration at the cornea or sclera. A deep anterior chamber (AC) with a 1.0 mm hypopyon and 360° posterior synechiae of the iris were observed . Fundus examination was impossible because of severe corneal edemas and AC inflammation. B-scan ultrasonography revealed dense vitreous opacities, and a mildly thickened choroid, consistent with acute infectious endophthalmitis . The right eye was normal.
The patient was admitted to the hospital, where he was treated with systemic (vancomycin 1.0 g every 12 h and ceftazidime 1.0 g every 8 h) and topical (fortified vancomycin 5% and ceftazidime 5%) antibiotics every hour while awake. In spite of extensive investigations including blood culture, ultrasonography of the abdomen, and echocardiography – to exclude the possibility of endogenous endophthalmitis – there was no obvious source of infection. He underwent a pars plana vitrectomy, pars plana intraocular lens removal, membrane peel, air-fluid exchange, intravitreal vancomycin (1.0 mg/0.1 mL) and ceftazidime (2.25 mg/0.1 mL), and silicone oil tamponade the following day. A sample of aqueous humor and intraocular lens was sent for gram stain and culture. During surgery, almost the entire retina was found to be necrotic and covered with a whitish exudative membrane. KOH stain smear revealed no fungus. After 5 days of incubation, the cultures were positive for Serratia marcescens. The organism was more sensitive to ceftazidime than moxifloxacin or gentamycin. Therefore, the patient was continued on systemic ceftazidime (1.0 g every 8 h), topical moxifloxacin 0.5% every hour and prednisolone 1% (every 6 h).
After 1 month, the vision remained at finger count/50 cm but the retinal layer structure and vasculature were relatively well-preserved .