A 70-year-old gentleman was admitted to our institution for invasive angiography given Rutherford class 5 peripheral artery disease. He reported a history of arterial hypertension, dyslipidemia, smoking, diabetes mellitus, obesity, prior myocardial infarction, and coronary artery bypass grafting. His medications included aspirin, clopidogrel, bisoprolol, atorvastatin, oral antidiabetic agents, and insulin. Noninvasive duplex ultrasound had showed total occlusion of the right common iliac artery, significant stenosis of the left common iliac artery, and total occlusion of the left superficial femoral artery.
The right brachial artery was accessed with a short 6F sheath (Avanti+; Cordis), and diagnostic angiography was performed with a JR4 diagnostic catheter (Infiniti; Cordis), confirming right common iliac artery occlusion, and significant stenosis of the left common iliac artery . After upsizing to a 7F sheath (Avanti+), a 7F JR4 guiding catheter was placed in the distal abdominal aorta (Vista Brite Tip; Cordis), and the lesion in the left common iliac artery was crossed with a 0.014″ Pilot 150 guidewire (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The lesion was then predilated with a 7.0 mm × 40 mm semicompliant balloon (Aviator Plus; Cordis), a 8.0 mm × 40 mm self-expandable nitinol stent (Precise; Cordis) was deployed, finally postdilated with a 7.0 mm × 40 mm semicompliant balloon (Aviator Plus), achieving a satisfactory final angiographic result.
Hemostasis in the brachial artery was then achieved with the MynxGrip device, deployed as per instructions of use. Specifically, the device was inserted into the sheath (ensuring that the uninflated balloon amply overcame the proximal tip), the balloon was inflated and gently pulled until resistance was felt (ensuring that the balloon was seated on the tip of the sheath), the whole system was retrieved until additional resistance was felt (ensuring that the balloon was not seated at the arteriotomy site), the procoagulant matrix (polyethylene glycol) was pushed in contact with the external surface of the artery, the sheath was removed during continuous balloon inflation, the procoagulant matrix was compressed by pushing the MynxGrip shaft, and the sealant was aptly deployed. The balloon was finally deflated and removed, and manual hemostasis continued for 1 minute. Radial pulse persisted throughout and up to patient discharge on the following day, without any evidence of bleeding or other access site complications. No duplex ultrasound control was performed as per our standard practice. However, the brachial, radial, and ulnar pulses were all valid at discharge.