A 39-year-old Caucasian man who was an information technology operative (height, 182 cm; weight, 84 kg; body mass index, 25.4 kg/m2) attended a private physiotherapy clinic with a 4-week history of pain in the upper right calf. The patient is a nondrinker and has never smoked. The patient has no family history of RA or vascular disorders. The patient uses a standing desk when at work and regularly attends a gym, undertaking weight training plus CV exercise on various types of apparatus three times each week. The patient’s calf symptoms occurred during a gym session in which he was exercising on a step machine against high resistance, which resulted in his forcefully pushing up onto his toes; he therefore ascribed his symptoms to a calf strain. The patient’s only past medical history of note was a diagnosis of RA made 2 years previously. At onset, the patient’s RA had presented in a nonsymmetrical joint pattern affecting all metacarpophalangeal and metatarsophalangeal joints on the left. The patient’s rheumatologist prescribed the disease-modifying antirheumatic drug (DMARD) methotrexate at a dosage of 20 mg each week (eight 2.5-mg tablets once per week).
Upon clinical examination at the physiotherapy clinic, it was clear that the possibility of DVT of the right calf existed. This was based on the awareness that a diagnosis of RA carried an increased risk of CV complications. Moreover, the patient’s right calf was warm, and the area of tenderness was adjacent to the popliteal crease rather than the common area of tenderness of a calf strain that normally resides at the medial gastrocnemius muscle–tendon junction with the Achilles. The proximal site of the area of discomfort ruled out the distally situated soleus muscle; furthermore, resisted ankle plantar flexion produced no discomfort, which would normally be observed in the event of a posterior calf strain. This finding also ruled out the plantaris muscle as the source of the patient’s symptoms of injuries that can cause pain in the popliteal region.
The test result for Homans sign, a clinical test for DVT, was positive. At the end of physiotherapy assessment, the patient was told that his presentation was one of a possible DVT, and it was carefully explained that there were diagnostic limitations of clinical assessment in isolation for this pathology. Therefore, the patient was sent with a letter, clearly stating this clinical diagnosis, to a nearby minor injuries unit as a matter of urgency. The patient was clinically assessed by a member of the staff at the minor injuries unit who expressed doubt that calf thrombosis was the basis of his symptoms, stating that they would be “amazed” if the diagnosis was one of a DVT rather than a calf strain, basing this belief on the facts that the patient was young, male, healthy, of athletic build, and had first experienced his calf symptoms while using the stair-climber apparatus in the gym. The patient stated that he remained concerned that DVT rather than a calf strain was the diagnosis and that he wished to seek a further opinion, particularly because no investigations had been undertaken at this point. The patient was then directed to an A&E department 12 miles from the minor injuries unit. The patient directly attended this A&E department, where he was clinically assessed and underwent ultrasonography of the right calf. A DVT of the popliteal vein was diagnosed. The patient received an injection with heparin and was prescribed the anticoagulant apixaban at a dose of 10 mg twice daily for 7 days to be followed by a maintenance dose of 5 mg twice daily, and he was discharged from the A&E unit for his treatment to be managed in primary care. The patient was maintained on this dose of apixaban for 6 months, then he was reviewed by his general practitioner. At that time, the patient had experienced no adverse effects of this medication, such as headaches, visual impairment, or serious bleeding, and a dose of a 2.5-mg tablet of apixaban twice daily was decided on as a continued daily dose to reduce any future DVT risk.