A 48-year-old right-handed Thai male patient presented to our hospital with a large solid, painful lump in his left axillary region.
The mass was noticed by the patient himself one year ago, with rapidly progressed in sized during the six months prior to presentation. The pain gradually increased in intensity despite the treatment with painkillers, without cold hypersensitivity or neurological deficit around this area.
The patient had no previous underlying disease.
A personal or family history of benign or malignant tumors did not exist.
On the physical examination, a large solid, soft tissue mass in his left axillary region was observed . The mass elicited mild tenderness by palpation test without pulsatile sensation. Tinel’s sign was negative. No neurological deficit was observed; however, the patient had limited range of motion of his left shoulder due to pain.
Laboratory examination showed a white blood cell count of 7280/μL, with 62% of neutrophils, hemoglobin of 14.1 g/dL, platelets of 247300/mm3, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 15 mm/h, lactic dehydrogenase 150 U/L, and normal range of electrolyte profile. Besides, the human immunodeficiency virus antibody test was negative.
A core needle biopsy was performed. Histologically, the tumor was composed of sheets and cords of relatively uniform tumor cells with moderate amounts of foamy, lightly eosinophilic cytoplasm and round to oval mildly hyperchromatic nuclei without atypia . Immunohistochemical studies revealed the tumor cells to be positive for smooth muscle actin, vimentin and collagen type IV, and negative for S100, AE1/AE3, CD34, GCDFP-15, chromogranin, and synaptophysin. The overall features were felt to be consistent with glomus tumor.
Plain radiography revealed soft tissue shadow around his left axillar. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a 9.6 cm × 11.2 cm × 9.8 cm heterogeneous contrast-enhancing mass bulging from the posterior cord of the brachial plexus and encasing the axillary artery and vein associated with vascular invasion, compatible with a malignant soft tissue tumor with a differential diagnosis including undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, or lymphoma . Furthermore, the pre-operative chest computerized tomography displayed a 3-mm nodule at the posterior basal segment of the right lower lung.