A 68-year-old woman presented to our institution because of increasing anal pain and a palpable tumor. She did not have other gastrointestinal symptoms, including inflammatory bowel disease. She had a history of a perianal abscess at the 5 o’clock position 3 years previously. Transanal ultrasonography showed a fistula-like structure connecting to the abscess. The perianal abscess was treated with a drainage procedure under local anesthesia in the outpatient setting. Normal pus was confirmed without any tumor findings. Her symptoms were resolved 3 days later, but she did not come to the hospital for a follow-up visit thereafter.
Transanal ultrasonography showed that the enlarged fistula connected to the tumor . A 15 × 15-mm tumor was observed at the former drainage site . A biopsy taken from the tumor revealed a mucinous adenocarcinoma. We diagnosed the tumor as FAMC. Tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels, were within the reference range. Colonoscopic evaluation did not reveal other synchronous colorectal cancer. [18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography revealed pelvic and inguinal lymph node metastasis . No distant organ metastases were observed. Laparoscopic abdominoperineal resection with pelvic and inguinal lymph node dissection was performed. Because paraaortic lymph node metastasis was identified intraoperatively, a curative resection could not be performed. The operative time was 489 min, and the blood loss was 227 mL. She had transient unilateral obturator nerve paralysis and required rehabilitation. She was discharged on postoperative day 23. The tumor was protruding from the surface of the anal canal Histopathology of the resected specimen showed poorly differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma proliferated around the distal aspect of the anal fistula . The lumen of the anal fistula was covered with highly dysplastic cells .
Genetic analyses confirmed the KRAS mutations in the primary tumor. Chemotherapy for paraaortic lymph node metastasis was given with fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan with bevacizumab according to the colorectal adenocarcinoma regimen [–]. At 23 months after the surgery, lymph node metastases have shrunk and there is no evidence of relapse.