A 56-year-old independent woman presented to a rural public South Australian hospital for elective dressing care for bilateral lower limb chronic lymphoedema. Her past medical history was significant for aortic stenosis (AS) due to a congenital bicuspid valve, class III morbid obesity [weight 197.8 kg, body mass index (BMI) 68.5 kg/m3], asthma, and hypothyroidism. The severity of the AS prior to presentation was unknown as the patient had been lost to cardiology follow-up for several years. The emergency department medical officer advised the patient to lay supine in the Trendelenburg position with her legs elevated to aid venous return to reduce the lower limb oedema.
Within minutes after lying supine, the patient developed central chest pain that was characterized as ‘like someone sitting on her chest’ that radiated to her jaw and was associated with dyspnoea, diaphoresis, and nausea. The patient noted that she had a similar character chest pain experienced exclusively on exertion associated with dyspnoea in the 12 months prior to presentation.
On clinical examination, the patient had a grade 4 ejection systolic murmur auscultated loudest over the aortic valve with a soft second heart sound that radiated to the carotids.
A 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed new dynamic ST depression in the inferolateral territory . Sequential high sensitivity troponin assays increased from 15 (ng/L) to 75 (ng/L), to 332 ng/L (reference range ≤ 12 ng/L). Additional notable findings included a mild hypochromic microcytic anaemia (110 g/L, reference range 115–155 g/L) without any known history of overt bleeding symptoms. Upon returning the patient to the upright position, the patient’s angina dissipated within minutes with resolution of ischaemic ECG changes .
Initial diagnosis was non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), either due to Type 2 myocardial oxygen demand and supply mismatch in the setting of AS or alternatively due to a Type 1 acute plaque rupture event. The patient was treated with therapeutic dose enoxaparin and dual antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) with aspirin and ticagrelor, before being up transferred to a tertiary centre in Adelaide for further investigation and management.
The transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated a bicuspid aortic valve with a mean pressure gradient 94 mmHg , peak aortic valve velocity (Vmax) 5.9 m/s, aortic valve area of 0.7, and dimensionless performance index of 0.19. A moderately dilated ascending aorta (4.8 cm diameter measured at the main body) was also noted. There were no regional wall motion abnormalities.
In light of the TTE finding of critical AS, a computerized tomography coronary angiogram (CTCA) was chosen as the first-line investigation, with the plan being that the patient would undergo an invasive coronary angiogram if obstructive coronary artery disease was found. The CTCA excluded the presence of significant obstructive coronary artery disease , confirming the diagnosis of type 2 NSTEMI in the context of critical AS; therefore, an invasive coronary angiogram was not performed. Computerized tomography with transcatheter aortic valve insertion (CT TAVI) protocol confirmed bicuspid aortic valve and that the iliofemoral vessels were suitable for transfemoral transcatheter aortic valve insertion (TAVI) .
The patient’s case was discussed at TAVI multidisciplinary meeting for options of TAVI vs. surgical aortic valve replacement (SAVR) or aortic root replacement. Due to her co-morbidities including class III morbid obesity, she was considered high risk for surgery. Despite bicuspid valve, the annular anatomy was thought to be suitable for TAVI with no significant asymmetric calcification. The right common femoral artery was thought to be the most favoured access with least risk associated compared to alternatives. Her young age is a relative contraindication for TAVI; however, expectation was that post-TAVI, the patient may lose weight to be a potential candidate for surgical intervention in future.
The patient had an uneventful TAVI procedure via a transfemoral approach with a 26 mm Edwards Sapien 3 Ultra bioprosthetic aortic valve. The femoral access was obtained under ultrasound guidance with vascular surgery colleagues in attendance. Post-valve deployment, haemostasis was achieved with two Proglide ® percutaneous lateral sutures (Abbott Laboratories, Chicago, IL, USA).
Postoperatively, the patient went into rapid atrial fibrillation (AF), for which the patient was cardioverted following exclusion of thrombus by transoesophageal echocardiogram. The patient also developed new left bundle branch block, likely secondary to mechanical stretch of the conduction system from valve implantation.
The patient was discharged back to the rural public hospital for further convalescence before being discharged home. She was prescribed clopidogrel for antithrombotic therapy post-TAVI and Apixaban for AF. If there was no further AF after a month, the patient was to cease Apixaban and to commence aspirin, with the plan being to remain on DAPT until 6 months post-TAVI, after which she would remain on lifelong aspirin.
Fifty-two days post-procedure, the patient was seen again. She reported no further angina. The patient was laid in the supine position for a period and monitored on telemetry with no recurrence of angina after several minutes of observation. A repeat ECG did not demonstrate any new ischaemic changes. TTE images showing the parasternal short axis window with the TAVI valve in-situ and the post-TAVI mean pressure gradient are shown below .