A 20-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital (April 2023) with complaints of intermittent headache in the right temporal region with no obvious cause, and then, after strenuous exercise in the dance class, the headache became aggravated, accompanied by unresponsiveness, blurred vision, and diplopia. Cranial CT showed low density in the right temporo-parietal lobe and symmetric calcification in bilateral basal ganglia areas. The patient had no similar family history. She had cold 2 or 3 days ago. She had type 2 diabetes for 2 years, taking metformin hydrochloride extended-release tablets orally, without monitoring for blood glucose, “cerebral circulation insufficiency” for 1 year, with details unknown and no sequela, and bilateral hearing loss for more than 1 year, wearing a pair of hearing aid.
On examination, the patient was drowsy and unresponsive, with slightly slurred speech, and uncooperative on physical examination. Pupils were equal, round, and sensitively reacted to light. The face was symmetric with normal eye closure and a smile. The tongue was midline with normal movements. The muscle strength of the extremities was grade V. Muscle tone and reflexes were normal. Sensory and ataxic movements were unable to be detected. Pathologic reflexes were negative. The neck was supple, and there were no signs of meningeal irritation. After 1 day of this admission, the patient presented with two convulsive seizures. She yelled and screamed, and was confused, irritated, and uncooperative on physical examination. The left eye abduction is limited. The rest of the physical examination was unchanged. The patient is 150 cm tall and 37 kg weight, with a BMI of 16.44. Her mother said the patient had poor academic performance.
The patient's plasma lactate level was 14.77 mmol/L, and her ANA was positive (1:1000, normal range: negative), while other measurements, such as complete blood count, liver and kidney function tests, antiphospholipid antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, blood homocysteine, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (ACCP), and anti-keratin antibodies (AKA), were all normal. Her anti-mGluR5 was positive (1:10, normal range: negative), and the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) autoimmune antibody test was normal. A CSF analysis showed a normal cell count, acid-fast staining, ink staining, protein, and glucose levels. Muscle biopsy showed myogenic damage, and the modified Gomori trichrome (MGT) staining showed ragged red fibers (RRF) . The staining of periodic acidic Schiff (PAS), oil red O(ORO), and non-specific esterase (NSE) was normal. Electroencephalogram (EEG) diffused low-to-middle amplitude slow waves, combined with low-amplitude fast activity, and normal EEG rhythm disappeared during awake and sleep states. Cardiac ultrasound, urinary ultrasound, lower extremity deep vein ultrasound, inferior vena cava, and thoracic ultrasound were normal. Brain diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) revealed a hypertensive signal in the right temporo-parietal-occipital cortex and subcortical area . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) was normal. Brain magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) showed decreased N-acetyl aspartate (NAA) peak and increased lactate peak, and there was a double inverted lactate peak at 1.31 . Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) indicated brain parenchymal swelling in the right temporoparieto-occipital lobe and abnormal signals in the right temporoparieto-occipital cortex and subcortical and right thalamus. Arterial spin labeling (ASL) indicated hyperperfusion in the right temporoparieto-occipital lesion area compared to the contralateral side . A genetic study revealed a mitochondrial DNA A3243G mutation, and the level of heteroplasmy was ~53.73% in her peripheral blood .
The patient was diagnosed with MELAS syndrome by gene testing. She received the treatment with propofol (0.5 g/time) sedation, levetiracetam (1 g/day), and clonazepam tablets (2 mg/day) for seizure control, adenosine triphosphate disodium (ATP) (120 mg/day) to improve cellular energy metabolism, L-arginine (15 g/day) to treat stroke-like episodes, coenzyme Q10 (30 mg/day) to scavenge free radicals, and sodium bicarbonate (3 g/day) to reduce lactic acid and correct acidosis. Then, the patient was seizure-free for 5 days but still had psychotic symptoms. After 13 days of treatment, the acidosis was corrected, lactic acid was reduced to 2.74 mmol/L, and brain DWI showed the hypertensive signal in the right temporo-parietal-occipital cortex and subcortical area disappeared . Then, she was discharged.