A 66-year-old Caucasian man was referred for an evaluation of an asymptomatic left buttock mass that he had noticed 6 months earlier. His past medical history was significant for prostate cancer at age 64 years (stage T1c Gleason grade 3 + 3) that was successfully treated with intensity-modulated radiation therapy. His pretreatment and posttreatment nadir prostate-specific antigen were 4.5 and 0.88 nanograms per milliliter, respectively.
A month prior to his skin evaluation, he was being worked up for a possible left inguinal hernia repair. His computerized axial tomographic scan showed enlargement of the left inguinal, left pelvic sidewall and retroperitoneal lymph nodes and a soft tissue nodule in his left buttock. His surgeon performed a superficial inguinal lymph node biopsy that showed a high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma; the tumor cells stained positive for CD56 (neural cell adhesion molecule), chromogranin, cytokeratin 20, cytokeratin AE1/AE3, and synaptophysin. The tumor cells were negative for CD45 (leukocyte common antigen), GATA3 (trans-acting T cell-specific transcription factor) and prostate-specific antigen. The morphologic and immunohistochemical features indicated a metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma.
He also had a history of multiple lipomas. He had considered the left buttock nodule, which he initially noticed 6 months earlier, to be another lipoma; however, it continued to increase in size. A positron emission tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) scan, which was performed after receiving the lymph node biopsy pathology report of metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma, demonstrated intense fluorodeoxyglucose uptake from the soft tissue density in the subcutaneous tissue of the left buttock. This was suspicious for a primary tumor.
Cutaneous examination (1 month after the lymph node biopsy and 6 months after the patient’s discovery of a left buttock mass) showed a painless flesh-colored 3 × 3 cm subcutaneous nodule with central erythema on his left buttock . The nodule was firmly grasped and pushed toward the skin surface as a punch biopsy using a 4-mm circular blade was performed into its center. A cylindrical core specimen of tissue, extending from the epidermis to beyond the deep dermis, was obtained. The nodule was then firmly squeezed and additional aggregates of tumor (appearing yellowish-white and blood tinged) that extruded through the biopsy wound were collected .
Microscopic examination of the skin biopsy specimen showed an infiltrate of small blue cells with minimal cytoplasm in the deep portion of the punch biopsy and all the pieces of subcutaneous tissue . The basophilic cells were uniform in size with a vesicular nucleus and small nucleoli. Numerous mitoses were appreciated and there were large areas of necrosis. The tumor invaded fascia in the deeper specimens and focally grew in close approximation to multiple blood vessels; however, no intravascular or perineural invasion was identified (Fig. ).
Immunohistochemical studies showed that the tumor cells stained positive for cytokeratin 20 (in a cytoplasmic and paranuclear dot-like pattern), CD56 (neural cell adhesion molecule), and synaptophysin . The tumor cells were negative for prostate-specific antigen and thyroid transcription factor 1.
Correlation of the history, clinical morphology, imaging studies, and pathology was diagnostic for metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma. The left buttock was the site of the primary tumor. Metastases had spread to the regional lymph nodes.
The biopsy tissue from the left buttock tumor was also sent for genomic evaluation. A next-generation sequencing-based assay was performed. Genomic alterations of our patient’s tumor, evaluated by next-generation sequencing included base substitutions, insertions, deletions, and copy number alterations .
DNA was extracted from 40 micrometer of formalin-fixed tissue (minimum 20% tumor cells) using the Maxwell® 16 FFPE Plus LEV DNA Purification kit (Promega, Wisconsin, USA) and quantified using a standardized PicoGreen fluorescence assay (Invitrogen). Library construction was performed using 50-200 nanogram of DNA sheared by sonication to approximately 100–400 base pairs before end-repair, dA addition and ligation of indexed Illumina sequencing adaptors (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Enrichment of targeted sequences (including all coding exons of 315 cancer related genes) plus introns from 28 genes often rearranged or altered in cancer was achieved by solution-based hybrid capture with custom biotinylated oligonucleotide bases. Enriched libraries were sequenced to an average median depth of >500× with 99% of bases covering >100× [Illumina HiSwq 2000 (Illumina, Inc.) platform using 49 × 49 paired-end reads] and mapped to the reference human genome (hg19) using the Burrows–Wheeler Aligner and the publicly available SAMtools, Picard, and Genome Analysis Toolkit. Point mutations were identified by a Bayesian algorithm; short insertions and deletions, determined by focal assembly; gene copy number alterations (amplification), by comparison to process matched normal controls; and gene fusions/rearrangements, by clustering chimeric reads mapped to targeted introns. Amplifications were called for ≥6 copies except for ErbB2 (≥5 copies). Six to seven copy numbers are called as equivocal and ≥8 are definitive; for ErbB2, equivocal amplification was 5–7 copies; all (equivocal or definitively amplified) were designated as positive for amplification in our patient. Aberrations, mutations or other alterations in kinases that were presumed to be inactivating based on wet lab experiments or structural modeling were not included .
Alteration of the SUFU gene [SUFU R299Q (due to nucleotide mutation at position 299, arginine becomes glutamine in the SUFO protein)] was the only abnormality identified by the next-generation sequencing-based assay (315 gene panel; Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, MA, USA) . Treatment with systemic chemotherapy was initiated with carboplatin and etoposide. He is receiving treatment every 3 weeks and adjuvant radiotherapy is planned.
Follow-up evaluation shows decrease in the size of the left buttock tumor and the previously enlarged lymph nodes. Consideration to use experimental agents that target the distal Hh pathway may be considered if his tumor progresses.
Informed consent was obtained from the patient for being included in the study and for publication of the images.