A 61-year-old Caucasian woman, previously in good health, presented with a three-day history of feeling generally unwell with dizziness, vomiting, abdominal, left lower chest pain and shoulder pain. She denied any sore throat, feeling feverish or other symptoms suggestive of an influenza-like illness. There was no cough or sputum production. There was nothing in the history to suggest a recent viral or other infective process including human immunodeficiency virus or acquired immune deficiency state and no history of any trauma or injury. She had no significant previous medical or surgical history and was not taking any medications. There was no background or family history of cancer, hematologic or clotting disorders. She was a smoker of approximately 40 pack years and had unlimited exercise tolerance. She worked as a nurse and there was no history of previous exposure to asbestos or other occupational hazards.
On examination she was ill-looking, conscious and orientated with a blood pressure 89/49 mmHg, heart rate of 72 beats per minute, saturations 97% on a non-rebreather mask and temperature of 36.9°C. The admission examination revealed normal cardiac examination and bibasal inspiratory crepitations with left upper quadrant and epigastric tenderness on abdominal examination.
Her blood work-up on admission showed a hemoglobin level of 11.4 g/L, white cell count of 19 × 109/L with neutrophils of 17 × 109/L and a C-reactive protein of 7 mg/L. Urea and electrolytes, liver function and coagulation tests were in the normal range. A blood film examination did not reveal any atypical lymphocytes or other abnormalities. A posteroanterior and lateral chest radiograph was performed .
Hemodynamic stability was achieved following rehydration with intravenous fluids. However, eight hours after admission she developed an acute abdomen with clinical signs of shock. Her blood pressure was 88/52 mmHg and heart rate 105 beats per minute. Further to that her oxygen saturations were 91% on a non-rebreather mask with a Glasgow coma scale of 14/15 (E = 4, V = 4, M = 6). Inspection revealed skin and conjunctival pallor. Clinical examination revealed new abdominal signs of generalized abdominal tenderness with guarding, rigidity and absent bowel sounds, consistent with an acute abdomen. A repeat test showed her hemoglobin level had dropped to 5.0 g/L.
She was stabilized with multiple blood transfusions and underwent an urgent computer tomography scan of her thorax and abdomen, which showed an 8.5 × 3.6 cm left hilar mass with extensive mediastinal adenopathy, bibasal small effusions and consolidation, and a large splenic hematoma of 15 × 12 cm with high attenuation suggestive of active bleeding . There was a lytic area affecting her T9 vertebra, which likely represented metastases rather than wedge fracture, but there were no abnormalities or neoplastic disease affecting the intra-abdominal organs.
Pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccines were administered and our patient was then promptly taken to theater for laparotomy. On examination of her internal organs at laparotomy, other than hemorrhage and rupture of her spleen, there was no other gross abnormality and no evidence of disease in her other intra-abdominal organs. She spent two days being ventilated in our intensive care unit and subsequently made a full recovery from the surgery. She was commenced on life-long penicillin V and was subsequently discharged home a week after admission, fully mobile and independent in terms of her activities of daily living.
Her splenic histology was negative for hematologic or other malignancy and no other pathology was identified. She then underwent a bronchoscopy; transbronchial needle aspiration revealed numerous malignant nodes consistent with non-small cell carcinoma. Histology of bronchial biopsies confirmed invasive adenocarcinoma. This was consistent with likely stage IV in view of the likely bone metastases found on CT. She was referred to the local oncologist and her case was discussed at the lung cancer multidisciplinary team meeting. In view of the diagnosis and staging, a palliative treatment pathway was agreed from the outset and our patient received palliative chemotherapy. She died five months after her presentation.