A 74-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our gynecology clinic for suspected pyometra. She was obese, diabetic and hypertensive. Outpatient hysteroscopy revealed a thickened white endometrium and pyometra. A pipelle endometrial sample was taken and sent for histology.
Three days later, she presented to the accident and emergency department feeling unwell, with profuse foul-smelling vaginal discharge and bleeding per rectum. She was admitted and started on intravenous antibiotics for suspected uterine sepsis.
The pipelle biopsy showed pus cells only. Her carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was normal and CA-125 slightly raised at 73. Vaginal swabs showed no pathogens. As the clinical picture was highly suggestive of endometrial cancer, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed, which revealed pyometra but no obvious tumor.
A repeat hysteroscopy was done under general anaesthetic and drainage of pyometra was performed. About 50ml of pus was drained and an endometrial biopsy was taken. Pus culture showed mixed anerobic growth and the repeat endometrial biopsy revealed acute on chronic endometritis. She improved clinically with intravenous antibiotics and was discharged home.
She presented 10 days later to the accident and emergency department with a history of collapse, acute abdominal pain, diarrhoea, vomiting and bleeding per rectum. A contrast computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen requested by the general surgeons was unremarkable. A sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy revealed significant diverticular disease with prominent thickened folds. She improved with conservative management.
She presented to the surgical team three months later with acute abdominal pain. A CT scan was repeated, which revealed an inflamed thick-walled sigmoid colon that tracked down to the uterus (a colouterine fistula). Our patient underwent laparotomy where a large diverticular mass was seen perforating into the uterus (a colouterine fistula) and adherent to its posterior wall. Pus was draining through the vagina. A Hartmann’s operation with total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed.
She made a slow but complete recovery. At follow-up six months later she was asymptomatic. Our patient is now deceased but her death occurred due to a cause unrelated to the condition mentioned.