A 69-year-old man with no prior history of medication or anticoagulant therapy first noticed a painless swelling in his left flank in 2005. This swelling gradually increased over 6 years, resulting in the formation of a mass in the left flank region. In June 2011, the patient presented to a local hospital after mild pain developed. The patient did not have any definite history of trauma or surgery that could have caused the left abdominal/back lesion. Computed tomography (CT) indicated the presence of a left retroperitoneal mass with left hydronephrosis because of external compression by the mass and a right atrophic kidney. A double J-stent was placed in the left ureter. The serum creatinine level changed from 0.72 mg/dL before double J-stent insertion to 0.53 mg/dL after the treatment.
On physical examination at the Gunma University Hospital, a firm area of swelling with an approximate size of 20 cm × 15 cm was detected. Blood tests results indicated that the patient had mild anemia and a hemoglobin level of 10.7 g/dL. The patient’s coagulation profile and platelet count were normal. However, CT indicated the presence of a huge mass (20 cm × 15 cm × 13 cm) compressing the left kidney in the upward direction in the retroperitoneal space. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed that the mass was not uniform but included scattered calcification and a partly enhanced rim . On T-1 and T-2 weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), high signal intensity and several partition walls were observed in a major portion of the mass . No bone metastases were noted on bone scintigraphy.
Based on these results and the patient’s clinical history, we suspected the presence of CEH, in addition to soft tissue malignancy and hemangiomas. Open abdominal surgery via the intraperitoneal approach was then performed. The mass was located in the retroperitoneal space, was completely encapsulated, and did not exhibit any evidence of invasion to the neighboring tissue; however, it was found to be partly adhering to the left ureter and psoas muscle. On exploration, we observed that there was no vascular malformation in the surrounding tissue. Although a slight adhesion was present between the mass and the left ureter, dissection was performed relatively easily because of a ureteral stent that was placed prior to the operation. However, the mass was partially adhering to the aorta, and therefore, we decided to perform dissection at a site close to the mass. Despite this careful dissection, the traction exerted on the thin capsule of the mass resulted in its rupture. We noted that the mass was filled with a dark brown substance including blood cells, necrotic tissue, and fibrin . Histopathological examination of the mass capsule revealed dense fibrous connective and fatty tissue containing numerous old clots . No evidence of neoplasia was found. The postsurgical diagnosis was a CEH in the retroperitoneal space. During the postoperative period, the patient developed high fever and a subcutaneous emphysema that spread out from the left thoracic wall to the left abdominal wall. As a result of consulting a dermatologist, a subcutaneous emphysema seemed to be caused by the operative stress than a bacterial infection. He received compression therapy by a compression garment. The laboratory data revealed leukocytosis and elevated levels of β-D-glucan. Antibiotic therapy with cefazolin was replaced with doripenem and clindamycin. In addition, treatment with fosfluconazole was initiated. We could not locate the site of inflammation or infection after examination by CT, urine culture, sputum culture, and blood culture. Thereafter, the fever and subcutaneous emphysema resolved, and the β-D-glucan levels gradually declined until normalization. No sign of CEH recurrence was observed 2 years after surgery.