An 80-year-old woman in good general condition (160 cm, 60 kg) with severe aortic stenosis was admitted to our centre for TAVR. She had a history of renal insufficiency, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, persistent atrial fibrillation requiring oral anti-coagulants, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. She complained of progressive dyspnoea [New York Heart Association (NYHA) III] with evidence of cardiac decompensation (proBNP = 1410 pg/mL). Aortic stenosis was confirmed by echocardiography (mean transvalvular gradient = 45 mmHg; peak aortic jet velocity on continuous wave Doppler ultrasound = 4.3 m/s in normal left ventricular function; left ventricular ejection fraction = 65%). Additional echocardiograph findings included mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitations and moderate pulmonary hypertension (systolic pulmonary arterial pressure = 61 mmHg plus central venous pressure). A physical examination showed a typical systolic heart murmur, but no oedema or other signs of cardiac decompensation. Pre-procedure electrocardiogram documented sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 56 b.p.m. and first-degree AV block. Previous medication included amiodarone, rivaroxaban, the common antihypertensive medication, and low-dose steroids. Coronary artery disease was excluded by invasive angiogram. Further imaging evaluation via computed tomography (CT) revealed an annulus diameter of 23.2 mm and a bulbus diameter of 31 mm . The scan also showed a massive calcified aorta that included the subclavian and coronary arteries. The aortic annulus was moderately calcified, while the valve’s leaflets were significantly calcified . A consensus was arrived at to perform TAVR after taking into consideration the aortic calcification, a score of 9.3% on the EuroSCORE II and the patient’s age. Due to the calcifications of nearly all the vessels and moderate calcification of the valve, a self-expanding valve was deemed appropriate. Furthermore, given the supra-annular design and large valve opening area of these valve types, there would be a lower risk of annulus rupture. As there was severe calcification in both iliac arteries, with lumen reduction (minimal diameter = 4.5 mm), transapical access was preferred . Moreover, the surgeons from our cardiac team are experienced in transapical access and have had good results., Written consent was obtained from the patient before the procedure.
A self-expanding ACURATE neo M 25 mm valve (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was implanted transapically with pre-dilation (Osypka 25 × 40 mm; filled 32 mL, used 28 mL) under general anaesthesia and with transoesophageal echocardiographic (TOE) guidance. After release of the prosthesis, there was mild PVL, which was observable at the grade I–II levels. Therefore, a post-dilation was performed as the radial force of the ACURATE neo valve is known to be weak and a PVL greater than grade I is associated with higher mortality. Following post-dilation (Osypka 25 × 40 mm; filled 32 mL, used 30 mL), a moderate PVL and a significant VSD with a jet from the annulus into the right ventricle was visible in an intraprocedural TOE .
Given the complete calcification of the ascending aorta and aortic arch , conversion to conventional surgery was rejected. As the patient was haemodynamically stable, we decided to end the procedure. The next day, another TOE was performed that revealed a shunt volume (left-to-right ventricle) between 50% and 60%. This was a membranous VSD and partly between the stent struts of the ACURATE valve and close to the aortic annulus .
These findings were discussed and different therapeutic options were evaluated. Surgical treatment was rejected, and conservative management would lead to heart insufficiency due to the significant shunt. Implantation of an atrial or ventricular septal occluder might have disturbed valve function or generated an obstruction of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT). Implantation of a balloon-expandable valve was considered. However, there were concerns that it could worsen the situation due to the forces entering the annulus via the balloon. Implantation of a self-expanding valve was another option. We decided to perform a valve-in-valve (VIV) procedure via a transfemoral implantation of an EVOLUT Pro 29 mm (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA), regardless of the elevated risk of vascular complications within the iliac arteries. This valve cannot, however, be implanted transapically. As subclavian arteries showed heavily calcified stenosis in the CT scan, transfemoral implantation was the only possible access route.
The VIV was implanted 2–3 mm below the lower edge of the first valve and towards the LVOT . The implantation procedure remained uneventful and VSD was reduced to a small residual shunt without haemodynamic relevance . Furthermore, the PVL, which had been observed after first implantation, disappeared. Unfortunately, a pacemaker had to be implanted due to a high-grade AV block. On echocardiogram, valve functioning was normal, with a mean gradient of 8 mmHg. There were no signs of patient prosthesis mismatch (indexed effective opening area 1.0 cm2, according to the continuity equation). A telephone-based follow-up 20 weeks post-procedure revealed complete recovery from the TAVR and improvement of the heart failure symptoms to NYHA class II. A follow-up echocardiogram was obtained 12 weeks following valve implantation and showed a persistently good result. A small VSD remained verifiable, but no PVL, and the mean gradient across the aortic valve was 8 mmHg. According to the 2020 European Society of Cardiology guidelines for the management of adult congenital heart disease, patients with a small residual VSD should be seen after 3–5 years. We recommended another echocardiogram one year following implantation.