A 26-year-old woman who had given birth 3 months prior presented with progressive bilateral blurred vision and ocular pain for the preceding 10 months. She initially presented to a local hospital where her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/2000 and 20/400 in the right and left eye respectively, and intraocular pressure (IOP) was 50 mmHg in each eye. She was prescribed brinzolamide, latanoprost, brimonidine tartrate, and carteolol eye drops; however, her IOP remained in the 30’s and her vision continued to decline. On further questioning, she did recall that her vision was not good from childhood, and had noted a recent change. There was no history of eye diseases in the family, no history of ocular trauma or systemic diseases, and her recent pregnancy and delivery were both uncomplicated.
On presentation, her BCVA was count fingers at 10 cm in the right eye and 20/600 in the left eye. IOP measured by Goldman applanation tonometry was 25 mmHg in the right eye and 31 mmHg in the left eye. Positive findings on slit-lamp examination of both eyes revealed deep anterior chamber centrally but shallow peripherally without inflammation or posterior synechiae. The lenses were clear. Fundus examination was notable for bilateral cup-to-disc ratio of 0.95, horizontal macular pucker with mild vascular tortuosity, and discrete, round, yellow-white deposits of variable sizes scattered throughout the macula and posterior pole . Static gonioscopy demonstrated circumferential grade IV angle by Scheie grading with 2–3 clock hours open in each eye on dynamic gonioscopy. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) confirmed angle closure in the setting of iris thickening and plateau iris-like configuration with an anteriorly rotated ciliary body and iris root . IOL Master measured anterior chamber depth (ACD) of 2.64 mm in right eye and 2.77 mm in left eye and axial length of 21.88 mm in each eye. Spectral domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) revealed cystoid macular edema associated with retinoschisis as well as increased reflectivity of the vitreoretinal interface in both eyes with pre-retinal tractional membranes . Subfoveal choroid thickness measured 401 μm in both eyes, thicker than the previously reported normal range in the Chinese population .
Given the elevated IOP on maximum medical therapy with angle closure and extensive peripheral anterior synechiae, the decision was made to proceed with clear lens extraction with intraocular lens implantation and goniosynechialysis in the left eye with a higher IOP. On post-operative day 1, the visual acuity was 20/800 with an IOP of 44 mmHg and unchanged ACD. Malignant glaucoma was suspected and Nd:YAG laser capsulotomy was performed in an attempt to balance the pressure between the vitreous cavity and anterior chamber, but this did not result in any improvement. Two weeks post-operatively with no improvement in the patient’s condition, diode laser transscleral cyclophotocoagulation (TCP) was performed using 10 shots over 180-degrees with power of 1800 mW and 2 s duration (OcuLight SLx 810 nm diode laser and G-probe, Iris Medical, Mountain View, CA). One day following the laser, IOP in the left eye decreased to 25 mmHg with BCVA improving to 20/667 and slightly deepened ACD without anti-glaucoma medications. By post-operative day 4, the IOP had decreased to 15 mmHg with significant improvement in ACD to 3.014 mm. Concurrently, anterior vitreous liquefaction with increased vitreous motility were noted on slit-lamp examination. By post-operative week 5, the IOP remained normal with further deepened ACD to 3.427 mm. UBM showed increased space between the ciliary body and iris root with a moderate backward rotation of the ciliary body. Interestingly, following TCP, the retinoschisis in the left eye resolved completely but with no improvement after lens extraction with intraocular lens implantation and goniosynechialysis . One week following TCP on the left eye, the right eye underwent combined phacoemulsification, intraocular lens implantation, and goniosynechialysis followed by TCP 1 week later. The right eye had a similar course of IOP control, anterior chamber deepening, backward ciliary body rotation, and resolution of the retinoschisis . No complication occurred after TCP.
The patient underwent fundus fluorescein angiography 10 days following TCP on the right eye and 24 days following TCP on the left eye. This showed scattered early hyperfluorescence in the mid-periphery around the arcades with no significant change in late stages. The peripheral retina demonstrated capillary leakage in late stage images . Fundus autofluorescence showed perifoveal hypo-autofluorescence in the right worse than left eyes and hyper-autofluorescence in the posterior pole corresponding to the areas of hyperfluorescence seen on fundus fluorescein angiography . An extensive lab workup for inflammatory causes of macular edema with peripheral vascular leakage was negative, including: antinuclear antibodies, anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, human leukocyte antigen -B27, interferon gamma release assay, serum cortisol, erythrocyte sedimentation, anti-guanidine amino acid peptide antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, anti-β2-glycoproteinIantibodies, and rheumatoid factor within normal range. Electrooculography could not provide a reliable Arden index due to the inability to obtain a basic potential in the setting of the patient’s poor vision. Flash electroretinogram showed a decreased rod photoreceptor maximal reaction amplitude. The reaction amplitude of cone photoreceptor in 30 Hz flicker had no obvious change . Based on the fundus findings and the results of ancillary testing, a diagnosis of ARB was made. Whole-exome sequencing of this patient identified a novel homozygous missense mutation, c.1 A > G, p.M1V in BEST1. The variants were found in exon 2. Bidirectional Sanger sequencing of parents further confirmed that both were heterozygous for the same variant . Upon further inquiry, we ascertained a history of consanguinity.
Six months following TCP treatment, her vision improved to 20/250 in each eye with IOP between 14 and 16 mmHg in both eyes without anti-glaucoma medications. The ACD remained stable around 3.5 mm and there was no change in fundus examination with no recurrence of retinoschisis on OCT.