A 37-year-old Caucasian woman affected by DLE presented to our hospital for a sudden onset of proptosis and bulbar pain of her right eye (RE). She also complained of blurred vision and diplopia. She was subjected to a complete ophthalmological examination. A Hertel exophthalmometer was used to value proptosis. A Hess screen test was performed to evaluate the diplopia. Endocrinological visit and thyroid function tests and blood test examination were prescribed. A cranial X-ray was performed to evaluate sinus inflammation. To evaluate the extraocular muscle involvement both ultrasound echography (Cinescan S Ophthalmic Ultrasound System) and orbital computed tomography (CT) were performed.
On the first examination, best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/32 in her RE and 20/20 in her left eye (LE). RE examination revealed bulbar position in adduction, marked limitation of her extraocular movements in the right position of gaze, swelling eyelids, scleral and episcleral injection and conjunctival chemosis. Hertel exophthalmometer values were 22mm in her RE and 18mm in her LE. Pupil response, intraocular pressure, and fundus examination were normal in both eyes. Her LE examination was normal. The endocrinologist according to the thyroid function test and neck echography excluded thyroid disease. A cranial X-ray showed transparency of the sinus. The blood analysis was normal. No leukopenia or thrombocytopenia was detected and only a slight increase in the velocity of her erythrocyte sedimentation rate (20mm/hour) was seen. The values of her creatine phosphokinase and complement levels were normal. An immunological profile showed high titer of antinuclear antibodies with a dotting pattern. No myositis-associated autoantibodies were detectable in the serum. According to the Score of Activity and Damage in DLE (SADDLE) , the systemic disease was classified not active.
A Hess screen revealed a hypofunction of the right medial rectus with overreaction of the left lateral rectus . B-scan ultrasonography and orbital CT showed no orbital or periorbital mass, but an enlargement of the medial rectus muscle (7mm, maximum diameter; Figure ). A diagnosis of OM was made based on the patient’s clinical features and abnormal CT findings. Treatment was initiated with three courses of intravenous methylprednisolone (1g/day) for 3 days followed by oral prednisolone (20mg/day); tapering the dosage 5mg per week. Her ocular pain rapidly improved within several days, and the diplopia and abnormal muscle findings markedly improved during the course of the steroid therapy. Her BCVA was 20/20 in both eyes, her intraocular pressure was also normal in both eyes. The measurements of proptosis using a Hertel exophthalmometer were 18mm in both eyes. Her Hess screen test was remarkably improved . After 2 months, ultrasound echography showed a resolution of right medial muscle swelling. She developed an orbital inflammation recurrence with the same symptoms 6 months after finishing the steroid treatment. She was treated again with the same steroid protocol and the symptoms resolved. She was followed up for 2 years with no further relapses.