A 56-year-old Caucasian woman with a 20-year history of type II diabetes mellitus presented with increased fatigue, bilateral lower extremity edema, and tightness of her skin in her lower extremities in 2012. Her primary care physician evaluated her cellular blood counts, chemistries, and thyroid-stimulating hormone, and obtained an echocardiogram. All of these studies were normal. A sleep study revealed mild obstructive sleep apnea, which was treated.
Within six months, in addition to lower extremity skin thickening, she developed dyspnea, Raynaud’s phenomenon, and digital ulcerations. She was referred to a rheumatologist at that time and found to be positive for anti-nuclear antibodies, at 1:640 in a nucleolar pattern, and RNA polymerase III antibody. Tests for other SSc antibodies, including anti-centromere, anti-fibrillin, anti-topoisomerase, and anti-Th/To, were negative. Her blood pressure and creatinine were noted to be normal. Her hemoglobin A1c was 7.6%. She was not on an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACE-I).
At a rheumatology appointment six months after her initial symptoms started, pulmonary function tests demonstrated an isolated decrease in diffusing capacity (38% predicted). A repeat echocardiogram suggested the interim development of moderate pulmonary hypertension with an estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of 45mmHg and an impaired relaxation pattern of left ventricular filling. A computed tomography scan of her chest did not reveal the presence of a pulmonary embolism, and there was no evidence of interstitial lung disease. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not show any delayed enhancement that would suggest prior myocardial injury or infarction. The images revealed that she had normal stress and resting perfusion, as well as hyperdynamic left ventricular function with an ejection fraction of 77% and no wall motion abnormalities. However, there was mild bi-atrial enlargement and her right ventricle was dilated with normal right ventricular systolic function. A right heart catheterization established the diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension, with right atrial pressure of 12mmHg, right ventricular pressure of 53/17mmHg, pulmonary arterial (PA) pressure of 45/16mmHg (mean, 33mmHg), wedge pressure of 20mmHg, cardiac output of 7L/min, cardiac index of 3.5L/min, and peripheral vascular resistance of 2 Wood units. She was noted to be anemic with a hemoglobin level of 7.4g/dL.
Based on her cardiac catheterization results, she was treated with diuresis and a phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitor. At her one-month follow-up visit after the cardiac catheterization, her digital ulcerations were healing and lower extremity edema was improved, but her modified Rodnan skin score had worsened by six points (27 to 33). Methotrexate was prescribed, but our patient reported intolerable nausea after two doses. Owing to the anemia, she had an upper endoscopy. This led to a diagnosis of gastric antral vascular ectasia that was treated with argon plasma coagulation. Our patient was hesitant to continue methotrexate, thus mycophenolate mofetil was prescribed. Our patient did not receive any steroid therapy.
One year after her initial symptom of SSc, she had a scleroderma renal crisis (SRC), with a presenting blood pressure of 178/76mmHg and creatinine level of 1.77mg/dL. Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia was not present. Our patient was hospitalized and her blood pressure was controlled with an ACE-I. Our patient attended follow-up visits every other month for the next four months. Despite well-controlled blood pressure; echocardiogram improvement (normal ejection fraction); resolution of anemia following treatment for gastric antral vascular ectasia; creatinine stabilization (1.44mg/dL); and modified Rodnan skin score stabilization (maximum 38), our patient reported progressive fatigue and weakness. An electromyogram, nerve conduction studies, and levels of muscle enzymes were normal, and physical therapy was prescribed. She reported mild improvement in all symptoms at a follow-up visit two months later.
One year after her diagnosis of SSc and two months after her last clinic appointment, our patient was hospitalized for acute onset left-sided heart failure, with an ejection fraction of 20% documented by echocardiogram. An ECG revealed that her sinus rhythm and cardiac enzyme levels were normal. A repeat right and left heart catheterization showed a right atrial pressure of 19mmHg, right ventricular pressure of 64/7mmHg, PA pressure of 69/27mmHg (mean, 39mmHg), wedge pressure of 19mmHg, cardiac output of 6.8L/min, cardiac index of 3.3L/min, and only mild luminal abnormalities in her right coronary and left circumflex arteries. During this hospitalization, our patient stated that if she were to die, she wished to donate her body to science to help further physician understanding of SSc. One day after making this statement, she died of pulseless electrical activity, despite being followed closely at a clinic dedicated to SSc care and having no limitations to access.
An autopsy was immediately performed. She had cardiac enlargement, right and left ventricular chamber dilatation, pleural effusions, hepatosplenomegaly, and ascites indicative of heart failure. Atherosclerosis of her right coronary artery with 20% occlusion of the lumen was identified. Sections of her right and left ventricles, and septum showed focal interstitial fibrosis . There was mild perivascular fibrosis in her left ventricle. Trichrome staining confirmed the presence of collagen; there were no other microvascular changes. There was myocyte hypertrophy, but no signs of inflammation. Her lungs showed moderate interstitial fibrosis, septal thickening, and large arteries with intima fibrosis. Segments of her esophagus, stomach, small bowel, and large bowel showed marked collagen deposition in the lamina propria. There was moderate autolysis without significant inflammation. Sections of her kidney showed several globally sclerotic glomeruli, moderate fibrous arterial intimal thickening, and interstitial fibrosis. There were no inflammatory infiltrates, casts, or crystals. There was glomerular enlargement, nodular increases in mesangial matrix, and capillary wall thickening consistent with nodular diabetic glomerulosclerosis. No thrombotic microangiopathy of the small vessels was noted. Her bone marrow was hypercellular for age but showed trilineage hematopoiesis with an approximately normal ratio of myeloid to erythroid precursors. No other significant abnormalities were reported. The pathologist reported her likely cause of death as a fatal dysrhythmia due to myocardial fibrosis and atherosclerosis.
Metabolomics were used to investigate which metabolism and signaling pathways played a key role in her heart failure. For this investigation, the heart was immediately placed in a −80°C freezer. Subsequent quantitative analysis of a large number of small metabolites (<1000Da) within a cell or tissue and principle component analysis allow maximum variation in the data to be described, providing a fingerprint of physiological and pathophysiological status. In our study, the comparative analyses of metabolomes were performed by a combined approach of gas chromatography–mass spectrometry spectroscopic techniques with subsequent computer analysis of the data generated. Our patient’s tissue was compared to averages of 79 metabolites in 16 other patients who suffered cardiac death. In our patient, the essential amino acids (2-aminoadipic acid, lysine, valine, leucine, alanine, glutamic acid, proline, aspartic acid, asparagine, methionine, cysteine, tyrosine, and histidine) were the most elevated metabolic class. Our patient’s lipid, peptide, and carbohydrate metabolites were similar to those in the other 16 patients tested. Of interest, despite her history of SRC, our patient’s creatinine level was lower than any of the other samples tested.