A 30-year-old man presented with recurring painless gross haematuria for half a month but without urinary tract infections or lower back pain. He had an unremarkable history of cigarette smoking, clinical history, and physical examination. On admission, his laboratory results showed routine urinalysis with elevated numbers of red blood cell count and leucocytes. Furthermore, tumor marker levels were within their normal ranges.
Ultrasonography was performed with an Aplio500 device (Toshiba Medical Systems, Tokyo, Japan) equipped with a 375BT convex transducer (frequency range 3.0–6.0 MHz). Conventional US revealed the presence of a large cauliflower shaped mass (3.4 × 3.1 cm), located at the anterior wall of the bladder, and the mass did not move with changes in body position. The mass exhibited uniform echogenicity, protruded into the lumen with hyperechoic margins and had a wide base . No invasion of the trigone of bladder and bilateral hydronephrosis was observed. Superb microvascular imaging (SMI) showed strong blood flow signals in the mass . CEUS was then performed with an injection of 2.4 ml US contrast agent (SonoVue, Bracco, Milan, Italy) followed by 5 ml 0.9% sterile saline flush through the antecubital vein. The examination was performed at a low mechanical index of 0.09. In the early phase, the lesion exhibited completely homogeneous enhancement that was obviously stronger than that of the normal bladder wall . At the same time, CEUS showed disruption of the entire bladder wall by homogeneous hyper-enhanced tumor tissue. Then, the lesion rapidly showed hypo-enhancement, resulting in a sharp contrast compared with the adjacent bladder wall . Next, we created TICs to exactly analyse the perfusion of the lesion. The lesion was initially enhanced on CEUS at 9 s compared to the bladder wall that was enhanced at 13 s. The tumor reached the peak enhancement at 13 s, and the strong enhancement was continuously maintained until 40 s. Subsequently, the microbubbles within the mass began to wash out, and the level of enhancement decreased to equivalent to that of the bladder wall . After 300 s, the microbubbles in the tumor were completely washed out. These CEUS features suggested a diagnosis of urinary bladder malignancy.
The patient underwent partial cystectomy under general anaesthesia without complications. Histological examination revealed large tumor cells with polymorphic nuclei and organoids, trabecular growth, a coarse chromatin pattern, and prominent nucleoli . Immunohistochemically, the neuroendocrine tumor differentiation markers CD56 , chromogranin A and synaptophysin were positive, suggesting neuroendocrine differentiation. The cellular proliferation marker Ki-67 was as high as 90% . Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as LCNEC. The patient received six courses of postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy (cisplatin/etoposide) and he has now been free of recurrence for more than 2 years after surgery.