A 2 years and 6 month old girl presented to our hospital due to recurrent seizures, flushing and sweating of the skin on her unilateral face and trunk and paroxysmal headache. She was a 34-week premature infant with no history of perinatal injury. PEPD symptoms started 7 days after birth. From birth to 3 months of age, she presented with recurrent convulsions with tight-closed or staring eyes, stiff limbs and no response to calls, reddening of the complexion and trunk accompanied with cyanosis of the face and lips. Her non-epileptic tonic seizures were usually triggered by stimulation of the perineum, defecation, or touching the body and usually last for several minutes. From 3 months to 1 year of age, the patient experienced paroxysmal flushing or sweating on the face or trunk , usually occurring several times a day and lasting 20–30 min each time. The flushing was predominantly unilateral, which is known as HCC. Occasionally, the patient showed red flushing at the corners of her eyes when she cried. She was conscious without closed or staring eyes or abnormal changes of the pupil and it usually lasted for approximately 10 min. At two years old, she had a paroxysmal headache, accompanied by local facial or half trunk skin reddening with high frequent attacks. The pain often occurred during eating and could also be triggered spontaneously during sleep. It occurred on the forehead and temporal regions, usually lasting 1–2 h. She also had constipation since infancy. The patient is the first child of her non-consanguineous parents (G1P1). Her mother had a history of syncope, bradycardia, sinus arrest and other arrhythmias so that she was given a pacemaker. She had constipation but denied any history of rectal, eye or mandibular pain since childhood.
Her intellectual development was normal, while her motor development lagged behind that of children of her age. She walked independently at 2 years and 3 months old. When she was admitted to our hospital , no obvious abnormalities were found upon general physical and nervous system examinations. No Horner syndrome or other abnormalities were observed in the pupil. Results of laboratory tests, including blood glucose, electrolyte, hepatic and kidney functions, thyroid function, blood ammonia, blood and urine metabolic screening, were all normal. Video-EEG showed no abnormalities in the interictal and symptomatic phases (autonomic epilepsy excluded). MRI of her head and spinal cord showed no abnormalities. Results of dynamic ECG suggested sinus arrhythmia, temporary sinus bradycardia and temporary sinus arrest.
The administration of carbamazepine (10 mg/kg/day, bid; then, gradually increased to 20 mg/kg/day, bid) reduced the number and severity of attacks obviously. After 3 months of carbamazepine therapy, the girl’s motor ability improved. She could jump forward and backward and run. The patient has been taking the medication for 2 years, resulting in significant pain relief and improved motor ability.
The peripheral blood sample of the patient was collected and sent to Running Gene Inc. (Beijing, China) for whole-exome sequencing. Detailed methods have been described in the previous study . Sanger sequencing was performed on the patient and her parents for confirmation and the co-segregation analysis. Whole-exome sequencing identifed a novel heterozygous variant c.4384T>A (p.F1462I) in the SCN9A gene (NM_002977.3), which was inherited from her mother . The variant is absent from the general population in the databases of 1000 Genomes Project , ExAC and gnomAD (PM2). It was predicted to be deleterious by in silico algorithms (REVEL , score = 0.964 > cutoff = 0.75) (PP3). Although c.4384T>A (p.F1462I) was novel, c.4384T>G (p.F1462V) has been reported in the Human Gene Variant Database (HGMD) as a disease-causing mutation (DM) at the same site (PM5) . Besides, this variant was in the isoleucine, phenylalanine and methionine (IFM) motif, which forms the inactivation gate and plays a pivotal role in fast inactivation (PM1) [, ]. Therefore, the variant identified in our patient was evaluated as likely pathogenic according to the guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) .