A 69-year-old woman presented with a chief complaint of exertional dyspnea. She experienced palpitations when climbing the stairs 3 months before her visit to our department, and her dyspnea had worsened thereafter. She experienced thrombocytopenic purpura at the age of 26 years and underwent splenectomy. She was also diagnosed with SLE and Sjogren’s syndrome at the age of 35 years and was treated with prednisolone (10 mg/day) for 1 year for her SLE. After the end of treatment, the SLE was well controlled. She had been on medical therapy for high blood pressure (olmesartan medoxomil, 10 mg/day) and underwent endoscopic treatment for stomach cancer. She had no history of smoking. She was diagnosed with acute aortic dissection (Stanford type A) 10 years before her visit to our department, and hemiarch aortic replacement was performed with an artificial graft. She was noted to have a small pseudoaneurysm at the proximal anastomosis 1 year postoperatively. The surgeon who performed the first surgery did not choose reoperation due to the risk of collagen disease but followed up with the patient every 6 months. The patient had also experienced sudden-onset dyspnea and chest pain 1 year before the current presentation. She was rushed to the same hospital where she underwent her first surgery and was treated for acute heart failure. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a pseudoaneurysm perforating the right ventricle, and surgical treatment was considered necessary. The reoperation was deemed technically challenging and a high-risk surgery because the pseudoaneurysm was in contact with the sternum. Due to the high risk, fistula closure was attempted with a catheter; however, this was unsuccessful at the first hospital. The treating physician at that hospital recommended surgery at our hospital, leading to the patient's transfer.
Physical examination revealed a height of 160.6 cm and weight of 48.1 kg. Her blood pressure was 110/56 mmHg and heart rate was 66 bpm in sinus rhythm. Her oral medications were furosemide 40 mg/day, tolvaptan 15 mg/day, and bisoprolol fumarate 5 mg/day. Laboratory data were as follows: hemoglobin level, 11.2 g/dL; platelet count, 196 × 109 U/L; total protein level, 7.5 mg/dL; albumin level, 3.9 mg/dL; triglyceride level, 90 mg/dL; low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level, 81 mg/dL; high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level, 75 mg/dL; serum creatinine level, 1.00 mg/dL; hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) level, 5.7%; brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level, 718 pg/; C-reactive protein level, 0.15 mg/L; fibrin degradation product (FDP) D-dimer level, 3.2 μg/ml; anti-nuclear antibody positive; anti-Smith antibody negative; double-stranded DNA IgG level, 15 IU/mL; antiphospholipid (antibody) syndrome negative; anti-SS-A/SS-B antibody negative; antiphospholipid antibodies negative; and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (PR3/MPO) titer, 1.0/1.0 U/mL.
Electrocardiography revealed normal sinus rhythm. Chest X-ray revealed a cardiothoracic ratio of 60% , and CT demonstrated a true saccular aneurysm on the lesser curvature side with a proximal arch diameter of 45 mm, a proximal anastomotic pseudoaneurysm of 60 mm, and a Valsalva of 37 mm . The annulus diameter was 21 mm with mild to moderate aortic valve regurgitation, shunt flow into the right ventricle from this pseudoaneurysm was recognized, and the pulmonary blood flow/systemic blood flow ratio (Qp/Qs) was 1.05 . Her left ventricular ejection fraction was 68%, with mild tricuspid regurgitation, and the estimated right ventricular pressure was 39 mmHg (risk score: Euro II 20.25%, Japan Score 10.9%). Electrocardiography-gated cardiac 3DCT was performed preoperatively, and the pseudoaneurysm was found to be located in the proximal anastomosis, with the morphology of the Valsalva being preserved. The shunt perforated the right ventricle and was not in contact with the right coronary artery. We found it challenging to dissect the pseudoaneurysm before establishing cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) in the re-aortic surgery.
Sternotomy was performed similarly to the first surgery. Before adhesion detachment, an artificial CPB was established with the inflow on the right subclavian artery and the outflow on the right femoral vein and was then placed into the left atrial venting tube via the left atrial appendage. Initially, we initially planned to vent from the pulmonary artery. However, there were few adhesions on the left side of the heart, and we could quickly identify the left atrial appendage. Moreover, the pulmonary artery had very tight and solid adhesions with the artificial graft, and we thought that the venting tube inserted into the pulmonary artery would interfere with the artificial graft resection. We exfoliated the tissue surrounding the pseudoaneurysm and placed a tape around the distal superior vena cava. We resected the true saccular aneurysm at the distal anastomosis using an open-distal technique. We removed the previous graft and performed distal anastomosis with selective cerebral perfusion under systemic hypothermia. Regarding the strategy for brain protection, the target minimum core temperature was approximately 28 °C, and the circulatory arrest time was 25 min. After distal anastomosis, systemic rewarming was initiated. At the ST junction, the artificial graft and aortic wall were separated by half of the posterior wall . We were able to identify a fistula leading from the pseudoaneurysm to the right ventricle , which was closed while reinforcing the fistula with a pericardial patch. Because the Valsalva wall was fragile and vulnerable, aortic root reconstruction was performed using the bio-Bentall technique (Inspiris 23 mm: Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA; Gelweave Valsalva 26 mm: Vascutek Ltd., Terumo Aortic, Scotland, UK). The pathological findings of the pseudoaneurysm showed that the aortic intima and media were absent and that only the adventitia was preserved. The operation, CPB, and aortic cross-clamp times were 466, 252, and 189 min, respectively. The respiratory support time was 12 h postoperatively. The patient was discharged from the intensive care unit on postoperative day 2, and rehabilitation was initiated. She experienced postoperative atrial fibrillation; however, no other complications occurred. The hemodynamic performance was excellent without a shunt, and there was no evidence of any pseudoaneurysm on postoperative 3DCT . One year after the surgery, the patient resumed daily activities effectively, and we found no residual shunt on postoperative echocardiography.