A 36-year-old Caucasian woman was evaluated with chief complaint of gluteal pain radiating to her leg. Her medical history was remarkable with gunshot injury to the affected leg with multiple pellets dispersed into her pelvis and proximal part of the thigh, as shown in Figs. and . She had gunshot injury 20 years ago. She was previously diagnosed as having lumbar disc herniation at L4–5 level. She underwent a previous discectomy outside our institution 2 years ago. A radiological examination revealed the presence of recurrent disc herniation, as well as multiple shotgun bullets in her pelvis and thigh. One of those bullets was deep into the sciatic nerve inside her quadratus femoris muscle.
Electromyography (EMG) showed the presence of chronic sciatic nerve injury. Since it was clinically impossible to distinguish lumbar disc herniation from the sciatic injury, we decided to proceed with removal of the foreign object and neurolysis of the sciatic nerve followed by L4–5 discectomy and fusion. We decided to perform those procedures in two different settings. The first surgery included access to the sciatic nerve in the upper portion of her thigh and exposing the nerve fibrotic bands around the nerve. The dissection proceeded deep into the nerve within a muscle, where a bullet was found and removed. The distance from the bullets to the nerve was approximately 2 cm. Muscle tissue around the bullets was excised for analysis. For comparison, another specimen was obtained from the gluteal muscle, superficially away from the nerve and all the bullets. Two weeks later, she underwent scheduled L4–5 discectomy and fusion. Her postoperative course was uneventful. On follow-up examination at 6 months, she was essentially symptom free.
A scanning acoustic microscope (AMS-50SI) developed by Honda Electronics (Toyohashi, Japan), whose schematic setup is shown in Fig. , was used in AI mode. It has a transducer with quartz lens, a pulser/receiver, an oscilloscope, a computer, and a display monitor. An 80 MHz transducer is installed within the microscope, which generates the signals and collects the reflected acoustic waves. Water is the coupling medium between the quartz lens and the substrate. For two-dimensional scans, an X-Y stage, controlled by a computer, is used. An oscilloscope analyzes the reflected signals from both the reference and target material after being collected by the transducer. As a result, acoustic intensity and impedance maps of the region of interest with 300 × 300 sampling points are obtained.
The principle of SAM in AI mode is demonstrated in Fig. . Distilled water is widely used as reference. The signal reflected from the target is
where, S0 is the generated signal by the 80 MHz transducer, Ztarget is tissue’s AI and Zsub is the polystyrene substrate’s AI (2.37 MRayl). The tissue’s AI is calculated by combining the reflected signals from the tissue and the reference. The signal reflected from the reference iswhere Zref is the AI of water (1.50 MRayl). Then, the target’s AI is written aswith a constant signal S0 generated by the transducer.
Electron microscopy-based imaging and chemical analysis studies were performed in a JEOL JIB-4601 focused ion beam scanning electron microscope (FIB-SEM) multi-beam platform coupled with an Oxford X-MaxN EDS system, as shown in Fig. .
Blood samples were collected in test tubes containing ethylenediamine-tetraacetic acid (EDTA) and no anticoagulant on the day of the first surgery (foreign object removal) prior to the procedure. Then, 2 ml of 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) was supplemented into the blood samples to release the red blood cells (RBC) and other ingredients. The supernatant part was received from blood with TCA by centrifugation at 4000 revolutions per minute (rpm) for 20 minutes for the analysis of Pb and cadmium (Cd) within total blood. Coagulation of blood samples enabled serum trace element analysis: chromium (Cr), Fe, Cu, magnesium (Mg), manganese (Mn), selenium (Se), and Zn. The serum specimen was prepared using Hettich Universal centrifuge by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 15 minutes, separating from cells immediately after and storing at − 20 °C until the analysis .
After weighing the left sciatic nerve tissue samples, they were digested with 2 ml of 65% nitric acid (HNO3) at 180 °C in the incubator for 1 hour. Then, 2 ml of 65% perchloric acid (HClO4) was added into the cooled mixture. Then, the mixture was digested at 200 °C in the incubator until the volume was halved. Digested materials were vortexed and diluted in water to a total volume of 10 ml. Concentrations were given in micrograms per gram (μg/g) wet tissue weight .
All glassware were maintained at 10% (volume/volume; v/v) HNO3 before use, cleaned with deionized water, and dried in an incubator at 100 °C overnight. Pb, Cd, Cu, Cr, Fe, Mn, Se, and Zn elements were detected by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrophotometer (ICP-OES 6000, Thermo, Cambridge, United Kingdom). Measurements for each element were done three times and averaged. The ICP-OES was operated with argon carrier flow rate of 0.5 L/minute, plasma gas flow rate of 15 L/minute, sample flow and elusion rate of 1.51 L/minute, and peristaltic pump speed of 100 rpm, selecting the suitable wavelength for Pb, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Se, and Zn, which were 220.353 nm, 228.802 nm, 267.716 nm, 324.75 nm, 285.213 nm, 357.610 nm, 196.090 nm, and 206.200 nm, respectively. Transport lines were obtained using 1.25 mm internal diameter polytetrafluoroethylene tubing. Element levels were indicated in micrograms per deciliter for serum (μg/dl) and μg/g for wet tissue. The standard concentrations for standard graph calibration were arranged from standard stock solutions of 1000 μg/ml for each analyzed element .
The tissue samples were investigated by using AI mode of SAM. Figure shows the AI map of the tissue obtained away from the gunshot. The map was constructed by collecting the reflections of acoustic signals, generated by the transducer within SAM, from surfaces of the reference (water) and the tissue sample on the polystyrene substrate. At specific locations within the sample, the AI was calculated to be higher than 2 MRayl, indicating accumulation of elements with different elastic properties. Figure shows the AI map of the tissue obtained close to the gunshot. As can be seen in this image, almost everywhere had an AI of greater than 2 MRayl.
SEM images of the tissue far away from the gunshot were obtained at magnifications of 5000 × and 500 ×, as shown in Figs. and , respectively. Similarly, SEM images for the tissue close to the gunshot were obtained at magnifications of 5000 × and 500 ×, as shown in Figs. and , respectively. The images were acquired at 5 keV energy for both tissue samples.
The SEM images show that the tissue far away from the gunshot keeps its original structure, whereas the tissue close to the gunshot seems to be deformed and torn up. These results demonstrate the degree of damage the impact of gunshot causes on soft biological tissues.
Table represents the EDS measurements in SEM, carried out for determining the elemental distribution differences in the deformed tissues. The measurements show the percentages of the residue elements detected on tissues far away from the gunshot and close to the gunshot. According to the results, among all residue elements, Pb, Cr, Fe, and Mn are found to be higher in weight content in the region close to the gunshot, when compared to distant region. Cd and Cu levels do not differ much; however, Zn level is lower in the tissue close to the gunshot.
We determined Pb, Cr, Cd, Cu, Fe, Mn, Zn, and Se levels in both tissue samples. Pb, Cr, Fe, Se, and Mn levels were higher in the tissue close to the gunshot, conversely, Zn level was lower in this sample . Blood Pb and blood Cd, and serum Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Se, and Zn levels of our patient were also analyzed and the results are shown in Table , however, we did not observe significant differences when compared to reference values.