A 24-year-old woman was referred to our eye clinic complaining of double vision in the left eye after bilateral ReLEx at another refractive surgery center three months prior to consultation. She had undergone uneventful bilateral FLEx, which involves creating and lifting a hinged flap followed by the manual removal of an intrastromal refractive lenticule with the VisuMax femtosecond laser (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Jena, Germany) . The preoperative ophthalmic examinations were normal with the exception of myopia with astigmatism. The manifest refraction was OS −4.25/ -0.75×150° with the corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) of 20/20. The preoperative corneal central thickness was 534 μm and the mean keratometry reading was 45.7 D. The attempted lenticule thickness was 96 μm, with flap thickness of 100 μm and optical zone of 6.6 mm. In the early postoperative period, the patient complained of constant double vision extending laterally and vertically around the visual target. This disturbance was experienced in the left eye only, and her perception was worst in dim environment. The routine postoperative ophthalmic examinations were performed at our clinic. The uncorrected distance visual acuity (UDVA) was 20/25 in the left eye and the manifest refraction was −0.50/-1.25 × 180° with a corrected distance visual acuity (CDVA) of 20/20. Ocular wavefront aberrations were measured with COAS analyzer (Carl Zeiss, Meditec AG, Germany) and analyzed at 5 mm pupil size using 6 orders of Zernike polynomials. The root mean square (RMS) values of total aberrations, higher order aberrations and coma were 1.44 μm, 0.52 μm and 0.31 μm in the left eye, respectively. The corneal topography was measured by Scheimpflug imaging (Pentacam; Oculus, Wetzlar, Germany), showing a central-inferior steepened zone, without significant abnormality of the posterior float . The left eye was treated with fluorometholone 0.1% drops four times daily for two weeks. One month later, the UDVA was at 20/20 but the double vision symptom was not alleviated. Furthermore, the central-inferior steepened zone remained unchanged and the manifest refraction was stable.
At four months postoperatively, the patient was scheduled for an enhancement procedure in the left eye. A Sinskey hook was used to undermine the edge of the flap inferiorly, separating the flap from underlying stromal bed. After the lift edge has been extended to 5 mm, a non-toothed forceps was used to lift the flap gently from its stromal bed and peeled back superiorly towards the hinge. Then the excimer laser ablation was performed, using the Mel-80 excimer laser, which is a conventional platform (Carl Zeiss Meditec AG, Germany) for a correction of −0.50/-1.25 × 180° with intended stromal ablation of 38 μm and the optical zone was set 6.75 mm. Irrigation of the interface with balanced salt solution was carried out, followed by flap reposition. A silicon-hydrogel bandage contact lens was applied immediately after surgery and removed the following day. Postoperative medication was prescribed for the operated eye. Five weeks after the enhancement, the UDVA was 20/20 and the subjective refraction was plano with a CDVA of 20/20. Under slit-lamp examination, the flap was intact with no flap striae, inflammation, epithelial ingrowth, or diffuse lamellar keratitis (DLK). The RMS values of total aberrations, higher order aberrations, and coma of 0.77 μm, 0.47 μm and 0.18 μm were all diminished after retreatment. The corneal topography showed a central flattened surface and remained stable within one month of the post-enhancement . Fourier-domain OCT showed a uniform flap that was attached well to the stromal bed and no interface fluid or epithelial ingrowth were noted in the left eye . The patient reported that double vision had resolved completely and she was extremely satisfied with the enhancement.