An 82-year-old woman affected by hypertension, grade 1 obesity, severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), atrial fibrillation (AF) and history of previous cardiac surgery was admitted to the emergency room (ER) for acute pulmonary edema and renal insufficiency. Eight years before she underwent aortic and mitral valve replacement (Magna Aortic 23 mm, Magna Mitral 27 mm – Edwards Lifescience, Irvine, CA, US), tricuspid valve repair and atrial fibrillation radiofrequency ablation complicated by complete AV-block and pacemaker implantation. During the years she remained asymptomatic without signs of heart failure. The trans-thoracic echocardiography (TTE) performed at admission showed no signs of endocarditis, no degeneration of the aortic bioprosthesis, good function of the repaired tricuspid valve but a very severe mitral prosthesis stenosis (mean gradient 24 mmHg, PHT 420 msec, area 0,52 cm2; PAPS 66 mmHg) [Fig. ; Additional file : Video 1]. ECG-gated MDCT (multidetector computed tomography) recorded no significant coronary artery disease, calcified thoracic aorta, a calcified mitral bioprosthesis (outer-diameter 28.9mmx28.6 mm, inner-diameter 24.9 × 24.4 mm) and bilateral severe pleural effusion. Laboratory testing showed severe anemia. The patient was initially medically treated with endovenous diuretics, blood transfusions, Continous Veno-Venous Hemofiltration (CVVH) and bilateral pleural drainage. Despite medical therapy optimization, the patient ‘s conditions remained critical with hemodynamic instability, hypotension, initial neurological impairment and acute anuric renal failure. Evaluated morbidity and mortality risk for surgical redo mitral replacement (EuroSCORE II = 19,84; CHA2DS2-VASC Score = 4; HAS BLED score = 4) our multidisciplinary Heart-Team decided for an emergency ViV-TMVR in general anesthesia with TEE-monitoring.
A temporary endocardial pacing leads was introduced in the right ventricle through a 6-F sheath positioned into the left femoral vein. Apex position was optimally detected by TTE evaluation and the pericardium was reached through a left anterolateral thoracotomy. As in our standardized technique for transapical approach, we proceed with the removal of all the adherence and with the positioning of 2 perpendicular “U”-stitches (2/0 polypropylene - Prolene; Ethicon, Inc.), reinforced by pledgets, directly on the myocardial tissue of the apex. Performed the transapical puncture, we positioned a 7-F sheath in order to introduce a 0.035 guide-wire through the ventricle toward the mitral prosthesis reaching the pulmonary vein. Over the guide-wire, we inserted a MultiPurpose catheter to exchange the previous wire with an ExtraStiff .035 in. (Cook Medical). The valve delivery system was introduced through an expandable 21-F E-Sheath (Edwards Lifescience – Irvine, CA, US). Under fluoroscopic and TEE guidance, we proceeded with the deployment of a 29 mm Sapien-3 valve (Edwards Lifescience – Irvine, CA, US) using the annulus of the surgical bioprosthesis to recognize the correct position . There were no paravalvular leaks or mitral regurgitation, and we immediately observed a significant improvement in intraprocedural monitoring parameter. The procedure was uneventful, as well as ICU course (no needs of CVVH, inotropes or prolonged mechanical ventilation). The patient was discharged 10 days after ViV-TMVR in good clinical condition (NYHA class I-II). At pre-discharge TTE transvalvular mitral mean gradient was 3 mmHg, PAPS decreased to 29 mmHg and LV Ejection Fraction remained 55% Fig. , Additional file 2: Video 2, Additional file : Video 3. At 1 month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic (NYHA class I-II) and the TTE confirmed the absence of valve dysfunction or Paravalvular leak [Fig. ].