The patient in question is a 63-year-old Chinese gentleman with a good performance status, a non-drinker and ex-smoker of seven pack years. He was diagnosed with Child-Pugh B8 liver cirrhosis secondary to chronic Hepatitis B infection in April 2017 after being admitted with liver decompensation with ascites.
During that admission, a work-up for symptomatic iron-deficiency anemia (hemoglobin 5.0 g/dL) revealed hypertensive gastropathy and four column Grade II–III esophageal varices on upper endoscopy, which were banded uneventfully. A colonoscopy revealed colonic edema indicative of portal hypertension. A triphasic computer-tomography (CT) scan of the liver showed irregular nodular contour of the liver with left lobe hypertrophy indicative of cirrhosis, with splenic and gastric cardia varices, splenorenal shunt, and severe ascites. The gallbladder was noted to be markedly distended then, but with no evidence of biliary or duodenal/pyloric obstruction. Ascitic fluid was sent for microbiology, which returned negative. He was started on medical therapy during that admission with improvement of his ascites and was discharged well.
A repeat CT scan in August 2017 showed a grossly dilated gallbladder, which was not seen to be compressing on the common bile duct (CBD) with mild prominence of the central intrahepatic biliary tree. The proximal small bowel loops were also noted to be mildly prominent with increased wall enhancement, likely related to portal hypertension.
Given the concerning findings of gallbladder distension, an outpatient magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was performed. The MRCP performed in November 2017 showed a markedly distended, thin-walled gallbladder with a 1 cm gallstone lodged in the proximal cystic duct . The CBD was stretched over the distended gallbladder with focal narrowing noted at its upper third related to the mass effect, with mild intrahepatic proximal dilation. The presence of loculated ascites, clustering of small bowel loops, and mild dilation of the proximal small bowel and duodenum raised the possibility of encapsulating peritonitis. The differential diagnoses for the patient at that point were intermittent GOO secondary to gallbladder mucocele, intermittent small bowel obstruction secondary to encapsulating peritonitis, and gastritis.
Cholecystectomy was offered to the patient with the aim of removing the potential source of GOO, with the caveat that his vomiting symptoms may not be fully resolved given the presence of other synchronous diagnoses. The patient declined surgical intervention at that point. The patient was admitted for postural hypotension likely secondary to intermittent vomiting in early March 2018, and a repeat CT scan once again demonstrated the distended gallbladder, with spontaneous resolution of his symptoms.
His next admission in mid-April 2018 was the decisive one. He presented this time with markedly different symptoms; multiple episodes of non-bilious emesis and being unable to retain neither solids nor liquids. Abdominal examination revealed epigastric fullness with a succussion splash . A nasogastric tube placed on intermittent suction removed three liters of yellowish effluent over the course of two days. By the time of a repeat CT abdomen pelvis two days after his admission, the output from the nasogastric tube had decreased significantly and no epigastric fullness nor succussion splash were clinically evident. Nevertheless, the CT showed a markedly distended gallbladder that had increased marginally in size, measuring 9.8 x 8.5 cm, with a resultant mass effect and compression on the second part of the duodenum. The small bowel loops were normal in caliber, but were unchanged in appearance and distribution compared to his last CT scan in March 2018 (a and b). It was determined that given the nature of symptoms and lack of small bowel dilation, that his concomitant encapsulating peritonitis was a red herring, and that the patient’s symptoms were due to GOO resulting from duodenal compression.
An attempt was made for laparoscopic cholecystectomy despite the pre-operative expectation that it would likely not be possible in view of the encapsulating peritonitis. This proved to be true as safe entry could not be achieved via the umbilicus due to dense peritoneal adhesions, and the decision was made promptly for a right subcostal incision and open cholecystectomy. The distended gallbladder was covered with firm white plaques, and a cholecystostomy was performed to allow decompression of the gallbladder with a suction apparatus to enable surgical manipulation of the gallbladder and better visualization of biliary anatomy . White mucoid bile was aspirated. A fundus first approach was used as the large size of the gallbladder even after decompression meant that the hepatocystic triangle could not be accessed immediately. A single pigmented stone 1 cm gallstone was found impacted at Hartmann’s pouch and was milked back into the gallbladder before securing and transecting the cystic duct. The small bowel loops were encapsulated within a firm white capsule but were not dilated, and the liver surface was similarly covered in the same white fibrous capsule; a biopsy of the peritoneal lining was taken for histological confirmation.
The patient recovered well, and was able to be taken off his nasogastric tube and tolerate diet by the second post-operative day, and was discharged by the third post-operative day. He was seen in clinic two weeks later with full resolution of his symptoms. The histology of the gallbladder showed features consistent with a gallbladder mucocele, and the peritoneal biopsy showed fibrous tissue with chronic inflammation and reactive mesothelial hyperplasia with no features of granulomatous inflammation or malignancy.