A 30-year-old woman was diagnosed with aggressive systemic mastocytosis at age 9 after battling with cutaneous and gastrointestinal symptoms for 4 years. At age 24, she suffered significant progression of her symptoms with disabling fatigue, flushing, and chronic bone pain requiring high doses of narcotic analgesia. Bone marrow biopsy at that time showed 50 % involvement with mast cells and her tryptase level was 101 ng/mL. KIT mutation analysis showed a rare K509I mutation that is sensitive to imatinib . She was started on imatinib 100 mg daily and achieved complete bone marrow response and normalization of tryptase level. Despite disease control, patient continued to suffer from significant constitutional symptoms.
Subsequent bone marrow biopsy continued to showed normocellular marrow with no abnormal mast cells. There was an increase in reticulin fibrosis that was not previously reported. Jak-2 mutation was negative and cytogenetics were normal.
Imatinib was continued, but Ruxolitinib was started in attempt to control symptoms. Ruxolitinib was initiated at 5 mg twice daily and titrated up every 4 weeks over a 24-week period based on symptoms response and tolerance. Patient was monitored closely for toxicity or adverse effects from the addition of Ruxolitinib. Weight, EKG, and labs including CBC, CMP, amylase, lipase, and tryptase were collected at baseline and monitored weekly.
Labs and clinical data were recorded with each Ruxolitinib dose adjustment and results are depicted in Table . Only mild anemia was seen with increasing doses of Ruxolitinib that reversed once dose was decreased. No additional cytopenias were noted. Liver function, amylase, and lipase remained at baseline. Tryptase remained stable. No EKG changes were seen. Weight gain was witnessed over the 24-week period.
Symptoms and quality of life were assessed every 4 weeks by EORTC QLQ-C30 , BFI , MPN-SAF , and PGIC. Patient reported significant improvement in quality of life due to symptom reduction. Narcotic requirement was reduced from Methadone 30 mg daily to 15 mg daily. Flushing resolved and cutaneous manifestations markedly improved .