A 38-year-old female patient with American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status 1 underwent tooth extraction under general anesthesia. She had no skin disease or history of allergy preoperatively, and she was receiving no medications. In the operating room, electrocardiogram (ECG) electrodes (Vitorode L, Nihon Kohden, Tokyo, Japan) and other standard noninvasive ASA monitors were attached. Immediately before induction, an electrode for the BIS monitor (BIS QUATRO Brain Monitoring Sensor, Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) was attached in a routine manner after alcohol skin preparation as recommended by the manufacturer. Propofol and remifentanil were used for induction, and rocuronium was used for nasal intubation. Anesthesia was maintained with desflurane and oxygen to ensure a BIS of 40–60. We used eye patches (Nichiban, Tokyo, Japan) for eye protection during surgery. The durations of anesthesia and surgery were 85 and 43 min, respectively. During surgery, hydrocortisone 100 mg and acetaminophen 1000 mg were administered to prevent laryngeal edema and analgesia, separately. After surgery, the eye patches and BIS sensor were removed in the operating room. No abnormal skin reaction was noted in the region surrounding the BIS sensors, ECG electrodes, and eye patches.
The patient had no apparent skin reaction on postoperative day 1. The anesthesiologist made a postoperative round the morning after surgery and found no complications. Subsequently, the patient was discharged from the hospital. Three days after surgery, she felt itching sensations and burning pain and noticed erythema on her forehead. She visited a dermatologist 5 days after surgery, and the anesthesiologist identified dermatitis . The patient was administered topical steroids and antihistamines. Erythema peaked on the fifth postoperative day and improved gradually thereafter.
One month after surgery, patch testing for allergic reactions to the BIS sensor was performed. After 48 and 72 h, a positive reaction to the adhesive component of the BIS sensor was observed. The reaction to the foam component was positive after 48 h, but it tended to disappear after 72 h . The patient also had reactions to p-tert-butylphenol-formaldehyde resin (PTBP-F-R) and lanolin using a Japanese standard patch test series.
At the outpatient examination 42 days after surgery, erythema had disappeared, and slight pigmentation was observed. In consultation with the patient, the medical treatment was ended at this point.