A 70-year-old woman with a 7-year history of medication-refractory Parkinson’s disease was referred to our department for treatment of involuntary movements of the left hand and leg. She had no relevant psychiatric history, such as personal or family history of obsessive-compulsive disorder. She was independent in activities of daily living on medication; however, she was suffering from severe on/off motor fluctuations. Her preoperative neuropsychic evaluation was not significant for dementia or mental disorders. The Mini-Mental State Examination was 27/30, and the Montreal Cognitive Assessment was 27/30. Frontal Assessment Battery was 15/18. In addition, the Geriatric Depression Scale was 1/15, and the State and Trait Anxiety Inventory score was 31/80.
She underwent elective DBS targeting the right GPI. The DBS lead (model B33015, Medtronic, Minneapolis, MS) was implanted in the right GPI under local anesthesia. The implantable pulse generator (IPG; B35200, Medtronic) was implanted in the left subclavicular pouch without suture fixation under pectoral fascia on the same day under general anesthesia. Since the patient is right-handed, she requested to implant the IPG in the left subclavicular. A skull radiograph was performed immediately after surgery to confirm the location of the lead . Functional outcomes were favorable, and medical therapy could be markedly reduced. The patient was discharged with no evidence of surgical complications or adverse events. No impairments or neurological deficits were evident on routine follow-up visits.
She had kept having benefits from the first DBS therapy and was then planned to undergo left GPI DBS for the right hemibody symptoms one year later. Around one year after DBS surgery, she developed a resting tremor in the right leg, and DBS implantation in the left GPI was planned. Before the surgery was performed. However, a chest X-ray during a routine check-up incidentally revealed that the extension wire was twisted in the chest cavity, and the IPG was flipped left to right . Normal impedance measurements suggested that her DBS system was intact and functioning, and she had no recollection of turning or twisting the IPG actively or passively. She did not complain of any tenderness along the extension wire path. We performed left GPI DBS concomitantly with the revision of the implantable pulse generator and extension wire. We also fixed the IPG to the pectoral fascia by sutures. The left GPI DBS was uneventful, and no adverse events have been reported as of the 6-month follow-up.