A 44-year-old man presented to the emergency department on 20 March 2020, after 9 days of persisting fever over 39°C, productive cough and chest pain, despite treatment with amoxicillin–clavulanate and paracetamol. No GI symptoms were reported. Clinical history was negative; no smoking history or drugs use was reported. The patient reported only about an isolated anal fissure, sometimes slightly bleeding, diagnosed 20 years ago.
COVID-19 was diagnosed by reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) testing for SARS-CoV-2 on nasopharyngeal swab. At admission, plain film of the chest showed a right infrahilar opacity and a bilateral peripheral reticular pattern. The following laboratory studies resulted altered: C-reactive protein (CRP) 16.64 mg/dL, procalcitonin (PCT) 0.29 ng/mL, ferritin 1966 ng/mL, D-dimer 1248 ng/mL, international normalized ratio (INR) 1.53, and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 380 U/L. Except for minimal neutrophilia, the blood count was normal, and interleukin-6 levels (<3.0 pg/mL), AST (38 UI/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) (28 UI/L), and bilirubin (1.20 mg/dL) resulted within the normal limits. Hepatitis serological tests were compatible with previous vaccination for hepatitis B virus. Blood and urine cultures and Legionella pneumophila and Streptococcus pneumoniae urinary antigens were negative.
Lopinavir/ritonavir 400/100 mg plus hydroxychloroquine 200 mg, both two times a day, were started. Given the persistence of high fever and productive cough, and the slightly increased level of PCT, in suspicion of a secondary bacterial infection resistant to the previous therapy with amoxicillin–clavulanate, intravenous teicoplanin 400 mg one time a day (after loading dose) plus piperacillin–tazobactam 4.5 g three times a day were started. Moreover, subcutaneous enoxaparin 4000 UI was administered one time a day for prophylaxis of venous thromboembolism.
After 6 days, the patient had a clear improvement of general conditions, with resolution of fever from 48 hours, an almost complete remission of cough, and needing for very low flow oxygen support (1 L/min). CRP decreased to 3.43 mg/dL, and D-dimer to 1027 ng/mL. At the same time, however, we observed altered levels of AST (143 UI/L, after 2 days further increasing to 353 UI/L) and ALT (150 UI/L, then 378 UI/L), and hyperammonaemia (113 μg/dL), with persisting normal values of cholinesterase, bilirubin, and alkaline phosphatase; gamma-glutamyl transferase only slightly increased (71 UI/L). In the hypothesis of iatrogenic acute liver damage, we promptly interrupted the treatment with lopinavir/ritonavir and hydroxychloroquine, avoiding further administration of paracetamol (last administration 48 hours earlier), maintaining only therapy with teicoplanin, also because its putative efficacy to inhibit the first stage of SARS-CoV-2 viral life cycle in human cells, and adding intravenous acetylcysteine; moreover, enoxaparin was discontinued. Lactulose at an average daily dose of 25 mL was administered for the next 6 days. Ultrasound (US) examination of the abdomen did not report any particular finding. The lung high-resolution CT showed bi-basal dorsal consolidations associated with traction bronchiectasis, especially at the level of right inferior lobe, compatible with COVID-19 pneumonia ; no particular abdominal finding was depicted in the lower scans .
Lung US examination performed regularly starting from the admission showed a progressive resolution of the subpleural consolidations. The patient completely recovered and did not report any other symptom; the laboratory examinations repeated after 6 days from the previous ones confirmed the normalisation of CRP (0.41 mg/dL), PCT (0.05 ng/mL) and AST (34 UI/L; ALT was still 99 UI/L); unexpectedly, D-dimer levels resulted instead significantly increased to 3389 ng/mL.
In suspicion of a thromboembolic event, despite no clinically suggestive symptoms or signs, we performed an Echo-color-Doppler examination of inferior vena cava and iliac–femoral–popliteal–infrapopliteal venous axis, excluding deep thrombosis; the lung contrast-enhanced CT (CE-CT) did not show filling defects related to emboli within the pulmonary arteries, and showed the reduction of consolidations, in particular in the right inferior lobe, with residual ground glass opacity within its upper segment . Unexpectedly, as collateral finding on the lower image acquired during this examination, intraperitoneal free bubbles were reported ; the subsequent abdominal CE-CT showed the collection of air in dependent and non-dependent portions mainly involving the caecum and the right colon, compatible with pneumatosis intestinalis (PI); no filling defects were depicted in the lumen of abdominal aorta and its branches, no portal venous air was found, and no free fluid collection was found .
Given the complete absence of symptoms and the progressive normalisation of blood tests (CRP 0.11 mg/dL, D-dimer 858 ng/mL, LDH 184 U/L, AST 34 and ALT 63 UI/L), the patient was discharged on 7 April, with a follow-up programme. An empirical treatment with ciprofloxacin 500 mg two times a day and metronidazole 500 mg three times a day, and enoxaparin 4000 UI one time a day, was prescribed for 1 week.
On 24 April, the patient was asymptomatic, and the abdominal non-CE-CT showed the complete resolution of all previous pathological findings ; the laboratory examinations were within the normal limits, of note only slightly increased levels of D-dimer (652 ng/mL), ferritin (436 ng/mL), and ALT (103 UI/L). RT-PCR for SARS-CoV-2 on two consecutive nasopharyngeal swabs tested negative.