The proband was a 13-year-old Chinese boy with lifelong global DD. Brain development evaluations and genetic analysis were planned for the current medical visit after referring to local medical geneticists because the family hoped to have one more child.
There was no exposure to medications or alcohol during the pregnancy, and he was born spontaneously at 35 wk and in an incubator for 3 wk. He presented with delayed developmental milestones: unassisted sitting at about 1 year, unassisted standing at about 20 mo, and unassisted walking at about 2 years. He could speak only one word at 2 years old. He was admitted to the local hospital at that time, and brain MRI showed abnormal long T2 signals in the white matter, but electroencephalography was normal. He was diagnosed with cerebral palsy and brain dysplasia and did not receive any rehabilitation training before receiving special education from 6-years-old. He can eat and go to the toilet by himself but still speaks monosyllabic words and can hardly communicate with others. He experiences less sleep and is excitable.
He showed no other health problems in the past.
He is the only child of nonconsanguineous parents without marked family histories.
Upon physical examination, the patient weighed 28.3 kg (< 3rd percentile), his height was 140.5 cm (< 3rd percentile), and the occipitofrontal circumference was 50 cm (normal range). He was conscious and had a normal gait. He also presented irregular dentition but no special facial features. Patellar reflex was normal, and Babinski signs were negative. The hand-alternating movement test, heel-knee-tibia test, and intelligence quotient value could not be completed because of non-cooperation with the instructions.
Blood tests were normal, including ceruloplasmin, lactic acid, ammonia, and liver and kidney functions. Screening for genetic and metabolic diseases in the blood and urine was not suggestive of disease.
The next generation sequencing-based trio whole exome sequencing plus copy number variation sequencing was performed for genetic analysis (the process was performed by Beijing Chigene Translational Medicine Research Center). The EDTA-treated peripheral blood were collected with informed consent of the patient’s guardians. The DNA was extracted using the Blood Genome Column Medium Extraction Kit (Kangweishiji, China) according to the manufacture instructions and was subjected to quality control using Qubit 2.0 fluorimeter and electrophoresis with 0.8% agarose gel for further protocol. The whole exome library was constructed using xGen Exome Research Panel v1.0 (IDT, Iowa, United States) that consists of 429826 individually synthesized and quality-controlled probes, which targets 39 Mb protein-coding region (19396 genes) of the human genome and covers 51 Mb of end-to-end tiled probe space. High-throughput sequencing was performed by Illumina NovaSeq 6000 series sequencer (PE150). A de novo heterozygous nonsense point mutation in exon 6 in SATB2, c.687C>A (p.Y229X) (NCBI reference sequence: NM_001172509.2) was detected in the proband. Direct sequencing validated the detected missense mutations. PCR was performed to amplify the exon with the detected mutation and its neighboring introns using the forward primer: 5’-TAGTTTTAAGGGAGCCAACTAGGA-3’ and the reverse primer: 5’-TCAGTTTACAGGAGAGTGACTGTTT-3’. PCR products were purified using micro concentrating centrifugal filter columns (Millipore, Bedford, MA, United States), sequenced by ABI 3730XL (Applied Biosystems, Forster City, CA, United States), and analyzed by DNASTAR software.
The proband had the mutation that neither of his parents had . The detected heterozygous mutation c.687C>A (p.Y229X) is near the end of coding region for the CUTL domain and leads to a stop codon. We think the mutation c.687C>A (p.Y229X) leads to an abnormal transcription and then a truncated protein, like a nearby mutation c.715C>T (p.R239X) that had been reported to lead to an abnormal transcription and a truncated protein[,,]. We did not investigate the mutation in control groups, but the minor allele frequency for the mutation was not found in the dbSNP database , 1000 Genomes Project, Virtual Chinese Genome Database, or Genome Variation Map. The effect of the mutation was evaluated according to the guidelines of the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics, and the mutation was considered pathogenic . The mutation is the first reported for SAS.
An electroencephalography was normal, but brain MRI revealed multiple small cystic lesions in the white matter near the posterior horns of the right lateral ventricle and long T2 signals in the white matter adjacent to the bilateral posterior horns of the lateral ventricles .