The patient was a 56-year-old man in whom a nodular shadow was found in the left lower lung field via chest radiographic screening. Because close examination via computed tomography (CT) revealed a nodular shadow in the left lingular segment, the patient was referred to our department for surgery. He was an active smoker who consumed 1 pack/day for 30 years. No other noteworthy features were found in his past history or physical findings. The CT scan showed a 1-cm nodule in the left lingular segment . However, positron emission tomography revealed fluorine-18 deoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation in the subcarinal lymph node and not in the nodular shadow in the lingular segment . FDG uptake was not noted in other organ lesions. Serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was elevated at 14.3 mg/ml (normal range 0.0–5.0 ng/ml). Biopsy of the lesions in the lung and the lymph node was performed for a definite diagnosis.
The patient underwent thoracoscopic surgery via two incisions by video-assisted thoracoscopic approaches: a 12-mm camera port incision was made at the eighth intercostal space, the posterior axillary line; and a 4-cm incision at the fourth intercostal space, the anterior axillary line. At the time of surgery, a 1-cm nodule was palpated in the lingular segment, and wedge resection at that site was performed. Intraoperative pathologic examination revealed inflammation and necrosis. The subcarinal lymph nodes were also resected and examined pathologically. Because the results indicated a cancer lesion, the remaining subcarinal and hilar lymph nodes were dissected. The patient was diagnosed with mediastinal lymph node cancer, and no additional lung resection, such as left upper lobectomy, was performed.
Histopathologic examination of the intrapulmonary nodule revealed necrosis and no viable tumor cells inside . Alveolar elastic fibers were well-maintained, and veins full of necrotic cells were observed . Granuloma was not evident, and acid-fast staining provided no evidence of acid-fast bacteria. Immunostaining showed irregular features positive for pan-cytokeratin (AE1/AE3) and napsin A in the necrotic tissue, suggesting residual cancer tissue . Meanwhile, a proliferation of large cancer cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm was found in the lymph node specimen . Cancer cells were found in the subcarinal lymph node, but not in additionally dissected regional lymph nodes. Immunostaining of the tumor cells was positive for pan-cytokeratin, TTF-1, and napsin A but negative for p40 and p63, suggesting a poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of pulmonary origin .
The postoperative course was favorable, and the patient was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. Given that the cancer was at pTxN2M0 and stage IIIA according to lung cancer staging, concurrent chemoradiotherapy comprising systemic chemotherapy (cisplatin and vinorelbine) and radiotherapy of 60 Gy/30 Fr was administered. The serum CEA level reverted to normal after surgery . To date, at 3 years after surgery, no recurrence has been noted.