The patient is a 51-year-old man who presented to ophthalmologist at the age of 46 years because of progressive bilateral visual loss during the previous 3 months. Clinical findings and history suggested LHON that was confirmed by genetic testing. He was a smoker. At age 47, he had visual acuity below 0.1 bilaterally, could count fingers and was able to move about independently. He started taking idebenone 300 mg tds at age 47, but this medication was discontinued after 1 year because of lack of efficacy.
He was referred to neurologist at age 47 because of unsteady and broad-based gait, inability to walk a straight line, lower limb pain and sensory loss. Neurological examination disclosed that both patellar and ankle jerk reflexes were bilaterally enhanced but without clonus and plantar responses were in flexion. The muscle tone was normal. Gait was broad-based, and there was difficulty in tandem gait. Light touch and pinprick sensation were diminished, vibration sensation was absent, and he reported tingling and numbness below the knee level (L5). At follow-up visits at ages 48 to 51, the patient was still independently ambulatory but used a white cane. Unassisted gait was unsteady and broad-based, and he could not perform tandem gait. He now reported sensory abnormalities up to the groin level (L1). Subtle action tremor of both hands was observed, but the examination did not suggest an extrapyramidal or cerebellar disorder. Eye movements, speech, and cognition were normal. Bladder function was normal.
Molecular genetic testing revealed homoplasmic m.11778G > A variant in mtDNA, confirming the diagnosis of LHON. His mother harboured homoplasmic m.11778G > A, whereas the two siblings of his mother and his maternal grandmother were not examined. These maternal relatives were reported to be unaffected. At age 47, brain MR imaging revealed a non-expansive arachnoid cyst in the posterior fossa but was otherwise normal and MR imaging of the spinal cord was normal . Laboratory work-up did not reveal any abnormalities that the symptoms could be attributed to. Fasting blood glucose (5.6 mmol/l) and HbA1c (37 mmol/mol; reference 20–42 mmol/mol) were normal. Serum vitamins B1 (188 nmol/l; reference 60–230 nmol/l), B12 (105 pmol/l; reference > 35 pmol/l) as well as B9 (folate) (648 nmol/l; reference 285-1475 nmol/l) were normal. In CSF, protein was mildly elevated (440 mg/l; reference range 105–290 mg/l), but there was no pleocytosis, and there were no oligoclonal immunoglobulin G bands. There were no antibodies against Borrelia burgdorferi in either serum or CSF.
Neurography and electromyography at age 47 were normal. Investigation of somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP) at age 48 showed that cortical responses to tibial nerve stimulation were absent, whereas the lumbar responses were normal. Cortical N20 response to median nerve stimulation was bilaterally abnormal with increased latency and distorted wave morphology. The latency of N13 response was prolonged too . Motor evoked potentials using transcranial magnetic stimulation were normal.