A 37-year-old male underwent bilateral lung transplantation for non-cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis. The patient developed partial dehiscence of the right bronchial anastomosis complicated by a BPF 29 days post-transplant. Upon assessment there was no evidence of pneumothorax, however, the presence of a small fistula was identified and confirmed both by bronchoscopy and CT imaging. The fistula was found to cause empyema in the right lung. Two bronchoscopic applications of autologous platelet-rich plasma of 40 mL and 10 mL were carried out on post-op days 36 and 43, respectively. Follow-up showed complete closure and healing of the fistula on post-op day 50 .
The patient underwent a double lung transplant while on central ECMO support and was mechanically ventilated for 2 days. The ischemia times were 5 h 22 min and 7 h 14 min for the right and left lung, respectively. The patient was placed on methylprednisolone, mycophenolate, and tacrolimus for immunosuppression. mTOR inhibitors were not included in the treatment regimen of this patient.
Six days after extubation, the patient developed hypoxic respiratory failure, so he was intubated again and extubated successfully 2 days later. During his ICU stay, the patient developed right sided loculated pleural effusion and empyema; pleural fluid culture grew Klebsiella pneumoniae. In addition, he developed donor-derived pneumonia with multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and a carbapenemase-producing Klebsiella pneumoniae OXA-48 gene that was complicated by secondary bacteremia. Initially, he was placed on a broad-spectrum antibiotic with colistin that was later changed to ceftazidime-avibactam for 6 weeks. He was also treated with a course of tobramycin for decolonization of MDR Pseudomonas aeruginosa. To control the empyema, a right chest tube was inserted for drainage.
Surveillance bronchoscopy 1 month post-op showed mucosal sloughing at the areas of anastomosis with possible dehiscence in the right bronchus forming a BPF . The transbronchial biopsies did not reveal any acute cellular rejection. Chest CT 6 days later showed left-sided empyema with partial dehiscence of the right bronchial anastomosis forming a BPF . The patient was then scheduled for left-sided chest drain insertion and autologous PRP application at the site of dehiscence using bronchoscopy.
The platelet-rich plasma was prepared after harvesting plasma from a sample of the patient’s blood (whole blood concentration: 238 ± 38 × 103/µL, mean ± SD) using the Arthrex ACP Double Syringe System (ACP, Arthrex concentration: 470 × 103/µL).
Autologous PRP was applied directly via bronchoscopy to the site of the right bronchial dehiscence on two occasions 1 week apart. The first application took place 36 days post-op; 40 mL of PRP was applied to the site of the anastomotic dehiscence fistula via bronchoscopy until completely covered. The second bronchoscopic application of 10 mL was carried out on postoperative day 43, when the old anastomotic fistula was nearly closed. Bronchoscopy performed on postoperative day 50 showed complete closure and healing of the anastomotic fistula, so no further PRP was applied . Long-term follow-up and surveillance bronchoscopy, postop day 162, revealed resolution of the anastomotic fistula . Overall, there were no complications, and the patient tolerated all the procedures well.