A 67 year old Caucasian woman with a history of epilepsy was admitted for complex reconstruction of the lower limb, secondary to spastic cerebral palsy. Five centimetres of true shortening in the tibia were associated with midfoot and hindfoot deformities and severe tibio-talar osteoarthritis . A multifocal Ilizarov circular frame was constructed, with a proximal lengthening segment to address limb length inequality; a hindfoot segment to perform tibiotalar arthrodesis for severe degeneration and a forefoot segment to achieve acute derotational correction of a midfoot deformity . The post-surgical period was complicated by an episode of respiratory embarrassment due to pneumonia which required short term ventilation. Subsequent recovery appeared to have occurred, and the patient and her husband were formally instructed in the correct method and rate of adjustment to achieve proximal lengthening.
The patient failed to attend for regular follow-up, and represented at six months following index surgery complaining of worsening deformity. On examination, the proximal threaded rods of the circular fixator were bent and severe valgus deformity was apparent within both the frame and the limb. On questioning, it became apparent that the patient’s husband had been lengthening the medial aspect of the frame and compressing the lateral aspect. At this juncture, the regenerate, midfoot and hindfoot arthrodeses were deemed consolidated , and the patient refused further frame treatment to correct the inadvertent proximal tibial deformity. Due to severely symptomatic pre-existing osteoarthritis of the knee, and a prior plan to perform total knee arthroplasty at a later juncture, a single stage intervention was proposed, utilising a stemmed total knee replacement and a simultaneous closing wedge osteotomy of the tibia to correct deformity and provide primary stability.
At surgery, a standard medial parapatellar approach to the knee was performed, and the incision carried distally to the level of the metaphysis of the tibia. Due to severe intra-articular contracture, an extensile approach was performed via an osteotomy of the tibial tuberosity . Standard femoral preparation was carried out. A separate lateral incision was used to perform a fibular osteotomy. An acute closing wedge osteotomy of the tibia was performed and the tibia realigned. Utilising intramedullary guidance, the tibia was prepared appropriately, and a tibial component with a canal filling stem used to bridge the osteotomy, correcting the deformity and simultaneously compressing the osteotomy . The tibial tuberosity was reattached with a large fragment screw. Uneventful osteotomy union subsequently occurred by three months post-operatively . Knee range of motion at final follow-up was 0-5-105 and no instability was reported by the patient.