A 55 years old woman who was suffering from a slow progressive spinocerebellar ataxia over the last 20 years participated in this study. Her last MRI showed cerebellar atrophy. She reported that she was a frequent faller due to her poor balance. She believed that one of the major contributors to her falls was having spasticity in her lower limbs.
Since the PoNS™ is not registered in Australia, it was used with approval from the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) of Australia and the Melbourne Health Human Research Ethics Committee. The patient provided informed consent.
Intervention consisted of 2 physiotherapy sessions per day, 1.5 h per session (3 h between sessions) for 2 weeks (18 sessions in total plus pre- and post- intervention assessment sessions). Each session was structured in three blocks of 20 min, each focusing on gait performance, balance control and a relaxation/meditation period in the same order. During each block the patient used the PoNS™ device at a comfortable intensity which could be adjusted by the patient or therapist. At least 5 min of rest was given between stimulation blocks. Since the PoNS™ mouthpiece sits on the tongue, the patient was allowed to remove the device in case of excessive salivation to swallow or clean up.
Clinical assessment of gait and balance was performed using the miniBEST, which is a 14-item test scored on a 3-level ordinal scale with a maximum of 28 points. It focuses on anticipatory postural adjustments, reactive postural control, sensory orientation and gait . The Depression Anxiety Stress Scale (DASS) and cognitive function using the CogLog were also used to assess negative emotional states and memory functioning and executive skills, respectively [, ].
Gait assessment was performed using a set of 4 inertial sensors sampling at 128 Hz (APDM, Portland, OR, USA) placed at the ankles, sacrum and chest, from which spatiotemporal and ranges of motion (RoM) measures were obtained over 40 gait cycles. Included walking measures were: speed (pace of walking), stride length (distance between any two successive points of heel contact of the same foot), cadence (number of steps per unit time), trunk RoM (the full movement potential of trunk) and percentages of stance (when the foot remains in contact with the ground), swing (when the reference foot is not in contact with the ground and swings in the air) and double support (both feet are in contact with the ground) time.
Posturography was used to assess balance using the same APDM system during double support (DS), tandem (TS) and single-leg (SL) stance for 30 s.
The patient completed the 2-week intervention with no adverse effects related to the intensity of the intervention or the use of PoNS device. In the miniBEST, improvements were calculated as the percentage of the possible improvement points, that is: post- minus pre-intervention score as a percentage of 28 (maximum score) minus baseline score. Her score increased by 12 of 19 potential improvement points (63%). Interestingly, most of the improvements occurred in the dynamic (gait) section of the test, which assesses gait speed, turns and obstacle negotiation. She also showed considerable improvement in the anticipatory tasks, being able to stand from a chair independently, rising on toes for more than 3 s, and single-leg standing, as well as in the reactive balance tasks . In addition, the patient showed a decrease in DASS and CogLog scores.
Gait assessment showed that most spatiotemporal measures remained similar after intervention with a slight increase in the cadence. However, greater changes were observed on arm (20% increases in RoM) and trunk motion (22% more horizontal and 22% less frontal RoM) during walking. Furthermore, in the symmetry measures, asymmetry of stride length and velocity (> 35%) was decreased .
Posturographic measures of balance showed large reductions in jerk, sway area and mean velocity for the DS and TS conditions (> 77%). Interestingly, mean velocity in the anteroposterior (AP) direction was increased (> 25%) but decreased in the mediolateral (ML) direction (> − 76%) for the same conditions (DS and TS) . These changes were less pronounced in the SL conditions, which were the most challenging. Other non-linear measures of balance, e.g. mean frequency, also showed important reductions.