A 64-year-old woman (III-2) presented to our clinic for single-site analysis of a BRCA2 pathogenic variant that had been identified in her sister (III-3). Her family tree showed that her paternal aunt (II-3) had been diagnosed with breast cancer in her 50s, and her younger sister (III-3) had developed breast cancer in her 30s. Since discovering the presence of the pathogenic variant, the patient has undergone regular out-of-pocket ovarian and breast surveillance every 6–12 months. The price of out-of-pocket surveillance ranges from about $340 USD to $480 USD (including tax, estimated at the September 2023 exchange rate) per visit, depending on the imaging tests performed. About a year and a half into this surveillance, a nodule displaying a different contrast pattern from previous results was noted on contrast-enhanced MRI of the breast and we decided to perform a detailed evaluation at our hospital. Mammography showed no malignant findings , and breast echography showed a well-defined nodule measuring 6 mm in diameter in the lower outer quadrant of the right breast . Contrast-enhanced MRI of the breast also showed a nodule similar to the previous one in the right breast, but washout that had not been seen on the previous kinetic curve was identified . Because very early breast cancer, such as ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS), could not be ruled out, the patient was referred to our department. Since she was at high risk for developing breast cancer as a carrier of a BRCA2 pathogenic variant, we performed core needle biopsy of the small breast mass with a 14-G needle after injecting local anesthetic subcutaneously and around the tumor under ultrasonographic guidance. The pathology report of the core needle biopsy identified DCIS, a so-called non-invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast . In addition to right breast cancer, hereditary breast cancer and ovarian cancer syndrome was identified. We therefore conferred with the patient and decided to perform breast cancer surgery, contralateral risk-reducing mastectomy (CRRM), and RRSO. First, carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum was started and gynecologists in our hospital performed laparoscopic RRSO in the lithotomy position after the legs were separated, elevated, and supported by leg holders. Afterwards, carbon dioxide pneumoperitoneum was terminated, then the breast surgeon performed breast surgery with the patient in the supine position (right mastectomy and sentinel lymph node biopsy, CRRM for the left breast). Breast reconstruction was not performed. Total operation time was 6 h and 2 min, including the time for setting the surgical environment. This patient showed good food intake from the day after surgery and was discharged home on postoperative day 6. Postoperative histopathological diagnosis revealed that atypical cells had proliferated within the duct to 1.7 mm in diameter, leading to the diagnosis of low-grade DCIS . In this case, we were able to resect the cancer at pStage 0. No malignant findings were observed in the contralateral breast or bilateral fallopian tubes and ovaries.
Currently, the patient visits our hospital about once every 6 months for peritoneal cancer surveillance and postoperative wound examination. In the future, we plan to have the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology perform peritoneal cancer surveillance, such as computed tomography, and to have the patient perform regular self-examination of the chest (focusing on the surgical scars of the breast).