A 33-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our facility for primary infertility resulting from her partner, who had secretory azoospermia. Our patient had regular menstrual cycles. Her body mass index was estimated to be 21. Previous hormonal and ultrasonographic evaluations confirmed ovulatory cycles. Obstructed tubes were seen on X-ray hysterosalpingography. During the hysterosalpingography, there was no free spillage of contrast material into the peritoneal cavity. Laparoscopy showed tubal patency. Our patient did not have any post-surgical complications. Six intracervical inseminations with donor sperm failed. Four intrauterine inseminations with donor sperm also failed. Finally an in vitro fertilization with donor sperm was performed. A first transvaginal oocyte puncture had been performed eight months previously without any complications. Induction of ovulation was initiated by using pure follicle-stimulating hormone administrated intramuscularly.
When more than three follicles ≥17mm in diameter were present, 5000IU human gonadotropin was administrated intramuscularly. Our patient had not taken any other medication before the oocyte puncture. Transvaginal ultrasonography-guided oocyte retrieval was performed 35 hours after the human chorionic gonadotropin injection had been given. The follicles were retrieved by sequential puncture without reinsertion of the needle through the vaginal wall, so only one puncture was made on each side. A total of 13 oocytes were retrieved without using solutions for flushing. At the end of the procedure there were no ultrasonographic signs of bleeding and our patient was kept in the department for observation.
Three hours after the procedure our patient stated she had abdominal pain. Her blood pressure was normal, and her pulse rate was 70 beats per minute. There was no fever. An abdomen rebound defense appeared. Her hemoglobin level was 99g/L and hematocrit was 29 percent. A transvaginal sonography revealed a blood collection in the pouch of Douglas and in the Morisson space.
Six hours after the procedure, her pain increased and our patient became pale. Her blood pressure and pulse rate were normal. The abdomen rebound defense increased. Her hemoglobin level was 90g/L and hematocrit was 26 percent. Coagulation tests showed normal prothrombin and partial prothrombin times. Transvaginal and transabdominal sonography showed massive hemoperitoneum. This severe bleeding required emergency laparoscopy, seven hours after the oocyte retrieval, finding a massive hemoperitoneum of 2.5L. At the beginning of the procedure her hemoglobin was 77g/L with the HemoCue® system (the diagnosis of anemia can be accomplished by assessing hemoglobin concentration with point-of-care testing devices as the HemoCue® test system, HemoCue France, 77100 MEAUX). No pelvic vessel lesions had been observed. Hemoperitoneum was evacuated and active bleeding from the left ovarian puncture point was noted (Figure
). Hemostasis was difficult to achieve. Traditional operative procedures such as bipolar coagulation, use of hot water or use of oxidized cellulose hemostats (Surgicel®) were not efficient. Eventually the only way to stop bleeding was human fibrinogen and thrombin sponge (TachoSil®, Nycomed, Denmark), which was applied around the ovary (Figure
). During laparoscopy three pints of packed red blood were administrated.
Her post-operative hemoglobin level was 111g/L, and hematocrit was 32 percent.
Our patient was discharged from hospital after two days. A transvaginal sonography procedure was performed within 10 days, and this did not show any blood collection. No specific alteration of screening coagulation tests was found one month later.
All embryos were allocated to a cryopreservation protocol and at this time our patient has not had the embryos transferred.