A 55-year-old woman was admitted to the Neurointensive Care Unit because of loss of consciousness for nearly 10 h. She was previously healthy and developmentally normal. The patient had a history of hypertension for more than four years and regularly took medication to control her blood pressure. Her son was previously diagnosed with beta-thalassemia, but she has not undergone any head CT or other examination before. In addition, this patient had no significant medical history, such as cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases, or any neurological symptoms. This patient also did not have the typical clinical manifestations (neuropsychiatric features and movement disorders) of PFBC in the past, and there were no similar cases in her family.
Neurological examination on admission showed Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS): 5; Hunt-Hess Scale: III; Modified Fisher Scale: IV; National Institute of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS): 31. The pupils were both 2.5 mm, equal and round, with normal adjustment reflection but a slow light response. In addition to the stiff neck, no obvious positive signs were found on the other physical examinations. A CT scan confirmed the multiple intracranial symmetrical calcifications, SAH, and left frontotemporal-lateral and paraventricular haemorrhage . CT angiography (CTA) showed an aneurysm of the left middle cerebral artery M1 segment terminal . Hemoglobin electrophoresis suggested beta-thalassemia. Repeated examinations of parathyroid hormone, thyroid hormone and related antibodies showed no abnormality, autoantibody profiles and immunoglobulins were normal, IgG and IgA levels were normal, and there were no disorders of calcium and phosphorus or trace elements metabolism. There was a slight increase in her serum IgM level, and her 25-hydroxyvitamin D level was low.
Combined with the patient’s medical history and imaging features, a diagnosis of PFBC, aSAH, ICH and beta-thalassemia was considered. During hospitalization, this patient underwent craniotomy aneurysm clipping and intracranial hematoma removal. Intraoperatively, the aneurysm size was about 3 × 5 mm. 16 days after admission, her postoperative condition improved significantly, and she was discharged from the hospital for further rehabilitation. The patient's Modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score at discharge was IV, and the 3 months follow-up mRS was II. There were no adverse or unanticipated events.