The patient is a 20-year-old woman diagnosed with FAP 3 years previously by colonoscopy which revealed less than 100 benign polyps involving the entire colon . Her father, older brother and older sister were all diagnosed with FAP and treated by surgical resection. Her older brother and older sister had desmoid tumors. She presented with left upper abdominal pain and enhanced computed tomography scan showed a 10-cm pancreatic tumor with clear margins defined by a calcified capsule. Solid and cystic components were inside the lesion . On magnetic resonance imaging, part of the cystic component had high intensity on T1- and low intensity on T2-weighted images , suggesting intra-tumor bleeding. No signs of malignancy were observed. The pancreatic tumor was diagnosed as an SPN. Given that she was already 20 years old from a FAP family, prophylactic colectomy was indicated. Simultaneous laparoscopic distal pancreatectomy and subtotal colectomy with an ileo-rectal anastomosis were performed. The post-operative course was uneventful. She remains free of SPN recurrence 5 years postoperatively, although an abdominal desmoid tumor is followed up.
Macroscopically, the SPN had a gray solid component with bleeding and a multi-locular cystic component with necrosis . Histopathological findings of the SPN revealed loose tumor cell connectivity with cell dissociation and pseudopapillary arrangements . There was no evidence of malignancy. Immunohistochemical staining showed that both the nucleus and cytoplasm in the tumor cells stained with beta-catenin but were negative for chromogranin A and synaptophysin. The polyps in the colorectum had no evidence of malignancy.
Protein truncation tests from an analysis of peripheral blood samples revealed no mutations in the protein coding region of the APC (adenomatous polyposis coli) gene. Analysis by the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) technique that can quantitatively analyze exonic deletions and duplication revealed a decrease in the copy number of the promoter 1A and 1B region of the APC gene , which resulted in decreased expression of the APC gene in this patient . Genetic analysis of the resected specimen was not performed.