A 45-year-old woman had consulted on 7th July 2008 in the Department of Infectious Diseases and Pneumology of the teaching hospital “Centre Hospitalier Universitaire” (CHU) Sylvanus Olympio in Lomé for ongoing fever, cough, dyspnea, since two weeks before admission. She was known to be HIV positive and was taking antiretroviral treatment (Zidovudine-Lamivudine-Efavirenz) associated with cotrimoxazole since July 2007. The CD4 count was 12 cells/mm3 at the beginning of antiretroviral treatment. She has always lived in Togo and has never traveled outside the country. The clinical examination of the patient revealed a poor general condition and nutritional status, a body temperature of 38.5°C, respiratory rate of 48 breaths/min, a pulse at 78 beats/minute and blood pressure at 110/70 mm Hg. We noted a thrush and a scar of the right intercostal zona. On the face of the patient, we noted translucent papular and nodular “molluscum contagiosum like” lesion with a small central depression (Figure ).
There was also a syndrome of pulmonary consolidation characterized by increased vocal vibrations at the right lung, dullness at the base of right lung crackling rales at both lung bases.
Chest radiography showed reticulonodular opacities in upper and middle right lobes and two caves in the right hilar region. The CD4 count was 6 cells/mm3, the hemoglobin rate was 10 g/dl and the leukocytes count was 2 × 103 cells/μl. Smear was negative.
The patient was treated as bacterial pneumonia by the combination of amoxicillin-clavulanic acid and gentamicin for ten days without success, then as smear negative pulmonary tuberculosis with two months combination of (rifampicin + isoniazid + pyrazinamide + ethambutol) followed by four months combination of (rifampicin + isoniazid) protocol.
Fungal culture of skin scraping and sputum sample on Sabouraud medium with chloramphenicol without cycloheximide, revealed fluffy colonies with a red appearance grows after two weeks (Figure ). Microscopic examination revealed hyaline filamentous forms with branches, sometimes with chains of smooth conidia giving the appearance of a brush compatible with P. marneffei (Figure ).
A treatment with ketoconazole 600 mg per day was initiated. After two weeks of treatment, there was a decrease in the size and number of papules and nodules, without any new skin lesions. We noted disappearance of cough and fever. The chest X-ray showed a decrease of pulmonary lesions. There was no reactivation of P. marneffei infection but the patient died from AIDS after two years of follow up since his first consultation in the department of infectious diseases.