A 69-year-old Caucasian male, a non-smoker, presented with a mild dry cough and mild shortness of breath after exercises. He was sent for suspected interstitial pulmonary fibrosis. The patient’s family history was negative regarding pulmonary and malignant diseases. Until then he was only treated for hypertension. The patient was an old-age pensioner. He worked as an engineer (dustfree office work). Clinical assessment (including screening questionnaire, antibodies against specific antigens) was performed in order to exclude hypersensitivity pneumonitis or autoimmune disease. No exposure was found to cause exogenous allergic alveolitis. No causative antigens were found.
Physical examination revealed clubbing fingers and bilateral end-inspiratory crackles in the lower and middle lung areas. The posteroanterior chest-X ray showed bilateral reticular pulmonary infiltrates . High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of lungs identified reticular opacities, bronchiectasis, and honeycombing changes ( and 3). Pulmonary function testing revealed no ventilation defect [forced vital capacity (FVC) = 3.54 L, 100% of the predicted value (p.v.); total lung capacity (TLC) = 5.13 L; 82%] and moderate decrease of diffuse lung capacity for carbon monoxide (DLco; 4.23 L; 53%p.v.). Arterial blood gas analysis was also normal. Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage showed an increased number of neutrophilic granulocytes and lymphocytes (13%, 74%). Lymphocyte subtypes were investigated: CD3+CD4+ = 69.20%, CD3+CD8+ = 27.00%. The ratio CD4+/CD8+ was 2.5. The neutrophilic and lymphocytic alveolitis was caused by a previous lung infection in a patient immunocompromised by hematological disease. There was no yield of transbronchial lung biopsy. Due to the patient’s condition and hematological disease, histological verification by transbronchial cryobiopsy was not indicated.
We considered other interstitial lung diseases (ILDs) including hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP), but we did not find any exposure in either work or home. The HRCT finding was discussed with the Multidisciplinary Team (MDT). Other ILDs were excluded, autoantibodies were negative, and no exposure leading to hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) was found (negative questionnaires, specific IgG were negative). The diagnosis was concluded as usual interstitial pneumonia on HRCT of the thorax with honeycombing at dorsal basal regions. The patient had been treated with corticoids before he was referred to us. Radiological progression of lung fibrosis occurred during treatment. We gradually discontinued corticoids. The duration of this treatment was 6 months. We considered antifibrotic treatment, but we did not administer it, as the patient did not meet the indication criteria for antifibrotic therapy. At the same time, the patient developed thrombocytopenia (77 x 109/L) and macrocytic anemia (hemoglobin 108 g/L; mean red cell volume 111 fL). Furthermore, high-risk MDS with blast excess (EB-2) was diagnosed (11.2% of myeloblasts in the bone marrow; deletion 5q in cytogenetics). Therapy with 5-azacytidine was initiated and the patient received 20 cycles of this treatment. Unfortunately, the patient was only temporarily stabilized by treatment and subsequently progressed into acute myeloid leukemia and died of severe COVID-19 pneumonia with respiratory failure.
Because of suspected inherited predisposition leading to IPF and MDS, genetic testing focused on whole exome sequencing (WES) was performed. The WES variants evaluation process was aimed at the analysis of single nucleotide variants (SNV) and short indels (indel) within virtual genes panel associated with myeloid malignancies and predispositions to both myeloid and pulmonary disorders (Supplementary Table 1). A germline heterozygous variant c.1360delG (NM_025099.5; g.8235132) encoding the p.Glu454Serfs*9 substitution in 8 exons of the CTC1 gene was identified. The coverage of c.1360delG was 73 and variant allele frequency (VAF) was 47.95% in a patient. The sequencing result is shown in . Deleting guanine at position 1360 creates a new reading frame, resulting in a premature stop codon at position 9. Variant c.1360delG is classified as pathogenic/likely pathogenic, according to the consensus guidelines by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology. The presence of variant c.1360delG was verified by Sanger sequencing. Shen et al. reported a 31-years-old man with heterozygous c.1360delG variant in CTC1 which was diagnosed with adult-onset severe idiopathic aplastic anemia (AA) and development of secondary paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria. In addition, a c.1049delC variant (VAF: 21.21%) in the RUNX1 gene was identified and classified as a variant with uncertain significance (VUS).