A 69-year-old Caucasian man presented with recurrent metastatic carcinoid tumor to his liver. His past surgical history included gunshot wounds to his abdomen, resulting in an exploratory laparotomy in 1979. Four years later, a ventral hernia developed that was repaired primarily. His hernia recurred another 5 years later and was repaired with a polypropylene mesh.In 2009, he developed gastrointestinal symptoms of intermittent bloating, epigastric pain, abdominal cramps, and alternating episodes of diarrhea and constipation. With increased frequency and severity of symptoms, he subsequently developed a third recurrence of his ventral hernia in late 2010. A small bowel mass was visualized on a computed tomography scan in 2011 along with the recurrent ventral hernia . This prompted serologic testing and radionuclide scanning studies that lead to a diagnosis of carcinoid tumor. An octreotide scan revealed uptake in his distal small bowel as well as the dome of his liver suspicious for metastatic carcinoid tumor with involvement of his liver.
He underwent exploratory laparotomy for the metastatic carcinoid tumor in March 2011. A 5cm right flank ventral hernia located at the edge of the polypropylene mesh was found. Extensive adhesiolysis, small bowel resection with primary anastomosis, cholecystectomy, intra-operative ultrasound-guided microwave ablation of segment 8 liver lesion (pathology positive for metastatic neuroendocrine carcinoma), and a ventral hernia repair were performed.
During the ventral hernia repair, the previously placed polypropylene mesh was removed. The hernia sac was excised and component separation consisting of a bilateral rectus abdominis muscle advancement flap was performed. His abdominal wall was reinforced with a 20cm×20cm non-cross-linked biologic hernia repair graft underlay (Biodesign®, Cook Medical, Bloomington, IN, USA) and secured with transfascial O Ethibond sutures (Ethicon, Blue Ash, OH, USA). The fascia edges were approximated primarily over the biologic graft with #1 polydioxanone (PDS) and drains were placed in the subcutaneous layers. He recovered uneventfully.Thirty months after the carcinoid resection and liver tumor ablation, a repeat surveillance octreotide scan revealed a suspicious 1.9cm lesion on segment 1 of his liver that was confirmed with magnetic resonance imaging. Good fascial approximation at the site of the prior recurrent ventral hernia repair was also noted . He underwent surgery for recurrent metastatic carcinoid tumor ablation in October 2013. On visual inspection, there was no clear demarcation of the previously placed biologic graft except for the presence of the permanent transfascial Ethibond sutures . His native fascia was observed. Tissue biopsies of the incised midline fascia were obtained. Histology of the resected section revealed vascularized dense connective tissue .