42 year old obese (BMI-38) caucasian male presented to his primary care provider with complaints of insidious onset of anorexia, nausea, jaundice, pale stools, dark urine and about 35 pound weight loss over the previous 3 weeks. Outpatient laboratory work up revealed normal complete blood counts and basic panel but deranged liver function tests suggestive of cholestatic jaundice. Patient was then referred to a regional medical center for imaging studies. Ultrasound of abdomen showed multiple hyperechoic and hypoechoic liver lesions all less than 1 cm in size. The CT scan of abdomen showed massive hepatomegaly with coarse echotexture with contracted gall bladder and normal sized common bile duct. A chest x-ray obtained at the same time revealed a huge mediastinal mass with evidence of mediastinal widening. CT scan of the chest showed 3 anterior mediastinal masses with the largest one being 16 cm × 10 cm. In view of these imaging studies, the patient was referred to a tertiary care center for further work up. Upon arrival, we found the patient to be significantly icteric with some abdominal distension. There was smooth, non-tender liver edge palpable 10 cm below the right costal margin. No peripheral lymphadenopathy was noticed. The laboratory work on admission showed normal CBC and basic panel but persistently deranged liver function tests .
Additional work up was ordered which showed ceruloplasmin 5 mg/dl, AFP <1.3 ng/dl and serum ferritin 4686 ng/ml. ANA, anti-smooth muscle antibodies, HIV, along with EBV and CMV antibodies were all negative. CT guided biopsy of the mediastinal mass showed features of malignant lymphoma characterized by a diffuse proliferation of medium sized lymphoid cells, which exhibited fine nuclear chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli and scanty cytoplasm. Occasional mitosis with few scattered tangible body macrophages was noted. The neoplastic cells were positive for CD1a , CD3 , CD4, CD5, CD8 and CD43. The neoplastic T cells also expressed synaptophysin . However, the tumor was negative for CD20, kappa and lambda light chain immunoglobulins, CD34, TDT, cytokeratin AE1/AE3, cytokeratin 5.2 and CD56. The proliferation fraction (Ki-67) was 100%. Next, a PET CT scan was ordered which again showed a very large anterior mediastinal mass extending across the mediastinum from left to right and superiorly into the supraclavicular area. Diffuse liver involvement and abnormal activity in axial bones were also noticed. CT guided liver biopsy and bone marrow biopsy revealed the same tumor cell morphology with identical immunohistochemistry. A 200-cell count with differential performed on bone marrow aspirate showed 85% lymphoblasts, 2% small mature lymphocytes, 6% segmented neutrophils, 2% intermediate granulocytic precursors and 5% erythroid precursors. Ultrasound of bilateral testes was negative. MRI brain showed no masses or infarcts. Lumbar puncture was normal with no lymphoblasts. Thus, the diagnosis of precursor T-ALL/T-LBL was made. Since this patient had more than 25 percent T lymphoblasts in his bone marrow aspirate, his disorder could be best described as precursor T-ALL. After having considered the highly deranged liver function tests, per the recommendations of the treating oncologist, the treatment was initiated with cisplatin and dexamethasone (CD) for a total of 3 cycles to be followed by 4 cycles of Hyper CVAD. Follow up on day 100 after the completion of 3 cycles of Hyper CVAD revealed a normal hepatic panel and normal LDH with the patient scheduled for a fourth round of Hyper CVAD and a subsequent referral to a bone marrow transplant center.