A 68-year-old man presented with appetite loss, a 25% reduction in body weight, and general fatigue for 8 months in August 2020. Bladder cancer with multiple lung metastases was suspected. Cystoscopy revealed large lesions in the bladder. CT showed large lesions in the bladder with right hydroureteronephrosis, multiple lung metastases, and multiple hilar and mediastinal lymph node metastases, T4aN3M1b . The patient underwent transurethral resection for bladder tumors in August 2020. Pathological findings revealed squamous differentiation-dominant, high-grade, and G2-invasive urothelial carcinoma . Since the patient was ineligible for cisplatin due to his general condition, he received six courses of gemcitabine and carboplatin chemotherapy. Bladder cancer and multiple metastases markedly decreased in size on CT in February 2021 . He has been receiving pembrolizumab therapy since February 2021 (200 mg once every 3 weeks, 400 mg once every 6 weeks from October 2021). Cystoscopy showed no protruded lesion and urine cytology revealed negative for urothelial carcinoma in October 2021. Reductions in the size of bladder cancer and multiple metastases were maintained. However, a GGO lesion was detected in the inferior lobe of the right lung and was gradually increasing in size; therefore, primary lung cancer was suspected . Bronchoscopy and biopsy were performed but could not obtain a specimen for diagnosis. Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography revealed the accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose in the GGO lesion in the inferior lobe of the right lung, but not in the bladder lesion or metastatic sites . Based on these findings, a diagnosis of primary lung cancer was reached and the patient underwent a thoracoscopic right lower lobectomy in April 2022. Histopathological findings revealed ALK-negative, EGFR L858R mutation-positive invasive adenocarcinoma with a PD-L1 tumor proportion score of less than 1% . The patient has been receiving pembrolizumab therapy (400 mg once at 6-week intervals) without recurrence as of September 2022.