This 16-year-old male child presented with spontaneous onset of headache, nausea, and slight drowsiness since 2 weeks. The neurological examination revealed intact higher mental functions and no cerebellar signs. However, there was a bitemporal heteronymous hemianopia confirmed by perimetry. Power in right upper and lower limb was 4/5 according to Medical Research Council (MRC) scale with positive pronator drift. The gait was otherwise normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a left parietooccipital lesion with intraventricular extension . Both solid and cystic components were present with calcifications marked on the medial aspect. The patient underwent a craniotomy with neuronavigation-guided biopsy of the mass and gross total excision. Intraoperatively, a soft-firm mildly vascular lesion was identified, which was clearly demarcated in most dimensions. A frozen section confirmed the diagnosis of World Health Organization (WHO) grade IV GBM and this was consistent with the final histopathology report. The tumor was Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and s-100 positive and 40% of the cells showed nuclear positivity with MIB-1 antibody to the Ki-67 antigen (MIB-1). Postoperatively, the patient developed a subtle sensory aphasia. The rest of the hospital course was unremarkable and the patient was discharged in stable condition. The patient received postoperative local radiotherapy with a total dose of 54 grays (Gy).
Eight months later the patient presented with acute onset bilateral lower limb paraplegia. There was a complete loss of sensation in dermatome thoracic 7 (T-7) and T-8. Abdominal and cremasteric reflexes were absent. The power was 0/5 with increased spasticity and 3+ reflexes and normal bulk in both the lower limbs. The Babinski's sign was positive bilaterally and the patient had lost bladder control. An MRI showed recurrence of GBM with multifocal cranial deposits and spinal MRI showed an intradural extramedullary mass measuring 1.1 × 5.0 cm in anterioposterior (AP) and craniocaudal dimensions at T-5 to T-7 level with significant cord compression .
The patient underwent a T5-T7 laminectomy and excision of metastatic mass. Intraoperatively, a fragile highly vascular intradural extramedullary mass was noticed and sent for histopathology analysis. The histopathological examination of the mass revealed multiple fragments of a cellular tumor with hemangiopericytomatous vasculature. The cells revealed hyperchromatic round to oval nuclei with scant cytoplasm . Increased mitotic figures and glycogen were also seen. On immunohistochemical staining, the mass was focally positive for GFAP, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), cluster of differentiation 99 (CD 99) and Vimentin . The MIB-1 was raised and a diagnosis of metastatic GBM was made. Postoperatively, the patient showed recovery of autonomic function and the power was 3/5 in both the lower limbs, which gradually improved to 5/5 over the next one month. The patient was given postoperative radiotherapy with a total dose of 28 Gy.
Three months later, the patient presented to the emergency room (ER) with fever of 39° C and seizures since 3 days. He also complained of urinary and fecal incontinence. We evaluated him for these complaints with urine culture, which grew Escherichia coli and Psuedomonas and the patient was given appropriate supportive care and antibiotics and discharged from the hospital once in stable condition.
Three weeks later, the patient presented with severe pain in right arm and loss of sensation, which now involved both the upper arms. The family signed a do not resuscitate (DNR) form and the patient passed away 2 days later following cardiopulmonary arrest after significant brain stem herniation and extension of GBM.