A 54-year-old male was admitted from pre-admission clinic for investigation of new-onset hypoxia. He was planned to have an endoscopy for investigation of weight loss, abdominal pain, and diarrhoea. He had additionally reported a history of intermittent palpitations and exertional dyspnoea.
Background medical history included hypertension, obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, gastro-oesophageal reflux disease, and previous traumatic splenectomy. He was a lifelong non-smoker.
Physical examination revealed oxygen saturation of 81% on room air improving to 87% on 4 L via nasal cannula. There was no orthodeoxia. Lung auscultation was unremarkable. There was a Grade 3/6 pansystolic murmur at the left sternal edge associated with jugular venous pressure elevated to the angle of the jaw, with prominent ‘v’ waves and no peripheral oedema.
Resting electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, rate of 71 beats per minute, normal axis, and no ischaemic changes. Chest X-ray showed clear lung fields. An arterial blood gas on room air showed hypoxia with a mild respiratory alkalosis and elevated alveolar-arterial (A-a) oxygen gradient . Haemoglobin and renal function were normal. Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram on admission revealed normal lung parenchyma and a left posterior basal segmental pulmonary embolism without evidence of right heart strain, the size of which was thought to inadequately account for the hypoxia. Pulmonary function testing showed a mild restrictive pattern with FEV1 2.44 L (70% predicted), FVC 3.22 L (73% predicted), FEV1/FVC 75.90% (99% predicted), and carbon monoxide transfer coefficient 4.38 mL/(min*mmHg*L) (103% predicted), although there was variable performance in testing.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed the normal left ventricular size and systolic function. There was mild bi-atrial dilatation along with mild right ventricular dilatation (44 mm basal diameter) with hyperdynamic systolic function. Tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion was 30 mm. Tricuspid valve leaflets were noted to be thickened, immobile and retracted, not coapting in systole with free-flowing tricuspid regurgitation, which in the setting of a morphologically normal mitral valve was pathognomonic for carcinoid heart disease (, Video 1 and ). The pulmonary valve had a normal appearance and mild regurgitation. Twenty-four hour urinary 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid was elevated at 260 µmol/24 h (normal range 0–30), whilst chromogranin A was 156 ng/mL (normal range 0–104).
A TTE bubble study (Video 2) was performed due to radiographically normal lungs, the small size of the pulmonary embolism, and patient reluctance for a transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE), which were strongly positive within three cardiac cycles suggesting shunt at the cardiac level. However, the passage of bubbles appeared to originate from the pulmonary veins which was suspicious for pulmonary shunting.
Dedicated digital subtraction pulmonary angiography was therefore performed which excluded pulmonary arteriovenous fistula and large pulmonary embolism but revealed early filling of the left atrium confirming an intracardiac shunt. The patient eventually agreed to a TOE (, ) with bubble study (, Video 3) which confirmed a long tunnel patent foramen ovale with an aneurysmal interatrial septum. There was evidence of the significant right to left shunting on colour Doppler at rest in the supine position.
68-Gallium DOTATATE PET and CT imaging identified a 27 mm × 36 mm × 57 mm avid retroperitoneal para-aortic lymph node and avid right testicular mass. Percutaneous biopsy of the retroperitoneal mass revealed a well-differentiated neuroendocrine (carcinoid) tumour WHO Grade 1.
Prior to excision biopsy of the right testicular tumour, consideration of surgical tricuspid valve replacement combined with PFO closure was declined by the patient. Given marked resting hypoxia, need for surgery and undetermined diagnosis and prognosis, percutaneous closure of the patent foramen ovale was considered appropriate.
Pre-procedural right heart catheterization demonstrated a right to a left atrial pressure gradient . The PFO was successfully closed under fluoroscopic guidance with a 30 mm Amplatzer PFO Occluder device . Pre-procedural arterial oxygen saturation of 82% improved to 88% immediately post-procedure. There were no procedural complications.
The patient underwent an inpatient orchidectomy with histopathology of the right testicle confirming a primary well-differentiated neuroendocrine (carcinoid) tumour. The patient was commenced on somatostatin analogue therapy. He was discharged a week following PFO closure with arterial oxygen saturation of 92% on room air. He has had durable relief of his symptoms. Repeat TTE showed no residual flow across the interatrial septum. The patient continues to decline consideration of tricuspid valve surgery.