The patient was a 48-year-old man with no significant medical history who presented with transient motor aphasia. On neurological examination, diplopia was noted on the right lateral gaze, which suggested partial left oculomotor nerve palsy, with no dysfunction of pupillary reflexes. Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large supratentorial cystic lesion that occupied the left temporal and frontal convexity, with a 10-mm midline shift and uncal herniation. The cyst contents showed low intensity on T1-weighted images and high intensity on T2- weighted images , with no diffusion restriction. The cyst fluid showed a cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-like pattern in most sequences, other than in fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images, where the content showed slightly higher intensity than regular CSF . There was a mucous- like nodule with isointensity on T1-weighted images and mild high intensity on T2-weighted images. The lesion was not enhanced the following gadolinium injection.
It was concluded that the mass effect from the cyst caused uncal herniation , resulting in partial left oculomotor palsy, as well as seizures manifesting as transient aphasia, and thus, it was decided to perform cyst resection.
Under general anesthesia, a left frontotemporal craniotomy was performed. As the dura mater was opened, a large extra- axial cyst was seen, covered with a thin whitish membrane and containing white turbid fluid . After the cyst wall was opened, cyst contents with mucous-like components were aspirated. Most of the cyst membranes were resected, but some part of the membrane that adhered to the brain surface strongly was left. The cyst wall was sent for histopathological examination, which showed that the lesion was endodermal in origin. No obvious intraoperative complications were noted. The patient awoke from the anesthesia promptly, was extubated in the operating room, and was then sent to an intensive care unit.
The patient did not demonstrate any neurological deficits immediately after surgery. However, he experienced a tonic- clonic seizure 9 h after surgery. Diazepam and levetiracetam (LEV) were immediately administered, but frequent complex partial seizures still occurred. Fosphenytoin (f-PHT) was also administered, and he was intubated and sedated with propofol. Lumbar puncture was performed on postoperative day 1, and the obtained CSF was whitish and opaque, with the initial pressure as high as 330 mmH2O. The cell count was 11/uL, glucose was 68 mg/dL, and protein was 46.6 mg/dL. The electroencephalogram showed theta bursts localized in bilateral frontal lobes. Status epilepticus caused by chemical meningitis was diagnosed. The seizure was finally satisfactorily controlled with LEV 4000 mg, f-PHT 7.5 mg/kg, lacosamide 200 mg, and propofol 0.3 mg/kg/h, with minimal simple partial seizures affecting the right hand. Propofol was stopped on the 5th day, and the patient was extubated. Postoperative course shown above is organized as a timeline . Mild right hemiplegia and motor aphasia persisted, which gradually improved with rehabilitation. On postoperative MRI performed 2 weeks after the surgery, the cyst shrank dramatically with satisfactory decompression . The patient continued rehabilitation and was discharged home in 1 month. Mild impairment in dexterity of his right hand remained. No recurrence was noted on computed tomography 2 months after the surgery.
On histopathological examination, the cyst wall contained pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium with a basement membrane on hematoxylin and eosin staining . A few goblet cells were also present on staining with periodic acid-Schiff , mucicarmine, and Alcian blue stains. The presence of secretory granules, basement membrane, and cilia suggested an endodermal origin. Ectodermal markers such as S-100 and GFAP were negative. Epithelial markers such as cytokeratin CAM5.2 and epithelial membrane antigen were positive, which supported the diagnosis of an endodermal cyst. Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was also positive in the cytoplasm in a few epithelial cells .