A 23-year-old woman with no underlying chronic disease presented to the ED after an episode of dyspnea. Her dyspnea improved upon arrival; she was, otherwise, symptom free. Her vitals upon arrival were stable: oxygen saturation, 100%; blood pressure, 121/83 mmHg; pulse rate, 105 beats/min; and respiratory rate, 16 breaths/min. Exactly 4 h and 40 min prior to the onset of symptoms, she had undergone a closed reduction surgery for a nasal bone fracture under general anesthesia. The course of surgery was uneventful and the patient was discharged after observation as she showed no unusual signs postoperatively. After arriving home, she was drinking a glass of water when the dyspnea started. This symptom lasted 30 min. She had no history of a recent upper respiratory infection or immobilization, did not smoke or drink alcohol, and had no family history of cardiac or cerebrovascular diseases. The physical examination showed no signs of neck vein engorgement or leg edema; there were also no unusual results pertaining to the lung, heart, or abdomen. Her electrocardiogram (ECG) and chest radiography did not show any unusual pathology . Arterial blood gas analysis results were as follows: pH, 7.407; pCO2, 29.6 mmHg; pO2, 105.4 mmHg; base excess, − 4.1 mmol/L; HCO3, 18.8 mmol/L; and O2 saturation, 98.2%. The laboratory investigations showed a normal blood cell count, and electrolyte and chemistry tests showed nothing abnormal except for a slightly elevated glucose level of 115 mg/dL (reference range: 74–106 mg/dL). From these findings, the initial diagnosis was that of an asthma attack or hyperventilation syndrome. Therefore, she was to be discharged and an appointment was fixed at the outpatient department of the pulmonology center. Thereafter, to rule out occult pneumothorax, pulmonary embolism, and the rare case of a coronary event in a young adult, we ordered for cardiac biomarker testing and performed a chest computed tomography (CT). Cardiac markers showed creatine kinase levels within the normal range at 175 U/L (reference range: 26–192 U/L), but creatine kinase myocardial band and high-sensitive troponin I levels were elevated at 11.2 µg/L (reference range: 0.0–5.0), and 6.122 ng/mL (reference range: 0.000–0.046), respectively. Subsequently, an echocardiogram and pulmonary and coronary angiography CT were ordered to consider or exclude myocarditis, pulmonary embolism, pericarditis, and coronary artery disease. Finally, the bedside echocardiogram performed at the ED showed an ejection fraction (EF) of 25% by the modified Simpson method and midventricular and apical akinesia with basal hyperkinesia, which were indicative of RWMA associated with TS . The pulmonary and coronary angiographic CT scans showed no abnormal findings. Considering these results, apical TS was the most likely diagnosis. She was admitted to the intensive care unit. During her hospitalization, no symptoms of chest pain or dyspnea were presented, creatinine kinase myocardial band and high-sensitive troponin I level decreased gradually , and a follow-up echocardiogram performed on the fifth day of hospitalization showed full recovery with a normalized EF of 60% and no RWMA . The patient was discharged on the sixth day with no other complications.