A 31-year-old man was admitted to the intensive care unit with severe burn injury involving 52% of the total body surface area and a prognostic burn index of 79.5. The clinical data recorded at the time of hospitalization are presented in Table S. After hospitalization, an escharotomy was immediately performed, and fluid resuscitation and mechanical ventilatory management were initiated. Devices, such as central venous catheter, arterial line, and flexible double lumen catheter, were inserted. The patient developed acute kidney injury (AKI) and received continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) immediately after hospitalization.
The first surgical debridement was performed on the 3rd day of hospitalization. On the fourth day of hospitalization, the patient developed fever and decreased blood pressure. Meropenem (MEPM) and linezolid (LZD) were initiated as treatment for septic shock. Blood and wound culture results revealed the presence of Klebsiella species, Serratia marcescens, Enterobacter cloacae complex, and several other indigenous skin bacteria. Based on the susceptibilities of the bacterial species that were identified, MEPM and LZD were replaced with sulbactam/ampicillin (SBT/ABPC) and ceftazidime (CAZ) to target bacteria, excluding indigenous skin bacteria. Subsequently, the surgical debridement was performed on the 5th and 10th days of hospitalization. Since the clinical course was favorable and blood samples collected and cultured at the follow-up evaluation were negative for the target bacteria, both SBT/ABPC and CAZ administration were discontinued after the 5-day regimen.
The second skin graft surgery was performed on the 29th day after admission; carbapenem-resistant P. aeruginosa was detected for the first time in the burn wounds and in sputum cultures collected before grafting . Amikacin (AMK) monotherapy was selected as a perioperative therapeutic strategy for burn wounds . However, because the patient was receiving CRRT support for AKI due to burns, the blood levels of AMK did not reach the target peak concentration required for therapeutic effect. Furthermore, trough concentrations remained high; therefore, the dose was reduced and continued. AMK blood concentration results are shown in Table S. Thereafter, a chest X-ray showed partial loss of permeability in the right lung field, and an increased inflammatory response was confirmed, possibly due to postoperative ventilator management, suggesting the possibility of ventilator-associated pneumonia. As AMK diffuses poorly in the lung tissue, MEPM was included as a treatment for pneumonia caused by P. aeruginosa, and the ventilator was weaned off. However, the blood sample collected at the follow-up evaluation revealed β-lactams and AMK-resistant P. aeruginosa. The drug susceptibility results of P. aeruginosa detected in blood cultures (blood culture samples at days 37, 41, 50, and 56) are shown in Table . The antimicrobial synergistic study of P. aeruginosa was conducted using the Eiken breakpoint checkerboard plate (BC plate®) . The results were analyzed using the interpretive criteria defined by the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute. Notably, the low-dose MEPM and AMK combination therapy did not exhibit a synergistic effect. Due to the patient’s AKI complications, it was difficult to increase the MEPM and AMK doses.
Therefore, we initiated TAZ/CTLZ 1.5 g/8 h instead of the AMK and MEPM combination therapy on the 43rd day of hospitalization . Although the antimicrobial susceptibility test of TAZ/CTLZ could not be performed on the day of hospitalization, the results of the genetic analysis confirmed that P. aeruginosa that was isolated was a non-carbapenemase-producing strain. The patient could be weaned off from CRRT on the 40th day of hospitalization, but low-dose TAZ/CTLZ was continued because of prolonged renal dysfunction, which resulted in a transient clinical improvement. The third skin graft surgery was performed on the 46th day of hospitalization. However, fever and an increased inflammatory response were observed, and XDR-P. aeruginosa was detected on the blood culture as in previous blood cultures. The treatment could have failed due to underdosing with TAZ/CTLZ or bacterial resistance to TAZ/CTLZ at that time. Therefore, the TAZ/CTLZ dose was increased to 3 g/8 h in accordance with the renal function.
The fourth skin graft surgery was performed on the 57th day of hospitalization. However, despite an increased TAZ/CTLZ dose, bacteremia persisted, and the blood cultures remained positive. Because of the limited therapeutic effect of TAZ/CTLZ monotherapy, the TOB susceptible to this isolate (180 mg/24 h) was initiated. TOB was added on TAZ/CTLZ at low doses for synergistic effect against Gram-negative bacteria. The therapeutic drug monitoring results of TOB are shown in Table S. Blood cultures collected after initiation of combination therapy with TAZ/CTLZ and TOB were negative on two consecutive follow-up evaluations. Since the blood cultures were negative, the patient’s persistent bacteremia was considered to be under control. Moreover, since P. aeruginosa may become resistant to TAZ/CTLZ with long-term use, a higher dose of TOB was considered in order to switch to standard therapy for Gram-negative bacteria. In addition, since the clinical course was favorable, TOB was increased as standard monotherapy against Gram-negative bacteria, and the peak concentration measured on the 69th day of hospitalization reached the therapeutic response range. Combination therapy with TAZ/CTLZ and TOB was continued for 10 days, and then treatment with TOB as a monotherapy was continued for the remainder of the treatment period, which was set at 14 days after negative blood cultures. Thereafter, although the patient had several episodes of fever and increased inflammatory response, blood cultures consistently tested negative, and all of the wounds healed. On the 93rd day of hospitalization, due to the good healing progress, the patient was transferred to another hospital.
Although susceptibility testing of TAZ/CTLZ was not possible, we performed retrospective antimicrobial susceptibility testing of TAZ/CTLZ on P. aeruginosa isolated from blood cultures as an additional analysis . The results from samples collected before TAZ/CTLZ administration showed that one of the isolates was resistant, while another showed intermediate susceptibility.