A 51-year old Caucasian male presented to his local hospital with a history of an enlarging painful mass in his left thigh in 1992. A needle biopsy was in keeping with the diagnosis of a myxoid liposarcoma, and full staging imaging did not reveal any secondary lesions. A wide local excision was performed and subsequent histopathological examination showed a completely excised high-grade myxoid liposarcoma. Fractions of radiotherapy (60 Gy) were administered postoperatively. In both 1997 and 1999, local recurrences occurred, for which surgical excisions with wide margins were achieved. Surgery was supplemented with radiotherapy on both occasions. In 2004, the tumour disseminated to three distant sites including the liver, chest wall, and neck. The metastases were successfully resected. Histopathological examination revealed similar cellular findings do the primary tumour . As the surgical margins were clear, no further treatments were deemed necessary at that stage. In 2005, the patient started complaining of back pain but plain spinal radiographs, CT (chest, abdomen and pelvis) and a TC 99m bone scan did not reveal any signs of spinal disease. However, a spinal MRI showed a diffuse and widespread abnormal bone marrow signal not detected previously. A bone marrow aspirate suggested the diagnosis of metastatic disease. During 2006, chemotherapy (Doxorubicin, Ifosfamide, and Trabectedin) and radiotherapy (fractions of 20 Gy) were administered, resulting in good symptomatic recovery, with no disease progression. In 2007, the patient sustained a pathological fracture in his left proximal femur following a fall. An MRI revealed multiple well-defined foci of abnormal signal throughout both femora and in the right pubis and both ischia, in addition to the fracture. He subsequently underwent a proximal femoral replacement at our institution with the view of achieving good pain relief and a reasonable functional outcome. Histopathological examination revealed extensive bone necrosis secondary to radiotherapy, but no viable tumour cells were identified. Single agent Trabectedin was given postoperatively. The patient died of his disease eleven months later, 15 years after initial diagnosis.