A 68-year-old woman with prior history of dyslipidaemia and ovariectomy due to endometrial cancer was admitted due to acute chest pain while resting after dinner. She had intense mental stress 1 month before onset. Upon admission, her vital signs revealed an elevated blood pressure of 170/110 mmHg, a heart rate of 75 b.p.m., and a body temperature of 36.5°C. Her physical examination had no significant findings. Twelve-lead electrocardiography (ECG) showed sinus rhythm, no ST-T change, and normal QTc intervals . Laboratory data demonstrated normal levels of cardiac enzymes, including that of troponin-T (0.15 pg/mL) . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed akinesis of the LV posterior wall. With the clinical suspicion of TTS, emergent coronary angiography (CAG) was performed to exclude coronary artery disease. Coronary angiography showed systolic compression of the mid-left anterior descending artery, indicative of myocardial bridging, but no significant stenosis. The acetylcholine provocation test was also negative . Left ventriculography showed akinesis of the LV mid-ventricular wall ; thus, mid-ventricular–type TTS was diagnosed. Laboratory tests demonstrated an elevated troponin-T level (0.171 pg/mL) 6 h after admission. Medical management included enalapril (2.5 mg daily) administration. On Day 2, ECG revealed T-wave inversion in lead Ⅱ, Ⅲ, aVF, and prolonged QTc . Chest pain and palpitations subsided, and the patient was discharged 2 days after admission. After 2 weeks, she was readmitted due to a recurrence of acute chest pain and reactive hypertension (188/108 mmHg). There was no emotional trigger in this episode. Physical examination remained unremarkable. Laboratory data demonstrated an elevated troponin-T level (0.283 pg/mL). Electrocardiography revealed ST elevation in lead V1–V4 and no T-wave inversions . Transthoracic echocardiography showed hypokinesis at the LV apex and no mitral regurgitation or LV outflow tract obstruction. Emergent catheterization showed intact coronary arteries, and LVG revealed typical TTS with apical akinesis, anterolateral hypokinesis, and inferior-basal hyperkinesis . She was diagnosed with a recurrence of TTS but an apical phenotype. Notably, the mid-posterior LV area of akinesis on the initial presentation was hyperkinetic during recurrence. The next day, ECG showed prolonged QTc and T wave inversion in lead Ⅱ, Ⅲ, aVF, and V1–V4 . Gadolinium cardiac magnetic resonance imaging revealed late gadolinium enhancement in the LV middle anterior wall, apex, and middle inferior wall matching the akinetic wall motion on LVG . Re-evaluation of laboratory data showed normal catecholamine values, and abdominal computed tomography revealed no adrenal lesions. Further analysis of MIBG scintigraphy demonstrated no hot spots excluding the possibility of pheochromocytoma . The oestrogen value was below detection sensitivity. Enalapril was increased to 5.0 mg daily. She did not experience any recurrence of chest pain during hospitalization and was discharged after 5 days. Electrocardiography showed improved giant negative T waves when she was discharged, although TTE showed hypokinesis in the LV apex. However, she was transferred by ambulance after another 2 weeks, presenting with similar chest pains. There was no emotional trigger in this episode. Physical examination and laboratory data were unremarkable. Electrocardiography showed T wave inversion in lead V1–V4, Ⅱ, Ⅲ, and aVF . Transthoracic echocardiography showed hypokinesis at the left inferior ventricle and normalized wall motion of the apex. Coronary angiography performed a third time revealed no major changes in the coronary arteries, although LVG demonstrated hypokinesis of the left inferior ventricular wall and normokinesis of the apex indicative of mid-ventricular TTS . Spironolactone 25 mg and bisoprolol 1.25 mg daily were added. She had an acute episode of chest pain on Day 9 after admission, although it was not accompanied with responsive hypertension. Electrocardiography showed giant negative T waves, and TTE showed hypokinesis of the left inferior ventricle at discharge. Oral nitrates did not alleviate symptoms, but lorazepam relieved her chest pain. She remained asymptomatic with normalized ECG findings and without recurrence 4 months after initial presentation . Electrocardiography and TTE showed normal findings after 6 months from occurred third recurrence of TTS.