We report a case of a 24-year-old male with a left-sided anterior subcoracoid shoulder dislocation following a road traffic accident. This was the first episode of dislocation. The shoulder was closed reduced by the Kocher’s technique within 3 hours of trauma, and a post-reduction radiograph was taken to confirm concentric reduction. The shoulder was immobilized for 3 weeks ( and ), following which rotator cuff strengthening exercises were initiated. The patient was followed up, after the shoulder was reduced at 3 weeks, 3 months, and 6 months, and then, the patient reported after 2 years. This patient was a non-alcoholic healthy college-going student who was not on any medications. At 6-month follow-up, the left shoulder radiograph showed a sclerotic sector of the head with cortical erosions near the greater tuberosity ( and ). A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was done which revealed a geographic area of the anterior part of humeral head with an altered marrow signal, which was iso- to hyper-intense on short tau inversion recovery sequence, with a hypointense rim on T1 sequence. The differential diagnosis was a bone bruise or osteonecrosis of the humeral head. However, due to the sclerotic changes on the radiographs, possibility of osteonecrosis could not be ruled out and this required displaced medially, outside the bicipital groove ( and ), and the rotator cuff was normal. The patient had a stable shoulder with mild pain at the extremes of motion. A radiograph of the pelvis with both hips was normal, without any sclerotic changes of the femoral head. The patient was treated with cuff strengthening exercises, and he resumed all routine activities including leisure sporting activities. Bisphosphonate was not administered. At the end of 2 years, the patient had no functional restriction and had an excellent UCLA score. The shoulder radiograph revealed a mixed sclerotic and lytic lesion in the humeral head without any cortical defect and a maintained a congruent articular surface. The greater tuberosity erosions seen on the earlier radiographs became sclerotic without any further undermining ( and ). A repeat MRI of the shoulder at 2 years revealed a 19 mm3×17 mm3×12mm3serpiginous, geographic area, larger in size than the previous MRI, which was consistent with osteonecrosis of the humeral head without any deformation of the articular surface. There was a partial thickness tear with medial retraction of the subscapularis. The long head of biceps tendon was torn and retracted. The rest of the rotator cuff and glenoid labrum was normal ( and ). An MR angiography of the shoulder was performed to know the status of the circumflex vessels (, , , ). It showed attenuation of the some of the branches of anterior circumflex humeral artery, but all the vessels around the humeral neck were patent, but their course was not clearly defined. To enable a better visualization of the arteries around the neck of the humerus and to localize the site of obstruction of the artery, if any, a computerized tomography angiography of the left shoulder was performed at 2 years (, , , and ). This study reported that the origin and proximal part of the anterior circumflex humeral artery was not opacified while the distal part of the artery was seen filling with the dye through the collaterals. The posterior circumflex humeral artery was normal. On clinical examination, the patient was able to perform 170° shoulder abduction, with a normal scapulothoracic rhythm. The power of internal rotation of the shoulder was 4/5 as per the Medical Research Council grading on the left side, and the power of the rest of the shoulder movements such as external rotation, abduction, forward flexion, and extension was 5/5. The patient was advised biceps tenodesis with subscapularis repair. However, the patient was not willing for the same.