An 8-year-old young boy presented unwell with prolonged fevers, abdominal pain, and progressive respiratory distress. His physical exam was significant for adenopathy and splenomegaly.
Excisional cervical node biopsy revealed a dense proliferation of atypical lymphoid cells and multiple scattered “hallmark cells.” Immunohistochemistry showed diffuse ALK1 expression (nuclear and cytoplasmic), CD30, CD4, focal staining with CD2, and negative CD3 confirming ALK+ ALCL. The pathology met the criteria for the lymphohistiocytic variant.
Diagnostic lumbar puncture (LP) and bone marrow (BM) exam were deferred as the patient could not be sedated due to significant respiratory distress. He was urgently started on therapy according to ALCL99 which includes a 5 day pre-phase and six alternating courses of intensive chemotherapy derived from the NHL-BFM protocol., Secondary to his compromised clinical state, intrathecal (IT) chemotherapy due on day 1 of pre-phase could not be administered. Positive emission tomography (PET/CT), completed 1 week post-initiation of therapy showed multiple sites of disease including nodal involvement above and below the diaphragm, lung parenchyma, stomach, small bowel, and bilateral kidneys as well as hypermetabolic lytic bone lesions.
Due to his degree of illness including anasarca, high dose methotrexate (HD MTX) was omitted from cycle 1. He clinically improved and was discharged home briefly before the second cycle. LP with triple IT chemotherapy (15 mg MTX and hydrocortisone and 30 mg cytarabine) was given during his second cycle and his cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was negative at the time.
On the 19th day of his second cycle of chemotherapy, 54 days from diagnosis, he complained of new-onset headaches, blurry vision, and photophobia. A diagnostics LP showed 135 WBC with blasts. CSF flow cytometry confirmed the presence of ALCL cells that were positive for CD4 and CD30. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed extensive leptomeningeal enhancement over the cerebral convexities and parenchymal abnormalities within the cerebellar hemispheres consistent with early CNS involvement of ALCL. .
He received triple IT, dexamethasone (10 mg/m2/day), and a session of craniospinal irradiation. The following day he was unresponsive and had a generalized tonic-clonic seizure. Urgent CT showed obstructive tri ventricular hydrocephalus and diffuse extensive leptomeningeal enhancement, particularly in the cerebellum. He received mannitol, hypertonic saline, and an urgent extra ventricular drain (EVD) was inserted. Peripheral blood at that time became positive for circulating blasts, positive for CD30, CD3, and CD4. Ceritinib was started at 20 mg/kg daily through a feeding tube because of its demonstrated CNS efficacy in adult studies.
Subsequent MRI 2 days later showed new cerebellar herniation, compression of the brainstem, and progression of the leptomeningeal enhancement . Despite aggressive medical management, he died 10 days after the date of diagnosis of relapsed disease.