The patient was a 44-year-old man, non-smoker, with a history of IgA nephropathy. He had no history of trauma or anticoagulant use and had no significant/relevant family history. He had no smoking history. The patient was referred to our hospital with the chief complaint of bloody sputum. He also complained of right upper back pain. He was alert, afebrile, and his vital signs were stable, with a peripheral arterial oxygen saturation level of 98% on room air. A plain chest X-ray revealed decreased radiolucency of the right lung field and an opacity in the right lower lung field . Chest computed tomography revealed a right pleural effusion and a large round mass in the right lower lobe, measuring 6.7 × 5.6 cm in size . This mass was not observed in a CT examination performed 10 months previously . Hematological examination showed a leukocyte count of 8200/μL, hemoglobin level of 12.3 g/dL, serum creatinine of 1.86 mg/dL, serum C-reactive protein level of 0.19 mg/dL, prothrombin time of 10.5 s, activated partial thromboplastin time of 25.9 s, serum fibrinogen level of 412 mg/dL, and a serum D-dimer level of 0.8 mg/L. Tests performed for markers of infectious diseases, such as serum β-D-glucan, serum aspergillus galactomannan antigen, and serum anti-glycopeptidolipid core immunoglobulin A antibodies were all negative. A test for tuberculosis-specific interferon-gamma and sputum smear examination for acid-fast bacilli were negative. We performed chest tube drainage of the right thorax and confirmed bloody pleural effusion. The chest tube drained 600 mL of bloody effusion within 2 h. Six hours after admission, as the patient continued to have hemoptysis and his hemoglobin level dropped from 12.3 to 10.3 g/dL, emergency bronchial artery embolization was performed .
On the following day, the chest X-ray findings deteriorated and the hemoglobin level dropped further from 10.3 to 7.4 g/dL. The hemoptysis persisted, and there was no reduction in the drainage volume of the bloody fluid from the chest tube. Therefore, we decided to perform emergency surgery.
Intraoperative observation showed bloody pleural effusion, fibrin clots on the lung surface, and a giant mass in the right lower lobe. There was evidence of injury to the visceral pleura, which was stretched excessively by the mass . We performed right lower lobectomy with extirpation of the clot. We could not exclude the possibility of lung cancer; therefore, we additionally performed lymph node dissection. The operative time and estimated blood loss were 143 min and 163 mL, respectively. Histopathological examination showed a hematoma with granulation tissue and multiple ossified areas with bone marrow formation. The hematoma, which measured 9.2 × 8.0 cm in maximum diameters, consisted of fresh and old hemorrhages, and rupture of a blood vessel wall was observed within the hematoma . In addition, multiple ossified areas with bone marrow formation were observed around the hematoma. There was no evidence of malignancy or angiitis. Based on these findings, we diagnosed this patient as having a pulmonary hematoma with diffuse dendriform pulmonary ossification . After the operation, the patient was discharged without any complications, and a follow-up chest X-ray showed no evidence of recurrence.