Patient: A 76-year-old woman.
Chief complaint: To improve asthma management before undergoing neck surgery.
Past medical history: Diabetes, hypertension, pollen allergy.
Tobacco use: No.
Current medication (antiasthmatic drugs): Symbicort® Turbuhaler® (Symbicort), 2 inhalations twice daily up to a total of 8 inhalations per day (SMART); montelukast tablets 10 mg/day; theophylline sustained-release tablets 400 mg/day; ketotifen capsules 2 mg/day; salbutamol inhalation 0.5%, 0.5 mL/asthma attack; and prednisolone tablets 5 mg, to be taken at the patient’s discretion at the time of an attack.
Respiratory function test: Forced vital capacity, 2.74 L (129.2%); forced expiratory volume for 1 s (FEV1), 1.09 L (76.8%); FEV1, 39.8%, with findings of obstructive ventilatory defect.
Current medical history: Adult-onset asthma. Despite undergoing Step 4–5 (Global Initiative for Asthma 2017 [GINA2017]) therapy as a long-term management approach, wheezing persisted, and she had been admitted to a nearby hospital once every 2 years or so due to asthma attacks triggered by irregular weather conditions.
She was referred by a nearby otolaryngologic clinic to the Department of Otorhinolaryngology in our hospital for thorough examination of hoarseness lasting for 1–2 years. Examination findings revealed thyroid cancer with tracheal infiltration for which radical surgery was indicated. However, because wheezing increases surgical risk, she was referred to the Department of Internal Medicine for preoperative control of intractable wheezing. Consistent with her complaint of constant wheezing, initial examination revealed expiratory wheezing at rest.
To improve asthma management during a 4-week period before surgery, we prescribed Spiriva® Respimat® (Spiriva Respimat) 2.5 μg (two inhalations once daily) and subcutaneous injections of 300 mg anti-IgE antibody omalizumab every 2 weeks (determined based on the level of serum IgE [159 IU/mL IgE specific to Aspergillus fumigatus] and body weight [50.9 kg]).
Owing to these additions, wheezing disappeared after 1 week, and so the patient was able to undergo right thyroid lobectomy with tracheoesophageal resection as scheduled.
Considering that it would be difficult for the patient to use the inhalation powder Symbicort because of a permanent tracheostomy postoperatively, we switched from Symbicort to nebulized budesonide 2000 μg/day and a tulobuterol patch (2 mg). Spiriva Respimat and omalizumab were continued after surgery.
Approximately 3 weeks after surgery, the patient began to develop respiratory distress and wheezing early in the morning. According to the patient, these attacks would have been managed quickly as small attacks by additional inhalations of Symbicort, suggesting that the nebulized SABA that she had been taking postoperatively was not sufficiently effective. Because these symptoms used to be well managed when Symbicort was used, we considered switching back to Symbicort from nebulized budesonide and the tulobuterol patch. In Japan, however, Symbicort is available in only a DPI formulation, Turbuhaler®. In order to maximize the beneficial effects of Symbicort Turbuhaler, inspiratory flow rates need to exceed a certain level, but our patient would likely have had insufficient inspiratory flow rate due to the tracheostomy, and would thus need a device that does not require a high inspiratory flow rate, such as a pressurized metered-dose inhaler (pMDI). Adoair® and Flutiform® aerosols are commercially available pMDIs in Japan and contain ICS/LABA. Flutiform® aerosol was considered the most likely candidate because it contains the same LABA (formoterol), but not ICS, as in Symbicort, but Flutiform may leak out from the tracheostomy after being sprayed intraorally. Because the patient had previously been undergoing SMART with additional inhalations of Symbicort for acute exacerbations, it would be best to use Symbicort if possible. There seems to be no difference in the degree of distribution to the respiratory tract whether a tracheostomy is present or not if the patient is able to close the tracheostomy using his or her hand. However, the drug distribution in the respiratory tract is unknown when a patient with a tracheostomy uses an inhaled drug. Since the diameter of the tracheostomy is about 1 to 2 cm, the dead space can potentially be ignored. When the effect was found to be inadequate, we considered a change to Flutiform®, which has similar components in a different device (pMDI), because the tracheostomy was just under the skin in this patient.
Two types of devices are used to measure inspiratory flow rate: the whistle-type Turbutester (accessory for the Turbuhaler®) and the In-Check Dial®, an inspiratory flow measurement device. The Turbutester generates an audible whistling sound during inhalation, signifying that the patient has an adequate inspiratory flow rate to use Symbicort. The In-Check Dial, when used with an adapter tailored to conventional inhalers, functions as an inspiratory flow measurement device and expresses inspiratory flow rates in L/min. Our patient had an inspiratory flow rate barely sufficient to generate a whistling sound from the Turbutester during inhalation while simultaneously closing the tracheostomy with her hands. So, to select the best inspiratory flow rate, she was instructed to measure the rate three times using the In-Check Dial®, the Turbuhaler®, and the special adaptor while closing tracheostomy. The results were 40, 43, and 43 L/min. Several inspiratory flow rates have been suggested to be required to exert the beneficial effect of Turbuhaler®, but the consensus is that inspiratory flow rates above 30 L/min are sufficient to use Turbuhaler® [, ]. These findings, together with the findings from the Turbutester, suggest that the present patient could benefit from these devices.
Based on these findings, nebulized budesonide 2000 μg and tulobuterol patch 2 mg were switched to 2 inhalations of Symbicort twice daily up to a total of 8 inhalations/day (SMART). The antiasthmatic drugs Spiriva Respimat and anti-IgE antibody, which had been added before surgery, were continued. The patient’s symptoms improved quickly over the course of 2 days after starting 2 inhalations of Symbicort in the morning and evening plus additional inhalations as needed (usually 1 inhalation in the evening). Owing to stabilized asthma symptoms, she was discharged on the third day after switching drugs .