A 62-year-old male weighing 75 kg and with a height of 162 cm complained of discomfort in the throat. Preoperative laryngoscopy revealed a large laryngeal polyp attached to the right vocal fold that synchronously swung inward into the trachea and outward to the larynx with inspiration and expiration, respectively . The space between the vocal cords was too narrow due to the presence of the polyp for an endotracheal tube to be inserted. In addition, a surgical procedure could not be performed if the polyp moved into the trachea after endotracheal intubation. Thus, we decided to reduce the volume of the polyp by using a flexible bronchoscope through the LMA and then to perform total removal of the polyp by using a rigid laryngoscope with endotracheal intubation. If the airway did not remain patent by such airway management, we planned to perform temporary tracheostomy for removal of the polyp using a rigid laryngoscope.
The patient was not given premedication, and routine noninvasive monitoring including blood pressure, percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2), and end-tidal CO2 was performed in the operating room. SpO2 was 97% on room air, and oxygen was delivered by a facemask at 7 L/min in the operating room. During anesthesia that was induced with incremental administration of propofol (total dose of 170 mg), spontaneous ventilation was manually assisted and was followed by manual positive pressure ventilation without any airway obstruction. However, complete airway obstruction occurred immediately after a size 4 LMA (LMA Supreme™, Teleflex Co., NC, USA) was inserted. Maneuvers including changing the LMA position and increasing and decreasing the volume of cuff air did not improve the difficult airway. A flexible laryngoscope revealed airway obstruction due to the polyp lodged between the vocal cords , and the polyp could not be moved by pulling with forceps through the LMA. Spontaneous respiration returned, but the airway was still not patent even though the maneuvers were repeatedly tried. SpO2 decreased to 88%, and the LMA was removed. Soon after the removal, patency of the airway was dramatically improved and SpO2 returned to 100%. Transient tracheostomy was then carried out under general anesthesia with 2.0% of sevoflurane in 40% oxygen with assisted spontaneous ventilation and injection of 250 μg fentanyl. Resection of the polyp was successfully performed using a rigid laryngoscope. The tracheostomy was closed on postoperative day 5, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 7.