A 77-year-old Japanese male presented with hematochezia. Five years prior to presentation, he underwent trans-anal mucosal resection of a 13-mm semi-pedunculated polyp of the rectum. Histologic findings showed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma in situ; however, the horizontal margin was unclear due to cauterization of the lateral edge of the tumor . After resection, magnified endoscopy was performed and showed no atypical pit pattern. The patient takes Amlodipine for hypertension. The patient had a history of hypertension and no allergies. He drank distilled spirits daily for 57 years. He smoked one and a half pack of cigarettes for 20 years and quit smoking 37 years ago. His father died of esophageal carcinoma. Anal tenderness and a hard mass in the anal canal were found on the digital rectal examination. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory tests showed: Hb 13.4 g/dl, CEA 2.4 ng/ml (normal value < 4.5), and CA19-9 10 U/ml (normal value < 36). Colonoscopy revealed an irregular mass in the anal canal with three distinct areas. A sessile polyp was located in the proximal anal canal (near the anorectal line) , a villous-appearing lesion in the middle of the anal canal (near the dentate line) and a depressed hard lesion from the inferior part of the anal canal to the anal verge . Endoscopic biopsy showed adenocarcinoma in situ, well-differentiated adenocarcinoma, and mucinous carcinoma with invasive proliferation at the site of each lesion. No metastatic lesions were found on computed tomography (CT) scan. Pelvic magnetic resonance imaging scan showed extramural growth of a tumor on the ventral side of the rectum; however, there was no invasion to the prostate .
The lesion was felt to be resectable and laparoscopic abdominoperineal resection was performed. Intraoperatively, the tumor was found tightly adherent to the dorsal surface of the prostate, necessitating the removal of a portion of the prostate. The tumor measured 3.0 × 3.5 × 1.5 cm . Histopathologic evaluation showed a malignant neoplasm with goblet-like cells. Malignant cells with nest formation were found from the submucosa to the adventitia and invaded into the anal verge. Components of well-differentiated adenocarcinoma were also found in the mucosa. These goblet-like cells showed lymphatic invasion, venous invasion, and perineural invasion ; however, a well-differentiated component did not show any microscopic invasive features. The surgical resection margins were negative for malignant cells. Goblet-like cells stained positive for CK7, CK20, CAM5.2, synaptophysin, CD56 (weak), chromogranin A (a few), CDX-2, Ki-67 (only peripheral areas in the nests), CEA, MUC2, MUC5AC(a few), and negative for serotonin and somatostatin by immunohistochemistry. Ras and BRAF were wild types. Adenocarcinoma components stained positive for CK20, CDX-2, Ki-67, and CEA . The final diagnosis was well-differentiated adenocarcinoma in the mucosa and GCC from the submucosa to the adventitia of the rectum. The patient was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 16.
Six months postoperatively, a CT scan revealed multiple metastatic lesions in the liver . Although there is no established chemotherapy regimen for goblet cell carcinoid, the patient was initially treated with 4 courses of 5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin (FOLFOX), and bevacizumab . As a second regimen, capecitabine + oxaliplatin + bevacizumab (CapeOX) were selected. After 17 courses of CapeOX, the progression of the liver metastases was noted. As a third regimen, irinotecan plus oral S-1 (a combination of tegafur, 5-chloro-2, 4-dihydroxypyridine, and potassium oxonate) + bevacizumab was used, and 5 courses have been given to date. The liver disease is now stable, 27 months postoperatively.