A 38-year-old woman originally from the Middle East received referral to the Department of Clinical Genetics after moving to Finland at the age of 37 years. She had a clinical diagnosis of neurofibromatosis 1. Skin freckles were observed in the upper body along with six café au lait spots, large plexiform neurofibroma was observed in the right sided chest area which was surgically removed at the age of 37 years. Neurological status was normal. Patient is 142 cm tall.
Patient was evaluated with native radiographs, computer tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Severe dystrophic kyphoscoliosis was present in the plain radiographs. Imaging revealed severe kyphoscoliosis with major scoliosis curve in the thoracolumbar region of 80 degrees and a marked kyphosis. Thoracic height (T1-T12) was 185 mm. MRI scan revealed three masses in the abdominal cavity which were suspected as neurofibromas. Anomaly in T12 vertebra and severe lumbar vertebra rotation was observed in CT and MRI scans. Patient had no spinal tumors and no compression of the spinal cord.
Patient had worn an orthopedic cast at the age 3 to 4 for early onset scoliosis. Operative treatment was suggested but the family had refused the treatment. Currently, the patient is able to walk for 10 minutes before muscle cramps forces her to rest. Patient has pain in the lower extremities and experienced shortness of breath during minor physical performance. Patient does not experience back pain at rest or when moving. Patient manages light physical activities and work but lifting of heavy objects is not possible and rotational movements are not recommended. The patient was recently evaluated by an orthopedic surgeon in our university hospital. Despite the marked deformity, surgical treatment was not recommended to the patient as it would be unlikely to improve the symptoms. Patient is being monitored for progression of the deformity. Patient did not either want surgical treatment. Physiotherapy was organized for the patient. Spinal deformity has not progressed during the 6-year follow-up in Finland .
At the age of 37 patient was diagnosed with ductal breast carcinoma. The carcinoma was estrogen, progesterone receptor, and HER2 positive by immunohistochemistry. Patient was treated with surgery (mastectomy and reconstruction) combined with radiotherapy and adjuvant therapy. Patient has remained disease free.
The patient’s mother and aunt have reportedly similar clinical signs and symptoms suggesting NF1. None of the family members had severe scoliosis. There were no other breast cancer cases in the near family. Family members did not participate in NF1 genetic investigations.