The patient is a 72-year-old immunocompetent Han Chinese man who had repeated dry cough for more than half a year. The patient had chronic hepatitis B for more than 10 years, and was now taking lamivudine tablets 100 mg/d and adefovir dipivoxil capsules 10 mg/d for antiviral treatment. The patient had no immune abnormalities, no extensive used of hormones or antibiotics, no history of poultry exposure, no history of recent travel, and no smoking and alcohol consumption history. Physical examination revealed decreased breath sounds at the left lung. His heart rate was 88 beats per minute, blood pressure 130/63 mmHg, breath 19 times per minute, and temperature 36.3 °C. Laboratory data showed cytokeratin 19 ragment (Cyfra21–1) was 5.69 μg/L higher than normal, and the other was show no significant differences.
CT of his chest showed multiple nodules and an irregular mass at the left hilum of the lung . The irregular mass measured 4 × 3 cm, with unclear boundary, fine burrs and shallow lobes. CT also revealed left upper lobe bronchial stenosis and distal obstruction, with a few small segmental patchy shadows at distal upper lobe of the left lung. One 1.0 × 0.8 cm nodule with unclear boundaries, no obvious lobulation and burr signs, and no calcification was located in the subpleural area of the posterior segment of the upper lobe of the right lung. Another 1.2 × 0.9 cm nodular with lobular depression and adjacent vascular aggregation, but no obvious thickening was located in the subpleural region of the dorsal segment of the right lower lobe. Those two nodules in the right lung will have disappeared 5 years later . The patient was initially diagnosed with left central lung cancer with intrapulmonary metastasis based on the CT findings.
On the third day of hospitalization, bronchoscopy revealed bronchial stenosis and a mass in the upper left lung, which was pathologically confirmed as squamous cell carcinoma.
In order to evaluate the staging of lung cancer and select appropriate treatment, CT-guided percutaneous lung biopsy was performed on one of the nodules located in the lower lobe of the right lung on the 8 day of hospitalization. Puncture histopathology confirmed that the nodule puncture was cryptococcus infection of the lung .
Two weeks later, the patient underwent resection of the left lung cancer. One 15 × 10 × 4.5 cm lobe of lung tissue was surgically resected, containing a 4 × 3 × 3.5 cm mass, that had been seen adjacent to the bronchotomy margin without clear boundary of section gray matter. The neoplastic cells were arranged in sheets, nests, and cords with extensive necrosis, infiltrative growth, recidivism of the bronchial wall, and the tendency of single cells to become keratinized. No metastatic carcinoma was found in lymph nodes (0/15), with negative bronchial resection margin. There were polykaryotic giant cells and epithelioid cells in the lung tissue next to the mass. Vacuoles or round bodies were seen in the cytoplasm with focal necrosis. Another 0.3 × 0.5 cm gray nodule was seen below the pulmonary membrane, which was PAS staining positive. The final pathological results were medium-low differentiation squamous cell carcinoma, with nodule formation, no lymph node metastasis (0/15), negative bronchial resection margin, and concurrent cryptococcal infection .
In addition, the patient underwent a period of antifungal treatment with fluconazole 400 mg/d for 6 months. After discharged from hospital, the patient did not received good follow-up observation until we found that CT examination revealed tumor recurrence 5 years after lung cancer surgery, but two pulmonary cryptococcus nodules had disappeared.