A 70-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for ileus and uncontrollable high blood pressure. His systolic blood pressure exceeded 160 mmHg, and oral diltiazem and amilodipin were initiated 5 days before the onset of ileus. Computed tomography showed a left adrenal mass and ileus . His consciousness level was low with incoherent speech. His body temperature was 37.4 °C, pulse rate was 126 bpm, blood pressure was 210/146 mmHg, and SpO2 was 98 % on room air. He appeared to be sweating profusely, with cold moist peripheries. Electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm tachycardia and short PQ, high voltage, mitral P, and negative T on V4–6. Abdominal radiography showed large intestine expansion due to gas. Initial laboratory data showed low thrombocyte count (74,000/μL), normal white blood cell count (6000/μL), high levels of hemoglobin (16.3 g/dL), C-reactive protein (9.30 mg/dL), serum glucose (201 mg/dL), and blood urea nitrogen (48 mg/dL), and normal level of serum creatinine (1.05 mg/dL). Amino-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide was extremely high at 13,938.0 ng/mL.
We suspected pheochromocytoma on the basis of his computed tomography findings and clinical features. Doxazosin (2 mg/day orally), nicardipine (1.5 μg/kg/h i.v.), and landiolol (200 mg/day i.v.) were administered for blood pressure control. Because of the high fever, we suspected necrotizing enteritis due to ileus. Therefore, intravenous antibiotics were administered. Moreover, creatinine kinase and lactose dehydrogenase increased rapidly to 7066 and 609 IU/L, respectively. At that time, his body temperature was 40.1 °C. His respiratory state was aggravated after 3 days in the hospital, and oxygen was started. Laboratory tests showed that renal and liver functions were deteriorating. Five days after hospitalization, tracheal intubation was performed in the intensive care unit. Artificial ventilation and continuous hemodiafiltration were started.
The patient was diagnosed with PMC on the basis of the clinical course and radiological findings, without considering serum catecholamine levels. We performed emergency left adrenalectomy despite his critical condition, as he showed poor control and was refractory to medical treatment. Intraoperatively, the anesthesiologist used several types of antihypertensive drugs including doxazosin, landiolol hydrochloride, and diltiazem as necessary. Although temporary blood pressure was reduced to 80/46 mmHg after removal of the adrenal gland, the patient’s vital signs stabilized quickly after catecholamine infusion.
Postoperatively, the patient’s blood catecholamine levels intraoperatively were: epinephrine 10,351 (normal range ≤100 ng/mL), norepinephrine 27,654 ng/mL (normal range 100–450 ng/mL), and dopamine 209,500 ng/mL (normal range ≤20 ng/mL). The patient recovered rapidly postoperatively. One day postoperatively, his body temperature normalized. Furthermore, lactose dehydrogenase, creatinine kinase, liver function, respiratory status, and consciousness began to improve. He was weaned from ventilatory support at 2 days postoperatively, and from continuous hemodiafiltration and catecholamine administration at 3 days postoperatively. He was discharged 37 days postoperatively. Various imaging examinations including computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging were performed during hospitalization to reconfirm the absence of metastatic mass. He has had no tumor recurrence or metastasis for 2 years.
The resected tumor was 12 × 11 × 8 cm in size and weighed 530 g, with prominent central necrosis and internal bleeding . Histologically, the tumor had a capsule and was comprised of basophilic granular cells with polygonal features . On immunohistochemistry, the specimen stained positive for chromogranin A, NCAM, and S100. Therefore, the tumor was identified as a pheochromocytoma. The cell proliferation index measured using an anti-Ki-67 antibody was 9.7 % .