A 43-year-old male was brought to the Emergency Department (ED) with a left-sided hemiparesis and mixed aphasia. He had a long-term history of end-stage renal failure on hemodialysis with difficult vascular accesses because of infection-related devices (two failed prosthetic arteriovenous grafts in the upper arms, loss of a cuffed catheter in the left subclavian vein and several losses of non-tunneled catheters). On presentation, vital signs were a heart rate of 110 beats/min., respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min., axillary temperature of 38 °C (100.4°F), blood pressure of 160/90 mmHg and pulse oxygen saturation of 96% breathing on room air. Glasgow Coma Scale was 12/15 (M: 5; E: 3; V: 4), with mixed aphasia and left-sided hemiparesis. Several petechiae were found in conjunctivae and in the hands and feet. The patient had a non-cuffed hemodialysis catheter placed in the right femoral vein that was used for renal replacement therapy. Relevant data on blood analysis were a hemoglobin level of 7 g/dL, platelet count of 16,000 per microliter, a prothrombin time of 18 s and a fibrinogen level of 130 mg/dL (overt disseminated intravascular coagulation). Two sets of blood cultures were taken at admission. Cranial computed tomography showed a right-sided parietal and occipital lobe infarcts. A point-of-care transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed a non-dilated left ventricle with moderate impairment of the systolic function. A pedunculated oscillating mass measuring 22 mm × 13 mm was attached to the atrial side of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve which triggered a severe mitral regurgitation . Also, a fixed mass measuring 18 mm × 10 mm was observed attached to the atrial side of the posterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve; minor tricuspid regurgitation was noted . Aortic and pulmonary valve leaflets were thin, with no stenosis or regurgitation. Left ventricle filling pressure was elevated. Size and systolic function of the right ventricle were normal. Based on the whole clinical picture and POCUS-TTE findings, the diagnosis of infective endocarditis (IE) was first considered. He started on vancomycin and meropenem. Subsequently, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus grown in blood cultures and IE was therefore confirmed. Given the lack of cardiovascular surgery capabilities in the hospital and that the patient rapidly developed into an irreversible shock, he died shortly thereafter.