Our patient was a 30-year-old female from Southern India who had initially reported to a local general practitioner with complaints of fever, multiple episodes of vomiting and cough with expectoration for 5 days. She was treated with oral antibiotics (amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 625 mg oral twice daily), but she continued to have fever spikes (mild to moderate grade with Tmax of 102.6℉). On admission and evaluation in a local hospital, she was diagnosed to have accelerated hypertension (200/110 mm of hg), moderate thrombocytopenia (60,000/mm3). While she was being managed with intravenous fluids and antihypertensive medications (labetalol 2 mg/min intravenous infusion), she developed sudden onset of visual disturbances and had a drop in sensorium. Computed Tomography scan brain revealed ill-defined areas of parenchymal oedema in left parieto-temporal lobe white matter, left ganglio-capsular and left hippocampal regions .
Magnetic resonance imaging brain revealed ill-defined T2/ FLAIR hyperintense signals in left parieto temporal region, multiple small foci of restricted diffusion in the left frontoparietal, parasagittal region, multiple small patchy FLAIR hyperintense lesions were seen in bilateral frontoparietal subcortical white matter, left thalamus, bilateral basal ganglion, splenium of the corpus callosum on the left side and bilateral perioptic space widening with partial empty sella. All these features were suggestive of atypical PRES or acute demyelinating encephalomyelitis.
She was treated with anti-epileptics (levetiracetam 500 mg twice daily), antihypertensive medications (labetalol 100 mg twice daily oral) and glucocorticoids (methylprednisolone 500 mg intravenously for 1 day). She was shifted to our hospital for further management. Her past medical history was notable for an aborted twin pregnancy and gestational hypertension about three years ago. She denied a history of any other co-morbidity. Her family history and psychosocial history was unremarkable. Physical examination was notable for pallor, tachycardia, and elevated blood pressure (190/100). She was drowsy but arousable with Glasgow coma scale/score of 14/15 (E3V5M6) at the time of admission. Neurological examination was notable for bilateral extensor plantar response. Cranial nerves, motor, sensory and other deep tendon reflexes examination were normal. Baseline blood investigations were notable for anaemia (Haemoglobin—8.2 g/dl), moderate thrombocytopenia (platelet count—51,000/mm3), and mild hypokalemia (serum K+—3.1 meq/l).
Blood and urine cultures were sent, and she was started on empirical antibiotics (ceftriaxone 2 g twice-daily intravenous and oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily), antihypertensives (labetalol 2 mg/min infusion followed by 100 mg twice daily oral) and anti-epileptics (levetiracetam 500 mg orally twice daily). Infective workup done was negative (Dengue, malarial parasite (quantitative buffy coat test), H1N1 polymerase chain reaction test and Scrub typhus IgM enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay test). Guarded lumbar puncture was done to rule out infective causes of encephalomyelitis after discussing with the neurologist and infectious diseases specialist. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis (CSF) was non-contributory. (CSF was colourless, clear, no red blood cells or white blood cells were seen, Glucose was 64 mg/dl, protein was 41.1 mg/dl, GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay, Herpes simplex virus 1 & 2 real time polymerase chain reaction test were negative and CSF culture did not show any significant growth). Blood and urine cultures did not show any significant growth. Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome workup was negative. Antinuclear antibody by indirect immunofluorescence assay was positive (1:40 dilution, Intensity—4+, pattern nuclear coarse speckled). Anti-double-stranded DNA was negative, and extractable nuclear antigen antibodies profile was positive for Sm/RNP and negative for Sm. She was finally diagnosed to have posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) with underlying mixed connective tissue disorder. She recovered completely with antihypertensives (T. Metoprolol XL 25 mg PO BD) and anti-epileptics (T. Levetiracetam 500 mg PO BD). Repeat platelet count done on Day 4 of admission was normal (2, 64,000 cells/mm3). She was discharged with a plan to continue antihypertensive medications (T. Metoprolol XL 25 mg oral twice daily). She was reviewed as an outpatient after 6 weeks, and she was doing well. Follow-up MRI of Brain done after six weeks as outpatient showed resolution of oedema . After discussing with patient and family in detail, our plan, in this case, was strict blood pressure control, watch out for MCTD manifestations by regular follow up.