This 79-year-old man presented to his local hospital in May 2007 with a 2-month history of a chronic non-productive cough, weight loss of 1.5 stone (9.5 kg) over 1 month, anorexia and general malaise. Other gastrointestinal or respiratory symptoms were absent. Examination was consistent with the finding of a left-sided pleural effusion and of note, abdominal exam was normal. An admission chest X-ray showed a left-sided pleural effusion with basal collapse. His inflammatory blood markers were also elevated (WCC 21.3, CRP 286). He was commenced on intravenous antibiotics but showed little improvement after 3 days of treatment, at which point a computed tomographic (CT) scan of the thorax and abdomen was performed. The CT showed a loculated pleural effusion consistent with an empyema plus thickening of the pleura and diaphragm as well as an abnormal thickened splenic flexure adjacent to the diaphragm . The patient was subsequently transferred for further management.
On the day of transfer, the patient was taken to theatre for pleural decortication. A posterolateral thoracotomy was performed and the abscess collection was evacuated. A small perforation of the diaphragm was also found and it was established that the abscess cavity was extending through the diaphragmatic defect . At this point a laparotomy was performed. It was found that the patient had a locally perforated splenic flexure tumour, which had formed a collection that communicated with the thorax and also invaded the spleen. The tumour, along with the adherent spleen was removed and a transverse colostomy and distal mucus fistula were fashioned. An omental patch was used to close the defect in the diaphragm.
The patient made an uneventful postoperative recovery and was discharged from hospital 15 days after the operation having received the relevant vaccinations. Pathological assessment showed a Dukes B moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with the pathological staging of T4 N0 M1. The label of M1 is derived from the fact that the thorax was breached. Adjuvant chemotherapy has been scheduled.