An 18-year-old female patient was admitted to the endocrinology unit for assessment and preoperative management of a retroperitoneal PG. The patient's past medical history was significant for psoriasis since age 2, for which she has been getting an association of betamethasone and salicylic acid. The patient also reports a history of functional colopathy for the past 3 months. No other significant history of endocrine or tumoral conditions was reported. The patient has been suffering from recurring episodes of excessive perspiration and palpitations over the past 4 years, associated with other symptoms of hypertension such as headaches and tinnitus. The patient also reported multiple episodes of recurrent right-sided abdominal pain worsening over the past year.
Her physical exam upon admission was normal with a BMI (Body Mass Index) = 21.8 kg/m2, a BP (blood pressure) = 130/90 mmHg bilaterally (no postural hypotension was noted), and a heart rate (HR) =88 beats per minute (bpm). The cutaneous examination showed facial erythrosis and eczematous lesions of the upper and lower extremities. No pigmentation disorders nor cutaneous superficial neurofibromas were noted. EKG analysis showed a sinus rhythm and a left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed no adrenal abnormalities but a 7.0 x 5.0 cm tissular-like retroperitoneal mass in contact with the abdominal aorta and the inferior vena cava, intimately related and displacing anteriorly the head of the pancreas . Abdominal MRI and elevated urinary methylated metabolites of catecholamines (Metanephrine = 3.2 μmol / 24h (normal range (NR) 0.2 to 1), Normetanephrine = 47.5 μmol / 24 h (NR: 0.4 to 2.1)) confirmed the diagnosis of catecholamine-secreting retroperitoneal PG.
Twenty-four hours after admission, the patient developed a cardiogenic shock. Her initial vital signs were as follows: Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) = 14 (E4 V4 M6), BP = 82/46 mmHg, HR = 150 bpm, a respiratory rate at 25 cycles per minute with a SpO2 (peripheral oxygen saturation) at 60% with cold distal extremities and cyanosis. Capillary blood glucose was 150 mg/dl. Fluid resuscitation using 500 ml of Ringer Lactate solution and oxygen through high concentration mask were both promptly started and the patient was transferred to the ICU.
On admission, clinical assessment showed signs of heart failure, elevated troponin, and lactates markers and an EKG revealed sinus tachycardia with a frequency of 130 bpm. The patient was hypoxic with a SpO2 at 95% under 9 L/min of oxygen. Two right femoral central lines were placed (venous and arterial) and the patient was started on Noradrenalin (at a rate of 0.5 μg/kg/min). An echocardiography revealed a global hypokinesia with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) at 15%, requiring the patient to be put on 15 μg/kg/min of Dobutamine as inotropic support.
Seeing how the patient was in no shape to undergo open surgery, we opted for a preoperative radiological percutaneous transarterial embolization (TAE), under local anesthesia. It consisted of coiling of four major feeding vessels, 2 arising from the right renal artery and 2 more from the lumbar arteries (L2 and L3), using hydrogel with Polyzene®-F coating microparticules . The patient was gradually weaned off catecholamines during embolization. She was completely weaned off vasoactive drugs in the next 24 hours. 48 hours after embolization, a follow-up echocardiography showed an overall normokinetic left ventricle (LV), an improved FEVG at 50%, and an aortic VTI (velocity time integral) at 20m/s. Lactate levels went back to normal over the next 48 hours. In the postembolization period, the patient experienced several nonsymptomatic hypertension peaks (systolic blood pressure (SBP) = 220mmHg) and received intravenous nicardipine at a rate of 5 mg/H. The extremities warmed up and the daily urine output was maintained.
Three days after embolization, the patient was taken to the operating room for the tumor to be surgically removed through a right subcostal approach. Perioperative exploration found a retroperitoneal soft encapsulated tumor measuring 7.0 cm in diameter, in intimate contact with the abdominal aorta, the right renal vein, and the inferior vena cava . Embolization caused no complications. The tumor's adhesions were carefully released from adjacent organs including the right kidney, the duodenum, and the head of the pancreas. There was no need to place a double J ureteral stent preoperatively. Upon manipulation of the mass, there was moderate elevation in the blood pressure that was controlled with intravenous propranolol and nicardipine. A complete resection of the tumor was performed and no adjacent organs were removed or injured during the surgery .
The patient experienced episodes of hypotension after the tumor excision and received intravenous noradrenaline at a rate of 0.3 μg/kg/min. The patient was then transferred back to the ICU and extubated in fast track manner. She was weaned off vasoactive drugs in the following 6 hours.
sums up the lab work-up of the patient during her stay.
During close ICU monitoring, the patient presented several episodes of hypoglycemia and hypokalemia and was given intravenous supplementation of glucose and potassium. A postoperative echocardiography showed a hyperkinetic myocardium with an enlarged LV, an IVS (interventricular septum) measuring 13 mm, a lateral wall measuring 14 mm, and a much improved LVEF at 70%.
The patient was subsequently discharged after spending 4 days in the ICU and transferred to a general surgery service. Pathological report of the tumor mass confirmed the diagnosis of benign extra-adrenal PG. A one-month echocardiography follow-up noted nothing significant. She now completely recovered and is back to her daily life.