A 22-year-old male patient from Kabul, Afghanistan, presented himself to our oculoplastic clinic at Farabi Eye Hospital. He reported a five-month history of progressive proptosis in his left eye, which had been associated with a gradual decrease in vision over the past three weeks. The patient experienced very mild pain. He had a negative past medical history.
Upon ophthalmic examination, the patient’s visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/200 in the left eye. The left eye exhibited proptosis, upward globe dystopia, ocular motility limitation in all gazes, mild conjunctival injection, and mild chemosis . The fundus examination showed severe disc swelling (Frisen grade 5) . A relative afferent pupillary defect of 2 + was noted. Exophthalmos, measured using the Hertel exophthalmometer, was 17 mm in the right eye and 21 mm in the left eye. The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 17 mmHg in both eyes. The examination of the right eye yielded normal results. The patient’s medication history included amoxicillin/clavulanate, prednisolone, and metronidazole, which were previously prescribed by another physician.
A paranasal-orbital CT scan revealed a large, oval, well-defined, thin-walled, homogenous cystic mass measuring approximately 36 × 25 mm . This mass was positioned inferior to the globe in the left inferior rectus muscle . It was observed to compress the optic nerve near the apex of the orbit, causing significant upward globe displacement. No bone erosion was detected. An orbital MRI showed that the cystic lesion was hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images, with marginal ring enhancement following contrast injection . The patient’s laboratory tests, including a complete blood count and thyroid function tests, were within normal limits.
An inferior transconjunctival orbitotomy was initiated by creating an incision 4 mm below the inferior tarsal border and dissecting towards the inferior orbital rim. Further dissection was performed in a pre-periosteal plane to gain access to the cyst, which was embedded within the fibers of the inferior rectus muscle. Given the large size of the cyst, which prevented further exposure, needle aspiration of the cystic fluid was performed as an initial step, during which a total of 15 cc were aspirated. Then, the fibers of the inferior rectus muscle were then carefully displaced to facilitate direct access to the cyst. The cyst wall was delicately excised, ensuring the preservation of its integrity . Post-excision, the surgical field was irrigated with a hypertonic saline solution. Hemostasis was achieved, and the conjunctiva was sutured using 8 − 0 Vicryl. An antibiotic ointment was applied to the eye, and the excised specimen was sent for histopathological evaluation. There were no post-op complications.
The pathology slides and cytology of the hydatid cyst biopsy revealed a cystic structure, evident in the hematoxylin and eosin stain slides . This structure comprised an outer acellular eosinophilic laminated membrane connected to a transparent germinal membrane, which was nucleated. The germinal membrane exhibited budding protoscolices. Additionally, a daughter cyst with protoscolices, identifiable by its sucker and refractile hooklets, was observed. The cytology smear from the cyst aspiration further confirmed the presence of these protoscolices.
The patient was discharged one day after the surgery with a prescription for systemic albendazole (15 mg/kg/day, divided into two doses) to be taken over 28 days. Subsequently, a chest CT scan and abdominal ultrasonography showed no suspected lesions in either the chest or abdomen.
One-week post-operation, the patient exhibited complete resolution of the proptosis, and his vision improved to 20/30 . Ocular motility showed significant improvement, with a residual diplopia only in the downgaze. After one month, the patient’s vision further improved to 20/20, there was a -2 limitation supraduction, and the optic disc swelling had significantly resolved to a Frisen grade 1 . By 3 months post-operation, there was no limitation in ocular motility. During a telephonic follow-up conducted 10 months post-surgery, the patient reported experiencing no abnormalities. The patient will continue to be monitored on a yearly basis to inspect for any signs of recurrence.