A 69-year-old male patient was referred to our pain management clinic with a chief complaint of severe pain in both upper extremities. When he was 49 years old, he had a severe traffic accident and was rushed to the hospital. After examination, he was diagnosed with cervical ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament, for which he had no relevant medical history. He underwent a C3–C6 laminoplasty immediately post-injury. However, his complete bilateral lower extremity paralysis and incomplete upper limb paralysis, as well as his severe upper limb pain symptoms persisted and he was diagnosed with C4 SCI (American Spinal Injury Association Impairment Scale A) . He was prescribed various medications including antiepileptics, antidepressants, and weak opioids, those analgesics did not sufficiently relieve his pain. He underwent rehabilitation once a week to prevent joint contractures.
On presentation to our institution, his spontaneous, sharp electrical intermittent pain lasted between several minutes to half an hour and recurred in both upper extremities multiple times daily. The pain severely interrupted the patient’s sleep and quality of life (QOL), with a maximum pain score of 10 and a minimum of 7 on the numerical rating scale (NRS; 0–10). Although he maintained spontaneous breathing, he required maximum assistance with activities of daily living such as feeding and cleaning himself. He had paresthesia in C5–Th3 and sensory paralysis below T4. Manual muscle testing of the bilateral biceps and deltoid muscles revealed scores of 2–3/5, and his lower extremities showed complete paralysis. Muscle atrophy and edematous change were observed in his bilateral upper extremities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spinal cord revealed a high-intensity lesion in the C3–C4 spinal cord . Although a T1 transforaminal epidural block reduced his pain to NRS 4, the effect was temporary. Therefore, his pain was considered an at-level SCI neuropathic pain, entailing both peripheral and central neuropathic pain. This patient was deemed a good candidate for SCS; therefore, we opted to perform an SCS surgical trial and implantation, and two 8-electrode epidural trial leads (Vectris™ SureScan™ MRI percutaneous leads, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) were implanted. Epidural access was obtained at the T6/7 interlaminar space. We had planned to position the tip of the leads at the target cervical dorsal column to obtain paresthesia in the painful region; however, the lead tips were placed at T1 because of epidural space adhesions at the cervical level . We tried sub-perception SCS stimulation (1-kHz frequency, 90-μs pulse width) as a trial stimulation for 7 days, and the patient experienced > 50% pain improvement (NRS range, 3–5). Hence, he underwent permanent implantation of a pulse generator (Intellis, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) in a subcutaneous pocket in the left abdominal region. One month after implantation, the patient’s pain intensity further improved to an average NRS of 3. His sleep and QOL significantly improved. At a 12-month follow-up, the patient did not report any increase in pain. Figure shows the patient’s progress in terms of pain scores and sleep quality.