A 52-year-old female achondroplasia patient (body height 130 centimeters) was referred for orthopaedic treatment with a symptomatic leg length difference after bilateral total hip arthroplasty. Her medical history contained psoriasis and atopic dermatitis, as well as several orthopedic operations in the course of her underlying disease. During childhood and adolescence, she had undergone several surgical procedures due to recurrent bilateral dislocation of the patella including bilateral varus osteotomy of the distal femur. Apart from orthopedic issues, no other complications from achondroplasia were apparent.
Dysplastic cox arthrosis affecting both hip joints had been treated with bilateral hip replacement surgery. The first prosthesis was implanted on the right hip without any perioperative complications eight years prior to presentation at our clinic. Hip replacement surgery on the left side was carried out six years after total hip arthroplasty on the right side. A postoperative overlength of five centimeters of the left femur resulted whereas prior to the procedure the leg length had been balanced out.
At our clinic, the patient presented with a limping gait pattern and complained about constant pain in the left hip ¡oint as well as intense and motion dependent lower back pain. Activities of daily living were possible only with extreme difficulty. A heel elevation of three centimeters had been tried temporarily on the right side, but did not prove to be sufficient for the patient. Both hip implants were found to be stable with no radiological signs of loosening. A postoperative overlength of the left femur (70 centimeters versus 65 centimeters) was apparent while the tibiae were of approximately equal length with both leg axes in slight (normo)-varus positions.
The patient had become well adapted to her short stature during lifetime and did not feel any strain for increasing her body height. Now she was eager to cope with everyday life again - as she had been before her second total hip arthroplasty. The possible therapeutic options were evaluated and discussed with the patient. We advised for right leg lengthening. The patient strongly opposed and refused the operation, mentioning friends with short stature history who underwent lengthening procedures. She did not want to “suffer the same complications” and lengthening treatment schedule.
Informed consent for a distal femoral shortening osteotomy of the left lower limb was obtained. Shortening of the distal femur by five cm was performed using a Low Compression Plate with angle stability (LCP DF, Synthes, Solothurn, Switzerland) for osteotomy fixation. There were no perioperative complications. In the postoperative course, the patient was instructed in 15 kilograms weight bearing and was mobilized with full range of motion. The patient was discharged in good medical condition with clean wound conditions four days after surgery. At the follow-up six weeks later, the patient presented with a balanced leg length. Three month after surgery the osteotomy was healed and the patient was allowed full weight bearing. Walking without crutches was reached four months after the operation.
One year after surgery, the control radiograph showed a fully consolidated osteotomy. In the gait analysis, the gait pattern was normal showing no signs of instability and the patient managed walking on uneven ground without difficulty. The straight leg raise test was performed without any signs of a muscular deficit. During the chair rising test, neither assistance nor support by the upper extremity was needed. Active bending of the knee joint was performed with good muscular strength. The patient was entirely satisfied with the postoperative result.