A 52-year-old woman presented with the symptoms of abdominal distension and increasing abdominal girth.
Because of decreased appetite, the patient was referred to our hospital for further evaluation.
The patient had a rheumatoid arthritis history for 18 years. She also had a diagnosis of superficial gastritis for 2 mo.
There was no family history.
Physical examination revealed the patient had a distended abdomen with a hard and non-tender mass. The mass was approximately 15 cm in diameters with ill-defined margins. Shifting dullness could not be found.
Blood examination was performed. Normal levels of the tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 12-5 (CA12-5), CA19-9, and CA724 were observed. However, an increased CA242 level (25.87 U/mL) was found. Other physical examination results were as follows: Body temperature 37.0 degrees, pulse 80 beats per minute, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, blood pressure 120/70 mmHg, and abdominal gurgling sounds approximately three times per minute. No abnormalities were seen on the ultrasonic cardiogram or gastroscopy. The patient had a relatively unremarkable previous medical history apart from rheumatoid arthritis. She denied any other relevant, specific past medical or family medical history. The urinary and bowel elimination functions were reported to be good. She denied weight loss.
Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CECT) showed a mass in the greater omentum located on the left side of the abdomen, likely to be a cystic mass of peritoneal origin.
Ultrasound indicated that the mass in the left upper and middle abdomen was flocculent, with an internal stripe-like echo . The mass could not be deformed by the probe pressing technique[,]. The space occupying lesion looked like a mucinous mass, on the basis of the flocculent and stripe-like echoes observed in the scan. Subsequently, ultrasound-guided percutaneous aspiration of the cystic lesion revealed hallmark yellow gelatinous material characteristic . These findings, combined with the clinical presentation, suggested a clinical diagnosis of PMP.
Once the PMP diagnosis was recognized, identification of the origin was indicated. Thus, an exploratory laparoscopy was performed. It showed a mass with cystic characteristics and jelly-like content located inside the greater omental cavity. Considering the jelly in the greater omentum, the suspicion of PMP increased in possibility. However, from macroscopic observation, the appendix had an elongated shape with no edema or tumor mass. Nonetheless, complete microscopic tissue examination of the appendix was needed. Considering that appendiceal origin was most likely, appendectomy was performed with the permission of the family. Frozen sections of the excised appendiceal tissue were immediately analyzed during the operation. Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining showed chronic appendicitis obliterans of the tissue .
Women with PMP often have mucinous tumors involving both the appendix and the ovary[,]. Hence, the ovaries were carefully inspected in the patient, which showed negative results. Exploratory laparotomy therefore continued, in the absence of primary tumors from appendix and ovary. The location of jelly in the omental cavity necessitated total omentum removal. During radical greater omentectomy, an extremely sticky mucoid material was observed proximal to the splenic flexure of colon, which was a helpful feature likely signaling the primary origin of the cystic tumor. Besides, it was consistent with the location of the lesion on preoperative CECT imaging. Therefore, the sticky mucoid material was separated. And a mucinous tumor was found located on the anterior lobe of mesocolon on the left part of the splenic flexure of the transverse colon . Omentectomy was performed as the preferred option under this set of conditions.