A 27-year-old male was admitted to hospital emergency due to 4 h of chest pain in 13 January 2016. In fact, he had suffered from fatigue after activity for more than 10 days and felt chest tightness and chest pain for 4 days before admission. The patient, a taekwondo trainee, had a healthy body, and his family history was unremarkable. Emergency aortic computed tomographic (CT) scan showed a thickened aortic wall, bilateral pleural effusion and pericardial effusion . Cardiac colour ultrasound suggested aortic hematoma or dissection . On the basis of the condition and the results of auxiliary examination, the formation of aortic dissection should be considered. The next day, after excluding surgical contraindications, the patient was performed an emergency operation. Cardiac surgeons underwent ascending aortic replacement and aortic arch replacement. They developed postoperative comprehensive treatment measures, including anti-infection, adjustment of cardiac function, nutritional nerve and symptomatic supportive treatment, and the patient recovered well and was discharged after 15 days. The cause of aortic dissection was unclear, although the surgeons extracted arterial tissues and pericardial tissues and sent them for pathological examination. In fact, postoperative pathology of the aortic wall tissue showed aortitis, such as visible necrosis, granulation tissue hyperplasia and a large number of acute and chronic inflammatory cell infiltration . However, the surgeons and the pathologist at the time did not consider the cause of aortitis or aortic dissection due to GPA because of a lack of understanding of GPA-induced aortitis or aortic dissection. This event is one of the starting points of our study. We want to attract the attention of clinicians. GPA is also a common cause of aortitis and even aortic dissection.
On the first day of 2017, the patient was re-examined for aortic CT because of a 6-day fever and right chest pain. He showed a good prognosis in terms of aortic dissection after a review of aortic CT, but we found significantly increasing lesions in his lung, such as flake density increased shadow, less clear boundary, visible cavity and bronchial meteorology . The patient had no renal insufficiency and sinusitis but had eye damage with scleritis. The next day, the patient was readmitted to our hospital. At first, we considered pulmonary infection because of the combination of fever, haemogram, pulmonary shadow and cavitary lesions. Hence, we administered moxifloxacin. After 12 days, we reviewed chest CT again and found that the lung lesions became significantly heavier than before . Moreover, the patient still had intermittent fever, and the infection treatment was ineffective. At the same time, the patient developed conjunctivitis in the left eye and pain in the finger joints. Thus, we started to suspect pulmonary infection. We checked connective tissue disease-related indicators, such as ANCA, anti-nuclear antibody and immune indicators. The proteinase 3 (PR3)-ANCA (c-ANCA) level was 180 IU/mL, and the MPO-ANCA (p-ANCA) level was 10 IU/mL. Rheumatoid factor and anti-O experiments were positive, and anti-nuclear antibody spectrum was negative. We then performed a bronchoscopy, including brush biopsy, bronchoalveolar lavage and transbronchial lung biopsy. The pathological results suggested inflammatory cell infiltration, cellulose exudation and necrosis in clamped lung tissues . However, these pathological changes may be insufficient to diagnose GPA. We therefore carefully re-examined the pathological findings of the patient’s aorta and pericardium one year ago. Surgical biopsies obtained from the aorta and pericardium tissue showed that the epithelioid cells and multinucleated giant cells formed a granuloma , small vasculitis existed in the aorta and cellulose exudation and inflammatory granulation tissue hyperplasia were present in the pericardium .Combining with the two pathological results, clinical manifestations and laboratory tests, we invited a radiologist and a pathologist to perform a multidisciplinary discussion in the initial diagnostic assessment of the patient with suspected GPA. Finally, the diagnosis of GPA was established. Then, immunosuppressive therapy with i.v. steroids (methylprednisolone 40 mg twice daily) and cyclophosphamide 125 mg·day− 1 was initiated. The patient is currently followed up with the above treatment programs. We also adjusted the treatment program according to the patient’s disease progression. At present, the patient recovers well and is in stable condition.