A 49-year-old man was referred to the Oral Medicine Department of the Mashhad Faculty with an intra-oral mass in the left alveolar area. The patient had extracted his first mandibular molar tooth two months ago due to mobility. Afterwards, he noticed a mass in this area. Two other teeth were also extracted during this time as a result of progressive mobility. At the same time, the size of the lesion was increasing.
Intra-oral examination revealed expansion in the mandibular bone and a painless exophytic lesion with a verrucous and granular surface on the left side of the mandibular ridge. The anterior part of this lesion was purple .
The inferior parts were bony hard in consistency; but the alveolar area was firm. The right lateral incisor and left canine tooth both had luxation grade 3. The clinical diagnosis was oral SCC or verrucous carcinoma. Panoramic radiography showed a well-defined radiolucency with sclerotic borders between the left first molar and the right first premolar tooth .The Border was not intact in some areas .
Incisional biopsy was performed under local anesthesia. Histopathological examination of the peripheral lesion revealed malignant neoplastic proliferation of squamous epithelium with up-growth and down-growth that created a cauliflower appearance. The elongated rete ridges appear to push into the underlying connective tissue. The connective tissue in this region was fibrous and inflamed. The histopathological appearance indicates verrucous carcinoma .
In the histopathological evaluation of the central lesion, neoplastic proliferation of the odontogenic epithelium was observed to contain islands of columnar cells with polarized nuclei, which were similar to ameloblasts in the periphery and stellate reticulum-like cells in the center with acanthomatous changes and cystic degeneration. Fibrotic stroma was observed between the neoplastic parts. The histopathological appearance indicates plexiform ameloblastoma .
The patient was referred to the Otolaryngology Department for curative surgery. A midline labiotomy incision with an extension to the left side of the neck was done. The mass was totally exposed by a releasing incision in the gingivo-buccal sulcus. A rim of the inferior border of the left mandible and chin was preserved and the cyst was completely removed with the tumor above it. The final diagnosis was verrucous carcinoma in addition to mural ameloblastoma. Reconstructive surgery was performed with an iliac crest bone graft to repair defects of the jaws. After two years, the recurrence of the lesion was not observed.