A case of young male patients aged 25 years old presented with history injured from falling heavy object on his back. At initial evaluation, he had severe pain on his back with deformity of the vertebrae. He felt numbness and had weakness on this both legs. The physical examination revealed contusion on his back Neurological examination confirmed complete paralysis of L5 and S1 root on both sides. Loss Bladder-bowel function, sphincter tone and perianal sensation.
Radiographic findings Plain radiograph of lumbosacral spine showed the anterior dislocation of L5-S1 spondylolisthesis approximately 75%, with the complete comminuted burst fracture of L5 vertebra Computed tomography revealed a fracture of right lamina and both pedicle of L5. There was retropulsion of communited fragments inside spinal canal causing sever caudal compression.
The patient underwent surgery on emergency basis 6hrs after initial injury. In prone position, standard midline posterior subperiosteal dissection was carried out above & below injured vertebral body. Transpedicular screws were placed into L4 and S1 bilaterally. Because of neurological involvement laminectomy & unilateral facectomy was carried out to decompress thecal sac and roots of L5 and S1. Restoration of the affected vertebral body done by distracting L4 and S1 over screws. Complete discetomy of L4/5 and L5/S1 were undertaken. Conservative Corpectomy to decompress thecal sac and accommodate expandable cage was then performed using large curates, kerisons rongerd and pitutary forcepes while the dura and roots were protected. Hollow of expandable cage filled with cancellous bony chips inserted from left side to achieve fusion. Rest of the defect also filled with bony cancellous chips harvested from local laminectomy. Pedicular screws are connected with rod and singal cross connector. The procedure lasted for 4hr, the blood loss was 1200mls. demonstrate serial images during surgery of pedicle location, screw placement & cage insertion in to achieve vertebral hight. No complication was observed afterward during the admission. Motor power in his lower 2 extremities was still similar to that found initially as well as his sensation. From the , it shows the new alignment of the spine, however, 25% dislocation of the spines would be observed. On the day fifth after the operation, his pain was relieved. The lumbosacral brace was used and wheelchair ambulation was encouraged. He was discharge on the eighth day after the operation.