An 80-year-old male patient who was found to have stomach wall irregularities during routine medical check-up was referred to Keio University Hospital. Endoscopic examination detected a 20-mm protruding lesion in the greater curvature at the middle third of the stomach . The tumor was almost covered by normal mucosa, and the top of the lesion was partly depressed. Narrow-band imaging (NBI) showed the vascular surface pattern to be irregular. Further, EUS showed a thick, low echoic lesion in the second layer of the gastric wall, and the nodular part of the lesion had infiltrated into the submucosa . On the basis of the above findings, we suspected the tumor to be gastric cancer mimicking SMT, similar to linitis plastica of the stomach with SM invasion or a lymphoproliferative disorder such as a malignant lymphoma. However, the endoscopic mucosal, boring, and mucosal-incision-assisted biopsies revealed only a small number of atypical epithelial cells and no malignant cells. Additionally, CT and fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (PET) showed no lymph node metastasis. We diagnosed the tumor to be a gastric submucosal tumor with a high suspicion of malignancy based on the qualitative diagnosis. Therefore, an excisional biopsy was planned. Using endoscopic diagnosis as the reference, ESD was not selected because a conventional radical gastrectomy would have been highly invasive. Instead, we planned a partial gastrectomy using LECS for tumor resection.
To avoid peritoneal dissemination, we chose the modified CLEAN-NET procedure . Since the EUS revealed that the tumor was unlikely to spread laterally, we planned to excise the raised part only. The cutting line was decided to be 4 mm outside of the expected border.
The technical details of this surgery involve (1) detecting the lesion and performing an endoscopic submucosal injection, (2) performing seromuscular dissection around the tumor under laparoscopic view, (3) cutting the mucosal layer using a mechanical stapler , (4) and suturing the seromuscular layer.
The procedure duration was 51 min, blood loss was 0 mL, and there is no perforation of the gastric wall. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. Histopathological analysis of the specimen identified the tumor to be a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, pT4a(SE), Ly1a, V0, negative lateral margins . On the basis of these results, the tumor was classified as pT4a cN0M0 cStage IIB (according to TNM classification, 8th ed.), and an additional radical gastrectomy was planned.
A robotic-assisted distal gastrectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy was performed 6 weeks after the first procedure. The duration of the procedure was 338 min, and the blood loss was 50 mL. Adhesions from the previous procedure were not severe, and the postoperative course was uneventful. At the time of the final pathological diagnosis, there was no metastasis in the regional lymph nodes and no residual carcinoma in the resected stomach. The patient refused adjuvant chemotherapy of S-1 because of his old age and underwent follow-up examinations every 6 months.