A 23-year-old man was transferred from a local hospital due to diarrhoea, thrombocytopaenia, and azotaemia after transfusion with red blood cells to correct anaemia. Three days prior to admission, he developed general malaise, abdominal pain, and diarrhoea. He denied any cutaneous and musculoskeletal symptoms, and his past medical history and family history were unremarkable. On the day of admission, he presented with hypertension (170/110 mmHg). Physical examination has shown pitting oedema in the lower extremities and direct tenderness in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. Table summarises the initial laboratory findings. The patient presented with leukopenia (white blood cell count 3,900/µL), haemolytic anaemia (haemoglobin 9.7 g/dL, haematocrit 29.2 %, and haptoglobin < 10 mg/dL), thrombocytopaenia (platelet 41,000/µL), and azotaemia (blood urea nitrogen 52.9 mg/dL and serum creatinine 2.8 mg/dL). The patient had decreased total protein (4.9 g/dL) and albumin (2.1 g/dL). He showed elevated levels of total cholesterol (202 mg/dL) and triglyceride (236 mg/dL). In addition, the lactate dehydrogenase level was elevated (457 U/L), whereas aspartate/alanine transaminase levels (14/8 U/L) were within normal values. In terms of serum electrolytes, the uric acid level (9.4 mg/dL) was elevated while the sodium (142 mmol/L) and potassium (5.2 mmol/L) levels were normal.
A peripheral blood smear has revealed the presence of schistocytes. Urinalysis has shown proteinuria (4+) with a urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio of 3607.7mg/g and haematuria (many red blood cells/high power fields). Tests for hepatitis B surface antigen and antibody to hepatitis C virus were all negative. Below the normal limits, the serum complement C3 level and C4 level were 29 mg/dL and 3 mg/dL, respectively. Antinuclear antibodies and anti-double-stranded DNA were positive. Negative results were obtained for lupus anticoagulant, anti-cardiolipin IgM/IgG, and anti-β2 glycoprotein 1 IgM, whereas a positive result was obtained for anti-β2 glycoprotein I IgG. ADAMTS13 (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin type 1 motif, member 13) activity was 90 %. Stool examination did not show any Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O157:H7.
Due to the clinical manifestations and laboratory findings, diagnoses of TMA and SLE were made. The time sequence of key events and the clinical course are presented in Fig. . Plasmapheresis was started to treat SLE and TMA. Haemodialysis was initiated due to oliguria and volume overload. The patients received pulse IV methylprednisolone and 500 mg cyclophosphamide every 2 weeks. Although thrombocytopaenia improved, the platelet count (103,000/µL) and kidney function parameters (blood urea nitrogen 59.7 mg/dL, serum creatinine 4.95 mg/dL) were not within normal limits.
On the 15th hospital day, ultrasound-guided percutaneous kidney biopsy was performed. Light microscopy of renal biopsy specimens has shown diffuse proliferative lupus nephritis, class IV-G (active) with mesangiolysis and arteriolar fibrin thrombi indicative of TMA . Immunofluorescence staining has shown a “full-house” pattern (positive for IgG, IgA, IgM, C3, and C1q) in the mesangium and peripheral capillary wall. Based on these renal biopsy findings, a diagnosis of lupus nephritis with TMA was confirmed.
Next-generation sequencing and whole exon sequencing have revealed heterozygous mutation c.1685 C > T (p.ser562Leu) of the C3 gene. The presence of C3 mutation and incomplete response to conventional immunosuppression are consistent with diagnosis of co-existent lupus nephritis and aHUS (complement-mediated TMA). Haemodialysis and cyclophosphamide therapy was discontinued after 10 sessions and 3 administrations, respectively. On the 51st hospital day, treatment was shifted to intravenous eculizumab at an initial dose of 900 mg for four times a week escalated to 1,200 mg every two weeks thereafter. After 32 cycles, there was complete resolution of haemolytic anaemia (haemoglobin 13.7 g/dL, haematocrit 41.8 %, and haptoglobin 119 mg/dL), thrombocytopaenia (platelet count 149,000/µL), and azotaemia (blood urea nitrogen 13.0 mg/dL, serum creatinine 1.10 mg/dL). The lactate dehydrogenase level normalized (154 U/L) and the Urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio (206.4 mg/g) was greatly improved . At the time of writing this report, the patient was taking a 10-mg dose of a corticosteroid daily together with eculizumab therapy.