A previously healthy 9-year-old boy presented with a headache and incipient frontal swelling. After approximately ten days, the headache worsened, and he got a fever. He was then treated with penicillin for seven days, but four days after completion, the symptoms relapsed with increased swelling, pain behind the right eye, and a temperature of up to 40 degrees Celsius. The patient was admitted to an otorhinolaryngologist 24 days after the first onset of symptoms. On physical examination, there was swelling and pain at pressure on the right side of the forehead delimited to both eyebrows down to os nasale. There was no fluctuation, redness, or softness of the skin corresponding to the bone. Neurological examination was normal. The flexible nasoendoscopy was unremarkable, but an ultrasound depicted tissue edema without signs of abscess formation. Due to the uncharacteristic symptoms and clinical findings, a computed tomography (CT) scan of the sinuses (CTDI 1.44 mGy) was performed showing signs of bone erosions in relation to the frontal sinuses, although not visualized in its entirety. The patient was sent for evaluation at the pediatric ward. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI scan was performed, showing slight maxillary, ethmoidal and frontal sinusitis on the left side, osteomyelitis of the frontal bone, and in communication herewith an epidural and periosteal mass with capsular contrast-enhancement compatible with an abscess. Additionally, the contrast-enhanced MR venogram revealed partial obstruction in the anterior third part of the superior sagittal sinus in close relation to the abscesses due to reactive phlebitis without thrombosis. A subsequent CT scan of the cerebrum gave a full visualization of the frontal bone erosion internally on the right side.
Blood analyses showed an increased C-reactive protein level of 29 mg/L (< 8 mg/L) and white blood cell count of 24.2 × 109/L (4.5–12.5 × 109/L) with a neutrophil count of 19.8 × 109/L (1.8–8.9 × 109/L). The patient was diagnosed with PPT and followed a prolonged course of intravenous antibiotic therapy with ceftriaxone and metronidazole. Cultures of blood yielded Streptococcus anginosus. The patient was consulted with the neurosurgery department finding no indication for surgical intervention due to no neurological deficits and the patient’s well-being. After one week of hospitalization the patient went home to continue the intravenous antibiotic treatment for six weeks in total with frequent consultations. On follow-up for two months, the patient was in complete remission, both clinical and radiological.