A 52-year-old woman visited the emergency department because of worsening shortness of breath (SOB) accompanied by new-onset pleuritic substernal chest pain and dizziness. Three days earlier, she was tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction testing of a nasopharyngeal swab specimen. Initially, her symptoms were mild with asthenia, myalgia, and SOB. The patient had no cardiovascular risk factors, no regular medication, and her medical history was unremarkable except for a non-disabling Raynaud Syndrome.
The patient appeared in respiratory distress (respiratory rate 28/min), tachycardic (111 b.p.m.), and with cutaneous signs of hypoperfusion despite preserved arterial blood pressure (120/80 mmHg). Oxygen saturation was 98% on 28% of the inspired oxygen fraction. Cardiomegaly and signs of pulmonary interstitial oedema were observed on the chest X-ray.
The 12-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with small QRS complexes in the peripheral leads without significant repolarization abnormalities . Metabolic acidosis with partial respiratory compensation, hyperlactataemia at 6 mmol/L [upper reference limit (URL) 1.6 mmol/L], and PaO2 of 42 kPa were observed on arterial blood gas . Blood tests showed normal electrolytes, increased inflammatory markers, elevated high sensitive cardiac troponin-T (321 ng/L; URL 14 ng/L), and N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide (8789 ng/L, URL 300 ng/L) . Kidney function was normal (creatinine 53 μmol/L; URL 80 μmol/L) and liver enzymes were slightly elevated (AST 154 U/L, URL 42 U/L; ALT 139 U/L, and URL 42 U/L) .
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a normal-sized left ventricle with severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) at 25%, diffuse hypokinesia, and preserved right ventricular systolic function (, Video 1 and , Videos S1–S3). There was a moderate pericardial effusion (16 mm) with slight compression of the right ventricle but no significant mitral or tricuspid inflow respiratory variations. Despite the absence of clinical signs of tamponade, it was decided after a multidisciplinary meeting to perform pericardiocentesis with the aim to improve the symptoms and low-output state. A total of 150 mL of serous fluid was drained revealing acute and chronic inflammatory cells (214 M/L leucocytes) with a macrophage predominance (72%) on histological analysis. Pericardial fluid analysis showed elevated lactate dehydrogenase (1665 U/L) and albumin (19 g/L). No malignant cells were found, and the culture was sterile.
Despite pericardiocentesis the patient developed progressive circulatory failure at which point Norepinephrine (0.2 μg/kg/min) and Dobutamine (5 μg/kg/min) were initiated. As haemodynamic failed to improve under pharmacologic support, a short-term LV assisted device (Impella CP®) was implanted via a left arterial femoral approach . Coronary angiography revealed normal epicardial coronary arteries . Endomyocardial biopsy of the right ventricle demonstrated no inflammatory infiltration, but rather thrombotic microangiopathy (TMA) of the coronary capillaries with endothelial cell activation (endotheliitis) characterized by enlarged nuclei and capillary thrombosis . Polymerase chain reaction analysis of the samples was negative for SARS-CoV-2 mRNA.
Following Impella CP® implantation and further supported by the hypothesis of a cardiogenic shock due to coronary microcirculatory thrombotic damage, aspirin, and full-dose intravenous anticoagulation were initiated. Six days later, the patient’s haemodynamic profile improved and the Impella CP® assist device could be successfully weaned. There was no significant arrhythmia during the intensive care unit stay. Concomitant respiratory failure, mainly related to SARS-CoV-2 induced acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), required 17 days of orotracheal intubation, antibiotics (iv amoxicillin-clavulanic acid then iv piperacillin/tazobactam), and dexamethasone 6 mg daily for a total of 10 days as proposed in the RECOVERY trial. Apart from the heart and lungs, no other organ was affected by the systemic endothelial cell activation.
The patient was eventually discharged from the intensive care unit after 20 days. Before hospital discharge, TTE revealed a normalized biventricular systolic and diastolic function (, Video 2, ). Cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) confirmed good biventricular function (Video 3) (LVEF and RVEF of 59% and 59%, respectively) and gadolinium enhancement sequences ruled out signs of myocarditis or infarction scars .
The final diagnosis was cardiogenic shock due to transient severe LV dysfunction induced by COVID-19-associated coronary endotheliitis and TMA.