A 30-year-old white woman, gravida 1, para 1, presented to our hospital for scheduled laparoscopy after IUD threads were not visualized on speculum examination during a 6-week placement check. The hormonal IUD had been placed 8 weeks after an uncomplicated cesarean delivery and our patient was concurrently breastfeeding. Pelvic ultrasonography did not show intrauterine placement of the IUD. Subsequent abdominal radiography located the IUD in the left anterior aspect of her pelvis .
She was scheduled for a laparoscopy to remove the IUD. An acorn uterine manipulator was used to assist with visualization, elevation, and movement of her uterus and adnexa during the procedure. It was easily placed into the endocervical canal without complication. A 5 mm infraumbilical incision was made for laparoscopic port placement. A laparoscope was passed through the port to visualize the intraperitoneal cavity. Her fallopian tubes and ovaries appeared normal. A normal appearing, but markedly retroverted uterus was also noted. Laparoscopic exploration of the peritoneal space revealed that the IUD was not in her pelvis or anterior cul-de-sac as originally suspected. Due to retroflexion of the uterus, the uterine manipulator was then used to elevate her uterus. When this was done, the stem of the tip of the uterine manipulator was visualized having perforated the peritoneal cavity at the junction of her cervix and her bladder . Due to the proximity of the perforation to our patient’s bladder, there was concern for possible bladder injury. A Foley catheter was placed and her bladder subsequently distended and distension was maintained. The uterine manipulator was removed, and the area of perforation was noted to be hemostatic. Her bladder was once again filled and adequate distension was visualized.
An intraoperative abdominal kidney-ureter-bladder X-ray (KUB) with fluoroscopic guidance located the IUD anterior to our patient’s left acetabulum, a more superior and lateral position than in the previous abdominal film . The IUD was located in the omentum of her left mid-abdomen using the laparoscope. The IUD was then removed without complication.
Urology was consulted and performed intraoperative cystourethroscopy which revealed no bladder, urethral, or ureteral injury and no evidence of bleeding. Careful laparoscopic visual inspection of intra-abdominal contents revealed no injury to bowel or vasculature. A speculum examination at the conclusion of the procedure revealed a normal appearing cervix. Her postoperative recovery was uneventful.