This is a 15-year-old girl who was referred to our structure, with no previous history who had consulted for pelvic pain over the past 3 months, which had been progressive and of moderate intensity. The young girl had her period at the age of 13, her cycle was regular, she did not have dysmenorrhea and did not report urinary or digestive signs, her secondary sexual characteristics were well developed.
Physical examination showed normal vulva with the whole hymen and a pelvic mass slightly painful. Abdominopelvic ultrasound images revealed a cystic mass.
MRI was performed in three planes in T1 T2 diffusion and Gadolinium injection sequence. The exam confirmed agenesis of the left kidney (, ), the existence of two separate uterine bodies and two separate cervices, with obstructed left Hemivagina and a huge left hematocolpos measuring 105*80*210 mm and left hematosalpinx that confirming the presence of uterus didelphys evoking the syndrome of Herlyn Werner Wunderlich. The both ovaries were normal.
The surgical procedure lasted 1 h, the patient was under general anesthetic in the gynecological position and a urinary catheter was inserted.
When the patient has no sexual activity, it is recommended to try to preserve the hymen, we did not use a speculum.
The first stage of the operation consisted of a very precise examination, followed by the installation of the operating vaginoscopy to explore the two hemivaginas. We found an enormous hematocolpos bulging in the right vagina.
Vaginoscopy incision of the vaginal septum was performed successfully with the monopolar cautery using Collins knife, and the left hematocolpos was evacuated, we then washed abundantly with physiological serum. .
The left cervix was then clearly visualized.
Reflux urine was visualized during the cystoscopy.
The hymen was not injured during the surgery.
Postoperative recovery was without complications. A Pelvic ultrasound was done 3 months later and showed 2 uterine cavities, there was no recurrence of hematocolpos. .