A 33-year-old woman without a significant past medical history, was diagnosed with stage IV subcutaneous panniculitis like T-cell lymphoma in 2011, complicated by hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis. She completed 6 cycles of CHOEP regimen (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, etoposide, vincristine and prednisone) in December 2011. Shortly after completion of the therapy, she relapsed and received multiple salvage regimens including gemcitabine/oxaliplatin, bexarotene/dexamethasone and pralatrexate. She was then initiated on ESHAP regimen; a combination of the chemotherapeutic drugs etoposide, methylprednisolone, a high-dose cytarabine and cisplatin in April 2012, achieving complete response; followed by an allogenic stem cell transplant on June 28, 2012. Since that time, she has been on observation with no evidence of disease recurrence. Subsequent to the treatment, she was found to have high triglycerides (230 mg/dL [2.60 mmol/L] (normal range < 150 mg/dL [1.69 mmol/L]) in 2011, and 613 mg/dL [6.93 mmol/L] in 2013) and loss of fat tissue from her entire body with accompanying muscular prominence. She was also diagnosed with diabetes in 12/2013. Constellation of these findings led to the diagnosis of AGL in 2013.
At her visit in our clinic, her BMI was 24.4 kg/m2. Her leptin level was low at 3.4 ng/mL (182 pmol/mL) (a level of < 4 ng/mL [215 pmol/mL] is accepted as low for women with BMI < 25 kg/m2 despite a wider range provided by some reference labs). Upon obtaining a detailed history, and reviewing her old pictures, it was confirmed that the onset of body fat loss occurred prior to her T-cell lymphoma diagnosis. She also endorsed complaints of hyperphagia and a marked increase in her appetite. Current clinical endocrine problems outside of diabetes and dyslipidemia include increased appetite and hyperphagia, lack of menses and a generalized pain syndrome likely attributable to small fiber neuropathy due to hypertriglyceridemia . Table summarizes her laboratory findings since the diagnosis until her last visit in our clinic. Figure panels a-d show her pictures; before diagnosis (a), at diagnosis of T-cell lymphoma(b), during chemotherapy (c) and after chemotherapy (d).
At her most recent visit, she was doing well and is in remission for T cell Lymphoma. A “fat shadow” representation from her DXA scan (panel a) and her new clinical pictures (panels b-e) are presented in Fig. . For her metabolic complications of her AGL, she is currently not being treated with Metreleptin and this possibility is still under discussion. She is on multiple medications to treat her diabetes, high triglycerides and has been trying to limit her food intake.