A 46-year-old man weighting 176 kg with BMI 53.7 kg/m2 was scheduled for gastric volume reduction surgery to reduce body weight under general anesthesia. The patient was diagnosed of obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) 3 years ago, without treatment. Airway inspection showed short neck with circumference of 51 cm, limited neck extension due to its thick fat and the Mallampatti score-Ш. The patient felt tired preoperatively because of his sleep deprivation secondary to OSA. He was very nervous and refused to consent for awake fiberoptic intubation under sedation.
We elected to perform tracheal intubation after anesthesia induction but keeping patient’s spontaneous breathing to avoid hypoxia, with initial direct laryngoscopy using video laryngoscope, and back up with fiberoptic intubation and then laryngeal mask airway (LMA). Bispectral index (BIS) was used to monitor anesthesia depth.
Vital signs showed Bp 142/79 mmHg, HR 88 bpm, SpO2 96%, RR 22 bpm before anesthesia induction. Midazolam 3 mg and sufentanil 10 μg was given intravenously to reach BIS at 62 for sedation. Thereafter, intravenous 100 mg propofol was given and BIS fell to 51. Mask pressurized ventilation could be performed to maintain SpO2 100% with patient under continuous target controlled infusion (TCI) at propofol 3μg/mL.Direct laryngoscope with video laryngoscope was tried twice but failed because of the invisible glottis obstructed by Huge epiglottis (Grace IIb view). SpO2 fell to 75% at the end of second laryngoscopy. Two hand pressurized mask ventilation was initiated and became difficult, although SpO2 could be maintained around 88% with following vital signs: BP 133/73 mmHg, HR 86 bpm, normal sinus rhythm, BIS 57.We then placed WEI Nasal Jet Tube (WNJ), (Well Lead Medical Equipment Ltd., Guangzhou, China. Production batch number: 20140901) in the patient’s right nostril to provide SJOV. The jet catheter of the WNJ was connected to an automatical jet ventilator-TKR-400 (Well Lead Medical Equipment Ltd.,Guangzhou, China.) with following working parameters: driving pressure (DP) 35 psi, respiratory rate (RR): 55 bpm, I/E ratio 1:3.SpO2 began to rise again and reached 100% at 1 min after initiation of SJOV. Thoracic cage moved ups and downs during SJOV indication of both oxygenation and ventilation. We then administered intravenous rocuranium 60 mg, TCI propofol 4μg/mL and controlled ventilation was achieved using SJOV. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy guided endotracheal intubation was performed via mouth approach. Fiberoptic intubation was difficult due to hypertrophy of the patient’s tongue and epiglottis but eventually succeded 5 min later. The vital signs at the end of successful intubation were as followings: SpO2 100%,BP 125/64 mmHg, HR 71 bpm, sinus rhythm, BIS 45.PetCO2 was not monitored during fiberoptic intubation due to the both Ports being not consistent and hurry to raise oxygenation. However,instant blood gas analysis showed pH 7.36, PaO2 124 mmHg and PaCO2 49 mmHg. Total time of SJOV via WNJ was about 7 min. No obvious barotrauma, nose bleeding etc.,was seen at the end of intubation.
The operation was successfully completed after 3 h. The patient was transferred to the ICU and was extubated in ICU without event. Patient recovered smoothly in hospital for 8 days and did not have any recall inside the operating room.