A 52-year-old male presented with headache for 1 week. The headache was mainly located in the occipital area with paroxysmal onset. The pain was milder in the morning and aggravated in the afternoon. The pain became progressively worse in the first week. The patient had low-grade fever (the highest temperature was 37.6 ℃) and no nausea, vomiting, and limb movement disorder. Nervous system physical examination showed that Kernig’s sign was suspiciously positive, and no other positive signs were found. The patient had a history of upper respiratory tract infection 2 weeks prior to onset. He had no history of other diseases and no history of long-term drug use.
When the patient was first admitted to another hospital, blood tests showed elevated C-reactive protein (CRP, 37.1 mg/L), normal white blood cell count (WBC, 5.3 × 10∧9/L) and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed no abnormalities. The doctor gave cefixime for anti-infection and ibuprofen for anti-inflammatory and analgesic treatment. After four days of treatment, the patient’s headache and fever symptoms were not relieved. Reexamination results on the fourth day showed that CRP was increased to 50.2 mg/L. The patient came to the neurology department of our hospital for further treatment. At admission, blood tests showed CRP levels of 64.8 mg/L (reference range, < 10.0 mg/L), normal leukocytes, and Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 68 mm/H (reference range, 0–15 mm/H). The patient had obvious headache symptoms, and the neurologist considered the possibility of meningitis by combining headache, fever, and suspicious positive Kirschner’s sign. Therefore, acyclovir combined with ceftriaxone was used for anti-infection and symptomatic relief of headache. The neurologist also performed a lumbar puncture to check for cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The intracranial pressure was 215 mmH2O, the number of nucleated cells in cerebrospinal fluid was 0.006 × 10∧9/L(reference range, < 0.008 × 10∧9/L), the glucose level was 4.66 mmol/L(reference range, 2.70–4.20 mmol/L), and the protein level was 402.8 mg/L(reference range, 120.0–400.0 mg/L). Cryptococcus was not found in cerebrospinal fluid, and the result of bacterial culture was negative. No evidence of meningitis was found, and the patient’s headache and fever symptoms did not relieve after two days of treatment.
Other tests were performed, and the results showed thyrotoxicosis. Thyroid-stimulating hormone decreased to 0.046μIU/mL (reference range, 0.350–4.940 μIU/mL), free triiodothyronine (FT3) was 5.31 pg/mL (reference range, 1.58–3.91 pg/mL), free thyroxine (FT4) was 1.61 ng/dL (reference range, 0.70–1.48 ng/dL), and thyroglobulin was elevated to 151.20 ng/mL (reference range, < 77.00 ng/mL). Thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor antibody (TRAb), thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb), and thyroglobulin antibody (TGAb) were negative. Further examination of thyroid color ultrasound showed bilateral diffuse hypoechoic areas , and color Doppler ultrasound first suggested SAT. Thyroid examination was done again, and mild tenderness of the left thyroid was found. Finally, the diagnosis of SAT was made after consultation with an endocrinologist, and methylprednisolone 40 mg was given to the patient. After 1 day of treatment, the patient’s headache was relieved, and his body temperature returned to normal. ESR and CRP returned to normal after 2 weeks of methylprednisolone treatment. Thyroid function returned to normal after 1 month of treatment.