A 35 year old G2, P2 female presented with a two hour history of retrosternal chest discomfort radiating to the jaw, associated with nausea and diaphoresis. She was 7 months post-partum and had no underlying cardiovascular risk factors. On physical examination, the heart rate was 84 bpm with a blood pressure of 115/70 mm Hg. The jugular venous pressure, heart sounds and breath sounds were within normal limits. The initial EKG demonstrated evidence of an acute inferior ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). On coronary angiography, there was evidence of a distal dissection of the left second obtuse marginal (OM2) coronary artery, with no percutaneous options for repair (Figure
A). During the patient’s admission to CCU, the cardiac enzyme levels including creatine kinase and high sensitivity troponin T peaked at 1340 U/L and 3702 ng/L, respectively. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated mild hypokinesis of the basal inferior wall with a left ventricular ejection fraction of 50-55%. As the hematologic and connective tissue disease work-up was negative, the patient was diagnosed with an acute inferior STEMI secondary to spontaneous dissection of the OM2. The patient was appropriately discharged on dual antiplatelet therapy including ASA and Clopidogrel including beta blockade with Metoprolol.
One month later, the patient returned with diplopia and numbness of her left arm and face. Computed tomographic angiography demonstrated a focal 8 mm long dissection of the right vertebral artery in its V1 segment with mild associated aneurysmal dilatation (Figure
B). No other abnormalities were present in the angiogram and repeat TTE was within normal limits. With the diagnosis of spontaneous dissection in two separate vascular territories, including the coronary and vertebral arteries, the patient was investigated with genetic testing to rule out any underlying collagen disorders including Ehlers Danlos and Marfan syndrome, which was within normal limits. The patient was subsequently started on anticoagulation therapy to prevent future spontaneous dissections.