A 63-year-old Thai man with a history of right-sided otorrhea presented with a 2-day history of right abducens nerve palsy and severe headache. His headache began 1 month ago concomitant with right-sided otorrhea. At that time, his otorrhea improved temporarily after taking empirical systemic and otic antibiotics, but the headache did not. Five days prior to presentation, he experienced worsening headache, nausea, and vomiting. Emergency computed tomography (CT) was initially reported as an unremarkable study. Three days later, he developed binocular diplopia in a primary gaze position that worsened when looking to a right gaze. The constant headache had begun with ipsilateral pain in his right frontal and retro-orbital area radiating to his whole head. His medical history was unremarkable with the exception of a right ear radical mastoidectomy performed 30 years previously. He was lost to follow-up and still had persistent right ear discharge.An otoscopy of his right ear revealed mucoid discharge and granulation tissue occupying the middle ear and mastoid cavity, which was inflamed with a high facial ridge . His left ear contained an intact tympanic membrane and a narrowing of the external ear canal. Ophthalmologic examination revealed an isolated right-sided abducens nerve palsy. All other neurological examination findings were unremarkable.
He also had a high erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein level, and white blood cell count with a predominance of neutrophils. Moderate right-sided mixed-type hearing loss was evidenced on audiometry. Ear swab cultures were negative for microorganisms. Biopsy of his right external ear and mastoid cavity revealed only chronic inflammation.A CT scan of his temporal bone confirmed partially opacified right middle ear cavity and mastoid air cells, as a result of chronic otomastoiditis and nonpneumatization of right petrous filled with fatty marrow, later confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; Figure B). Subtle evidence of petrous apicitis of his right temporal bone was demonstrated by MRI . Abnormal enhancement of the roof of right middle cranial fossa, the dura along the floor of the middle cranial fossa, thickened enhanced anteromedial part of right tentorial cerebelli and adjacent right cavernous sinus, as a result of superomedial extension of the infection, were demonstrated by MRI . Edematous right trigeminal ganglion within right Meckel’s cave , most likely to be responsible for his severe headache and facial pain, was also detected.
A 2-week course of intravenous ceftazidime (2g three times a day) and levofloxacin (750mg once a day) was commenced. Ofloxacin eardrops were continued for 2 weeks. Resolution of his headache was achieved after only 2 days of intravenous antibiotic administration. His primary position and right lateral gaze diplopia improved within 3 and 5 days, respectively. He was discharged and prescribed oral levofloxacin for 4 weeks. Complete recovery of his headache and right abducens nerve palsy occurred after 2 months and he is currently doing well.