A 20-year-old enlisted man presented with a 1-month history of discontinuous fever, panic, and hypodynamia, and was admitted to People's Liberation Army 152 hospital in May 2008. He had no other complaints. The patient had previously been healthy, with no history of infectious diseases or allergies to food or drugs. Physical examination showed a temperature of 37.3°C and no other remarkable signs. Laboratory measurements and examinations revealed no abnormalities. On admission, the patient was administered broad spectrum antibiotics and antiviral drugs. However, his fever failed to resolve and his temperature rose to between 38.5°C and 40.9°C. More than 2 weeks later, lymphadenopathy of the left neck, armpit, and left groin was detected by ultrasound. Left groin lymph node and bone marrow puncture biopsies were performed. Histopathological examination of the groin lymph node showed reactive hyperplasia and revealed one histiocyte engulfing few blood cells . The bone marrow smear showed no remarkable results. On admission, we cultured for bacteria, parasites, and fungi, and tested for antibodies to hepatitis A virus (HAV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), treponema pallidum, chlamydia pneumoniae (CP), mycoplasma (MP), respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), and adenovirus (Adv), however, we were unable to detect the triggering agent. One month later, laboratory tests produced the following values: white blood cell count 1.60 × 109/L, red blood cell 3.42 × 1012/L, hemoglobin 107 g/L, platelet count 156 × 109/L, fibrinogen 0.67 g/L, triglyceride 13.9 mmol/L . Ultrasound examination revealed hepatosplenomegaly.
Left neck lymph node biopsy and bone marrow puncture smear were performed. The results were characteristic of HPS . The germinal centers were unclear in both the groin and cervical lymph nodes, and the lymph nodes retained normal structure, except for sinusoidal expansion . Broadening of the sinuses in the groin lymph node was mainly detected in the medullary area, where they were filled with histiocytes . In the cervical lymph node, the subcapsular, peritrabecular and medullary sinuses were expanded and filled with activated histiocytes that were seen to be phagocytosing blood cells . Plasma cell counts averaged 8/high power field (HPF) in the medullary cord of the groin lymph node, while they averaged 17/HPF in the cervical lymph node . Treatment was administered according to the Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) 2004 protocol , with proper alternation (cyclophosphamide, perarubicin, vincristine sulfate, dexamethasone and etoposide), but the patient suffered multiple organ dysfunction syndrome after therapy, and died from pulmonary infection 2 month later.