We present a case involving a 16-year-old Japanese female who suffered from abdominal pain and a feeling of tiredness. Four months earlier, she complained of feeling tired, having abdominal pain after getting up and experiencing dyspnea. The patient was not able to go to high school and later went to a mental clinic. She went to a clinic for internal medicine, and her cortisol was 4.92 μg/mL (normal range 5.0–17.9). The adrenocorticotropic hormone load test revealed levels of 18.73 μg/mL at 30 min and 21.84 μg/mL at 60 min. Hydrocortisone 5 mg/day was administered, and she was able to wake up in the morning, but the feeling of tiredness and abdominal pain remained. Two months earlier, the patient was referred to a psychiatric outpatient clinic and was diagnosed with depression and treated with tandospirone 10 mg/day and lamotrigine 50 mg/day. She was introduced to us for psychological assessments because her abdominal pain was unchanged. We referred her to the Department of Gastrointestinal Medicine and Department of Endocrine and Metabolism in the university hospital for further physical examinations before the psychological assessments. Organic diseases in the gastrointestinal tract were excluded, and although IBS was suspected at first, this diagnosis was later disregarded. In addition, an examination of the pituitary gland magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head and hormone loading tests revealed no abnormal findings. Based on the results of the physical examinations, psychogenic pain was finally suspected, and the patient was admitted to the Department of Psychiatry for detailed psychological examinations 4 months later. We switched her medication from tandospirone 30 mg/day to mirtazapine 30 mg/day. Her depressive symptoms improved, but her abdominal pain remained. Because Carnett’s test was positive but no abnormality was found from a simple abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan, we suspected ACNES in addition to depression and referred her to Department of Diagnostic and Generalist Medicine. Block anesthesia using trigger point injections dramatically improved the abdominal pain. We concluded that her diagnosis was ACNES, and the patient was discharged. She underwent dissection of the left intercostal nerve and anterior sheath in the abdomen 6 months later. The patient has not complained of any abnormal pain, and her mental condition has been stable since the dissection.