A 52-year-old woman underwent a medical examination at a local clinic. She did not feel a mass in her breast, but a lump in the left breast was detected by breast ultrasonography. She was referred to our hospital for further investigation. Although she had received laser treatment for cervical dysplasia at the age of 40 years, she had no other clinical history such as cancer or breast trauma. Her family history included breast cancer in a younger sister and gastric cancer in her father. Physical examination revealed no palpable mass in her breast and no swollen axillary lymph nodes. Mammography revealed a focal asymmetric density at the lower outer portion of the left breast . Breast ultrasonography showed a heterogeneous 1.2-cm hypoechoic lesion with partially cystic changes and relatively clear boundaries. Vascular signals were scant . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a mass approximately 1.2 cm in diameter at the lower outer portion of the left breast. T2-weighted imaging showed mildly high signal intensity at the periphery and center of the tumor . The signal was elevated on diffusion-weighted imaging but low in the apparent diffusion coefficient map . Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging showed hyperintensity in the early phase, but the signal intensity was slightly attenuated in the center of the tumor in the delayed phase . A time–intensity curve of the mass showed intermediate enhancement in the initial period and a plateau in the delayed period . Enhanced chest computed tomography also detected a solitary mass with heterogeneous rim enhancement at the outer lower area of the left breast . No lymph node swelling or distant metastasis was present.
A tumor specimen was obtained by percutaneous biopsy. Core needle biopsy of the left breast mass showed a fibrosing lesion with proliferation of fibroblastic cells arranged in a storiform pattern, chronic inflammatory cells, and histiocytic cells . No epithelial neoplasm was observed. The spindle cells in the lesion were immunohistochemically positive for ALK.
At the initial examination, the C-reactive protein concentration was slightly increased at 0.16 mg/dL (reference range, 0.00–0.14 mg/dL). The carcinoembryonic antigen and cancer antigen 15-3 concentrations were not increased. The serum concentrations of other indexes were within the reference ranges. The serum interleukin-6 concentration was also within the reference range.
Under the preoperative diagnosis of IMT, we performed left partial mastectomy with adequate margins (> 1.0 cm) for a definitive diagnosis. There were no significant findings on intraoperative specimen X-ray photography. However, intraoperative ultrasonography of the excised specimen showed a 1.2-cm hypoechoic mass in the center of the specimen with ill-defined margins . The specimen showed a well-defined 1.0- × 0.7-cm tumor that appeared homogeneous and gray–white on cut section . The postoperative pathologic examination revealed a fibrosing lesion with proliferation of fibroblastic cells arranged in a storiform pattern. The surrounding mammary tissue showed fibrocystic change . Chronic inflammatory cells and histiocytic cells were also observed . The surgical margins were clear of tumor cells. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were diffusely positive for ALK-1 and negative for IgG4 . There were no histopathological findings of breast cancer. The final diagnosis was pathologically confirmed as IMT. At the time of this writing, the patient was being followed up and was doing well 24 months postoperatively without recurrence or metastasis.