A 22-year-old woman, gravida 1, para 0, was admitted to the hospital at 22 2/7 weeks of quadruple pregnancy due to dilated cervix. The quadruple pregnancy was confirmed during the first trimester, following conception by ovulation promotion and she refused a reduction. She had three episodes of heavy vaginal bleeding during the first trimester and was treated at the local hospital. Ultrasound examination two days ago (22 weeks of pregnancy) found that the upper segment of the cervical canal was U-shaped, about 2 cm, the internal cervical was dilated, about 3.6 cm, and the closed cervical canal was only about 0.6 cm . The patient had no vaginal bleeding, liquor leaking, or tightness in the abdomen or uterus. Her vital signs were stable, and fetal monitoring was normal.
The patient was advised to stay strictly in bed and elevate the hips. Ritodrine hydrochloride was used to inhibit occasional uterine contraction and magnesium sulfate was used for neuroprotection. Ultrasonographic assessment again showed that the closed cervical canal was shorter than before and approximately 0.3 cm. The emergency transvaginal cervical cerclage was performed at 23 weeks of gestation under combined spinal-epidural anesthesia. The anterior amniotic sac protracted from the cervical orifice, with a small amount of amniotic fluid leakage. Postoperatively, we continued ritodrine hydrochloride, cefazoline and metronidazole were initiated because of elevated inflammatory markers to prolong the pregnancy. The surveillance protocol involved laboratory assessment (White Blood Cell [WBC] and C-Reactive Protein [CRP] levels three days a time), ultrasonographic evaluation twice a week, vital signs clinical assessment (arterial pressure, heart rate, temperature), and electronic fetal monitoring twice a day. The fluctuations of CRP and WBC values during the patient’s hospitalization are shown in the Fig. B.
At 23 3/7 weeks of pregnancy, a small amount of vaginal liquid was leaked, then it was confirmed via speculum examination, and suggesting amniotic fluid leakage. Laboratory examinations revealed the presence of mild elevated WBC (11.1*10^9/L) and CRP (18.94 mg/L with an upper normal laboratory limit of 10 mg/L). Chorioamnionitis was highly suspected, and amniocentesis was recommended to confirm the diagnosis. However, the patient declined the amniocentesis and requested to continue the pregnancy. Informed consent was obtained. At 25 4/7 weeks of pregnancy, the culture of vaginal discharge was suggestive of candida albicans infection, and clotrimazole vaginal tablets were given for intravaginal placement.
At 25 6/7 weeks of pregnancy, a large amount of streaky discharge was observed, and the cervical was dilated about 6 cm. Cervical cerclage was removed, and a male fetus was delivered, weighing 735 g, with Apgar scores of 6 at the first minute and 8 at 5 min, and transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for treatment. Then uterine contractions gradually decreased, and no signs of active labor were noticed. After informing the patient and family in detail of the possible benefits and complications, they chose to delay the delivery of other fetuses. Cervical cerclage was performed after high ligation of the umbilical cord. The vagina was rinsed with iodophor. We used ritodrine hydrochloride and indomethacin to prolong pregnancy and antibiotic therapy (cefazoline and metronidazole) was continued while continuously monitoring the patient and fetuses.
Four days later (26 3/7 weeks of pregnancy), there was a recurrence of vaginal discharge and irregular contractions. Ultrasound examination showed dilated cervical canal and part of the fetus protruding into the cervical canal. The fetal heart rate was normal. A second emergency cervical cerclage removal and transvaginal delivery of a fetus were performed. A second male infant was delivered, weighing 870 g, with Apgar scores of 7 at the first minute and 8 at 5 min, and was also transferred to the NICU. After careful consideration of the situation and wishes of the patient, DID has performed again. Given the progressively higher infection indicators and the more frequent uterine contractions, we started using meropenem to control the infection and atosiban to suppress contractions. Then, at 27 2/7 weeks of pregnancy (6 days after the last surgery), she had irregular uterine contractions with the outflow of amniotic fluid. Then, we observed a slowing of the fetal heart rate related to uterine contractions with gradual onset following the peak of the uterine contraction and delayed return of the deceleration to the baseline, usually following the contraction. The gradual decrease in fetal heart rate suggested fetal distress. After informed consent, the pregnancy was terminated by cesarean section. Two male infants were delivered, weighing 1050 g/1030 g, with Apgar scores of 7 at the first minute and 8 at 5 min both. The flowchart of the case is shown in Fig. .
The patient continued on antibiotic (meropenem), anti-thrombotic (low molecular weight heparin) and uterotonic therapy (oxytocine) after the cesarean section. She remained afebrile although a pathological examination of the placenta found acute chorioamnionitis . She was discharged four days after the operation without any complications.
Four preterm neonates were admitted to the NICU. They were all given meropenem to control infection, vitamin K1 to prevent bleeding, lung surface-active substances to promote fetal lung maturation and intravenous nutritional support, and antibiotics were adjusted according to infection and drug sensitivity. The first baby was also treated with ganciclovir for antiviral therapy and transfused with human immunoglobulin and platelets because of repeatedly low platelets. The second baby was also given creatine phosphate and levothyroxine sodium. They recovered well after neonatal treatment and were discharged successfully with hospital stays of 136, 92, 59, and 68 days respectively. All of them started to eat and parenteral feeding was stopped. All four babies had normal primitive reflexes and muscle tone. Serial electroencephalograms did not reveal any abnormalities in neurophysiological development.