A 72 year-old female was transferred to our Department of Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery at the University Hospital of Münster with a hyperplastic gingivitis and intraoral pain in October 2015.
The patient was diagnosed with GPA already in 2007. Since that time she has developed glomerulonephritis, nephrosclerosis, pulmonary emphysema, Raynaud’s phenomenon, sinusitis maxilliaris and had surgery on an orbital pseudotumor in 2014. Since the first diagnosis of GPA in 2007 the patient was treated with prednisolone and cyclosporine. She also suffered from a steroid-associated osteoporosis which has been treated intravenously with denosumab, a human monoclonal antibody directed towards osteoclast-mediated bone resorption by binding to osteoblast-produced RANKL. Mild hypertonia and presbyacusia of both ears were also diagnosed. Oral manifestations like “strawberry gingivitis” did not occur since the first diagnosis of GPA in 2007, but a basal cell carcinoma developed in 2015. The patient was first diagnosed with hyperplastic gingivitis by her dentist in April 2015 and was treated subsequently by non-surgical periodontal therapy without antibiotics. However, since the therapy lacked any beneficial effect the patient was sent to a periodontist in September 2015. The periodontist did not conduct any treatment. He recommended gingivectomy of the hyperplastic gingiva and due to the additional intravenous denosumab therapy, he transferred the patient to our Department for further treatment.
In the intraoral examination, alterations of the gingival volume were observed. Plaque control was poor since handling with the toothbrush was too difficult for the patient. Additionally, we noted the absence of petechia on the buccal and oral gingiva in the upper as well as in the lower jaw and bleeding in the buccal area of 13–15. . She described intraoral pain and was handicapped during food intake. In the orthopantomogram the patient showed an impacted canine, furcation involvement of the first upper molars, and horizontal bone loss according to the age . Thus, the gingival volume appeared uncommon.
At the time of the patient’s visit at our Department the medication for the therapy of GPA consisted of a combination of prednisolone 10 mg/day and cyclopsporine 150 mg/day prescribed by her family doctor. The patient’s full medication is presented in Table .
As periodontal therapy has previously failed and cyclosporine has been given since 2007 without any intraoral side-effects like gingival hyperplasia, we decided in suspicion of the recurrence of GPA with gingival hyperplasia to take a biopsy from the palatinal premolar region under local anesthesia. The biopsy was then sent for routine histopathological analysis which revealed inflammation with parakeratosis and neutrophil-granulocytic infiltration . These findings were conveyed to her family doctor who decided to refer the patient to the Clinic of Internal Medicine at the University Hospital of Münster. Since the staining for c-ANCA tested positive, the recurrence of GPA was suspected. Therefore, they decided to treat the patient with rituximab via infusion. In addition to prednisolone 10 mg/day, the patient was given 375 mg/m2 rituximab weekly for a total of 4 doses. After one week of therapy, she was re-evaluated at our Department. At the follow-up visit, the patient showed complete remission of the hyperplastic gingiva , the absence of pain, and the patient was able to eat without problems. Periodontal probing depths of 5 mm or more only appeared at the molars. Table shows the diagnostic and treatment process of the patient in chronological order.