A previously healthy 9-year-old boy with normal growth and development presented with progressive pallor, peripheral oedema and respiratory distress. Examination showed pallor, pitting oedema, and respiratory distress. No lymphadenopathy, jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly or abdominal masses were present, and the remainder of the physical examination was normal.
Investigations showed hypoalbuminaemia; albumin 16 g/L, and total protein 27 g/L, with normal liver and renal function. The urine was normal with no proteinuria or haematuria. Haemoglobin (Hb) was 89 g/L, white blood cell count (WCC) 16.6 × 109/L, but neutrophils and lymphocytes and blood film were normal.
The chest X-ray (CXR) showed consolidation in the right lower lobe and an abdominal ultrasound scan was normal.
At gastroduodenal endoscopy, multiple raised large (2 to 3 cm in diameter) ulcerated tumours of the greater curvature of the gastric body were seen , and numerous smaller tumours were seen in the second and third part of the duodenum but colonoscopy was normal.
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest and abdomen showed multiple exophytic lesions in the stomach, several filling defects within the jejunum, and a 5 cm long intussusception in the ileum . Small lymph nodes were seen around the superior mesenteric vessels. Bilateral pleural effusions and atelectasis were seen in the chest but there was no mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
Gastric biopsies showed a diffuse lymphoid infiltrate , immunohistochemistry identified a B-cell population and flow cytometry was positive for the B-cell markers CD20, CD10 and CD43 . Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) was positive for the C-MYC, t(8:14) translocation of Burkitt lymphoma. The bone marrow aspirate, trephine biopsy and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) were normal. No Helicobacter pylori infection was detected.
The histology, immunophenotype and FISH analysis of the biopsies, and the radiological findings were consistent with a primary gastrointestinal Burkitt lymphoma, Stage III, Group B.
Treatment was according to the UKCCSG consensus guideline for Burkitt lymphoma (2003). Induction chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisone (COP) was given together with alkaline hydration and allopurinol, daily albumin infusions, frusemide and omeprazole.
No tumour lysis syndrome occurred, and there was a rapid rise in serum albumin and protein with resolution of clinical signs of protein-losing enteropathy.
Further chemotherapy included two courses of cyclophosphamide, vincristine, prednisone, cytarabine, doxorubicin and methotrexate (COPADAM) followed by two courses of cytarabine and methotrexate (CYM) and double intrathecal chemotherapy of methotrexate and hydrocortisone.
Our patient's clinical course and disease response were monitored by sequential endoscopic biopsy, histology and molecular analysis by FISH. The rapid clinical response was reflected in the rapid histological and molecular resolution of disease. Follow-up endoscopy showed complete resolution of the mucosal tumours with only residual mucosal puckering present. Abdominal CT cans were normal and, once in remission and having completed chemotherapy, the patient's ongoing disease surveillance was by endoscopy and repeat biopsy for FISH analysis. No molecular evidence of residual disease was detected, and he remains in clinical remission with complete resolution of the protein-losing enteropathy and no treatment related sequelae 4 years from initial diagnosis.