A 52-year-old female patient, sustained low back pain for 1 year with complaints of numbness in both lower extremities, underwent PLDF (Medtronic Sofamor Danek USA, Inc) bilaterally from L4 to S1 in September 2011 and got instant relief. 3 month postoperatively, however, the patient represented with low back pain. The increasingly severly deep aching pain had intensified over the next 5 months and ultimately gave rise to trouble walking accompanied by a mild sphincter disturbances before she’s review. This had been thought to be related to delayed postoperative infection. But, the patient had no fever and her physical examination was unremarkable other than a slightly swelling with tenderness over the operative region. Neither a high skin temperature nor flare was found. On the contrary, the incision scar had met a criterion of primary healing. Serial blood analysis showed erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP), and complete blood count with differential (CBC w/ diff) were within normal limits. X-ray films showed the slightly shifted internal fixators partially lost its function , and computed tomography (CT) gave evidence of loosening and osteolysis . Findings of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the operative lumbar spine revealed topical swelling of soft tissue around the prosthesis and cloud sign of the adipose layer . There was no diagnostic explanation for her pain. None of the clinic findings supported delayed postoperative infection. As no other cause for the low back pain (commonly named failed back surgery syndrome) could be identified, a quick decision was made to proceed with removal of the pedicle screw system.
During surgery, the 6 pedicle screws were found to be very loose off the vertebrae and effortlessly removable, resulting to lost their fixation functon. No pus, caseous necrosis or tumor was found over the periprosthetic tissue. But a small granulation tissue was identified around the pedicle scerw in the L4/5 level and sent to biopsy along with a piece of bone from the L5/S1 intervertebral space. A predominance infiltration of lymphocytes with massive fibroblasts and neocapillaries was found in this specimen , yet no evidence of infection. We still offered a postoperative treatment toward infection, including intravenous antibiotics application for 3 weeks and continuous antibiotic lavage and drainage for 25 days. Bacteria was not verified from the drainage culture, yet. The removal of pedicle screw system alleviated all the symptoms, especially the back pain, reduced to a lower level but persisted for a while.
She gave a clear history of skin sensitivity to metal for many years before receiving PLDF and was unable to wear a metal watch or ring. After PLDF, she did not notice rashes or irritation over the low back area, or any other skin reaction, and other clinical evidence of infection.