The patient, a 26-year-old Japanese woman, had been nulligravid. The first menstruation occurred at age 13 and had menstrual cycles regularly thereafter. At 21 years old, the patient experienced amenorrhea, resulting from 12 kg weight loss in two months. At another hospital, beginning at 23 years old, this patient had received oral E2 and P4 replacement therapy for two years. The patient was married at 26 years old and decided to undergo fertility treatment at our hospital. The patient’s body mass index (BMI) was 19.2 kg/m2 and her feminine characteristics appeared normal. The diameter of right ovary was 26.0 mm and left ovary was 29.1 mm. Serum FSH and LH concentrations were 3.2 mIU/ml and 0.5 mIU/ml, respectively. Her endocrine test results were within reference ranges of our hospital except for triiodothyronine (T3) and prolactin (PRL) (Additional file ).The patient was diagnosed with hypothalamic amenorrhea following luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LH-RH) loading test.
Both oviducts and the uterine lumen in this patient were morphologically normal when examined with hysterosalpingography (HSG). The husband’s semen quality appeared normal and fell within the World Health Organization criteria 2010 . Through the examination by transvaginal ultrasonography, over five antral follicles (i.e., 5–10 mm) each were observed in both ovaries. Serum Anti-Müllerian Hormone (AMH) concentrations were 10.8 ng/ml, from which the ovarian reserve was judged to be functioning [–]. To undergo planned infertility treatment for this couple, who lived in separately, the husband’s sperm were cryopreserved.
In our country, however, recombinant LH (rLH) is not yet available, and HMG and human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) must be injected intramuscularly only by a medical doctor or nurse. Due to her work assignment and work loads, she was not able to receive daily administrations of HMG or hCG, therefore, self-administration of rFSH was only what we could offer for this patient during the COS period. Antral follicle counts (AFCs) and AMH concentrations of the patient were at high risk of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) [, ]. Therefore, gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) antagonist regimen was planned to avoid rapidly rising serum E2 concentrations [, ], only if proper increase in serum E2 concentrations were observed and dominant follicles reached over 12–14 mm in diameter.
When this patient experienced withdrawal bleeding following daily administration of oral contraceptive (OC) for 14 days, measurable follicles were not observed in either ovary on day 3 . On the same day, COS was initiated with daily administration of 225 IU rFSH. Follicular developments and increased P4 concentrations were observed, but E2 concentrations were low on day 11 . GnRH antagonist regimen was not performed because proper increase in serum E2 concentrations was not observed. Although both ovaries had over 30 follicles of 15–19 mm on day 13, serum E2 concentrations were low at 484 pg/ml and P4 concentrations were high at 2.09 ng/ml. COS was canceled due to the hormone concentration which did not reflect those of numerous follicular developments.
From the day when the first COS was canceled, the patient took 10 mg synthetic progesterone (SP) orally for the next 14 days. The patient experienced withdrawal bleeding, and several small follicles were observed in both ovaries on day 3 . From the same day, the daily dosage of 175 IU rFSH was administered for the first 5 days, followed by 200 IU for the remaining treatment period. Similar to the response seen at the first COS, high serum P4 concentrations were observed; however, serum E2 concentrations were not increased on day 15 .
During COS, therefore, we advised this patient that assisted reproductive technology (ART) might fail due to her unusual serum steroid hormone concentrations, low E2 and high P4. At the same time, we also informed the patient that ART might succeed because serum AMH concentrations were adequate and numerous follicles were developed in response to rFSH. The patient and husband voluntarily agreed to go through ART in understanding the procedure with informed consent. On the same day, the ovulation was induced with 5000 IU hCG.
35 h after the hCG administration, follicles were pricked with an oocyte pick-up (OPU) needle transvaginally. Follicular Fluids (FFs) from the largest follicle were aspirated, which were frozen for the subsequent hormone analysis. Sperm that had been cryopreserved were thawed, which had characteristics of 44.0 × 106/ml and 9.5% motility. It was previously reported that oocytes from low serum E2 concentrations of a HH patient have decreased fertilization rate with IVF . To obtain as many fertilized oocytes with sufficient quality frozen-thawed sperm, in addition to IVF, ICSI was also performed. 18 and 15 COCs were subjected to IVF and ICSI, respectively. IVF-COCs were inseminated with 5.0 × 104 motile sperm/COC. After 16–18 h after IVF and ICSI, fertilization was determined by the presence of two pronuclei (PN). Fertilized oocytes were cultured in the cleavage medium for the initial 3 days, and embryos were then cultured in the blastocyst medium until blastocyst formation. Embryo cryopreservation was performed with an ultra-rapid vitrification kit.
Frozen-thawed blastocyst transfer (FBT) was performed following hormone replacement treatment (HRT) due to hypothalamic amenorrhea [, ]. After the patient experienced withdrawal bleeding by daily administration of OC for 14 days, daily administration of oral 2.0 mg E2 was initiated on day 3. Dosage of E2 was increased to 3.0 mg/day on day 6 and 4.0 mg/day on day 8. On day 11, serum E2 concentrations reached to 215 pg/ml and endometrial thickness was 12.0 mm, both of which exceeded our hospital standards of over 200 pg/ml serum E2 concentrations and endometrial thickness over 8.0 mm. The ovulation day (Ovd) was estimated to be on day 12 of the menstrual cycle. From the next day, luteal function was supported by daily administration of 30 mg oral SP, followed by 125 mg i.m. SP in every 5 days, which was continued until eight weeks of pregnancy.
A cryopreserved blastocyst was thawed with a thawing kit. FBT was performed transvaginally using an embryo transfer (ET) catheter under transabdominal ultrasound guidance. Serum hCG concentrations were determined 7 days after FBT and clinical pregnancy was confirmed with a transvaginal ultrasonography.