In February 2021, a 66-year-old male patient presented to our orthopedic department because of multiple erythematous skin nodules on both lower legs and painful swelling in the right knee .
The dermal lesions first appeared 4 wk before without any history of trauma. Antibiotic therapy was started 3 wk before by the dermatology department with intravenous (IV) clindamycin 600 mg three times daily for three weeks. This was effective, and the patient was ultimately discharged. One week after discharge, the skin lesions worsened, and he was readmitted to the dermatology department. Antibiotic therapy was broadened to IV clindamycin 600 mg and IV fosfomycin 8 g three times daily.
Due to a spontaneous, painful swelling in his right knee, he was transferred to our orthopedic department, and septic arthritis was suspected. Eighty milliliters (ml) of pus were obtained after intraarticular puncture and were sent for culture. His abdominal pain did not occur until approximately two months after the onset of the first dermal lesions.
The patient had multiple comorbidities, including arterial hypertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetic neuropathy, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, aortic bifurcation graft, ilio-femoral bypass on the right leg, iliac artery stent on the left side, and a double stroke. He reported recurrent ulceration on both feet and lower legs associated with his peripheral arterial disease and type 2 diabetes, which were never treated surgically. He was suffering from chronic pancreatitis caused by alcohol abuse and had a smoking history of approximately 40 packyears.
The patient had no history of previous joint infections. His family history for similar symptoms was negative.
The patient was in good overall condition, had no fever and was free of pain. There was swelling with marked effusion, warming, and reddening in the right knee. On both lower legs, he had multiple erythematous subcutaneous nodules.
The C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 27 mg/dL (norm < 1 mg/dL), and the leukocyte count was 16.1 G/L (norm 4-9 G/L). Serum levels of lipase, amylase, triglycerides, calcium, parathormone and immunoglobulin G4 were found to be normal. The aspirate from the right knee showed growth of Staphylococcus aureus in culture. Further infection diagnostics, such as a QuantiFERON test and screening for human immunodeficiency virus, LUES, and Francisella tularensis, all remained negative.
Radiographic X-ray imaging showed osteoarthritis of both knees without signs of osteodestruction. Magnetic resonance imaging showed an extensive bone lesion in the right femur and tibia extending approximately 15 cm craniocaudally. There were also several smaller bone lesions in the left tibia with a maximum size of 3.6 cm, indicating chronic osteomyelitis .
Following the positive detection of Staphylococcus aureus in the knee joint aspirate, arthroscopy with extensive irrigation and debridement was completed, and suction-irrigation drainage was applied. Due to persistent putrid secretion from the arthroscopic wounds, arthroscopy was repeated one week later. Several superficial abscesses were incised , and a biopsy of suspicious bone tissue was taken from the right tibia. The antibiotic therapy was changed to IV cefazolin 2 g three times daily and oral fusidic acid 500 mg three times daily. The inflammatory markers declined, with the CRP level decreasing to 2.9 mg/dL, and the leukocyte count had decreased to 11.1 G/L.
Despite extensive multimodal therapy, the skin lesions and swelling in the knee remained. The patient’s general condition deteriorated a few days later, and he complained of progressive abdominal pain. His CRP levels increased to 41.3 mg/dL with a leukocyte count of 26.7 G/L. The levels of lipase and amylase peaked at 582 U/L (norm 5-60 U/L) and 267 U/L (norm 30-120 U/L), respectively.
A computed tomography scan of the abdomen showed a stenotic transverse colon as well as massive inflammatory changes of the entire colon and peripancreatic acute necrotic collections (Revised Atlanta classification) in the sense of an incipient abscess indicating necrotizing pancreatitis . In addition, there was a cystic lesion around the uncinate process of the pancreas with a diameter of approx. 2.2 cm. There were no signs of malignant tumors.
The material obtained from the right tibia histologically showed fat tissue necrosis without florid inflammation, and microbiologic culture was negative. The onset of acute pancreatitis in combination with the existing skin lesions and knee infection finally provided decisive clues for the actual diagnosis.