A 5-year-old right-handed boy was admitted to the neurosurgery department with 5-month history of headache, nausea, vomiting, dizziness, and dysphoria, as well as visual blurring associated with the peak of the headache. In nearly a month, the boy’s clinical manifestations gradually worsened. He complained of being unable to maintain balance while walking or standing. The patient had no similar clinical history previously reported in his family. Moreover, neurological examination showed that the patient had bilateral grade II papilledema, gait ataxia, and was positive for the finger-nose and the Romberg test.
A computerized tomography (CT) scan showed a heterogeneous dense large mass in the 4th ventricle of the brain, combined with unclear edges and significant dilation of bilateral and 3rd ventricles. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI; ) revealed a large, irregular, heterogeneous mass of approximately 4.9×5.4×6.2 cm, which herniated to the orientation of the foramen magnum, extending to the C2 level. In addition, the bilateral cerebellar hemisphere, cerebellar tonsils, medulla oblongata, and cervical cord were particularly compressed. Iso- and hypointensity signals were seen on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI; ) and T2-weighted fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR; ). Mixing isointensity and hyperintensity signals were seen on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI; ). On enhancement, the tumor showed moderate heterogeneous enhancement with an ill-defined boundary . In addition, there was significant presence of hydrocephalus and periventricular edema.
A preoperative diagnosis of medulloblastoma was made and the surgery was performed under preoperative and intraoperative neuronavigation together with electrophysiological monitoring of cranial nerves VII, IX, X, XI, brainstem, somatosensory, and muscle-evoked potentials. The patient underwent midline suboccipital craniectomy, C1 posterior arch excision, and total tumor resection in a lateral prone posture. The tumor appeared pinkish, solid, and bloody. The interface between the tumor and healthy parenchyma was not as sharply defined.
After combined diagnosis of two chief pathologists at our hospital and the Xuanwu Hospital Capital Medical University, China, the pathological diagnosis was cLNC, with WHO Grade II. Upon histopathological examination, hematoxylin and eosin-stained paraffin sections showed predominantly small to moderately, round or ovoid tumor cells, with low mitotic activity. These tumor cells grew in a sheet shape with clusters of fat cells were observed in the center or formed chrysanthemum-liking clusters . Immunohistochemical analysis indicated that the Ki-67 index was ± 5% mostly, and only 10-20% focally . In addition, the neoplasm was positive for synaptophysin, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), microtubule associated protein-2 (MAP-2), vimentin, and negative for isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 (IDH1)-R132H, neurofilament, oligo-2, S-100, and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA).
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he discharged on the 14th day with ataxia and the symptoms of pontine reticular formation lateral-gaze center injury. The patient received postoperative radiotherapy with a dose of 5400cGray/25F in the tumor bed and 4500cGray/25F in a high-risk area, respectively. We then processed a strict and long-term follow-up for 29-months until now. Postoperative MRI of brain and the whole spinal cord together with the periodical cranial MRI examinations demonstrated that the lesion had been completely removed, with no signs of recurrence or metastasis . The symptoms of ataxia and binoculus gazing to the right showed some improvement 29 months postoperatively, and we will continue the follow-up the patient closely. The child and his parents signed consent to take part in the study.