A 42-year-old man with normal sinus rhythm was admitted to our institution for the evaluation of his eligibility for heart transplantation owing to advanced heart failure , which was classified as New York Heart Association functional class IV due to dilated cardiomyopathy diagnosed by previous endomyocardial biopsy. He had been receiving 10 mg/d of carvedilol, 2.5 mg/d of enalapril and 25 mg/d of spironolactone. At admission, he had slight edema in bilateral leg, and his plasma B-type natriuretic peptide level was 423 pg/mL. He had no history of hypertension or diabetes at admission. Transthoracic echocardiography showed that the left ventricular diastolic dimeter was 67 mm, and as calculated by the modified Simpson method, the left ventricular ejection fraction was 23%; mild mitral and tricuspid regurgitations were present as well. He had no SDB or active respiratory infection. For further improvement of his heart failure symptoms, he was subjected to ASV support testing accompanied by haemodynamic assessment using right-heart catheterization as well as HRV and noradrenaline plasma level analyses at 10 days after the admission . An informed consent was obtained from the patient beforehand.
An advanced bi-level positive airway pressure unit (AutoSet-CS; ResMed, Sydney, Australia) together with a best-fitting full-face mask (ResMed) was used for the ASV support testing, as previously described . Before the final test, the patient received 5-min’s adaptation period, during which ASV support at a default setting was conducted for adaptation and confirmation of his tolerability. During the ASV support testing, the peak end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) was set at 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 cmH2O, each one of which was within the minimum range of 3–10 cmH2O (PEEP ramp test); each pressure setting was maintained for 3 min.
During the PEEP ramp test, the pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and cardiac index gradually decreased with the increased PEEP settings, although a maximal cardiac index was achieved at a PEEP of 5 cmH2O . Other haemodynamic parameters, including heart rate and systolic blood pressure, remained unchanged from the baseline levels of 84 bpm and 110 mmHg, respectively, during the study period.
During the PEEP ramp test, we also performed an HRV analysis . Power spectral analyses of HRV were performed using the MemCalc power spectral density method (MemCalc system; Suwa Trust Co, Tokyo, Japan) [–]. Low frequency (LF) was defined as a level of 0.04–0.15 Hz; high frequency (HF), which reflected parasympathetic nerve activity, was defined as a level of 0.15–0.40 Hz. The ratio of LF to HF (LF/HF ratio) reflected sympathetic nerve activity. Although the LF/HF ratio decreased upon the initiation of ASV support, the LF/HF ratio gradually increased at increased PEEP levels accompanied by increased noradrenaline plasma levels . In contrast, the HF level gradually decreased below the baseline at increased PEEP levels . The patient complained of mild discomfort at a PEEP of 8 cmH2O. No adverse events occurred during the study period.