A 25-year-old woman presented to the ED complaining of left-sided vaginal pain and swelling. She stated she had woken up approximately five hours earlier with these symptoms, which had been progressing. She described the pain as severe and throbbing. She stated she was unable to sit comfortably and that it was painful to walk. The patient reported having five episodes of sexual intercourse over a two-hour period the day prior; afterwards, she applied ice to the area. She denied abdominal pain, vaginal bleeding, or discharge. The patient was in good health otherwise and denied any medical problems, including sickle cell disease or bleeding disorders. She was not on any medications and denied drug allergies.
Physical exam revealed a young woman in mild distress secondary to severe pain. Vital signs revealed a pulse of 96 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 14 breaths per minute, blood pressure of 123/86 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), temperature of 97° Fahrenheit (36.1° Celsius), and 100% oxygen saturation on room air. Examination of the heart, lungs, and abdomen was normal. Genitourinary exam revealed marked swelling of the left labia majora and minora. The swollen area was dark, firm, and tender to palpation . Speculum exam was deferred due to the significant amount of pain and swelling.
We were concerned for hematoma primarily, but also considered abscess or a deep venous thrombosis (DVT). An intravenous (IV) line was established and the patient was administered morphine four milligrams (mg) and ondansetron four mg IV for pain. She required repeated dosing in the ED for adequate pain control. Laboratory studies were sent for a complete blood count (CBC), basic metabolic profile (BMP), coagulation studies, D-dimer, urinalysis, and urine pregnancy test. Results included a normal CBC, BMP, coagulation studies, D-dimer, and urinalysis. The urine pregnancy test was negative.
The gynecology service was consulted; they also were unable to perform a speculum exam. After discussion, it was mutually agreed to image the patient with a computed tomography (CT) of the pelvis. The CT of the pelvis with IV contrast showed an enlarged left labial mass-like lesion, most likely due to focal hemorrhage or hematoma, but no definite involvement of the base of the bladder or urethra. There was a 6.6 x 4.8 cm hyperdense ovoid focus within the left labial region. Given this finding, and that the swelling appeared to be expanding, the patient was taken to the OR. A two-centimeter incision was made on the mucosal surface of the labia minora and approximately 150 cc of clot was evacuated. Also identified was an area of arterial bleeding, which was ligated with 3.0 Vicryl suture (Ethicon, Inc., Somerville, NJ).
On the first postoperative day, the patient felt much improved, with significant reduction in the swelling and pain. Her hemoglobin and hematocrit were unchanged from the day prior. She was discharged home with a diagnosis of vulvar hematoma, with instructions to follow up in one week and for pelvic rest for one month.