We present a 45-year-old male patient diagnosed with cystic fibrosis at three years of age, with no history of meconium ileus and no other relevant medical or surgical history. The patient's regular treatment included albuterol, multivitamins and pancreatic enzymes. He arrived at our emergency department due to dyspnea. Upon admission, an anteroposterior chest x-ray showed bronchiectasis and atelectasis due to chronic pneumopathy. A consolidation of the left inferior lobe and left pleural effusion was also seen, compatible with pneumonia. At that moment, heart rate was 82 beats per minute, respiratory rate 35 breaths per minute, and blood pressure 125/75 mmHg. Laboratory studies reported 12.4 × 103 leukocytosis, hemoglobin 12 g/dl, platelets 223 × 103/μl, C-reactive protein 15.28, glucose 117 mg/dl, and all other laboratories values were within normal parameters.
The patient was started with antibiotics and supplement oxygen, and during his fourth day of hospitalization, the patient began with diffuse abdominal pain, bloating, nausea, vomiting of bilious material, and constipation. An abdominal x-ray revealed air fluid levels in the small bowel and no gas in the rectum (a). A computed tomography with oral contrast was taken, where dilatation of the stomach, the duodenum, and the proximal jejunum were seen, showing a transition zone in the mid-jejunum with no visible contrast past this segment, with fecal impaction at this site (b). DIOS was diagnosed, so polyethylene glycol was administered through the nasogastric tube. The nasogastric tube drainage was more than 1 L per day; therefore, on his third day due to failed medical treatment the patient was transferred to surgery.
Upon acceptance from the patient, a diagnostic laparoscopy was done by the attending surgeon, running the small bowel from the ligament of Treitz to the ileocecal valve, observing a dilated mid-jejunum with impaction of abundant fecal content 100 cm from the ligament of Treitz . The surgery was converted to laparotomy, performing a longitudinal enterotomy of 5 cm immediately after the fecal impaction manually extracting and washing the viscid fecal contents with sticky mucous secretions . The enterotomy was repaired with a 3–0 PDS transversal suture. The patient evolved favorably, and the bowel obstruction was resolved. On post-op day two, he began oral intake and presented his first evacuation of semi-solid consistency. The patient was discharged from our service without further complications.