A 74-year-old male retired accountant with a background of asthma, atrial fibrillation, and gout presented to our emergency department with syncope following an insidious 6-month history of systemic symptoms. He had had intermittent fevers, 15-kg weight loss, general malaise, regular diaphoresis that occurred day and night, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and a nonproductive cough with sporadic morning hemoptysis. His exercise tolerance had reduced from unlimited walking capacity to breathlessness after roughly 2 km. His medications included rivaroxaban, verapamil, digoxin, and fosinopril. He had received a short course of prednisolone 25 mg daily for a flare of gout 3 weeks prior. He had a 50-pack-year ex-smoking history, having given up smoking 30 years prior. He lived independently with his wife. He had undergone outpatient chest computed tomography (CT) 2 months earlier that showed consolidation in the left lower lobe and a peripheral opacity in the right lung base measuring 14 mm by 12 mm. He had received several courses of oral antibiotics, including amoxicillin for 10 days and doxycycline for 2 weeks for presumed pneumonia. Because of his ongoing cough, he had a repeat CT scan 1 month later that showed resolution of the consolidation but no change in the peripheral opacity. His general practitioner had then referred him to a respiratory specialist, who felt that his illness was in keeping with a pneumonia that was now resolving. He advised withholding fosinopril, cessation of antibiotics, repeat CT scan in 3 months, and follow-up in 3 weeks. Prior to this appointment, he had had the syncopal episode that led to this presentation.
On arrival to the emergency department, he felt washed out, with vital signs that were notable for low-grade fever of 38.3 °C, sinus tachycardia to 130 beats per minute, and fluid-responsive hypotension (82/45 mmHg), and his physical examination was largely unremarkable. Investigations revealed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 10.6 × 109/L (neutrophil count 9.1 × 109/L, lymphocyte count 0.9 × 109/L), C-reactive protein (CRP) 119 mg/L (normal range 0–5 mg/L), Streptococcus mitis on blood cultures (penicillin minimum inhibitory concentration [MIC] 0.030 mg/L [susceptible = MIC < 0.5 mg/L]), and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) demonstrating a mobile 30 × 25-mm vegetation on the PV that extended into the right ventricular outflow tract . Complete destruction of the anterior cusp with severe pulmonary regurgitation was seen. Initial management included intravenous benzylpenicillin and gentamicin for a total of 4 and 2 weeks, respectively. A surgical opinion was obtained, but a trial of medical management was advised. The patient felt better, and his inflammatory markers normalized.
Two months after antibiotic cessation, the patient still felt well, with a normal WBC count and CRP of 5.3 mg/L (normal range 0–5 mg/L). Cardiac and chest imaging was performed to check resolution of lesions. TTE showed a reduction in the PV vegetation to 29 × 9 mm. A follow-up chest CT scan, however, showed new nodular lesions thought to be due to embolization , suggesting persistent endocarditis. Repeat blood culture results remained negative.
After 3 months, he again began to feel lethargic with breathlessness on exertion. His examination was unremarkable, but his WBC count was 16.1 × 109/L and CRP was 182 mg/L. Results of five sets of blood cultures were negative, and the vegetation size had improved on TTE to 23 × 10 mm. He was then started on a 2-week course of amoxicillin and clavulanic acid. Again he began to feel well, with improvement in his CRP and WBC count, so he was discharged to home.
Repeat outpatient CT of the chest 1 month later showed new lesions, including a cavitating lesion . In light of the recurrent lung lesions, he underwent surgical PV replacement. His PV had been destroyed with a perforated anterior leaflet that was completely encompassed by a large vegetation. The other leaflets were untouched. After valve and vegetation excision, a 27-mm Carpentier-Edwards PERIMOUNT tissue valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA, USA) was inserted. Histology confirmed IE with expansile inflammatory masses composed of fibrin and neutrophils. Small clusters of degenerate bacterial cocci were noted, but a valve culture revealed no growth. The patient made a good recovery on intravenous benzylpenicillin and oral clindamycin. TTE showed a normal-functioning bioprosthetic PV. Over the following weeks, the patient’s radiographic and inflammatory markers normalized.