A 20-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our institution with decreased vision in the right eye (RE) with a 4-month evolution. The patient’s vital signs were within normal limits, and no abnormalities were noticed upon physical and neurological examination. Similarly, her past medical history was unremarkable. Her best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 50 ETDRS (Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study) letters in the RE and 84 ETDRS letters in the left eye. Her intraocular pressure (IOP) was normal in both eyes, and the result of her anterior segment examination was unremarkable. Upon ophthalmoscopic examination, a red-colored globular lesion of 3 disk diameters (DDs) with prominent feeder vessels was noticed in the superior temporal region of the retina in the RE . The fellow eye was normal on fundus examination, and no other lesions were found in the posterior pole or periphery. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) was carried out using the DRI OCT Triton™ SS-OCT device (Topcon Medical, Tokyo, Japan).
A structural OCT B-scan of the RE showed a diffuse cystoid macular edema (central macular thickness of 450 μm) . The en face scan enabled assessment of the extent of the cystoid edema, which involved the posterior pole and expanded outside the vascular arcades .
The patient’s family history was collected, and it was discovered that the patient’s mother had died of pulmonary edema during pregnancy at the age of 40. A genetic test was carried out, which showed a variant in the VHL gene: c.335A>G(p.Y112C). In our patient, this variant was in the heterozygous state. On the basis of genetic findings and considering the presence of RHB, the diagnosis of VHL disease was made. A systemic study was conducted to search for other organs with lesions. Results of renal ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging of the brain were both negative for visceral lesions.
The patient received an intravitreal injection of ranibizumab and was then followed every month. Forty days after the injection, an OCT B-scan and an OCT en face scan revealed a reduction in RE macular edema . The patient’s BCVA was 50 ETDRS letters in the RE. Considering the persistence of cystic spaces, an intravitreal injection of slow-release dexamethasone was considered to reduce macular edema in preparation for cryotherapy. At 60 days following ranibizumab administration, a slow-release intravitreal dexamethasone implant (IDI) was injected. A structural OCT B-scan performed 1 week after IDI showed the almost complete absence of cystic spaces in the subfoveal and perifoveal areas with complete restoration of the retinal profile . Inconsistent with the improvement in retinal morphology, the patient complained of visual impairment and recurring headache. BCVA was found to be 42 ETDRS letters in the RE. No changes IOP values were observed during the follow-up examinations.
Twenty days after IDI, the patient’s RHB was treated with a combination of laser photocoagulation and a triple freeze-thaw technique of transconjunctival cryotherapy. Although the patient’s retinal profile seemed to have been restored, OCT images obtained 20 days after cryotherapy was performed showed increased exudation causing a massive and wide serous retinal detachment. The patient was then followed every month for 6 months, and, considering the persistence of the exudative retinal detachment and having ruled out the presence of a retinal break, she is currently under evaluation for pars plana vitrectomy (possibly associated with lens extraction and/or scleral buckling) and endovitreal tumor treatment.