A 45-year-old Arabian female with history of controlled hypertension on Co-Diovan 160\12.5 mg (Valsartan\hydrochlorothiazide), presented with a complain of abdominal laxity, the physical exam showed abdominal laxity, diversion of recti, upper back lipodystrophy. Patient have been counseled about lipoabdominoplasty, back liposuction and gluteal lipofilling. The procedure was done under general anesthesia; vital signs and all parameters were within the normal range throughout the procedure and early recovery period. Power-assisted liposuction (PAL) using MicroAire (Charlottesville, Va.) and ultrasound assisted liposuction (UAL) using VASERlipo were used in this case. Infiltration was done using cannulas that are size 4 in diameter (Evamatic, by Euromi) with super wet technique. The procedure started with supine position for lipoabdominoplasty with liposuction of flank and waist. Longitudinal plication and oblique transverse plication to defined the waist in better shape. Then, the patient was turned to prone position for the completion of back, lateral gluteal depression liposuction as well as the gluteal area. In gluteal lipofilling, local infiltration was done using syringes along the incision sites, and cannulas size 4 were used. Pressure garment was applied post operative, and nothing unusual occurred throughout the procedure which took nearly 6 h. VTE (venous thromboembolism) prophylaxis included: adequate hydration, early ambulation, elastic stockings, and chemoprophylaxis with Low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWHs) (Enoxaparin 40 IU, subcutaneous, 8 h after the procedure and for 4 days). The patient recovered from the anesthesia smoothly, sating well on room air with no bronchospasm, and patient transferred to her room for an overnight stay. On the first postoperative day, the patient was complaining of chest pain otherwise her vital signs were within normal range, painkiller given to patient with release of garment, symptoms improved temporarily. 4 h later symptoms recur accompanied with tachypnea (respiratory rate: 28) and tachycardia (pulse rate: 120 bpm), the Oxygen saturation was maintained on room air. Upon chest auscultation, diminished air entry was markedly noted on her left side, immediate chest X-ray and electrocardiogram (ECG) was done, which showed unremarkable X-ray and ECG shows sinus tachycardia. Computed tomography which showed left side pneumothorax. An urgent thoracic surgery consultation was done and chest tube was inserted. The patient reported immediate improvement of her symptoms and the vital signs retain to normal range. The patient start ambulating, regular respiratory exercises using the incentive spirometer, and cough exercises to help with chest expansion. On day 3, air leak stopped, chest tube was clipped by thoracic surgery, and the chest tube was removed 24 h later. The patient had a relatively smooth recovery with no other complications.