A 23-year old woman without relevant medical history visited our outpatient clinic complaining fever, sorethorat and cough lasting for 3 days. She was diagnosed as influenza B infection by nasophayngeal antigen test (Influenza B strain was not confirmed because reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction was not performed.). She was not obese (body mass index 22.3 kg/m2) and had not received any influenza vaccination in the past. She had no smoking history. She had an allergy history for macrolides antibiotics. Although she had received an antiviral therapy of oseltamivir 150 mg per day, flu symptoms such as fever and cough persisted and she once again came to the clinic on day 4 after starting the therapy. Also, she had an acute respiratory failure (SpO2 93% on 5 L/min O2 mask) with elevation of inflammatory reactions (WBC 18,900 /μL, CRP 11.69 mg/dL). Chest radiography and chest computed tomography (CT) revealed peripheral subpleural opacities and consolidations. Broad spectrum antimicrobial agent, meropenem, was empirically administered but additional antiviral therapy was not started. A rapid influenza diagnostic test showed that influenza A and B were negative and positive, respectively. Urinary streptococcal antigen and legionella antigen were both negative. No virulent pathogens were detected in the sputum. Therefore, she was diagnosed as having influenza B virus pneumonia and was referred to us. While her respiratory condition was improved, inflammatory reaction and abnormal chest radiographic shadows recurred. Transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) revealed lymphocytic alveolitis and organizing pneumonia . No pathogens were found in the BALF. She was diagnosed as secondary OP associated with influenza B pneumonia. Corticosteroid therapy was started and inflammatory reaction and chest radiography were gradually improved. The initial dose of corticosteroid was 30 mg (0.5 mg/kg) daily and tapered with improvement of inflammatory reaction and chest radiography. She was discharged on day 30. The dose was reduced to 25, 20, 15 and 10 mg per day every month with symptomatic and radiological resolution. After corticosteroid therapy was discontinued, disease recurrence was not observed.