A 61-year-old man was injected with detergent through the venous line and presented to the emergency department of our institution complaining vascular pain, dizziness, nausea, and chest discomforts.
The patient was admitted to a local hospital two months ago because of second degree burn. While undergoing burn treatment, another patient in the same room injected an unknown bubbling liquid through the patient’s venous line in the left greater saphenous vein, under the pretext of clearing the blocked fluid line. Within minutes of being injected with detergent, the patient complained of vascular pain, dizziness, nausea, and chest discomforts. He was then prompted admission to the emergency department of our institution.
The National Forensic Service compared the components of the liquid in the patient’s intravenous infusion line and the bathroom detergent in the hospital room of the local hospital. The detergent contained the following ingredients: Surfactant (dodecyldimethylamine oxide, sodium alkylbenzene sulfonate), stabilizer (water, ethanol, octane-1,2-diol, sodium sulfate, silicon dioxide), cleaning aid (sodium hydrogen carbonate), antifoam (dimethylsiloxane), abrasive (calcium carbonate), and perfume (2,6-dimethyl-7-octen-2-ol, linalool, (E)-dodec-2-en-1-al, (R)-p-mentha-1,8-dien) . The surfactant and calcium carbonate, which accounted for the largest proportion, were also detected in the intravenous infusion line. It was revealed that approximately 20 mL of detergent was injected.
The patient was maintained on atorvastatin 10 mg for dyslipidemia.
The patient has no relevant family history.
At the emergency department, the patient’s vital signs showed the following: Blood pressure, 120/60 mmHg; heart rate, 88 beats per minute; respiratory rate, 14 per minute; body temperature, 36.1 °C. On physical examination, the breath sounds were clear, and the heart rhythm was regular without murmurs. Erythema was observed around the left greater saphenous vein.
The initial laboratory findings revealed mild leukocytosis (14.8 × 103/μL) and elevated levels of aspartate transaminase (AST) (111 IU/L), total and direct bilirubin (3.48 mg/dL and 1.02 mg/dL, respectively), and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (1726 IU/L) . Arterial blood gas analysis did not show metabolic acidosis or hyperlactatemia. The dipstick urinalysis results revealed protein 3+ and blood 3+, and urine microscopy revealed the presence of numerous red blood cells (RBCs) .
The chest radiography and electrocardiogram readings showed no abnormal findings. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis was performed to determine the cause of bilirubin elevation. The CT images revealed mild common bile duct dilatation, which was seen as a senile change, and the absence of any lesions that could elevate the bilirubin level. The kidney sizes and shapes were relatively normal, but both renal parenchymal enhancements were decreased, which was suggestive of AKI .
On the 2nd day of hospitalization, the patient complained of general weakness and nausea. A decrease in hemoglobin from 12.6 mg/dL to 10.1 mg/dL was observed in laboratory findings on the 2nd day of hospitalization. LDH, AST, and bilirubin elevation were observed in the initial laboratory findings, and since hemolysis may be caused by detergent[,], further diagnostic work up was performed. Peripheral blood smear showed normal RBCs and reticulocyte counts without schistocytes. Serum haptoglobin level was also within normal range .
White blood cell count, AST, bilirubin, and LDH, which were increased in the initial laboratory findings, all decreased at the 2nd day of hospitalization; however, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and serum creatinine (Cr) levels were increased to 44.0 mg/dL and 3.59 mg/dL, respectively. Oliguria was noted as the patient’s daily urine output was only 350 mL. On the 3rd day of hospitalization, the BUN and serum Cr levels further increased to 55.7 mg/dL and 5.42 mg/dL, respectively. Oliguria (daily urine output 320 mL) persisted and generalized edema, which did not respond to diuretics, was noted.
Renal biopsy was performed on the 4th day of hospitalization. Light microscopy examination of renal biopsy specimen revealed up to 15 glomeruli that appeared normal in size and cellularity. The tubules showed diffuse swollen cytoplasms with vacuolar degeneration, focal loss of brush border with focal regenerative nuclear change and mitotic figures. Some tubular lumina contain a few RBCs and granular casts, sloughed cells and calcium concretions. There were focal interstitial fibrosis and infiltration of lymphocytes and some neutrophils. Segmental trace immunofluorescence staining for IgG, IgM and fibrinogen in mesangium was suggestive of a nonspecific trapping. Electron microscopic examination revealed tubular degeneration and granular casts in distal tubular lumina. Thus, the diagnosis was diffuse acute tubular injury .