A 77-year-old Japanese man with a history of hypertension and diabetes mellitus developed chest compression at rest and was referred to our hospital. On initial examination, we observed higher blood pressure, normal heart rate, tachypnea, and normal body temperature (154/94 mmHg, 80 beats per minute, 22 breaths per minute, and 36.6 °C, respectively). His first and second heart sounds had normal loudness, and a fourth heart sound was heard. Neither the third heart sound nor murmur was heard. A coarse crackle was heard in the lower field of his right lung. Electrocardiography (ECG) showed regular sinus rhythm and ST elevation in precordial leads. His value of troponin-I was 1682 pg/ml. The findings of the physical examination, ECG, and a high value of troponin-I supported the diagnosis of ST segment elevation myocardial infarction, classified into Killip classification II. Coronary angiography showed 90% stenosis of his proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD), 75% diffuse stenosis of his proximal right coronary artery (RCA), and total occlusion of his mid RCA with a Multicenter CTO Registry of Japan (J-CTO) score of 3, which originated from the septal branch . A month after PCI of his LAD, PCI of his RCA-CTO was planned because of remaining chest discomfort on effort.
In the second intervention, his serum creatinine level was 88 umol/L, and the stage of chronic kidney disease was 3A. His B-type natriuretic peptide level was 400 ng/L and left ventricular ejection fraction was 45%. Heart failure was compensated. Seven-French Amplatz 1.0 with side hall and 6-French Extra Backup 3.5 with side hall were engaged to his RCA and LAD, respectively. Septal channel tracking was performed with SUOH 03® supported by Caravel® in the manner of channel surfing. After the wire was advanced to the distal cap of the CTO lesion, Gaia Next 1® supported by Corsair® penetrated the lesion antegradely with the kissing wire technique; however, the antegrade wire was repelled by severe calcification and penetrated into the pseudolumen. Gaia Next 1® was changed to Grand Slam®. Then, a 2.5-mm balloon was delivered to the lesion and dilated. Gaia Second® was retrogradely advanced to the tip of the dilated balloon (contemporary reverse CART) . After intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) confirmed the retrograde wire was located in the true lumen, the wire was inserted into the antegrade guiding catheter. After externalization with RG3®, the CTO lesion was dilated with a 2.5-mm balloon. Stents were deployed from the mid to the ostium in the RCA without contrast medium, using IVUS marking and dummy wire . The ostium of the RCA was fully covered with the stent, and several struts protruded to the aorta, which was confirmed by IVUS. Contrast medium was injected two times after stent implantation to confirm coronary flow and no perforation . The total amount of contrast medium was only 8 mL for CTO-PCI. Our patient did not develop CI-AKI and his chest discomfort has disappeared (Additional file ).