Approximately 6 months before presentation to our institution, a 67-year-old white woman had undergone placement of an IVC filter for bilateral pulmonary embolism after anticoagulation was contraindicated due to groin hematoma. She presented to our hospital with a 2-day history of fever, chills, and right upper quadrant abdominal pain. Her physical examination was normal except for mild right upper quadrant tenderness. Her blood cultures came back positive for methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. No external source of infection was found during a detailed physical examination. She had intact skin with no ulcers or abscesses. She denied ever using intravenous drugs. The results of echocardiography were normal with no valvular vegetation. A computed tomographic scan of her abdomen and pelvis was ordered to rule out an intraabdominal infection source. Interestingly, the scan showed four struts of filter penetrating the wall of the IVC by approximately 1.5 cm. The anterior two struts extended into the lumen of the third portion of the duodenum, with the rest extending into the retroperitoneum, abutting the third lumbar vertebra and right ureter (as shown in Figs. and ). The gastroenterology team deferred upper endoscopy due to risk of barotrauma.
The cause of the patient’s abdominal pain was explained by the IVC filter penetrating the duodenum; however, the source of bacteremia could not be ascertained. The duodenum is a sterile part of the gastrointestinal tract and was unlikely to be the source of bacteremia. It was unclear if the bacteremia was a mere coincidence or whether it contributed to this complication by any means. Hopefully, more cases such as this one will clarify this in the future. A vascular surgeon and an interventional radiologist were consulted. The patient underwent successful retrieval of the IVC filter using a superior vena caval approach with a minimally invasive technique. She experienced no complications. She was discharged on an intravenous antibiotic. Anticoagulation was resumed upon discharge.