A 45-year-old Bulgarian man presented with a vague abdominal pain. The onset of the pain was gradual and had persisted for 3 weeks. He had no comorbidities or surgeries, and did not take medication. His skin was pale, cold, and clammy. His breathing was labored with rapid and shallow respirations. Auscultation of his lungs revealed diminished breath sounds bibasally. His abdomen was bloated, diffusely tender, with guarding and rebound tenderness. Tympanism centrally and dullness laterally were noted on percussion. Bowel sounds were absent.
His vital signs on admission were: pulse, 125 minute; blood pressure, 80/40; respiratory rate, 38 minute; oxygen saturation on air, 90 %; and axillary temperature, 35.8 °C.
His intra-abdominal pressure (IAP) measured via urethral catheter was 26 mmHg. This was a grade IV intra-abdominal hypertension (IAH). The amount of urine on catheterization was 50 mL. Blood tests showed anemia, leucocytosis, azotemia, hypoproteinemia, and metabolic acidosis; alpha-amylase was normal. An erect plain X-ray of his abdomen revealed the saddlebag sign . A chest X-ray disclosed the high position of his diaphragmatic domes, and a small reactive pleural effusion to the right.
He was in shock, with signs of generalized peritonitis and ACS. He received a short course of intravenous fluid resuscitation and broad-spectrum antibiotics. This was immediately followed by a midline laparotomy. Upon entering his peritoneal cavity, pressurized gas with a “rotten-egg” odor escaped and 3100 mL of frothy fetid pus evacuated. Despite preoperative rehydration, decompression of the abdomen resulted in sudden hypotension.
All of his organs and tissues were uniformly inflamed with no apparent focal site. His intestines were gathered medially in a ball and covered by a “shield” of dense fibrin deposits below which they appeared normal with shiny serosa and non-swollen walls. The appendicular end was indistinguishable from his small bowel loops, and beneath the fibrin shield looked normal. An appendectomy was performed.
Systematic exploration of all intraperitoneal, retroperitoneal organs and spaces (including the lesser sac) did not reveal the source of infection. Air-leak testing excluded a ruptured hollow viscus. A sealed perforation was also ruled out. Therefore we concluded that we were dealing with a primary bacterial peritonitis (PBP) of an anaerobic microorganism whose metabolism was responsible for the TP.
His abdomen was washed out and left open. His IAP was monitored during the first 48 hours, and fluctuated between 10 and 15 mmHg. Three planned re-laparotomies were performed at 48-hour intervals for debridement, wash out, and exploration for any septic source; none were found. At the end of each re-entry, the laparostomy was partially closed with fascial sutures at both ends. Rapid degradation of the fibrin shield made the bowel loops distinguishable on the second re-entry . On this occasion there was no danger of ACS with IAP <10 mmHg and no organ dysfunction. Consequently we used the intraperitoneal silo technique by placing a presterilized sheet of cellophane over his intestines. It was tucked into the lateral paracolic gutters, and his abdomen was closed using only skin sutures.
On the third re-laparotomy, the silo was removed and the decision was made to definitively close his abdomen. Fascial suture was not possible because the central section remained with an insurmountable gap of 6 cm. We performed the posterior part of the components separation technique (CST) described by Ramirez et al. . Longitudinal incisions of the two posterior rectal sheaths parallel and near his linea alba were made. We bluntly separated these sheaths from his rectus muscles, paying attention not to disturb the neurovascular bundles at the lateral rectal borders. This led to a good mobilization of the two rectal myofascial complexes (RMFCs), allowing apposition under acceptable tension. We used the Kloppel interrupted suture technique, and placed four Smead-Jones internal retention sutures. Our patient made an uneventful recovery, with the wound healing by primary intention.
The sample of the peritoneal exudate for culture and sensitivity taken during the initial operation did not grow bacteria. The samples from the three re-operations as well as the urine culture recovered Acinetobacter baumannii (anitratus). Blood samples were sterile. This bacterium is a Gram-negative obligate aerobe that usually causes nosocomial infections that are rarely clinically significant. With sensitivity only to carbapenems, a 6-day course of imipenem (1.5 g/day) led to complete eradication. The exudate samples for biochemical testing for bilirubin and alpha-amylase revealed levels corresponding to non-elevated serum samples.
A histological examination of the removed appendix showed that its end was reactively inflamed from the outside in. The mucosa was intact, as was the proximal appendicular wall through its full thickness. This excluded the appendix as the primary source of the infection.
Our patient was negative for HIV, hepatitis B, and hepatitis C. He had normal levels of immunoglobulins and was immunocompetent. Before discharge, the following imaging tests were performed: (a) a follow-through with liquid contrast, which revealed no structural or transit-times abnormalities throughout his gastrointestinal tract; (b) a computed tomography of his abdomen, which showed normal findings for all parenchymal and hollow organs.
He was discharged in good health 25 days after admission. He had no complaints at the 1- month and 6-month follow-up. He gained 10 kg in weight and returned to work. His abdominal wall was healthy; an abdominal ultrasound and chest X-ray were normal. A tuberculosis screening test was negative. He continued to be symptom-free with normal findings on physical examination 18 months after discharge.