A 74-year-old female patient presented with a past medical history of dementia, anemia, liver disease, and thrombocytopenia. Two years ago, during a routine laboratory workup with her primary care physician outside our institution, her TSH level was elevated to 5.79 mIU/L (normal 0.40–4.50 mIU/L) with normal free T4 and total T3 levels and she was negative for thyroglobulin and thyroid peroxidase antibodies. No medication was prescribed, and the patient was closely followed. One year later, her TSH level remained elevated at 5.24 mIU/L, and thus her primary care physician ordered an ultrasound thyroid that showed multiple bilateral hypoechoic nodules measuring up to 1.9 cm . The findings prompted the clinician to perform a fine needle aspiration biopsy; a Bethesda Category 5 nodule indicating a suspicion for malignancy was detected in the right superior lobe of the thyroid gland. The patient was referred to our hospital for further work-up and a higher level of care.
The patient was evaluated by our otolaryngology surgery department. She had no compressive symptoms, hoarseness, dysphagia, hemoptysis, otalgia, shortness of breath, or weight loss. Upon palpation, multiple thyroid nodules were detected, which were confirmed by an in-house ultrasound. The results from the remaining exams were unremarkable. The consensus between the patient and the clinician was to perform a total thyroidectomy. The patient underwent total thyroidectomy approximately 6 months after her diagnosis of a Bethesda Category 5 nodule.
Our pathology department received total thyroidectomy specimens after central neck dissection. Macroscopically, multiple tan, focally hemorrhagic, irregular nodules ranging from 0.3 to 1.5 cm were observed throughout the left and right lobes. Microscopically, we observed an encapsulated follicular adenomatous neoplasm with a trabecular pattern and hyalinizing stroma (PAS staining). Numerous bizarre nuclei with significant pleomorphism were observed. Bizarre multinucleated giant cells were present with prominent nucleoli. No lymphovascular or capsular invasion was observed. The neoplastic cells were positive for PAX-8, TTF-1, and Vimentin and focally positive for synaptophysin. The neoplastic cells were negative for chromogranin and BRAF V600E. The expression pattern of p53 was wild-type with a low level of the proliferation index Ki-67 . The histomorphology of the tumor was consistent with the entity named follicular adenoma with bizarre nuclei. We sent the case to another institution for a second opinion, and the expert agreed with our diagnosis.
The patient recovered well from the surgery with no complications and received regular follow up with the surgeon. Her TSH level returned to normal. No further treatment was recommended by the clinical team.