A 54-year-old female was referred to our respirology specialty clinic for evaluation of a small amount of blood-tinged sputum. She had had a chronic cough accompanied by small amounts of sputum for 10 months, and had noticed intermittent small amounts of blood-tinged sputum in the last few days. One week prior to her hospital visit she had visited a local clinic and had been diagnosed as bronchiectasis on the basis of simple radiographs. She had been treated with antibiotics for 7 days, but her symptoms had not been relieved. About 20 years previously she had been diagnosed with pulmonary tuberculosis and had been treated successfully, and had had no further respiratory symptoms until 10 months before. She had had a history of spine operation for her back pain 14 years prior to her admission but no other underlying disease had been diagnosed. She had never had upper respiratory infections or pneumonias requiring antibiotic treatment, nor had she been hospitalized. To her knowledge she had never undergone chest image before visiting the local clinic. The patient was a lifetime non-smoker, and at baseline was active and healthy. She did not complain of chest pain or dyspnea, or any limitation of her activity level. Vital signs on admission were stable, and her chest was completely clear to auscultation, without wheezes, rhonchi, or rales. The rest of her examination was unremarkable. The spirometry test was notable for a forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) of 1.40 L (71% predicted), forced vital capacity (FVC) of 3.53 L (88% predicted), and FEV1/FVC ratio of 69%. The flow-volume loop suggested mild obstruction, and lung volumes were not measured at the time.
Simple chest radiographs revealed a patchy opacity with multiple thin-walled cystic structures in the right lower lobe of the lung field . A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest showed multiple large air-filled cystic lesions in the right lower lobe, which measured 12.0×11.0×5.5 cm3 in aggregate and were primarily located in the right lower lobe. At its perimeter were many small, fluid-filled spaces, the largest of which measured 1.5×1.0×1.0 cm3, and there was some calcification. These radiologic findings were consistent with type I CCAM . Moreover, an oval-shaped opacity in the distal right middle lobe bronchus was surrounded by a low attenuation in the right middle lobe and there was no clear connection between the lesion and the tracheobronchial tree ; this was suggestive of BA. The other lung parenchyma was normal.
On a flexible bronchoscopic examination, the opening of the right middle lobe bronchus was not seen and there was no endobronchial lesion . Based on radiologic and bronchoscopic findings, the patient seemed to have CCAM in the right lower lobe and BA in the right middle lobe.
To diagnose and treat this lesion, the patient underwent a right middle lobectomy and a medial basal segmentectomy of the right lower lobe via a right posterolateral thoracotomy. The cystic malformation was excised en bloc along with the right lower lobe. The operation was completed without complications. On gross inspection, the specimen showed multilobular cystic lesions ranging in size from 0.3 to 1.8 cm in diameter, separated by grossly unremarkable pulmonary parenchyma. The diameter of the whole cystic lesion measured 12.5×11.0×5.2 cm3, and there was yellowish white mucous and necrotic material in the medial basal segment of the right lower lobe. Histologically, the right lower lobe was seen to contain a multilocular cystic lesion lined by stratified ciliated columnar epithelium, with underlying cartilage and mucus-secreting glands. There was marked infiltration of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells in the cyst wall, with focal calcification and a proliferation of small blood vessels. These findings were consistent with type I CCAM . The bronchus of the right middle lobe of the lung was cystically dilated and lined by pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium. The ciliated bronchus contained mucus material, and the bronchial wall contained underlying cartilage and mucous glands with few calcifications. The alveolar spaces distal to the ectatic bronchus were dilated and there was septal smooth muscle proliferation . These findings favor a bronchocele. All 24 lymph nodes were unremarkable. Since removal of the anomalies the patient has been followed up in the outpatient-clinic for 2 years without any complications.