A 67-year-old woman was diagnosed with Hodgkin’s lymphoma (initial disease stage according to Ann Arbor classification: IIA, without risk factors) which continued to progress after initial standard treatment with ABVD (liposomal doxorubicin, bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine). Due to disease progression, two cycles of ICE (ifosfamide, carboplatin, etoposide) were applied, followed by brentuximab vedotin which had to be stopped after four months due to polyneuropathy. Stem cell transplantation was not possible due to a relevant pre-existing medical condition (congestive heart failure). Pembrolizumab was then started in this refractory situation. It was administered every three weeks with a dosage of 200mg intravenously. Two months after starting pembrolizumab a complete remission was achieved.
Twelve days after the sixth cycle of pembrolizumab, the patient presented herself to the emergency department with blurred vision, visual field impairment and altered color perception affecting the right eye. Fundus examination showed papilledema in the right temporal optic disc . Further testing revealed a visual acuity of 0.05 on the right side and a horizontal visual field loss . The brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no abnormality. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis including extensive infectious parameters (including Borrelia species, Flavirus, Treponema pallidum, different herpes virus, measles and mumps virus), neuronal and paraneoplastic antibodies (including anti-amphiphysin antibodies, anti-Hu/anti-Yo/anti-Ri/anti-Ma/anti-Tr antibodies, anti-SOX1 antibodies, anti-ZiC4 antibodies, anti-collapsin-responsive mediator protein 5 antibodies [CRMP 5], anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies [anti-GAD], anti-angiotensin converting enzyme [ACE] antibodies), oligoclonal bands, malignant cells, flow cytometry remained without any relevant findings, despite a slightly elevated total protein level. Moreover, aquaporin-4 immunoglobulin G antibodies (ACQ4) as well as myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein antibodies (MOG) were not pathologically elevated. Considering these diagnostic results, the patient was diagnosed with an immune-related optic neuropathy due to PD-1 blockade with pembrolizumab. High-dose steroid treatment was immediately initiated (125mg intravenous methylprednisolone for five days), followed by tapering of prednisone over a period of four months. The symptoms showed partial regression (visual acuity of 0.3). Additional treatment was not necessarily due to a satisfactory clinical outcome regarding binocular vision. The treatment with pembrolizumab was stopped permanently. There was no sign of tumor activity.
Seven months after the initial presentation with optic neuropathy on the right side, the patient was admitted to the hospital again with complaints of blurred vision, visual field impairment and altered color perception, affecting now the left eye. Fundus examination revealed sectorial papilledema in the left optic disc . A visual acuity of 0.4 in the left side (preliminary recording: 0.8) with horizontal visual field loss was documented . The brain MRI revealed an increasing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) signal along the left optic nerve with continued minimal contrast uptake . Again, an extensive examination of the CSF (same parameters as in the initial examination) showed no abnormal finding, despite a slightly elevated total protein level. In the imaging of the whole body, there was no signs of lymphoma activity. The patient was diagnosed with immune-related optic neuropathy on the left side. Treatment with high-dose steroids was immediately started (500mg intravenous methylprednisolone). In addition, plasmapheresis was performed five times after a deterioration in the symptoms as a result of a reduced high-dose steroid treatment (250mg intravenous methylprednisolone). The symptoms improved and the steroid dosage was gradually reduced. At a dosage of 80mg prednisone (1mg per kg bodyweight) the symptoms worsened again (visual acuity 0.2) and the irAE was interpreted as steroid-refractory. Immunoglobulins were intravenously administered for five days. Due to the absence of relevant clinical improvement, a retrobulbar injection of steroids was administered and treatment with mycophenolate mofetil (1000mg peroral twice daily) was started. This treatment improved the symptoms so that the steroid treatment could finally be stopped after six months of tapering. The dosage of mycophenolate mofetil could gradually be reduced (after 12 months: current dosage of 250mg peroral twice daily) without recurrence of symptoms. A visual acuity of 0.8 could be measured on the left side, corresponding to the baseline assessment. Six months after affecting the left eye the patient is independent again in everyday life. So far, there is no sign of tumor activity.