A 15-year-old boy presented with sudden-onset, nondisabling gait ataxia of 1 month duration followed by right hemiparesis, aphasia, and drowsiness of 2 days duration. He had no other neuraxial or constitutional symptoms. His vaccination status was erratic and he had a history of viral exanthematous fever at the age of 2.5 years.
On admission he was drowsy and afebrile with normal vital signs. The findings of a systemic examination were unremarkable. On repeated commands, he attempted to answer questions with only one or two words. He performed single-step commands. His fundi and cranial nerve findings were normal. He had right hemiplegia (Medical Research Council Grade 2) with normal reflexes and extensor plantar response. He had mild choreoathetoid movements of the distal left extremities. In view of the multiaxial involvement and acute presentation, possible diagnoses of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) and viral encephalitis were considered. An EEG disclosed polymorphic, asynchronous 3- to 4-Hz delta activity over the entire left hemisphere, with normal background activity over the right hemisphere . Brain magnetic resonance imaging disclosed bilateral, subcortical, and posterior periventricular hyperintensities on T2-weighted, gadolinium-nonenhanced images . All blood parameters were normal. His cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was acellular with normal glucose and mild elevation in protein (60 mg/dL).
The presence of white-matter hyperintensities and albuminocytological dissociation on CSF analysis supported a diagnosis of ADEM. Intravenous methylprednisolone was administered at a dose of 1 g/day for the following 3 days, but had no impact-the patient deteriorated to a stuporous state. On the 4th day he exhibited slow myoclonic jerks involving the left-side extremities. A repeat EEG disclosed long-interval, high-amplitude, generalized periodic complexes of slow waves, lasting 1 second, with a slow background of low-amplitude, 3- to 4-Hz delta activity between them . Elevated titer of IgG antimeasles antibodies was detected in the CSF, and the CSF: serum ratio was 3. Amantadine and isoprinosine were started along with antiepileptics; However, the disease progressed relentlessly, and on the 7th day of hospitalization the patient became comatose and required ventilator support. He succumbed on the 13th day of hospitalization (i.e., 45 days from the onset of the illness).
After obtaining consent from the parents, a brain autopsy was performed within 2 hours of death. The brain was diffusely edematous with haziness of cortical and basal meninges. On serial coronal slicing, the white matter in the occipital, parietal, and temporal lobes had a granular gray appearance with areas of softening . The cortex appeared relatively normal, as did the deep nuclei of the basal ganglia and thalami. Gross sections through brainstem also exposed areas of softening and grayish discoloration in the midbrain . The cerebellum was well preserved.
Representative sections taken through different areas revealed predominant involvement of the bilateral visual, parietal, and temporal cortices. The sections revealed a diffuse encephalitic process with perivascular lymphocytic infiltration in the meninges, cortex, and white matter. The gray matter exhibited dense infiltrate of lymphocytes, histiocytes, and few plasma cells. There were large areas of neuronal loss with large reactive astrocytes highlighted by glial fibrillary acid protein immunostaining. The white matter from these areas also contained aggregates of histiocytes with demyelination. The neurons and the oligodendrocytes were loaded with smudgy intranuclear eosinophilic inclusions . The inclusions were strongly immunostained for the measles virus antigen . The midbrain also exhibited intranuclear inclusions and periaqueductal gliosis. Neither inclusions nor antigens were found in the cerebellum and cervical cord.