An 81-year-old man presented to our hospital with chest pain and dyspnea 2 weeks after sustaining blunt trauma from a cultivator accident. At the time of the accident, he did not seek medical care. On admission, he was alert and complained of chest pain. He had a history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia which was being treated with medications for 9 years. A bruise was noted on the anterior chest. His blood pressure had decreased to 70/50 mmHg; however, his other vital signs were normal.
Laboratory tests revealed decreased hemoglobin (8.5 g/dL), elevated plasma lactate (104 mg/dL), and normal creatine kinase (CK), CK-MB, and troponin T levels. The other laboratory values were within the reference limits.
An electrocardiogram indicated sinus rhythm with premature atrial complexes and low voltage QRS complexes. Initial contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) showed a collection of hemorrhagic fluid in the pericardium and suspected leakage of contrast medium on the right ventricle , with multiple fractured ribs(3rd to 5th ribs) on the right aspect of the chest. The ascending aorta was measured to be about 45 mm in maximum diameter .
We suspected right-sided cardiac rupture, established an anesthetic plan based on the cardiac rupture and performed emergency surgery. After median sternotomy, immediately after pericardial incision, approximately 200 mL stagnated blood gushed out and the blood pressure normalized. After removing the hematoma covering the heart, continuous pulsatile flow of fresh blood was observed coming from the ascending aorta. A laceration-type wound approximately 7 mm in size with 2 mm perforation was closed with a 4–0 pledgeted polypropylene suture. We could not find any obvious laceration of the parietal pericardium except for a small perforation and an abrasion at the level of the ascending aortic injury. The tip of sharp bony fragment of the fractured 4th rib was removed using a rongeur. The patient was discharged after 14 days, without any complications.