The patient is a 43-year-old Caucasian male, with a history of diarrhea since age three months, when diet with wheat and milk was begun. Diarrhea did not stop before changing to vegetables and potatoes. At age 9, abdominal colics occurred until late puberty. Since then diarrhea or colics did not recur but episodes of unformed faeces occurred. In 1986, he noted that he frequently lost his slippers and experienced straddling of the toes when stretching his legs. He did no longer tolerate wearing shoes because of hyperalgesia and allodynia and took them off whenever possible. In 2002, the diagnostic work up revealed an inflammatory CSF-syndrome (17/3 cells, 84mg/dl protein, 1.2mg/dl intrathecal IgG, positive oligoclonal bands) and multiple white matter lesions on MRI, which is the reason why he was diagnosed as relapsing-remitting MS with an EDSS score of 1.0. Interferon beta-1b was started and given during the next 8 years without a significant effect or evident side effects. Neurological exam in 5/2003 showed reduced tendon reflexes on the lower limbs, slight ataxia, and stocking-type pallhypesthesia. Nerve biopsy revealed a burned-out, axonal polyneuropathy. Sarcoidosis was excluded by a normal angiotensin converting enzyme-level and negative whole body gallium scintigraphy. Cerebral white matter lesions were unchanged in 2005 except for the regression of the hyperintensity in the left cerebellar peduncle. Cerebral MRI in 2008 revealed a new lesion in the left thalamus. Since 2009 nightly muscle cramps in the calves occurred. In 2010, the diagnostic work-up revealed normal anti-gliadin antibodies but positivity for HLA-DQ2 and HLA-DQ8 (genotype C/T, presence of alleles HLA DQA1*0501, *0505, HLA DQB1*0201, *0202, *0302 by means of a SSP-PCR) . Cerebral MRI showed a white matter lesion in the left parietal region and the left cerebellar peduncle. In 2/2010, the patient decided to follow a strict gluten-free diet, which resulted in a marked improvement of the gastrointestinal abnormalities but hardly affected the gluten ataxia. In 7/2011, osteoporosis was diagnosed.
At a follow-up in 4/2012, he admitted to have drunk alcohol excessively between 1985 and 1995 and to be impotent for some time. Neurological exam revealed gaze-evoked nystagmus, brady diadochokinesis, intention ataxia on the left side, stocking type hypoesthesia on the lower limbs, absent tendon reflexes on the lower limbs, and ataxic stance and gait, this is why he used two crutches for walking. Standing without support resulted in a tendency to fall. Blood tests revealed elevated myoglobin, vitamin-B12 deficiency, and vitamin-D-deficiency, but no gliadin (endomysial) and transglutaminase autoantibodies were found . Nerve conduction studies revealed a slight improvement compared to previous investigations, such that the sural nerve could be stimulated again and that nerve conduction velocity of the right peroneal nerve improved .
Compared to 2010, cerebral MRI showed an old subcortical, frontotemporal, band-like hyperintensity and an old hyperintensity in the left cerebellar peduncle, and a new left parietal, paramedian hyperintensity, a new hyperintense, spot-like periventricular lesion on the right side, and a microadenoma of the pituitary gland. The gastroenterologists refused biopsy of the gastric or colonic mucosa, since he was on a gluten-free diet for 2 years and since only one third of CD patients with gluten ataxia have evidence of enteropathy on biopsy . In 4/2012, his medication comprised ibandrone acid every 3 months exclusively. He was still on a strict gluten-free diet.