A 38-year-old pregnant woman (gravida 2, para 0) was admitted at 40 weeks of gestation to our labor and delivery unit with regular contractions after an uncomplicated, regularly supervised pregnancy. She reported a history of mild asthma, endometriosis, and an early miscarriage. At admission, physical examination showed normal vital signs and a fully dilated cervix. Laboratory results were unremarkable. She had an uncomplicated spontaneous vaginal delivery with Apgar scores of 10 and 10. A blood pressure of 152/67 mmHg was noted once during labor.
The patient received extremely stressful news about her child just after delivery. Thirty hours after delivery, she reported a sudden and intense headache associated with epigastric pain. She had no chest pain or respiratory discomfort, such as dyspnea, and neurological examination found no abnormalities. Laboratory tests revealed cytolysis (ASAT, 414 U/L and ALAT, 399 U/L; LDH, 1,017 U/L), associated with a slightly low haptoglobin concentration (0.44 g/L). A whole blood count showed thrombocytopenia (84 G/L) but no evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation. Slight signs of inflammation were present (white blood cells count, 12.9 G/L; CRP, 77 mg/L). The blood creatinine concentration was elevated (1.12 mg/dl or 85 μmol/L) and was associated with de novo proteinuria. The urinary protein profile demonstrated tubular and glomerular involvement (total proteinuria, 0.45 g/mmol creatininuria; albumin, 227 mg/mmol creatininuria; alpha-1-microglobulin, 9.03 mg/mmol creatininuria; alpha-2-macroglobulin, 2.27 mg/mmol creatininuria; IgG, 60.43 mg/mmol creatininuria; retinol-binding protein, 0.53 mg/mmol creatininuria; transferrin, 37.90 mg/mmol creatininuria). We diagnosed HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, low platelet) syndrome, a complication of pregnancy with a risk of kidney failure. The patient was admitted to the nephrology intensive care unit on day 2.
On admission to the nephrology intensive care unit, we found elevated levels of cTnIhs and cTnThs, indicating cardiac necrosis, as well as elevated levels of NT-proBNP. Retrospective assays of cTnIhs and cTnThs in stored plasma samples revealed that pathological concentrations of cTnIhs (i.e., above the 99th percentile threshold) were already present 1 h before delivery but not of cTnThs . Measurements of these cardiac biomarkers up to 6 days after delivery found distinct qualitative and quantitative differences. Qualitatively, whereas pathological levels of cTnIhs were already present before delivery, cTnThs began to increase 0.5 day later. Quantitatively, between admission and day 6, cTnIhs concentrations ranged from 115 to 6,264 ng/L whereas cTnThs concentrations were much lower, ranging from 10 to 273 ng/L; NT-proBNP concentrations ranged from 200 to 4,056 ng/L. Both cTnIhs and cTnThs reached a peak concentration at day 2 and decreased soon after. The peak concentration of cTnIhs, however, was much greater than that of cTnThs (median cTnIhs/cTnThs molar ratio = 20.9; 95% C.I., 14.9–36.6—see Methods Section). NT-proBNP levels peaked around the same time as those of the troponins but decreased only after day 3.
The twelve-derivation electrocardiogram was unremarkable. No coronary stenosis or dissection was found by coronary computed tomographic angiography. Transthoracic echocardiography performed at day 1 after transfer to the nephrology intensive care unit (i.e., at day 3 post-delivery) revealed hyperechogenicity, ballooning and akinesia of the basal and mid segments of the inferoseptal , inferior and anteroseptal walls, with mild impairment of left ventricular ejection function (LVEF, 45%), suggesting inverted Takotsubo syndrome, a rare variant of this disease that presents with basal ballooning instead of apical ballooning. Cardiac MRI performed at day 3 after transfer to the nephrology intensive care unit (i.e., at day 5 post-delivery) revealed a non-dilated, non-hypertrophied left ventricle, slightly altered global LVEF (51%) and characteristic wall motion abnormalities of inverted Takostubo syndrome including hypokinesia of the basal third predominating over the septum and apical hyperkinesia associated with diffuse basal myocardial edema detected by T2 mapping sequence without late gadolinium enhancement . Global T2 mapping values demonstrated a gradient from the base to the apex of the left ventricle: 56 ± 4 ms in the first third, 51 ± 7 ms in the second third, and 48 ± 3 ms at the apical level.
The patient was treated with an intravenous beta-blocker (labetalol) as soon as the diagnosis of HELLP syndrome was made and with intravenous magnesium sulfate until abolition of neurological signs. Her evolution was favorable, with a reversal of headache, hepatic cytolysis, acute renal failure and thrombocytopenia. In addition to the beta-blocker, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (captopril) was used at day 3 to improve blood pressure control with no adverse events. cTnIhs levels slowly decreased to 849 ng/L on day 6 when she was discharged from the nephrology intensive care unit. One month after discharge, the patient was in complete remission of her post-partum inverted Takotsubo syndrome. A follow-up cardiac MRI demonstrated complete resolution of left ventricular dysfunction (LVEF, 60%) and regional left ventricular function recovery . Moreover, normalization of T2 mapping values indicated the disappearance of myocardial edema (in ): 50 ± 5 ms in the first third, 46 ± 6 ms in the second third, and 46 ± 5 ms at the apical level. These findings from cardiac MRI were consistent with our diagnosis of inverted Takotsubo syndrome. Three months after discharge, medical examination found a normal blood pressure of 123/82 mmHg and blood analyses were normal. The main results of the case presentation were summarized in .