A 57-year-old male patient who presented with left-sided chest tightness, frequent dry cough, progressive orthopnea, and a weight loss of 5 kg over a 4-month period was admitted to our department on 18th July 2022 (Day 0). The patient complained that he began to feel chest tightness and dry coughing at night about a month. He had an unremarkable medical history, was an active smoker consuming 1 pack of cigarettes every 3 days and had a 20-year history of occupational asbestos exposure from his work as an interior designer. He frequently came into contact with sound and heat insulation material containing high levels of asbestos and did not consistently use a face mask.
The patient's body weight and length were 73.4 kg and 173 cm, respectively, and his blood pressure, heart rate, and respiratory rate were 102/67 mmHg, 81 beats/minute, and 24 breaths/minute, respectively. The physical examination was notable for bilateral pitting edema of the lower legs. Muffled and irregular heart sounds were detected with jugular vein elevation. Electrocardiography showed sinus tachycardia without abnormal T waves or ST segment changes. The initial laboratory analysis revealed that the white blood cell count was 16,390 cells/mm3, the BUN/creatinine ratio was 31/1.16, the high sensitivity troponin I level (hs-troponin I) was 4.3 pg/ml, NT-proBNP was 418.0 pg/ml, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) was 1.9 ng/ml. Chest x-ray showed cardiomegaly and pericardial effusion . Computed tomography (CT) scans revealed massive pericardial effusion with thickened pericardium and bilateral pleural effusion .
Pericardiocentesis was performed on Day 1 to relieve the symptoms of the unexplained pericardial effusion, and the drainage of pericardiocentesis came out with a purulent and bloody effusion. In light of his history of occupational long-term asbestos exposure and clinical data, a thoracoscopic pericardial biopsy was conducted on Day 3. Subsequent cytopathology analysis of pericardial effusion showed clustered mesothelial cells . Pathological evaluation of the biopsy specimen revealed the presence of several abnormalities, including an overgrowth of mesothelial cells, changes in the nuclei of these cells, increased collagen in the connective tissue, and the accumulation of fibrinoid exudates . Immunohistochemistry shows positive mesothelial 183 markers (cytokeratin 5/6 and calretinin) and negative pulmonary 184 epithelial markers (thyroid transcription factor-1 and 185 carcinoembryonic antigen). The tumor cells also exhibited a loss of 186 expression of methylthioadenosine phosphorylase and retained 187 expression of BRCA1-associated protein 1 (–). Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) was then performed to detect potential metastasis on Day 10. The result showed 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the anterior part of the mediastinum without distant metastasis . With these pathological findings, the diagnosis of PPM was made on Day 11.
After the diagnosis, our patient was recommended to receive a combined cardiac tumor debulking surgery and palliative chemotherapy, but he opted for palliative chemotherapy only, which started on Day 33. For cycles 1–6, the patient was administered Avastin (bevacizumab) at a dose of 5 mg/kg, Cisplatin at a dose of 50–60 mg/m2, and Alimta (Pemetrexed) at a dose of 400–500 mg/m2. The patient tolerated the first cycle well and experienced mild appetite loss and nausea. The patient received acupuncture as an adjuvant therapy aiming to minimize the treatment-related symptoms. There were no other treatment-related side effects reported. A follow-up chest x-ray and CT scan immediately after the 6 cycles of chemotherapy on Day 149 revealed normal heart size, no pleural or pericardial effusion , and lessened pericardial thickening . The follow-up laboratory analysis revealed that the white blood cell count was 5.89 cells/mm3, the BUN/creatinine ratio was 15/1.03, the hs-troponin I was 5.8 ng/ml, NT-proBNP was 871 pg/ml, and CEA was 1.6 ng/ml. Subsequently, the patient was discharged with minimal side effects, such as mild body weight loss, appetite loss, and fatigue. On Day 270, the patient initiated a second course of chemotherapy due to an escalation in episodes of arrhythmia and mild dyspnea. However, the patient opted to discontinue the medical treatment after the initiation of the second course due to side effects. We did fully discuss with the patient and family members regarding the treatment. The patient also received mental consultation from experts. The patient nevertheless refused to receive further treatment. Subsequently, the patient was transferred to the hospice care unit and unfortunately expired on Day 355. The timeline of the major events during the episode of care for this patient is summarized in .