A seventy-year-old right-handed female has complained progressive memory problems, which started one year prior to the initial visit. She reported her frequent forgetfulness of going to important meetings and had difficulties in grocery shopping. She also reported in having a tremor in her right hand for the past 20 years, persistent during resting and forearm stretching stances, which did not progress further. She presented with slightly decreased facial expressions, but did not show rigidity, ataxia, myoclonus, or seizure. Since she was separated from her other family members during the Korean War, we could not obtain her family history. Her Korean version of Mini-Mental Status Examination (K-MMSE) was 18 and CDR-sum of boxes was 4.5. She also underwent neuropsychological tests using a standardized neuropsychological battery called the Seoul Neuropsychological Screening Battery (SNSB) . She had normal spontaneous speech and comprehension. Her SNSB showed digit span forward was 16.86%ile; Korean-Boston naming test, 12.09%ile; Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure Test copy, 0.01%ile; calculation, < 5%ile; Seoul Verbal Learning Test-delayed recall, 1.05%ile; Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure-delayed recall test, 2.09%ile; Digit Symbol Coding, 1.15%ile; Korean Stroop test-color reading, 11.46%ile; Controlled Oral Word Association Test, 0.01%ile. She also revealed the BPO (body part as object) error when doing praxis test. Fist-edge-palm and alternating hand movement, motor impersistence test were normal, but Luria loop and alternating square and triangle were deformed and perseverative. Neuropsychological tests revealed severe verbal memory impairment, which was not improved by cues. In addition, she showed visuo-spatial dysfunction and difficulty in calculation and frontal executive function. Her brain MRI showed diffuse cortical atrophy with mild white matter hyperintensities in FLAIR images, and FDG-PET revealed bilateral temporoparietal and precuneus hypometabolism. A diagnosis of probable AD was made. She had an APOE ϵ3/4 polymorphism, but other laboratory tests were normal.