A 51-year-old man was admitted to Zhejiang Hospital at the end of June 2020, complaining of lower back pain of over a month’s duration. He had a 10-year history of diabetes, controlled with oral metformin (2 tablets daily). After computed tomography (CT) examination, he was diagnosed with adrenal tumour and no abnormality in other parts. Due to the limitation of focus and the possibility of malignancy considered in imaging, a retroperitoneal laparoscopic resection of the left adrenal tumour was performed under general anaesthesia. During surgery, it was found that the tumour, identified in the left adrenal region, was about 4 cm in diameter, with a complete capsule and obvious adhesion to the left upper pole. Then, the tumour body and adrenal tissue were completely removed. Postoperative pathology revealed an adrenal angiogenic malignant tumour with massive necrosis (combined with morphology and immunohistochemistry, an epithelioid angiosarcoma was also considered), and a negative margin (R0 resection). . The results of immunohistochemistry were as follows: CD34 (+), CD31 (+), ERG (partially weak+), FLI-1 (partially weak+), CK (+), CK7 (+), CK20 (–), CD56 (-), CgA (-), Syn (-), SMA (-), S-100 (-), desmin (-), HMB 45 (-), melan-A (-), and Ki67 (+, 20%) . The patient decided not to undergo chemotherapy despite medical advice but followed up regularly after surgery. Seven months after operation, a positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET-CT) examination was performed in response to further abdominal and back pain. The results showed a soft tissue mass in the operative area that was accompanied by an abnormal increase of fluorodeoxyglucose metabolism (maximum standardized uptake value, 21.0), and the diameter of the larger cross-section was about 2.4 × 1.6 cm. Furthermore, the lesion involved the left renal upper pole and left renal fascia, and the fat space around the lesion was slightly blurred . Meanwhile, multiple enlarged lymph nodes were found in the bilateral clavicular area, bilateral mediastinal-hilar, mediastinum, bilateral anterior diaphragm, left retrocrural space, hepatic hilum, retroperitoneum (perirenal and pericaval) and left inguinal area, and the larger ones were located in the 8R area (4.2× 1.9 cm, maximum standardized uptake value, 7.9, ). Postoperative recurrence of adrenal epithelioid angiosarcoma was comprehensively considered. The patient was then admitted to the Zhejiang Cancer Hospital and given 10 mg oxycontin every 12 h to control the pain. Given the extent of the local recurrence and possibility of new distant metastatic disease, our multi-disciplinary team discussions concluded that further surgery would not be indicated and that systemic chemotherapy should be considered. At the end of January 2021, the patient received combination chemotherapy, consisting of six cycles of liposomal doxorubicin (25 mg/m2 on day 1) plus paclitaxel (90 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8) once every 3 weeks. Fortunately, the patient had good tolerance and no obvious adverse reactions to the therapy (grade II peripheral neurotoxicity only, manifested as numbness of hands and feet). In addition, after two cycles of chemotherapy, the pain was relieved. At that time (after two cycles of chemotherapy), a CT scan showed a disappearance of the soft tissue tumour lesions in the operation area and a significant reduction or disappearance of the mediastinal and mediastinal-hilar lymph nodes . He achieved partial response (PR) according to the RECIST 1.1 criteria. Further, he underwent four cycles of the treatment, and a total of six cycles ended in mid-May 2021 (day 1 of cycle 6). After six cycles of chemotherapy, a CT re-examination showed that the soft tissue tumour lesions in the operation area were responding to the treatment, and the diameters of the larger lymph nodes (8R) were less than 1 cm . Finally, he had achieved a CR.