A 59-year-old female presented at our emergency department with complaints of severe abdominal pain several hours after undergoing ESWL in another hospital. She presented at the peripheral hospital with her chief complaint being an acute onset abdominal pain that started 4 h before arriving at the hospital. At the time the abdominal pain was intermittent, localized (mainly around the umbilical region), and radiated to the right flank. She also complained of nausea and had one episode of vomiting. After evaluation, an abdominal CT-Scan and abdominal ultrasound both revealed a right ureteral calculus and right renal hydronephrosis. They then scheduled her for ESWL. Unfortunately, in the patient's discharge summary, they did not disclose the specifics of the ESWL in terms of the shock waves delivered and the power range. The procedure was uneventful, and they discharged the patient.
After some hours, the patient started complaining of diffuse abdominal pain. She was then referred to our hospital for further management. At our facility, she presented with complaints of diffuse abdominal pain with associated nausea and vomiting. She did not report any dysuria, change in bowel movements, or hematochezia prior to the ESWL. Before this admission, her past medical history was uneventful; she had no history of any chronic illnesses, significant abdominal trauma, or abdominal surgery.
On physical examination, she was tachycardic but normotensive. Her abdomen was distended with generalized abdominal tenderness and mild rebound tenderness, but with no guarding present. Murphy's sign was negative. There was tenderness on percussion of the right kidney. Bowel sounds were increased at around 5/min and positive shifting dullness was present. Her other systems were normal.
Routine blood tests found that she had raised WBC at 26.9 ↑ 109/L and absolute neutrophilia of 76.5%, HB at 128 g/L, and hematocrit of 36.8%. CRP was elevated at 36.2 mg/L, revealing an inflammatory picture. LFT's showed a decrease in albumin at 26.8 g/L. Urea and creatinine were elevated at 9.2 mmol/L and 98.7 mmol/L respectively. Her coagulation profile was deranged, with prothrombin time and d-dimers at 12.6 s and 1302 μg/L, respectively. Urinalysis, urinary occult blood of 3 + , urinary protein 2 + , RBC 459.32/HP, WBC 45.83/HP.
After surgical consultation, we immediately scheduled her for an emergency exploratory laparotomy. As the patient was being prepared for surgery, she had one episode of hematochezia of approximately 300mls of fresh blood. Because of this, she received a transfusion of four units of packed red blood cells.
The laparotomy revealed that there was a large hematocele, with partial necrosis of the small intestine. The small intestine was entrapped by omental and mesenteric adhesions approximately 2 m from the ligament of Treitz. The bowel segments entrapped within the adhesions were released. Unfortunately, assessment of the bowel segment revealed that it was necrotic. The 2.6 m of the necrotic intestinal segment was resected and the continuity of the remaining 40 cm of the ileocecum and jejunum was maintained by end-to-end anastomosis.