A 67-year-old Japanese woman complained of acute-onset abdominal pain and vomiting (Glasgow Coma Scale score = 14). Her vital signs were largely stable, apart from tachycardia with atrial fibrillation (Af) that had never been treated. The laboratory data revealed acidosis, inflammation, and elevated lactate and creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels. The contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed that the SMA was occluded by a thromboembolism. Because of her pre-existing Af, she was diagnosed with embolic occlusion of the SMA and intestinal necrosis. She was treated with an emergency enterectomy . The pulse of the SMA disappeared, and a relatively fresh thrombus was observed in the stump of the resected intestines. Anticoagulation therapy with heparin was initiated after the laparotomy.
Post-operatively, she developed methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) colitis and sepsis. Due to her respiratory insufficiency and shock conditions, she was treated with ventilator support. Although antibiotics resolved her MRSA colitis within 3 weeks of the laparotomy, she began to gradually develop gangrene in her right hand.
The three-dimensional CT images showed that her right brachial artery was occluded 5 cm proximal to the elbow joint ; however, we could detect arterial pulsation 15 cm proximal to the elbow joint. We diagnosed her with an acute brachial arterial occlusion associated with an SMA embolism, and 6 weeks after the emergency laparotomy, an amputation was performed 15 cm proximal to the elbow joint. We did not observe any severe atherosclerotic changes in the brachial artery. The pulsation of the brachial artery disappeared at the level of the bone transection, and the arterial lumen was filled with an organized embolus .
An abdominal CT scan revealed multiple infarctions of the spleen, indicating a shower embolism. Anticoagulation therapy was re-started after the amputation to prevent recurrent or new emboli. She was able to ambulate independently 2 months after the amputation. She used a prosthetic upper limb for 12 months after the amputation, at which time she died of malnutrition resulting from the enterectomy.