A 76-year-old Asian man was involved in a road traffic accident. He presented with neck and arm pain on his right side, but motor weakness and paralysis were not observed. His arm pain corresponded to the right C6 and C7 dermatomes.
We carried out an X-ray image examination of our patient’s cervical spine and diagnosed a slight cervical spondylolisthesis . CT and MRI were not performed. Because our patient did not show motor weakness or paralysis, his neck and arm pain were treated conservatively. However, the pain did not change over the six weeks following the injury. We conducted further X-ray imaging, MRI and CT eight weeks after the injury . Plain X-ray film images obtained at this time showed increased instability at the C5 to C6 joint when compared with those taken immediately after the accident . MRI revealed central spinal canal stenosis at the C5 to C6 joint and high signal intensity in the spinal cord on T2-weighted imaging . A sagittal CT showed bilateral dislocation of facet joints .
We planned posterior-anterior surgery eight weeks after the injury. We performed a partial resection of both C5 to C6 facet joints for reduction, using a posterior approach. Half of the C5 to C6 facet joint was resected on the right side, and one quarter of the C5 to C6 facet joint was resected on the left side.
Lateral mass screws on the left side were used for fixation, and bilateral local bone was grafted between the posterior surface of the C5 and C6 laminae. Lateral mass screws on the right side were not used for fixation because most of the lateral bone mass was resected. Because fixation was insufficient, we added an anterior approach by removing the C5 to C6 intervertebral disc, and grafted iliac bone into the C5 to C6 space. We used a titanium plate for fixation.
Our patient gradually became symptom-free after surgery. He presented with a transient C5 palsy on his right side; however, he had recovered three months after the surgery. Plain X-ray film images obtained six months after surgery showed good stability . MRI revealed recovery of the central spinal canal stenosis at the C5 to C6 joint and showed normal intensity in the spinal cord on T2-weighted imaging .