On 23 February 2000, a 50-year-old man was referred to our hospital because of progressive abdominal pain for 3 hours. The patient's initial blood pressure was 88/58 mmHg and his heart rate was 109 beats/minute. Laboratory data were within normal limits except for the hemoglobin and alanine aminotransferase, which were 8.8 g/dl, and 145 U/l, respectively. After transfusion of 2 units of packed red blood cells and 4 units of fresh frozen plasma, the patient's blood pressure was 112/63 mmHg and his heart rate was 75 beats/minute. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) on admission showed a 12 × 12.5 × 5 cm3 mass in Couinaud segments 7 and 8 and ascites accumulation . Angiography revealed dilated, tortuous and displaced arterial tumor feeders with neovasculatures showing a disorganized pattern over the right lobe of the liver. This was consistent with HCC. Other laboratory data revealed positive hepatitis B virus surface antigen and antibodies against hepatitis C virus. Serum alpha-fetoprotein level was less than 20 ng/ml.
The patient underwent a right extended lobectomy, with partial resection of the diaphragm (about 4 × 4 cm2) and cholecystectomy, on 26 February 2000. The tumor was resected with margins greater than or equal to 1 cm. Six hundred cubic centimetres of bloody ascites were removed during surgery.
Histopathological examination revealed a poorly differentiated HCC . Direct invasion to the resected diaphragm was seen, although the microscopic surgical margins were unremarkable.
The patient's postoperative course was smooth and he was discharged on 13 March 2000. After surgery, he had regular followups with serum alpha-fetoprotein levels, chest radiographs, and abdominal ultrasonography every three months in our hospital. A small intrahepatic recurrence was found and treated twice by ultrasound-guided percutaneous alcohol injection.
The patient presented with mild hemoptysis 30 months after the hepatectomy, and follow-up chest CT demonstrated a metastasis in the right lower lobe the of lungs. The metastasis was removed with wedge resection measuring 2 × 1 × 1 cm3. Histopathological examination confirmed the presence of metastatic HCC .
A follow-up chest radiograph and CT revealed a 2.9 cm solitary metastasis in the right upper lobe of the lung without any sign of liver recurrence 52 months after hepatectomy. A wedge resection of the right upper lobe of the lung was performed through a thoracotomy and the tumor was confirmed as a metastasis of HCC.
A further follow-up chest CT scan disclosed tumor recurrence in the right upper lobe of the lung and pleural seeding 80 months after hepatectomy . The serum alpha-fetoprotein level was 39.14 ng/ml. The patient underwent surgery again in December 2006 and these tumors were removed with combined resection of the right upper pulmonary lobe and right chest wall with the fourth and fifth ribs. Histopathological examination confirmed the presence of metastatic HCC. After surgery, the serum alpha-fetoprotein level decreased to 1.96 ng/ml in February 2007.
No intrahepatic recurrence of HCC was found after the last percutaneous alcohol injection of the liver and the patient has remained disease-free for 10 months since the last resection of pulmonary metastases, i.e. 90 months after the initial hepatectomy for a ruptured HCC.