A 11-year-old boy was admitted to our department with a 1-year history of progressive visual loss. He was initially taken as pseudomyopia without treatment. Four months ago, he was diagnosed with T1DM and found bilateral OA by brain magnetic resonance image (MRI), optic coherence temography (OCT) and visual evoked potential (VEP) (no pictures provided) in the local hospital. And he was treated with compound anisodine hydrobromide injection and mouse nerve factor injection for one and a half months without alleviating. Then the boy was referred to our department with suspicious of ON or NMO.
The patient was hospitalized in local hospital because of a sudden faint in school 4 months ago. Some of his laboratory tests were as follows: finger point blood glucose test > 33.3 mmol/L, blood glucose 38 mmol/L, HbAc 15.8%, and positive urine sugar and ketone. His mother recallded that he was polydipsia, polyphagia and polyuria with weight loss for 1 month. So he was diagnosed with ‘type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM1), ketoacidosis and coma’, and treated with insulin pump of Medtronic in the local hospital.
Some of his main investigations in our hospital revealed as follows. ANA+ENA + ANCA, TSH in serum, AQP4 and OCB in serum and cerebrospinal fluid were negative. His HbAc was 5.9% and blood glucose was 4.88 mmol/L. His anti-GAD antibody and anti-insulin antibody in serum was negative. Regular urinalysis and hearing was normal. The photographic images of the patient’s eyes showed bilateral papillary atrophy . OCT measure around the disc showed thin retina . Brain MRI showed bilateral optic nerve atrophy thinner . OA and DM1 in a young patient suggested his clinically diagnose of WS.
The patient was the first child, and had one little sister. Both his little sister and his parents had no signs or symptoms. And his parents were non-consanguineous.
For further confirmation of the diagnosis, we got the consent to sequence WFS1 gene for the patient and his parents without his other family members. The patient’s number 587 codon, c.1760G > A, located in exon 8, mutated and changed from arginine to glutamine. He was homozygote while his parents were both heterozygote of mutant genes. We used the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) to assess that this was a novel mutation. Exome sequencing disclosed a novel mutation in WFS1 gene (the novel variant c.1760G > A) , confirming WS.