A 58-year-old Caucasian man with a history of pityriasis versicolor and metastatic melanoma was started on pembrolizumab 200 mg every 21 days. He developed pruritic maculopapular rashes throughout his body 22 weeks into the treatment course. In some areas, the maculopapular lesions coalesced into patches and plaques. Many of these lesions were scaly in appearance and resembled his prior pityriasis versicolor infection. The skin eruptions were mainly in the abdomen, back, and extremities . He was started on topical betamethasone diproprionate 0.05% and miconazole nitrate 2% cream for the dermatitis due to the irAE with associated underlying pityriasis versicolor. The skin lesions improved with these topical therapies.
By 25 weeks after starting pembrolizumab, his melanoma then progressed and the immunotherapy regimen was switched to ipilimumab 3 mg/kg every 21 days. Five weeks later, he had a worsening of the dermatitis with severe pruritus. The dermatitis covered approximately 40% of his body surface area and involved his torso, bilateral hands, and lower extremities . A second course of topical betamethasone diproprionate 0.05% cream, daily cetirizine 10 mg tablet, and miconazole nitrate 2% cream was administered to the patient, without improvement. Oral prednisone 50 mg (0.5 mg/kg) daily was then prescribed, and the extent of his rashes from dermatitis improved.
Subsequent multiple attempts to wean him from the prednisone resulted in rapid worsening of his skin condition. His melanoma disease burden continued to worsen and ipilimumab was discontinued, although the dermatitis did not abate. His diffuse rashes were only moderately controlled with prednisone and topical antifungal cream. Due to the persistent refractory dermatitis, which resembled his prior pityriasis versicolor eruptions, the decision was taken to treat the dermatitis with a stronger oral antifungal therapy for pityriasis versicolor while continuing prednisone for the dermatologic toxicity due to the irAE. He was started on fluconazole 200 mg daily on day 1 followed by 100 mg daily for 6 additional days while continuing with a prednisone taper at 15 mg daily. A skin biopsy of the flank torso was also performed on the day of starting fluconazole and showed superficial middle dermal perivascular dermatitis with associated spongiosis. The pathology was compatible with hypersensitivity from either medication or other potential allergens. The rashes resolved within days after starting fluconazole without any reported intolerability to the treatment, and the patient came off the prednisone shortly without the need of any further escalation.
His performance status remained optimal, and his treatment was switched to temozolomide 5 weeks later given optimal performance status. Unfortunately his cancer progressed further, and he was rechallenged with nivolumab 1 year later. No significant dermatological toxicity was noted.