The patient was a 56-year-old male. A computerized tomography (CT) scan revealed a staghorn stone in the left kidney. The puncture point was selected under ultrasound guidance, and a vertical incision was made through the skin into the renal calyces of the left kidney. Using a 24-Fr fascial dilator to establish a clear passage, it is determined that the left renal lower calyx stone cannot be broken. To reevaluate the procedure, another puncture point is created, with a vertical skin incision into the left lower renal calyx group. The passage was dilated to 18-Fr, resulting in a successful operation process by completely removing the stone; F20 and F16 drainage tubes were retained. Post-surgery, the color of the fluid from drainage was dark red, and the hemoglobin decreased by 10 g/d. After the conservative treatment failed, the CT scan revealed renal pelvis mucosal artery hemorrhage . A selective angioembolization (SAE) was performed immediately, but the operation was considered unsuccessful after 3 h of intervention therapy failed to control bleeding. There were several reasons for the failure of SAE: the blood vessels were too thin; the opening was at an angle opposite to the renal artery trunk; the renal artery trunk was thick, therefore unable to support it to enter its opening, and was too deep into the distal end, and the opening may have been at a complicated angle. Considering the patient's condition may deteriorate, the decision was made to immediately prepare for emergency hemostasis surgery. This necessity was explained to the patient’s family, along with the potential consequences of nephrectomy if hemostasis failed to achieve further hemostasis. After the patient was anesthetized, the kidney was entered along the original channel. The nephroscope cleared the clot in the renal pelvis, and the mucosal bleeding point at the junction of the renal pelvis and ureter was identified. Electrocoagulation treatment was used to successfully control bleeding after surgery. Careful inspection of the fluid in each cup revealed no bleeding or large stones remained (Additional file : Video 1). The hemoglobin value of the patient was monitored gradually after the operation, and there was no recurring bleeding after the patient was discharged from the hospital.