A 56-year-old male, who was ethnic Han, with a known history of type II diabetes mellitus and who received a kidney transplant 10 years previously was admitted to our department with the chief complaint of fever and dry cough. He denied shortness of breath or chest pain. His immunosuppression regimen included oral tacrolimus 2 mg twice daily (BID) (his tacrolimus blood concentration was 4.66 ng/mL one month prior) and oral mycophenolic acid 360 mg BID. Insulin was administered subcutaneously at regular intervals, and his blood glucose was controlled well. He experienced severe pneumonia caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 5 months prior . Paxlovid was administered, and dexamethasone was substituted as an immunosuppressant during that hospitalization. This patient was a businessman, and his social, environmental, family, and psychosocial history was unremarkable. He did not smoke or consume alcohol.
He was hemodynamically stable with an O2 saturation (SpO2) of 98% while breathing ambient air, and his physical exam was unremarkable. His laboratory values were significant for a serum creatinine (Scr) level of 186 μmol/L and a urea nitrogen (BUN) level of 15.85 mmol/L. The patient’s nasopharyngeal swab SARS-CoV-2 nucleotide test was positive. The thoracic computerized tomography (CT) scan was normal . Oral Paxlovid was administered as 300 mg of nirmatrelvir combined with 100 mg of ritonavir BID. His immunosuppressant drugs were adjusted to a quarter of the previous doses: oral tacrolimus 1 mg BID and oral mycophenolic acid 180 mg BID one day apart . This patient responded well after 3 days of taking Paxlovid: his temperature returned to normal, and his cough was relieved. On the fourth day of taking Paxlovid, this patient suffered sudden severe diarrhea at night lasting nearly 8 hours, and he did not receive any medical intervention (he went home at night without permission). He was confused and short of breath when he came back. The physical exam revealed dehydration, a drowsy state, tachypnea (35 breaths per minute), and tachycardia (110 beats per minute). His blood pressure was 108/60 mmHg with an SpO2 of 95%. There were scattered crackles in the lung bases.
Laboratory tests demonstrated that glucose was 63.3 mmol/L and that blood ketones had increased to 4.1 mmol/L. Blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis with a pH of 6.98 and bicarbonate of 2.8 mmol/L. The patient developed acute kidney injury with a serum creatinine (sCr) of 483 µmol/L and a BUN of 34.45 mmol/L. The calculated serum osmolality was elevated at 339.78 mOsm/kg. A broad work-up for diarrhea was carried out, including routine stool tests and culture, and all these tests were negative. Combined diabetic ketoacidosis and a hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS) were confirmed. Paxlovid and immunosuppressants were withheld. Loperamide 4 mg orally four times daily (QID) and montmorillonite powder 3 g orally three times daily (TID) were administered. Restoration of intravascular volume and correction of electrolyte abnormalities, acidosis and hyperglycemia were carried out. At 24 hours, the diarrhea stopped, and the blood glucose was approximately 15 mmol/L. Three days later, homeostasis was reestablished with almost normal pH, electrolytes, blood glucose, and blood ketones. Over the next few days, basic laboratory testing was unremarkable, except that the blood tacrolimus concentration was 4.56 ng/mL after tacrolimus had been withheld for more than 7 days. He was discharged one day later .