A 71-year-old Chinese woman was initially diagnosed as NSCLC through biopsy of a neoplastic tissue at left hilum on Dec 28th, 2015. Histology of the tumor revealed as adenocarcinoma with positive staining of cluster of differentiation 68 (CD68, +), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA, +), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1, +), and Napsin A (+), but negative staining of P40 protein (-) and CD5/6 (-) by histochemistry. Genetic analysis indicated, epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR, Exons 18, 19, 20, and 21): wild type; Kirsten rat sarcoma virus (KRAS, Condon 12 and 13): wild type; B-Raf proto-oncogene (BRAF, Exon 15): wild type; ALK: fusion type; and ROS Proto-Oncogene 1 (ROS1): wild type. Given the ALK fusion type, the patient was advised to treat with crizotinib. However, the patient and families declined the crizotinib regimen, and thus, a systemic chemotherapy (pemetrexed 700 mg intravenous injection on day 1, cisplatin 35.5 mg intravenous injection on day 1, 2, and 3) was initiated in December 2015 and completed the first full therapeutic course in April 2016. Chest CT of June 2017 indicated the malignancy increased in size, and thus, the second course of systemic chemotherapy was carried out from July through September 2017 with outcome of stabilizing disease. Nearly two years after completion of the systemic chemotherapy (May 2019), contrast-enhanced CT scan demonstrated metastasis of the central lung cancer to cervical spine, scrum, right ilium, and right side first anterior rib. Regimen of crizotinib (250 mg, bid po) plus periodic pamidronate disodium injection was then initiated immediately. After 2 months of the treatment with crizotinib, chest CT scan showed that the size of primary cancer on the hilum of left lung as well as the metastatic tumors were significantly reduced . However, enlarged lymph nodes on the hilum of left lung (2.0 × 2.7 cm size), obstructive pneumonia of left lung, and mild pleural effusion on both sides were noticed.
After 3 months on crizotinib treatment, the patient was hospitalized in August 2019 due to low fever (38 °C), backpain, and fatigue. Laboratory examination on admission showed white blood cell count was 11.78 × 109/L, and CT scan indicated multiple cystic masses on both kidneys and liver . Considering potentiality of metastatic tumors, needle biopsy for the kidney cystic mass was performed and approximately 10mL pus fluid was drained from the cystic mass during the procedure. Pathological examination of the biopsy tissues and drainage from the cystic mass on the left kidney revealed granulation tissues with mild infiltration of lymphocytes and negative malignancy. Immunohistochemistry of the biopsy tissue indicated TTF-1 (-), cytokeratin antibodies AE1/AE3 (-), Ki-67 protein (5%+), cytokeratin 7 (CK7) (-), Paired-box gene 8 (PAX-8, -), P40 protein (-), and Villin (a calcium-regulated actin-binding protein, -). To control fever, moxifloxacin and imipenem cilastatin (even though the blood culture for bacteria was negative) was used without success.
After 5 months on crizotinib treatment (October 2019), chest CT scan indicated that the size of primary tumor and lymph nodes at the hilum of left lung, intensity of obstructive pneumonia of left lung, and pleural effusion were progressed compared to that of August 2019. In addition, compared to the CT scan of August 2019, not only size of the cystic masses in the liver and kidneys was enlarged, but also the cystic masses in the left kidney invaded into the left psoas major muscle . With the suspicion of an infection, catheterized drainage of the cystic masses on the liver and left kidney was performed, respectively. Pathological examination of the liver drainage revealed negative for malignancy and demonstrated necrotic tissues of the liver with abscess and inflammatory cells. Histochemistry of the liver tissue revealed cytokeratin antibodies AE1/AE3 (-), calretnin (-), CD68 (+), and Wilms’ tumor 1 (WT-1, -). Pathological examination of the kidney drainage revealed inflammatory necrosis and negative malignancy. Crizotinib-associated renal cysts (CARC) was confirmed, and crizotinib was stopped on October 15th, 2019.
After one month of stopping crizotinib, the patient’s body temperature was back to normal, and the size of cystic masses in liver and kidneys significantly reduced, but hepatic subcapsular effusion was noted by CT scan . Patient was then followed up at 2 and 6 months after stopping crizotinib, and the size of cystic masses at kidneys and liver was continuously decreased (2 months: Figures E-H and 6 months: Fig. I-L) without noticeable change in the primary lung cancer at left hilum and metastatic tumors. Given the positive ALK fusion type, anti-cancer therapy was switched to alectinib (600 mg bid) 6 months after stopping crizotinib (April 31st, 2020). After 2 months of switching her treatment regimen to the 2nd generation ALK inhibitor, the regressed cystic lesions in the liver and kidneys remained unchanged , and the size of primary lung cancer (approximately 2.6 × 1.9 cm) and lymph nodes on the left hilum as well as obstructive pneumonia were not changed, either.