The case described was a 49-year old menopause woman (G4P4L4) referred to our hospital with complaints of abdominal pain, abdominal enlargement and dyspnea. The past medical history, drug history, and family history of the patient were negative. On examination, abdomen was distended without any evidence of vaginal abnormalities. Due to the size of the abdomen, a two-handed examination was not possible. On pulmonary auscultation, there was a decrease in the sound of the lungs. The patient was initially assessed by abdomino-pelvic ultrasonography. In this regard, evidence of abundant ascites was found in the abdomen and pelvis. Baseline laboratory parameters including blood cell count, platelet count, as well as thyroid parameters (TSH, T4) were in the normal range. Heterogeneous solid mass with the diameter of 78 × 58 × 66 mm with cystic regions in the left adnexa, which had severe vascularity in color Doppler examination (ORADS 5) was visualized on ultrasound. Right ovary with the diameter of 22 × 25 mm was seen with normal view. Based on the patient's ultrasound, which concerned for malignancy, further tumor markers and MRI were performed. Pulmonary CT was also requested due to pulmonary symptoms. Assessing tumor markers indicated positivity for CA125 (2599 U/mL) and ROMA Value (14.6) and negativity for HE4, CA19-9, BHCG, CEA, and AFP. In MRI, uterus is normal. There was a 73 × 57 × 89 mm enhancing solid mass lesion in left adnexa. Also, severe ascites and omental infiltration and slightly enhancement were also revealed. The findings were suggestive of malignant mass lesion in left ovary. Right ovary was normal and other pelvic and abdominal organs were unremarkable ( and ). Moreover, pulmonary CT scanning revealed mild unilateral pleural effusion. To reduce the patient's pain and shortness of breath, ascites fluid was drained. Cytologic exam of the peritoneal fluid was negative for malignancy. The Pap smear test was also negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy. Due to the appearance of the mass on imaging, ascites, and elevated tumor markers, the patient underwent laparotomy. The patient's abdomen was explored with a midline incision below the umbilicus. About 4 L of ascites were removed. A mass with adhesion to the pelvic floor was seen on the left . In the initial examination, no pathological lesion was seen in other parts of the abdomen. The left ovary was sent to the laboratory to be frozen that was ultimately resulted in the definitive diagnosis of struma ovarii in left ovarian . Pathological assessment of the cervix showed chronic cervicitis. Assessment of omentum also indicated inflamed congested adipose tissue, free from tumor. In immunohistochemistry (IHC), the biomarkers of CK7, TTF1 and PAX8 were found to be positive. Due to the patient's menopause, total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. Due to severe inflammation of the omentum, a biopsy of the omentum was performed. The patient was discharged after 3 days in good general condition. In following-up, laboratory parameters including thyroid functional indices and CA125 tumor marker were shown to be normalized. In thyroid ultrasonography, only two small thyroid nodules were visible.
After twelve-month follow-up, the patient survived, and no mass was seen on imaging.