A 19-year-old woman with 32+3 weeks of gestation was referred to our hospital due to oligohydramnios. The patient had a history of myomectomy at age 15. At that time of ultrasound examination, there was a mass of 20.0 cm × 8.7 cm in size in the pelvic cavity. Postoperative pathological findings showed cellular uterine leiomyoma.
On admission, both the patient and the fetus were in good condition. Physical examination revealed a huge mass in the pelvic cavity. Abdominal and pelvic ultrasound confirmed the presence of multiple masses in the pelvic, sized 16.9 × 11.2 × 10.1 cm, 13.1 × 5.6 × 6.2 cm, and 19.2 × 17.5 × 12 cm, respectively, next to the gestation without signs of abortion. The masses were connected into large clumps. An abdominal MRI was done to show multiple nodules in the abdominal cavity .
In order to ascertain the diagnosis, an exploratory laparotomy was performed because of aggravated abdominal pain. After the delivery of the fetus by lower-segment cesarean section, the gynecological oncologist performed further operation. The patient was found to have multiple sporadic leiomyoma in the anterior wall of the uterus; an 8 × 6 cm leiomyoma in the posterior wall of the uterus; a 20 × 15 cm tumor mass in the left pelvis; and multiple tumor masses in the right pelvic sized 8 × 7 cm, 7 × 7 cm, and 7 × 5 cm separately up to 10 tumor masses sized 3 × 2 cm in the omentum and mesocolon transversum . All macroscopic tumor masses were dissected and removed via an extremely difficult surgery without hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy because of the patient’s strong objection and the consideration of young age. Post-operative pathology determined the diagnosis of LPD with red degeneration. The patient recovered well after surgery and was discharged on the ninth day after the removal of the abdominal incision suture.
The patient underwent several ultrasound examinations after surgery, and no signs of disease recurrence were found without any continuous treatment. The patient was pregnant again 25 months after the surgery. At 7 weeks of gestation, ultrasound examination revealed a fibroid of about 3.7 cm × 3.7 cm in the posterior wall of the uterus, and ultrasound examination during pregnancy indicated that the fibroid was slowly enlarged without any discomfort symptoms. The patient underwent a cesarean section again at 39 weeks of gestation. No abnormal lesions were found in the pelvic and abdominal cavity during the operation, and only a uterine fibroid of about 7 cm × 6 cm was found in the posterior wall of the uterus . Postoperative pathology suggested uterine leiomyoma. The patient was reviewed at 6 months postoperatively and recovered well.
We collected 15- of 4-μm tissue sections from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples of LPD and normal tissue adjacent to the lesion for the genetic analyses. QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (QIAGEN, Heidelberg, Germany) was used to extract genomic DNA according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
DNA was profiled using a commercial available capture-based targeted sequencing panel (Burning Rock Biotech, Ltd., Guangzhou, China), targeting 295 genes which were closely related to the mechanism of cancer and targeted therapy and spanning 1.5 MB of human genomic regions. DNA shearing, end-repair, and adaptor ligation were performed by the use of Covaris M220 (Covaris, Inc., MA, USA). Fragment sizes ranging from 200 to 400 bp were selected using Agencourt AMPure beads (Beckman Coulter, CA, USA) followed by hybridization with capture probes baits, hybrid selection with magnetic beads, and PCR amplification. Subsequently, Qubit® 3.0 and Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies Inc., CA, USA) was performed to assess the quality and size of the fragments. Indexed samples were sequenced on Nextseq500 sequencer (Illumina, Inc., CA, USA) with pair-end reads.
Based on the high throughput sequencing, the copy numbers (CNs) of this LPD patient compared with the normal population were demonstrated in Fig. g. There were four somatic cell line mutations detected in the lesions. The CNs of CDK4, NBN, DAXX, and MYC were all amplified for at least 4 times.
Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining slides of this LPD were shown in Fig. a. Rich blood supply was revealed in LPD in HE staining analysis .
Immunohistochemistry staining showed that the tumor was strongly positive for smooth muscle markers, SMA and Desmin , which suggested that LPD shared partial molecular cytogenetic characteristics with uterine leiomyoma. Immunohistochemistry of hormone receptors, estrogen receptor (ER), and progesterone receptor (PR) was positive .
The immunohistochemistry staining analysis of CDK4, MYC, NBN, and DAXX in uterine leiomyoma (10 cases), LPD (4 cases), and leiomyosarcoma (10 cases) was subsequently conducted. The uterine leiomyoma tissues were obtained from patients who underwent hysteromyomectomy and proved to have no malignant lesions. The clinical information of LPD and leiomyosarcoma patients was seen in Tables and . We defined the scores of staining intensities as 0 (negative), 1 (weak), 2 (moderate), and 3 (strong) and then multiplied with the corresponding area to obtain the scores of immunohistochemistry. The highest score for each group was defined as 100, and the other scores were converted accordingly. The results revealed that the expression profiles of LPD were more similar to leiomyosarcoma. LPD showed CDK4, NBN, DAXX, MYC moderately, and strongly positive, and uterine leiomyosarcoma displayed strongly positive. However, the four markers in uterine leiomyoma were slightly positive or negative . Therefore, we can infer the conclusion that LPD is an intermediate disease between benign uterine fibroids and malignant leiomyosarcoma.