This is the case of a 65-year-old male, with no known comorbid, who presented through outpatient clinic with the complaints of right-sided deafness, peripheral vertigo associated with vomiting, and progressive headache for the past 5 months. Symptoms had become severe over the past 2 months making him completely deaf in the right ear. There was no complaint of altered level of consciousness, fits, falls, no visual symptoms, or facial weakness. His neurologic examination revealed a horizontal left beating nystagmus, right-sided sensorineural hearing loss, and no other cranial nerve dysfunction, however, Romberg’s test was positive with impaired tandem walking.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain with contrast showed a lesion in the right CPA, hypointense on T1-weighted sequences , hyperintense on T2-weighted sequences , and demonstrated homogeneous enhancement on T1 postgadolinium contrast images , with characteristic trumpet sign. The lesion was about 4 × 5 cm in size, compressing the ipsilateral cerebellar hemisphere and 4th ventricle. Based on the abovementioned findings, a diagnosis of vestibular schwannoma was made preoperatively.
We positioned the patient in a park bench position with the right side facing up. After fixing the patient’s head in the Mayfield head clamp, retrosigmoid craniotomy was done and surgery progressed in a usual fashion. The cerebellomedullary cistern was opened followed by drainage of cerebrospinal fluid. Cerebellum was retracted with the help of a Duro retractor and the tumor was identified. It was encapsulated and firm in consistency. The cerebellar invasion was evident along the medial aspect along with dense adhesions between the capsule and lower cranial nerves. After taking a biopsy, intracapsular tumor debulking was done with the help of an ultrasonic aspirator and near-total resection was achieved with the possible removal of all visible tumor mass.
Postoperatively, the patient remained stable with no new neurology. His central nervous system examination was the same as the preoperative examination, and hence, he was discharged and followed up as an outpatient in the clinic. Histopathology revealed fragments of neoplastic lesions showing dense cellularity composed of markedly atypical cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and pleomorphic enlarged nuclei with vesicular chromatin and prominent nucleoli. Patchy areas of palisading necrosis were also seen. Few gemistocytic cells were seen. Mitosis of approximately 3–4/10 HPF was noted.
Immunohistochemical studies were performed by DAKO envision method using the following antibodies:
GFAP patchy +ve S100 patchy +ve EMA –ve CKAE1/AE3 −ve
Ki67 approximately 8–10 % proliferative index.
All of these features favored the diagnosis of glioblastoma WHO Grade-IV.
The patient was then referred to a neuro-oncologist for further management, however, because of the poor prognosis, the patient refused further management and follow-up. On calling, after 2 months, we came to know that after remaining symptom free for about 1 month, the patient had started to have symptoms of vertigo and severe gait imbalance.