A 66-year-old Turkmen man was referred due to gradual and painless decreased vision following an initially uncomplicated course of recovery after pterygium surgery 4 years before, at another center. According to the surgical records, pterygium removal was performed using a combination of conjunctival autograft and adjuvant intraoperative MMC 0.02%. The patient was in good general health with no remarkable medical or ocular history, except for pterygium surgery.
On examination, uncorrected distance visual acuity (UCDVA) were 1.5 and 0.8 LogMAR (20/630 and 20/125, Snellen acuity) in the right and left eyes, respectively. With a refraction of +6.00-0.75 @ 130° and −1.50-0.75 @ 135°, best spectacle corrected distance visual acuity was 0.5 and 0.2 LogMAR (20/63 and 20/32, Snellen acuity) in the right and left eyes, respectively. There was no afferent pupillary defect, nor pupillary abnormality. Slit lamp biomicroscopy of the left eye was unremarkable, while in the right eye, an elevated, bleb-like, fluid-filled, cystic lesion was noticeable in the nasal sclera (over the presumed site of previous surgery). The sclera seemed fistulized at the surgical site (approximately for 1 × 1 mm2) and a thin layer of conjunctiva completely covered the lesion . Seidel's test was negative. The anterior chamber had normal depth comparable to the opposite side and was quiet. There was neither a significant cataract nor synechiae. Goldmann applanation tonometry readings were 6 and 10 mmHg in the right and left eyes, respectively. On dilated fundus examination at the slit lamp, the optic disc had no significant cupping in either eye; however, in the right eye the disc margin was slightly blurred and marked choroidal folds were present in the macular region . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) further documented the clinical findings .
With a diagnosis of iatrogenic bleb formation, complicated by hypotony maculopathy, surgical closure of the fistula was planned. A precisely sized, donor scleral patch graft was secured water-tightly over the fistula with multiple 10-0 nylon sutures, followed by excision of the thinned avascular conjunctiva and advancement of the healthy adjacent conjunctiva to cover the patch graft. One day following surgery, the graft was in good condition , intraocular pressure (IOP) was 16 mmHg, and UCDVA was improved to 0.5 Log MAR (20/63 Snellen acuity). Choroidal folds were markedly reduced.
One month later, a small bleb re-appeared adjacent to the scleral patch graft and UCDVA dropped to 1.2 Log MAR (20/320 Snellen acuity). IOP was 2 mmHg; however, Seidel's test demonstrated no leakage over the bleb. Faint wrinkling was obvious on fundus examination. Regarding the good condition of the overlying conjunctiva and low-lying nature of the bleb, argon laser was applied to induce scarring and reduction of bleb size. The procedure was highly effective and after one week IOP was increased to 8 mmHg, UCDVA improved to 0.3 LogMAR (20/40, Snellen acuity), and choroidal folds were reduced markedly. Repeat OCT evaluation confirmed the reduction in macular thickness . The clinical features remained stable through all other visits until final follow-up, 4 months after initial presentation.