A 51-day-old boy was referred to our institution with jaundice and acholic stool. Physical examination results were unremarkable, except for skin jaundice. Laboratory analysis revealed total bilirubin, direct bilirubin, and γ-GTP levels of 6.7 mg/dL (normal: 0.1–1 g/dL), 5.2 mg/dL (normal: 0.1–0.4 g/dL), and 1,295 IU/L (normal: 11–58 IU/L), respectively. These results were indicative of obstructive jaundice and liver disorder, and the patient was admitted. At 60 days of age, laparotomic cholangiography revealed BA (IIIb1μ), and Kasai PE was performed.
On postoperative day 17, the patient suddenly developed massive melena and was determined to have severe anemia (hemoglobin level: 6.5 g/dL). His coagulation data were normal with a prothrombin time-international normalized ratio of 1.26 (normal: 0.80–1.20) and activated partial thromboplastin time of 37.1 s (control time: 28.0 s).
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed that the jejunum near the PE site was partially and strongly enhanced with enhancing nodules in the arterial phase, and a wider area of the imported jejunal wall was enhanced in the venous phase . Extravasation into the intestines was not detected.
Because the hemorrhage did not stop, an emergency laparotomy was performed for hemostasis. No bloody ascites were observed. The PE site was apparently normal, and there were no varices at the surface of the intestine. The anastomosis of PE was detached, and no obvious bleeding or lesions were observed at the site of the anastomotic jejunum. A 5-cm incision was made vertically from the anastomotic jejunal site, and a blood clot was found. The Roux limb was resected 5 cm from the anastomotic site. Further investigation of the small intestines revealed a red spot (suspected to be an AVM) on the jejunal wall, which was located 30 cm from the Roux-en-Y anastomosis. The red spot lesion was wedge resected, and PE was performed.
Macroscopic examination of the excised Roux limb specimen showed no abnormal findings, such as ulcer and tumor. In contrast, microscopic examination revealed that the AVM comprised aggregates of abnormally shaped vessels showing hemorrhage . The lesions were distributed in the submucosal tissue, muscularis propria, and subserosal tissue. These abnormal vessels markedly dilated and occasionally branched with hemorrhage in lamina propria . Each vessel wall showed viable thickness and contained abundant elastic fibers in the Elastica van Gieson-stained sections . The abnormal vessels displayed various morphologies that mimicked veins or arteries. In addition, some vessels were difficult to interpret due to vein-like or artery-like appearance. Some AVMs penetrated and fractured the muscularis propria .
The patient was jaundice-free at 125 days of age and was discharged at 145 days of age.
At 7 months of age, massive melena was observed, and he was re-admitted. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed no abnormal findings, and upper GI endoscopy revealed no esophageal or gastric varices. Hemorrhagic scintigraphy detected a slight accumulation at the hepatic hilum; thus, hemorrhage from the PE site was suspected . As a residual lesion of the AVM was a possible source of the bleeding, we consulted a pathologist preoperatively, planned a frozen section analysis (FSA) for intraoperative margin assessment, and performed an emergency surgery. The jejunal Y-shaped anastomosis was detached, and the endoscope was inserted. Endoscopy detected bleeding lesions with an erosion of the Roux limb at the PE site ; there were no other findings in the small intestine. The PE anastomosis and its mesentery had no apparent abnormalities, such as varices. The anastomosis was detached, and the Roux limb was resected approximately 6 cm from the anastomosis. FSA for the stump of the anal side of the resected jejunum, performed by a pathologist, revealed no vessel abnormality in the submucosa . PE and Y-shaped anastomoses were performed.
Regarding the specimen collected during the second emergency operation, no obvious AVM was microscopically detected in the surgical stump of the Roux limb, even in the permanent sections . Remnant AVMs were seen with serosal fibrosis and suture granuloma . The AVM was localized in submucosal tissue with hemorrhage in lamina propria . The presence of elastic fibers was confirmed in these vessel walls in the Elastica van Gieson-stained section .
The postoperative course was uneventful with no re-bleeding, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 15.