In October 2004 a 50-year old woman was admitted presenting with gluteal and perineal fistula formation after proctocolectomy eleven years earlier. The clinical examination showed a single fistula opening on the perineum with purulent secretion. A second opening was found on the posterior wall of the vagina.
The MRI-scanning revealed a large formation in the lower pelvis reaching to the sacrum. This mass showed a thickened, contrast-enhancing wall and necrotic, liquid inner parts suggestive of abscess-formation. No involvement of the small bowel or bladder was detected .
The patient's history revealed Crohn's disease first diagnosed in 1981. Ten years later (1991), the patient was readmitted because of severe perineal fistula disease. The clinical and radiological examination showed multiple transphincteric fistulas and a single rectovaginal fistula as well as one enterocutaneous fistula originating from the terminal ileum. After medical management (parenteral nutrition and corticoids) she was referred to the department of surgery where an ileocoecal resection with a diversion ileostomy and drainage of the perianal fistulas were performed. Postoperatively the patient developed all signs of an Addison crisis, which could be satisfactorily treated.
The patient was readmitted in 1993 with a new inflammatory episode including perianal fistulating disease. Because of the disease recurrence and due to further impairment of the sphincter mechanism a proctocolectomy with exstirpation of the sphincter ani muscles and a terminal ileostomy was recommended and performed. The histopathological examination showed signs of Crohn's disease with some epitheloid cell granulomas and giant cells as well as microgranulomas in both the large bowel and the rectum. No signs of malignancy and no dysplastic changes were found. The patient developed a paralytic ileus that could be treated conservatively and a perianal wound infection which required secondary wound closure.
Three years later, in 1996, the patient was readmitted because of a persistent perineal secretion. No fistulas and no signs of Crohn's disease could be found in the small bowel. The patient was treated with local wound therapy without any further surgical procedure until readmission in 2004.
After informed consent a perineal drainage with entire resection of the clinically inflamed tissue was performed. Intraoperatively the tissue showed a colloidal consistency and fistulation into the coccygeal bone and the vagina. Histological analysis of the tissue detected a mucinous adenocarcinoma occupying the resected tissue and the resection margins. The tumour consisted of moderately atypical glandular cell elements lying in pools of PAS-positive mucin. A distinct fibroblastic stromal reaction could be found in the surrounding mesenchyma.
Upon diagnosis, a second intervention was performed including an en-bloc exenteration of the uterus, vagina and ovaries via laparotomy and resection of the sacrum through a posterior approach. The pelvis was closed using a Vypro® mesh (polypropylene-polygalactine composite) and the perineum was left open for secondary wound healing.
Postoperatively, bladder function was impaired, otherwise the patient recovered well and could be dismissed into out patient oncological care.
Examination of the specimen showed typical cylindrical epithelium of colorectal type lining some residual lumina of fistulas and cysts . The resection margins did not show any residual fistulas. No rests of original bowel mucosa or remaining bowel wall structures could be found in the "en-bloc" specimen. But there were some minor residual carcinomatous infiltrates in the soft tissues between coccygeal bone and dorsal wall of the vagina . Bone tissue and the vaginal wall structures themselves proofed to be free of tumour histologically. No florid, ulcerating or granulomatous inflammation was found in the remaining mucosal tissues.