In August 2018, a 17-year-old male patient of Han ethnic group presented to local hospital with left cervical mass. He was diagnosed as being in the high-risk group with international prognostic index (IPI) score 4. The diagnosis indicated IVa stage ALK positive ALCL with recurrence after chemotherapy. Bone marrow smear analysis revealed hyperplastic and active bone marrow cells, with no significant increase in lymphocytes observed. Additionally, flow cytometry analysis did not detect any notable immunophenotypically abnormal lymphocytes, which revealed that the bone marrow was not infiltrated. Immunohistochemical staining of the cervical lymph node showed positive results for VIM (+), EMA (+), ALK (++), CD30 (++), CD4 (++), CD5 (++), CD2 (+), CD8 (partially+), CD15 (partially+), BCL-6 (partially+), MUM-1 (partially+), Ki67 (80%+), and negative results for CD3, CK, CK8/18, P63, TdT, MPO, CD20, CD79a, CD10, PAX-5, BCL-2 and HMB45. The patient received first-line chemotherapy with CHOPE (Isocyclophosphamide, Doxorubicin liposomes, Vincristine, Dexamethasone and Etoposide) for one cycle and achieved partial remission (PR). Subsequently, the patient underwent three cycles of chemotherapy with BFM-90-A (Dexamethasone, Cyclophosphamide, Vindesin, Methotrexate, Cytarabine and Etoposide) and BFM-90-B (Cyclophosphamide, DEX, VCR, Methotrexate, doxorubicin liposomes) respectively, resulting in CR as indicated by PET-CT. Nonetheless, in February 2021, the disease progressed, presenting with left abdominal distension and pain for one week, leading to a diagnosis of stage IVA ALK+ ALCL relapse. After receiving one cycle of Gemcitabine, Oxaliplatin and Vebutoximab, the patient achieved PR.
The patient was referred to our hospital in March 2021 for further treatment and requested immunotherapy. Upon confirmation, CT scans revealed measurable nodules in the retroperitoneum, mesentery, and right pelvic wall. Expression of the CD5 antigen on the lymphocytes of bone marrow was measured by flow cytometry, which showed that 98% of CD3 positive cells expressed CD5 antigen . In May 2021, the patient was accepted to participate in a clinical trial of anti-CD5 CAR-T cell therapy. The patient provided informed consent before undergoing apheresis.
The patient received a standard dose of Fludarabine, 50 mg/m2 and Cyclophosphamide, 500 mg/m2 (FC) regimen from day -4 to day -1 as lymphodepleting chemotherapy. Autologous anti-CD5 CAR-T cells were infused on June 12, 2021 (day 0) at a dose of 1.0 x 10^6/kg. The CAR structure , as well as the manufacturing and preparation of CAR-T cells, were described previously . The amplification of CAR-T cells in peripheral blood was detected by ddPCR as reported . In , the copy number of the CAR-T product was 23 copies/μg DNA on day 0 and reached its peak level (88623 copies/μg DNA) on day 14. Flow cytometry was also conducted in the analysis of CAR-T cells and CD5 positive targeted cells during treatment. The proportion of CAR-T cells reached a peak level of 56.17% in lymphocyte cells and 62.88% in CD3+ T cells, while the proportion of CD5+ target cells in lymphocytes began to decrease on day 1 and reached to 0.00% on day 11 . The absolute number of white blood cells, platelets, and hemoglobin level fluctuated within the normal range . These results demonstrate that CAR-T cells but not for CD3+CD5+ T cells can be effectively expanded in patients, and the routine blood indicators including white cell, platelet and hemoglobin were basically normal.
The plasma level of cytokines, including IL-1β, IL-2R, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α), and ferritin, were measured using an electrochemiluminescence assay during anti-CD5 CAR-T cell treatment. TNF-α began to increase on day 1, reached its peak level (489 pg/mL) on day 13, and gradually decreased thereafter . IL-8 exhibited a similar pattern to that of TNF-α. IL-2R remained at higher level throughout the treatment period, while IL-1β and IL-10 were nearly undetectable. The peak level of IL-6 was reached on day 3. Ferritin levels remained elevated throughout the treatment, with the highest level recorded on day 105 .
The adverse events (AE) were evaluated according to the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (V.5.0). On day +7, the patient met the criteria for CRS grade 1, with the highest recorded body temperature being 38°C. On day +10, CRS subsided but was succeeded by a grade 1 CAR-T cell relevant encephalopathy syndrome (CRES), which persisted for 5 days. Other CAR-T related adverse events, such as neck pain, skin rash, headache, nausea, diarrhea, and abdominal pain, subsequently emerged. Throughout this period, methylprednisolone sodium succinate and cetuximab were administered to alleviate these symptoms.
Approximately three months after CAR-T cell infusion, the patient presented with multiple painless enlarged lymph nodes in the bilateral neck and groin on September 8, 2021, as evidenced by PET. Hematoxylin-Eosin (HE) staining of cervical lymph node biopsy showed that the loss of normal structure of lymph node architecture, with the absence of lymph sinuses or follicles. The hyperplastic T cells displayed enlarged size, abundant cytoplasm, vacuolated nuclei with prominent nucleoli, and exhibited a certain degree of atypia, consistent with features typically associated with refractory ALCL . Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining of cervical lymph nodes showed diffuse positivity for CD2, CD3, CD7, CD8, TIA1, CD30 (with scattered positivity), Ki67 (80% labeling index), and negativity for CD4, CD5, CD20, EBER, and ALK ( and ). This immunophenotype is inconsistent with the previously observed ALK-positive ALCL profile.
To discern whether the hyperplastic T lymphocytes observed in inguinal lymph node were a result of CAR-T cell expansion or aberrant tumor cell presence, a series of analyses were performed. Flow cytometry results from the inguinal lymph node biopsy showed that abnormal lymphocytes were negative for CD5 expression , indicating the proficiency of anti-CD5 CAR-T cells in eliminating CD5 positive cells. Genomic DNA was extracted from the inguinal lymph node biopsy sample, followed by the establishment of a library using a multiple amplicon method. High throughput deep sequencing and Sanger sequencing were subsequently performed. This comprehensive analysis identified a total of 157 lymphoma related hot genes, all showing no mutations. Rearrangements of IGHA, IGHB and TCR genes were assessed in the lymph node biopsy sample, peripheral blood cells post infusion, and premanufactured leukapheresis sample using next generation sequencing, and these findings were further corroborated by Sanger sequencing. Clonal rearrangement IGHA and IGHB genes were evident in both the lymph node biopsy and peripheral blood cells, but not in the premanufactured leukapheresis sample . Specific primers targeting IGHA, IGHB and TCR gene locus were designed for Sanger sequencing. Results revealed that the rearrangement fragment of IGHA and IGHB were attributed to the CAR sequence , and no monoclonal rearrangement was found in the TCR gene region. To further ascertain the diversity of TCR clones in peripheral blood cells post CAR-T cells infusion and the premanufactured leukapheresis sample, immune repertoire assays were conducted. The Shannon diversity index was determined to be 8.97, with the identification of 6474 T cell clones in the patient’s peripheral blood post infusion. In contrast, in the premanufactured leukapheresis, the Shannon diversity and clone numbers were calculated to be 14.47 and 53808, respectively ( and ). These results collectively suggest that there is no discernible preferential expansion of abnormal T cell clones occurring.
Furthermore, the patient underwent follow-up clinical monitoring after the CAR-T treatment. On February 22, 2022 (255 days post anti-CD5 CAR-T cell infusion), the proportion of CAR-T cells in CD3+ T cells was 1.92%, and no discernible lymph nodes were detected in neck and groin regions according to the FDG-PET scan . On August 30, 2023 (815 days post anti-CD5 CAR-T cell infusion), the CAR gene was still detectable in the peripheral blood, with a count of 1902 copies/μg DNA. These results suggest that the hyperplastic T cells observed in the inguinal lymph node are, in fact, expanded CAR-T cells rather than lymphoma cells.