We report a case study of a 29-year-old male ASA (American Society of Anesthesiologists) grade II E, a regular smoker, with a possible diagnosis of acute appendicitis and was scheduled to undergo emergency laparoscopic appendicectomy. The patient weighed 59kg with a body mass index (BMI) of 21kg/m2. He had a past medical history of left thumb extensor tendon repair. Preoperatively patient was on paracetamol 1g 6 hourly (the last dose was 3 hours prior to the surgery) and had received 5 mg of morphine 11 hours before surgery. In the operating theatre pre holding area patient reported a pain score of 7/10 on the numerical rating scale (NRS). A written informed consent for general anesthesia (GA) and an ESPB under GA for post operative pain relief was obtained from the patient.
In the operating theatre the patient was connected to standard monitors. Anesthesia was induced by intravenous (IV) lidocaine (1mg/kg), fentanyl (1.5mcg/kg), propofol (2.5mg/kg) and rocuronium (0.9mg/kg) followed by orotracheal intubation.
After intubation, patient was positioned in the left lateral position. Under full aseptic conditions, using a landmark technique, a line was drawn adjoining the lower edge of the two scapulae in order to mark the spinous process (SP) of the seventh thoracic vertebral body. After placing a 6–13-mHz linear ultrasound (US) probe (Sonosite M-Turbo ultrasound device, Fujifilm, Sonosite, WA, USA), on the T7 SP, the probe was moved laterally till the transverse process (TP) was identified. Thereafter the US probe was moved in the caudad direction till we identified the T10 TP. The TP of the T 10 was then marked with a marker on both sides. Using a parasagittal approach with the US the erector spinae muscle (ESM) was identified. An 80 mm 22 G sonoplex STIM needle, in plane with US probe was inserted from cephalad to caudad direction till the tip of the needle was in contact with the TP just in front of the ESM. At this point the needle was withdrawn 1 mm and 1 mL of local anesthetic (LA) was injected in order to visualize the spread and rise of the ESM. Once confirmed 20mL of 0.25% Levobupivacaine was injected on the right side and then on the left side, with aspiration done every 5 mL to confirm any inadvertent injections. The total duration of the procedure was 11 minutes.
At surgical incision, no change in the patient’s hemodynamic markers was observed. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane at a minimum alveolar concentration of 0.7–1.4 Vol%. Patient’s hemodynamic parameters at different intraoperative time points are shown in . Laparoscopically, the surgeons found a normal appendix, but there was some pus seen. On further look around, a a perforation in the superior/First part of the duodenum (D1) was identified and repaired by the surgeons. Intraoperatively, the patient received IV paracetamol 1g, ketorolac 30mg, dexamethasone 8mg, and ondansetron 4 mg.
Total surgical time was 60 minutes and total anesthesia time was 89 minutes. The surgery was completed uneventfully. After which the patient was extubated safely and was transferred to Post-Operative Anesthesia Care Unit (PACU).
The patient was followed up in PACU where he reported a pain score of zero on the NRS. The hemodynamic parameters during patients’ stay in PACU are presented in . After a two hour stay in PACU the patient was transferred to the ward.
On the ward the patient received regular IV paracetamol 1g 6 hourly post operatively in the next 24 hrs. Patient reported NRS pain score of zero at 7, 10, 14, 18, 22 and 26 hours in the postoperative period on the ward. Thereafter the patient re-developed abdominal pain 24 hours post operatively for which he required morphine. The patient’s stay was complicated by further abdominal fluid collections and pleural effusions, which were appropriately managed, and the patient was ultimately discharged after 23 days.