A 44-year-old Caucasian male had a road traffic accident. The patient had a medical history of NF-1 (von Recklinghausen’s disease). On arrival in the trauma center, peripheral blood pressure was 145/80 mmHg, heart rate 130 beats/min, peripheral oxygen saturation 97% with oxygen at 10 L/min, initial Glasgow coma scale scored 14. Except for disorientation, the patient showed no neurologic abnormalities. He complained of chest pain and headache. Physical examination was typical for Recklinghausen’s disease with café-au-lait spots and neurofibromas on his trunk and limbs. The patient had areas of bruising on the chest in a seat belt distribution pattern. Initial capillary haemoglobin was 9.7 g/dL (HemoCue B-Hemoglobin®, HemoCue AB™, Ängelholm, Sweden). A total of 1000 mL sodium chloride 0.9 % and 500 ml Gelofusin® (B.Braun AG™, Melsungen, Germany) was infused as fluid resuscitation. For pain control 100mg tramadol and 1g paracetamol were injected. Patient underwent bilateral thoracic drainage because of signs of bilateral pneumothorax on chest X-ray.
A cerebral computerized tomography scan showed right sphenoïdal hemosinus. An angio CT scan detected traumatic subarachnoïdal hemorrhage, without intracranial vascular abnormality. A thorax CT scan revealed a bilateral anterior pneumothorax, a left hemothorax and a left subclavian artery branch lesion, with active bleeding. One hour after the first haemoglobin determination, the concentration decreased to 6.2 g/dL. A total of seven units of packed red blood cells and three units of fresh frozen plasma were administered in the six hours after admission. The patient was anesthetized, intubated (rapid sequence induction with etomidate and succinylcholine) and mechanically ventilated to prevent breathing difficulties due to a progressively expanding hematoma in the left supraclavicular and mediastinum area. An angiography of the aortic arch, that didn’t include the neck, revealed active bleeding on a collateral artery of the thyrocervical trunk, a branch from the left subclavian artery , and was treated by intravascular covered stent. The patient remained hemodynamically stable and was admitted in intensive care.
On day 6, the patient was extubated. His neurological examination remained stable. He complained of a constant bruit synchronized with the arterial pulse that he could hear in his head. On day 7, physical examination found a right carotid murmur. A doppler ultrasound found a distal right internal carotid pseudo aneurysm. A cerebral angiography confirmed a right internal carotid pseudo aneurysm , and revealed a left internal carotid artery dissection and a right vertebral arterio-venous fistula. No sign of fibromuscular dysplasia was found. The patient was first treated with full-dose of standard heparin sodium. On day 8, the right carotid artery underwent balloon angioplasty and stenting. The right vertebral artery was occluded by coils. Heparinization was discontinued 24 hours post-treatment and the patient received oral antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel bisulfate, one per day).
The patient was discharged from the hospital on day 35, without any neurological sequelae.