A 17-year-old Caucasian female presented to a private ophthalmic clinic with a complaint of decreased vision for 6 weeks because the patient gazed at the sun to take a “selfie.” The patient never smoked, nor was she a regular user of alcohol. The patient was healthy and reported no significant prior medical or family history. One month ago, the patient was referred to a hospital where her best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 0.1. The optical coherence tomography (OCT) scans showed an ellipsoid zone and interdigitation zone disruption, with an increased hyperreflectivity of the overlying tissues due to the inflammation process . However, no fundus images were available from her first clinical examination in the hospital.
When the patient visited the private clinic, the BCVA of her right eye was 0.4 (with refraction −0.75 × 173), whereas the BCVA of her left eye was 1.0 (with refraction +1.75/−1.00 × 9). Clinical examination showed unremarkable features in the anterior segment of both eyes. Fundus examination showed a dull foveal reflex in the right eye, while the left eye was normal. OCT scans of the right eye showed ellipsoid zone and interdigitation zone disruption with hyperreflectivity of overlying tissues . However, the lesion was less intense than the acute phase. OCT scans of the left eye were normal.
After that, a consultation with the patient’s parents to do a suprachoroidal injection of triamcinolone with a custom-made needle was explained by declaring that this procedure may cause an elevation of intraocular pressure or/and form cataract, and informed consent from her parents was taken.
The next day, the suprachoroidal injection was done without any complications. After 1 week, the patient’s BCVA was 0.7, and the OCT image showed a signal of reappearance in the ellipsoid zone . After 12 weeks, the patient's BCVA was 0.8. OCT imaging presented a resolution of the overlying increased reflectivity, with the presence of the ellipsoid zone integrity and persistent discontinuity of interdigitation zones . Four months of follow-up showed full recovery in the BCVA (1.0) and the retina .
During 12 weeks of follow-up, there were no vision-threatening complications. However, intraocular pressure (IOP) increased to 28 mmHg in the seventh week, and was controlled by topical eye drops (timolol) to be 15 mmHg.
The tools needed to make this injection manually are scissors, calipers, blade, Luer slip syringe, 30-gauge needle, irrigating cannula, and needle-nose pliers . First, we measured the needle’s full length, including the part embedded in the plastic; . Then, we prepared the plastic stopper by measuring 2.5 mm (less than 1 mm for the needle, and 1.5 mm was added) . First, however, the blade was used to cut the syringe according to the measurements . After that, we prepared the stopper’s rubber part by using scissors to remove the rubber seal’s ramifications . Next, the rubber stopper was installed on the prepared plastic Luer slip, which will permit only 1000 microns from the 30-gauge needle to penetrate the sclera . Next, the needle-nose pliers were used to straighten the irrigating cannula , and they were impaled in the rubber seal through the rubber ring and used as a guide to putting the 30-gauge needle out of the rubber seal . Finally, the plastic Luer slip was fixed to the plastic part of the 30-gauge needle .
After sterilizing the epidermis around the eye, we administered the suprachoroidal injection in sterile conditions, including eyelids and lashes.
The injection site was in the temporal quadrant. We measured 4 mm from the limbus using calipers and injected 0.1 ml triamcinolone inside the suprachoroidal space (SCS) . The needle was withdrawn obliquely from the eye .