A 73-year-old Caucasian female presented to hospital with symptoms of malaise, fever, reduced appetite, and non-specific upper abdominal discomfort. She had no significant past medical history on record. Clinical examination was essentially normal besides mild pyrexia (38°C) and an audible cardiac murmur, described to be continuous throughout the cardiac cycle. Following clinical assessment and investigations (blood tests, blood cultures, chest radiograph, and abdominal ultrasound), she was identified to have elevated inflammatory markers: white cell count 14×109/L (reference range 4–11×109/L), C-reactive protein level of 206 mg/L (reference range < 5 mg/L), with normal amylase levels, liver function, urea, and electrolytes. Abdominal ultrasound was normal (i.e. normal liver, gallbladder, and pancreatic appearance with no free fluid detected), and chest radiograph (CXR) indicated mild cardiomegaly only. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed marked dilatation of the right coronary artery (RCA) with turbulent flow across into the right atrium (RA) suggestive of an RCA to RA fistula. The origin of the RCA fistula showed a holo-diastolic flow pattern demonstrated on colour flow Doppler, with a peak velocity of 1.4 m/s. In addition, there was dilatation of the coronary sinus and mild-to-moderate tricuspid regurgitation (TR) . Blood cultures isolated growth of Streptococcus gordonii.
In view of the initial TTE findings, cross-sectional imaging was pursued, with a CT coronary angiogram (CTCA) confirming the presence of a coronary cameral fistula. An aneurysmal RCA was observed arising from the right coronary sinus, with an extensive tortuous course wrapping around the heart, and terminating at the right atrium. The average size of the fistula measured 1 × 1 cm along its course, with dilatation of coronary sinus, which measured 0.9 × 0.8 cm at the level of the os. No obvious masses were detected on the valves, chambers, or along the course of the fistula . A transoesophageal echocardiogram (TOE) also confirmed these findings .
The provisional diagnosis was bacteraemia, with possible early infective endocarditis. This was presumed to be one of the late manifestations of the fistula, even in the absence of any definitive evidence available at this point to suggest that the CAF was the primary focus of infection. She was treated with a prolonged (4-week) course of parenteral broad-spectrum antibiotics (penicillin and gentamycin) as per standard local microbiology department guidelines, with an excellent response to treatment with gradual normalization of her inflammatory markers.
This patient presented few months later with new onset anginal chest pain, which was confirmed with a nuclear myocardial perfusion (Myoview) scan identifying inducible ischaemia in the left anterior (LAD) territory. A subsequent invasive coronary angiogram confirmed only non-obstructive coronary artery disease in the LAD, suitable for medical management only. She was treated with aspirin 75 mg, atorvastatin 20 mg, and bisoprolol 1.25 mg once a day. This was assumed to be another late manifestation of the fistula. Her case was discussed at a Cardiology-Cardiothoracic MDT with the consensus that in the absence of repeated infective endocarditis or haemodynamic impact secondary to the high shunted flow, surgical ligation was not indicated and therefore the patient was kept under close echocardiographic and clinical surveillance.
Three years later, nonetheless, she developed progressive breathlessness and ankle swelling. Examination revealed new atrial fibrillation (AF) with a rate of 130 beats/minute, blood pressure of 130/80 mmHg, mild pedal oedema, and normal juglar venous pressure. Auscultation confirmed a continuous murmur, known before, with new bi-basal crackles on the chest. The AF was confirmed on a 12-lead ECG and CXR identified cardiomegaly with congestive lung changes. Blood tests were normal, including serial troponins, but with elevated NT-pro-BNP levels of 5107 (reference range < 400 pg/L). A repeat TTE confirmed normal biventricular sizes and functions, with unchanged appearances of the fistula demonstrating shunted flow into the right atrium and moderate tricuspid regurgitation/TR (i.e. increased, compared to index admission) with new bi-atrial dilatation. She was commenced on standard heart failure therapy and following good response to treatment, she was discharged on apixaban 5 mg b.i.d., atorvastatin 20 mg, bisoprolol 1.25 mg, and furosemide 40 mg daily.
She underwent an elective DC cardioversion shortly after in an attempt to restore sinus rhythm but this was unsuccessful. AF-rate control strategy was then adopted, but the patient’s symptoms persisted. Another repeat TTE confirmed new right ventricular dilatation (basal diameter measurement of 48 mm and mid cavity diameter of 42 mm) and impairment with a fractional area change of 28% and severe functional TR (i.e. failure of the leaflets to coapt). The left ventricular function also deteriorated to borderline low systolic function (EF 50–54%) with a new moderate-sized pericardial effusion. Owing to the significant haemodynamic impact of the shunt and remodelling of the right ventricle, the cardiothoracic surgical team accepted her for a surgical closure/ligation of the CAF, coronary artery bypass surgery with a saphenous venous graft to the posterior descending artery of the RCA, implantation of a size 30 mm annuloplasty band to restore competence of the tricuspid valve, ligation of the left atrial appendage, and standard pericardiotomy.
Her post-operative recovery was uneventful with marked symptomatic improvement. Repeat TTE prior to discharge confirmed normal biventricular function and mild TR. The patient was discharged home after a 7-day inpatient stay. She had remained well and asymptomatic during her 3-month post-operative outpatient clinic follow-up.