A 50-year-old man with a history of alcoholism was admitted to an emergency hospital, complaining of worsening pain and redness of the right elbow. There was a history of trivial trauma 2 days before this complaint. The X-ray of the elbow was negative, and the patient was discharged with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
The day after, the patient returned to the same emergency department because of the persistent erythema and tenderness around his elbow with no systemic inflammatory symptoms.
On examination, a skin erythema, edema, warmness, and tenderness were detected on the right elbow, with no axillar lymphadenopathy. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable.
Results of laboratory tests included a white blood cell count of 7770/μL (normal 4000-10000), CRP 533.6 mg/L (0–5), hemoglobin 14.8 g/dL (13–17), glucose 0.83 g/L (0.75–1), creatine 1.4 mg/dL (0.7–1.2), and sodium 133 mmol/L (135–145) with a LRINEC score of 6.
Kidney and liver function tests were normal, and a blood culture was negative.
The diagnose of cellulitis was evoked and the patient was empirically treated with intravenous antibiotics (Cefazoline 4 g daily and Metronidazole 1500 mg daily).
After 5 days, his condition continued to deteriorate with intense pain and significant edema and tenderness of his right elbow. A wound culture revealed a Streptococcus pyogenes infection.
Over the course of 6 days, he was brought to our hospital for a surgical advice.
On admission to our hospital, the patient was febrile (38°C) and his blood pressure was 148/83 mmHg. Laboratory analysis indicated a white blood cell count of 16000/μL (normal 4000–10000), a CRP 95 mg/L (0–5) and a LRINEC score of 3. Blood endotoxin was negative.
The margins of tenderness and erythema spread all over the right upper extremity including the upper right thorax with phlyctens and areas of necrosis .
An emergency aggressive debridement of necrotic tissues was performed, under general anesthesia; after 7 days from his first visit at the emergency room . Skin swabs taken during the operation were negative and the underlying muscles were intact.
After the surgery, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit for respiratory, renal, and circulatory support after intensive debridement and he was treated with intravenous penicillin (4.000.000 UI, 6 times daily).
The patient underwent multiple sets of vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) technique. In between, the patient underwent to hyperbaric oxygen therapy (HBOT).
On the 24th hospital day, his wound was closed by split-thick-ness skin graft.
Postoperatively, there were no complications, and the patient was discharged on the 17th day after the skin grafting with totally healed wounds, but he kept a stiff elbow.
At 2-month post-discharge, the patient had regained an acceptable range of motion of his right arm . Two years after discharge, the patient showed no sign of infection recurrence.