A 77-year-old man developed bilateral peripheral edema in August 2017. Persistent proteinuria and nephrotic syndrome were observed, and he was admitted to our hospital in September 2017. Past medical history included hypertension, cerebral hemorrhage, and rectal cancer. The rectal cancer was detected via a colonoscopy examination in July 2015, and a high anterior resection surgery with lymphadenectomy was performed in October 2015, with pathological diagnosis of rectal cancer, pT3N2bM0, pStage IIIC. Based on the sequelae of cerebral hemorrhage and performance status, no adjuvant chemotherapy was administered, and no recurrence was detected in follow-up. The patient’s family history was unremarkable. On admission, the blood pressure was 109/69 mmHg, the pulse was regular at 109 beats/min, and the body temperature was 36.8 °C. Physical examination revealed no abnormalities except for pitting edema of the limbs. Mild bilateral pleural effusion was confirmed by chest radiography. The size and the blood flow signal of both kidneys were normal in renal echography. Laboratory test results were as follows: total protein, 5.3 g/dL; albumin, 1.3 g/dL; serum creatinine, 1.07 mg/dL; total cholesterol, 293 mg/dL; glycosylated hemoglobin, 6.2%; white blood cell (WBC) count, 5000 cells/μL; hemoglobin, 12.3 g/dL; and platelet count, 23.7 × 104/μL. The patient was positive for hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody, but HCV RNA level was low. Tests for hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis B surface antibody, and human immunodeficiency virus antibody were negative. Urinalysis results were as follows: urinary protein excretion of 10.1 g/day, sediment containing 1–4 red blood cells, 1–4 WBCs per high-power field, 1–4 granular casts per whole field, and oval fat bodies. Further serological study results were as follows: IgG, 891 mg/dL; IgA, 176 mg/dL; IgM, 90 mg/dL; C3, 149 mg/dL; and C4, 41 mg/dL. Anti-nuclear antibody was present at 40-fold in a homogenous and speckled pattern, but the specific antibody was absent.
A renal biopsy was performed the day after admission. Light microscopy (LM) showed that 9 of 42 glomeruli were globally sclerotic. Although the glomerular base membranes were thickened, spike formation was not observed . Mild mesangial proliferation was observed in a few glomeruli. There was no endocapillary proliferation or crescent formation. Tubulointerstitial or vascular damage was absent. Immunofluorescence showed diffuse granular staining for IgG (2+), and C3 (2+) along the glomerular capillary walls (GCWs). Staining for IgA, IgM, and C1q was negative. Regarding the subclasses of IgG, strong staining was observed for IgG1, IgG2, and IgG4 and weak staining for IgG3 . Electron microscopy showed subepithelial electron-dense deposits . Consequently, a diagnosis of MN of Ehrenreich-Churg stage 1 was made. Additionally, we performed immunostaining for PLA2R and THSD7A of the glomeruli and rectal cancer tissues with metastatic lymph nodes to discriminate between idiopathic and secondary MN . In the glomeruli, granular staining for THSD7A along the GCW was observed with negative staining for PLA2R. In the rectal cancer tissue, THSD7A staining was positive, showing a mainly luminal pattern, which was reported as the staining pattern of rectal cancer . THSD7A staining of metastatic lymph nodes revealed deposition in the secondary lymph follicles and in the sinus. Based on the above findings, a diagnosis of THSD7A-associated MN was made, which was associated with rectal cancer. We suspected the recurrence of rectal cancer; however, there was no tumor recurrence on chest and abdominal CT examination and colonoscopy. No lymph node enlargement was observed.
Treatment of tumors cures tumor-associated MN , but the patient did not want chemotherapy, and therefore he was kept on observation with supportive therapy. Consequently, nephrotic syndrome still persists, but obvious recurrence and metastasis of the primary tumor have not been observed.