A 56-year-old Japanese man with end-stage renal disease secondary to diabetic nephropathy visited our hospital because of abdominal pain and pus discharge from the exit site of a PD catheter. He had redness around the exit site and tenderness at the subcutaneous tunnel. The dialysis effluent was not cloudy and the effluent cell count was < 100/μL. Thus, we performed pus swab culture based on a suspicion of ESI and TI. Treatment was started using intravenous vancomycin (1.5 g/day), oral minocycline (200 mg/day), and topical gentamicin ointment, because the patient had a history of ESI caused by methicillin-resistant coagulase-negative Staphylococcus (MRCNS).
The patient was admitted to our hospital 3 days later, with the following vital signs: blood pressure of 165/104 mmHg, pulse of 86 bpm, and temperature of 36.7 °C. A physical examination revealed continued pus discharge from the exit site, as well as redness and swelling of the surrounding skin . No rebound tenderness or muscle guarding were observed. A complete blood count from the admission revealed a white blood cell count of 8390/μL, a red blood cell count of 380 × 104/μL, a hemoglobin level of 10.1 g/dL, and a platelet count of 21.4 × 104/μL. The blood test results revealed an albumin level of 2.9 g/dL, a blood urea nitrogen level of 54.3 mg/dL, a creatinine level of 13.95 mg/dL, and a C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 0.09 mg/dL. The white cell count in the dialysis effluent was 7/μL (mononuclear cells: 6/μL, polymorphonuclear cells: 1/μL), and the pus culture revealed the presence of MRCNS.
We continued to suspect that the ESI and TI were caused by MRCNS, and continued treatment using intravenous vancomycin . However, abdominal computed tomography on day 7 revealed an increased density of fatty tissue around the PD catheter . Thus, we performed simultaneous removal and reinsertion of the PD catheter at a new exit site, based on the refractory ESI and TI in the absence of peritonitis. The PD was re-started on day 12, although evaluation of the dialysis effluent on day 15 revealed that the white cell count had increased to 631/μL (mononuclear cells: 455/μL, polymorphonuclear cells: 176/μL), which supported a diagnosis of peritonitis. Negative results were obtained from Gram staining and acid-fast staining of the dialysis effluent. The dialysis effluent was then cultured in aerobic, anaerobic, and Ogawa media. Treatment was switched to intravenous meropenem (0.5 g/day) and intraperitoneal amikacin (2 mg/kg/day). On day 23, we observed a rise in the CRP level (10.1 mg/dL) and the number of white cells in the dialysis effluent (4126/μL). Therefore, the patient was converted to hemodialysis (HD) on day 24.
On day 29, gram-positive rods (GPR) were found in the aerobic culture of the dialysis effluent from day 15. These bacilli were sensitive to imipenem but resistant to meropenem and amikacin. On day 30, we noticed growth of acid-fast bacilli in Ogawa medium. The GPR from the aerobic culture were identified as M. abscessus on day 33. M. abscessus was also detected in cultures of the dialysis effluents from days 20 and 28. After switching the treatment from meropenem to imipenem, the CRP levels decreased. However, ESI and TI persisted at the reinserted catheter and wound dehiscence was detected at the old exit site . Thus, the second catheter was removed on day 37, and the patient’s condition subsequently improved. Additional susceptibility testing revealed that the M. abscessus was sensitive to clarithromycin, and oral clarithromycin was started after 4 weeks of treatment using imipenem. Cultures of the catheter tip and intraoperative ascites fluid revealed positive results for M. abscessus. In addition, pathological findings at the original exit site revealed granulomatous dermatitis and a positive result during acid-fast staining. M. abscessus was detected in the wound cultures until day 58, although negative results were observed thereafter. On day 101, the patient developed nausea and vomiting, and computed tomography revealed intestinal dilation . On day 103, the patient underwent laparoscopic adhesiolysis surgery because of adhesive ileus, and the intraoperative findings revealed adhesion of the intestinal tract near the abdominal wall site where the catheter had been placed. There were no findings of encapsulating peritoneal sclerosis, and M. abscessus was not detected during culture of the intraoperative ascites specimen. The patient was discharged on day 115, completed 6 months of treatment using clarithromycin monotherapy, and did not develop infection or ileus recurrence during the next 2 years.