An 80-year-old male with a documented unknown allergy to cephalosporins, residing at a long-term acute care hospital, was suspected of having a urinary tract infection (UTI) based on a progressive fever and dysuria. A clean catch urine specimen was collected 5 days prior to hospital admission (PTHA) during a scheduled ambulatory dialysis session, and the patient was empirically started on cephalexin. Urine analysis was positive for large leukocyte esterase and bacteria, and culture subsequently grew Escherichia coli, 10,000–50,000 cfu/mL demonstrating resistance to ampicillin, levofloxacin, trimethoprim, and sulfamethoxazole; intermediate sensitivity to ampicillin/sulbactam; and sensitivity to cefazolin, gentamicin, and nitrofurantoin. The patient was prescribed cephalexin 500 mg three times daily, and 2 days PTHA, he started to develop an extensive erythematous rash which developed into sloughing of the skin. There was continued progression of this severe reaction, and on day 4 after first receiving cephalexin, the drug was discontinued and the patient was transferred to a local burn intensive care unit (BICU). The patient’s past medical history was notable for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, type 2 diabetes mellitus, coronary artery disease, hypertension, hypothyroidism, depression, and end-stage renal disease (ESRD) requiring hemodialysis. The patient had a history of multiple myocardial infarctions with subsequent ischemic cardiomyopathy, and atrial fibrillation. The patient’s home medications included hydrocodone/acetaminophen, levothyroxine, escitalopram, carvedilol, guaifenesin, docusate, calcitriol, albuterol, and amiodarone. Within 24 h of admission, the patient developed pulmonary infiltrates with respiratory failure for which he was intubated.
Upon admission to the BICU, the patient reported difficulty swallowing and an endotracheal tube was placed. The patient was diagnosed with toxic epidermal necrolysis syndrome (TENS) estimated to cover approximately 56% of the total body surface area, involving his entire back, lower chest, abdomen, bilateral upper extremities, and bilateral thighs. Remarkable vital signs and lab results were the following: blood pressure 81/45 mm Hg, respiratory rate 12 breaths/min, temperature 36.8 °C over the temporal artery, with a white blood cell (WBC) count of 1.5 × 103/mm3 with 73% neutrophils, platelet (PLT) count of 77,000/µL, serum creatinine (SCr) of 2.12 mg/dL, and venous serum lactate 3.1 mmol/L. His oxygen (O2) saturation was 99% on 6 L O2 via nasal cannula, which was quickly advanced to 15 L via a non-rebreather mask. Pain was assessed at 9 within a 10-point pain scale, with 10 points depicted as the worst imaginable pain.
Two peripheral blood cultures were obtained, as were skin surveillance cultures of nares, axilla, and groin, and a urine culture from a newly placed indwelling Foley catheter. Shortly after, a chest radiograph revealed right pleural effusion with right lower and left basilar opacities. With the patient exhibiting marked respiratory distress, he was then intubated. He was placed on norepinephrine and vasopressin drips for pressure support, as well as continuous infusion of albumin 25%. Lactated Ringer’s was given at 300 mL/h, titrated to the patient’s urine output. He was administered tetanus–diphtheria toxoids vaccine intramuscularly. Given his reaction was strongly suspected due to a beta-lactam antimicrobial, the 80-kg patient was given single intravenous (IV) dose of gentamicin 120 mg and fluconazole 100 mg.
The following morning (hospital day 2), the patient’s WBC was 5.4 × 103/mm3, SCr 1.98 mg/dL, and venous serum lactate 1.8 mmol/L. A random serum gentamicin level (22.5 h post-dose) was 2.4 mg/dL, and the patient was redosed with 120 mg of gentamicin 3 h later. Supportive continuous renal replacement therapy was ordered, and fluconazole continued at 200 mg IV every 24 h as early results of his urine culture showed >100,000 cfu/mL Candida species. The Gram’s stain of the tracheal aspirate performed late the evening before showed heavy growth of pleomorphic Gram-negative rods and diphtheroid-like Gram-positive rods. On day 4 of hospitalization, the patient developed wide complex tachycardia and amiodarone was restarted. Gentamicin was held as a random serum level returned at 2.2 mg/dL. Physical examination performed on hospital day 5 revealed sloughing of skin over his back, chest, upper extremities, abdomen, bilateral thighs, and buttocks. Culture and sensitivity results of the tracheal aspirate grew Pseudomonas aeruginosa, sensitive to all anti-pseudomonal beta-lactams as well as gentamicin, tobramycin, amikacin, and colistin, but resistant to doripenem and quinolones. Another 120 mg dose of gentamicin was administered as a random gentamicin level returned under 2 mg/dL, but the patient continued to decline and expired on hospital day 6. The cause of death listed was cardiac arrest, a consequence of multisystem organ failure due to TENS. An autopsy of the chest and abdomen was performed with full-body external examination. The autopsy reported TEN involving 80% of body surface area, as well as necrotizing bronchopneumonia, a very poor prognostic indication for survival. A Severity of Illness Score for TEN (SCORTEN) calculated by pathology at the time of autopsy estimated a predicted mortality of 62%.