A 31-year-old patient (first gravida, 20 + 4 weeks of gestation) presented to the emergency department of an external hospital with sudden left-sided pelvic pain and pressure. Physical examination was unremarkable, but transvaginal sonography and MRI revealed an unknown left parauterine mass with a maximum diameter of 39 mm . The patient was transferred to a specialized center with high diagnostic and interventional expertise for clarification of diagnosis and further treatment. Blood count showed slightly elevated infection parameters and slightly reduced but stable hemoglobin at 9.4 g/dl (norm value: 11.9 to 14.6 g/dl). Cardiotocogram and fetal sonography were unremarkable, while intensified transvaginal color-coded sonography including pulse-waved-Doppler showed a perfusion of the parauterine mass and yin-yang sing, typical for an aneurysmatic lesion . Additional pelvic MRI with MR angiography led to the diagnosis of a partially thrombosed true aneurysm originating from the left uterine artery . There were no signs of rupture (i.e., intra-abdominal free fluid) but the UAA showed an increase in size of 7 mm within 6 days. Due to the increasing risk of rupture, an immediate interdisciplinary therapy-discussion was initiated including feto-maternal specialists, gynecologists, an interventional radiologist and a vascular surgeon. All concluded that based on the early gestational age, the size progression of the true UAA and considering the persistent pain, selective embolization should be the treatment of choice. Afterwards the patient was intensively informed about procedural risks associated with the treatment in relation to her pregnancy and signed specified informed consent form.
The intervention taking 79 min was performed under local anesthesia with retrograde access via the right common femoral artery. Contrast agent application under X-ray fluoroscopy secured the diagnosis of a true left UAA . Embolization was performed by super-selective back-door, intra-aneurysm and front-door coil-embolization via a 2.7 F microcatheter (Progreat, Terumo) with a total of 34 coils (Cook: 2 mm Hilal, 3 mm / 8 mm / 10 mm Nester; BostonScientific: 3 mm IDC, 20 mm Interlock; see also Fig. D-F). Due to superselectivity, a more proximally originating small vascular branch of the left uterine artery could be preserved to ensure continued left-sided supply of the uterus . Control X-ray fluoroscopy showed complete occlusion of the aneurysm . A total amount of 25 ml Accupaque 300 was applied. Fluoroscopy time was 13 min. The model calculated radiation dose to the fetus using VirtualDose™ software was 4.33 mGy . Follow-up sonographic examination 15 days post-treatment confirmed a healthy mother, fetus, and a still eliminated true UAA. The pregnancy continued without complications and a control MRI before the calculated date of birth to plan the birth process showed a significant decreased and still occluded aneurysm , so that a regular childbirth was possible. Finally, a healthy child was born without the need for anticipation of birth.