A 37-year-old female presented to the gastroenterology clinic because of the gradual enlargement of the left lower extremity along with intermittent hematochezia and hematuria for 5 mo.
The patient had repeated hematochezia with intermittent gross hematuria for 5 mo, and the symptoms gradually worsened.
The female patient was found to have several port wine stains on the skin of her left lower extremity and hip after birth. In addition, her left lower extremity was found to be larger than the right lower extremity since childhood, which gradually increased with age and was accompanied with pain and heaviness. At the age of 14 years, she was diagnosed with “filariasis” by other hospitals; however, no improvement was noted after the anti-filarial treatment. Repeated hematochezia began to appear at the age of 7 years. The bleeding frequency was low (3-5 times/mo), and the amount was small. As the problem was self-limiting and did not affect her normal life, the patient did not undergo enteroscopy or professional treatment. However, the hematochezia gradually worsened and intermittent gross hematuria appeared. She was admitted to another hospital and was diagnosed to have hemorrhoid bleeding. She was treated with conventional hemostatic drugs, but continued to have intermittent gastrointestinal bleeding and hematuria.
Her parents did not have a consanguineous marriage, and nobody else in the family had a similar medical history.
The patient walked with asymmetry in both lower extremities and mild claudication. Her skin and sclera were pale. There was a mild enlargement in the right arm, and her fingers were thickened. There was a small piece of port-wine stain on the back of her hand , and the varicose veins were seen on the forearm (black arrows in Figure ). Furthermore, there were several map-like port wine stains on the left lower extremity, hip, and trunk . The left hip and the left extremity were obviously enlarged, with giant deformed toes and atypical varicose veins on the outside of the leg (black arrows in Figure ).
Blood routine: Hemoglobin 88g/L. Liver function was normal.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT)-plain scan + enhancement: The spleen was large, with multiple low-density shadows, which were considered to be vascular lesions (hemangioma). The rectal wall was unevenly thickened, and the enhancement was not uniform. The left ovarian vein was thickened, with a filling-defect area. The left iliac vein and pelvic floor vein were slightly thickened and tortuous. Multiple speckled calcium density shadows were observed in the pelvic cavity. The bladder wall was slightly thickened, and venous stones were detected . Left lower extremity magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)-plain scan + enhancement: There was an obvious enlargement in the left lower extremity, with multiple tortuous strip long T1/T2 and enhanced signals in the subcutaneous soft tissues, muscle space, and the muscle soft tissue area. Subcutaneous varicose veins were prominent on the left leg, with an obvious enhancement. Multiple reticular long T2WI signal shadows were observed in the surrounding muscles and soft tissues, with mild enhancement . X-ray of both lower extremities: The spine exhibited a slight compensatory deviation to the left. The soft tissue of the left lower extremity was thickened, with nonuniform density and a normal bone structure .