A 65-year-old Chinese woman with 1 year of grade school education came to the Department of Neurology, First Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang University in November 2018. Her complaints included a 3-year history of walking instability which was characterized by slow walking, lower foot height, hypsokinesis, poor balance, reduced stride length, broad-based gait, and difficult starting/turning. Furthermore, she was found to have memory loss and was slow to respond. The symptoms had gradually worsened, and she was dependent on family members to help her walk. Twenty days before presenting to our clinic, she suffered thoracic vertebral compression fracture (T11–12) due to a fall at home and required surgery. The patient had no medical history of hypertension, diabetes, cardiac diseases. She had no family history of similar diseases. Her neurological examination revealed a severe gait disturbance and increased muscular tone of limbs. Marked muscle wasting was seen in the temporalis. The Medical Research Council power was 4/5 on the flexor and extensor of four limbs . Neuropsychological examination revealed diminished memory, prominent math difficulties and temporal-space disorientation. She scored 7/30 on the MMSE . No abnormalities in the cranial nerves and sensory system were noted.
Additional screens detected no abnormalities, including normal routine blood tests, biochemistry examination, coagulation function, thyroid function, tumor marker, and normal folate and vitamin B12 levels. Screens for HIV, syphilis and hepatitis were negative. Furthermore, routine CSF analysis, CSF biochemistry and CSF pressure were normal. However, first degree atrioventricular block and complete right bundle branch block was presented in the electrocardiogram (ECG), cholecystolithiasis in abdominal ultrasound, bilateral multiple thyroid nodules in the thyroid ultrasound, and chronic inflammatory foci in the lower lobes of both lungs in lung CT. Furthermore, brain MRI revealed ventriculomegaly (Evans index =0.34) and atrophy on bilateral frontal, temporal and occipital lobes . Moreover, the electromyogram (EMG) indicated muscle damage with excessive myotonic discharge. Finally, genetic testing showed an over 100 CTG repeat expansion in the DMPK gene on chromosome 19q13.3, confirming the diagnosis of DM1 . Her two children also underwent genetic testing and one daughter presented with a repeat expansion on the DMPK gene.
As noted previously,the patient demonstrated gait disturbance and cognitive impairment (in absence of urinary incontinence) accompanying with normal CSF pressure and ventricular enlargement. These observations triggered a probably case of NPH and cerebrospinal fluid tap-test (CSF-TT) was performed. The patient’s gait temporarily improved after CSF drainage . A second CSF-TT was performed with a similar pattern of temporary gait improvements . These observations are consistent with NPH, further suggesting the diagnosis of NPH. However, the patient refused shunt surgery and was discharged. A 6-month follow-up showed aggravation of symptoms and increased dependence on family members.