A 12-year-old boy was admitted to West China Second University Hospital, Chengdu on 13th April 2019 with the chief complaints of low-grade fever, cough for over a month, and headache, vomiting, progressive disturbance of consciousness for 3 weeks. He suffered from several generalized seizures throughout the course of the illness. His parents reported that he was previously healthy. There was no known contact with an individual with active tuberculosis although they resided in Tibet, where tuberculosis is highly prevalent. Vaccination status with Bacillus Calmette-Guerin was unknown.
On examination, his temperature was 37.8 °C, heart rate 74/min and respiration rate 20/min. No BCG scar was observed on his upper arms. The patient was confused and lethargic, and had neck stiffness and positive Kernig’s sign. The lower limbs had normal muscle tone, and can be lifted off the bed when giving pain stimulation. The Babinski sign was absent. There were crackles in the left lung.
Blood tests showed white blood cell 7.6×109/L, absolute value of neutrophils 5.3×109/L, hemoglobin level of 140 g/L, and platelet count 223 ×109/L. The C-reactive protein was less than 0.8 mg/L. Liver and kidney function tests were normal. A tuberculin skin test was negative, while the interferon-gamma release assay was positive. Several sputum acid-fast bacilli stains, and an induced sputum culture for Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) were negative. Contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) demonstrated consolidation in the apical posterior segment of the left upper lobe with hilar and mediastinal lymphadenopathy. Contrast-enhanced CT of the brain revealed dilated lateral ventricles and basilar meningeal enhancement. Analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed a white blood count of 569×106/L (80% lymphocytes), a remarkably elevated level of protein (4.52 g/L) and adenosine deaminase (89.4 U/L), as well as a decreased level of glucose (1.84 mmol/L) and chlorides (86.7 mmol/L). Xpert MTB/RIF test on bronchoalveolar lavage fluid demonstrated a diagnosis of rifampicin-sensitive tuberculosis.
The patient was diagnosed with pulmonary TB and TBM and commenced on standard anti-tubercular therapy (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) with dexamethasone 0.6 mg/kg.d. In the following days, the patient became conscious and oriented, and experienced no recurrence of seizure or vomiting. Other symptoms including fever and headache were gradually relieved. However, seventeen days after treatment, he developed right upper quadrant pain and lumbodorsal pain, and thereafter, he developed spastic paraplegia of the lower limbs with fecal and urinary retention. On examination, there was motor weakness in the lower extremity (manual muscle testing assessed 1/5) as well as impaired sensation in right lower limb. Hypertonia and hyperreflexia were detected in the lower limbs. Repeat routine blood test and C-reactive protein were normal. MRI of the spine demonstrated generalized inflammation of spinal cord and meninges with enlarged syringomyelic cavities. Syrinx formation was exceptionally notable from C1 to T1 with the maximum width of 5.9 mm in the central canal of the cervical cord . T2-weighted images showed hyperintense signals within the spinal cord parenchyma . Contrast enhanced MRI demonstrated significant thickening and enhancement of the arachnoid, with narrow and even disappeared subarachnoid space . Hyperintense signals on T2 and isointense signals on T1-weighted images were shown in the subarachnoid space. There was atrophy of spinal cord from T6 to T8 , and nodular enhancement of conus medullaris was shown .
The clinical deterioration and the spinal involvement were unexpected since the patient was receiving effective anti-tubercular treatment with initial improvement. After discussion with the pediatric neurosurgeon, surgery was believed to be unrewarding given the extensive arachnoiditis with no obvious cord compression. The development of spinal cord complications was thought to be caused by the exaggerated cell-mediated immune response against mycobacterial antigens, while other etiologies, like superimposed bacterial infection and drug-resistant TB were thought less likely. High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG, 2 g/kg) was given to the patient given the progressive deterioration of the symptoms and potential efficacy of IVIG as an immunoregulatory and anti-inflammatory drug. The patient responded well and went on for a steady recovery. Seven days after the use of IVIG together with anti-tubercular drugs and dexamethasone, the patient was not complaining of any urinary disturbance, back pain, headache or vomiting. Manual muscle testing assessed 4/5 in his lower extremities and he was able to walk under assistance. Repeat MRI showed radiological improvement of syringomyelia and other spinal lesions. He was then discharged for further rehabilitation at a local hospital.