In October 2016, the man aged 68 was admitted to our hospital because of repeated cough for 8 months and hemoptysis for 1 month.
The patient was diagnosed left lower lung adenocarcinoma (pT1N0M0, Ia) in 2012, and then received surgical resection without chemotherapy. In March 2016, the patient began to develop dry cough, without fever, chest pain, hemoptysis and night sweats. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed and revealed multiple lung nodules, enlarged right hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes . Suspecting metastatic malignant tumor, further bronchoscopy biopsy was then performed, and the pathological diagnosis reported non-mucoid adenocarcinoma. At that time, the patient was diagnosed left lung adenocarcinoma recurrence (rT4N2M1, Ia), and underwent “pemetrexed + cisplatin” chemotherapy on March 23 and April 13. However, the patient still experienced cough, with white sputum and no hemoptysis. On May 4, the second chest CT showed that the right upper lobe nodules became larger in size, accompanied by an empty cavity while the remaining multiple nodules in both lungs have been absorbed . At that time, the right upper lobe lesion was considered infectious lesion and repeated sputum smear and culture were taken, all coming back negative, including acid-fast staining. The patient was then empirically treated with levofloxacin and cefepime for 7 d, but his symptoms didn’t relieve. On May 18, there was no change of the upper lobe lesion in a reviewed chest CT . The bronchoscopy biopsy was performed again and neither malignant tumor cells nor suspected pathogens were found. Moxifloxacin was administered for 7 d with no symptoms relief.
On July 28 2016, the patient underwent percutaneous right upper lung mass biopsy and pathological result found pulmonary consolidation with fibrosis containing parasitic eggs, suspecting paragonimiasis. Serum parasite antibodies including paragonimiasis, echinococcosis and schistosome antibodies were all negative and no eggs were found in stool. Praziquantel was given for 5 d with no improvement in symptoms.
On September 5 2016, the patient had hemoptysis and was transferred to our hospital. The patient denied a history of having raw or unclean diet and had a history of smoking for more than 30 years, occasionally drinking alcohol. He was born in rural area of Shanghai and had no travel history before the onset. He is heterosexual, married and has given birth. He has no malnutrition. Lung auscultation didn’t detect obvious wet rales. Laboratory examinations revealed normal blood routine (white blood cell: 5.59 × 109/L, Neutrocyte %: 71.7%, Eosinophil %: 1.8%), slightly elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR, 40 mm/h), normal tumor markers like carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), neuron-specific enolase (NSE), cytokeratin 211 (CY211), and normal stool routine without parasitic eggs.
There was still no significant change of the right lung lesion in a reviewed chest CT examination . Still suspecting a possible parasite infection, the lung biopsy specimens were sent to Shanghai Medical College Institute of Parasitology for consultant. Amoebic trophozoites ingesting erythrocytes were found under the microscope , and the serum antibody of amoebic trophozoites was 1:64 (Additional file : Figure S1). The enteroscope examination showed multiple polyps. The PCR test for Entamoeba gingivalis was negative. The patient was diagnosed as pulmonary amebiasis and he was given metronidazole 0.5 bid ivgtt for 11 days, and then metronidazole 0.4 tid po before discharge. The patient’s cough gradually reduced and lesions were significantly absorbed by reviewed chest CT on December 26 . On June 6 2017, reviewed lung CT showed that the lesions were completely absorbed .