A 72-year-old female patient, who was not prescribed any medications, without any relevant medical history, was transported to our hospital due to suspected tetanus. She had never been vaccinated against tetanus. Fourteen days previously, she had been injured on her right forearm by a rose thorn while gardening. She did not visit any hospital, and took treated her injury herself. On the 10th day after injury (day 1), trismus suddenly appeared. Two days later (day 3) she presented to another hospital with a chief complaint of lock jaw and anorexia, and she was hospitalized for an unknown disease. The muscle tone of her limbs gradually increased after admission, and opisthotonus appeared on days 5–6. Tetanus was suspected, and she was transported to our hospital on day 7.
On general examination when she arrived at our emergency department, her consciousness was alert. Her vital signs were as follows: blood pressure, 128/88 mmHg; heart rate, 82 beats/minute, respiratory rate, 24 breaths/minute, and body temperature, 37.9 °C. A physiological examination revealed trismus as small as 2 finger breadths , dysphagia, and limb muscle spasm or spinal stiffness that were triggered by stimuli such as light, sounds and a change of body position. The wound on her right forearm was covered by a scab and no debridement was needed .
Whole body computed tomography (CT) was performed on admission and revealed a hematoma of the right iliopsoas muscles without extravasation . No hematoma was observed on CT images from a scan performed on day 4 . We decided to perform conservative therapy for IPH.
The patient transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). She was sedated with diazepam and intubated, then mechanical ventilator management was started because she complained of painful spasms. Human tetanus immune globulin (3000 units) was administered intravenously. Penicillin G (8,000,000 units/day) and Ceftriaxone (2 g/day) were administered to treat local infection and pneumonia, which was found on CT after her admission. The continuous administration of midazolam and magnesium sulfate hydrate (50–75 g/day) was started, and a Kampo medicine, shakuyakukanzoto (7.5 g/day), was administered by nasogastric tube to relieve the pain caused by her muscle spasms. Muscle relaxants, such as rocuronium and vecuronium, were not required during her hospital stay.
On day 10, we performed tracheostomy in anticipation of the need for long-term mechanical ventilation. On day 17, a CT scan confirmed that the IPH had been absorbed , and we started heparin calcium (10,000 units/day) with subcutaneous injection for the prevention of DVT, where whole-body muscle spasm subsided around day 21, then the mechanical ventilator became dislodged. She was transferred from the ICU to the general medical ward on day 24. During her hospital day, she developed some complications, including HAP/VAP, catheter-associated infection, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus pneumonia, cardiopulmonary arrest due to obstruction by sputum; however, all of complications were overcome. The patient underwent rehabilitation in our hospital and was discharged to her home on the day 95.
Prior to the patient’s hospitalization, there were no episodes that suggested a bleeding tendency. We performed blood tests to check for any factors associated with hemorrhagic conditions, such as hemophilia; all of these tests were within the normal limits.