A 23-year-old Caucasian woman was presented at the ED of our hospital after having lost her consciousness in a bus. Bystanders reported convulsions during this event. At our ED, the woman was too weak and too confused to answer questions, therefore taking a correct history was not possible. Her medical records showed substance abuse: cocaine, cannabis, amphetamines, crack and GHB. At time of presentation at the ED, she was awake, but with diminished consciousness and incoherent thoughts, which was scored as a Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) of 14. Except for tachycardia, vital signs and electrocardiography were normal.
She was diagnosed with GHB intoxication and admitted to the medical ward for observation because her consciousness was still slightly lowered. The evening of the day of admittance, she became very agitated, had hallucinations and recognized no persons other but her boyfriend. Vital signs remained stable. Lorazepam was started at 1 mg 4 times per day and raised to 1 mg 6 times per day. As the agitation increased, she had to be physically restrained. Being still uncooperative, she received 5 mg haloperidol and 50 mg clorazepate.
The next day she remained disoriented and still had hallucinations. Because of her uncooperative behaviour, she was transferred to the psychiatry ward, next to, but separated from the hospital, where she was treated with clorazepate 50 mg daily, oxazepam 25 mg 3 times per day, biperiden 2 mg 2 times per day and haloperidol in a rising dose up to 5 mg 3 times per day.
Six days later, her psychiatrist sent her back to the ED because of deterioration with loss of motor control and fever. The patient was again very agitated. Physical examination showed no abnormalities and neither did a computer tomography (CT) of the brain. At that time she had a fever of 39.3 °C, a blood pressure 109/76 mmHg, and a pulse rate of 132/min. Pulse oximetry showed an oxygen saturation of 97%, while her respiratory rate was 33/min and she now scored a GCS of 10 out of 15 (E2 M5 V3). Laboratory investigation showed WBC 20.000/μl, C-reactive protein (CRP) 50 mg/dl and a highly increased creatinekinase (CK) of 6000 U/l. Again she was admitted to the medical ward for observation and treatment with lorazepam. The next day, the situation worsened with hypoxia (pO2=8.2 kPa), a rising CK (9800 U/l) and extreme motion restlessness of extremities with choreatic movements and peri-oral hyperkinesias. The choreatic movements, resembling Huntington's disease, prompted us to consider a cause related to the GABA system, leading eventually to the diagnosis of GHB withdrawal syndrome. Bruises were visible on knees and elbows. With the diagnosis of severe GHB withdrawal syndrome and rhabdomyolysis she was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). The midazolam (50 mg/h) and clonidine (120 mcg/h) needed to manage the unrest, inhibited patient's coughing reflexes and lead to diminished clearance of secretions of her upper airway, resulting in hypoxia, which necessitated intubation and mechanical ventilation. Even despite these high doses of sedatives, she still sometimes had phases of being awake and sitting upright in bed. Because of rhabdomyolysis, she received 6 L infusion fluid intravenously per 24 hours. There were no signs of renal failure at any time. After three days the neurological situation had improved significantly. The patient was extubated despite having need of high doses of midazolam and clonidine, which could be decreased over days. Temperature, CK, WBC and CRP returned to normal values. Eight days after admission to the ICU, the patient was discharged to the medical ward with oxazepam 80 mg 3 times per day. Soon thereafter she could be discharged from the hospital, without any obvious neurological sequelae.
Her parents later reported that over the last three months for admittance, their daughter was using GHB every two to three hours. Based on information given by her parents and other relatives, our patient daily GHB intake was estimated between 60 and 90 g. Patient later confirmed this.