A 52-year-old male presented to the emergency department of a large regional hospital in the Netherlands. He was the owner of a grooming salon for dogs. Four days prior to admission, he was bitten by a dog in his index finger of the left hand. One day before admission, he started experiencing pain throughout his body, vomiting, diarrhea, coldness, shortness of breath, and a rash. He did not develop a fever. He has no medical history and takes no medication. He had a known allergy to bee stings. The patient smoked cigarettes and marihuana. On arrival of the ambulance, the patient was alert, tachypneic (47/min), pale, and cyanotic, with hematomas over his whole body. Blood pressure was 130/81 mm Hg, pulse 105/min, temperature 36.1°C. Oxygen saturation was not measurable due to insufficient peripheral circulation. Clemastine was administered on suspicion of anaphylaxis. On arrival at the emergency department, the blood pressure was 140/70 mm Hg, pulse 140/min, capillary refill time was greater than 5 se, temperature 34.7°C. The patient had generalized petechia. Laboratory results showed acidosis (pH: 7.28), hypocarbia (3.1 kPa), low bicarbonate (10.7 mmol/l), high lactate (8.3 mmol/l), renal failure (blood urea nitrogen 14.9 mmol/l, creatinine 379 µmol/l), C-reactive protein 169 mg/l, leukocytosis 15,6.109/l, rhabdomyolysis (CK 4746 U/l), diffuse intravascular coagulation (activated partial thromboplastin time >100 s, international normalized ratio 2.9, thrombocytes 8.109/l, D-dimer >35 000 µg/l) and later liver cell decay. The chest radiography showed no abnormalities. The patient received tetanus toxoid, amoxicillin/clavulanic acid associated with gentamycin intravenously and was admitted to the ICU with a systemic sepsis of unknown cause as a working diagnosis. Antibiotics were continued, and meropenem associated with clindamycin was added. There was no diuresis despite the liberal fluid infusion. Respiration gradually started failing, resulting in hypercarbia and increased oxygen dependency. The circulation further deteriorated, for which noradrenaline and, later, for a short period, adrenaline were administered. The patient received hydrocortisone in the context of therapy-resistant sepsis. Twelve hours after admission to the ICU, renal replacement therapy was started. Eighteen hours after admission, the patient was intubated and ventilated. On day 5, the blood cultures obtained at admission became positive with a strong suspicion for C. canimorsus. During his stay in the ICU, the patient developed necrosis of the hands, feet, genitals, face, and later the forearms and lower legs . The senior vascular and plastic surgeons were consulted. The exact origin of the necrosis could be due to vasopressors, DIC, or a combination of those two. Despite maximal supportive therapy, the condition of the patient further deteriorated. On day 11, it was decided that multiple amputations, including all four extremities, the nose, and the genitals, seemed mandatory to improve the patient’s chance of survival.
After careful consultation with his relatives, we concluded that performing these amputations would have a detrimental and unjustifiable effect on the quality of life.
Therefore, supportive therapy was stopped, after which the patient died on day 11. Definitive conformation for C. canimorsus from the blood cultures was obtained on day 13.
The antibiogram showed it was sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and clindamycin and resistant to metronidazole.