A 78-year-old Caucasian woman was referred to our department with right flank pain, pyrexia and features of a urinary tract infection. Part of her investigations included an emergency ultrasound scan. This suggested right hydronephrosis with debris, suggestive of infective material, but with no obvious obstruction, mass or calculi seen. In terms of her past medical history, she had a splenectomy 15 years ago for splenic lymphoma with villous lymphocytes (SLVL), and had undergone laparoscopic cholecystectomy, a left total hip replacement and hysterectomy. She had been under regular follow-up by the hematologists and been managed conservatively. Part of her follow-up with the hematologist included ultrasound and computed tomography scans, which suggested a long-standing right PUJO and some prominent lymph nodes in her porta hepatis .
On the evening of admission, our patient underwent a right nephrostomy insertion under imaging guidance in view of the findings on her repeat ultrasound . Results of her biochemical studies reported a white blood cell count of 32.7×109 cells/L), C-reactive protein level of 202mg/L and a creatinine level of 113μmol/L (with a baseline of 60μmol/L) . We drained bloody urine full of pus that grew coliform bacteria, which we treated with intravenous antibiotics.
Over the next few days, our patient recovered quite well and was discharged from hospital after a five-day stay.
In terms of her outpatient investigations, she underwent a dimercaptosuccinic acid renogram, which showed 52% function in her right kidney and 48% in her left. A nephrostogram revealed a grossly distended right pelvicalyceal system in a PUJO pattern. The contrast passed out in small aliquots and without obstruction into her bladder with just a little hold up over her iliac vessels .
Our patient underwent an elective laparoscopic pyeloplasty two months after being discharged. The procedure included a cystoscopy, which revealed an inflamed bladder wall with normal ureteric orifices, and a right retrograde that showed a normal ureter with narrowing and a kink at the right pelvi-ureteric junction, with contrast spill into her pelvis - typical of a PUJO. The pyeloplasty was uneventful and her 6Fr stent was removed at flexible cystoscopy four weeks after the operation.
Histology of the specimen showed a dilated ureter with loss of surface urothelium in many areas. The submucosa, muscle and deeper tissues contained a patchy but heavy infiltrate of small lymphoid cells without any follicular structures. These cells showed widespread positivity for B-cell markers cluster of differentiation (CD) 20 and CD79a, staining with markers B-cell lymphoma 2 and cyclin D2, weaker diffuse staining with CD5 and a low proliferation fraction, less than 5%, with marker Ki67. These features are consistent with MCL . A recent computed tomography scan suggested persistence of her minor lymphadenopathy and continuing appearance of the right PUJO . An intravenous urogram was performed, with both kidneys concentrating contrast appropriately, with a pelvicalyceal system that was prominent on the right and evidence of appropriate drainage bilaterally.
Our patient has now been referred back to the hematologist for further management of her MCL and is undergoing rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone chemotherapy treatment.