A 28-year-old female presented to us in July 2015 with complaints of pain and restricted movement of the right ankle joint since 1 month. The pain aggravated on walking. There was no history of trauma and was not associated with fever, loss of weight, or any other constitutional symptoms. History and family history were non-contributory. Clinical examination revealed no inspectory findings. Palpation revealed tenderness over the anterior aspect of the distal tibia with no local rise of temperature. Range of motion of the right ankle joint was painful and restricted. X-rays revealed a well-defined expansile predominantly lytic lesion in the distal epi-metaphyseal region of the right tibia with minimal periosteal reaction seen along the medial margin suggestive of malignant tumor of the bone . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the right ankle joint suggested an ill-defined eccentric expansile lesion measuring 4.3 (CC) × 3.0 (transverse) × 2.9 (anteroposterior) involving epi-metaphyseal end of the lower end of tibia causing cortical breach and having extra-osseous tissue component with the abnormal signal in flexor and extensor group of muscles with the possibility of GCT . According to the radiological classification of campanacci the tumor was classified as a grade 3 lesions . Laboratory investigations were within normal limits and surgery in the form of intralesional curettage with bone cement was planned. Anterior incision was taken over the distal end of the tibia. Bone was exposed, a cortical window of 3 cm × 2 cm was made , the tumor was excised , and curettage was done. The specimen was sent to histopathology for further examination. A thorough wash was given, and the defect was treated with 5% phenol. The cavity was filled with three layers consisting of bone graft, gel foam, and cement mixed with vancomycin, respectively . The tumor was sent for histopathological examination which confirmed the diagnosis of GCT . X-rays were taken at regular follow-up to confirm the union and the cast was removed after 3 months postoperatively, and weight-bearing was started. The patient was followed up regularly with no signs of recurrence.