A twelve-year-old boy was admitted to our clinic with seven days history of nausea, vomiting, anorexia and fatigue; the patient was febrile and icteric with normal vital signs. There was no significant medical history. The medical history was unremarkable. He had no underlying disease and there was no exposure to other patient with hepatitis A. On physical examination there was a tender liver, palpable 3 cm below the costal margin and the spleen was not palpable.
Laboratory examination yielded the following; hemoglobin: 10.9 g/dL; hematocrit: 32%; white blood cell count: 4200 cells/mm3; platelet count: 172.000/mm3; serum aspartate aminotranferase and alanine aminotranferase: 1364 and 1838 U/L (respectively); total (direct) bilirubin: 6.3 (5.6) mg/dl; gamma-glutamyl transferase: 89 U/L; alkaline phosphatase: 132 U/L; total protein: 5.2 g/dL; albumin: 1.9 g/dL; prothrombin time: 16 seconds; blood urea nitrogen, glucose, serum electrolytes levels and erytrocyte sedimentation rate were in normal limits. HAV IgM and HAV IgG were positive,
whereas all other viral markers including hepatitis B, C and E markers were interpreted as negative. Serological analysis for cytomegalovirus, parvovirus, Epstein Barr virus, leptospira and salmonella were also found to be negative. So diagnosis of HAV infection was confirmed according to positive IgM and IgG antibody titers.
On the 4th day of admission patient complained of abdominal distension and mild respiratory distress. Chest X-ray showed closure of right costophrenic sinus and there was no parenchymal infiltration . Thoracic ultrasonography revealed a right-sided pleural effusion and ascites. In abdominal ultrasound there was a mild hepatomegaly with increased echogenicity, a hydrophic, thickened, not calculous gallbladder (4 mm), and intra-abdominal fluid . Thoracocentesis revealed pleural fluid with no leukocytes or atypical cells. Bacteriological culture of pleural fluid remained sterile including for M. tuberculosis. PPD was also negative.
He was managed with supportive parenteral fluids and was given a protein-lipid restricted and carbohydrate enriched diet. One dosage of vitamin K was enough for mildly elevated prothrombin time level. During the follow-up there was no progression of clinical findings. Ten days after admission, chest X-ray and ultrasonographic examinations showed regression of pleural effusion, ascites and hydrophic changes in the gall bladder.
With supportive therapy considerable improvement was observed in biochemical tests and periodical ultrasound controls . Hepatic enzyme levels gradually returned to normal values within two months. He continued to do well during a three month follow-up.