A 35-year-old woman presented to our hospital because of repeated episodes of transitory amaurosis and presyncope during the last 3 months. These episodes were often preceded by a short period of palpitation. She also complained of chest discomfort on effort, and she quitted her work as a warehouse manager because of marked fatigue. She had a 17-year history of hypertension and took long-acting nifedipine everyday. She had a 12-year history of mild chest discomfort, and she had been diagnosed as having hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in a local hospital. She also suffered from systemic lupus erythematosus and has been taking oral glucocorticoid for 7 years. She had no family history of hypertension, cardiovascular diseases, or sudden death. The patient had normal vital signs upon admission. Blood pressure (right upper arm) was 135/75 mmHg. There was a systolic murmur at the left sternal border and in second to third intercostal spaces. No other remarkable abnormalities were found during regular physical examination. EKG showed sinus rhythm with right bundle branch block (RBBB) and T wave inversion in precordial, I, and aVL leads.
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated asymmetric left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy with abnormal systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the anterior mitral valve leaflet and obstruction of left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) . There was no critical valvular disease, and systolic function of the left ventricle was normal. Cardiac MRI showed a finding of asymmetric left ventricular hypertrophy as TTE .
On the second day of admission, the patient had an acute episode of palpitation associated with light-headedness. EKG showed supraventricular tachycardia with RBBB . Electrophysiology study revealed atrioventricular reentrant tachycardia using the left-sided concealed accessory pathway. Catheter ablation procedure was then performed. Surprisingly, via the right femoral artery the ablation catheter was failed to access the left heart but the right ventricle, showing left bundle branch block in EKG by stimulation. The ablation procedure was discontinued, and aortic angiography was performed instead. Advancement of the angiographic catheter was blocked at the proximal end of descending aorta, while the wire could be delivered to the right ventricle. Angiography performed on the descending aorta could disclose pulmonary artery rather than aortic arch and ascending aorta.
Coarctation of the aorta (CoA) and PDA were suspected and then confirmed by CT angiography (CTA) of the aorta. The descending aorta was remarkably narrowed at the isthmus by approximately 2 cm past the left subclavian artery . The innominate artery and the left subclavian artery were dilated with extensive collateral circulation arising from those arteries . A small vessel, immediately distal to the aortic obstruction, was found to be connecting the descending aorta and the pulmonary artery , confirming the presence of PDA. Blood pressure was measured again, and a pressure gradient of 50 mmHg was noted between the upper and lower extremities. Holter monitor results showed frequent premature ventricular beats , non-sustained ventricular tachycardia and supraventricular tachycardia that had the same morphology as the one captured by 12-lead EKG .
The catheter ablation procedure was performed again thereafter. An ablation catheter was delivered to the right atrium via the right femoral vein and advanced to the left side of the heart by trans-septal puncture. By this way, ablation was completed successfully.
After ablation, the patient had no episodes of presyncope and paroxysmal palpitation. However, she still felt chest discomfort on effort and marked fatigue, and could not go back to work. One month later, she was readmitted to our hospital, and balloon angioplasty with stenting was performed. A catheter was delivered to the root of the aorta via the right brachial artery. Angiography of the root of the aorta showed narrowing of the aortic isthmus and marked collateral circulation . Pressure was 200/100 mmHg at the proximal end of the descending aorta to the obstruction and 124/90 mmHg at the distal end to the obstruction . After balloon dilatation, the covered endovascular stent was placed at the aortic isthmus, and PDA was blocked by the stent concomitantly . Aortic pressures were equalized at the proximal and distal ends of the descending aorta . The symptoms of the patient of chest discomfort and fatigue were relieved remarkably after reconstruction. Her blood pressure was below 120/80 mmHg with metoprolol succinate (95 mg/day) that was given to treat premature ventricular beats and ventricular tachycardia and HCM. The patient went back to work one month later after successful repair of CoA. She remained normotensive and was doing well thereafter. On 8-year follow-up, aortic CTA and angiography were repeated, which showed patency of the covered stent , and no pressure gradient was detected at the proximal and distal ends of the descending aorta . Pressure was 177/90 mmHg at the proximal end and 174/92 mmHg at the distal end of the descending aorta, respectively . Aortic CTA showed reduced collateral circulation and disappearance of PDA compared to before the stent treatment . Moreover, repeated TTE on 8-year follow-up showed similar HCM-related imaging features as before the stent treatment, such as similarly thickened interventricular septum , and flow velocity in the descending aorta was around 2.9 m/s .
We performed whole exome sequencing with high depth (>100-fold coverage) by next-generation sequencing and then validation by Sanger sequencing to identify genetic involvement in the causation of the disease. After filtering intron variants, synonymous variants, and minor allele frequency >0.005 variants in the dbSNP database, variants in the ESP database, nonpathogenic variants in the ClinVar database, and in silico functional predicting, we identified two likely novel heterozygous HCM-causing mutations, DSP (p.Val520Met, c.1558G>A) (SIFT = 0.05; PolyPhen-2 = 1) and MYBPC3 (p.Tyr525Ser, c.1574A>C) (SIFT = 0; PolyPhen-2 = 0.976) according to the guideline . Except for these mutations, we detected no other likely pathogenic mutation in all cardiomyopathy-related genes. Notably, these mutations are located in evolutionary highly conservative areas across multiple species (phylop = 2.6 and 1.94, respectively). Furthermore, the following Sanger sequencing demonstrated that they did not exist in the 500 unrelated ethnically matched healthy controls.