We present the case of a 51-year-old woman suffering from end-stage renal disease after kidney transplantation, which had become necessary because of systemic lupus erythematosus. Her immunosuppressive therapy consisted of 1 mg of tacrolimus twice daily. Moreover, her drug history included amlodipine, bisoprolol, pravastatin, candesartan, levothyroxine, cholecalciferol, and calcitriol but no anti-coagulation. Due to a history of multiple arteriovenous fistula failure, a THC (Demers® catheter with dacron cuff and split tip) had been implanted into the right internal jugular vein more than 1 year ago. Lately, high-dose urokinase was used to lock the catheter’s proximal lumen post-dialysis because of catheter malfunction and suspicion of catheter thrombosis. Moreover, the inflow and outflow lumina were switched so that the proximal cannula was now used for blood outflow in order to perform IHD in ambulatory care . Nevertheless, high flow rates could not be achieved by these measures. Ambulatory IHD could only be performed without fluid removal and at a very low blood flow rate.
The patient was admitted to the emergency department because of discomfort and stabbing chest pain at the start of the regular ambulatory IHD treatment. Upon admission to the hospital, she was hypotensive (90/60 mmHg), in sinus tachycardia (110 b.p.m.) and presented with cool extremities, suggestive for circulatory shock. There were no appreciable murmurs. Arterial blood gas analysis, obtained in the emergency department, revealed a concomitant lactate acidosis and hyperkalaemia (serum lactate: 5.5 mmol/L, normal: 0.5–2.2 mmol/L, serum potassium: 8 mmol/L, normal: 3.5-4.6 mmol/L). All other laboratory values, including markers of myocardial ischaemia, were low, respectively within normal range (Troponin I 13 pg/mL, normal < 3 pg/mL; CK 52 U/L, normal <145 U/L).
The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for further diagnostic evaluation and treatment. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a moderate circular pericardial effusion without echocardiographic signs of tamponade or haemodynamic significance. Left and right ventricular functions were normal. A chest radiograph revealed no clear pathological findings . A computed tomography (CT) scan ruled out pulmonary embolism and confirmed the circular pericardial effusion, measuring up to 1.2 cm . Beyond that, the scan was considered unremarkable. The THC tip could not be located due to contrast agent overlay.
Due to severe hyperkalaemia, a short continuous veno-venous haemodialysis (CVVHD) with a low blood flow rate (100 mL/min) without fluid removal was performed after admission to the ICU until normalization of potassium values. During the treatment, the patient complained of chest pain.
The following day sustained low efficiency dialysis (SLED; Genius™ system, Fresenius) with a higher blood flow rate of 300 mL/min was performed using the THC. Immediately at the start, the patient showed severe hypotension, tachycardia, dyspnoea, and chest pain. This acute situation progressed within minutes to asystole. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation was started, an endotracheal intubation was performed without complications and a return of spontaneous circulation was observed after three minutes. An electrocardiogram showed no signs of electrical alternans. Initial atrial fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response quickly converted into normal sinus rhythm. A blood gas analysis revealed an elevated serum lactate of 7.1 mmol/L and a mild hypercapnia (pCO2 of 54.7 mmHg, normal: 34.0–45.0 mmHg, other values: pO2 164 mmHg, normal: 75.0–100.0 mmHg; pH 7.35, normal: 7.360–7.440; HCO3− 27.6 mmol/L, normal: 20.0–26.5 mmol/L; BE 4.3 mmol/L, normal: −2.0 to 3.0; Na 146 mmol/L, normal: 135–145 mmol/L; Hb 9.9 g/dL, normal: 12.3–15.3 g/dL; K 5.1 mmol/L). Mild therapeutic hypothermia was induced to minimize the risk of secondary brain injury. The patient remained stable with low doses of catecholamines.
Urgent bedside TTE demonstrated an enlargement of the circular pericardial effusion up to 2 cm with the diastolic collapse of the right atrium and the free right ventricular wall, indicating cardiac compression and tamponade.
Immediate pericardiocentesis drained 350 mL of sanguineous fluid (Hb 7.2 g/dL). This led to a rapid clinical improvement in the patient’s condition, but the source of bleeding remained unclear. Significant coronary artery disease was ruled out by invasive coronary angiography. Due to primary asystole, a temporary pacemaker wire was inserted through the femoral vein.
The patient remained stable without recurrence of pericardial effusion. A CT was repeated in order to further evaluate the origin of the intra-pericardial blood. Based on the sequence of events, repeated imaging now raised the first suspicion for catheter migration through the right atrial wall into the pericardium (, see also ). As the exact location could not be determined by CT, contrast echocardiography was performed, injecting contrast agent through the proximal lumen of the THC which became immediately visible in the pericardial space and led again to the development of a circular pericardial effusion . Hence, the diagnosis of a THC migration was made, the injected fluid was aspirated immediately and an open thoracotomy was performed urgently.
Surgical exploration confirmed an atrial perforation of the proximal tip of the catheter . The THC was removed (chest radiograph after thoracotomy, ) and the atrial laceration was closed with a bovine pericardial patch. Due to intermittent sick sinus syndrome, a permanent epicardial two-chamber pacemaker was implanted during the same procedure.
Further recovery was uneventful with extubation on the first postoperative day. The patient was transferred to the nephrological ward in stable condition and was discharged home on post-operative day 13. At follow-up, 9-month later, the patient is doing well without any neurological or cardiovascular problems. An upper arm A–V fistula is used for haemodialysis.