A 47-year-old female patient was admitted to the orthopedics service to undergo elective decompression surgery and lumbosacral spine arthrodesis (L4, L5, S1).
The orthopedic procedure was performed without complications. On the first postoperative day, the patient presented severe pain in the anterior aspect of the thigh, bilateral burning in the gluteal region and lower limbs in shock with neurogenic claudication.
Patient’s comorbidities comprised type II Diabetes Mellitus and hypothyroidism. The patient used 500 mg Metformin twice a day and 50 μg Levothyroxine once a day, on a regular and continuous basis, and did not have allergies.
The patient was in good general condition; she was flushed, hydrated, eupneic, afebrile and presented obesity grade I. The physical examination of the chest and cardiovascular system did not present relevant findings. Patients’ abdomen was flaccid and painless; it presented normal noises and did not show visceromegaly or palpable masses. Her orthopedic surgical incision presented satisfactory appearance. She had been submitted to a specific spinal cord MRI prior to her orthopedic surgery.
Lumbar CT was requested and, since the patient presented persistent pain on the 5th postoperative day, MRI of the lumbar spine was also requested; results showed posterior epidural collection in L3 and L4 with dural and spinal canal compression, as well as massive heterogeneous nodular perihepatic lesion (of undetermined nature) anterior to the right kidney. There were no association between the collection and the Schwannoma. The patient was subjected to a new surgery to drain the 50 mL collection that caused dural sac compression; the procedure did not show complications.
Given the heterogeneous mass found in front of the right kidney, which led to significant thinning of the inferior vena cava in lesion topography, the general surgery team was required to assess the patient, who had her pain stabilized and did not have new episodes of it. MRI of the abdomen and pelvis was requested by the general surgery team; results have shown undetermined, expansive, 7.2-cm retroperitoneal lesion on the right side of patient’s body – it was in close contact with the inferior vena cava and with the right renal vein, which caused a compression that extended toward the left renal vein . The patient did not present compressive symptoms associated with the lesion.
CT-guided puncture was performed to collect two biopsy fragments, which were subjected to anatomopathological analysis for diagnostic clarification purposes. Analysis results have shown fusiform neoplasia, with discrete nuclear atypia, interspersing more and lesser cellular areas. Mitosis and necrosis figures were not detected. The material was subjected to immunohistochemical profile analysis, which indicated its compatibility to schwannoma.