The 73-year-old male patient initially presented in the emergency room with nausea and persistent abdominal pain in the upper right quadrant for 1 day. He reported to feel weak and exhausted for a few weeks already. A weight loss of 5 kg in 2 months was attributed to a special diet; the patient did not record loss of appetite. Night sweating was negated. The medical history did not reveal a malignant or benign disease of the gastrointestinal tract. A routinely performed screening colonoscopy 3 years ago showed normal findings.
Elevation of serum amylase and lipase, liver transaminases, and bilirubin as well as the patient’s clinical presentation indicated acute pancreatitis .
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen confirmed the diagnosis of pancreatitis, showing edematous peripancreatic fat, minimal amounts of ascites, accentuated peripancreatic lymph nodes, a dilated pancreatic duct in the tail and body of the pancreas, and slightly dilated intra- and extrahepatic bile ducts. There were no clear signs of a tumor or stenosing process in the pancreas and bile ducts at that time .
Conservative treatment and further evaluation including endosonography and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreaticography (ERCP) were initiated. Endosonography revealed an enlarged pancreatic head with inhomogenous parenchyma, compromising the distal bile duct, but without signs of mechanic cholestasis or cholelithiasis. The pancreatic duct was dilated to 7 mm , with a vaguely discernible configuration of the duct wall, being suspicious of main-duct-intraductal pancreatic mucinous neoplasm (IPMN). ERCP showed an atypical tissue fragment sticking out of the swollen orifice of the papilla of Vater, considered either to be a thrombus, sludge, or neoplasia . With minimal manipulation, the specimen dropped into the duodenum and could be collected for histopathological examination . Bile duct intubation was unsuccessful. Pancreatography revealed congestion of the distal duct, a protective plastic stent was therefore inserted, and an aspirate probe was taken for cytological evaluation . During the procedure, the examiner did not notice mucin content.
Histopathological and immunohistochemical workup (antibodies listed in Table ) of the specimen collected via endoscopy yielded the unexpected diagnosis of a partly necrotic, highly differentiated pancreatic tumor, strongly positive for keratin 7 (CK7) and pankeratin AE1/AE3, and alpha 1 antichymotrypsin; negative for synaptophysin and chromogranin A, CDx2, CK20, S100, MUC 2, MUC5AC, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), and somatostatin; and in part positive for CA19-9 (20% of cells positive). A proliferation rate of 20% was revealed by Ki-67 staining. CK7 expression in combination with the histological feature of a tumor with back to back tubular glands was indicative of intraductal tubulopapillary neoplasia. In the absence of desmoplastic stroma reaction, classic pancreatobiliary carcinoma was considered unlikely. A neuroendocrine tumor was excluded due to the negative immunohistological reaction to neuroendocrine markers.
Cytological evaluation of the pancreatic duct aspirate was performed in an extern laboratory. The probe did not contain any cells or mucin and was D-PAS negative. KRAS mutation was not detected. The patient was checked for abnormality of serum immunoglobulins, in particular IgG4 and tumor markers, but showed no relevant increase of alpha-1-fetoprotein, CEA, cancer antigen (CA) 19-9, CA72-4, CA125, IgA, IgM, or IgE. Only IgG subclass 2 was unspecifically elevated.
Eighteen days after the initial endoscopic intervention with pancreatic stenting, re-endoscopy with stent removal and follow-up endosonography were performed. Pancreatic duct diameter had normalized. A highly suspect 11-mm hypoechoic vascularized lesion with sharp limitation, contacting but not compromising the pancreatic duct, was detected in the pancreatic body. In the inhomogenously structured pancreatic head, pancreatitis seemed to have regressed, but a hypoechoic formation without a clear border was seen, suspicious of pancreatic carcinoma. The distal common bile duct was compressed in the pancreatic head with a slight prestenotic dilatation.
Staging CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis confirmed the presence of a suspect hypodense lesion located in the head of the pancreas , and accentuated peripancreatic, mesenteric, and parailiacal lymph nodes with a maximum diameter of 8 mm were described. There was no indication of metastatic tumor spread. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreaticography (MRCP) was not performed.
Following interdisciplinary consensus in the hepato-pancreato-biliary tumor conference, oncologic extended pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy (PPPD) was planned. After another short episode of a mild pancreatitis and thorough anaesthesiological evaluation prior to surgery, extended PPPD with pancreatogastric anastomosis was performed without complications on day 47 after initial admission to hospital. Intraoperative immediate frozen sections of the resection margins of the common bile duct and pancreas were free of tumor cells. Intraoperative sonography of the liver showed no sign of hepatic tumor spread.
In the formalin-fixed surgical specimen, macroscopy revealed a narrowed pancreatic duct in a distance of 1 cm from the papilla, occluded by a drop-shaped 8-mm tumor that appeared to leave the duct wall intact for the most part. The organ parenchyma appeared partly fibrous with regular acini in the uncinate process.
Histopathological examination of HE-stained sections taken form most parts of the resection specimen revealed an intraductal lumen-occluding lesion with a mainly tubular growth pattern with back to back tubular glands . In areas with intraductal growth, a remainder of the original ductal epithelium was observed in some ducts. Nodular tumor cell aggregates showing the same histomorphological appearance were seen extraductally . Those nodules infiltrated the normal pancreatic tissue, reaching the organ margins without invasion of the peripancreatic fatty tissue. The remaining parenchyma was fibrotic with signs of chronic pancreatitis.
Immunohistology revealed the same findings as compared to the biopsy specimen including a strong expression of keratin 7 by all tumor cells . Neuroendocrine markers (synaptophysin, chromogranin A) were negative as was a trypsin stain. Keratin 19 was positive in approximately 10% of tumor cells.
Definite histopathological diagnosis was a tubulopapillary carcinoma of the pancreatic head grown from an intraductal tubulopapillary neoplasm with a maximal tumor diameter of 28 mm.
According to the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) 8th edition TNM staging for malignant tumors, the tumor was classified as pT2, pN0 (0/25), L0, V0, Pn0, R0 (wide), which refers to a stage IB. The tumor was considered low-grade (G1) .
The patient could be discharged from hospital on postoperative day (POD) 13 after an uneventful postoperative course. Six weeks after the operation, on POD 43, the patient was readmitted for 1 day due to unspecific upper abdominal pain and vertigo. Clinical examination showed a distended abdomen, but no signs of peritonitis. Abdominal sonography revealed slightly reduced bowel movements. There were no signs of cholestasis or fluid collections seen on ultrasound examination. Blood test showed normal levels of serum pancreatic and liver enzymes as well as normal inflammation parameters . Regular postoperative findings were recorded on abdominal CT. After fast recovery under conservative treatment with bland diet and analgetics, the patient could be discharged in good general condition.
Due to the rarity of that specific tumor entity and data postulating lower malignancy than in ductal adenocarcinoma, the interdisciplinary tumor conference decided for short interval follow-up (3 months) without adjuvant chemotherapy.
The patient recently had the second follow-up in our hepatopancreatobiliary outpatient clinic 6 months after pancreatic resection. Physical examination as well as blood tests and abdominal sonography showed normal findings, and the patient presented clinically well under pharmacological pancreatic enzyme substitution. The next follow-up appointment after three more months is planned to include an abdominal CT.