A 2-year-old female mixed-breed Shepherd weighing 15 kg, who suffered a trauma during play 3 months before, was presented with severe chronic lameness of the right hindlimb nonresponsive to NSAIDs. The orthopedic examination revealed a positive drawer test. The stress radiographs confirmed the suspicion of CdCL rupture with a displacement of the tibia relative to the femur . A Liverpool osteoarthritis in dogs (LOAD) questionnaire was completed with the owner of the animal during the preoperative consultation, with a score of 22/52 indicating severe mobility impairment . A replacement of the CdCL by a synthetic UHMWPE ligament was decided using an arthroscopic approach.
The dog was anesthetized with tiletamine (0.5 mg/kg)/zolazepam (0.5 mg/kg) + medetomidine (0.01 mg/kg) + morphine hydrochloride (0.5 mg/kg) by induction. An isoflurane relay (between 0.8 and 1%) in half-closed circuit was carried out at a flow rate of 1 l/minute. A constant rate infusion (2 ml/kg/hour) of a mixture of 250 ml of physiological serum + 30 mg of morphine + 202.75 mg of lidocaine + 75 mg of ketamine was administered. A single injection of cephalexin at 30 mg/kg was given at the start of the surgical preparation. The dog was placed in dorsal recumbency and prepared for aseptic surgery on the right hindlimb using chlorhexidine. A joint distractor supported by two 2.5-mm pins was placed on the stifle. The arthroscopic port was placed on the lateral side through a 5-mm lateral parapatellar incision performed with an 11-mm blade. Arthroscopic evaluation of the joint revealed inflammation of the medial meniscus without structural damage and confirmed the complete rupture of the CdCL in its distal part at the tibial insertion . The lateral meniscus and the cranial cruciate ligament were intact. The lateral parapatellar incision was made 3 cm wider to allow the complete resection of the damaged CdCL with an 11-mm blade under arthroscopic control. The bone tunnels for femoral and tibial fixation of the synthetic ligament were drilled under arthroscopic control. A 2-mm guide wire was inserted at the femoral footprint of the origin of the CdCL in a caudo-medial direction to exit on the medial side of the femoral condyle under arthroscopic guidance. The femoral tunnel was drilled over the guide wire using a 3.6-mm cannulated drill bit . The tibial tunnel was created with the help of a tibial drilling guide. A stab incision was made at the caudal aspect of the joint to insert the tip of the tibial drilling guide, which was positioned at the footprint of the proximal tibial insertion of the CdCL under arthroscopic control, and oriented in a distal and cranio-lateral direction. A stab incision was made on the proximal aspect of the craniolateral aspect of the tibia to position the sleeve of the drilling guide. The appropriate position of the tip of the tibial drilling guide was assessed arthroscopically before drilling. The same technique as that used for the femoral tunnel was used to drill the tibial tunnel . The UHMWPE implant (Novalig 4000, Novetech Surgery, Monaco) was passed through the tibial and femoral tunnels using a passing tube and a wire loop . A 4.5 × 20-mm interference screw was placed from inside-out . The UHMWPE implant was then passed through a 3-mm-wide sliding tunnel, drilled perpendicularly through the tibial crest using a medial approach and located near the distal exit of the tibial tunnel. This setup increased the precision of the tensioning of the prosthesis using the created counter-support and facilitated the placement of the interference screw. Once satisfactory tension was obtained, the implant was locked with a second 4.5 × 20-mm interference screw placed from outside-in . Once the implant was securely locked, no residual drawer sign was observed and a normal range of motion was reported.
Postoperative radiographs showed a satisfactory position of the tunnels and a good implantation of the interference screws along the drilling axes .
The patient was placed on full rest for eight weeks, with short lead walks only. Pain was managed with NSAIDs (Meloxicam (0.05 mg/kg)) for 6 days, and a painkiller (fentanyl patch (12 μg/hour)) for 72 hours.
On day 1 post-surgery, the dog was walking on her operated leg with moderate lameness. During each postoperative consultation, two x-rays were performed (face and profile), as well as an orthopedic examination. A LOAD questionnaire was also completed. After 2 weeks, moderate lameness was observed, and radiographs showed thickening of the patellar tendon and moderate synovial inflammation; the LOAD score was 21/52. After 1 month, moderate lameness was persistent, radiographs still showed thickening of the patellar tendon and moderate synovial inflammation; the LOAD score was 13/52. After 2 months, moderate lameness was still observed, radiographs had not evolved, and the LOAD score was 7/52. After 3 months, mild lameness was observed, a mild posterior drawer was reported at orthopedic examination and moderate synovial inflammation was observed on radiographs ; the LOAD score was 7/52. After 6 months, very mild lameness was observed, a mild posterior drawer was reported at orthopedic examination and a resolution of the synovial inflammation was seen on radiographs ; the LOAD score was 5/52. After a year, a persistent yet stable mild posterior drawer was reported at the orthopedic examination but was not associated with any lameness, and the LOAD score was down to 2/52.