A 68-year-old man with high fever and without any apparent cause was prescribed oral moxifloxacin in a community clinic. On day 5, his maximum body temperature reached to 41 °C with shivering, and so he visited the emergency department immediately. On laboratory examination, his white cell count was raised to 11.74*109/L and neutrophil percentage was 92.4%. The results of blood culture indicated Salmonella enteritidis (O9), while Widal test and Weil-Felix test were shown to be negative, which confirmed the diagnosis of Salmonella enteritidis sepsis. The patient was healthy before, and had no history of any other diseases, as well as smoking and drinking history. According to the results of antibiotic susceptibility test, piperacillin/tazobactam was prescribed. His temperature returned to normal after 2 days. He was discharged after maintenance of normal body temperature for 12 days, and was instructed to continue oral cefixime. On day 6 after discharge, he discontinued cefixime by himself and had fever (increased to 38.6 °C) accompanied with chills, fatigue, and night sweats. He also had paroxysmal pain in the left chest and back. He did not visit the hospital and took cefixime at home, and his body temperature was maintained constant at 37–38 °C. However, the patient was admitted after 24 days due to long-term low-grade fever and fatigue. He complained of slight back pain when inquired in detailed. His white cell count was 8.21*109/L and neutrophil percentage was 73.3%. C-reactive protein (CRP) was 45μg/ml, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 55 mm/h. Blood cultures still indicated Salmonella enteritidis (O9). Spine MRI showed abnormal signal changes at T9-T10 vertebral bone and adjacent soft tissues, and the corresponding spinal cord was compressed. CT scan showed infectious lesions. More specifically, bone destruction and sclerotic bone formation were observed, indicating that the course of spondylitis was not short. PET-CT revealed changes in T9-T10 vertebrae and intervertebral space, and formation of soft tissue masses adjacent to the vertebra, increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) metabolism, and spinal tuberculosis was considered . Anti-mycobacterium tuberculosis antibody and T-spot test were shown to be negative. The final diagnosis confirmed it as thoracic spine infection. Intervertebral lesion debridement, partial rib resection, intervertebral bone fusion and pedicle screw internal fixation were performed. After surgery, the patient experienced a significant decrease in pain. Finally, histopathological results suggested inflammatory cell infiltration and tissue bacterial culture indicated Salmonella enteritidis (O9) . He underwent treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam for 2 weeks consecutively. His postoperative temperature and white cell count remained normal. Blood cultures were negative twice in a row, so he was discharged from the hospital. Ceftriaxone was prescribed for 3 weeks once a day after discharge. The patient was followed up for 4 months after discharge and showed a good prognosis. From postoperative imaging results after 4 months, intervertebral fusion was achieved in T9-T10 .