On March 2015, a 22-year-old right-handed male with a 2 month history of right sided weakness and numbness was diagnosed with a primary brainstem tumor on MRI. He was empirically treated with temozolomide, bevacizumab, and stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS). Six months later, while stable disease was noted on brain MRI, the patient was also treated with an additional hypo-fractionated course (~50Gy in 25 fractions over 2 months) of involved field radiation.
Patient received empiric chemotherapy and radiation therapy for 21 months and follow-up brain MRI on December 2016 revealed a stable, necrotic left midbrain mass lesion measuring 2.5 × 2.1 × 1.8 cm with subacute hemorrhage in the inferior posterior margin .
Nearly 2 years after the initial diagnosis, the patient presented to the clinic with progressively worsening gait instability and left greater than right weakness. Additional symptoms included transient confusion with malaise and dizziness. Brain MRI at this time revealed progression at medial and inferior margins along with interval mild ventriculomegaly consistent with obstructive hydrocephalus . Decision was made to place the shunt and resect the tumor in a two-stage procedure during the same admission.
The patient underwent an uneventful right occipital ventriculoperitoneal shunt placement with utilization of volumetric image guidance and laparoscopic assistance.
The following day, left posterior temporal-occipital craniotomy was performed with an intention to obtain tissue for diagnosis and remove as much of the brainstem tumor as safely as possible. Volumetric image guidance, microscope, neuro-monitoring, and intraoperative MRI were utilized. The brainstem lesion was approached through the posterior temporal-occipital supratentorial plane with sectioning of the tentorium to widen the exposure. The inferior posterior temporal gyrus was partially resected, allowing mobilization and preservation of the vein of Labbe. The midbrain was entered through the lateral mesencephalic safe entry zone. The tumor itself was very firm and moderately vascular. Usual microsurgical tools, including ultrasonic aspirator, were inefficient.
The tumor’s firm consistency did not allow us to remove much of the lesion. The outer portions of the mass were very fibrous and could not be mobilized. Progress was very slow. The remaining tumor was “hard as a rock” in consistency, and surgical manipulation would move it as a single block, distorting the entire brainstem. Considering the circumstances, it was felt that the safest choice would be to stop further dissection/tumor removal. Intraoperative MRI showed an approximately 40% decrease in tumor volume, but the peripherally enhancing capsule of the tumor remained unchanged, as expected given the consistency of the tumor encountered intraoperatively .
Final pathology confirmed PA, negative for BRAF mutation or rearrangement, and the patient was started on combination therapy with carboplatin and vincristine. Unfortunately, chemotherapy was complicated with breakthrough seizures and brain MRI revealed symptomatic interval progression of the left midbrain tumor. Carboplatin and vincristine were discontinued, and seizures controlled with levetiracetam, gabapentin, and valproic acid. The patient was subsequently started on a 3 day monthly cycle of cisplatin and etoposide.
On May 2018, 14 months after the first operation, the patient presented to the emergency department for worsening headache, double vision, right-sided weakness, and gait ataxia. Clinically, he was noted to have significant right upper extremity weakness to 1–2/5, hypophonia, and rapidly progressing functional decline. Brain CT showed known mass extending from the brainstem to the thalamus, slightly eccentric on the left. A hemorrhagic component within the mass and slight increase in size of the tumor was noted as well .
The patient underwent suboccipital-torcular craniotomy with utilization of volumetric image guidance, microscope, and neuromonitoring. The lesion was approached through the supracerebellar infratentorial corridor through the infracollicular safe entry zone. Initially, the cystic portion was decompressed and motor oil-like fluid evacuated. The cyst walls collapsed and the brainstem relaxed. The solid portion of the tumor in the middle of the caudal midbrain and upper pons was considerably softer than in the first surgery, but more vascular with areas of hemorrhagic transformation. This tumor was successfully mobilized and grossly resected with what appeared to be normal appearing brainstem underneath.
Postoperative brain MRI demonstrated GTR and marked decompression of the brainstem. Pathology confirmed mainly necrosis and hemorrhage with focal residual PA with little/no proliferation and Ki-67 in MID1 proliferation indices .
Five days after surgery, the patient experienced increased somnolence. Head CT revealed new bilateral parieto-occipital subdural and epidural retrocerebellar hemorrhage. The parieto-occipital convexity hemorrhages were likely related to intra- and postoperative brain shift and tearing of the bridging veins. Although supratentorial hematomas were not felt to require surgical intervention, the retrocerebellar hemorrhage was more significant. The patient was subsequently taken up for emergent re-opening of the torcular-suboccipital craniotomy for evacuation of the epidural hematoma. Postoperative CT revealed successful evacuation of the extra-axial hematoma.
Three months after surgery, follow-up brain MRI demonstrated evolving postoperative changes with no residual/recurrent tumor.
Twelve months after surgery, the patient’s dysarthria improved. Motor exam revealed persistent right hemiparesis (improved to 3–4/5), arm weaker than the leg. Patient was now able to stand and walk short distances with assistance. Chronic steroids have been successfully weaned off, and the patient had a complete reversal of cushingoid appearance.