A 59-year-old male presented with 5 months of intermittent fever and productive cough. Laboratory findings showed significant elevation of white blood cell count (18.5 × 109/L) and C-reactive protein (147 mg/L). Chest CT scan revealed consolidation of the lingula, mediastinal lymphadenopathy and left-sided pleural effusion . Bronchoscopy showed a mass completely blocking the airway opening of the inferior lingual segment . Transbronchial biopsy revealed pathological finding of granulomatous inflammation. Predominant neutrophils were observed in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid but all cultures were negative. The patient was treated with antibiotics including levofloxacin, ceftazidime, meropenem and vancomycin, but with no effect. Concurrently, the patient suffered an episode of herpes zoster infection. One month before admission, the patient developed multiple skin abscesses which spontaneously burst and drained white-yellow pus on the neck, back, elbows and legs . Meanwhile, he suffered from progressive pain and swelling of bilateral wrists, elbows, and shoulders. Radiological findings demonstrated multiple osteolytic lesions in scapulae, clavicles and T10 vertebrae, with pathological fracture of the left clavicle . The patient used to be a heavy smoker with a family history of gastrointestinal malignancy and reported no exposure to illicit drugs or immunosuppressants.
After admission, needle aspiration from skin abscesses and repeated bronchoalveolar lavage fluid were sent for microscopy and culture. Xpert MTB/RIF assay was negative, but acid-fast smears of both samples were positive. Metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) using whole genome shotgun approach of skin pus reported Mycobacterium Colombiense (M. Colombiense), which was also confirmed by mycobacterial culture for 623 h, establishing the diagnosis of dNTM infection. The patient was negative for HIV. A standard anti-NTM therapy with oral azithromycin, rifampicin, ethambutol and intravenous amikacin was firstly initiated for three months but could not successfully prevent the relapse and progression of NTM infection despite good patient compliance. As anti-mycobacterial alone was less effective, more diagnostics were conducted to investigate the underlying reason of dNTM infection. T cell subset analysis showed apparently decreased B cell count, but normal CD4+ and CD8+ T cell counts. Serum immunoglobulin levels were within the normal range. Further evaluation indicated undetectable serum IFN-γ concentration and high-titer autoantibodies against IFN-γ, suggesting the diagnosis of adult-onset immunodeficiency (AOID) with defects in IFN-γ signaling. Rituximab was then given intravenously as two 1 g infusions separated by two weeks and aforementioned anti-NTM antibiotics were continued. Thereafter, neck abscesses were almost completely absorbed and lung lesions significantly reduced in size three months later . Follow-up reported no relapse of infection one year later.