A 56-year-old woman visited a hospital with a chief complaint of right abdominal pain on May 2015. Contrast enhanced CT showed a 7.8 × 4.6 cm right renal tumor, positron emission tomography-magnetic resonance imaging also revealed multiple lymph node metastases but bone scintigraphy demonstrated no evidence of metastasis. She was diagnosed with T1bN2M0 renal tumor and referred to our department. Laboratory test of the serum was normal. Multicore biopsy of the primary tumor revealed that the pathological diagnosis of all of biopsy specimens was chromophobe RCC. Immunohistochemical staining showed positive reactions to colloidal iron stain, cytokeratin 7, CAM5.2, and vimentin . Sunitinib was given as treatment for the advanced non-clear cell RCC.
After a total of 6 months of sunitinib treatment, CT showed that the metastatic lymph node had significantly reduced. The anatomical structure of renal hilar vessels was clarified by the sunitinib treatment . Cytoreductive nephrectomy was performed. However, rapid progression of lymph node metastases was then observed, and axitinib was started as a second-line therapy, because the sunitinib treatment caused a grade 3 adverse event of hand-foot syndrome. No effect was observed with axitinib treatment, the disease progressed rapidly, distant lymph node metastases were seen, and the patient died 4 months after the operation. Histopathological examination showed spindle cell renal carcinoma with a necrotic region in the primary tumor, without a chromophobe RCC element in the primary tumor. Immunohistochemical staining showed a positive reaction to CD44, vimentin and N-cadherin, but not cytokeratin 7, CAM5.2 or E-cadherin .
The presence and number of CTCs were evaluated before and 1 month after sunitinib treatment to assess the efficacy of sunitinib, as described elsewhere. Briefly, blood samples were obtained from the patient and red blood cells were removed using Pharm Lyse™ lysing solution (On-chip Biotechnologies, Tokyo, Japan). After negative selection with CD45-conjugated microbeads, the cells were dissolved in a staining solution containing CK-FITC, EpCAM-PE. Flow cytometry was performed using On-chip Sort (On-chip Biotechnologies). In this case, the number of CTCs before sunitinib treatment was 15 cells per 4 mL blood sample, and the number decreased to eight cells 1 month after sunitinib treatment . Consequently, the treatment was continued for five more months.