A 36-year-old man was brought to the emergency room owing to chest pain and headache. He reported having intermittent episodes of chest pain, headache, and shortness of breath for 8 months. He had no other significant medical or family history and was not receiving any medication. At the time of presentation, the patient’s blood pressure was 190/120 mmHg and heart rate was 120 beats per minute (bpm). Electrocardiography revealed sinus tachycardia with a heart rate of 111 bpm. Routine laboratory test results including the cardiac troponin level were within the normal limits.
Chest radiography revealed a mass-like lesion near the left hilum . On chest computed tomography (CT), a 7-cm heterogeneous mass was observed on the left side of the vertebra . T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed that the paravertebral mass had a high signal intensity . 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) scanning revealed focally high tracer uptake in the left paravertebral area . On biochemical testing of urine, the patient had elevated levels of metanephrine (4.2 mg/day; normal range < 0.8 mg/day), norepinephrine (4946 μg/day; normal range 15–80 μg/day), and vanillylmandelic acid (26.6 mg/day; normal range 0–8 mg/day), confirming the diagnosis of a catecholamine-producing, functional paraganglioma in the posterior mediastinum.
The patient was prepared for surgery by orally administering the α-aderenergic blocker doxazosin (4 mg once daily) and the β-adrenergic blocker bisoprolol (2.5 mg once daily) for more than 1 month. The patient initially underwent thoracoscopic resection, which was later converted to lateral thoracotomy because the large-sized mass in the posterior mediastinum was tightly adherent to adjacent vessels and bled easily when manipulated and the patient had high blood pressure during the manipulation. The posterior mediastinal mass (6.5 × 4.0 × 3.0 cm) was successfully resected using lateral thoracotomy . The patient’s systolic blood pressure increased to more than 200 mmHg during resection, and temporarily dropped to 60 mmHg after resection, both of which were controlled with intravenous injections of a short-acting calcium channel blocker (nicardipine) and ephedrine. Histologic examination revealed the presence of Zellballen structures and absence of lymphovascular invasion and ganglion-like cells . On immunohistochemical staining, the mass tested positive for synaptophysin and S-100 protein and negative for cytokeratins . The Ki-67 proliferation index was 1% .
After surgery, the patient’s blood pressure was stabilized at 100/60 mmHg and the heart rate was 85 bpm; hence, the administration of adrenergic blockers was stopped. Biochemical testing revealed that the metanephrine level in urine returned to normal (1 mg/day). The patient was asymptomatic and normotensive during follow-up.