A 63-year-old man without any history of systemic disease developed voiding difficulty for several months prior to his presence in the hospital. Associated symptoms included poor appetite, nausea, distended abdomen, and body weight loss. Further abdominal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large multilobulated tumor with the size of 16.1 × 14.9 × 14.5 cm in the left upper abdomen . During physical examination, a very big abdominal mass was palpated in the left upper quadrant with firm texture. The mass was fixed with regular border. His laboratory data, such as alpha-fetoprotein and carcinoembryonic antigen, were within normal limits. He received tumor biopsy in which it revealed tissue fragment infiltrated by tumor cells bearing relatively uniform round nuclei and high nucleus–cytoplasm ratio arranged in sheet or rosette-like patterns. Immunohistochemical staining showed positive for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and somatostatin receptor 2A (SSTR2A) . Moreover, the mitotic activity was about 3 per 10 high-power fields. The Ki-67 labeling index was about 4%. Well-differentiated, grade 2, neuroendocrine tumor was diagnosed.
There was no metastasis or regional lymph node involvement under initial MRI and further contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT). Because the tumor size was too large to differentiate the primary affected organ and the border of the tumor was implicated with surrounding organ, complete resection was not achievable. Therefore, Lanreotide was given initially. However, marked enlargement up to the greatest diameter of 18 cm was noted on CT scan 5 months later . Coinciding with this, he complained about bulging abdomen interfering with digestion. In the second-line therapeutic regimens, there are multiple anti-tumor therapy including Everolimus- or Sunitinib-based targeted therapy, chemotherapy, and even peptide receptor radionuclide therapy (PRRT). Among these therapies, PRRT was not achievable in our hospital, and reimbursement for Temozolomide for pancreatic NET was not included in the National Health Insurance of our country. Given the bulky and progressive disease status, a second-line therapeutic regimen with cytotoxic chemotherapy was taken into consideration. After offering multidisciplinary treatment options in the full discussion with the patient and his families, CCRT was chosen for strengthening local control. Thus, he began to receive capecitabine + oxaliplatin (XELOX) concurrently with image-guided radiotherapy (IGRT).
We utilized the Hi-Art helical Tomotherapy, version 2.2.4.1 (TomoTherapy, Inc., Madison, WI). The planned total dose was 70 Gy in 35 fractions. The dose statistics was provided in the supplementary material regarding doses of the various organs at risk at each of the three plans, e.g., kidneys, liver, stomach, and spinal cord. After 14 fractions, we performed adaptive treatment planning to better suit regressed tumor. The target volume has shrunk from 1,910 to 1,057 cc . Again, after 10 more fractions, IGRT revealed further shrinkage. Another new adaptive plan was administered, since the target volume has shrunk from 1,057 to 605 cc . Corresponding with radiological response, his urinary and abdominal symptoms improved. The tumor volumes of the enhanced CT before and after radiotherapy have been calculated by the radiation oncologist utilizing a segmentation tool program. It was 2,199.35 cc before radiotherapy and 315.54 cc after radiotherapy. On the third month of CCRT, MRI showed a continuously decreased tumor dimension . The axial perpendicular diameters of the tumor reduced at least 50% in preoperative CT after CCRT .
His baseline performance status before CCRT was Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) grade 1 with only mild urinary frequency but no other complaint. There was also no acute radiation-induced nausea, diarrhea, or abdominal cramping. The radiotherapy-related toxicity was evaluated by the Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v4.0. Radiotherapy was well-tolerated without acute toxicities >2. In addition, his kidney function, as measured by creatinine clearance, remains mostly the same throughout the radiotherapy. He developed grade 1 radiation-induced dermatitis with mild erythema and later worsened because of a weekend trip swimming in the ocean. Grade 2 dermatitis subsided after Tomotherapy. Apart from avoiding disease progression, CCRT under current regimens resulted in tremendous tumor volume shrinkage. To achieve the best prognosis for the patient, curative surgical resection of tumor was indicated. Laparoscopic subtotal pancreatectomy with spleen preservation was performed, and the surgeons did not report any unusual difficulty. Pathology confirmed a pancreatic NET with the size of 12 × 10 × 6 cm and weighed 315.9 g with American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) stage II, ypT3 . The surgical margin was 15 mm and uninvolved by tumor, which was confined to the pancreas.
The patient recovered well without post-operative complication. There was neither diabetes mellitus, postoperative ileus, nor surgery-related infection after subtotal pancreatectomy. Then, he was under regular surveillance in the outpatient department with abdominal CT every 3 months in the first year post-resection and every 12 months after the first year post-resection. It has been more than 46 months since his diagnosis of pancreatic NET, and he has no recurrence or distant metastasis during regular follow-ups. The overview of the clinical course of this patient is illustrated in .