A 76-year-old ex-smoker White Scottish woman first presented in 2014 via Emergency Department, with central chest pain in the context of recent bereavement. Her admission troponin was increased to 8.6 times the upper limit of normal contemporary range. Her B-type natriuretic peptide was 1220 pg/mL. All other laboratory test were unremarkable. Her admission electrocardiogram (ECG) showed in Figure . Coronary angiography revealed normal coronary arteries but the left ventriculogram showed extensive apical ballooning . An echocardiogram demonstrated apical ballooning (, Movie M4). Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) ruled out a myocardial infarction . Her left ventricular ejection fraction recovered entirely after 4 months and she had a classical diagnosis of apical takostubo. Her InterTak diagnostic score was 61, with 58.6% probability of takotsubo.
The patient had a significant family history of ischaemic heart disease with sister and brother dying of myocardial infarction in their 6th decade of life. Her past medical history included hypercholesterolaemia and three previous episodes which were labelled ‘myocardial infarctions’ in 1986, 1988, and 1998. These historic presenting ECG’s are shown in Figure –C, respectively. Her cardiac enzymes in 1986 and 1988 were unremarkable but in 1998 her initial creatine kinase was raised to 1.7 times the upper limit of normal contemporary range. She underwent coronary angiography which demonstrated normal coronary arteries on each occasion. Digitized images of 1998 left and right coronary arteries shown in Figure . In 1998, she was admitted directly from her son’s wedding. The InterTak diagnostic score and probability in 1998 was the same as in 2014.
Subsequently, she represented with central chest pain in 2015, on the background of being the main carer of her husband who had a stroke. Initial troponin was 75 times more than the upper limit of normal and the repeat 12 h troponin was 48 times the upper limit of normal contemporary range. Electrocardiogram on admission is shown in Figure . Again, coronary arteries were normal as shown in Figure and C. She had a left ventriculogram demonstrated probable mild area of hypokinesis in the inferior apical wall, supporting the diagnosis of apical Takotsubo. Her InterTak diagnostic score was 67, with a 79.8% probability of takotsubo.
Further, in 2018, she had another episode of chest pain. Ambulance ECG is shown in Figure with widespread T-wave inversion in the lateral leads and QTc of 527 ms. Initial troponin on admission was increased to 61 times the upper limit of normal contemporary range and repeat troponin 6 h later was again raised to 59 times the upper limit of normal contemporary range. InterTak diagnostic score was raised to 67, with a probability of 79.8%. Angiogram revealed normal coronary arteries and a focal phenotype of takotsubo cardiomyopathy best illustrated on cardiac MRI which once again ruled out any myocardial infarction. Figure and F shows the end-diastolic and end-systolic phase, respectively. Red arrow in Figure illustrates mid-cavity focal ballooning. A four-chamber cardiac magnetic resonance is shown in , Movie M7. Once again she made a good recovery.
Clinical follow-up 3 months after the 2018 episode confirmed good clinical recovery, unremarkable clinical examination, and normal left ventricular ejection fraction with no regional wall motion abnormalities. Based on the local policy of not medicating these patients due to the lack of supporting evidence, she was discharged on no specific therapy.