A 65-year-old man with paroxysmal AF was admitted for LAAC and RFCA. The CHA2DS2-VASc score was 3 owing to hypertension, peripheral artery disease, and age. Computed tomography angiography revealed no significant coronary artery stenotic lesions. Transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE) demonstrated no intracardiac thrombus. General anesthesia was maintained with propofol and remifentanil. Following transseptal punctures, intra-venous heparin was administered to maintain an activated clotting time of more than 300 s. A suitable Watchman device (Boston Scientific) was first performed with the guidance of TEE. After verifying the assessment of “PASS” criteria, we decided to release the device. However, before releasing the device, the patient’s blood pressure (BP) fell to 70/45 mmHg with heart rate (HR) drop and ST-segment elevation in II, III, and aVF and reciprocal ST-segment depression in I and aVL . An isotonic sodium chloride load was administered immediately. Cardiac tamponade was ruled out by TEE. After 3 min, the BP and HR raised, and ST segment returned to normal. The patient's condition was stable after an observation for 30 min. Thus, after reconfirming suitable positioning of the device and good plugging effect, the occluder was released and RFCA was performed orderly. When isolating the right pulmonary veins, the patient’s BP and HR dropped again with ST-segment elevation in inferior leads. Spontaneous ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation developed rapidly and defibrillation was performed immediately with success. Immediate coronary angiography showed total occlusion of the right coronary artery , no air bubbles were noted in coronary angiography, and no thrombus founded in aspiration. Eventually, the obstruction resolved after repeated intracoronary injection of nitroglycerin (1 mg) . The fact that intracoronary nitroglycerin led to resolution of coronary obstruction confirmed the diagnosis of CAS. Under systemic diltiazem infusion, subsequent RFCA was preformed successfully. After the procedure, the patient recovered without any neurologic deficit, and CAS has never recurred with isosorbide mononitrate treatment during follow-up.