In January 2013, an 11-year-old female patient with a chief report of swelling in the left mandibular molar region was referred to our medical center. Two weeks before the first visit, the patient was prescribed antibiotics by a local family medical clinic because of swelling in the left side of the jaw and tenderness of the mandibular angle. For these reasons, she was referred from a local dental clinic and consulted our center. The patient had no systemic health conditions. Extraoral examination revealed swelling in the left mandibular angle area, and intraoral examination revealed mucosal swelling that extended from the lower first molar to the retromolar region, mixed dentition, and an unerupted left mandibular second molar.
A panoramic radiograph revealed a well-circumscribed, unilocular radiolucency in the region of the left mandibular molars, extending from the distal root of the first molar area to the left ascending ramus, with an unerupted second molar, and the dental follicle of the third molar . The impacted left mandibular second molar presented with incomplete root formation and displacement up to the inferior border of the body. The left mandibular third molar was located on the coronoid process of the mandible. Considering the clinical and radiographic findings, a provisional differential diagnosis of UA, dentigerous cyst, and odontogenic keratocyst was considered. With the patient under local anesthesia, an incisional biopsy was conducted; after histopathologic evaluation, the lesion was diagnosed as UA. The parents were informed of the condition, proposed treatment, recurrence, and benefits, after which they provided their informed consent for the conservative treatment. Marsupialization of the gingiva and cystic wall was performed using a silastic drain to maintain continuity between the marsupialized lesion and oral environment and to ultimately reduce the lesion size. The patient was scheduled for follow-up and daily management for the first month, followed by weekly management. The parents were instructed to maintain overall proper hygiene of the oral cavity through self-irrigation after marsupialization. After 1 month, a propensity of the lower left second molar toward eruption was observed . After confirmation of epithelization of the cystic wall, the drain was removed. Three months after marsupialization, the lesion diminished in size, new bone formation was observed, and the lower left second molar was in a more advanced phase of eruption . Radiographs obtained 6 months after marsupialization showed that the lesion margin had lost clarity and that the regenerated bone was replaced by normal trabeculae. The radiolucent area was significantly reduced . Twelve months after marsupialization, a part of the lower left second molar was observed in the oral cavity . Thirty months after marsupialization, the lower left second molar erupted on the same occlusal plane as the lower right second molar. The lower left third molar was impacted. In the following month, enucleation of the lesion was performed to completely remove the lesion along with the impacted third molar with the patient under general anesthesia . The second molar was preserved. The patient began orthodontic treatment for reduction of mild crowding. At 36 months after marsupialization, radiographs showed complete eruption of the lower left second molar, whereas a mild interdental space was observed between the first and second molars. At 48 months after marsupialization, complete occlusion was observed. This tooth was eventually preserved and did not require a root canal . To date, no evidence of tumor recurrence has been observed on examinations during the 49-month follow-up.