This case report focuses on a female patient in her sixties suffering from OAB symptoms with histories of chronic rheumatoid arthritis and Sjogren syndrome. The patient had been visiting our outpatient clinic regularly for 4 years. She received lumbar posterolateral spondylus fusion twice for severe lumber spinal canal stenosis 9 and 13 years ago and experienced a compression fracture 2 years ago. She had been receiving a combination therapy of anticholinergics (fesoterodine) and β3-adrenoceptor agonist (mirabegron) for OAB symptoms, but anticholinergics therapy was sometimes discontinued due to dry mouth. This approach did not significantly improve OAB symptoms. The mean and maximum voided volume on frequency-volume charts were below 100 and 140 mL, respectively, with 20–40 mL of postvoid residual urine. Cystometry before BTX-A injection under administration of anticholinergics and β3-adrenoceptor agonist showed no DO and 5 cmH2O of Pdet at 326 mL of maximum cystometric bladder capacity (compliance = 65 mL/cmH2O) . The bladder wall was not thick on CT scan . We administered 100 units of BTX-A into the bladder wall to manage refractory idiopathic OAB. At the same time, anticholinergics and β3-adrenoceptor agonist were discontinued. Bladder mucosal abnormalities, such as Hunner lesion, were not detected on cystoscopy.
Three months after BTX-A injection, her OAB symptoms were poorly improved with only a slight improvement in urinary frequency. OAB symptom score was changed from 13 (Q1: 2, Q2: 3, Q3: 4, Q4: 4) to 9 (Q1: 1, Q2: 3, Q3: 3, Q4: 2). Cystometry showed no DO and 38 cmH2O of Pdet at 292 mL of maximum cystometric bladder capacity (compliance = 7.7 mL/cmH2O) . Mirabegron was resumed, but a few weeks later, serum creatinine level was elevated from 1.05 to 1.46 mg/dL. At this time, a CT scan showed hydronephrosis and bladder wall thickness. Continuous pyuria was found in this patient both before and after BTX-A injection. Bilateral VUR was noted on VCUG . Serum creatinine level and hydronephrosis were immediately improved after restarting anticholinergics therapy and inserting a temporary transurethral catheter for a period of 6 weeks . Bladder compliance was also normalized at that point . After this episode, the patient received BTX-A injection twice (100 and 200 units, respectively) again with concurrent anticholinergics and β3-adrenoceptor agonist therapies, and no hydronephrosis or renal dysfunction was developed.