We present a case of UPS with giant cells in a 46-year-old woman with HAM/TSP from a non-endemic HTLV-1 area of Argentina. In November 2013, the patient started with weakness in the legs and bladder dysfunction. One year later, she presented mild paraparesis in both extremities and hyperreflexia. By February 2015, detection of anti-HTLV-1 antibodies in plasma and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by ELISA (HTLV I&II Ab, ULTRA version, Dia.Pro) and western blot (HTLV Blot 2.4, MP Diagnostics) confirmed HTLV-1 infection. For HTLV-1 molecular confirmation and proviral load (PVL), DNA was extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) by column extraction (ADN PuriPrep-S kit, Highway®, Inbio, Tandil, Argentina) and analyzed with “in-house” n-PCR and by real-time SYBR Green PCR (qPCR) as previously described, respectively (, ). HTLV-1 pol and tax regions were detected and PVL determined a total of 7.9 copies of HTLV-1/100 PBMC. No other pathologies have been found through imaging, blood and CSF examination and HAM/TSP diagnosis was confirmed. By June 2015, difficulty in walking due to spasticity progressed and PLV value was 17.3 copies of HTLV-1/100 PBMC; an antiretroviral treatment (tenofovir and emtricitabine) was indicated with a decreased in PVL in the next months and improvement of neurological symptoms and signs.
In November 2015, the patient attended for the first time a dermatology service due to a cutaneous painless mass, soft in consistency (diameter <5 cm) that had arisen in the anterior right ankle. A benign ganglion cyst was first suspected without the need of an immediate intervention. However, a consistent mass grew quickly. A computed tomography revealed a mass of indefinite borders, and consequently, a surgery to remove the tumor was performed in March 2016. Based on a biopsy, a sarcoma was diagnosed; metastasis was discarded by positron emission tomography (PET) scans. Three weeks after surgical resection of the primary tumor, a new mass was detected near the primary one and the patient attended a private hospital, where a local recurrence was confirmed. Metastasis was again discarded by PET scans. She had no pain, no symptoms (weight loss and/or fatigue), and the laboratory analysis was normal. In June 2016, after a new laboratory exam and MRI, two possible surgical interventions were discussed in an athenaeum with different specialists: leg amputation considering the rapid progressive spasticity due to HAM/TSP or an excisional biopsy. The latter was indicated considering also the patient’s decision. This time the tumor aroused in deep tissue and behaved aggressively, implicating a complete and extended surgical resection to the fibula, joint reconstruction, and soft-tissue graft. Macroscopic examination showed a tumor with a solid grayish cut surface and no clear envelope. The histopathology exam showed fascicles and sheets of spindle cells in a loose/storiform pattern. Numerous markedly atypical cells and some multinucleated giant cells admixed with tumor pleomorphic cells were observed. Chronic inflammation and abundant atypical mitosis, and necrosis, and hemorrhages areas were also present. This histopathologic pattern defines the lesion as UPS with giant cells . A panel of immunohistochemistry was performed expressing Vimentin, focal smooth muscle actin, and CD34 being negative for Desmin, S100, CK AE1, AE3, and CK18. Complete resection with negative margins was also observed and radiotherapy was indicated. Later, HTLV-1 integration was determined in biopsy cells by nested-PCR and qPCR (PVL was 0.74 copies/PBMC).
In September 2016, the patient had to begin chemotherapy due to bilateral pulmonary metastasis [doxorubicin, ifosfamide, and mesna repeated every 21 days as recommended by the European Organization and Treatment of Cancer Soft Tissue and Bone Sarcoma Group ]. By February 2017, the patient had already finished the treatment and showed a favorable response. In April, two local recurrences were detected and amputation of the leg was indicated.