A 24-year-old white woman was referred for coronary angiography owing to typical progressive angina pectoris. Bicycle ergometry disclosed reproducible symptoms as well as deep ST segment depressions in the precordial leads. 2 years earlier, the patient had been diagnosed with occlusion of the left subclavian artery, possibly associated with a thoracic outlet syndrome.
Upon physical examination, heart rate was 80 bpm, with blood pressure of 105/65 taken on the right arm and 75/50, on the left arm. Laboratory data were as follows: leukocyte count 8500/mm3, C-reactive protein 18 mg/l (reference <5 mg/l), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 65 mm/h. ECG revealed sinus rhythm, 80 bpm, left axis type and incomplete right bundle branch block. Echocardiographic findings were unremarkable, and left ventricular systolic function in particular was normal. Semi-selective angiography of the left coronary artery revealed high-grade ostial stenosis . Owing to persistent angina pectoris and electrocardiographic signs of acute myocardial ischemia, immediate percutaneous coronary angioplasty with subsequent implantation of an everolimus-eluting stent was performed. This intervention yielded excellent angiographic results. Suspicion of vasculitis arose owing to hypoechogenicity on postprocedural intravascular ultrasonography , and diagnosis of Takayasu’s arteritis took place on the basis of several concomitant criteria. The patient was treated with prednisolone (initially 40 mg per day, tapered by 2.5 mg per week) and cyclophosphamide (15 mg/kg body weight every 3 weeks) for 5 months.
Owing to recurrent angina pectoris, additional coronary angiography was performed, which revealed high-grade in-stent restenosis. Immunomodulatory therapy was switched to high-dose prednisolone (100 mg daily) and the anti-IL-6 receptor antagonist tocilizumab (8 mg/kg body weight every 4 weeks). High-grade in-stent restenosis persisted for ten days, and aortocoronary bypass graft surgery was performed with two saphenous vein grafts to the left anterior descending and circumflex artery. Subsequently, the patient has done well for 2 years.