A 37-year-old man began to lose weight gradually after decreasing his food intake due to dysphagia in relation to both solid and liquid foods that began one month before admission. The decrease in food intake intensified over the last three days before his hospitalization because of an inflammatory and hemorrhagic process in his nose and fever. He did not have a cough, and had not had any previous similar episodes. Before hospitalization, the patient took several drugs without response. The patient’s medical history included moderate-risk sexual behavior (no condom) during the preceding four years and pulmonary tuberculosis five years earlier.
He presented difficulty in his vocal pronunciation associated with the growth of the hemorrhagic and inflammatory process in his nose. He was extremely thin (48 kg) and presented significant edema in the nasal area. He had an intermittent high temperature, which reached 40 °C, accompanied by chills. His pulse and blood pressure were normal, and heart and lung examinations showed normal results.
There were multiple non-painful lymph nodes of hard consistency in his neck. His nasal region showed phlogistic signs and skin fistulae, with bloody and purulent active secretion into the right ala, and other oronasal fistulae. The right nasal septum was very friable with tissue destruction.
The laboratory values were as follows: hemoglobin, 10.9 g/dl; hematocrit, 33.7%; platelets, 106; and white cell count, 3800/mm3, with 1% metamyelocytes, 2% less mature neutrophils (bands), 90% segmented neutrophils, 1% eosinophils, 5% lymphocytes and 1% monocytes. The aminotransferase levels were abnormal (aspartate, 774; and alanine, 136) and the albumin level was 2.1. The serological tests confirmed that the patient presented acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Chest radiographs were normal.
After the patient had been admitted to hospital, he was prescribed oxacillin, but this did not produce any response. This was then replaced by ceftriaxone, again without success. During hospitalization, computed tomography was performed, showing significant destruction of the nasal septum, with an image suggestive of severe nasal infection. Biopsies of the nasal septum lesion and lymph nodes were performed. At this point, metronidazole (400 mg, three times a day) was prescribed.
The following week, the patient presented intense vomiting, diarrhea, daily fever, nasal and oral hemorrhagic processes, anorexia and more weight loss. The patient began to show significant pancytopenia and two red blood cell packs were prescribed. The patient progressed badly and died a few days later.
The cervical lymph node that was biopsied did not reveal any histopathological alterations. From the biopsy material taken from the lesion in his nose and nasal septum, the fungus Histoplasma capsulatum was isolated.