A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed pneumonitis after ten cycles of immune checkpoint inhibitor treatment.
A 40-year-old man, who has no history of smoking, was diagnosed with locally advanced (pT3N2M0 stage IIIA) left-lower lung adenocarcinoma. The status of driver genes and PD-L1 expression were unknown. He underwent radical left-lower lobe resection plus mediastinal lymph node dissection followed by four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with pemetrexed plus cisplatin. After the operation and chemotherapy, he was administered with durvalumab (anti-PD-L1, 1500 mg q4w) as consolidation immunotherapy. After ten cycles of durvalumab injection, pneumonitis with a COP pattern in the left upper lung was detected by CT for regular follow-up . Physical examination showed no positive signs. Considering that the patient did not have a history of interstitial pneumonia and did not complain of any relevant symptoms, he was diagnosed with CIP grade 1. Treatment with durvalumab was continued for two cycles until the patient complained of moderate dry cough. An interesting finding in the chest CT scan was that the pneumonitis in the left upper lobe completely disappeared without any anti-CIP treatment. In addition, new consolidations and ground-glass opacities representing again a COP pattern in combination with an HP pattern were newly observed in multifocal distributions in the rest of the lung . The values of β-D glucan and procalcitonin were normal, which indicated that it was a non-infectious pneumonia. He was therefore diagnosed with recurrent CIP grade 2 and was treated with intravenous injection of methylprednisolone (1 mg/kg/d). After a week of methylprednisolone treatment, the dry cough was significantly improved and CT showed resolution of consolidations and ground-glass opacities . Methylprednisolone was tapered slowly over 8 wk. After oral corticosteroid treatment, a chest CT was performed for routine follow-up. Again, interestingly, in the absence of durvalumab retreatment, new diffuse ground-glass and consolidative opacities appeared in the lung exactly where the first and second episode pneumonitis were not involved . With only radiographic changes, the patient was again diagnosed with recurrent CIP grade 1. He refused to restart the steroid treatment. Durvalumab was discontinued permanently because of recurrent CIP.
The patient had on history of past illness.
The patient had no notable personal or family history.
Physical examination showed no positive signs.
The values of β-D glucan and procalcitonin were normal.
CT scan images of the patient during CIP presentation and follow-up in Figure . The first episode of CIP in Figures -; chest CT showed that the changes of the former in Figures -; CIP in the left upper lobe disappeared in Figures -; the second episode of CIP in Figures -; a significant improvement in the CIP in Figures -; the third episode of CIP in Figures -; resolution of CIP in Figures -.