A 28-year-old Ethiopian female came to University of Gondar comprehensive specialized hospital, northwestern Ethiopia, with a complaint of left axillary swelling of 3 years duration. The swelling was small initially and progressively increased in size to attain the current size. She had visited a nearby health center on multiple occasions for this complaint and took unspecified antibiotics, but experienced no improvement. Apart from the local mild pain and discomfort, there was no history of cough, fever, weight loss, night sweating, or other constitutional symptoms. She has no family history (first-degree relatives) of diabetes, hypertension, or any other remarkable noncommunicable disease including cancer. Her past medical history is not significant, except for occasional mild dyspeptic symptoms; she took unspecified over-the-counter anti-acids a couple of times for her dyspepsia as the symptoms arose. She has no history of admission to hospital. She has no history of any form of surgical procedure. She has no history of smoking. Except for the mild-to-moderate amount of local alcohol beverages she consumed on holidays, she has no history of excess alcohol consumption. She is a janitor in a public school. She is unmarried and lives with her parents. She has a fiancé and uses a combination of natural calendar method and male condom for contraception. She has no history of oral contraceptive pill (OCP) or injectable or intrauterine contraceptive device (IUCD) use. She has no history of pregnancy. She reported that she has regular menstrual cycles and no significant past obstetric or gynecologic history.
On physical examination, her general appearance was stable, healthy looking, and ambulating. Vital signs were as follows: pulse rate, 82 beats per minute; blood pressure, 110/80 mmHg; respiratory rate, 18 breaths per minute; temperature, 36.2 °C. She has pink conjunctiva, non-icteric sclera, and no abnormal finding on head and neck examination. On lymphoglandular system (LGS) examination, there was an approximately 5 × 4 cm solitary mass in the left axilla . It was firm in consistency, nontender, well defined, mobile, and completely separated from the left breast. Skin over the mass was normal with no nipple, areola, or ulceration. There were no clinically significant findings detected on examination of breasts, right axilla, or the other externally accessible lymph node regions. On chest examination, it was symmetrical and moved with respirations, and clear breath sounds were heard on auscultation. On precordial and cardiovascular examinations, the normal S1 and S2 heart sounds were heard, there was no murmur or gallop, and all the peripheral arterial pulses were palpable with strong and regular pulse. Abdomen was soft to palpation. No hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or mass was detected, and there were no signs of fluid collection. No costovertebral angle tenderness or abnormal finding was detected on genitourinary system (GUS) examination. No pedal or other subcutaneous edema was identified on musculoskeletal examination. No palmar pallor or skin lesions were seen on integumentary system examination. On neurologic examination, she was conscious, alert, and fully oriented to time, place, and person. Cranial nerve examination revealed normal findings. No motor or sensory deficit was detected, and deep tendon reflexes were normal. On the basis of the above findings, a provisional clinical impression of axillary lymphadenopathy due to either lymphoma or tuberculosis was considered.
Laboratory investigations done on the same day of her presentation including complete blood count (CBC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and chest X-ray were noncontributory. On CBC, white blood cell (WBC) count was 5900/mL with 53% granulocytes, 42% lymphocytes, 1% eosinophils, and 4% monocytes. Platelet count was 247,000/mL. Hemoglobin was 13.4 g/dL with mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 89 fL. ESR was 13 mm/hour. Renal function test revealed blood urea nitrogen (BUN) of 13 mg/dL, and serum creatinine level was 0.78 mg/dL. On liver function test, total bilirubin was 0.7 mg/dL, serum albumin was 4.4 g/dL, and serum aspartate transaminase (AST/SGOT) and serum alanine transaminase (ALT/SGPT) were 29 and 33 IU/L respectively. All of these laboratory test results were within the normal reference range of our laboratory. Urinalysis was also done, and it was normal.
Owing to the limited number of pathologists and long waiting list of patients, she was scheduled for fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC). Two weeks after her initial presentation, FNAC from the mass was done and smears were stained with Wright’s stain following the standard procedures. Microscopic examination revealed cellular aspirates of tight cohesive clusters of bland ductal cells in branching stag-horn-like pattern along with numerous scattered bare nuclei on the background and fibromyxoid stromal fragments . Lymphoid cells were not seen. Fibroadenoma (in axillary accessory breast tissue) was suggested on the basis of these FNAC features. Abdominopelvic ultrasound and echocardiography were normal.
After discussion with the patient, we agreed to undergo surgical intervention for multiple indications, including discomfort, difficulty reaching full range of shoulder movement, cosmetic and hygienic reasons, and patient request. We opted to perform lumpectomy of the left axillary mass under general anesthesia. After securing an intravenous line and putting her on maintenance fluid, ketamine 30 mg plus diazepam 10 mg was prepared and administered intravenously. After light sedation, we infiltrated the skin incision area with 4 mg/kg lidocaine, and then underwent the lumpectomy under all aseptic precautions. The intraoperative finding was a firm, mobile, well-capsulated solitary gray-whitish 5 × 4 × 4 cm mass in the left axillary fossa. The mass was located superficially in the subcutaneous tissue separated from the left breast parenchyma. Postoperatively, we put her on intravenous diclofenac 50 mg, which was later switched to 100 mg is taken orally when needed (PO PRN) discharge. As she had a smooth postoperative course, she was discharged on the same day with appointment scheduled for follow-up and wound care. The wound healing process was uneventful, and she only took the antipain medication for only a couple of days.
The excised mass was subjected to histopathologic evaluation following the standard tissue processing and staining procedure. Gross and microscopic histopathologic examination confirmed the diagnosis of fibroadenoma in axillary accessory breast . The histopathology report was issued 3 weeks after the day of her operation as there was a long biopsy waiting list and few pathologists were available in the hospital. She was informed about the pathology result, reassured, and discharged from care after 3 months of follow-up. The difficulty of shoulder movement and discomfort associated with the mass as well as other complaints were relieved. She was very much satisfied with the intervention and care given.