A 56-year-old male with a history of alcohol-induced cirrhosis, a 46-pack-year smoking history, and chronic kidney disease stage 3a presented with three rapidly enlarging masses on his left cheek, mandible, and neck, along with associated facial swelling. He initially noticed a small mass on his cheek 3 weeks ago and was treated with clindamycin with no resolution. The mass progressively grew in size, and the patient developed two more masses near his left mandible and neck. At presentation to the hospital, the masses were non-fluctuant and non-mobile, with the largest measuring 7.5 by 8.3 cm on the cheek and extending to the left mandibular angle. Symptoms included tenderness to palpation of the cheek and mandible, difficulty and worsening pain with chewing, dysphagia, hoarse voice, sore throat, and left temple tenderness to palpation with radiation to the left ear.
Computed tomography of the head and neck revealed a well-circumscribed, enhancing mass in the left masticator space (7.5 × 8.3 cm), extending into left pharyngeal space medially and to the left infratemporal fossa (a–c). Similar masses were also noted in the premaxillary region (4.3 × 3.5 cm), neck (3.9 × 2.5 cm), and mediastinum. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis showed scattered peritoneal, subcutaneous, and left chest wall masses compatible with metastases. Additionally, imaging showed diffuse left mediastinal, premaxillary, supraclavicular, and inguinal lymphadenopathy. Biopsy of the cheek mass showed CD5- and CD8-positive DLBCL. Treatment with R-CHOP was initiated, and the patient had significant reduction tumor size and pain over the next 4 days. The patient then developed Klebsiella gram-negative sepsis, complicated by refractory neutropenia and immunosuppression from chemotherapy, and passed away 12 days after diagnosis.
The CARE Checklist has been completed by the authors for this case report, attached as online supplementary material (for all online suppl. material, see ).
Biopsy revealed fragments of lymphoid tissue heavily infiltrated by large, atypical cells (a). A panel of immunohistochemical stains was performed, and atypical cells were positive for CD20 (b), PAX5 (c), CD5 (d), CD8 (e), CD10, BCL2, BCL6, cMYC (∼20%), and MUM1. The atypical cells were negative for CD3, CD4, CD23, CD30, cyclin D1, SOX11. The Ki-67 score showed a proliferation index of ∼100% (f). In situ hybridization for Epstein-Barr viral encoded RNA was negative. Flow cytometry showed atypical B lymphocytes that were positive for CD5 (g), CD8 (h), CD19 (g), CD20, CD22 (h), and was kappa light chain-restricted (i). Fluorescence in situ hybridization was positive for rearrangement of BCL6, but negative for rearrangement of MYC at the 8q24 locus and negative for double fusion involving t(14, 18) IgH/BCL2. Chromosomal microarray analysis was positive for loss of TP53.