A 57-year-old male (height 173 cm, weight 75 kg) was admitted to our center with a diagnosis asymptomatic HCC. The lesion was located in segment 5 and 8, which was close to the right anterior and posterior portal veins . There was no other medical history but a 20-year history of HBV under a normal level of HBV-DNA.
Blood test showed a total bilirubin of 17.9 umol/L, ALT of 47 U/L, AST of 43 U/L, AFP of 175.8 ng/ml and PIVKA of 79 mAU/ml. Platelet count was of 180 × 109/L and hemoglobin of 160 g/L. The 3-dimentional reconstruction examination gave the left hemiliver volume of 468 ml. The remnant liver volume to total liver volume (RLV-TLV) was 42.01% and the RLV to body weight ratio (RLV-BWR) was 0.6% [, ]. Based on the above, we considered it necessary to carry out hemihepatectomy to ensure R0 resection and adequate surgical margin, and PVE before the operation was essential to provide more remnant liver volume for surgical safety reason.
Optimized percutaneous transhepatic portal vein embolization (oPVE) was performed by contralateral approach under local and sedation anesthesia. After giving antibiotics, a periportal left vein was punctured to provide the access to the target vessels. The embolic material was n-Butyl-2-Cyanoacrylate (Compont, Beijing Compont medical devices CO., LTD.), iodized oil and Interlock coil (14 mm *30 cm, Boston Scientific Corporation). A microcatheter was put into the deepest position in the branch of the right portal vein through a 5F catheter. The Compont and iodized oil ratio was 1:3 to 1:4. The mixture was injected through the microcatheter. The same procedure was performed on the other branches and the interlock coil was put in the right portal vein. The operation time was 30 min. The portograms showed a well-performed embolization in the right portal vein and its branches . The patient had no other complications but complain of upper abdominal pain, and was discharged on the third day after the operation.
Nine days later, the patient revisited for further evaluation for the following resection. The left hemiliver volume increased significantly to 726 ml (RLV-TLV 56.80%; RLV-BWR 0.97%). AFP rose to 380 ng/ml and PIVKA was in the level of 90 mAU/ml. The size of the tumor remained almost unchanged. Based on the assessment of liver function and volume, the patient went through the surgery under the combined intravenous-inhalation anesthesia (CIVIA). The patient was placed in the spine position. The first trocar was inserted through umbilicus for laparoscope. One 5-mm and one 12-mm trocar were placed under the right costal arch for the main operator. One 10-mm trocar was placed under the right costal arch and one 5-mm trocar in the upper abdomen for the assistant. Firstly, the mobilization of liver included the cut of the ligament and the division of the adrenal gland. The right anterior interval was then exposed in front of the vena cava, the hepatic short veins were cut and ligatured. The pringle maneuver via a prepared tourniquet was performed. After the common cholecystectomy, the hilar plate was opened and the root of the right portal vein was exposed. Ligation of the vessel was done with a thread and the demarcation line could be seen on the liver surface. Along with the line, the liver parenchyma was opened widely until the right Glissonean pedicle was exposed. The Glissonean pedicle was cut by a linear stapler through the 12-mm trocar. The division was going on to the hepatic vein side to reveal the middle hepatic vein (MHV). The root of the right and middle hepatic vein (RHV & MHV) could be identified in the deep position along with the MHV. Finally, we used the linear stapler to dissect RHV and MHV at each origin and removed the resected liver. The incision below the right costal arch was extended to 7 cm, and the specimen was collected in a specimen bag and moved outside the body. The operation time was 185 min with blood loss close to 200 ml. (see Additional file : ) The surgical margin was negative and was 1.2 cm to the tumor. The patient was discharged on the seventh day without complications. The liver function became normal on the fourth day after the procedure.