A 46-year-old female was incidentally found to have an ACoA aneurysm during screening conducted because her mother and maternal uncle both suffered subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH). Of note, her mother's SAH was due to giant MCA aneurysm. The patient smoked tobacco daily and was normotensive. She had no other medical illnesses. A computed tomography angiogram (CTA) uncovered a 3 mm ACoA aneurysm facing posteriorly with the dome directed to the left . The right A1 was dominant. The patient underwent a right lateral supraorbital craniotomy for clipping. The aneurysm was largely excluded using a single curved clip, but there was a small remnant based on the right half of the ACoA that was unable to be included in the blades. Bipolar electrocautery was used to coagulate this portion until it was occluded. The patient awoke at her neurological baseline. Postoperative CTA did not reveal any residual aneurysm or DNIA .
The patient's last CTA prior to the discovery of her DNIA was 10 months after surgery at which time there was no new or recurrent aneurysm. She lost to follow-up after this, until 2014, when she presented to the neurosurgery clinic complaining of subjective memory issues. She was neurologically intact. The patient reported that she continued smoking following the initial surgery. A new CTA revealed a 2.5 cm × 3.7 cm × 3.0 cm largely thrombosed, partially calcified DNIA based off of the medial wall of the right pericallosal artery . A digital subtraction angiogram (DSA) was obtained to further evaluate the lesion. It revealed small mural filling of a giant aneurysm from the right A2 2 mm distal to the A2 takeoff without any ACoA filling . After a discussion of all options including surgical, endovascular observation, the patient elected to proceed with the endovascular approach. A 2.5 mm × 20 mm Flex Pipeline Embolization Device (PED; [Coviden; Plymouth, Minnesota, USA]) was deployed in the proximal right A1 extending across the aneurysm neck into the distal right A2 . Angiography following stent deployment revealed immediate stagnation in the filling portion of the aneurysm.
The patient was neurologically intact after the procedure. There were no complications. She currently reports that her memory issues are unchanged. She was discharged home on Aspirin and Plavix.