The patient is a 65-year-old Caucasian female G0P0 with a past medical history of meningioma status post resection of a left parieto-occipital meningioma in 2011 with residual impairment in her left peripheral vision and hypertension, well-controlled diabetes mellitus, gastroesophageal reflux, and difficulty with ambulation who developed a chronic draining wound in the left chest wall area. About 4 months before clinical presentation, she was diagnosed with coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pneumonia, for which she received sotrovimab, a COVID-19 monoclonal antibody (500 mg/IV as a single dose), a 5-day course of azithromycin (500 mg per mouth on day 1, and then 250 mg per mouth daily for days 2–5), and prednisone 20 mg per mouth daily for 5 days. Three months before her presentation, she fell, hitting her left anterior chest against the wooden footboard of her bed without incurring any wound. Shortly thereafter, she noticed a sore lump in that region that progressively increased in size. A month later, she presented to her primary care provider with subjective fevers, chills, and night sweats. She was prescribed with doxycycline orally at 100 mg every 12 hours for 7 days with no resolution of her symptoms. Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 9.2 k/mm3, Hgb A1c of 5.6%, and normal liver and kidney function tests. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan with intravenous contrast demonstrated an abnormal infiltrate with small foci of fluid and air measuring 6–7 mm, concerning for a small abscess along the anterior left seventh costal cartilage . Subsequently, she was referred to thoracic surgery, where a chest ultrasound showed a 1 cm fluid collection, 3 cm deep in the soft tissue. A 1 ml cloudy fluid was drained by ultrasound-guided aspiration and was sent for Gram stain and culture, which were negative. On clinical follow-up 2 weeks later, the patient was treated empirically with clindamycin 300 mg orally three times a day for 21 days to cover for possible anaerobic infection. After antibiotic course completion, a repeat chest CT scan with intravenous contrast showed unchanged findings with mild worsening of the overlying skin thickening. A subcentimeter focus of hypoattenuation within the chondral portion of the left seventh rib was again demonstrated . The patient underwent repeat CT-guided aspiration for histopathology and cultures—bacterial, fungal, and acid-fact bacteria (AFB) . All cultures came back with negative Gram stain and growth, and histopathology findings showed fibroconnective tissue with chronic inflammatory changes and dense fibrosis. On subsequent follow-up with thoracic surgery, the biopsy site was noted with draining purulent fluid sent for culture. She was empirically prescribed with cephalexin 500 mg four times a day for 2 weeks for the suspected costochondritis with abscess. The Gram stain of the drainage fluid showed Gram-negative rods and the culture grew S. enterica serotype Choleraesuis. The patient was referred to the infectious disease clinic for further evaluation and management recommendations.
During the infectious disease evaluation, a more detailed history was obtained. The patient did not have any risk factors for disseminated Salmonella infection such as chronic steroid use, autoimmune diseases, or malignancies. However, the patient did receive a short course of prednisone when she had COVID-19. The patient denied having any history of gastrointestinal symptoms including nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or abdominal pain. There were no known animal exposures, including reptiles. No recent history of travel or known sick contacts. The patient denied changes in eating habits or eating raw or reportedly contaminated meats or vegetables. The patient is married and works as an emergency department nurse. She has no history of alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drug use. On examination, she was afebrile with a normal pulse and blood pressure and oxygen saturation on room air. She was in no acute distress and had obesity. She had diminished vision in her left periphery. Pupils were equal, round, reactive to light, and appropriately accommodating. Oral exam revealed good dentition with no posterior erythema or thrush. Her neck exam showed no jugular venous distention, cervical adenopathy, or thyromegaly. The left anterior chest area showed an open wound with a pinhole-size opening located inferior to her breast with associated local swelling and serous wound discharge . Auscultation of the lungs was clear and with good chest expansion. Cardiac auscultation revealed a regular rate and rhythm with no apparent murmurs, rubs, or gallops. Lower extremity pulses were normal. The abdomen was soft, nontender, nondistended, and with normal bowel sounds. Musculoskeletal and joint examinations were unremarkable. Skin examination was without rash, ulcers, excoriations, or jaundice. A neurological exam revealed her known ambulation issues, but no reflex or sensation abnormalities were noted. A repeat complete blood count (CBC) showed a WBC count of 7.2 k/mm3 and elevated c-reactive protein (CRP) of 1.0 mg/dL (reference range: 0–0.5 mg/dL). Patient hemoglobin, platelets, and comprehensive metabolic panel (CMP) were all within normal limits. A repeat culture of the wound discharge was again obtained. A Gram stain showed Gram-negative rods and the culture grew S. enterica serotype Choleraesuis. Aerobic and anaerobic blood cultures were obtained from separate sites which were negative.
Due to her penicillin allergy, large body habitus, and concern for deep infection with costochondritis and abscess, she was started on trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole at two double-strength tablets (160 mg TMP and 800 SMX) taken orally twice a day. The dosing was based on her adjusted body weight of 85 kg (4 mg/kg/dose every 12 hours, equating to 340 mg/dose). The antibiotic susceptibility test confirmed susceptibility to both ampicillin and trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole. The plan was to treat for at least 8 weeks of antibiotic therapy. The follow-up evaluation showed a persistent wound with decreased drainage 3 months later . Her clinical course was complicated by the development of a diffuse, pruritic skin rash presumably from trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole, which resolved upon cessation of the trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole therapy. Treatment was changed to cefpodoxime (400 mg every 12 hours) until a peripherally inserted central catheter (PICC) line could be placed for ceftriaxone (1 g intravenously daily). Repeat wound cultures were obtained that grew methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus susceptible to doxycycline with which she was treated at a dose of 100 mg orally every 12 hours. Repeat chest CT scan with IV contrast showed persistent focal soft tissue thickening surrounding the left seventh rib cartilage extending to the skin with a sinus tract. There was also a redemonstration of a focus of hypoattenuation measuring approximately 0.9 × 0.6 cm near the seventh rib cartilage, consistent with an abscess described in the prior study . Thoracic surgery recommended surgical intervention for source control of the infection. Subsequently, the patient underwent surgical debridement with excision of the fistula and a partial resection of the left seventh costochondral cartilage. Operative bone tissue was obtained and Gram stain and cultures were negative. Histopathology showed findings consistent with costochondritis. The surgical wound eventually healed postoperatively, and antibiotic therapy was later discontinued after achieving adequate source control of infection. Continued follow-up with cardiothoracics and infectious disease at 6 months and 1 year showed a well-healed wound and without active signs of infection. Her follow-up labs showed a normal CBC, CMP, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and CRP at 6- and 12-month follow-up.
During the course of her illness, the patient expressed disappointment and concerns about the nonhealing nature of the chest wound and poor response to prolonged antibiotic treatment. She also expressed concern about the drug rash from trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole use, but felt relieved when the rash resolved. The patient was cooperative during the treatment and was eventually satisfied with the full resolution of her condition after surgery.