A 28-year-old Japanese woman became aware of bloody stools from August 2013 and visited a neighborhood clinic dedicated to internal medicine and digestive organs in September 2013. An initial examination by colonoscopy identified elevated lesions with mild bleeding in the Rb section of her rectum . These rectal lesions were biopsied for analysis. Immunohistochemical investigation of the biopsy revealed that the proliferating cells were phenotypically characterized as CD20+, CD79a+, CD3−, CD5−, CD10−, and cyclin D1−. Based on these findings, she was diagnosed as having MALT lymphoma. A complete blood count revealed a hemoglobin level of 10.6 g/dl. Biochemical examination of her blood showed a lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) level of 102 IU/l and a soluble interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R) level of 190 U/ml (reference value, 145 to 519 U/ml). Although her hemoglobin was slightly reduced, LDH and sIL-2R were within the normal range. She was referred to the Department of Gastroenterology of a general hospital in October 2013. No enlargement of regional nodes or distant metastasis was revealed by positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT). Finally, she was diagnosed as having Lugano I rectal MALT lymphoma.
She was then introduced to our institute and initiated on radiotherapy. However, she expressed a desire to bear children and had some embryos frozen by the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology before being admitted to our department in February 2014.
To achieve dose constraints of 12 Gy to her entire ovary, we used horizontally opposed pair fields for radiotherapy to minimize the irradiation to her endometrium and ovary. The irradiated field and dose distribution for this case are shown in Fig. , respectively. The clinical target volume (CTV) was defined as the whole rectum and it is shown in orange in Fig. . The planning target volume (PTV) was defined as CTV plus 1 cm margin in all directions and it is shown in green. The ovary and uterus are shown in yellow and pink, respectively. A total dose of 30.6 Gy was given in 17 fractions of 1.8 Gy by 10-Megavolt X-ray linear accelerator to PTV and no chemotherapy was scheduled. As a result, one-third of her uterus and half of her ovary would be outside the irradiation field. A dose volume histogram is show in Fig. . The mean dose received by her uterus and ovary was 22.5 Gy and 16.6 Gy, respectively. We determined that a hot area of a maximum of 130% spreading to the soft tissue (subcutaneous fat) was acceptable as the actual dose was 39.8 Gy. Mild radiation dermatitis (Grade 2) around her anus was observed as an acute adverse event.
She completed radiotherapy and was discharged in March 2014, but returned to the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology in May 2014 due to amenorrhea. A female hormone test revealed a reduction in estrogen level and an increase in follicle-stimulating hormone level. She was thus diagnosed as having premature ovarian failure. Kaufmann therapy was then commenced. After approximately 1 year of treatment, positive pregnancy was confirmed (April 2015), and she revisited the clinic. A gestational sac was confirmed by ultrasound examination, and the second month of pregnancy was diagnosed. Surprisingly, she had conceived naturally. Finally, she safely gave birth to a baby girl without congenital abnormalities in October 2015.