A 57-year-old woman was admitted for treatment of liver nodules. Three years prior, she had been diagnosed with histologically-confirmed uveal melanoma in the left eye and had been treated with chemotherapy after undergoing resection of the affected eye and upper and lower eyelids. At her 3-year follow-up, metastatic lesions were found on the liver via positron emission tomography (PET) and computed tomography (CT).
Originally, the patient had visited the outpatient ophthalmology clinic with complaint of left eyeball discomfort. In May 2011, the patient had been diagnosed with dysplastic nevus. Accordingly, a mass was removed from the left eye and confirmed by histology as malignant melanoma ; the patient underwent subsequent treatment by radiotherapy (total 6400 cGY, 32 wk) and chemotherapy (single-agent dacabazine 150 mg/m2 daily for 5 d every 4 wk, four rounds). In December 2012, she underwent total exenteration of the left eye for local invasion of the melanoma , and a follow-up PET-CT revealed metastases in the left jugular lymph nodes. In March 2013, a left radical neck lymph node dissection was performed, after which the patient underwent chemotherapy with high-dose interferon (IFN)-alpha administered on a 2-d interval schedule for 48 wk. Neither abdominal nor thoracic CT showed metastatic lesions in the solid organs or ascites. In June 2014, the patient completed IFN-alpha chemotherapy, but follow-up PET-CT in July 2014 revealed two metastatic nodules in the right lobe of the liver, being 2.5 cm (segment #7) and 2.3 cm (segment #5) in size .
The patient did not have any underlying disease.
The patient had no notable family or personal history.
The patient had no unusual abdominal symptoms.
The whole blood count, serum electrolyte levels, liver function test results, urea nitrogen level, creatinine level, and C-reactive protein level were normal.
Serial PET-CT found hypermetabolic sites. In December 2011, a PET-CT had revealed the metastatic lesion in the left eyelid, and metastases had been detected in the left jugular lymph nodes in December 2012. In June 2014, the follow-up PET-CT revealed two metastatic nodules in the right lobe of the liver (2.5 cm in segment #7 and 2.3 cm in segment #5) .