We present a case of a 78-year-old female with a past medical history of gastroesophageal reflux disease, subclinical hypothyroidism and recently diagnosed SM who was transferred to our institution for ST-elevation myocardial infarction. She was diagnosed with SM two years ago after she had multiple anaphylactic reactions and cardiac arrest secondary to anaphylactic shock. She was found to have elevated tryptase 119 ug/L and the diagnosis was confirmed with bone marrow biopsy. Since then, she has been on anti-histamine.
She presented to the emergency department at an outside hospital with substernal chest pain that radiates to both shoulders and elbows. She described it as pressure-like and was severe with associated symptoms of nausea, vomiting, and diaphoresis. Laboratory analysis revealed troponin T 0.24 and a normal lipid panel and hemoglobin A1C. Electrocardiogram (EKG) was notable for ST elevation in Lead II, Lead III and AvF . The patient initially refused to take medications due to her concerns for anaphylactic reaction and agreed after she was premedicated with methylprednisolone and famotidine. She was treated with aspirin 326mg and Plavix 300mg. She refused thrombolytics. Once arrived at our institution, her symptoms resolved and repeated EKG showed resolution of ST-segment elevation and small Q waves in the inferolateral leads. Echocardiogram demonstrated mild hypokinesis of the basal to mid inferior wall. The ejection fraction was 60-65%.
Her case was discussed with her allergist in a large academic medical center in the area and we decided to do an oral challenge test for the dual antiplatelet therapy which she tolerated without any premedication. The patient was taken to the catheterization suite with premedication for assumed contrast allergy. Angiography revealed 95% stenosis in the mid-right coronary artery (RCA) which was believed to be the culprit lesion. There were no significant obstructive lesions noted in other coronary arteries . She underwent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with successful drug-eluting stent placement to the mid-RCA. She was started on guideline-directed medical therapy which she tolerated without any allergic reaction. She did not have any chest pain after the procedure and her cardiac enzymes down trended. She was discharged home in a stable condition 2 days later.