A 56-year-old male patient presented to the hospital with an epileptic seizure, amnesia, slow reaction, and irritability. After drinking alcohol, he began experiencing epileptic seizures around 3 days ago, manifesting as consciousness disturbance, rolling eyes, foaming at the mouth, and body shaking with a tongue bite. His memory impairment began about a month ago, as evidenced by his failure to recall recent occurrences. He was examined at a local hospital and given antiepileptic medication. The seizure reappeared during the duration of therapy, and the body temperature increased to 38°C. Then the fever subsided, and he visited our hospital for further treatment. He experienced one convulsion during admission, lasting about 310 s, and it was the same as the first time. The patient had a lengthy history of drinking and smoking, consuming two packs every day. He was previously healthy and had no family history of psychiatric disorders or cognitive disorders. Physical examination on admission showed the following results: vital signs were normal, and blood pressure was 132/86 mmHg on admission. The cardiovascular, pulmonary, and abdominal examinations did not show abnormalities. His neurological physical examination revealed sanity and was remarkable for decreasing computational ability and short-term memory. There were no abnormalities in the cranial nerves, muscle tone, muscle power, deep tendon reflex, or coordination (timeline in ).
The patient had normal levels of vitamins B and E, cholesterol, albumin, and ethanolamine as well as no kidney, liver, or thyroid impaired function. Glycated hemoglobin, basal glycemia levels, and serum tumor markers were within range. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was translucent and had a clear appearance. The CSF pressure was 120 mmH2O (normal value: 80–180 mmH2O), while protein, erythrocytes, and leukocytes were within range. Pandy’s test showed positive results. A cytological preparation of cerebral spinal fluid revealed occasional lymphocytes and no abnormal cells. Cerebrospinal fluid immunoglobulin G (IgG) was 52.50 mg/l. Human immunodeficiency virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus I/II DNA, toxoplasma gondii-DNA, and rubella virus RNA were undetectable in serum. The above results were from the central laboratory of the First Affiliated Hospital of Jilin University. Additionally, it should also be mentioned that the initial dilution gradients of serum and cerebrospinal fluid are 1:1 and 1:10, respectively. Cell-based assay (CBA) was utilized for the detection of antibodies for autoimmune encephalitis, while BLOT was used for the detection of antibodies for paraneoplastic disease. The anti-GABABR antibody IgG was positive (1:100) in the serum. However, the biomarkers of paraneoplastic syndrome antibodies (anti-Hu, -Yo, -Ri, -CV2, -Amphiphysin, -Ma, -SOX1, -DNER, -Zic4, -GAD65, -PKC, -Recoverin, -MGT30) and the rest of autoimmune encephalitis antibodies (NMDA, LGI1, CASPER2, AMPAR, IgLON5, mGluR5, GlyR5, D2R) were all negative in serum and CSF.
On neuropsychological assessment, the MMSE (Mini-Mental State Examination) score was 19/30 and the MES (Memory and Executive Screening) score was 45/100. The MoCA (Montreal Cognitive Assessment) score was 11/30. The scores of HIS (Hachinski Ischemia Scale) and ADL (Activity of Daily Living Scale) were 2/18 and 28/80, respectively. The CDR (Clinical Dementia Rating) score was 2, suggesting moderate dementia. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed bilateral multiple lacunar cerebral infarction, bilateral hippocampal regions were normal, and postcontrast enhancement revealed no obvious enhancement of lesions. The chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed no obvious tumor signs. Electroencephalogram (EEG) demonstrated epileptiform discharge . Positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan revealed hypermetabolic foci in the para mid-esophagus, which was poorly demarcated from the adjacent esophageal wall and measured 1.7 cm*0.6 cm . Then, we recommended that the patient undergo a biopsy to exclude malignancy, but the patient and his family refused. Consequently, we were unable to do a biopsy in order to identify the tumor.
The final diagnosis was anti-GABABR encephalitis, status epilepticus, and rapidly progressive dementia. During admission, treatment was started with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg 0.4 g/kg*day for 5 days), antiepileptic treatment (sodium valproate 0.5 g b.i.d. and levetiracetam 0.25 g b.i.d. orally, and phenobarbital sodium 0.2g intramuscular q.d.), and intravenous methylprednisolone (IVMP) pulse therapy. He was initiated on IVMP pulse therapy (1,000 mg for 3 days). Then, he showed memory impairment improvement and IVMP pulse therapy was gradually tapered (500, 240, and 120 mg/day for 3 days each). After 12 days, prednisolone was taken orally at 60 mg/day for 7 days. The memory impairment improved, and there was no seizure recurrence. After discharge from the hospital, the patient took prednisolone orally (prednisolone was reduced by 5 mg every 7 days and until maintaining the therapeutic dose of 5 mg), sodium valproate 0.5 g b.i.d., and levetiracetam 0.25 g b.i.d. We conducted a telephone follow-up, and the results demonstrated that his seizures entirely recovered. The patient later underwent endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) as an outpatient which revealed a hypoechoic lesion in the mediastinum, but the nature was to be investigated. However, the patient still did not undergo a puncture biopsy.
Four months later (13 March 2021), the patient presented to the hospital again with memory impairment for 20 days, which manifests as forgetting about his relatives. Additionally, he developed sleep dysfunction that showed difficulty in falling asleep at night and waking up easily. The abnormal examination on admission showed intermittent speech disorder and aprosexia. The tumor marker of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) increased, showing 5.84 ng/ml (normal value: <5 ng/ml). The cerebrospinal fluid appearance was transparent, and cerebrospinal fluid IgG was 50.97 mg/l. The CSF pressure, protein, erythrocytes, and leukocytes were within range. The anti-GABABR antibody was positive in both CSF and serum (cerebrospinal fluid anti-GABABR antibody IgG: 1:100+, serum anti-GABABR antibody IgG: 1:1,000+). Anti-SOX1 antibody IgG was 8 AU (arbitrary units) in CSF, and anti-SOX1 antibody IgG was 30 AU in serum (negative: <5 AU, positive: >10 AU. If the results are within 5–10 AU, rechecked after 8–12 weeks). Additionally, the rest of paraneoplastic syndrome antibodies (anti-Hu, -Yo, -Ri, -CV2, -Amphiphysin, -Ma, -DNER, -Zic4, -GAD65, -PKC, -Recoverin, -MGT30) and autoimmune encephalitis antibodies (NMDA, LGI1, CASPER2, AMPAR, IgLON5, mGluR5, GlyR5, D2R) were negative in both CSF and serum.
Brain MRI revealed bilateral hippocampal regions with abnormal signal, showing a slightly high signal in T2-weighted sequences and a slightly high signal shadow in fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) . The chest CT scan showed paraesophageal space-occupying lesion, considering the possibility of malignant lesions in the patient’s mediastinum . Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of his mediastinal lesions showed positive results for malignant cells. The immunohistochemistry showed positive results for TTF1, CK, synaptophysin, villin, CgA, E-cad, and CD56. CK7 and CEA scattered positively and showed a 70% ki67 nuclei-positive staining . The pathology report confirmed a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma, suggestive of an SCLC.
Although it is important to consider the diagnosis of PLE in the patient with cognitive impairment, neuropsychiatric symptoms, and seizures, other causes that caused these neuronal and psychiatric symptoms should not be ignored. Patients with symptoms of neuropsychiatric dysfunction and seizure may also be attributable to viral encephalopathies (VE). Moreover, most patients present with non-specific symptoms including fever, headache, consciousness disturbance, and abnormal behaviors, and it is easy to have a misdiagnosis in clinical work. Considering his symptoms and that he had a fever before admission, we assumed he had VE. However, his laboratory examination revealed no alterations in parameters of the virus, such as human immunodeficiency virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus I/II DNA, toxoplasma gondii-DNA, and rubella virus RNA. After excluding VE, we considered that potential PNSs might account for the seizure and memory impairment in a male smoker patient. Considering this, diagnosis hinges crucially on lumbar puncture examination of specific anti-neuronal antibodies in serum and CSF. Consequently, we chose to detect the anti-neuronal antibody spectrum and a PET-CT scan. The anti-GABABR antibody in serum was positive, which was associated with SCLC. PET-CT scan revealed that the metabolism of para mid-esophageal was increased, suspicious of malignancy, but the patient and his family refused to undergo a biopsy. After 4 months, anti-GABABR and anti-SOX1 antibodies were positive and brain MRI revealed a limbic system with an abnormal signal, which was a predictor for underlying malignancy, especially SCLC. After performing FNA of the mediastinal lesions, the pathology report confirmed a poorly differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma, supporting the judgment of SCLC.
The final diagnosis showed (1) small cell lung cancer and (2) paraneoplastic limbic encephalitis (anti-SOX1 and anti-GABABR antibodies both positive).
Treatment: After administration of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg 0.4 g/kg*day for 5 days) and antiepileptic treatment (sodium valproate 0.5g b.i.d, and levetiracetam 0.25g b.i.d), his memory impairment and neuropsychiatric symptoms improved.
The family decided to discontinue the anticancer therapy after careful thought. We conducted a telephone follow-up in July 2022, and the results demonstrated that while his psychiatric symptoms and seizures had subsided and his sleep disorders had entirely recovered, memory dysfunction—which manifests as forgetting about recent events—remained. He gave up using radiotherapy and chemotherapy to treat tumors in the case of SCLC, and Chinese medicine became a vital part of his tumor treatment. We hypothesized that the SCLC-associated immune response would suppress tumor development.