A 75-year-old Japanese woman presented with nephrotic syndrome, microhematuria and renal insufficiency. She had been treated as hypertension for 15 years. She was deaf since she was 6 years old for unknown reason. 6 months prior to admission, she developed erythema nodosum but Crohn’s disease, Sarcoidosis, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and malignancy were denied, and had been treated with prednisolone 10 mg per day. Then she noted pretibial edema and was referred to our hospital as nephrotic syndrome.
At the time of admission, blood pressure was 177/99 mmHg, the height was 148 cm, and the weight was 58.4 kg. She exhibited edema in her face and both lower extremities. Pigmentation was seen on her legs but erythema was not present. The results of laboratory test on admission were as follows: hemoglobin 9.4 g/dl; red blood count 336 × 104/μl; white cell count 11500/μl; platelet count 569 × 103/μl; blood urea nitrogen 18 mg/dl; serum creatinine (sCr) 1.55 mg/dl; serum total cholesterol 286 mg/dl; triglycerides, 249 mg/dl; total protein 4.9 g/dl; albumin 2.3 g/dl; serum IgG 301 mg/dl; IgA 42 mg/dl; IgM 28 mg/dl. The levels of serum complement, free κ and λ light chains were within normal limits. Electrophoresis of serum and urine revealed no monoclonal spikes. Cryoglobulin, HBV antigen, HCV antibody and antinuclear antibody were not detected. Urinalysis showed massive proteinuria (8.0 g/gCr) and microscopic hematuria (>100/HPF). A renal biopsy was performed. On light microscopy, 13 glomeruli were observed and 11 glomeruli exhibited global sclerosis and two glomeruli exhibited lobular accentuation and mesangial hypercellularity, therefore, diagnosed as membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN) . Immunofluorescent study showed weakly positive C3 and fringe pattern for IgM . Whereas, staining for IgA, IgG and C1q were negative. Congo red staining was negative. Additional immunefluorescent staining for IgG1-4, kappa light chain, delta light chain were also negative. Electron microscopy showed effacement of the glomerular epithelial foot process and massive fibril deposits in the subendothelium, mesangial area and subepithelium . Under high magnification, the fibrils were non-branching, partially parallel, partially curved and 17 nm in diameter, and some of the fibrils formed spherical structure . Additionally, bone marrow biopsy was performed and no specific abnormalities were found. She was treated with increased dose of oral predonisolone (20 mg/day). In 3 month, the amount of urinary protein was reduced from 8.0 to 2.0 g/gCr, however, the level of sCr increased from 1.5 to 2.5 mg/dl. The amount of urinary protein was re-increased concomitant with the reduction of predonisolone. Whereas, serum creatinine levels were progressively elevated, and she required hemodialysis in 15 months since the renal biopsy.