A 69-year-old man presented to our Department of Dermatology with progressive asthenia of eye-opening and ptosis for more than one year.
Ptosis for over one year was the only complaint that the patient presented. There were no obvious lesions on periocular skin or other areas of the face. The patient denied the existence of discomfort such as itching, swelling, or pain. He attended the Neurological Department and Ophthalmology Department frequently with no significant positive changes in his condition. Initial considerations of neurogenic and myogenic ptosis, for example, oculomotor paralysis, myasthenia gravis, and hyperthyroid ophthalmomyopathy, were excluded after a series of examinations including neuroelectromyography, neostigmine test, myasthenia gravis-related antibodies, thyroid function, and craniocerebral imaging. The patient was diagnosed with senile blepharoptosis, and he refused treatment. However, his ptosis aggravated so a skin biopsy was finally recommended.
The patient reported well-controlled diabetes and hypertension. He denied other systemic diseases or any history of dermatoses such as rosacea, acne, erysipelas, contact dermatitis, angioedema, and skin lupus erythematosus. The patient also denied preceding periocular rash, trauma, surgery, or self-conscious swelling.
The patient denied bad personal habits and genetic diseases in his family. However, he reported that his father had similar progressive ptosis but did not attend a hospital for diagnosis and treatment before his death.
Upon physical examination, moderate bilateral blepharoptosis was observed without obvious edema, erythema, papules, or masses on his face . Further careful examination of the periocular and upper facial skin led to the observation of shallow glabellar wrinkles and obvious infiltration by touch. It was important to note that erythematous lesions were inspired for the first time after the skin biopsy of the upper eyelid and forehead .
No abnormalities were observed after routine examination of the blood, liver and kidney function, and electrolyte levels. Antinuclear antibody, anti-DNA antibody, anti-ENA antibody, muscle enzymes, and immunoglobulin E (IgE) tests were all negative. There were no obvious abnormalities from neuroelectromyography, neostigmine test, myasthenia gravis-related antibodies, and thyroid function. Upper eyelid and forehead histopathological results showed manifestations such as edema in dermis, lymphatic hyperplasia and dilatation, as well as perivascular lymphocytic infiltration . Toluidine blue-stained mast cells increased with a mean number of over five in each high-power field .
There were no significant abnormalities in craniocerebral imaging.