A 40-year-old male received a transverse colostomy due to CD in 2017. Subsequently, he developed progressive contracture of the transverse colostomy and was complaining of difficulty defecating.
The patient was diagnosed with CD in 2014. He experienced recurrent diarrhea and abdominal distension. After diagnosis, he received symptomatic treatment. In 2017, due to acute exacerbation of his symptoms, such as abdominal pain and the development of ileus, transverse colostomy was performed. This effectively relieved his symptoms. Later, he was treated with mesalazine but responded poorly to this treatment. No neoplastic occurrence was observed by contrast-enhanced CT . Hence, he began to receive induction treatment with infliximab in 2018 (5 mg/kg intravenous infusion at weeks 1, 2, and 6, and every 8 wk thereafter). Ten months later, the patient returned to hospital due to progressive contracture of the transverse colostomy.
The patient had no special history of past illness, other than seafood allergy. His medical history was unremarkable.
The patient was a nonsmoker and his family were negative for cancer.
The patient’s temperature was 36.6 °C, heart rate was 78 bpm, respiratory rate was 20 breaths per min, and blood pressure was 125/60 mmHg. He was skinny and had a scaphoid abdomen. The contracted transverse colostomy was located in the upper abdomen.
Blood analysis revealed anemia with a hemoglobin level of 11.1 g/dL. The patient had a normal platelet count and no significant change in biochemical and plasma electrolytes. His serum carcinoembryonic antigen concentration was 4.48 ng/mL, carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) was 762.80 U/mL, and CA24-2 was > 150.00 U/mL.
Positron emission tomography (PET) and computed tomography (CT) revealed the presence of a large soft tissue mass, adjacent to the transversostomy, which had high levels of glucose metabolism. Multiple nodules were present in the abdominal cavity, all with increased glucose metabolism. In conclusion, the carcinoma from the gastrointestinal tract had metastasized widely .