A 61-year-old male, with no known comorbid, presented with a huge painless mass in his left inguinoscrotal region associated with malaise and vague abdominal pain for one month. He had a history of lifting a Camel after which a lump gradually developed. On abdominal examination, he revealed a well-defined, non-tender, and firm mass of 15 × 10 cm at the left lower abdomen involving the left inguinal region as well as the left hemiscrotum . Based on the examination, a diagnosis of indirect inguinal hernia was made.
The complete blood count and biochemical tests were within the reference values. Tumor markers i.e. Carcinoembryonic antigen, Alpha-fetoprotein, Carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19.9, and CA 125 were within range. Abdominal ultrasound showed a heterogeneous structure with hyporeflective areas and was highly vascularized. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan identified a mass at the left iliac fossa, adjacent to the anterior wall of the abdomen, but extraperitoneal, measuring 15 × 10 × 10 cm. The mass was heterogeneously hypodense, well-defined, and lobulated, with marked enhancement effect after contrast administration, comparable to vascular density, but no evidence of distant metastasis or lymphadenopathy .
Surgery was planned under general anesthesia and the patient underwent an en-bloc local resection of the tumor via an inguinal approach. An inguinal crease incision was given over the swelling. On exploration, we found an encapsulated large mass originating from the omentum with enormously dilated blood vessels and a 5 × 5 cm hydrocele, which was excised and weighed around 1.5 kg. Testis was unremarkable (A and B). The macroscopic surgical margin was tumor-free.
On gross examination, an irregular dark brown to grey-white mass with prominent dilated vessels on the surface was seen. On sectioning, the cut surface of the mass was light brown with cystically dilated hemorrhagic spaces and separately lying omental tissue piece with prominent congested and dilated vessels measuring 17 × 17 × 5 cm. Microscopically a neoplastic lesion was visible, composed of spindle-shaped cells having moderate cytoplasm and bland nuclei without necrosis. The blood vessels appeared thin-walled with a staghorn appearance in hemangiopericytic pattern. Few mitotic figures were seen. No testicular parenchyma or epididymal tissue was reported. Omental sections showed fibro adipose tissue with dilated lymphatics and thick-walled blood vessels. Features were consistent with malignant HPC of 20 × 14 × 10 cm (C).
Immunohistochemical analysis showed strongly positive CD34 and patchy positive STAT 6 biomarkers while it was negative for cytokeratin, S100, ASMA, desmin, TLE-1, ER/PR, and EMA.
The patient was discharged on 3rd postoperative day without any complications. His recovery after surgery was satisfactory. At 12-months follow-up, there was no evidence of recurrence or metastasis and he is alive and well.