An 80-year-old male presented to the echocardiography lab for routine follow-up for moderate aortic stenosis (AS). His medical comorbidities included hyperlipidaemia, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. In the past, the patient underwent multiple PCI’s due to ischemic heart disease (IHD). His last coronary intervention involved implanting a drug eluting stent (DES) to the left main (LM) and proximal left anterior descending (LAD) coronary arteries, at an outside institution 2 years ago.
The patient was hemodynamically stable and reported no chest pain, back pain, or dyspnoea. Cardiac auscultation demonstrated regular heart sounds with crescendo-decrescendo systolic murmur heard best at the right upper sternal border, radiating to the neck. His lungs were clear and he had no signs of heart failure. Initial Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed normal left ventricular systolic function with moderate AS (aortic valve area: 1.1 cm², max and mean aortic gradients: 46 and 30 mmHg, respectively), moreover, a suspected linear echogenic structure was noted in the ascending aorta, which was suspicious for a dissection flap or an artefact (, , and ). As mentioned above, the patient was completely asymptomatic and for better visualization, evaluation, and characterization of the findings seen on TTE, trans-esophageal echocardiography (TEE) was immediately performed to reveal a mobile and linear echogenic structure originating from the sinuses of Valsalva/Sinotubular junction (STJ) and extending to the ascending aorta and the aortic arch (, , ), highly suspicious for Stanford type A aortic dissection. No aortic regurgitation was noted (see , ). Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm with no signs of acute ischaemia . Blood tests for high-sensitivity cardiac Troponin T (hs-cTnT) and Creatine Kinase-Myocardial Band (CK-MB) were negative. Immediate ECG-gated cardiac computed tomography (CT) was performed. In CT images the aortic endothel was intact and no false lumen was noticed, thus ruling out aortic dissection. A linear well-defined structure was noted originating from the ostium of the LM coronary artery and extending to the ascending aorta, aortic arch, and descending aorta, most probably a coronary guidewire from an earlier procedure . A second look at the last invasive coronary angiography record demonstrated the same finding at the end of the procedure—a coronary guidewire originating from the LM coronary artery and extending to the ascending aorta (see , ). A multidisciplinary heart team discussion, including an invasive cardiologist, a cardiothoracic surgeon, and a cardiac imaging specialist, was obtained, and concluded that the risk of surgical or endovascular intervention outweighed the potential benefit, particularly since the patient was completely asymptomatic, at advanced age and with multiple comorbidities. Discharge home followed several detailed explanations to the patient and his family regarding his condition and a recommendation for a close clinical and echocardiographic follow-up.