A 45-year-old man was admitted to our emergency department with an out of hospital cardiac arrest caused by VF. His medical history included Shapiro syndrome with many years of recurrent hospitalizations for hypothermia as low as 32°C, often accompanied by ataxia and/or delirium. In an effort to control his hypothermic episodes he was treated with chlorpromazine.
The electrocardiogram (ECG) made by the paramedics on arrival demonstrated VF, which was successfully terminated with three external defibrillator shocks. At return of spontaneous circulation the ECG revealed a sinus bradycardia of 40/min with a normal heart axis, a first-degree AV block and Osborn waves with normal QT interval lengths . Physical examination demonstrated a body temperature of 28.7°C. The echocardiography at admission revealed no abnormalities. The cardiac arrest was attributed to VF caused by the hypothermia since other possible causes, such as ischaemia, structural heart diseases, and electrolyte disorders, were excluded. During the warm-up phase at the intensive care unit a 2nd degree AV block Type 2 was documented . After recovery and warming up to the normal temperature of 34°C for the present patient he received a dual chamber ICD for the prevention of sudden cardiac death and for the option of pacing during bradycardia.
Within 1 month after hospital discharge the patient experienced two episodes of ventricular tachycardia (VT)/VF. During the first episode antitachycardia pacing during charging was not successful and a high energy shock was delivered . Two weeks later a second episode of VT/VF was terminated for which two high energy shocks were necessary . Hypothermic attacks returned every few days and during both episodes of VT/VF the patient experienced hypothermia. As a consequence of these and former hypothermia episodes, his neurological state was severely affected resulting in being bedridden.
One year after ICD implantation the patient was admitted for a prolonged period due to recurrent episodes of ‘fever’. During the ‘fever’ his temperature was 37.9°C and assumed extremely elevated for this patient. He was diagnosed with a urinary tract infection which was treated with several antibiotics after which he was discharged. Two weeks after discharge the patient unfortunately passed away. Post-mortem interrogation of the ICD did not disclose any further ventricular arrhythmias. At the time of his death the only finding seen on the ICD was a higher supraventricular heartrate, most likely a sinus tachycardia, although a supraventricular arrhythmia could not be excluded . Given the history of the patient, this was attributed to a recurrent infection. Since no autopsy was performed a definitive diagnosis could not be made. It was concluded that the most likely cause of death was an uncontrolled infection.