A 54-year-old married mixed ancestry man and father of four children, working in the construction industry, was diagnosed simultaneously with type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension 8 years prior to admission. He also had a significant family history of type 2 diabetes mellitus, with his father and two of his brothers affected, all of whom are deceased, having suffered complications of ischemic cardiac failure and renal failure, respectively. However, none of the siblings had a history of admission for recurrent hypoglycemia. The father of the index subject died at 70 years of age, having had ischemic cardiomyopathy, which necessitated coronary artery bypass graft surgery prior to this event, whereas his two brothers died from diabetic nephropathy at age 48 and 50 years. In addition, there was no family history suggestive of pituitary disease or hyperparathyroidism. Between 2010 and 2017, our patient presented several times to his primary care physician with blood glucose measurements greater than 26 mmol/L. At each of these visits, he received short-acting human insulin and intravenous fluid. His final presentation to the primary health care facility with hyperglycemia occurred 12 months prior to admission.
His current presentation on June 27, 2018, involved a referral to his secondary care hospital, having been asymptomatic for a year, with no episodes of hyperglycemia except for weight gain of 14 kg in the preceding 3 months. According to his family, he suffered from confusion and sleepwalking, particularly in the early hours of the morning between 03:00 and 08:00. These symptoms occurred almost every day, associated with generalized body weakness and sweating, which were noticeable after each episode. His family reported physical and verbal aggression and confusion. During additional episodes in hospital, he was noted to be combative with the nursing staff and fellow patients and was found to be hypoglycemic on several occasions. Our patient appeared to develop symptoms indicative of hypoglycemic unawareness, as he manifested with no sympathetic symptoms, despite glucose concentrations below 1.8 mmol/L (3.8–5.5 mmol/L). During this admission, he exhibited recurrent episodes of fasting and post-prandial hypoglycemia, which measured between 1.2 and 3.0 mmol/L.
The possibility of nonconvulsive seizures was entertained; thus a computed tomography (CT) brain scan was ordered and found to be normal, whereas an electroencephalogram was not available at the secondary care facility. He was transferred to a tertiary hospital for evaluation by the endocrine service.
At admission, his chronic medications were metformin, enalapril, hydrochlorothiazide, and simvastatin. Aside from metformin, he was not taking any oral hypoglycemic agent or insulin and denied using any other agents. Pharmacy records failed to identify that he had received either a sulfonylurea or insulin. The two-hourly ward glucose measurements showed recurrent hypoglycemic episodes ranging from 1.2 to 3.4 mmol/L, occurring between 03:00 and 08:00.
Clinical examination failed to identify insulin injection sites or evidence of target organ damage relating to diabetes, hypertension, or any other chronic disease. In particular, he had no indication of melanoderma.