A 61-year-old male developed stable angina in the last 6 months. He had history of coronary artery disease treated with multiple PCIs in triple vessel coronary artery disease, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia. He was treated with antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg), bisoprolol 2.5 mg b.i.d., ramipril 5 mg b.i.d., and atorvastatin 80 mg/die. A coronary angiography revealed multivessel disease with critical stenosis of proximal left anterior descending (LAD) artery and right coronary artery. Due to a SYNTAX score of 22, after multidisciplinary team discussion, the patient was addressed to surgical revascularization with in situ skeletonized left internal mammary artery (LIMA) graft to LAD, saphenous vein graft (SVG) to posterior descending artery, and sequential to first obtuse marginal coronary (OM1), SVG separated to second diagonal branch (D2). The post-operative was uneventful and the patient remained asymptomatic. A routine pre-discharge echocardiogram was performed 10 days after CABG. It showed the presence of a haematoma of the apex measuring up to 2 cm in diameter and partially extended to the right ventricle with no signs of tamponade (, Video 1). On colour Doppler, a systolic flow from the lateral wall into a hypoechoic area next to a pericardial effusion was seen. Physical examination was normal (, Video 1). Firstly, a computed tomography (CT) scan was performed confirming the presence of a haematoma of the left ventricle then, a coronary CT confirmed the presence of a PSA of the LAD close to the distal part of the anastomosis with LIMA due to a laceration of the native coronary . After consultation between cardiologists and cardiac surgery, a first approach with PCI with a covered stent was chosen (Video 2).
However, the intervention failed because of the small size of the LAD at the level of the PSA, not suitable for covered-stent treatment. Therefore, the patient underwent an off-pump repair through redo sternotomy approach. At the inspection in the operating room, the PSA of LAD was seen close to the distal part of the graft anastomosis. There was a laceration of the vessel but the adventitia appeared intact, no blood was found in the pericardium, excluding the large haematoma probably formed at the level of the anastomosis . A direct suture of the laceration of LAD was performed. The post-operative course was uneventful and the patient was extubated at Day 0. After 2 weeks, the patient was discharged still asymptomatic, the pre-discharge echocardiography was negative.