An 87-year-old woman did not respond to conservative therapy for an osteoporotic fracture of the T12 vertebral body. After 2 months of conservative therapy, she exhibited delayed union and gait disturbance due to delayed leg paralysis. She was referred to our institution from a neighborhood hospital. The strength of the lower limbs (knee extension and ankle dorsiflexion) was rated manual max muscle test (MMT) 4 in the left limb and MMT 1 in the right limb. Old osteoporotic vertebral fractures were observed at levels L2 and L3. Plain radiography in flexion position revealed a markedly compressed T12 vertebral body , and T2-weighted magnetic resonance imaging in the supine position revealed a large bony defect in the vertebral body . In addition, computed tomography (CT) in supine position revealed and a large cortical defect in the anterior vertebral wall and CT in flexion position revealed that a bone fragment of the posterior vertebral wall was markedly retropulsed into the spinal canal . Therefore, vertebral instability was significant in flexion and supine position.
Surgery was performed with the patient in the prone position under general anesthesia. We selected vertebroplasty in combination with pedicle screw fixation instead of balloon kyphoplasty, which was often indicated painful osteoporotic vertebral fracture, due to the large cortical defect in the anterior vertebral wall. An 11-gauge guide needle was inserted from the left pedicle into a vertebral body under fluoroscopic guidance. Then, a 10-cc syringe was attached to the guide needle. Bone marrow blood (2–3 mL/vertebral body) was collected with high-pressure aspiration . The bone marrow blood was transferred into another 20-cc syringe filled with Affinos® granules to impregnate them . Next, a guidewire was inserted through the guide needle sheath and placed in a vertebral body. Then, the guide needle was removed, and hollow cannulated pedicle screws (Solera®, Medtronic Sofamor Danek, MN, USA) were inserted along the guidewire with conventional technique. In this manner, a total of 12 mL of fresh bone marrow blood werecollected from normal vertebral bodies between the levels T10 and L3. Subsequently, a 5-mm inserter for vertebroplasty (Kuraray Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) was transpedicularly attached to the T12 vertebral body under fluoroscopic guidance, and Affinos® granules impregnated with bone marrow blood were injected under C-arm fluoroscopic guidance until the bone defect was completely filled. Finally, short pedicle screws were also inserted into the T12 vertebral body, and rods exactly reproducing the spinal alignment in the prone position were locked to the pedicle screws . To prevent screw back-out due to osteoporosis, two 5-mmwidth super-high-molecular-weight polyethylene tapes (Nesplon®, Alfresa Pharma, Osaka, Japan) each were passed under the laminae of T12T10and L3 to fasten the rods for reinforcement. Finally, the resected spinous process was ground into chips and implanted posteriorly on the laminae. The operative time was 290 min, and the volume of blood loss was 480 g.
Post-operative management included the use of a Jewett-type hard corset, and ambulation was allowed as early as possible. Teriparatide, which had been administered since the onset of this fracture, was continued for the treatment of osteoporosis. After surgery, leg paralysis resolved, and the patient was able to walk.
Three months after surgery, mild correction loss was observed in the affected vertebral body height; however, CT revealed regeneration of the cortex of the anterior vertebral wall. We determined that bone union was completed . Six months after surgery, Affinos® granules were absorbed and became nearly as bright as adjacent autologous bone. Simultaneously, the cortex of the anterior vertebral wall was found to be further regenerated . One year after surgery, X-ray in the standing position revealed that vertebral height was well maintained . CT revealed that Affinos® granules were further absorbed. Meanwhile, the gap between the synthetic bone mass and the anterior vertebral wall, which had been observed at 6 months after surgery, had become unclear. Autologous bone was found to be further regenerated in the vertebral body .