A 32-year-old female with childhood asthma has intermittent painless tense bulging of the bilateral upper eye lids for more than 15 years (since 1999). She had no diplopia, orbital pain, blurred vision, dry eyes, or dry mouth. She was informed of benign eyelid lesions in 2000 and 2002 by ophthalmologists. No biopsies were performed, and the lesions resolved with intravenous corticosteroids. However, eye lid swelling recurred after she was tapered off oral steroids. In 2003, MRI was performed, and she was diagnosed with SS. She was treated with methylprednisolone pulse therapy (MTP) for 3 days, after the eyelid swelling completely subsided. However, swelling of the upper eyelids recurred when she was tapered off oral steroids. In 2004, she had to quit her job because of recurrent eyelid swelling. In 2006, she began using Chinese herbal medicines which she stated reduced the eyelid swelling by about 50%. However, in the 3 months before being seen at our clinic, the upper eyelid swelling increased and was severe enough to produce tense bulging.
Her mother stated that she has had a cough and wheezing since her infancy, with the need for intermittent bronchodilator and intravenous corticosteroid therapy. She has no known allergies to foods or medications. Both her mother and sister have allergic rhinitis. Bilateral lacrimal gland swelling related to sicca syndrome was suspected.
A Schirmer test showed od 2 mm, os 1 mm, but the patient had no complaints of dry eyes or dry mouth. Cranial MRI revealed bilateral lacrimal gland and submandibular gland enlargement with mass infiltration into the bilateral maxillary sinuses and left foramen of ovale . The differential diagnosis was lymphoid tissue, inflammatory masses, and lymphoma. Sialoscintigraphy showed a high likelihood of sicca syndrome. Immunology studies were negative for SSA/SSB, anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA). In addition, elevated IgG (3790 mg/dL) and serum IgG4 (740 mg/dL), low IgM (39 mg/dL), normal IgA (163 mg/dL), and low C3/C4 (62/7 mg/dL) levels were found. A pulmonologist was consulted for suspected IgG4-related plasmacytic syndrome with lung involvement. High-resolution CT (HRCT), diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO), and bronchial provocation testing were performed. The DLCO and bronchial provocation tests were not consistent with bronchial asthma. HRCT showed multiple enlarged lymph nodes over the mediastinum, right pulmonary hilum, prevertebral space of the thoracolumbar spine, retroperitoneal paraaortic area, bilateral parailiac areas, and bilateral perirenal spaces (R/O lymphoma), and increased interstitial changes over the anterior right upper lobe (RUL) of the lung. Gallium scan demonstrated increased uptake in lacrimal, right parotid, and bilateral submandibular glands, and mediastinal, prevertebral, paraaortic, and bilateral pelvic (including internal iliac chain) lymph nodes. There was also uptake in the right 3rd and left 6th ribs, renal, and perirenal areas . Biopsy of the right parotid gland was consistent with Mikulicz disease. Microscopically, the section showed parotid tissue with diffuse, heavy infiltration of lymphoid and plasma cells in the stroma, with some lymphocyte infiltration into the glands and ducts. Diffuse atrophy of the parotid tissue was also found. The findings were consistent with Mikulicz disease. Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining for CD5, IgG, IgG4, and kappa and lambda light chains was performed. Numerous IgG4-positive cells were noted in each high-powered field. Immunofluorescence staining for IgA, IgG, IgM, and C3 revealed IgG deposition . The possibility of IgG4-related sclerosing disease was considered. Single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography (SPECT/CT) showed uptake to pancreatic region, indicating an additional diagnosis of autoimmune pancreatitis .
The patient was treated with low-dose corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 40 mg intravenous) for 2 days. There was no clinical response, so MTP pulse therapy 500 mg daily for 3 days was administered. The eyelid swelling rapidly decreased, and she was able to open her eyes. Three months after treatment, gallium SPECT only showed physiological uptake; no regions of abnormal uptake were noted .