Our patient was a 65-year-old Finnish male with schizoaffective disorder who was living in a local nursing home. His regular medication included chlorprothixene 50 mg twice a day, valproic acid with morning dose of 500 mg and evening dose of 1000 mg, propranolol 50 mg three times a day, and hydrochlorothiazide 12.5 mg. Propranolol and hydrochlorothiazide were prescribed previously to treat medication-induced peripheral edema and tremor. Our patient accidentally received the medication of another patient: clozapine 300 mg, theophylline 200 mg, olanzapine 30 mg, warfarin 5 mg, and 1 g of potassium chloride. Four hours after the initial dose he arrived at our emergency room for a clinical examination.
The first clinical examination took place 6 h after our patient took the incorrect medication. This examination was unremarkable and demonstrated that he had a soft non-tender abdomen. Results from an electrocardiogram were normal and there was no tachycardia or fever. Blood tests revealed a normal leucocyte level, an international normalized ratio of 1.0, minor thrombocytopenia (127 × 109/l), and a normal C-reactive protein level. Two hours later, our patient started to complain about upper abdominal pain and vomited brown liquid several times. An abdominal X-ray revealed gastric stasis. The next morning (14 h after taking the wrong medication) a gastroscopy was performed, which revealed necrotic esophageal mucosa starting 25 cm from the upper incisor teeth that abruptly ended at his gastroesophageal junction . The ventricle was extremely dilated because of the presence of air but only a minimal amount of liquid was present. A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed, which showed an edematous esophagus but no perforation. There was a sharp twist in the mesentery of his proximal small bowel with minor changes in the diameter of his bowel lumen.
Our patient was admitted to our surgical ward with a nasogastric tube in place. Antimicrobial medication with cefuroxime 1.5 g three times a day was started. The next day our patient was feeling worse, and his C-reactive protein concentration had risen to 163 mg/l. An exploratory laparotomy was decided upon, partly based on the suspicion of proximal small bowel obstruction. During the operation no signs of any obstructing lesion were found and his bowel seemed completely healthy. A repeat gastroscopy was performed the following day. The esophageal mucosa had started to drop off and there was a healthy muscular layer underneath.
Our patient healed uneventfully with conservative treatment and was admitted back to nursing home on the seventh day. A control-endoscopy was performed 2 months later that showed a completely healed esophageal wall with no signs of stricture or scarring.