A 27-year-old Chinese female patient from a southern Chinese town presented with primary amenorrhea, having not menstruated before the age of 18 in 2014. She was chromosomally identified as 46, XX, and ultrasonography indicated an infantile uterus. She was diagnosed with primary amenorrhea and showed menstrual onset when treated artificial menstrual cycle therapy with estradiol 1 mg and dydrogesterone 10 mg. Over the past 6 months, she experienced hair loss, fatigue, polydipsia, nocturia, palpitations, thin and reddened skin, muscle weakness, difficulty standing up from a squatting position, darkened periorbital skin pigmentation, and increased blood pressure. Antihypertensive medications did not effectively control her blood pressure. She had no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. Physical examination revealed: height 160 cm, weight 68 kg, BMI 23.44, blood pressure 147/103 mmHg, pulse 128 bpm, and temperature 36 °C. She exhibited a moon face, a plethora of appearance, coffee-colored periorbital pigmentation, thin cheek skin with visible superficial blood vessels, buffalo hump, central obesity, and ecchymosis on the shin. Neurological examination was unremarkable.
The summary of the patient's laboratory tests is shown in Tables and . Both the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (DST) and the high-dose DST failed to suppress cortisol production. The decreased gonadotropins and sex hormones indicated ACTH-independent CS accompanied by hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
Gynecological ultrasound examination results are summarized in Table . No obvious abnormalities were observed in the pituitary MRI. Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed slender bilateral adrenal glands without any nodules or hyperplasia. A soft tissue density shadow measuring approximately 2.9 × 1.8 cm was observed in the left renal hilum. The somatostatin receptor PET/CT whole-body imaging (68Ga-DOTA-TATE imaging) showed abnormal tracer accumulation in the left renal hilum soft tissue mass indicating a somatostatin receptor-positive lesion. This led to the suspicion of an ectopic adrenal cortical adenoma at the left renal hilum.
During hospitalization, the patient was administered 30 mg of nifedipine sustained-release tablets, 5 mg of linagliptin, 10 mg of dapagliflozin, and 0.25 μg of calcitriol daily. Upon completion of the required examinations, she underwent laparoscopic tumor resection. The tumor was 2.5 × 2.0 × 1.0 cm in size and yellow–brown in color. Histopathological examination confirmed it to be an ectopic adrenal cortical adenoma. Immunohistochemical staining showed: a-Inhibin(+), Calretinin(+), MelanA(+), Syn(+), CgA(−), CD99(−), s-100(−), EMA(−), CK8/18(−), P53(weakly positive in some areas), and Ki67(LI: about 1%). One week after surgery, the morning plasma cortisol level dropped to < 0.8 ug/L and the plasma ACTH level rose to 4.79 pg/ml. After the operation, the patient was given oral prednisone 12.5 mg everyday, which was gradually reduced. No obvious adverse reactions occurred after strict adherence to the medication regimen and regular review. Three months post-surgery and the withdrawal of glucocorticoid therapy, the level of blood cortisol was 33.0 ug/L, ACTH was 76.38 pg/ml. 68Ga-Pentixafor PET/CT imaging (CXCR4 receptor imaging) did not reveal any significant abnormal concentrations. In our case, three months after the surgery to remove the ectopic cortisol adenoma and after the hypercortisolemia state, a follow-up revealed some recovery of the gonadal axis. The level of LH and FSH increased, and the GnRH excitation test could be excited. The ACTH excitation test was not fully excited, suggesting that the function of the adrenal cortex needs to be further restored. The patient had urgent fertility needs and relatively deficient ovaries. We subsequently gave GnRH pulse therapy, and the gonads gradually recovered and menstruation gradually appeared regularly.