A 44-year-old Middle Eastern man was admitted for mitral valve replacement. He had history of atrial fibrillation and rheumatic heart disease affecting the mitral valve (MV) with consequent severe mitral stenosis. He was a non-smoker and did not consume alcohol. He had no family history of relevance. He weighed 60 kg and his height was 168 cm.
The patient underwent an uneventful mitral valve replacement using a mechanical 29 mm St Jude prosthesis. He was commenced on oral anticoagulant (warfarin) and a beta blocker. His pre-discharge transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a well-functioning prosthesis with no paravalvular leak. Six months later, the patient presented to his local hospital with exertional dyspnea and orthopnea. He admitted that he had stopped taking his oral anticoagulant therapy 10 days prior to hospitalization: his international normalized ratio was 1.0.
His physical examination showed atrial fibrillation, absent prosthetic click and congested lungs but was otherwise unremarkable. Routine blood investigations were normal. TTE showed immobile posterior mitral leaflet and mobile anterior leaflet with a mean pressure gradient of 20 mmHg (peak pressure 40 mmHg) and reduced surface area of 0.7 cm2. He was then referred to our center. His New York Heart Association class on arrival was II and he was in a stable hemodynamic status. A repeat TTE at our center showed a huge left atrial (LA) thrombus in the posterolateral aspect of LA involving the posterior cusp of MV prosthesis which kept it in a closed position with a mobile anterior leaflet . These findings were confirmed by transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE).
We proceeded with thrombolytic treatment using tenecteplase (Boehringer Ingelheim, Germany) in a slow intravenous infusion of 1.25 mg/h (dose was 0.5 mg/kg and the patient body weight was 60 kg). The patient was closely monitored in an intensive care unit for any sign of cerebral embolism or bleeding. Thrombolysis was continuous for 48 hours. Following 24 hours of tenecteplase treatment, a repeat TTE showed recovery of most of the MV mobility with a significant decrease in LA thrombus size and a recovering blood flow across the MV. The MV area was 2.7 cm2 with no paravalvular leak and pericardial effusion.
After 48 hours of treatment, a TEE showed well functioning MV prosthesis with no residual thrombus . The surface area was 2.8 cm2 and the peak pressure gradient across MV was 6 mmHg with a mean pressure gradient of 2 mmHg. Following thrombolysis, intravenous anticoagulation (unfractionated heparin) was started as a continuous infusion together with oral anticoagulation therapy (warfarin). The combination was then continued until his International Normalised Rate was in the therapeutic range and then heparin was discontinued. The patient was discharged home in a stable condition with no complications. He remained well four months later.