A 78-year-old woman suffering from generalized right leg pain applied to the outpatient department. From her medical history; she underwent total hip arthroplasty six years ago after being diagnosed as having primary osteoarthritis of the right hip. After surgery, she had not reported any problems about her right hip arthroplasty. Suddenly; she had restriction on full weight-bearing in her contralateral left side for seven months. She was prescribed painkillers by her general practitioner and started using a walking stick. Her relatives said that there was no specific trauma that could explain sudden onset of restriction on full weight-bearing in her contralateral left side. They criticized the general practitioner for not investigating her left side pain meticulously. We had no X-ray records of the patient during her application to general practitioner seven months ago.
While she was walking for seven months after restriction of full weight-bearing of left hip, she had a fall after stumbling on the carpet, and was admitted to the outpatient department of orthopaedics for evaluation of severe right hip pain. The antero-posterior radiograph of the pelvis revealed Vancouver type-C periprosthetic fracture of the right femur and a neglected femoral neck fracture in her left hip . According to the information gathered from her and her relatives, it was a simple fall that could not explain such a catastrophic periprosthetic fracture in the absence of any predisposing factor such as contralateral full weight-bearing for months.
The patient was 78 kg, 165 cm tall with a calculated body mass of 28.65 kg/cm2. She had undergone total hip arthroplasty with expansion cementless acetabular cup and cemented femoral prosthesis previously. After surgery, she had been followed up regularly for three years once a year and there was no complication such as significant leg length discrepancy or rotational abnormalities. Later she was lost to follow-up as she had no complication during those three years. She applied to outpatient department with periprosthetic fracture of the right femur and a neglected femoral neck fracture in her left hip. Pre-operative routine procedure was done by planning revision arthroplasty of the right hip. The only comorbidity was well-controlled blood pressure. C-reactive protein level and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were in normal range. She underwent revision arthroplasty of the right hip by using the previous anterolateral incision [modified Watson-Jones]. Both acetabular and femoral components were removed. Cementless acetebular cup with constrained polyethylene liner and 40 mm proximal body, 12/160 mm distal stem of fully porous coated long femoral prosthesis was implanted during revision surgery . Five dall-miles cables were used to stabilize the femoral component. There were no post-operative complications and the patient was ambulated with partial weight-bearing on the left side and as much as she tolerated on the right side with the aid of a walker on the third day postoperatively. Hip musculature strengthening physical therapy was applied during her follow-up. Although total hip arthroplasty was offered for neglected contralateral femoral neck fracture, patient and her relatives were not keen for a second operation due to advanced age of the patient and also because she had relatively less complaints with her left hip. Weight-bearing had been increased incrementally during the follow-up of six and twelve weeks. The patient was ambulated with full weight-bearing six months after surgery. After seven months of neglected contralateral femoral neck fracture, patient was encouraged for weight-bearing on that side as much as her pain allowed her to bear. During regular follow-ups, she continued to have restricted weight-bearing in the contralateral side and was consistently reminded of the necessity for a total hip arthroplasty for that side at eachfollow-up visit.