A 32-year-old woman presented with a 1-week history of fever, abnormal behaviour and refusal to eat and talk. She was a known case of bipolar disorder and was on multiple neuropsychiatric drugs: clomazapine 10 mg daily, lithium carbonate 300 mg (morning dose) and 600 mg (nocturnal dose), lorazepam 1 mg bd and 1.5 mg nocturnal dose prn and benzhexol 4 mg tds. On examination, she was conscious, flushed and able to open eyes spontaneously. Her pupils were equally reactive. There was no neck stiffness. Motor examination showed increased tone and brisk reflexes, more on the left side while the power was reduced to 3/5 in the upper limbs. She also had tremors on the right side. Plantar reflexes presented bilaterally.
Laboratory investigation showed leucocytosis with predominant neutrophilia and normal platelet and hemoglobin counts. Liver function test showed mild elevation of the alanine transaminase and alkaline phosphatase. Renal profile showed raised sodium level (161 mmol/l). Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) was markedly raised (537 U/l). Lumbar puncture was done and the opening pressure was raised (35 cm H2O). Cerebrospinal fluid examination did not show any presence of white cells. Ziehl-Nielsen stain, Gram stain and Indian ink stain were all negative. The levels of glucose and proteins were within normal limits. Hemophilus influenza B, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Neisseria meningitides or Streptococcus group B antigens were not detected in the cerebrospinal fluid.
CT scan of the brain showed a slightly swollen and hypodense splenium of the corpus callosum. Subsequent brain MRI showed swollen splenium of corpus callosum and appeared hypointense on T1-weighted image, hyperintense on T2-weighted image and FLAIR. Restriction in diffusion was observed in the DWI with decreased ADC values . No enhancement was noted on post-following gadolinium.
Her CPK level showed an up-going trend from the time of admission. It reached the maximum level of 1213 U/l on the 4th day of admission and correspondingly, she was noted to be more aggressive verbally. She was empirically treated for possible CNS infection with intravenous ceftriaxone 1 g twice daily and C-Penicillin 2 megaunit 6-hourly. She was also put on a rehydration regime in view of the rising CPK levels and hypernatremia.
Her temperature returned to normal and both CPK and sodium levels came down to 417 U/l and 156 mmol/l, respectively. Upon discharge, there was only minimal cog-wheel rigidity. She was otherwise well and able to talk and eat as usual. A follow-up MRI done 8 weeks after discharge showed complete resolution of the splenial lesion . In view of the clinical history and presentation as well as the laboratory findings, a clinical diagnosis of neuroleptic malignant syndrome was made.