A 63-year-old woman admitted in our clinic with complaints of intensive headaches in right frontal region and right orbit lasting for 1 month before. There was no history of vomiting, nausea, convulsions or unconsciousness, head trauma or early episodes of headaches. Physical and neurological examination was unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a right chronic subdural hematoma with a slight midline brain shift and a tumor mass with a “dura-tail” and “popcorn signs” and hemosiderin deposits in the right frontal region . Considering the cavernoma resection of this lesion was planned.
The patient underwent a right-side craniotomy using MRI-guided navigational assistance and neurophysiological monitoring. It was noted intraoperatively that the subdural hematoma had different stages of hemorrhages but predominantly chronic. There was no evidence of bone invasion or adjacent brain. The lesion was incapsulated and attached to the dura mater, capsule of mass had many veins. The tumor was dissected and removed away from the brain without bleeding. The resected mass had a brown-colored appearance with different size vessels in the cross section. A tight closure of the dura mater was performed using adjoining pericranium. Postoperatively the patient marked no neurological deficits.
Histological examination revealed the following: macroscopically the removed tumor of round-oval shape, with dimensions up to 2.5 × 1.3 × 1 cm, brown color. Large multi-caliber vessels are defined on the section. Microscopically: among the focuses of the hemorrhages and fragments of the coarse-fibrous connective tissue are available the clusters of fulfilling different-sized vessels with unevenly dilated lumens, thickened and some places sclerotized walls, in some vessels there are erythrocyte-fibrin clots. Between the conglomerates of the vessels are determined the focuses of the tumor growth, consisting of meningotheliocyte-like cells, forming aggregations, the nuclei of the cells are light, moderately polymorphic, diffuse-focal interstitial lymphoid infiltration is defined, deposition of hemosiderin grains . In the immunohistochemical study, fragments of formation regarded as meningiomas are positively stained with antibodies to epithelial membrane antigen . A component regarded as CM was stained with antibodies to smooth-muscle actin – positive coloration on the walls of the blood vessels . According to the morphological structure and immunomorphological characteristics, as well as on the basis of clinical data, removed tumor is regarded as the combination of meningioma (meningotheliomatous variant of the structure, Grade I) and vascular cavernous malformation.
Postoperative course was uneventful, the patient felt well and her headaches resolved. She was discharged from hospital on the fifth day after the surgery. Follow-up course continued for more than 1 year and there was no recurrence of the preoperative symptoms. MRI examination showed no residual or recurrent tumor mass in the original tumor area .