A 3-year-old boy presented with developmental delay and feeding difficulties after birth, with no risk factors that occurred in the developing fetal or infant brain. His family history was not notable. His mother's history of pregnancy was normal. Delivery was at 38 weeks gestation. His birth weight was 3.25 kg, height 50 cm. He did not achieve the normal milestones for his age. Until now, his height is 89.7 cm (<3rd percentile), weight 10.5 kg, and head circumference 43.7 cm (<3rd percentile). He could sit and crawl for a while, but could not stand or walk. He had no response to sounds or simple verbal commands and could not even say simple words. The boy presented with developmental delay, small stature, open mouth with drooling, underdevelopment of tooth, hypotonia, paresthesia, and behavioral disorders in the form of hyperactivity, aggression, and mild facial features. There was no anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, and urogenital abnormalities. The development quotient (DQ) was <20 and adaptive behaviors were extremely impaired. The ECG was normal and the MRI of the brain revealed unremarkable. The patient's hearing was normal and the ophthalmological findings showed no abnormalities. Complete blood count (CBC), mean corpuscular volume (MCV), mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH), and hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) were normal. Hemoglobin electrophoresis showed alkali-resistant HB determination 0.4%, HbA2 2.4%, and HbA 97.2%, and Hb-H inclusion bodies were not detected. The metabolic screening by mass tandem spectrometry and gas chromatography was negative. Laboratory tests, including thyroid function tests, toxoplasmosis, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, and HIV (TORCH) screen, blood ammonia, and lactate, all revealed no abnormal results. After 6 months of rehabilitation therapy and physical therapy combined with speech and cognitive training, there was no significant improvement in neurological function. Because of delayed motor skill milestones and severe intellectual disability, genetic screening in the proband's family for inherited diseases was recommended.