On 15 February 2020, a 64-year-old asymptomatic woman on board a cruise ship was tested for SARS-CoV-2 using RT-PCR undertaken with a throat swab sample. Her husband was diagnosed with laboratory-confirmed COVID-19 and transferred to an isolation ward at a health-care facility. Although she remained asymptomatic without fever on 20 February 2020, she was diagnosed with SARS-CoV-2 infection and was transferred to our hospital for quarantine.
The patient had been in her usual health without fever after her husband developed fever approximately 10 days before her current admission. Her medical history included hypertension. Her regular medications were amlodipine, candesartan, hydrochlorothiazide, and atenolol. On initial examination, her blood pressure, pulse rate, and body temperature were 108/57 mmHg, 57 b.p.m., and 36.6°C, respectively. While she was breathing ambient air, her respiratory rate and oxygen saturation were 18 breaths/min and 98%, respectively. Physical examination revealed the absence of cough and vesicular sound without crackles. Based on the patient’s laboratory test results, her white blood cell count and C-reactive protein level were 7,300 cells/μL and 0.41 mg/dL, respectively . Chest X-ray showed no abnormal findings. Chest CT revealed patchy ground-glass opacities in the peripheral areas under the pleura on the right lower lobe .
The patient was quarantined in a single room with a bathroom. She was not allowed to move outside the room. She did not develop fever during her hospitalized isolation . Follow-up with chest X-ray and chest CT was not carried out. Ten days after the first day of acquiring a positive RT-PCR test result, RT-PCR was undertaken on nasal swabs every few days following the instructions of the quarantine station.
The first day of continuous negative RT-PCT test results was 9 March 2020. All the following criteria had to be met so that an asymptomatic patient infected with SARS-CoV-2 can be discharged from a hospital: (i) hospital isolation longer than 12.5 days, (ii) normal temperature lasting longer than 3 days, (iii) absence of respiratory symptoms, (iv) two consecutively negative RT-PCR test results separated by at least 12 h. As the patient met the criteria for the discontinuation of quarantine in Japan on 10 March, she was discharged from our hospital on 11 March.