A 23-year-old postpartum woman with septic shock was transferred to the intensive care unit of the University Medical Center, from a regional rural hospital. During pregnancy, she was diagnosed with severe iron deficiency anemia (hemoglobin concentration 8.6 g/dl), gestational hypertension, meconium-stained amniotic fluid, and prolonged rupture of the membranes. There was no evidence of infection during the period of pregnancy and no Streptococcus spp. was detected in the vaginal smear. The course of pregnancy was complicated by chorioamnionitis, and urgent cesarean section was performed several days before transfer to our department. There was no evidence of shock/end-organ dysfunction during labor. About 24 hours following cesarean section, the patient developed clinical manifestations of purulent postpartum endometritis with fever of 39°C, chills, purulent uterine discharge, and fundal tenderness. An arterial line was placed following the diagnosis of endometritis. The sample for blood culture was obtained before initiation of empiric antibacterial therapy (vancomycin and gentamicin). Several hours later, she developed sepsis that abruptly progressed to septic shock (arterial pressure decreased to 60/40 mmHg) and organ failure with a sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score of 16–20 (10–12 points on the Glasgow Coma Scale, acute respiratory distress syndrome [ARDS] with PaO2/FiO2 180 mmHg, norepinephrine > 0.3 μg/kg/min [weight 60 kg], bilirubin 23 mmol/L, platelets 35 × 103/μl, and urine output 300 ml/day). Laboratory tests showed multiple abnormalities including hemoglobin concentration of 7.7 g/dl, white blood cells 25×109/L, prothrombin time 21 s, fibrinogen concentration 89 mg/dl, antithrombin III 53%, D-Dimer 2.4 µg/ml (normal range < 0.5), C-reactive protein 309.5 mg/L, procalcitonin 45 ng/ml, lactate 7.5 mmol/L, and brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) 4,000 ng/ml . Protein C and protein S tests were not available due to technical limitations. A bolus of normal saline (30 ml/kg) was administered and immediate norepinephrine infusion (0.3 μg/kg/min) was initiated. Due to the patient’s unstable condition, she was intubated and respiratory support in assist-control mode was initiated. Within a short span of time, the dose of norepinephrine was increased to 3.0 μg/kg/min to maintain the mean arterial pressure in the range of 60–65 mmHg. Two hours after the onset of shock, the color of her fingers and toes as well as abdominal wall appeared mottled. Several hours later, the echocardiogram demonstrated left ventricular systolic dysfunction with an ejection fraction of 32%, and dobutamine infusion (20 μg/kg/min) was initiated to improve cardiac contractility. Attempts to reduce the doses of catecholamines were unsuccessful due to inadequate hemodynamic response to fluid therapy. After initial stabilization of the puerperal condition, hysterectomy was performed. Two days later, the patient was transferred to our hospital by sanitary aviation.
Physical examination on admission to our department revealed massive aseptic necrosis of all fingers (I–V), toes (I–V), metatarsal region, and anterior abdominal wall ( and ). The patient also had had sepsis/septic shock-induced multiple system failure including ARDS, encephalopathy, systolic heart failure, and acute kidney injury. Invasive blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg, heart rate was 150/min, arterial oxygen saturation was 85–92%, and body temperature was 38.4°C. The patient was sedated with dexmedetomidine (0.4 μg/kg/h) and mechanically ventilated (assist/control ventilation with positive end expiratory pressure of 14 cmH2O and FiO2 0.7). Auscultation revealed crackles over the right middle and lower zones of the lungs. Hemodynamic support required intravenous norepinephrine 2 μg/kg/min and dobutamine 20 μg/kg/min.
Investigations revealed the following abnormalities: Hb 9 g/dl, WBC 22 × 109/L, C-reactive protein 200.5 mg/L, lactate 4 mmol/L, procalcitonin 32 ng/ml, сreatine-kinase MB 15.1 IU/L, BNP 5,000 ng/ml, platelets 90 × 109/L, fibrinogen 114 mg/dl, activated partial thromboplastin time 128 s, –international normalized ratio 1.27, prothrombin time 16.9 s . Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated reduced (but improved compared to the previous values) ejection fraction of 38%. Chest radiography showed bilateral infiltrations (mild acute respiratory distress syndrome with PaO2/FiO2 250 mmHg). Blood culture showed multiple drug-resistant Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Acinetobacter baumannii (all sensitive to meropenem). No microbial pathogens were identified in the necrotic tissues. Patient management plan included antibacterial therapy, goal-directed fluid therapy, nutritional support, protective mechanical ventilation, hydrocortisone, fresh frozen plasma, and high dose of ascorbic acid and thiamine. The skin wounds were managed with dressing and moist healing products. Three weeks after admission to our intensive care unit the patient was weaned off mechanical ventilation as well as from vasopressor therapy. There were no neurological consequences and all end-organ functions returned to normal (although the SOFA score-predicted hospital mortality was more than 90%); however, the necrotic area was quite large. The duration of vasopressor support totaled 8 days. After stabilization of the general condition, the necrotic masses were debrided and autodermoplasty was performed signed informed consent for publication was obtained.