A 66-year-old man who underwent regular hemodialysis (4 h a day, 3 times a week) for 9 months for end-stage renal disease secondary to IgA nephropathy was hospitalized for living kidney transplantation. He underwent ABO-compatible living kidney transplantation. The kidney donor was his wife; the allograft had three renal arteries that were trimmed and formed into one on the back table, and subsequently, it was anastomosed to the internal iliac artery. Intraoperative Doppler US revealed that the blood flow of each renal artery was adequate, resulting in sufficient blood flow throughout the allograft. Urine output was also observed as soon as blood flow returned. Allograft biopsy an hour after allograft blood flow returned was performed at the lower pole of the allograft, and we confirmed no bleeding from the operative field, including the biopsy site. His introduced immunosuppression regimen included cyclosporin, mycophenolate mofetil, prednisone, and basiliximab. Although urine output was observed postoperatively, serum creatinine level did not decrease. Doppler US showed no evidence of acute rejection, ureteral obstruction, or anastomotic stenosis of renal arteries on postoperative day (POD) 2. Although rejection was considered and steroid pulse therapy was initiated, the allograft function did not improve. On the contrary, urine output decreased, and serum creatinine level increased to 6.0 mg/dL. On POD 6, Doppler US did not show evidence of rejection and anastomotic stenosis, but a region with less blood flow was observed at the upper pole of the allograft, as well as a slight decrease in diastolic flow. During this period, his blood pressure was 145/80 mmHg, and progression of anemia was not observed. On POD 7, surgical exploration was performed and revealed that the blood flow of each renal artery was sufficient, but subcapsular hematoma was detected at the upper pole of the allograft . Capsulotomy was performed, and hematoma with clots was evacuated. Ruptured cyst was observed in the middle of the hematoma, and slight oozing around the cyst was observed . Allograft decompression improved the blood flow at the upper pole of the allograft, and diastolic flow was also improved . Retrospectively, preoperative enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the donor showed a small renal cyst at the upper pole of the allograft , and postoperative unenhanced CT of the recipient showed that the cyst was unclear . At the same time, allograft biopsy was performed, which did not show evidence of rejection and calcineurin inhibitor toxicity, but acute tubular injury was induced by allograft ischemia. After capsulotomy followed by evacuation, urine output increased, and serum creatinine level decreased to 1.7 mg/dL .