A 24-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with mildly impaired consciousness and myoclonus in the extremities. She had been diagnosed with MELAS at 21 years of age. Genetic testing revealed a 3271 T>C transition in the MT-TL1 gene, clinically confirming the diagnosis of MELAS.
After admission to hospital, neurological examination showed myoclonic movement in the extremities, mandible, and trunk. Muscle weakness was detected in the upper and lower limbs bilaterally. A laboratory examination showed increased serum pyruvic acid (2.1 mg/dL) and lactate (75 mg/dL). Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed bilateral high-intensity lesions in the temporal and parietal lobes of the cortical and subcortical areas in T2 weighted imaging . Antiepileptic drugs levetiracetam, perampanel, lacosamide, and clobazam were initiated. L-arginine, coenzyme Q10, and L-carnitine aimed at supporting mitochondrial energy production were given simultaneously.
As the impaired consciousness and myoclonus persisted for 2 weeks, we undertook brain magnetic resonance imaging again, which revealed high-intensity lesions in the right cortical temporal lobe, and arterial spin labeling showed increased blood flow in the bilateral frontal and temporal cortex. Electroencephalography revealed high-amplitude slow and spiked waves. We diagnosed the patient with non-convulsive status epilepticus.
To control the seizures, propofol was given at a dose of 2.7 mg/kg/h for 12 h and then increased to 5.4 mg/kg/h, with midazolam added at a dose of 2 mg/h. On day 5, the urine appeared brown and arterial blood gas revealed metabolic acidosis (pH 7.261, pCO2 33.0 mmHg, 14.4 mmol/L, and lactate 99 mg/dL). Creatinine kinase was elevated at 20,999 U/L. The patient was diagnosed with PRIS. She was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) on day 19 of hospitalization.
On admission to the ICU, the vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 39°C; blood pressure, 150/80 mmHg; heart rate, 150 b.p.m.; respiratory rate, 30 breaths/min; and SpO2, 99% (FiO2 40%). Laboratory findings showed metabolic acidosis (lactic acid, 99 mg/dL; pyruvic acid, 0.92 mg/dL), creatinine kinase 29,560 U/L, and myoglobin 9,845 ng/mL. We treated her with interruption of propofol and continuous hemodiafiltration for metabolic acidosis. We continued coenzyme Q10, L-carnitine, and L-arginine for mitochondrial support for MELAS and antiepileptic drugs including levetiracetam, perampanel, lacosamide, and clobazam. After concurrent treatment of PRIS and MELAS, metabolic acidosis and creatinine kinase gradually decreased after reaching 59,000 IU/L on day 2 of ICU admission. Continuous hemodiafiltration was discontinued on day 11. Tracheostomy was carried out because i.v. midazolam treatment was prolonged to control the status epilepticus. Mechanical ventilation was discontinued on day 25 . After rehabilitation, the patient was discharged on foot.