A 47-year-old man was referred to our centre for mechanical circulatory support for severe CS with multiorgan failure of unknown cause.
On the previous day, the extirpation of a benign thyroglossal duct cyst was performed. During the operation, recurrent hypertensive episodes occurred. After extubation, the patient developed serious hypotension and pulmonary oedema. A transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed severely impaired left ventricular (LV) systolic function. A coronary angiogram showed no evidence of relevant coronary artery disease. A toxicological screening was negative. Medical history revealed only chronic polyarthritis and arterial hypertension.
At admission to our centre, the patient was invasively ventilated due to severe respiratory insufficiency (PaO2/FiO2 30 mmHg) and required massive doses of norepinephrine (2.5 µg/kg/min). Clinical observation showed a blood pressure of 75/49 mmHg, silent heart sounds without murmurs, arterial oxygen saturation of 86%, bilateral rales, and basal dullness at percussion. The patient’s heart rate was elevated at 180 b.p.m. due to sinus tachycardia. Due to pulseless electrical activity, resuscitation for approximately 5 min was necessary (1 mg epinephrine). A bedside TTE showed akinesia of all basal and middle segments of the left ventricle with preserved kinetics of the apex (left ventricular ejection fraction, LVEF 15%, , , Video S1). Right ventricular (RV) function was preserved (TAPSE 17 mm). Decompensated myocardiopathy, similar to unknown dilatative cardiomyopathy, or florid myocarditis could be differential diagnoses; however, because of the typical LV kinetics, a reverse TTC was suspected. A percutaneous LV assist device (pLVAD), supplying circulatory support up to 3.5 L/min due to a micro-axial pump, was immediately implanted to unload the left ventricle, promote LV output, and reduce catecholamine levels. A LV endomyocardial biopsy revealed a moderate chronically active myocarditis with diffuse interstitial remodelling secondary to chronic polyarthritis. DNA testing, via the polymerase chain reaction, showed no evidence of acute or persistent myocardial infection.
Shortly after pLVAD implantation, RV function deteriorated (, , Video S2). Furthermore, severe respiratory insufficiency persisted despite protective lung ventilation and antibiotic treatment . Therefore, femoral veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (va-ECMO) was initiated, which unloaded the right ventricle and improved oxygenation as well as decarboxylation. To stabilize the patient, continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration and transfusion therapy were required.
A computed tomography scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was performed 24 h later, which demonstrated an extensive dorsal consolidation of the lungs due to pulmonary oedema or secondary acute respiratory distress syndrome. Furthermore, a lesion of the adrenal gland (6.7 cm diameter) suspicious of a pheochromocytoma was detected .
After 7 days, biventricular function (LVEF 40%, TAPSE 19 mm) and respiratory status (PaO2/FiO2 150 mmHg) improved, thus both assist devices were explanted. On the 6th day after admission, the patient no longer required norepinephrine. Therefore, the diagnosis of a pheochromocytoma was confirmed by significantly increased plasma concentrations of metanephrine/normetanephrine the following day. Non-specific α-adrenergic receptor inhibition with phenoxybenzamine (10 mg 1-1-1) was initiated, which markedly reduced the recurrence of hypertensive crises. Recurrent episodes of elevated blood pressure had been observed since admission with increasing frequency and severity until hemodynamic stabilization.
In the following days, weaning from the respirator and renal replacement therapy were successful. Metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy showed no evidence of metastases of the pheochromocytoma or coincident paragangliomas. After signed informed consent was obtained, a laparoscopic excision was performed in the presence of intensive α-adrenergic receptor inhibition. Histological and immunohistochemical staining confirmed a well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumour of the adrenal gland without any evidence of malignancy .
After 49 days, the patient was discharged into follow-up care with normalized biventricular function (LVEF 55%, TAPSE 25 mm, E/E ′ <8, , Video S3) and no neurological or cognitive deficit. Furthermore, TTE control confirmed a normal cardiac function three months after discharge.