A 17-day-old African-American girl was admitted for management of failure to thrive and general malaise. The initial workup was guided, in part, by an abnormal newborn hemoglobin electrophoresis screen consistent with SCD. Repeat electrophoresis confirmed a diagnosis of S-βthal. In addition to the patient’s hematologic workup, the patient was found to have a severely low fecal elastase level (<50μg elastase/g stool) consistent with pancreatic insufficiency. Subsequent sweat testing was performed and was positive on two occasions (73 and 72mmol/L with first test; 88 and 103mmol/L with second test) confirming a diagnosis of CF. CF genotyping results were positive for one intronic mutation for C.53+2 T>C; a second mutation was not identified.
This patient, who is now 4 years of age, has required 15 hospitalizations (most during the first 2 years of life) to manage complications of both CF and S-βthal. In general, the majority of hospitalizations were for presumed CF pulmonary exacerbations or weight loss. At 2 years of age, the patient began to develop vaso-occlusive events (VOE) including multiple bouts of pain crises and hepatic sequestration contributing to prolonged hospital stays for CF pulmonary exacerbations. Pain crises involving the chest, back, and abdomen limited both airway clearance and nutritional support with enteral feedings. Furthermore, the patient faced acute respiratory decline during VOE with hypoxia, fever, wheezing, and a new pulmonary infiltrate on chest radiograph consistent with ACS. The underlying etiology of ACS development was unclear although it was attributed to complications of CF, S-βthal, or both. Along with computed tomography imaging of the chest (mild bronchiectasis with bibasilar opacities consistent with atelectasis) and flexible bronchoscopy (normal airway anatomy with diffuse, viscous white secretions with 2,704 cells/mm3 and 51% neutrophils), IPFT measures were obtained to better define respiratory physiology and guide a treatment plan.
Infant lung function testing was performed using the RVRTC technique which elevates the lung volume of infants to near total lung capacity prior to performing a rapid thoracic compression maneuver. These forced expiratory flows from raised lung volumes were obtained after sedation with chloral hydrate according to American Thoracic Society/European Respiratory Society guidelines and approximate adult-type lung function maneuvers . Post-bronchodilator results were not obtained due to lack of sedative effects near the end of testing. IPFT data demonstrate moderate-to-severe lower airways obstruction, moderate air trapping, and no evidence of restrictive lung disease.
The IPFT data prompted initiation of inhaled deoxyribonuclease (DNase) in an effort to reduce any distal neutrophilic mucus impaction contributing to air trapping. In addition, due to the combination of frequent VOE, ACS, and new evidence of lower airways obstruction, hydroxyurea was started to attempt to theoretically minimize progression of SCLD . Although hydroxyurea is predominantly utilized in patients with more severe forms of SCD, clinical response has been shown in patients with S-βthal. Chronic transfusion therapy was considered but is not optimal given the risks of iron overload, autoantibody and alloantibody formation, and human leukocyte antigen sensitization that could complicate future stem cell and/or lung transplantation. Hospitalization frequency has subsequently improved with a reduction from 3.5 admissions/year to 0.5 admission/year following IPFT and therapeutic interventions. Spirometry data obtained at 4 years of age is included for comparison in Figure B. Although expiratory time is short, flow-volume loops reflect evidence of effort-independent flow limitation and suggest continued moderate lower airways obstruction with significant response to bronchodilator. Inhaled budesonide was initiated following spirometry secondary to the findings of bronchodilator responsiveness.