A 72-year-old male presented due to left upper quadrant abdominal pain that radiated to the flank and constipation one day following a colonoscopy. He reported that he had not had a bowel movement or passed gas since the procedure. The indication for colonoscopy was chronic constipation. Following instructions from his surgeon, the patient had stopped taking clopidogrel and aspirin, both taken for moderate coronary artery disease, several days prior to the colonoscopy. During the procedure, the patient had two polyps removed along the transverse colon near the splenic flexure. Intraoperatively and postoperatively, there were no complications noted
Upon arrival to the emergency department, his vital signs were as follows: heart rate 66 beats per minute; blood pressure 113/59 millimeters of mercury; respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute; and temperature 98.7 degrees Fahrenheit. Upon examination, the patient appeared in no acute distress due to pain, and his skin and conjunctiva were without pallor. Abdominal examination revealed hypoactive bowel sounds, and there was tenderness to palpation in the left upper quadrant. No rebound, rigidity or guarding were seen on physical exam. No ecchymosis was noted in the left upper quadrant or the left flank.
A point-of-care ultrasound of the spleen demonstrated mixed hypoechoic densities within the splenic capsule . Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast showed a perisplenic hematoma with small amounts of blood products extending into the intraperitoneal space . There were also heterogeneously hyperdense blood products surrounding greater than 50% of the circumference of the spleen, consistent with a grade II/III splenic injury. Initial complete blood counts demonstrated hemoglobin 16.1 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range 13.1 – 17.1 g/dL), hematocrit 47.3% (42–52%), and a white blood cell count 12,600 cells per microliter (cells/μL) (4,800 – 10,800 cells/μL). After consultation with general surgery, he was admitted for serial labs and abdominal examinations. He was discharged from the hospital three days later without requiring further intervention.