A 50 years-old previously healthy white man, with no migraine history, presented multiple episodes of monocular transient visual loss (TVL). TVL attacks were described as sudden and painless complete visual loss, lasting about one minute, followed by a full recovery without any prodromal signs or other visual or systemic symptoms. He described several non-simultaneous attacks in both eyes (OU), 16 in the right eye (OD) and 2 in the left eye on the same day. Fifteen days before, the patient received the second dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine, without any side effects, only a mild arm sore at the injection site. There is no previous history of COVID-19 infection, systemic arterial hypertension, or any other previous medical condition. In addition, the patient denied the use of any medication. He was referred to the emergence department, and the stroke fast track investigation protocol was proceeded. Neurological examination was unremarkable. Magnetic resonance angiography of the brain, echocardiogram, and doppler ultrasound imaging of the carotid and vertebral arteries were non-revealing. Complete blood count, Westergren erythrocyte sedimentation rate, D-dimer level, Antithrombin III, fibrinogen and protein C and S tests; serum electrophoresis, C3 and C4, anti-dsDNA, anti-Ro, anti-Sm, circulating immune complexes, indirect immunofluorescence for anti-nuclear antibodies on HEP-2 cells, anticardiolipine-lgM and IgG tests were normal. Serological tests for infectious diseases such as HIV, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, Bartonella henselae, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex were negative. The C-reactive protein test was slightly elevated (8,3 mg/dl, reference value up to 6,0 mg/dl). The next day, the patient was referred for ophthalmic evaluation. The best-corrected visual acuity was 20/20 in OU. External eye examination, ocular motility, and anterior segment were normal. The pupils were equal in size, with no afferent pupillary defect. On the fundus exam, no emboli or other `abnormalities were found.
Optical coherence tomography (OCT) and OCT angiography (OCTA) scanning of both optic disc and macular area were within normal limits. Automated visual field testing was also normal. However, the patient reported another episode of sudden visual loss in OD while in the waiting room. Fundus photography during the attack, revealed diffuse vascular narrowing for both arterial and venous branches, notably in the emergence of the optic disc. In addition, the circumpapillary OCTA vessel density map was reduced. Figure shows both fundus and OCTA images before and during the attack. So, the retinal vasospasm diagnosis was made. Oral verapamil hydrochloride 60 mg twice daily was initiated, and the attacks of TVL disappeared after two days.