A 55-year old female presented with altered mental status, lethargy, incontinence, and an unsteady gait. Past medical history was significant for Hashimoto's thyroiditis, lung carcinoma treated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy followed by lobectomy, and rheumatoid arthritis. Vital signs revealed a blood pressure of 116/76 mmHg, heart rate 45 bpm, respiratory rate of 10/min, temperature of 35.3°C, and SaO2 98%. She was alert and oriented to person but slow to respond and would not follow commands. Neurologic examination demonstrated a right facial droop, aphasia, right-sided neglect, and a right-sided pronator drift. Laboratory findings were significant for an elevated TSH (151 mcunit/mL) and a decreased free T4 (0.6 ng/dL). Brain computed tomography (CT) revealed a 4.0 × 3.1 × 3.3 cm AP/TR/CC left frontal temporal mass, with significant surrounding vasogenic edema, associated with mass effect/near-complete effacement of the left lateral ventricle and rightward midline shift of approximately 1 cm . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a meningioma in the left frontotemporal convexity with surrounding edema, a 1.3 cm midline shift to the right, and a compression of the lateral ventricle with transependymal resorption of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). A left uncal herniation was noted.
Shortly thereafter, the patient became obtunded with worsening bradycardia (HR 40), bradypnea, and became comatose. A multidisciplinary team involving anesthesia, intensive care, endocrinology, and neurosurgery was called to evaluate the patient. The decision was made for aggressive treatment of the severe hypothyroidism with administration of intravenous T3 and T4 while using osmodiuretics and steroids as temporizing agents. Shortly thereafter, the patient returned to her baseline mental status. Neurosurgery was on standby with close neurological observation and preparedness for surgical intervention should deterioration have occurred while conservative medical management was continued. After medical optimization and resolution of altered mental status, the patient underwent frontotemporal craniotomy and tumor resection. Endotracheal intubation was uneventful, and general anesthesia was maintained with a balanced concentration of intravenous remifentanil and propofol with sevoflourane titrated to <0.5 MAC. The tumor was isolated in the Sylvian fissure, and given the location along the dominant frontal lobe and temporal lobe, decision was made to perform a subcapsular resection. Using a microsurgical technique, the tumor was aggressively resected and the integrity of all the pial surfaces and the arachnoid/capsule was maintained. The surgical procedure and general anesthesia were well tolerated and no complications were noted. The patient was awakened uneventfully after extubation in the surgical intensive care unit 4 hours postoperatively.