An 8-year-old boy with known history of autism, presented to the emergency department with a 3-month history of intermittent fever, malaise and myalgia and headache along with significant weight loss. Other than autism, no past medical history existed. His drug history included Imipramine and Haloperidol. Except for fever [38 degrees centigrade], pale conjunctivae and palpable soft bulging in forehead, physical examination was unremarkable. Laboratory examination revealed ESR: 125 mm/hr, CRP: 90 mg/L, Hb: 7.1 g/dL, LDH: 1789U/L, ferritin: 2570 µg/L and TSH: 7.77mIU/L. On Abdomino-Pelvic ultrasound, a well-defined, 45*30*24 mm, solid-cystic mass was observed, replacing the normal left adrenal gland, with multiple pathologic lymph nodes in the para-aortic chain. Thoraco-Abdomino-Pelvic CT scan , revealed the heterogeneous enhancing left adrenal mass with central necrosis and multiple pathologic left para-aortic lymphadenopathies. The heterogeneous bone marrow density of the vertebral bodies, lytic lesions in the right scapula and 4th right rib suggested bony metastases. On brain MRI, multiple multi-loculated cystic, lentiform masses were observed on the external surface of cerebral hemispheric dura. Multiple fluid–fluid levels were noted in the locules in some of which, the dependent fluid was hyperintense on T1w and FLAIR and hypointense on T2w sequences, compatible with blood, representing blood-fluid level. The wall and septa of the masses, enhanced after contrast administration. Associated abnormal marrow signal and aggressive type periosteal reaction were identified in the overlying bone . MIBG scan showed increased uptake, compatible with the calvarial/epidural lesions, all vertebrae, bilateral humeri, ribs and pelvic bones, femurs and tibiae and in the left adrenal mass . Bone marrow biopsy revealed small round cells, diagnostic for neuroblastoma. The patient underwent chemotherapy treatment. All calvarial/epidural metastatic lesions resolved after chemotherapy and the residual adrenal tumor was resected. The biopsy specimen of the resected adrenal mass also confirmed the diagnosis of neuroblastoma . Further chemotherapy was done, and no primary or metastatic recurrence was observed in the first year of post treatment follow-up.