This is a case of a 57-year-old diabetic male patient on insulin, presented with a chest midline swelling that has been very small and stable in size for the last 25 years. It started to grow from 1 mm to 7 cm in diameter in the last 10 months. Upon examination: around 6*7 cm swelling at mid sternum, reaching sternum bone, not fixed but tethered with overlying . Very red with a few satellite lesion next to the base, it is partially mobile, not painful with no fluctuation and signs of infection. CT thorax with contrast showed a 45-mm solid lesion of the skin of the anterior thoracic wall impressive of malignant neoplasm.
The chest punch biopsy (4 mm) showed: A – Spindle cell proliferation with a few scattered mast cells in the background. B – Morphological features suggest a neural origin; however, immunophenotyping is not specific (only weak CD34 expression and possible factor XIIIa staining focally). C – No overt features of malignancy were seen. Histopathologist commented that this is a spindle cell proliferation with variable cellularity but without any overt features of malignancy. However, immunophenotype (despite a wide panel) has been noncontributory in subtyping this. Therefore, the slides are sent to Mayo Clinic for a second opinion and a final report.
Mayo Clinic laboratories reported that immunohistochemical stains showed weak staining for CD34 and negative staining for ERG, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, S100, SOX10, STAT6, Glut-1, CDK4, CD117, ALK, HHV8, and CD68. Molecular studies showed abnormal results indicating rearrangement involving the PDGB gene region. ALK stain shows high background. These findings are consistent with DFSP. No evidence of fibrous sarcoma is identified in the biopsy. FISH study for PDGFB (22q13) was positive. Thus, a diagnosis of DFSP was confirmed.
The patient underwent an operation of wide and deep excision to the level of pectoralis major muscle facia and periosteum of the sternum . Coverage was done with full-thickness skin graft from the left groin . The excised sample pathology report showed completely excised DFSP lesion with morphological features that are more obviously atypical with cellular storiform component. In addition, more diffuse and strong CD34 expression in some blocks/areas were observed. These features are in keeping with a diagnosis of DFSP on the excised sample as well. The follow-up clinic visits showed a well-taken skin graft with a clean, dry wound and no signs of infection or hematoma collection .