A 33-year-old female patient reported to the oral medicine and radiology clinic complaining of a swelling on the left side of her face since 8 months. Swelling had started insidiously and steadily increased to the presenting size. Patient reported slight difficulty in eating because of reduced intraoral space and an obvious concern with facial disfigurement. There was no contributory dental or medical history.
Extraorally, gross facial asymmetry could be seen as a diffused swelling in the mid facial region on the left half, approximately 2 cm × 3 cm in overall dimensions. Antero-posteriorly, the swelling extended from the ala of the nose to the malar prominence and superio-inferiorly from the infraorbital ridge to the upper lip region, without crossing the midline. Swelling did not interfere with the eye movements. Skin over the swelling appeared normal. Palpation revealed bony hard consistency of the swelling. No regional lymph nodes were involved.
On intraoral examination, a well-defined, bicortical swelling was noted in left maxillary region, measuring about 3 cm × 4 cm and extending from 22 to 26. Buccally, the inferior border was located at the marginal gingiva and the superior border extended deep into the vestibule. Buccal vestibule was completely obliterated. Palatally, the inferior border was located at the marginal gingiva with the superior border extended along the palatal contour lying approximately 2 cm short of the mid palatine raphae, not crossing the midline. Slight buccal displacement of involved teeth was noticed. Overlying mucosa appeared normal. On palpation, the swelling was hard in consistency, and associated teeth showed grade I mobility.
Based on the history and clinical features, a provisional diagnosis of adenomatoid odontogenic tumor was made. For differential diagnosis, COC, dentigerous cyst, ameloblastoma, and central giant cell granuloma (CGCG) were considered.
Orthopantomograph revealed a well-defined, multilocular, mixed radiolucency, roughly 6 cm × 5 cm in size, extending from 21 to 26 . Inferiorly it was lined by a sclerotic margin and superiorly extended into the left maxillary antrum. Multiple ill-defined radiopacities were seen within the radiolucency with a diffused opacificaion of the left maxillary sinus.
Paranasal sinus view revealed a diffused radiopacity obliterating the left maxillary sinus. On close examination, a multilocular pattern was appreciable .
Axial sections on computed tomography (CT) revealed a heterogeneous, soft tissue expansile mass in the left maxillary cuspid region causing destruction of the inner and outer cortical plates. Perforation of the facial wall of the maxillary sinus could be noted. Multiple pebble-like radiopacities were seen dispersed within the tumor mass .
Coronal sections revealed an extension of the lesion into the left maxillary sinus through the antral floor, with a soft tissue mass completely occupying the sinosal cavity causing slight elevation of the orbital floor .
Three-dimensional reconstruction of the cranium showed a perforation of the maxilla in the region of the left canine fossa below the infra-orbital foramen .
Hematological findings were noncontributory.
A radiographic diagnosis of COC (calcifying cystic odontogenic tumor [CCOT] or Gorlin's cyst) was made. Adenomatoid odontogenic tumor, ameloblastoma, Pindborgh tumor calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor, ameloblastic fibro-odontoma, and CGCG were considered under differential diagnosis.
Patient was referred to oral surgery for enucleation of the tumor mass .
Hematoxylin and eosin stained section of the enucleated tissue showed a lesion composed of a fibrous capsule lined by a proliferation of odontogenic epithelial cells. Some of the cells had hyperchromatic nuclei. Numerous pale eosinophilic ghost cells were seen forming masses and filling the lumen. Areas of calcification were seen. Wall adjacent to the epithelium showed homogeneous eosiniphilic deposits (dysplastic dentin) .
Van Gieson's stain later confirmed the histopathological diagnosis of a solid neoplastic variant of COC, also known as DGCT .