We introduce a 20-year-old female, non-smoker, non-alcoholic with no previous medical disease history recently diagnosed with morbid obesity (weight: 100 kg, height: 168 cm, BMI: 35.43 kg/m2). The patient underwent a laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy in April 2021 by a senior surgeon in private hospital, no early complications were observed, and the patient was discharged after 72 h. During the next two months, the patients had a 40 kg weight loss, resulting in a BMI reduction to 21.26 kg/m2. After three weeks, she faced a wave of chronic progressive nausea, vomiting, debilitating weakness, burning, and tingling in her feet. The patient was hospitalized for further medical evaluations. During the first examinations, distal hyperesthesia was found in both legs . In the lab test, a raised liver function test (LFT) such as (aspartate transaminase (AST): 50 U/L, alanine transaminase (ALT): 80 U/L) was observed, which was relevant with previous proven fatty liver (grade1–2). There was no anemia in complete blood count (CBC). Other lab tests include serum electrolytes (Na, K, P, Ca, albumin, uric acid), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein, serum iron, total iron-binding capacity (TIBC), antinuclear Antibody (ANA), anti dsDNA and thyroid function tests were within normal range. Other tests, including viral markers (HCV-Ab, HBs-Ag, HAV-Ab), liver kidney microsome type 1 (anti-LKM-1) antibodies, and anti-smooth muscle antibody (ASMA), were checked to rule out hepatitis, which was normal.
Because of severe ankle pain, a normal AP/LAT radiography was performed . A cervical MRI had done for patients that showed a decreased cervical lordosis that seems not essential and not related to the patient's symptoms. Because of the hyperesthesia, an X-ray and lumbar MRI showed disc bulging in L4-L5, mild central disk protrusion at the L1-L2 level, and decreased disk space .
Finally, the key test that helped diagnose was EMG/NCV. It showed subacute axonal sensory-motor polyneuropathy. Therefore, the serum level of A, B1, and B12 vitamins, copper, zinc, and ceruloplasmin were checked. The serum level of vitamin B1 was 24 nmol/L which was lower than the normal range (70–180 nmol/L); other tests include zinc serum level (75 μg/dl), vitamin A (0.43 mg/L), ceruloplasmin serum (17.2 mg/dl) and vitamin B12 serum level (>2000 pg/ml) were normal. Based on this decreased level of vitamin B1 and EMG/NCV results, the patient's diagnosis was dry beriberi. We started treating with a high dose of parenteral thiamine (thiamine hydrochloride 200 mg/2 ml daily for ten days) before any carbohydrate because of Wernicke-Korsakoff suspicious, then 100 mg thiamine daily per os for one month .
The patient then experienced an improvement as her pain decreased, and she regained sensitivity and strength in her legs. One month after admission, she was discharged after receiving supplements (10 mg/day) and physiotherapy, showing signs of progressive recovery, and her thiamine serum level became normal (70 nmol/L). The work has been reported in line with the SCARE criteria .