A 68-year-old man with recently diagnosed Stage IVA, cT4a cN2c cM0 moderately differentiated, p16 negative oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma of the posterior pharyngeal wall presented to the Emergency Department (ED) of ECU Health Medical Center in Greenville, NC in May 2021 with throat pain and dysphagia. The patient's regional oncology clinic had concerns for airway compromise, and it was noted that the patient's radiotherapy had been delayed as the patient required dental clearance and could not lay flat without desaturation. The patient's initial physical exam revealed a visible mass raising concern for potential airway compromise. Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the neck was obtained showing a large occluding mass in the oropharynx; the radiologist's impression described an increased size of the patient's pharyngeal mass with moderate narrowing of the oropharyngeal airway. Shortly after admission, the patient became somnolent and tachycardic, and saw a drop in oxygen saturation to 86%; otolaryngology was then consulted.
On assessment by the otolaryngology service, the patient was noted as being lethargic; their mouth was open, and tongue was protruding, and the patient was using their abdominal, neck, and shoulder accessory muscles to breathe. Lung sounds were noted as diminished. It was also noted that the patient had a high-flow nasal cannula in place set to 15 L. The patient aroused to verbal engagement but was difficult to understand due to their voice being raspy. Given the patient's known airway-obstructing tumor with minimal area of airway patency, the otolaryngology service considered the patient to be a difficult airway and decided to perform an emergent tracheostomy in the operating room. No endoscopy was performed, as this assessment was considered likely to confirm suspicions that the patient's airway was minimally patent.
The patient was placed on the operating room table in the supine position. After general anesthesia was induced and the neck was sterilely prepped and draped, an incision was performed in the inferior midline of the patient's neck. Dissection was carried out to the median raphe of the strap muscles, which were subsequently dissected and retracted to expose the upper trachea. The thyroid isthmus was divided vertically via electrocautery, and a cuffed Shiley tracheostomy tube was inserted between the second and third cartilaginous rings, which was then secured via 00 Prolene sutures. The procedure was considered relatively straightforward by the otolaryngology service, as the tracheostomy site was distal to the patient's airway-obstructing tumor and was accomplished in approximately 30 min. The patient remained hemodynamically stable throughout the procedure. The patient was transported to the intensive care unit (ICU), and later a respiratory panel taken on Day 5 of his hospital admission grew P. aeruginosa and H. influenzae on culture. The patient required an urgent start of radiation due to tumor bleeding, with planned initial doses of 600 cGy delivered in two fractions to the head and neck, and 400 cGy delivered in two fractions to the supraclavicular regions. The patient's radiotherapy planning CT imaging reflected a diagnosis of epiglottitis contributing to airway obstruction . He began treatment with 3.375 g of IV piperacillin/tazobactam every 8 hours for 1 week with good response. The patient went on to complete their definitive radiotherapy for oropharyngeal cancer (at 200 cGy/fraction for 22 fractions with an additional 10 fraction boost; see Figure for dose distribution mapping) despite multiple treatment delays due to the patient's requirement for sedation, ventilation, and inpatient resource coordination, with an excellent response by the last day of radiotherapy . The patient's tracheostomy was subsequently closed with adequate tumor shrinkage. He was discharged to a skilled nursing facility (SNF) in good condition.
During radiation follow-up about 10 weeks after discharge, the patient reported increasing dysphagia and odynophagia along with chills and hoarseness. Follow-up soft tissue neck CT revealed a mucosal mass at the left piriform sinus, at the inferior margin of the previously noted oropharyngeal mass (see Figure ). Laryngoscopy revealed widespread, generalized edema of the oropharynx and larynx, with an ulcerated lesion located posterior to the hypopharyngeal wall centered just left of midline. Given that the patient had undergone both radiotherapy and chemotherapy previously with minimal long-term improvement in his symptoms and the patient's lesion appeared resectable radiographically, surgery as salvage therapy was considered the patient's last option for symptomatic relief. The patient underwent successful partial pharyngectomy with left modified neck dissection 5 months after completion of radiotherapy. The patient ultimately tolerated the procedure; resection specimen (see Figure ) showed TNM staging: pT2 pN0 pM0 moderately differentiated. The patient's pathology report noted a residual invasive moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma forming a 3.0 × 2.7 × 2.0 cm mass. The tumor did not involve the hyoid bone or thyroid cartilage. Lymphovascular invasion was not identified and perineural invasion was present (see Figure ). PD-L1 was expressed with a combined positive score of 70; p16 study was negative.
Following surgery, the patient was stable and was planned to be kept under close surveillance at a SNF. Due to transportation difficulties the patient was unable to make his follow-up appointments for reassessment. Five months later, the patient presented to outpatient otolaryngology clinic with increased throat pain and dysphagia concerning for recurrence of disease; oropharynx biopsy revealed a malignant neoplasm with infiltrating nests of atypical keratinized squamous cells. The patient was placed under palliative care measures and ultimately succumbed to his disease 2 weeks later.