An 88-year-old male with baseline dementia and known CLL diagnosed in 2016 (although he had not been receiving treatment) initially presented to an outside hospital with bilateral lower extremity edema. There, he was found to have a white blood cell count of 280,000 cells per microliter (cells/μL) (reference range: 4,400–10,400 cells/μL), an increase from 120,000 cells/μL 10 months prior. He was subsequently transferred due to concerns for transformation. At our institution, the patient denied any specific complaints. In discussion with the transferring physician, it was determined that the patient initially presented for lower extremity pain and fatigue, and was found to have negative bilateral deep venous thrombosis studies.
On physical exam, the patient was a cachectic, elderly male found to be normothermic at 36.9º Celsius, with a blood pressure of 114/68 millimeters of mercury, heart rate of 88 beats per minute, respiratory rate of 14 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 95% on room air. Otherwise, he had an unremarkable exam with the exception of symmetric 1+ lower extremity edema without evidence of cellulitis.
Upon arrival, repeat laboratories demonstrated stable hyperleukocytosis of 279,000 cells/μL, but also a potassium of 6.7 microequivalent per liter (mEq/L) (reference range: 3.4–5.2 mEq/L) without reported visible hemolysis. It should be noted the patient had a reported potassium of 4.5 mEq/L at the outside hospital earlier that day. The patient continued to deny any symptoms, and an electrocardiogram (ECG) was obtained that did not show evidence of hyperkalemia. One liter of normal saline and furosemide 20 milligrams were given intravenously with a repeat potassium elevated to 9.4 mEq/L, this time with some hemolysis. Given the rapidly escalating potassium level despite an initial trial of therapy and a normal ECG, a point-of-care potassium was drawn and returned as 3.8 mEq/L. Since this value was more consistent with the outside hospital level and there was a lack of clinical and ECG findings to suggest hyperkalemia, no further interventions were performed in the emergency department.
Over the course of his hospitalization, the patient had multiple elevated potassium levels, usually with interpreted hemolysis, although occasionally without reported hemolysis. In fact, the patient had his apparently elevated potassium treated with a hyperkalemia cocktail of calcium gluconate, insulin, dextrose, and sodium polystyrene on at least one occasion during his hospital stay. The patient never had physical manifestations of hyperkalemia nor were there ECG changes.