Eructation and hiccup.
A 69-year-old man was diagnosed with esophageal diverticulum 35 years ago but had been followed up without treatment. Five years ago, he visited a clinic with an exacerbation of his chief complaint. Although he was prescribed esomeprazole, his symptoms did not improve. Therefore, he was referred to our hospital for surgery.
Internal hemorrhoids.
BUN was elevated at 25.3 mg/dL, and HBsAg was positive. No other abnormalities in blood counts or biochemical tests were reported.
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a diverticulum in the left wall of the esophagus, which was 37–45 cm distal to the incisors. After the contents of the diverticulum were drained into the stomach by changing body position, multiple erosions and scars were observed within the diverticulum. In addition, the endoscopic examination also revealed the presence of a hiatal hernia, Barrett’s esophagus, and esophageal erosions contiguous with the squamocolumnar junction (SCJ), indicative of gastric acid reflux . A barium esophagogram and CT scan showed a large diverticulum with fluid accumulation on the left side of the esophagus .
Preoperative high-resolution manometry showed no esophageal motility disorders.
The patient had a large esophageal diverticulum with reflux esophagitis and no esophageal motility disorders. Therefore, we decided to perform diverticulectomy and Dor fundoplication. The diverticulum extended 8 cm above the diaphragm. A transthoracic approach to the resection of the diverticulum was considered to be most appropriate. After induction of general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the prone position, and five trocars were inserted into the left thoracic cavity . Using CO2 gas at 10 mmHg and 6 mmHg (after a lung collapse), a pneumothorax was induced . A preoperative 3D-CT of the diverticulum was used to simulate the surgical procedure, and this simulation contributed to the success of the surgery . Thoracoscopic observation revealed that the diverticulum was located on the left side of the esophagus and was 8 cm long at the base. We inserted an endoscope into the stomach just prior to resection of the diverticulum, to prevent stenosis of the esophageal lumen during the surgery. We used the Signia™ stapling system (Covidien Japan, Tokyo) with purple staplers. This stapler can be mechanically adjusted in any direction, so that the direction of the staplers can be easily aligned with that of the diverticular resection .Two 45-mm staplers and one 60-mm stapler were used to resect the diverticulum from the cranial end towards the caudal end. The overlying sutures of muscles and adventitia were added over the stapler line along its entire length using 3-0 PDSII . Thereafter, the patient was placed in a supine position, and five trocars and a Nathanson retractor were inserted into the abdominal cavity . The esophageal hiatus was sutured appropriately, and Dor fundoplication was performed using a laparoscopic approach.
The patient had no postoperative complications. On the second postoperative day, an esophagogram revealed that the contrast medium could flow freely into the stomach without stagnation and did not reflux into the esophagus . The patient resumed oral intake on the third postoperative day and was discharged from the hospital on the tenth postoperative day. As of 21 months after surgery, the patient was not taking any acid secretion inhibitors and had no symptoms, such as reflux and dysphagia. Endoscopic findings showed no evidence of reflux esophagitis or recurrence of the diverticulum .