A 47-year-old man was admitted to the Department of Vitreous & Retina in Aier Eye Hospital of Wuhan University, for impaired vision and eye pain in his right eye for 2 days. Three days before admission, he received a penetrating injury to the right eye and underwent an emergency operation for foreign body removal combined with debridement and suturing in a local hospital . He had previously suffered from acute hepatitis that had been cured and had a history of vocal cord polypectomy and no chronic diseases, such as hypertension or diabetes mellitus. A complete review of symptoms, including chills, fevers, weight loss, and night sweats, and a history of contacts with ill persons were unremarkable.
Visual acuity in the right eye was hand motion at 30 cm, and in the left eye was 20/20. Intraocular pressure was normal bilaterally. In the right eye, an anterior segment examination showed mild conjunctival hyperemia, corneal edema, a hypopyon and an exudative membrane on the anterior surface of the crystalline lens . A posterior segment examination could not be performed due to the opacity of the refractive medium. B-scan ultrasonography showed extensive vitreous opacities and an attached retina .
The results of the complete blood count showed that the white blood cell count was normal, the neutrophil count was normal, and the neutrophil ratio was increased, while the lymphocyte count, monocyte count, eosinophil count and their respective ratios were all decreased.
The patient was diagnosed with acute infectious endophthalmitis and underwent pars plana vitrectomy combined with lens removal and silicone oil tamponade in the right eye. Vancomycin was added to the balanced salt solution. A vitreous sample was sent for isolation-culture and nanopore targeted sequencing (Wuhan Dgensee Clinical Laboratory Co., Ltd.).
Using biochemical identification method, culture analysis showed gram-negative bacilli but did not indicate the species. The antimicrobial susceptibility test showed that the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) of imipenem, ceftazidime, meropenem, polymyxin B and trimethoprim/sulfa indicated susceptibility. Nanopore targeted sequencing yielded positive results for Bordetella avium. (This Targeted Locus Study project has been deposited at DDBJ/ENA/GenBank under the accession KETD00000000. The version described in this paper is the first version, KETD01000000.) The bacterium was additionally verified as B. avium by the first-generation gene sequencing method.
The postoperative treatment was ceftazidime 1000 mg intravenously tid, and 0.5 % levofloxacin eye drops topical use qid. On the first day after the operation, we observed that the intraocular infection was effectively controlled, and the eye condition continued to improve in the following days, so topical steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs were added. The patient was discharged from the hospital one week post operation after observation of a mildly congestive and edematous bulbar conjunctiva, an almost transparent cornea, a clear anterior chamber, and a relatively healthy retina . In addition, the best corrected visual acuity was 20/50.