A 74-year-old male complained of right upper abdominal pain for several days and was admitted to the local hospital. He underwent conversion to open surgery for complete resection of gallbladder cancer and the final pathological diagnosis was GBCS. The patient did not receive any adjuvant treatment after surgery. Seven months later, the patient presented with right upper abdominal discomfort and came to our hospital for further examination. The blood routine, biochemical tests, coagulation tests, and tumor markers were within the normal ranges. The abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed multiple intrahepatic recurrent lesions in the segment of IV, V, and IV/VIII, and the largest lesion measuring 3.7×3.4 cm was located in the segment V with invasion of adjacent colonic hepatic flexure. A metastatic lesion in the hepatic hilum with a close relationship to portal vein and hepatic artery, and the main portal vein tumor thrombosis were also observed . The Subsequent pathological consultation results of our hospital indicated a mixture of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma and sarcomatous components, and confirmed GBCS . The immunohistochemistry showed CDX2(+), Vimentin(+), CK19(+) , CK(+), Ag(+), Ki67 45%, CD68(-), TTF-1(-), PSA(-), CK20(-), CK7(-), Actin(-), and PD-L1 expression of 20% the tumor cells. PD-L1 was positive in the sarcomatous components and negative in the carcinomatous components . He was administered combined chemotherapy (Gemcitabine 1400 mg and Oxaliplatin 150 mg) and immunotherapy (Sintilimab 200 mg) every 3 weeks. After two courses of combination therapy, tumor shrinkage of the intrahepatic lesions, and disappearance of the lesion in the hepatic hilum and the main portal vein tumor thrombosis were observed . All the recurrent lesions completely regressed following six courses of combination therapy . No severe adverse event was observed during the whole course of treatment. The patient has maintained a complete response for 3 months without signs of relapse. indicated the clinical course of the patient.