A 48 year old gentleman was referred for excision of a thymic mass after multidisciplinary team (MDT) discussion. The mediastinal mass was incidentally found via investigation for abdominal pain which then led to Computed tomography (CT) of the chest. Retrospectively, a CT coronary angiogram from 3 years prior also showed the mass; which was not reported at the time. The mass was relatively unchanged in appearance on the latest CT. The patient reported symptoms of mid-sternal discomfort when lying flat associated with breathlessness. There were no symptoms or signs of myasthenia gravis.
He had a past medical history of raised body mass index (BMI) and previous right inguinal hernia repair but was not on any regular medication. He was an ex- smoker, works as a window cleaner and lives with his wife and child. Examination was unremarkable apart from a BMI of 48.7.
CT imaging, from 5 month prior to his operation, showed a slightly lobulated and triangular lesion 40 mm (craniocaudal) × 23 mm (transverse) × 16 mm (anteroposterior) in size in the anterior mediastinum, just anterior to the aortic arch . An MRI thorax a month following the CT showed a soft tissue lesion 34 mm (craniocaudal) × 25 mm (transverse) × 18 (anteroposterior) in size.
Due to limited access with thoracoscopy, due to increased BMI, and the risk of conversion a partial median sternotomy was the approach of choice. Intraoperatively, the appearances were of a 6 cm lesion. It was larger than expected, being adherent to the pleura and partially to the pericardium but without evidence of direct invasion. The tumour was excised with a combination of blunt and sharp dissection from its inferior aspect up to the left innominate vein. After exposing the vein and clipping and cutting tributaries, the upper mediastinal dissection continued. The superior horns of the thymus were dissected out of the neck brought down into the mediastinum, and excised. The mass was dissected free from the right pleura, involving adhesionolysis and then as far laterally to the left as the mediastinal fat allowed. Given that there was a large amount of mediastinal fat, a good margin clearance was achieved. Two drains were placed; one into the right pleura which was open and another to the left of the mediastinum. The sternum was closed with stainless steel wires and the wound closed in layers.
Macroscopically, the lesion was a smooth, lobulated 60 × 45 × 30 mm mass which appeared partly surrounded by fibroadipose tissue . Serially slicing showed a well circumscribed pale fleshy, cream nodule of 29 × 18 × 25 mm. Histologically, the lesion was a fairly circumscribed, lobulated tumour composed of discohesive round to polygonal cells with indistinct cell borders, clear cytoplasm and prominent nucleoli associated with a background of prominent follicular hyperplasia. These discohesive cells are reminiscent of classical seminoma cells. In addition, in the background within the surrounding adipose tissue around this tumour, there are residual foci of thymic remnant tissue .
Immunohistochemically, the discohesive cells are positive with CD117 , Oct4 and PLAP (placental alkanie phosphatase) . CD20 highlights the background B lymphocytes within the germinal centres. Similarly PAX-8 highlights the lymphoid follicles with germinal centres. Both CD3 and CD5 highlight the background T lymphocytes in the interfollicular areas as well as in between the tumour cells TdT-terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase is negative in the tumour but is positive in the background residual thymic tissue. CKAE1/3 shows perinuclear dot-like pattern in the seminoma cells .
Overall, the appearances are consistent with a primary mediastinal seminoma with florid follicular lymphoid hyperplasia. In several foci, the lobules of lymphoid follicles abuts painted margin. Focally, particularly on the immunostain CD117, there are scattered seminoma cells infiltrating right into the paint surface. Therefore, the completeness of excision could not be guaranteed.
The patient had a routine overnight stay in our intensive care unit, and his drains were removed on day one. He was stepped down to the ward and once analgesia was adequate was discharged on postoperative day three. Post discharge, his wound healed well and the ongoing pain secondary to sternotomy eventually settled. However, he reported an ongoing breathlessness without any explainable CT or Chest X-ray findings. His breathlessness is being investigated by his respiratory physician. Repeat Pulmonary function tests and a ventilation perfusion (V/Q) scan were normal. An echocardiogram is currently awaited.
Following histology results, the patient discussed in the Urology MDT and subsequently referred to an oncologist, who suggested tumour markers namely beta human chorionic gonadotropin (βHCG), alpha-fetoprotein (αFP) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels which were negative and a repeat staging CT which was normal. The patient had a testicular ultrasound at the time of his original presentation, prior to his surgery, which excluded a testicular primary. A repeat positive emission tomography (PET) scan did not show any lesions either.
Given the normal staging CTs, ultrasound, PET scan and negative tumour markers, the MDT decision was for active surveillance.