A 55-year-old man was admitted to our hospital due to numbness and weakness of the left limb for a month.
The patient was admitted to a local hospital for numbness and weakness in his left limb for a month and was diagnosed with cerebral infarction. After standard treatment, the patient felt that the numbness and weakness in his left limb had improved. He occasionally felt weakness of the limb that would resolve spontaneously. Skin rash and shock developed due to an allergic reaction to iodine when he was undergoing head and neck computed tomography angiography (CTA) at the local hospital. The hospital’s management brought him out of the crisis. At that time, valuable head and neck artery images were obtained that showed multiple sites of stenosis in cerebral arteries. To better solve this problem, he was transferred to our hospital.
The patient reported well-controlled hypertension. He denied other systemic diseases such as diabetes, hyperlipidemia, coronary heart disease, hepatitis, and tuberculosis.
The patient reported no smoking or drinking, and there was no special family history.
Physical examination showed the following: clear mind, fluent language, limb muscle strength level 5, and NIHSS score 0.
There were no significant abnormalities in laboratory examinations.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging at our hospital showed multiple small patchy shadows on the right parietal lobe, most of which were deemed cerebral infarctions (new onset). Head and neck CTA performed at the local hospital showed that the V1 segment of the right vertebral artery was occluded, the lumen of the rest of the right vertebral artery was small, and the proximal segment of the right subclavian artery (R-SCA) and the right carotid sinus were severely stenotic . Carotid artery color Doppler ultrasound showed plaque formation in the bilateral common carotid artery, internal carotid artery (ICA), artery-SCA, brachiocephalic artery, and right vertebral artery; stenosis in the initial segment of the right internal carotid artery (R-ICAC1) (stenosis rate 80%) and initial segment of the R-SCA (stenosis rate 80%) , and R-SCA steal syndrome (partial). There was no obvious blood flow signal in the initial segment of the right vertebral artery, suggesting occlusion.