A non-smoking, 52-year-old woman presented to her general practitioner with headache, fever and right-sided thoracic pain. The chest radiograph showed a pulmonary infiltrate of the right lower lobe. Antibiotic therapy was initiated. Due to persistent fever a chest computed tomography (CT) was performed two weeks later, which showed low grade but diffuse ground-glass infiltration beside previously described bronchiectasis. Alveolar hemorrhage was documented by bronchoscopy. The histologic examination of a lung biopsy showed alveolar siderophages and focal chronic lymphocytic infiltration; no immunofluorescence was performed. Consecutive decline of kidney function completed the clinical picture of a PRS and the patient was referred to a renal division. Laboratory values at the time of referral are given in Table . The serum tested positive for anti-GBM antibodies as well as ANCA by standard indirect immunofluorescence (ANA negative, anti-dsDNA 6 E/ml (normal < 20)). Subsequent tests revealed antibody reactivity against both, MPO and NC1 domain of type IV collagen. A renal biopsy was performed and documented a necrotizing extracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis. There were nine glomeruli, one hyalinized, with five mostly segmental crescents (two cellular, three fibrocellular). A less well-preserved, frozen biopsy specimen did not show linear staining for human IgG by direct immunofluorescence. Similarly, all other immunoglobulins and complement factors were negative (IgA, IgM, Kappa, Lambda, C3, C1q). This was surprising since electron microscopy revealed small subepithelial deposits of a membranous nephropathy stage 1, without subendothelial or mesangial deposits . The co-occurance of CGN and membranous nephropathy is rare but has been described in detail previously [,].
We concluded that the patient had double-positive Goodpasture's syndrome with falsely negative immunofluorescence due to a not perfectly preserved frozen biopsy specimen. Induction therapy was established with plasma exchange, pulse cyclophosphamide and prednisone . Anti-GBM titers became negative, MPO-ANCA fell to 8 E/ml (normal < 5; Table ). Cyclophosphamide was stopped after three months but we decided to pursue with maintenance therapy with azathioprine because of the aforementioned findings also consistent with SVV. However, on demand of the patient prednisone was rapidly tapered and azathioprine stopped after 15 months. Kidney function had recovered to an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 50 ml/min. Seven months after discontinuation of the maintenance therapy the patient presented with mild dyspnea and worsening kidney function as well as proteinuria and microhematuria with dysmorphic erythrocytes. Anti-GBM antibodies were found to be positive again (28 E/ml) and rising MPO-ANCA were detected (56 E/ml, Table ). An initial chest CT showed regressive diffuse small pulmonary infiltration, but no signs of acute pulmonary hemorrhage. For the second time a kidney biopsy was performed and showed a mostly global sclerosing but also extracapillary proliferative glomerulonephritis again in combination with a membranous nephropathy (detailed in the legend of Figure ). Focal interstitial fibrosis and tubular atrophy was also observed. A global finely granular and a discreet segmental linear IgG positivity was detected by immunofluorescence in the GBM .
As this patient presented with the rare combination of dual positivity for anti-GBM and MPO-ANCA with relapsing pauci-immune CGN we examined the serum at time of relapse for anti-hLAMP2 antibodies, a new class of antibodies associated with SVV . The serum was indeed tested positive for anti-hLAMP2 antibodies. This prompted us to test also archival serum samples of this patient by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), immunfluorescence on cells stably expressing hLAMP2 on the cell surface, and western blot . The serum concentration of anti-hLAMP2 antibodies correlated positively with disease activity . The lack of the typical intense global linear IgG staining of the glomeruli combined with rising antibody titers to MPO together with the presence of anti-hLAMP2 antibodies led us to judge the disease as relapsing ANCA-associated SVV; hence plasmapheresis was discontinued and cyclophosphamide with prednisone successfully reintroduced.