A 52-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for headache, fever, weakness of the right lower limb, abdominal distension, and hearing loss. He was generally in good health without any medical history before. Initially, the patient experienced headache and fever, with a maximum temperature of 39 °C. Two days later, he also developed bilateral facial paralysis, right leg weakness, and bilateral hearing loss. Thereafter, two more days later, new symptoms including that of abdominal distention and urinary retention occurred. He did not experience any rash.
On physical examination, he was found to be alert and oriented. The right pupil was dilated (3 mm VS. 2.5 mm) but the direct and indirect light reflection was slow, without ocular movement disorder, thereby indicating incomplete injuries of the right oculomotor nerve. Bilateral peripheral facial paralysis and presence of hearing loss suggested that his bilateral facial nerves and vestibulocochlear nerves were affected. In addition, the strength of his right lower limb appeared to be significantly weak (medical research council (MRC) grade 3/5), while the left lower limb and both upper limbs were found to be normal ( (MRC) grade 5/5). It was observed that though bilateral ankle and knee jerk reflexes disappeared, whereas Babinski’s sign was positive on the right side. Furthermore, the puncture sensation below the T6 level on the left side of the body decreased markedly, while the sensation of vibration and touch were found to be normal. In addition, combined with abdominal distention and urinary retention, it was suspected that the patient suffered from a condition with spinal cord involvement.
The physical examination revealed that the patient had multiple cranial nerves and spinal cord injuries. Hence, neurological infection was primarily suspected. Normal nerve conduction studies ruled out the occurrence of PNS. Routine CSF analysis displayed an increased cell count to 272/mm3 (normal < 5/mm 3), of which lymphocytes accounted for 99%, and a slightly elevated protein levels to 199 mg/dl (normal < 45 mg/dl). Moreover, CSF cytology revealed primarily a lymphocyte reaction. Lyme titer, India ink capsule staining and interferon-gamma Release Assay (IGRA) were all found to be negative. Brain MRI showed mild non-specific white matter changes and cranial nerve MRI was found to be normal, with no enhancement signal in the contrast-enhanced scans . In addition, cell count was not found to be significantly enhanced in CSF analysis, which ruled out acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM). T2-weighted MRI revealed a hyperintense lesion in the spinal cord extending from T8 to T11 , enhanced MRI showed small patchy and strips hyperintensities in spinal cord and meninges . Moreover, plain abdominal radiographs and abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan displayed air-fluid levels and incomplete bowel obstruction . In addition, as limited evidence was obtained from the routine laboratory investigations including immunological examinations and CSF analysis, we next performed metagenomic next-generation sequencing (mNGS) to distinguish Listeria monocytogenes and genotyping of the virus. The result of mNGS in CSF showed a significant increase of VZV DNAc(41,353 reads) . Furthermore, we performed a VZV-specific intrathecal antibodies test and the result was also noted to be positive. Ultimately, we diagnosed that both polyneuritis cranialis and myelitis were caused by VZV infection. The diagnosis of intestinal pseudo-obstruction (paralytic ileus) was secondary to the segmental paresis caused by VZV infection. After intravenous administration of ganciclovir 5 mg/kg q12hr, combined with 5 mg/d dexamethasone therapy, and conservative managements such as nasogastric tube decompression, fasting, as well as intravenous (IV) resuscitation, the patient’s abdominal distention was noted to be gradually improved and disappeared within 14 days. The issues of bilateral facial paralysis and hearing loss were also found to recover gradually within a month too. The strength of the right lower limb rehabilitated to grade of 4/5 (MRC). However, the urinary retention was not observed to improve significantly.