A 46-year-old man presented with rashes and a movement disorder.
The patient has been HBsAg-positive for 15 years and has had moderate fatigue and elevated aminotransferases for four years, he was not treated. Facial and peripheral rashes were present for four months with no definitive cause. The patient suffered from simultaneous muscle soreness for half a month, which did not draw his attention until he could not move his extremities.
The patient reported no known systemic illness.
The patient’s mother, brother, and grandfather had chronic HBV infections.
On physical examination, the patient’s pharynx was congested. Purple-red edematous maculae were on the patient’s forehead and the malar areas around on his orbits. The peripheral skin was also involved sporadically, and telangiectasia was observed on the anterior chest wall. The abdominal examination was normal. A neurologic examination indicated muscle strength of 3/5 and limb muscle pain was positive.
The blood examination showed increased levels of creatine kinase (CK, 11889 U/L), C-reactive protein (32.4 mg/L), aspartate aminotransferase (AST, 280 U/L), and alanine aminotransferase (ALT, 242 U/L). The tests for HBsAg, HBeAb, and HBcAb were positive, and the tests for anti-HIV, anti-HCV, anti-EBV IgM, anti-cytomegalovirus IgM and HCV RNA were negative. HBV DNA was undetectable (< 50 IU/mL). Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) and Carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) were within normal range. Tests for the autoantibodies anti-PM-Scl and anti-Jo-1 were negative, and the test for anti-Ro-52 was positive. With regards to antinuclear antibodies, the membranous pattern was 1:1000 and the particle type cytoplasm was 1:100. The test for anti-M2 was negative. The indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min was 11.7% and a FibroScan revealed a stiffness value of 21.3 kPa. A liver biopsy showed nodular cirrhosis with extensive lymphocytes and few plasmocytes infiltrating the fibrous septa .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen revealed hepatic cirrhosis and mild splenomegaly. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the lung showed streaky opacities in the right middle lobe, right lower lobe, and ligula.