A 43-year-old Japanese man presented with decreased vision in his right eye that had lasted for 7 days prior to the hospital visit. His ocular history consisted of the diagnosis of ODP at another hospital several years ago. The best-corrected visual acuity was 20/150 and intraocular pressure was 16 mm Hg in the right eye. Slit-lamp examination was unremarkable in both eyes, but fundoscopy disclosed a bullous retinal detachment involving the macula and superotemporal area in his right eye. Optical coherence tomography (Spectralis OCT-Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) revealed retinal detachment without retinoschisis connected to the ODP .
After informed consent was received from the patient, he underwent combined phacoemulsification with in-the-bag implantation of an intraocular lens and a 25-gauge pars plana vitrectomy. After the core vitrectomy, posterior vitreous detachment was initiated by suction over the optic disc using a vitreous cutter. Triamcinolone acetonide was used during surgery to visualize the vitreous. Fluid-gas exchange was performed with aspiration of SRF through an intentional drainage hole at the superotemporal quadrant. Finally, intravitreal air was exchanged with 20% sulfur hexafluoride gas. Neither ILM peeling nor laser photocoagulation temporal to the disc was performed. The patient was instructed to remain in the prone position. Two days postoperatively, the migration of a small amount of gas in the subretinal space between the optic disc and the central macula was noted. The migrated gas resolved spontaneously in several days. OCT revealed an apparent connection between the ODP and the vitreous cavity .
Fifteen days after the initial surgery, macular detachment recurred and a second surgery was planned. The surgery consisted of removal of residual intraocular gas, SRF drainage with another intentional retinal hole near the first one, endophotocoagulation to the temporal peripapillary retina, and silicone oil tamponade. The patient was kept in the prone position. Five days after the second surgery, numerous silicon oil droplets were noted in the subretinal space associated with retinal re-detachment.
Nine days after the second surgery, an additional procedure was planned. Subretinal silicon oil was removed through the inferior peripheral retinotomy. The ILM was stained with ILM-Blue (DORC International), and a temporal optic disc edge-based 1.5-DD sized ILM flap excluding the foveal area was made to cover the optic disc including the ODP . Finally, the vitreous cavity was filled with 12% octafluoropropane gas, and the patient was instructed to remain in the prone position. SRF was rapidly absorbed, and the retina remained attached at 3 months, which was the patient's final postoperative visit. Postoperative OCT revealed the inverted ILM flap lying over the ODP . The best-corrected visual acuity was 20/200 in the right eye. It did not improve from the preoperative acuity because of preexisting extensive retinal pigmented epithelial atrophy involving the macula.