A 22 year old Sri Lankan Sinhala male who was being treated for steroid sensitive childhood nephrotic syndrome attended for routine clinic follow up.
There were no relapses for last two years and he did not complain of frothuria or ankle oedema. His routine medication was continued and he was reviewed with a urine full report and full blood count as he was plethoric.
The patient was diagnosed as having nephrotic syndrome at the age of two years and had responded to steroids well. Despite good steroid response he continued to have frequent relapses as the follow up visits were not regular due to family’s socioeconomic problems.
Renal biopsy was not performed earlier because of the good steroid response and absence of active sediment in urine. I.e. managed as minimal change disease. At the age of twenty one years he was found to have steroid induced osteoporosis, short stature and acne. He was started on alendronate, vitamin D and calcium supplements. Oral mycophenolate mofetil 250 mg twice a day was started as a steroid sparing agent one year previously.
Full blood count revealed that he had polycythaemia (Haemoglobin concentration of 17.8 g/L with a haematocrit of 54%) repeated full blood counts confirmed the presence of polycythaemia. Urine full report was negative for protein and red cells at this stage. An array of investigations were performed to search for a cause of the polycythaemia after the history excluded active or passive smoking and the physical examination did not show any murmurs suggestive of intra cardiac shunts or intra abdominal masses. There was no evidence to suggest a chronic lung disease on physical examination of the respiratory system.
A transthoracic echocardiogram and a transoesophageal echocardiogram did not reveal any shunts or evidence of pulmonary hypertension. Arterial blood gas analysis showed a metabolic acidosis but there was no hypoxia. (PH-7.3, PCO2-31 mmHg, PO2-92 mmHg, HCO3- -15.3 mmol/l) Serum erythropoietin level was normal at 6.2mIU/ml (3.7-29.5). Since there were no secondary causes such as renal failure or diabetic ketoacidosis which could explain the metabolic acidosis, renal tubular acidosis was suspected. An acid loading test was performed (Table
) which showed failure of urinary acidification in spite of systemic acidosis.
Urinary anion gap was positive favoring a diagnosis of Distal or type I renal tubular acidosis (Table
) Serum potassium level remained persistently low. Patient was diagnosed as having a hypokalaemic, hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis, most probably distal renal tubular acidosis (RTA). On further investigation, he was found to have medullary nephrocalcinosis ultrasonically but abdominal X ray did not show any calcifications. Other relevant investigation findings were as follows: serum calcium 2.6 mmol/l (2.1-2.55),serum magnesium 0.7 mmol/l(0.75-1.2),serum Phosphate 1.4 mmol/l (0.8-1.5), urine Calcium/Creatinine ratio of a fasting urine sample 0.7 (<0.4), Intact PTH 17 pg/ml(10–65) ALP 201 IU/l, Free T4 1.39 ng/dl(0.7-1.5), TSH 1.27uIU/ml(0.3-2.0), 24 Hr urine protein excretion 0.6 g, Creatinine clearance 94 ml/min.
Bone marrow aspiration biopsy was compatible with idiopathic erythrocytosis as JAK-2 V617F and Exon 12 mutations were negative.
The final diagnosis was steroid sensitive nephrotic syndrome, medullary nephrocalcinosis, type 1 distal renal tubular acidosis and idiopathic erythrocytosis. He was prescribed potassium citrate oral solution(potassium citrate monohydrate 22 g/dl) two tablespoons twice a day. He was also prescribed oral atorvastatin and alendronate. An arterial blood gas analysis one month after commencing therapy showed correction of the acidosis with normal bicarbonate level. ABG after treatment was as follows: PH- 7.40, PCO2 -39 mmHg, HCO3– 24 mmol/l.
Since his follow up haematocrit was 52% venesection was not performed. His renal functions and creatinine clearance continued to be normal. Serum potassium level was normalized at 4.2 mmol/l. Although his biochemical abnormalities were thus corrected with therapy he was advised to continue clinic follow up to detect progression of nephrocalcinosis, renal impairment, relapses of nephrotic syndrome and monitoring of haematocrit to institute venesection if and when appropriate.