The patient was informed and has provided written consent for the publication of this case report.
A 53 year old man was referred to our pain clinic for painful bilateral lower leg swelling, which began 1 month earlier. On presentation, his pain severity was 6–8/10 on the visual analogue scale (VAS). He had a past medical history of renal cell carcinoma diagnosed 3 years ago and radical nephrectomy of the left kidney. After 1 year, he was found to have recurrent renal cell carcinoma and underwent chemotherapy. Moreover, he underwent a left hemicolectomy 1 year ago because of a metastatic lesion in the descending colon.
Physical exam revealed fluid shifting, tender swelling, and painful limitation of range of motion of both knees, suggesting joint effusion . Digital clubbing was not present. To find the cause of the painful lower leg swelling, simple radiologic studies from the pelvis to the feet and whole body bone scintigraphy with Tc-99m hydroxymethylene diphosphonate were performed. Periosteal reactions were observed in both tibias, fibulas, and femurs on simple radiologic studies . Bone scintigraphy revealed increased radiotracer uptake along the cortex of the appendicular bones . Although the digital clubbing was not present, we could diagnose hypertrophic osteoarthropathy based on periosteal reactions found on X-rays and bone scintigraphy.
The patient was prescribed naproxen 1,000 mg/d for pain. An ultrasound guided therapeutic arthrocentesis of both knees was performed. Clear, yellowish joint fluid was aspirated from both knees (right 4 ml, left 12 ml). After the arthrocentesis, both knees were intra-articularly injected with a mixture of 1 ml ropivacaine, 0.75 mg/ml; 2 ml sodium hyaluronate, 10 mg/ml; triamcinolone acetonide 10 mg; and morphine sulfate 0.5 mg.
At 1-week follow-up, the pain was greatly reduced from VAS 6–8/10 to 1–2/10. At the patient’s request, another ultrasound guided therapeutic arthrocentesis was performed, with 2 ml and 3 ml of joint fluid aspirated from the right and left knee, respectively. Subsequently, a mixture of 1 ml ropivacaine, 0.75 mg/ml; 2 ml sodium hyaluronate, 10 mg/ml; triamcinolone acetonide 10 mg; and morphine sulfate 1 mg was injected in each knee joint. The patient showed no side effects after arthrocentesis and injection.
The patient is undergoing chemotherapy for treatment of his renal cell cancer. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are recommended for pain control. At the last follow-up, four months since the original arthrocentesis, the patient reported his pain level as VAS 1–2/10.