A 78-year-old female patient presented with a 1.5-month history of right knee pain accompanied by a locked facet joint. The patient had a 15-year history of hypertension and a 12-year history of diabetes. Physical examination: ambulation was impaired. There was slight swelling of the left knee, with a non-weight-bearing flexion–extension range of motion in the left knee of 0°–120°. Deep squatting was markedly limited after loading the left knee. Overextension and overflexion tests were positive, and tenderness in the medial and lateral compartments was also positive, as was McMurray's sign. The Lysholm score was 22 points, and the visual analogue scale (VAS) pain score was 5 points. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the affected knee showed a hollow-liked deficit and a protrusion deformity in the posterior root of the medial meniscus, with osteoarthritis.
The patient underwent epidural anesthesia complemented with intravenous sedative drugs and was placed in a supine position. The steps for the linear chain fixation method were as follows: (i) with the knee flexed at 40°, a standard anteromedial and anterolateral arthroscopic approach was employed. Under the arthroscope, the diagnosis of complete MMRPT and mild degeneration of osteoarthritis was confirmed. The MMRPT stump was then reconditioned, and the cartilage and cortical bone below it were removed with a curette to locate the inner opening of the tibial tunnel. (ii) A supplementary high-positioned posteromedial knee entry was made; a cannulated needle was passed through the MMRPT stump , and a single polydioxanone (PDS) suture and a single looped two-strand #2 Arthrex non-absorbable surgical suture were introduced. The two free ends of the suture passed through the suture loop of the folded end, forming a single-strand double-loop ligation fixation of the MMRPT stump . (iii) A tibial tunnel (4.5 mm in diameter) was established using a locator. The inner opening was located as described previously, and the outer opening was located under Gerdy's tubercle. (iv) The middle folded part of a traction wire (PDS suture) was inserted into the joint cavity via the anteromedial entry below the patella. One of the two strands of the surgical suture that ligated the MMRPT stump was then removed from the tibial tunnel to the outside . The end of the single-strand surgical suture was passed through the loop part of the buckle-strap titanium plate. Then, the single-strand surgical suture was brought into the joint cavity via the tibial tunnel with the help of the folded traction wire, and exited from the anteromedial entry below the patella by the folded part of the PDS suture . (v) After organizing the operating channel, the two surgical sutures were tied and pushed to the MMPR stump. The surgical suture that ligated the MMPR stump was then combined with the titanium plate loop of the locking strap in the joint cavity to form a mechanical traction complex . (vi) The loop of the locking strap titanium plate had an adjustable length and was unaffected by its combination with the double-stranded surgical suture. Its two free ends were tightened alternately and evenly via the locking mechanism to gradually move the micro titanium plate close to the bone at the outer opening of the tibial tunnel. (vii) After assessing the shape, tension and stability of the MMPR stump under arthroscopy , once satisfied with the result, the two attached lines of the locking strap steel plate were tied and reinforced . The surgical video image has been provided in the Video .
On postoperative day 12, the incision had healed well , and the sutures were removed. At the 7-month follow-up, the patient was able to walk painlessly, although she exhibited quadriceps atrophy compared with the contralateral side; her muscle strength was at level 4, and squatting was limited. The Lysholm score was 87, and the VAS score was 1. X-rays of the knee joint showed good positioning of the micro titanium plate at the external mouth of the tibial tunnel . Magnetic resonance imaging showed that the deficit in the posterior root of the medial meniscus was filled and occupied by the medial meniscus stump reconstructed by the suture anchor , without an increase in protrusion deformity. At the 1-year follow-up, the patient experienced no pain during normal activities, with joint extension of 0° and flexion of 110°. The VAS score was 0, and the Lysholm score was 76. Sagittal MRI showed the presence of solid tissue at the posterior root attachment . Coronal MRI showed that the medial meniscus was located between the medial tibiofemoral joint, with no obvious protrusion deformity .