Progressive yellowish skin turgor and firm sensation over the epigastric area.
A 61-year-old woman had been diagnosed with HCC at BCLC stage B as well as chronic hepatitis B infection 14 mo earlier. Because the typical image of contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed three heterogeneous arterial enhancing lesions with delayed phase wash out in segments S4 and S8, with the largest measuring 7.3 cm, she received segmental hepatectomy and cholecystectomy on October 5, 2021 based on the extensive criteria of the University of California San Francisco. Tumor recurrence emerged two months later, and we performed a TACE followed by systemic therapy of lenvatinib 8 mg daily due to an elevated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level after the TACE. The subsequent CT confirmed the progression of HCC volume, so we arranged a second course of TACE after the lenvatinib treatment.
The patient had a history of major depression with good medication control.
The patient denied smoking, alcohol use, and betel nut use. She also denied any family history of malignancy. There was no family history of hepatitis B or hepatitis C.
The patient’s height and weight were 162 cm and 60 kg. Her vital signs were stable, with a body temperature of 37.5°C, pulse rate of 90 bpm, respiration rate of 17 breaths per minute, and blood pressure of 136/76 mmHg. A physical examination revealed icteric sclera on the day of admission. A palpable firm mass lesion was observed at the epigastric area.
The laboratory data revealed mild anemia, including a low red blood cell count of 392 × 106 cells/μL and a high mean corpuscular hemoglobin of 32.7 pg. The hemoglobin, hematocrit, mean corpuscular volume, and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentrations were within normal values. Coagulation tests showed a low platelet count of 126000 platelets/μL and a prothrombin time/international normalized ratio within the normal value. Alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase were elevated at 273 U/L and 272 U/L, respectively, while total bilirubin was 4.7 mg/dL. The renal function tests and electrolyte tests were within normal ranges.
An abdominal contrast CT showed increased residual HCC volume after the second TACE course. The coronal view showed a patent portal vein and normal bile ducts . Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was arranged taken two weeks after a third TACE course because of an episode of jaundice. It revealed rapidly progressing of HCC volume in a short time, with left intra-hepatic duct (IHD) and portal vein tumor invasions .