A 34-year-old man complains of bilateral axillary ulcers with pain for half a year, and has chest congestion, weakness and polyuria for 3 years. In the past 3 years, the patient developed many weaknesses, including alopecia, sexual dysfunction, weight increment, chest congestion, mastauxy accompanied with pain, polydipsia and polyuria. One year ago, the patient got bilateral axillary ulcers which grew gradually. Besides, his head and face also appeared “red rash” together with pruritus. He was diagnosed as “multiple Boil”, “skin and soft tissue infections”, “skin ulcers investigation”, “hidradenitis”, “eczema”, “candidiasis”, “Hailey-Hailey disease (suspicious)”, “seborrheic dermatitis” and etc. by various hospitals. He was treated with anti-infection agents, debridement and topical drugs, including povidone-iodine, fusidic acid, mupirocin and oral medicines (cefaclor and azithromycin). After these treatments, symptoms had no significant improvement so the patient came to Department of Dermotology, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, (Shenzhen, China) for further examination on April 13, 2015. The usage of the patient's information was approved by him and the hospital ethics committee. He was considered asymptomatic because of not having fever, weight lost or night sweats. His family history was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed that the patient was mentally normal, with an anemia outlook, a fatty figure, a moon face and exophthalmos . Double lung breath sounds rough, and there were moderate rough moist rales. He had a bulging abdomen, and the liver was palpable 3 cm away from the right costal arch, with a medium texture and a sharp edge. Dermatologist examination revealed that light red or yellowish-white millet pimples were appeared on his scalp and face (area around the nose and forehead mainly). There were greasy yellow scales on the surface, and it showed hemorrhagic spots after been removed forcibly. In bilateral inguinal, there were nest-like ulcers, each of which is as large as soybean. The surface was dry and has some blood scabs on it but without secretion. We could see irregular ulcers with clear boundary in both axillary, about 5cm-long. The skin around the ulcers was red, swelling and tender, with white thin moss-like substance and granulation tissue. There was no obvious fester and specific smell .
Laboratory examination revealed that the patient's erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 23 mm/1 h (≤ 15 mm/1 h) and CRP was 50 mg/L. Bone Marrow Examination revealed that the bone marrow nucleated cells containing 47% granulocytes composed of vacuoles and toxic particles and 41% erythrocytes composed of polychromatic erythroblast had obviously proliferated with an expanding pale area. TSH was 0.021 Miu/L (0.35–4.94), testosterone was 0.67 ng/ML, PRL was 57.60 ng/ML and cortisol was 12.70 ug/dl. Liver function showed that ALT was 194 U/L (≤ 40 U/L), AST was 135U/L (≤ 50 U/L) and LDH was 409 U/L (100–300 U/L). Lymphocyte subpopulation were composed of 26.30% NK cells, 9.57% CIK cells (a little higher), and 1.89% B cells (a little lower), which indicated a low-level humoral immunity. Pituitary MRI scan revealed that most of pituitary fossa showed a cerebrospinal fluid signal. The pituitary volume was significantly narrowed and was located at the sellar floor with a line sample. The infundibulum signal was thickened unequally with a change of empty sella. ECT bone scan showed irregular radioactive concentration shadow of the sternum, bilateral ilium and hip joint, which indicated an active metabolism of bone mineral. Bonchoalveolar lavage luid routine showed that total nucleated cells were 280 × 106/L in which monocyte occupied 85% and coenocyte occupied 15%. The lavage fluid bacterial culture indicated the infection of viridans streptococcus. CD4/CD8 was declined (0.95%). The result of CD1α macrophage reaction was positive (+). CT plain scan showed a T2 high signal nodular shadow with a length of 8mm in the right eye orbital wall. Brest CT showed that there were higher penetrance of lung fields, extensive unequal-sized flake or cystic bright shade, and incrassate shade of interlobular septum . Abdomen B ultrasonography revealed that his liver was enlarged. The scalp lesion pathology showed dermal papilla edema and abundant hyperplastic large round cells, in which we could see nuclear groove, several eosinophile granulocytes and infiltrated lymphocytes . Immunohistochemical examination showed that histioid cell cytoplasm and nucleus were CD1a (+) and histioid cell cytoplasm were CD68 (+). Pathology of the alar skin ulcers showed that there were diffuse patchy medium sized hyperplastic cells. The actively proliferating cells have folding and sagging nucleus, smooth and exquisite chromatin and thin nuclear membrane. The common expression pattern of these cells was S-100 (+), CD1a (+), CD68 (+), CD3 (−) and CD79a (−). About 20% cells express the cell proliferation marker Ki-67.
Based on the above results of breast CT, BAL, histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations, the patient had diabetes insipidus, bone damage and nodular shadows of hypothalamus. Take all these results into consideration, a diagnosis of Langerhans cell histiocytosis (Hand-Schuller-Christian Disease) was validated. Then we take the therapy of CHOPE (cytoxan, adriamycin, vincristine, prednisone and etoposide) together with oral isotretinoin, and we carried out the operation of “debridement, free skin transplantation and thigh skin graft operation” for him. The operation was successful and the wound healed well. After half a year's follow-up, his systemic symptom was reduced and rash was apparently disappeared. There was no recidivation of his ulcers in the axillary.