A 32-year-old Caucasian Scottish woman was attending thrice weekly for a second course of narrowband ultraviolet B (UVB) phototherapy for severe dermographism . Eight months earlier, a similar course of treatment resulted in complete clearance of her dermographism. It had, however, recurred rapidly over 2 months. Antihistamines were of minimal benefit, hence the re-referral for phototherapy. At the time of presentation to us, she had a slightly raised alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and alkaline phosphatase but investigation for possible explanations of these findings, and an underlying cause of generalised itch might be exacerbating her dermographism, was unrevealing. On her twelfth attendance at the phototherapy unit, she reported that she was being investigated for possible heart disease following an admission to an Acute Medical Unit after she developed chest pain after a fall on an icy pavement. A chest X-ray and electrocardiogram had not shown any abnormalities and an exercise tolerance test was awaited. We requested her blood test reports which revealed a high creatine phosphokinase (CK) of 6195U/L (reference range: 30-120) and troponin T (Elecsys Modular Analytics E170 [Roche Diagnostics]; reagent kit Cat. No 12017644) of 0.14μ g/L (reference range 0-0.01).
She was reassessed. Her dermographism was improving but she had developed confluent erythema and slight hyperkeratosis between and over the dorsae of her fingers. She had dilated nailfold capillaries on the little finger of her right hand. Specific questioning elicited a history of proximal arm discomfort when lifting her young child. She had slight difficulty when asked to rise from a chair without using her arms. The combination of these skin changes, the muscle symptoms and her elevated muscle enzymes suggested a diagnosis of dermatomyositis. We admitted her for rest and to expedite investigations. Histopathology of a muscle biopsy and electromyography features supported the impression of inflammatory myositis consistent with dermatomyositis. A transthoracic echocardiogram did not show any abnormalities. No malignancy was found in her history, or during examination and investigation. Oral systemic corticosteroids were started.
At outpatient review, soon after discharge, her dermatomyositis was responding well to treatment. We requested troponin T as well as CK. Her CK had fallen to 3000 and her troponin T to 0.10. These results were telephoned through to her general practice (before being returned to us in hospital) and, alarmed by the high troponin T, a locum general practitioner referred her urgently to the Acute Medical Unit (AMU) that night. One of us, who had reviewed her earlier that day in outpatients, overheard a telephone enquiry about her seeking her case notes from the AMU to our ward. On assessment, there was nothing new of concern and, after reassurance that her blood test results were improving, she was allowed home.
After an initial response to oral corticosteroids alone, the rate of improvement in her condition slowed. Therefore, high-dose human intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) therapy was added . Shortly after the first IVIG infusion, her symptoms and biochemical features started to improve quickly . A few months after starting regular IVIG, her CK reached near normal population values and her skin and muscle symptoms and signs resolved. Her dermographism completely resolved, and has not recurred. Her condition continued to gradually improve. The IVIG infusion frequency was reduced and then infusions stopped. She was maintained on a low dose of prednisolone during a pregnancy, 4 years after her diagnosis. This had to be increased to 10 mg daily for a few months after delivery, because of increased activity of her disease, but has now been reduced again.