A 70-year-old woman presented to the referring hospital with a complaint of back discomfort. Her carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) levels were discovered to be elevated on subsequent testing, and the attending physician suspected a diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. The patient was referred to our hospital for further investigation.
The patient reported a normal appetite, despite a weight loss of 3 kg in the last month. On physical examination, her abdomen was soft, and no mass was felt during palpation. Her medical history included hypertension, hyperlipemia, and diabetes, treated by an antihypertensive agent, 3-hydroxymethyl-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase inhibitor, and an oral hypoglycemic agent, respectively. The patient had undergone two cesarean sections at 42 and 44 years. Her laboratory results demonstrated elevated hemoglobin A1c (9.4%) as well as tumor markers, including carbohydrate antigen 19−9 (CA19−9) (3696 U/mL), DUPAN-2 (1600 U/mL), and SPan-1 (220 U/mL). Bilirubin levels were normal.
Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a 70-mm pancreatic head-body-tail tumor with poor enhancement in the early phase . The tumor exhibited invasion and attachment to the vessels, such as the splenic artery and vein (SPA/SPV), superior mesenteric vein (SMV), and gastroduodenal artery (GDA). No metastases to distant organs were apparent, although the suprapancreatic lymph node was suspected of metastatic disease. Transgastric endoscopic ultrasonography-guided fine needle aspiration was performed using a 22-gauge needle (EZ Shot 3 Plus, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan) with two negative pressure punctures through the same tract. Biopsy samples were obtained from the tumor. Histopathological analysis of the biopsy sample revealed adenocarcinoma. She was diagnosed with cT3N1M0 pancreatic cancer (Union for International Cancer Control [UICC]-TNM classification, eighth edition) . According to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, the tumor was resectable . In this case, total pancreatectomy (TP) was deemed necessary to achieve a curative resection, and NAT was introduced prior to the surgery. Good glycemic control, important for surgical conditioning, was mandated in parallel with NAT. The NAT regimen included gemcitabine plus S-1 (an oral fluoropyrimidine agent containing tegafur, gimeracil, and oteracil potassium) therapy, which consisted of intravenous gemcitabine at a dose of 1000 mg/m2 on days 1 and 8 and oral S-1 at a dose of 60 mg twice daily on days 1-14 of a 21-day cycle; two courses of NAT were administered. After completing the preoperative treatment, we confirmed that there was neither progression of the tumor nor development of any distant metastases by utilizing multiple modalities, such as CT, enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and positron emission tomography (PET)-CT . CA19-9 levels had markedly decreased but still had not normalized (713 U/mL). Concomitantly, TP was performed.
A median incision was placed in the upper abdomen. The left retroperitoneal space was accessed from the level of the proximal jejunum. The part of the mesocolon covering the tumor and the retroperitoneal fat tissue were dissected along with the tumor. The Kocher maneuver was performed, and the omental bursa was released open to expose the anterior surface of the pancreatic head and duodenum. The suprapancreatic lymph node was suspected to be metastatic but had not infiltrated the common hepatic artery (CHA). Therefore, it was dissected away from the CHA. We could encircle the roots of the SPA and GDA sufficiently away from tumor invasion; hence, we judged this case to be resectable. Subsequently, we divided the bile duct, SPA, and GDA. The gastric antrum was divided at 30 mm proximal to the pyloric ring. Afterward, the nerve plexus of the pancreatic head was isolated. Tumor invasion of the SPV confluence was suspected when dissecting the portal vein (PV) surface. We performed PV resection (wedge style) with SPV and subsequent reconstruction. We dissected the pancreatic body-tail-spleen from the retroperitoneum and removed the specimen. The operation lasted 591 min, and the blood loss was estimated to be 920 ml. No intraoperative blood transfusion was required.
The resected specimen demonstrated pancreatic body cancer, with an additional adenocarcinoma lesion in the stomach wall . The gastric tumor location extended from the subserosal to the proper muscular layer, with no exposure to the mucosal surface . Considering this peculiar localization and its histological similarities to the primary pancreatic tumor, the stomach tumor was also suggested to be a pancreatic cancer metastasis . Immunohistochemical studies, using anti-cytokeratin 7 and 20 monoclonal antibodies, demonstrated positivity for cytokeratin 7 and negativity for cytokeratin 20 in both pancreatic and gastric tumors. The expression of these cytokeratin subtypes showed the same pattern in both the gastric and pancreatic tumors, providing evidence that the gastric tumor was a metastasis from the pancreatic cancer . Moreover, peritoneal washing cytology was found to be positive. Thus, the pathological diagnosis established was pancreatic adenocarcinoma, pT3N1aM1. The cancer was classified as Stage IV based on the eighth edition of the UICC-TNM classification . The pathological treatment effect of NAT was graded as IIa based on the Evans classification .
Postoperatively, there were no complications, and the patient could resume dietary intake four days post-surgery. She was discharged on the 24th postoperative day after being monitored for glycemic control by a diabetologist. The patient was initiated on adjuvant chemotherapy with S-1 orally, but she had an initial recurrence in the peritoneum 8 months after the surgery. Subsequently, she was administered systemic chemotherapy and was alive at the last checkup, 4 months after the recurrence.