A 65-year-old male patient with cholangiocellular carcinoma (Klatskin tumor) and a negative history of alcohol consumption was treated with Roux-en-Y hepaticojejunostomy, followed by radiotherapy. No metastatic lesions were detected at the time of initial diagnosis. However, after a 1-year follow-up from the first surgery, the patient developed gastric outlet obstruction and underwent palliative gastrojejunostomy, leading to the detection of peritoneal carcinomatosis. This malignancy was diagnosed as metastatic cholangiocellular carcinoma, and chemotherapy (gemcitabine) was initiated.
The patient was administered total parenteral nutrition for 2 months following surgery because of his inability to tolerate oral nutrition. After the first course of chemotherapy, the patient was admitted to the hospital with fever, and initiated parenteral antibiotic therapy. During hospitalization, the patient developed persistent nausea and vomiting due to subileus caused by compression from the intraperitoneal tumor implants. As the patient was still intolerant to oral nutrition, total parenteral nutrition was continued during hospitalization.
On the tenth day of hospitalization, the patient exhibited a decreased response to verbal stimuli. Diffusion-weighted brain magnetic resonance imaging was conducted, which revealed increased symmetrical fluid attenuated inversion recovery signal intensities in the bilateral mammillary bodies, medial aspects of the thalamus, walls of the third ventricle, periaqueductal gray matter, and dorsal brain stem . These findings were consistent with those of Wernicke’s encephalopathy. In addition, the patient was lethargic, disoriented, presented bilaterally horizontal nystagmus, and displayed confabulation. Gait ataxia could not be evaluated as the patient was immobile and presented low performance status.
Intravenous thiamin replacement therapy was started at 200 mg 3 times a day. The patient’s encephalopathy regressed on the second day after treatment, and his place-person-time orientation returned. However, the nystagmus persisted. After 1 month of thiamin replacement, the plasma thiamin level was 301.9 µg/L (reference range: 25–75 µg/L), and the previously noted fluid attenuated inversion recovery hyperintensities were almost completely resolved in the first-month follow-up diffusion magnetic resonance imaging . Thiamine replacement therapy (100 mg/day) was maintained since the precipitating factors of Wernicke’s encephalopathy were still present.