A 63-year-old Chinese male with a long smoking history was diagnosed with squamous cell lung carcinoma in December 2017. The tumor node metastasis (TNM) classification of this patient was T3N2M1. The patient had multiple hepatic metastatic lesions. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status score of the patient was 0. His initial tumor biopsy was negative for EGFR mutations or ALK rearrangement according to the results from an amplification refractory mutation system-polymerase chain reaction (arms-PCR) assay. The patient was first treated with carboplatin (495 mg, day 1) and gemcitabine (1.6 g, day 1 and day 8). After the failure of the first-line treatment in May 2018 due to progressive disease (PD), the patient received nidaplatin (40 mg once a day, day 1–3) and docetaxel (120 mg, day 1) as a second-line treatment and relapsed in July 2018.
To seek for potential treatment opportunities, circulating tumor DNA extracted from blood was subjected to DNA sequencing analysis using a cancer-gene panel with next-generation sequencing (NGS) as previously reported. The sequencing results showed that the patient had a HER2 exon 22 R896G mutation with an allelic fraction of 50.77% . Since the immunohistochemistry (IHC) detection for HER2 expression was not routinely carried out in the pathology department of our hospital, IHC examination was not performed for the patient at that time.
Thus the patient started to receive afatinib (40 mg/day) according to the NGS results in July 7, 2018. After the treatment of 2 months, the computed tomography (CT) scan showed that the maximal tumor diameter in the target lesions decreased from 5.61 cm to 3.34 cm with a decrease of 40.5% ( and ). According to the response evaluation criteria in solid tumors (RESIST 1.1), this patient was evaluated as a radiological partial response (PR). Comparing the CT scan in , the maximal tumor diameter in ( and ) increased from 3.31 cm to 3.64 cm (3.78 cm) with an increase of 9.0% (13.2%). Although the tumor increased, this patient was evaluated as a radiological stable disease (SD) according to the RESIST 1.1. As for the hepatic metastatic lesions, the maximal tumor diameter of the biggest metastasis before afatinib treatment was 3.2 cm . After afatinib treatment, the CT image suggested that the metastasis lesion had been reduced significantly and become unclear (–). The treatment-related adverse events associated with afatinib were grade 1 paronychia and grade 1 stomatitis without treatment interruption, which occurred during the first month of afatinib treatment and relieved without any treatment. Moreover, he got fever and obstructive pulmonary disease during the treatment, but it was hard to judge whether these symptoms were related with afatinib. Until September 2019, the latest return visit, no progressive disease had been observed in the patient . The progression-free survival is more than 14 months. Thus far, the afatinib treatment is ongoing.
This study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of the Taizhou Hospital of Wenzhou Medical University. Written informed consent had also been provided by the patient for publishing the case details and accompanying images in the case study.