We report a case of a 59-year-old male hospitalized in May 2017 for nephrotic syndrome, discovered after systematic dipstick. The patient’s past medical history was primary APS with lupus anticoagulant confirmed at 12-week interval, discovered in June 2015 after a second pulmonary embolism. No criteria for SLE were present. His usual treatment was vitamin K antagonist therapy.
On admission, he presented edema of the lower limbs; normal blood pressure; creatininemia 1.7 mg/dl (150 μmol/l); albuminemia 25.9 g/l; albuminuria 4.7 g/g; microscopic hematuria; normal renal ultrasound; negative anti-nuclear antibodies; positive lupus anticoagulant; and anti-PLA2R titer of 1:320 on indirect immunofluorescence, confirmed later on ELISA. HIV, syphilis, HBV and HCV serologies and screening for malignancy were negative.
Due to the high recurrence risk of pulmonary embolism when stopping anticoagulation, we did not perform a biopsy and we treated the patient as an idiopathic MN with angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor. Three months after the onset of nephrotic syndrome, antiphospholipid antibodies spontaneously became negative. No remission was observed at 6 months with angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor treatment with albuminemia 38 g/l, albuminuria 6.4 g/g and persistent anti-PLA2R antibodies.
Consequently, kidney biopsy was performed showing both i) antiphospholipid syndrome chronic vascular nephropathy with asymmetric fibrous intimal hyperplasia and tubular thyroidization and ii) MN stage II with diffuse glomerular basement membrane thickening on light microscopy and “spikes” on silver stain, without cellular proliferation. Immunofluorescence microscopy revealed a diffuse granular pattern of C3 and immunoglobulin G (with IgG4 dominance) staining along the glomerular basement membrane (staining for IgA, IgM and C1q were negative). Immunohistochemistry revealed PLA2R in deposits .
A treatment with rituximab was started 6 months after the beginning of follow-up (2 infusions of 375 mg/m2 administered 1 week apart) with 9 months later a decrease in serum PLA2R antibody levels at a titer of 1:10 on indirect immunofluorescence and partial remission.