A 15-year-old female patient was taken by her parents to a psychiatric emergency room presenting auditory and visual hallucinations as well as delusions (described as command hallucinations, thought broadcasting and persecutory delusions.) in March 2015, characterizing a first episode of psychosis. After two months, she had progressive impairment of speech and gait, along with fever, rigidity, and seizures. The patient was impulsive, hypersexualized, and disinhibited. There was no previous history of medical or psychiatric conditions, drug abuse, or family history of neurologic diseases.
On admission, in June 2015, she was catatonic (she scored 11/14 in the Bush–Francis Catatonia Screening Instrument, which has been previously used to assess catatonia in anti-NMDAR encephalitis) , had continuous orofacial and hand dyskinesias, autonomic dysfunction and horizontal nystagmus. Serologic tests were negative for HIV, hepatitis, syphilis, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, and ANCA. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed 2 cells/mm3 and protein levels of 57 mg/dL Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed small bilateral areas of encephalomalacia at the posterior occipital lobes. An electroencephalogram (EEG) identified EDB At this point she had frequent motor seizures and was comatose. She received methylprednisolone 1 g/day for five days and immunoglobulin (IVIG) 400 mg/kg/day for five days without any adverse events. Anti-NMDAR immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibody was positive in CSF (titers not recorded). Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen and pelvis, pelvic MRI, and transvaginal ultrasound were negative for malignancy. Seizures subsided and dyskinesias improved.
After six months of follow-up, there was a significant improvement in cognitive functions (Mini-Mental State Examination [MMSE] 27/30), Auditory hallucinations improved after the use of quetiapine 300 mg/day.
From 2016 to 2019, she remained neurologically stable, with preserved cognitive function and no seizures. The only symptoms that remained were occasional auditory hallucinations and impulsivity. We have no follow-up EEG from this period. In March 2019, a new EEG was requested because of persistent psychiatric symptoms and revealed extreme delta brush . We also requested a new CSF anti-NMDAR test, but it was not performed due to social factors. Hallucinations resolved and impulsivity improved with risperidone 2 mg/day. The patient missed the following appointments and therefore no treatment was started.
In August 2020, five years after initial manifestations of anti-NMDAR encephalitis, she presented irritability, apathy, fluctuating attention, social isolation, seizures, impairment of speech, nystagmus and orofacial dyskinesias. We initiated intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g/day for five days) and IVIG (400 mg/kg/day for five days). Electroencephalogram performed in September 2020 demonstrated persistence of EDB. Pelvic MRI and screening for infections were negative. Anti-NMDAR IgG antibody was positive in the serum (titer 1:200) and CSF (titer 1:64).
One month after IVIG, she had an improvement in seizures and dyskinesias, but maintained impulsive behavior and auditory hallucinations. We then prescribed Cyclophosphamide 750 mg/m2 and rituximab 750 mg/m2. Dyskinesias resolved, and hallucinations subsided. Her most recent EEG (January 2021) revealed normal baseline activity without EDB . Disease course timeline is shown in Fig. . The patient is back to her previous functioning in daily activities and her latest MMSE is 27/30.