A 51-year-old female with a recent diagnosis of acute lymphocytic leukemia was admitted to our hospital due to persistent fever and left-sided perioral dysesthesia following initiation of chemotherapy. Clinical examination revealed ulcerous lesions in the patient’s palate. Further laboratory tests were notable for pancytopenia and elevated CRP and ESR. Cultures of tissue samples taken from the oral lesions revealed multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Pseudomonas fluorescens and intermediate antibiotic sensitivity Acinetobacter baumannii. Chemotherapy was discontinued and the already instituted empiric antibiotic coverage was adjusted according to antibiograms. Head and facial computed tomography (CT) revealed extensive bone erosion of the maxilla around the dental alveoli without signs of inflammation of the paranasal sinuses. Anatomic variation was the bony dehiscence of the superolateral wall of the left sphenoid sinus , with concomitant carotid artery protrusion into the sinus and separated by the sinus cavity by only dura and mucosa.[,] One and a half month later, there was sudden-onset epistaxis that was managed successfully by tamponade by ENT surgeons. Postcontrast head and facial CT imaging revealed inflammation of the left nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses –especially the left sphenoid sinus – without any gross vascular abnormalities. Further episodes of intermittent epistaxis were noted although clinical and laboratory signs of infection remitted during the following fortnight. A repeat head-facial contrast CT scan was performed at that time. It showed containment of the infection but revealed a large enhancing lesion protruding into the left sphenoid sinus, which on further CT angiography (CTA) and digital subtraction angiography (DSA) were determined to be a 0.9 × 2 cm infectious irregular multilobulated pseudoaneurysm of the cavernous ICA [ and ]. The patient underwent emergent complete selective endovascular occlusion of the pseudoaneurysm with coils. Stenting of the parent ICA was not necessary and contraindicated in this acute phase, due to the need for concomitant dual antiplatelet therapy. Stenting would have raised concerns for recurrent hemorrhage, compounded by the fact that the patient was possibly due to become thrombocytopenic due to planned continuation of anti-leukemic chemotherapy. Postembolization angiogram revealed complete exclusion of the pseudoaneurysm with preservation of normal flow in the distal carotid and ophthalmic artery . There were no postoperative complications, complete remission of epistaxis was documented, and the patient was fully mobilized on the 1st postoperative day. Follow-up CTA a week after embolization confirmed complete occlusion of the aneurysm with no extension of the aneurysm neck or residual flow .