A 51-year-old Japanese male visited our hospital complaining of asymptomatic left scrotal swelling. The patient had no prior history of trauma and genitourinary disease, except for benign prostatic hyperplasia. And no familial history of testicular tumor was recorded. Physical examination revealed a nontender elastic paratesticular mass. Ultrasound (US) examination revealed a clearly demarcated 5.5 cm internally heterogeneous solid paratesticular mass . T2 weighted images (T2WI) by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination revealed a heterogeneous low intensity mass, including focal high intensity areas . Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed no apparent decreasing apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value in the internal area of the mass; however, this was suggested in the peripheral area . The results of laboratory examination, including alpha-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotropin beta-subunit, and lactate dehydrogenase, were within normal limits . Although testicular germ cell tumor was ruled out clinically, the possibility of malignant potential remained. Since the patient consented to complete resection, a transinguinal radical orchiectomy was performed. There were no specific findings of adhesion to surrounding tissue or intraoperative complications, and the patient recovered without postoperative events. In addition, no apparent recurrence was observed at 5 years after surgery.
On gross examination, the tumor measured 5.5 cm and was heterogeneous grayish-white in color. The tumor was encapsulated by fibrous tissue and detached from the testis . Microscopically, the tumor showed mixed hypercellular and hypocellular regions. The former showed proliferation of fibroblastic short spindle cells in a diffuse or perivascular pattern accompanied by collagenous fibers and dilated vascular channels . In the latter, some myoid stromal areas were seen with a few fibroblastic cells . Immunohistochemically, short spindle cells were positive for alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA), CD34, estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor and negative for desmin . The location and histopathological findings were compatible with the diagnosis of cellular angiofibroma.