A 24 year old Asian female presented to the surgical clinic with a goitre of eight months duration and recent onset of altered bowel habits (i.e., increased stool frequency) with features of anaemia. She was otherwise well and there was no family history of adenomatous polyposis, colorectal carcinoma or thyroid neoplasms. Physical examination revealed a multi nodular goitre. Ultrasonically both lobes of the thyroid gland were enlarged with multiple hyper-echoic nodules with central irregularity denoting necrosis. Fine needle aspiration cytology was compatible with a smear suspicious of papillary thyroid malignancy. The patient was biochemically euthyroid and antithyroid antibody status was negative.
Colonoscopy revealed multiple polyps (more than 100) of varying sizes from the caecum extending to the rectum. Histology showed adenomatous polyps with low grade dysplasia rendering the diagnosis of FAP.
She underwent a total thyroidectomy with level VI lymph node dissection and the recovery was uneventful. Macroscopy revealed multiple circumscribed whitish tumours of varying sizes in both thyroid lobes . There were 14 separate tumours in total, the largest measuring 18 × 17 × 14 mm in size. Some of the lesions contained areas of haemorrhages and cystic changes.
Microscopically, all the tumours showed predominant features of encapsulated PTC. However, unlike in the usual PTC, a variety of architectural growth patterns including cribriform, solid and trabecular with morule formation were noted along with the papillary structures . Constituent cells were cuboidal to columnar with amphophilic cytoplasm. Spindle shaped cells were noted in morular structures. Capsular invasion was seen in one tumour but there was no evidence of vascular invasion. The lymph nodes were free of metastases.
The patient was started on high dose thyroxine replacement and referred for radio iodine treatment. Disease involvement of the small bowel was excluded with capsule endoscopy and restorative proctocolectomy is being planned for the colonic polyposis. Colonoscopy screening of her two brothers and parents was found to be negative for FAP.