A 36-year-old Brazilian male patient was admitted to the hospital with a palpable lump in his right breast, located at the junction of the upper quadrants of the right breast . On physical examination, the lesion appeared firm with irregular margins. Axillary lymphadenopathy was negative and there were no palpable supraclavicular nodes. On breast imaging, ultrasonography showed a hypoechoic mass with partially defined contours measuring 4.0 × 3.0 cm, located at the upper region of the right pectoralis major muscle at the 12 o’clock position with muscle infiltration . Histological examination of core biopsy samples revealed a malignant tumor. Preoperative exams, such as X-rays and chest CT scan, abdominal US did not show any signs of disease. Radical mastectomy was then performed, due to pectoralis major muscle infiltration, consisting in removal of the breast along with the major and minor pectoralis muscles. Biopsy of the sentinel lymph node was performed. Gross examination revealed a solid tumor measuring 3.7 × 3.5 cm with a yellowish-tan cut surface and local foci of hemorrhage. Histopathology showed intravascular papillary proliferation of endothelial cells, spindle cell areas and necrosis, atypia and prominent mitotic figures, consistent with the diagnosis of high-grade angiosarcoma with areas of infiltration of the pectoralis major muscle (HE staining, magnification of 400×) . Histopathology also demonstrated a surgical specimen with clear margins, absence of angiolymphatic and perineural invasion, in addition to sentinel lymph node free of metastasis. Immunohistochemical study revealed a tumor positive for CD31 marker , confirming the vascular nature of the tumor. At the two-week follow-up of the surgical procedure, adequate wound healing was observed, without any evidence of the disease. The patient was transferred to the clinical oncology department, where he presented with severe headache and seizures after the second cycle of adjuvant chemotherapy with paclitaxel. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was ordered, revealing a right frontal parasagittal lesion, measuring 1.3 × 1.1 cm with a hemorrhagic component and perilesional edema, suggestive of brain metastasis. The disease progressed rapidly, culminating in the patient’s death at 20 days after the onset of neurological symptoms.