At the National Research Center for Pediatric Traumatology and Orthopedics, a 2-year old girl with a diagnosis of “Multiple congenital malformations of the spine” was admitted for planned surgical treatment. The diagnosis was made when she was 3 months old and the main complaint of her mother was the presence of spinal deformity. The conventional therapy, however, could not achieve stability or slowing of progression. Upon admission, the child was able to walk independently without any lameness, but an imbalance of the trunk was observed. Specifically, her right shoulder girdle and shoulder blade were located higher than those of her left shoulder, and the chest was not deformed. Asymmetric waist triangles (D < S) and a curved spine axis to the right were also observed in the thoracic region. However, the range of motion in the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spines was not limited and the movements were painless. Additionally, there were no orthopedic pathologies in the upper and lower extremities and no neurological or pelvic organ disorders were detected.
The child underwent clinical, laboratory, functional, neurological, and radiological examinations, including multislice computer tomography (MSCT) of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar spine. The results of the examinations showed multiple congenital spine malformations resulting from impaired formation, fusion, and segmentation of the thoracic vertebrae. Spondylograms and MSCT of the spine revealed a deviation of the thoracic spine to the right due to anomalies in the shape and structure of the thoracic vertebrae. Additionally, an indistinctly differentiated block of the bodies and arches of the vertebrae of the upper and middle thoracic spine was observed. The degree of the right-sided scoliotic curve Th1-Th8 was 35 degrees by Cobb. At the level of the thoracolumbar junction, a right-sided posterolateral hemivertebra Th13 was visualized, forming a local kyphoscoliotic deformity with a scoliotic component of 23 degrees by Cobb and a local kyphosis of the thoracolumbar junction of 33 degrees by Cobb .
Given the results of the examinations and the presence of multiple spine malformations, a multistage surgical treatment was recommended. In this case, risk of developing permanent mobility disability, impaired trunk posture and sitting ability, and restrictive ventilatory impairment due to unstable chest or severe thoracic deformities were also considered. The first step was the extirpation of the posterolateral hemivertebra Th13 (D) using a combined approach. The patient was placed on her left side and anterolateral and extrapleural access was performed on the right side with resection of the 12th rib. The body of the Th13 hemivertebra was extirpated along with the adjacent intervertebral discs. Then, the hemiarch of the Th13 (D) hemivertebra was removed from the dorsal approach and transpedicular supporting elements were installed in the vertebral bodies Th12, Th14 and L1 on both sides to correct the deformity. Posterior and ventral fusion with autologous bone was performed, and a peridural catheter was placed intraoperatively from the dorsal access for anesthesia in the early postoperative period. The wounds were closed. One of the main goals was to allow further growth of the spine, especially the thoracic spine, leading to increased lung volume.
After completion of surgery and extubation of the child on the operating table, doctors noticed a protrusion on the right side of the anterior abdominal wall. Initially, it was interpreted as relaxation of the abdominal muscles due to the introduction of anesthesia into the peridural space. In the first three days after the operation, the child was kept in the intensive care unit, where a unilateral abdominal protrusion was observed at rest and an increase was observed when the patient cried or strained. The peridural catheter was removed when the child was transferred from the ICU. On the fourth day after surgery, the girl was made to stand, and on the fifth day spondylograms were performed to monitor the correction of the local congenital deformity and the position of the metal structure. The results showed complete correction of the deformity, with the metal structure correctly and stably placed . The muscles of the anterior abdominal wall were found to be intact and there was no presence of free fluid or air in the abdominal cavity, according to MSCT.
The child received perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis, symptomatic therapy, and physical therapy. Surgical wound dressings were changed every three days and wounds healed through primary closure. On the seventh day after surgery, the child was provided with a rigid corrective corset and discharged from the hospital on the 14th day after surgical treatment. Although the pseudohernia of the anterior abdominal wall persisted throughout the hospital stay, it did not cause any complaints from the child .
At the 3-month follow-up examination, the pseudohernial protrusion remained the same size. However, six-month later, the child did not have a pseudohernial protrusion, and according to mother, the spontaneous restoration of the tone of the abdominal wall occurred 4.5 months after surgical intervention.
The protrusion was believed to be a consequence of intraoperative denervation during the lateral transthoracic approach, including resection of the 12th rib and damage to the intercostal nerve due to prolonged use of the wound retractor, or ligation of the neurovascular bundle during wound closure. Neuropathy symptoms included weakness of the abdominal muscles, which manifested as pseudohernia of the anterior abdominal wall.