A left-hand dominant, 30-year-old female was the unrestrained driver of a highway speed head-on motor vehicle collision. She presented to a Level II trauma center with a traumatic partial amputation (80 %) of the left arm at the proximal humerus . She was ejected from the vehicle and upon emergency medical service arrival, was found to be alert and conversant. A tourniquet was placed proximal to the amputation site to control bleeding. Injuries after examination and comprehensive computerized tomography scanning included a traumatic proximal trans-humeral amputation in the presence of a segmental humeral shaft remnant, an open left scapular body fracture, and left scapulothoracic dissociation with an associated acromioclavicular joint separation >3 cm. The patient's left hand had been packaged and accompanied the patient. The remaining intercalary segment of the left upper extremity did not accompany the patient. Additionally, the patient sustained a left pulmonary contusion, left axillary artery transection, 4-cm left ear laceration, and a left talus fracture.
After initial evaluation and resuscitation, a stepwise plan was formulated collaboratively between the orthopedic, thoracic surgery services, and interventional radiology. Potential arterial hemorrhage was felt to be the most immediate concern and coiling of the left subclavian artery was performed by the interventional radiology team. Afterward, the patient underwent wound washout with control of the hemorrhage with suture ligation of the distal subclavian vessels, staged forequarter (interscapulothoracic) amputation, and placement of a vacuum-assisted closure device.
Postoperatively the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit. On postoperative day one, the patient was extubated and transferred to the surgical floor. On hospital day three, the patient was brought back to the operating room and underwent primary closure of the amputation site . Prior to wound closure, cryoanalgesia was applied under direct visualization using AtriCure's cryosphere probe (AtriCure, Inc., Mason, OH) to the left brachial plexus, including the medial, lateral, and posterior cords for 120 s at −60 °C [, ]. Postoperatively the patient was transferred back to the surgical floor.
The patient was hospitalized for eleven days and subsequently discharged to an acute rehabilitation facility for two weeks before returning to her home. The patient was placed on gabapentin 300 mg every eight hours following her index surgery and remained on this medication during her entire hospitalization. Over the course of the patient's hospitalization, she reported only mild phantom tingling sensation but no pain. While the patient was at the rehabilitation center, medical staff changed this medication to pregabalin 50 mg twice a day due to increasing reports of fatigue and occasional phantom pain sensations. The patient described this increased sensation as not debilitating or particularly bothersome. She was discharged from the rehabilitation center on the same medication and dose. Additionally, she received medication for muscle spasms remote to the amputated extremity (cyclobenzaprine 5 mg three times a day for two weeks after surgery) and pain associated with her ankle fracture (oxycodone 5 mg every six hours as needed). Outpatient follow up occurred at two, four, six, twelve, and twenty-four weeks with pain scores measured on an 11-point numerical rating scale of 0, 2, 0, 0, and 0 respectively. At her 12-week postoperative visit, she denied phantom limb pain or new paresthesias and was no longer requiring any opioids for her ankle pain. During her six-month evaluation, she remained off opioids and reported no phantom limb pain symptoms or paresthesias.