A 39-year-old male with no known co-morbidities presented to the Emergency Department of our hospital with complaints of pain and weakness in the right lower limb. The pain was gradual in onset, pricking in character, radiating to the lower back, aggravated on activities/ exertion and also in the sitting position, which relieved on rest and lying down. The patient also presented with facial weakness in the right side. He also complained of a history of fever 15 days before the presentation in our hospital. According to him, he was treated as enteric fever; however, proper documentation of the treatment was not available. His family history, recent travel history, and allergic history were non remarkable. He does not consume alcohol, has a normal bowel habit, and is a reformed smoker.
On admission, he was alert, well oriented to time, place, and person with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 15. His vital parameters were stable on arrival. Initial baseline blood works were within the normal range including random blood sugar. His higher mental functions were appropriate. The cranial nerve examination revealed lower motor neuron type right facial palsy (Bell’s Palsy) showing right facial droop with loss of the right nasolabial fold, inability to close the right eye, inability to raise right the eyebrow and deviation of the angle of the mouth towards the left side. On rest of the neurological examination, he had decreased touch sensation from L1 to L5 dermatome of the right side with normal vibration and normal joint position sensation (proprioception). He had decreased power (3/5) of the right lower limb muscles supplied by L1–L3. Initially, there was asymmetrical muscle weakness in his lower limb, which progressed to symmetrical weakness of 3/5 power in both lower limbs and 4/5 in both upper limbs. Ankle and knee joint reflex was absent on the right however normal bilateral biceps and triceps reflex with preserved gag reflex, perianal sensation, anal wink, and anal tone. There was a bilateral upward response on the plantar reflex. There were no signs of meningeal irritation and absent cerebellar signs. Patient later complained of dysphagia. Other systemic examination including respiratory, gastrointestinal, and cardiovascular were normal.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed albuminocytologic dissociation with no cells and an elevated protein of 203.2 mg/dl with no pathogenic growth on CSF, blood, and urine culture. Nerve conduction study was abnormal in bilateral lower limbs suggesting severe demyelinating motor neuropathy. MRI of the head and spine showed nonspecific changes in brain and only mild degenerative disease in lumbar spine.
Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was started with the dose of 25 gm (0.4 mg/kg) once daily for 5 days, that is, five doses.The patient started showing signs of recovery with the initial dose of immunoglobulin. The patient was monitored for 2 more weeks in the hospital and during the observation the patient’s lower limb weakness, upper limb weakness, and facial palsy drastically improved. The patient was then discharged (2 weeks after the admisistration of IVIG). At the time of discharge the patient had a power of 4/5 on both lower limbs with 5/5 power of the upper limbs and the facial palsy completely disappeared. The pain and weakness of the lower extremities partially resolved so was planned for schedule follow-up in the outpatient department. A follow-up was done 3 months after the discharge and the patient still had slight pain and weakness on lower limb; however, could carry out his normal day to day activities.