A female child, aged 11 months, was admitted to the Department of Paediatrics with a history of fever and an ulcerated lesion on the upper left side of the chest. According to her mother, the child was apparently well 5 days previously when she noticed a redness over the left side of chest on the upper part. The mother gave a history of insect bite at that site followed by a history of itching. There was an area of redness that gradually increased in size with formation of pustules that burst on the third day discharging a thick yellow pus. On local examination, there was an ulcer measuring about 8 cm in length by 3 cm in width and 2–3 cm in depth. The base contained pus and necrotic tissue. The base was soft and was not attached to the underlying structures. The margins of the cavity were regular and non-indurated .
On physical examination, the pulse rate was 102 min−1, respiratory rate was 28 breaths min−1 and body temperature was 100 °F. There was no lymphadenopathy. Other systemic examinations were within normal limits. Laboratory tests showed the following results: total leucocyte count 9960 µl−1 with 40 % neutrophils, 52 % lymphocytes, 5 % monocytes and 3 % eosinophils; haemoglobin 9.6 g dl−1; platelets 454000 µl−1; urea 10 mg dl−1; creatinine 0.5 mg dl−1; sodium 131 mmol l−1; potassium 4.7 mmol l−1; total protein 6.1 g dl−1; and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 60 mm in the first hour. C-reactive protein was also raised with a value of 83.08 l−1. The immunization history of the child was complete up to 9 months of age and a BCG scar was present. Developmental milestones were normal. The mother was non-reactive for human immunodeficiency virus types 1 and 2.
A clinical diagnosis of a left-sided chest wall ulcer subsequent to a burst abscess was made. Chest X-ray was done, which showed a normal parenchyma and bony structures. The patient was initially started on injected ampicillin plus cloxacillin 200 mg intravenously (IV) every 6 h along with metronidazole 50 mg IV every 8 h and amikacin 120 mg IV once a day, keeping in mind possibility of a polymicrobial infection. The patient did not show much improvement as a result of the empirical treatment.
Pus from the lesion was inoculated onto blood and MacConkey agar and incubated at 37 °C. Growth of a lactose-non-fermenting organism on MacConkey agar and grey colonies on blood agar after 24 h incubation was obtained. On Gram staining of the colonies, Gram-negative bacilli were seen, which were motile in the hanging drop preparation. Biochemical reactions were negative for indole, methyl red, urease and citrate utilization tests. Triple sugar iron agar showed an alkaline/acid reaction without gas formation.
The following day, the primary culture plate day showed the production of a red-coloured pigment, which is characteristic of Serratia . For further speciation, l-arabinose and sucrose fermentation tests were carried out and were positive. An ornithine decarboxylase test was positive, with negative results for an arginine decarboxylase test. The organism was finally identified as S. marcescens. The organism was sensitive to ceftazidime, amikacin, imipenem and amoxyclav, and was resistant to ampicillin, piperacillin/tazobactam and netilmicin. A Mueller–Hinton agar sensitivity plate also showed the production of a red-coloured pigment . A blood culture done to rule out septicaemia was sterile. After the sensitivity report, metronidazole and ampicillin plus cloxacillin were omitted and intravenous ceftazidime (400 mg every 8 h at a rate of 150 mg kg−1 day−1) and amikacin (120 mg IV once a day) was given for 10 days. Under this therapy the lesion started to show signs of healing in the form of healthy granulation tissue, a decrease in size and approximation of the margins, as shown in . There was no pus discharge and no slough. The patient was discharged on amoxyclav 5 ml twice a day. On follow-up after 2 weeks, the lesion healed completely.