A 64-year-old male patient presented at our hospital with a 1-month history of gross haematuria and a 3-month history of left flank pain. The patient had a 40-year history of smoking and a 1-year history of hypertension. Laboratory examination revealed that the patient’s plasma tumour marker test was negative, and gross haematuria was found in the urine analysis. No tumour cells were detected in the urine by cytological analysis. The CT urogram revealed a soft tissue mass in the upper ureter approximately 1.5 cm from the left ureteropelvic junction , which was slightly enhanced by contrast-enhanced CT . There was mild hydronephrosis in the ureter and the left kidney above the mass, and a stone approximately 7 mm in size was found in the lower calyx of the left kidney. No enlarged lymph nodes were found in the retroperitoneal cavity. A chest CT scan revealed no primary or metastatic lesions in either lung. The whole-body bone scan showed no evidence of metastatic bone disease. No neoplastic lesions were found in the bladder or bilateral ureteral orifice by cystoscopy. The left ureteral lesions were diagnosed as primary ureteral malignant tumours, with a clinical stage of T2N0M0. We performed a laparoscopic left nephroureterectomy for this patient. The review of the pathology was performed independently by two experienced urological pathologists. Gross examination of the resection specimen demonstrated a 1.7×1.5×1.0 cm firm, nodular, grey-white mass in the left ureteral wall, protruding into the lumen. Microscopic examination revealed that the tumour was composed of two types of tumour cells . Some tumour cells were densely arranged, with similar cell sizes and less cytoplasm. Frequent mitosis and necrosis were common findings, and tumour thrombi could be seen in the blood vessels. The immunohistochemical results showed the tumour was positive for CD56 and negative for CgA and Syn . In the other area of the tumour, cells were arranged in sheets, with varying nuclei size. Cellular atypia was noted, with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and obvious keratinization. Immunohistochemically, this portion of tumour cells was positive for CK5/6 and p63. The Ki-67 index of the neuroendocrine tumour cells was 90%, and the Ki-67 index of the squamous cell tumour cells was 40%. The ratio of neuroendocrine tumour cells to squamous cell tumours was approximately 1:1, and the histomorphology and immunophenotype of the tumour cells did not overlap.
The patient was diagnosed with ureteral SCNEC colliding with SCC, and the pathological stage was upgraded to T3N0M0. The patient’s postoperative recovery period was uneventful. Two months after the operation, the patient received adjuvant chemotherapy (cisplatin and etoposide every 3 weeks for 4 cycles). No local recurrence or distant metastasis was found during the 14-month follow-up after the operation . depicts the clinical timeline of the patient.