We report the case of a 50-year old female patient, who was investigated for abdominal discomfort. She also had a 2-year history of menorrhagia and dysmenorrhea.
An ultrasound of abdomen showed the presence of a mass in the left upper quadrant, in keeping with a pancreatic mass. A CT and MRI of abdomen and pelvis confirmed the presence of an 8 cm solid and cystic mass in the tail of the pancreas . CT examination confirmed a fibroid uterus, while ultrasound showed the uterus to measure 7.7 × 6.6 × 4.7 cm with a 3 cm partially calcified posterior subserosal fibroid and an adjacent 4.7 cm partially cystic lesion, also deemed to be a fibroid .
A distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy was performed. A 9 cm circumscribed mass with yellow to tan solid and cystic cut surface was present in the tail of the pancreas, and was grossly confined to the pancreatic parenchyma. The mass was extensively sampled.
Histologically, the lesion was lobulated, and predominantly well-circumscribed, but focally infiltrative , and was composed of sheets of uniform spindled to epithelioid cells . The lesional cells had round to oval nuclei, with coarse to vesicular chromatin, visible nucleoli, nuclear grooves and clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm . Prominent arterioles were identified . The stroma was collagenized in areas. Admixed lymphocytes, occasional hemosiderin-laden macrophages, and focal cystic change were present. There was no evidence of nuclear pleomorphism, mitotic activity or necrosis, and there was no evidence of endometriosis. Lymphovascular space invasion was not seen.
Immunohistochemistry showed that the tumor cells were positive for CD10, estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), Wilms tumor 1 (WT-1; nuclear staining) and smooth muscle actin (SMA) . The tumor cells were negative for other smooth muscle markers (desmin, h-caldesmon) , cytokeratins (AE1/3, CAM5.2), PAX-8, inhibin, and HMB-45.
RNA sequencing was performed using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue, cut into scrolls (4 cut at 10 μm). RNA was extracted using the ExpressArt FFPE Clear RNA Ready kit following manufacturer’s instructions (Amsbio, Cambridge, MA). The libraries were prepared using 20–100 ng of total RNA with the TruSight RNA Fusion Panel (Illumina, San Diego, CA). Each sample was sequenced with 76 base-pair paired-end reads using an Illumina MiSeq at eight samples per flow cell (~ 3 million reads per sample). The results were analyzed using both the STAR and BOWTIE2 aligners, and Manta and JAFFA fusion callers, respectively. Testing confirmed the presence of PHF1 gene rearrangement (NM_024165.2).
The morphological, immunohistochemical and molecular features were of a low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (LG-ESS). Clinical and radiological correlation was required to determine if this lesion represented metastatic endometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS) from a uterine primary, or a rare primary extra-uterine endometrial stromal sarcoma (EU-ESS) of the pancreas, arising in the context of endometriosis. In view of the menorrhagia and dysmenorrhea, the patient underwent a total hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy 3 months later. Histological examination of the uterus revealed fibroids and the presence of a 5.8 cm LG-ESS with evidence of lymphatic invasion. Thus, the ESS in the pancreas was clearly the result of a metastasis from a primary uterine ESS.
A CT of thorax, abdomen and pelvis performed 2 months post-hysterectomy showed no evidence of recurrent or additional metastatic disease. The case was reviewed by oncologists, and the decision was made to follow the patient with an MRI of abdomen and ultrasound of pelvis every 3 to 4 months for the foreseeable future, without adjuvant therapy.