An 86-year-old man, who was a wood craftsman for more than 50 years, presented to the emergency room with a sudden onset of severe posterior head and neck dysesthesia immediately after accidentally falling backwards. He had no rheumatoid arthritis or other joint-related generalized disease. He had hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and hydrocephalus. On initial examination, his respiratory and hemodynamic status was stable. There was no neurological impairment of his extremities, although he had nuchal dysesthesia. It particularly worsened when we touched his ears. No contusions were observed on his neck or ears; therefore, we initially suspected an upper cervical spine injury. However, computed tomography revealed anterior and posterior C2–C7 osteophyte formation without cervical fracture. When the image brightness was adjusted using the window level, it revealed a retro-odontoid mass extending from the posterior part of the axis up to the cranial base . The MRI showed cervical spinal cord compression by a soft tissue mass posterior to the odontoid process of the axis, with high-intensity of the cervical spine at the C1–C2 level on T2-weighted imaging (WI). The mass was seen as an area of iso-intensity on T1-WI and of low-intensity on T2-WI .
He was admitted to our hospital because of unbearable neuropathic pain, which continued from the time of injury. On day 3 of admission, a plain cervical spine radiograph was carried out by an orthopedic surgeon to check for surgical indication. The flexion extension X-rays of the cervical spine showed no atlantoaxial subluxation . Due to the patient’s age and the absence of motor impairment, surgical decompression of the cervical stenosis was not warranted. Because of cervical stability and severe nuchal dysesthesia, his neck collar removed. The following are additional laboratory findings after admission: antinuclear antibody, negative; rheumatoid factor level, 1.7 IU/mL (normal range, <15 IU/mL); anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody level, <0.5 U/mL (normal range, <4.5 U/mL); and serum amyloid A protein level, 5.4 µg/mL (normal range, <8.0 µg/mL). Carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 levels were 6.5 ng/mL (normal range, <5.0 ng/mL) and 66.0 U/mL (normal range, <37 U/mL), respectively, which was slightly higher than the normal upper limit. The patient underwent upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy due to his history of gastric cancer, resected 24 years ago, and no evidence of malignancy was observed. Moreover, whole body contrast-enhanced computed tomography revealed no neoplastic tumors that could have metastasized to around C1–C2. Furthermore, we determined the anamnesis of long-term neck flexion due to his unique occupation. Therefore, we diagnosed a cervical spine injury with an isolated symptom of C2–C3 dysesthesia due to a retro-odontoid pseudotumor, and we believed that the retro-odontoid pseudotumor progressively developed over time with no related symptoms. We prescribed pregabalin at 150 mg/day on day 1 of admission and increased the dosage to 300 mg/day on day 8. On day 11, he was transferred to a rehabilitation hospital for pain control after slight recovery of the dysesthesia.