A 30-year-old previously well Bangladeshi male was admitted to a local tertiary care hospital with a 20-day history of fever, chills, rigors, headache, myalgias, and anorexia. He had been suffering from nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, jaundice with scleral icterus and dark urine for five days. One day prior to admission, he was diagnosed with malaria on thick smear at a private hospital, however parasite density result was unavailable. There he was treated with intravenous quinine (750 mg 8-hourly x five doses) and azithromycin, due to limited availability of first line therapy of artesunate, before being referred for further management.
Past medical history was significant for three prior malaria infections. His most recent episode of suspected vivax malaria was 30 days prior to admission, which was partially treated with an incomplete course of chloroquine. He had no history of jaundice, liver disease, transfusions, malignancy, or autoimmune disease. There was no family history of jaundice or iron treatments. He did not take any regular or traditional medicines. There was no history of betel nut consumption.
On admission, he had a temperature of 39.7 oC, Glasgow Coma Score (GCS) 15/15, blood pressure (BP) 127/60 mmHg, heart rate (HR) 127 beats per minute, a respiratory rate (RR) of 24 breaths per minute with oxygen saturation (SaO2) of 93 % on room air, and body weight of 65 kg. He appeared unwell with pronounced scleral icterus, black urine, hepatomegaly and splenomegaly (4 cm and 5 cm below the costal margin, respectively). There was no conjunctival suffusion or lymphadenopathy.
Admission peripheral blood smear confirmed a diagnosis of falciparum malaria (360 parasites/μl). Severity criteria included hyperlactataemia (lactate 6.8 mmol/L), hyperbilirubinaemia (total bilirubin 58 μmol/L), and 4+ haemoglobinuria (blackwater fever); hence the case was classified as severe malaria . He was promptly treated with intravenous artesunate 120 mg, 2.4 mg/kg body weight (Guilin Pharmaceuticals, China) at 0, 12, 24 and 48 h (four doses), in addition to empiric ceftriaxone 2,000 mg every 12 h, as per local hospital practice. After 30 h his peripheral parasites cleared with resolution of the fever and haemoglobinuria, and he was switched to oral artemether/lumefantrine (AL) combination 80/480 mg (Novartis, Switzerland).
On the third day of admission he developed fever, confusion, dyspnoea (RR 28, SaO2 90 %), tachycardia (HR 106), hypotension (BP 100/80 mmHg), recurrent 4+ haemoglobinuria with severe microcytic anaemia (haemoglobin of 32 g/L) accompanied by elevated lactate dehydrogenase and bilirubin, consistent with acute haemolytic anaemia . Pre-transfusion peripheral blood smear showed no schistocytes and reticulocytes of 2 % (reticulocyte production index 0.15 (compared to RPI of 0.3 on day 3 in blackwater fever patients ). Direct antiglobulin test (DAT; anti-IgG and anti-C3d) was negative and indirect antiglobulin test (IAT) was positive. Glucose was normal. Blood and urine bacterial cultures were negative. Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase testing and haemoglobin typing were not available. Human immunodeficiency virus, syphilis, hepatitis A, hepatitis B and hepatitis C serology were negative. Hepatitis B antigen was negative. He promptly received transfusion of three units matched whole blood. Intravenous artesunate was substituted for AL despite parasite clearance due to the notion that the recurrent fever must be due to malaria. In total, he received seven doses of artesunate (total dose of 840 mg) and three doses of AL (total dose of artemether 240 mg, and lumefantrine 1,440 mg). Empiric amikacin 500 mg, 7.5 mg/kg 8-hourly was added on day 6 to broaden antibacterial coverage for potential multi-drug resistant gram-negative bacteria given his ongoing fever despite negative blood and urine cultures. The haemolysis continued for nine days and he required a total of 10 transfusions .
On day 10, bone marrow biopsy revealed gross hypercellularity with erythroid hyperplasia and no evidence of lymphoma, leukaemia, or haemophagocytic syndrome. Meropenem (500 mg 8-hourly) was empirically substituted for amikacin and ceftriaxone given his renal dysfunction to cover potential extended-spectrum β-lactamase producers, and dexamethasone 5 mg 6-hourly was initiated for suspected autoimmune haemolytic anaemia. The haemoglobinuria resolved two days after steroid treatment and ceftriaxone discontinuation. His haemoglobin slowly recovered, reaching 76 g/L by day 20.
On day 16, he had ongoing fever with right-sided facial pain and swelling. A large, 3 × 2 cm ulcer on the right upper hard palate covered with yellow slough and an area of necrosis was observed . The right maxillary sinus was tender on palpation. He had pain with right eye extra-ocular movements but no ocular discharge, proptosis, pupil asymmetry, diplopia, or decreased visual acuity. There was no nasal or ear involvement. A swab of the hard palate ulceration revealed long, broad, aseptate hyphal elements displaying 90° branching consistent with Mucor, . Fungal cultures failed to grow. MRI showed extensive right-sided opacification and mucosal thickening of the maxillary and ethmoid sinuses with no radiographic evidence of orbital or cerebral extension . He underwent prompt surgical debridement of the oral ulcer and right maxillary sinus. His steroids were discontinued and he was started on oral itraconazole 100 mg 12-hourly until first line treatment with amphotericin B became available nine days later. Intravenous amphotericin B deoxycholate 50 mg daily, was continued for 14 days with improvement of his facial swelling and oral ulceration. The patient was pleased with his clinical improvement and hospital care, however due to a family emergency in his remote village he left hospital against medical advice and could not attend follow up.