A 67-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with the chief complaint of high fever. She had a past medical history of hepatitis B virus. Laboratory data showed Child–Pugh liver disease grade A and liver damage grade A. Levels of tumor makers such as carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, α-fetoprotein (AFP), and protein induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II were within the normal ranges. Dynamic abdominal computed tomography represented a ring-like enhanced mass 35 mm in diameter at segment 7 at the early phase . The enhancement was prolonged to the late phase through the portal phase, while the shape was irregular . Dynamic magnetic resonance imaging revealed that the tumor had a low signal intensity upon T1 weighting and a high signal intensity upon T2 weighting . Diffusion-weighted images identified that the tumor had remarkably high signal intensity. The tumors have ring-like enhancement at the early phase that was not detected throughout the tumor at the hepatocyte phase . Radiological findings suggested that the tumor was ICC or combined hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)–cholangiocellular carcinoma for which a laparoscopic S7 subsegmentectomy was performed. On operative finding, the surface of the liver was slightly irregular due to the hepatitis B viral infection. Under intraoperative ultrasonography guidance, the tumor was closed to the right hepatic vein without direct invasion and a laparoscopic S7 subsegmentectomy was completed. The operative time was 528 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 500 mL. On macroscopic examination, the tumor was solid and whitish with irregular margins . The tumor was 35 × 32 × 30 mm in dimension. Microscopically, most of the tumor cells had an enlarged nucleus–cytoplasmic ratio, and they proliferated into funicular or small alveolar structures with stromal tissue consisted of hyaline collagen fiber. The differentiation was poor adenocarcinoma with abundant clear cytoplasm . An immunohistochemical examination revealed that the cells tested positive for cytokeratin 7 (CK7), CK19, and CD56 but negative for CK20, CD10, AFP, and thyroid transcription factor-1 . Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as a clear cell ICC, T1aN0M0, stage IA according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer/Union for International Cancer Control staging classification 8th edition.
On the 7th postoperative day, she was discharged without complications. Although no adjuvant chemotherapy was administered, her postoperative course was uneventful without a recurrence at 2 year after surgery.