A 52-year-old female patient with history of ischemic heart disease and untreated essential hypertension for decades was admitted with somnolence, disorientation, 4/5 right-sided hemiparesis and high blood pressure (200/110 mm Hg).
Based on reports from her relatives, her family history was only positive for essential hypertension (no other cardio- or cerebrovascular diseases) and at the time of admission the non-compliant patient had not been taking any of her prescribed medications for a long time (including antihypertensives or antithrombotics).
Urgent non-contrast cranial computer tomography (CT) scan showed bilateral thalamic hemorrhages, accompanied by bilateral intraventricular propagation and subarachnoid component along the frontal, parietal and occipital lobes . Small pontine hemorrhages were also seen . CT angiography did not show any active contrast extravasation or macrovascular source of bleeding. There were no signs of sinus or deep cerebral vein thrombosis. Coagulation laboratory parameters (international normalized ratio (INR), activated partial thrombin time (APTT), prothrombin time (PT), platelet count) were in normal range. On ECG there was normofrequent sinus rhythm. HbA1c was 5,7%.
The patient was admitted to our neuro-intensive care unit (NICU) and intravenous urapidil (50 mg/50 ml with a dosing rate of 5 ml/h in a perfusor) was initiated within 6 hours of the symptom onset, with the target goal of systolic blood pressure reduction between 130 and 150 mm Hg. On the next day additional combination oral antihypertensive medications (1 × 20 mg enalapril, 2 × 5 mg amlodipine, 1 × 2 mg doxazosin) were initiated. On the following days the dose of iv. urapidil was gradually reduced, and on the 5th day of administration it could be stopped. Hypertensive crisis did not occur again during her hospital stay.
On the 5th day the patient was transferred from NICU to our regular Stroke Unit in a normotensive, stable condition, her hemiparesis improved to 3/5 and was still somnolent.
Six weeks after admission she became fully alert, right-sided hemiparesis gradually improved.
Follow-up CT scans on day 4, 13, 25 showed a slow, but steady regression of the hemorrhages.
Due to her mental status and decreased level of consciousness, she was initially unsuitable for a detailed cognitive evaluation. Later repeated neuropsychological assessment at week 1, 2, 4 and 6 showed a slow and moderate improvement of a major neurocognitive impairment. During this time, she received cognitive rehabilitation by a clinical psychologist. At discharge her Mini Mental State Examination score was 13/30 and Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination II score was 42/100.
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan on the eighth week depicted subacute-chronic stages of the bilateral thalamic hemorrhages, regression of perifocal vasogenic edema, 1 cerebral microbleed in the left external capsule and 3 in the pons. Leukoencephalopathy or any other underlying abnormality was not seen. [ (A, B)]
At discharge she was in normotensive, alert, had no focal neurological signs, walked on her own without any aid but was unable to care for herself due to lack of motivation, spatial and temporal disorientation and cognitive deficit. The patient was eventually discharged after 2 months to a chronic care unit and placed under guardianship as she remained incapacitated.
At discharge combined antihypertensive medication ACE-inhibitor (enalapril), calcium channel blocker (amlodipine), alpha-adrenergic receptor blocker (doxazosin) and diuretic (indapamide) were prescribed for secondary prevention. In her discharge documentation we highlighted the importance of the strict blood pressure control (target blood pressure: <140/90 mm Hg, daily blood pressure measurement, keeping documented blood pressure diary) for her family doctor and caregiver staff in order to avoid another possible hypertensive crisis.