A 62-year-old Caucasian man with end-stage renal disease presented to our hospital because of a four-day history of fever, diarrhea and the need for emergency dialysis due to hyperkalemia. Our patient had been treated with hemodialysis for one year. Over the last month, a temporary non-tunneled catheter had been used for vascular access because of arteriovenous graft thrombosis. However, he had missed the two last dialysis sessions. His prior medical history included diabetes mellitus type 2 and systemic arterial hypertension. During the hemodialysis procedure, our patient experienced shock and respiratory insufficiency with a requirement for endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation. An electrocardiogram revealed ST-segment depression in leads V4 to V6, suggesting an episode of acute myocardial ischemia. An emergency coronary arteriography was performed and showed severe stenosis of the proximal circumflex and anterior inter-ventricular coronary branches. Percutaneous coronary intervention with successful stent implantation was performed in both arteries. Because of our patient’s poor hemodynamic condition, despite the use of vasopressor and inotropic drugs, an intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation was placed and our patient was admitted to our intensive care unit (ICU). A rise in cardiac troponin and creatine kinase (CK)-MB levels confirmed the diagnosis of myocardial infarction.
Broad-spectrum intravenous antibiotics were initiated because of our patient’s previous history of fever and diarrhea. Peripheral blood cultures obtained at admission tested positive for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Culture of the removed dialysis catheter tip also grew MRSA.
On the fifth day of our patient’s ICU stay, echocardiography showed relevant pericardial effusion with impaired right ventricular filling. Pericardial drainage was performed and 500mL of purulent fluid drained. Cultures again tested positive for MRSA. A transesophageal echocardiogram revealed no valvular vegetation.
On the seventh day after our patient’s admission, ocular opacity was observed. An aqueous humor sample was collected and a culture grown tested positive for MRSA, which allowed a diagnosis of endogenous bacterial endophthalmitis to be made. Neurological clinical examination revealed nuchal rigidity. A lumbar puncture was performed and cerebrospinal fluid culture grew MRSA, confirming the diagnosis of bacterial meningitis. Septic arthritis of the right knee was diagnosed based on a positive synovial fluid culture for MRSA. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax showed multiple cavity nodules in both lungs, and sphenoid sinus tomography showed sphenoid sinusitis, probably of staphylococcal etiology.
On our patient’s 14th day in the ICU, a mitral regurgitation murmur was diagnosed. A second transesophageal echocardiography procedure showed a mobile image attached to the mitral valve leaflet with the appearance of vegetation, and an image compatible with ruptured anterior mitral chordae tendineae, resulting in severe mitral regurgitation. One day later, our patient experienced a refractory shock followed by cardiac arrest non-responsive to resuscitative efforts, and died.
An autopsy was performed and our patient’s heart was observed to have moderate enlargement. The pericardial surface was covered with greenish granular exudate and loose adhesions were present between the visceral and parietal layers of the pericardium. Concentric hypertrophy with mild dilatation of the left ventricle was observed. The subendocardial layer of the anterior, lateral and inferior walls of the left ventricle showed many yellowish areas with softened granular centers . Complete rupture of the anterior papillary muscle was also found , but the mitral valve leaflets did not present vegetation. The aortic, tricuspid and pulmonary valves were normal. Microscopic examination revealed acute purulent pericarditis and multiple subendocardial abscesses with Gram-positive cocci colonies within areas of healing necrotic myocardium, including the ruptured papillary muscle . Histological evaluation of the coronary arteries showed an acute inflammatory process in the wall of the circumflex and anterior inter-ventricular branches, characterized by neutrophil infiltration and the presence of Gram-positive cocci . Abscesses were also found in the lungs and spleen. Pulmonary edema was present.