We present the case of a 69-year-old man with type II diabetes mellitus with ocular end-organ dysfunction, on oral hypoglycaemic agents, and with hypertension. He was also affected by an end stage renal failure requiring haemodialysis three times a week. Furthermore, he had other co-morbidities: ischaemic cardiomyopathy treated with oral anticoagulant therapy, mild chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMML), dyslipidemia and obesity.
In June 2016, a permanent urinary Foley’s catheter was positioned due to urinary retention.
In August 2017, the patient was seen to the emergency room (ER) of the Montichiari Hospital, Brescia, Italy. On admission, the patient was afebrile and upon physical examination, his vital signs (arterial pressure, heart rate and respiratory rate) were within normal limits. The patient gave a 3-day history of ongoing macroscopic haematuria and reported no lower urinary tract symptoms or other symptoms suggesting an inflammatory response or bleeding tendency. The patient had no history of abdominal or pelvic surgery. The international normalized ratio (INR) was 2.5 and hematologic parameters were within the normal range except red blood cell count, which was decreased (3 × 10 6 /μL), related to kidney failure. Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) was 52 mmol/mol. Finally, he was discharged with a hemorrhagic cystitis diagnosis and he was empirically treated with ciprofloxacin at a renally-adjusted dose (250 mg 2/die for 1 week) with the complete resolution of the macroscopic heamaturia.
In September 2017, the patient was seen again to the ER for another episode of macro-hematuria. On admission, he had a temperature of 36.5 °C, the blood pressure and the heart rate were within the normal limits, and there weren’t relevant findings on physical examination; blood cultures were performed but they were negative. Glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) was 39 mmol/mol.
The patient had already started at home ciprofloxacin (250 mg 2/die) independently, so the clinician suggested that he continued this therapy for 1 week.
In the same month, the patient underwent a full urological investigation of haematuria, to exclude cancer or other abnormalities, a transrectal ultrasound, which identified a benign prostate adenoma, a cystoscopy which was negative for neoplasia, and a urinary cytology screening, which was negative for malignant cells. Despite the antibiotic therapy, the patient had symptoms related to urinary tract infection: bladder tenderness, hematuria and pelvic discomfort.
Therefore, a urine sample for culture was obtained by removing the indwelling catheter and obtaining a midstream specimen analysed by the laboratory of Microbiology and Virology of the Spedali Civili Hospital, Brescia, Italy; then, a new Foley’s catheter has been replaced. Urinalysis showed the presence of nitrites, leukocyte esterase and 6–7 leukocytes per high power field by microscopy.
Patient was discharged with clear instructions given to him for a proper care of the urinary catheter and for a correct hand hygiene to prevent infections, and the prescription of an empirical antibiotic therapy. It comprised levofloxacin at 250 mg for 10 days, switched then to amikacin 500 mg intravenously for the following three dialysis sessions (for a total of one week) for cover against multi-drug resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa, as guided by local epidemiology.
The urine culture grew a > 105 colony-forming units (cfu)/ml of a gram-negative rod. The bacterium was isolated from Columbia CNA agar (BioMérieux, Florence, Italy) after 24 h of incubation in aerobic conditions. The colonies appeared round, mucoid, yellow pigmented and with a fruity smell. The initial identification as Myroides spp. was performed using a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The definitive identification was obtained with 16SrRNA gene sequencing. The obtained sequence was compared with the sequences in the GenBank database and it exhibited a 100% identity homology with Myroides odoratimimus strain BK21.
The antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) was first performed by using the standard disc diffusion on Mueller-Hinton agar. Then, the minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were determined by automated microdilution broth test (BD-Phoenix NMIC-502, Becton Dickinson, Milan, Italy). The minimum inhibitory concentrations (MICs) were confirmed by Etest (BioMérieux). Since the breakpoints for Myroides spp. were unavailable, the interpretation of the results was performed according to the EUCAST guidelines for non-species related PK-PD breakpoints. The isolated strain was resistant to all beta-lactams, with and without inhibitors (Piperacillin/Tazobactam, MIC = 64; Ticarcillin/Clavulanate, MIC = 128; Ceftazidime/Avibactam, MIC = 32; Imipenem, MIC = 8; Meropenem, MIC = 4) and it was also resistant to fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, fosfomycin, nitrofurantoin and polymyxin. This conferred to the isolated strain a multi-drug resistance pattern. This strain was susceptible only to trimethoprim /sulfamethoxazole with a MIC of 1/19. A test was performed to assess beta-lactamase and carbapenemase production (ROSCO diagnostics, Biolife, Milan, Italy) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The results showed the absence of synergy between the meropenem disk and the dipicolinic acid, the phenylboronic acid, the EDTA and the cloxacillin.
In October 2017, due to the inadequacy of empiric therapy, the patient suffered from another hemorrhagic cystitis episode. Another urine culture confirmed the presence of a multi-drug resistant Myroides odoratimimus strain. According to the antibiotic susceptibility results, the patient was treated with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole at a renally-adjusted dose (160/800 mg daily for 2 weeks) which led to the resolution of macroscopic haematuria. In addition, in the same month, in order to reduce the possibility of recurrent UTIs, the urinary catheter was definitively removed.
Then, we tested its ability to grow in the form of biofilm. A Crystal Violet assay (CV) was performed to evaluate the production of biofilm at different concentrations of glucose and it was measured by spectrophotometry (NanoDrop™ Spectrophotometer, Thermo Fisher). The results indicated that this strain could be classified as a “strong biofilm-producer” , which is able to produce a high amount of biofilm when it is compared to the reference strains (Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1, strain ATCC 15692). The increase of glucose concentration facilitates the production of biofilm by Myroides odoratimimus, contributing to an increase in vivo of its virulence. Therefore, a strong biofilm-producing bacteria, like Myroides odoratimimus, is well protected against antibiotics. A phylogenetic analysis was performed using the Quick Bioinformatics Phylogeny of Prokaryotes web-server and the data were then re-analysed using the Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis software (MEGA 7.0.26) . Geographical phylogeny was then extrapolated from the Gene-Bank database with a self-written programme. The results showed that our strain clustered with a strain isolated in Jena, Germany . The geographic analysis showed that this pathogen is poorly represented in Western Europe .