A 78-year-old asymptomatic man with no significant past medical history, who had smoked 20 cigarettes a day for 50 years underwent preoperative computed tomographic imaging (CT) for chronic perforated otitis media; the imaging examination incidentally revealed an irregular tumor measured about 50 mm in diameter in the lower pole of the left kidney and also a large left lung tumor with multiple lymph node metastases, involving the nodes in the left pulmonary hilum, mediastinum, and bronchial bifurcation . The Karnofsky performance status was rated as 0. First of all, video-assisted thoracic surgery to obtain histological confirmation of lung metastasis from the RCC revealed invasion of the chest wall by the left lung tumor. On the other hand, histological examination of the left lung tumor showed features consistent with SCC, and IHC revealed a positive result for tumor PD-L1 expression (clone 22C3, tumor proportion score (TPS): 1–49%) . Positron emission tomography revealed supraclavicular lymph node metastases. The R.E.N.A.L. nephrometry score was 6 (maximal diameter: 2; exophytic properties: 1; nearness of the tumor to the collecting system: 1; location relative to the polar line was entirely below the lower polar line: 2) . Three weeks after the lung surgery, the renal tumor was treated by intraperitoneal RAPN performed by an expert surgeon, and the postoperative course was uneventful. Histological examination of the left renal tumor revealed clear cell carcinoma (WHO/ISUP nuclear grade 3) invading the perirenal fat tissue, but neither invading the renal pelvis nor the surgical margin . No venous or lymphatic invasion was seen either. While additional treatment of the left lung carcinoma was necessary, the patient refused any treatment due to the intense burden posed by the repeated examinations and surgeries. Four months after the RAPN, the patient neither had hematuria nor positive urinary cytology, but CT revealed left hydronephrosis caused by a markedly enhancing upper ureteral tumor. Multiple right lung metastases appeared and the left lung tumor also increased in size . Considering the volumes of the tumors, treatment of the lung SCC seemed to take priority over that of the metastases from the RCC, which was categorized into the intermediate category according to the IMDC classification (the detection of neutrophilia and metastases within 1 year of the nephrectomy) . Treatment with a combination of atezolizumab (1200 mg/body), nanoparticle albumin-bound paclitaxel (100 mg/m2), and carboplatin (area under the blood concentration–time curve 6) was administered by intravenous infusion of the drugs every 3 to 4 weeks for up to 4 cycles. The primary lung SCC with the lymph node metastases showed marked regression, while the patient developed persistent appetite loss. Moreover, 4 cycles of atezolizumab (1200 mg/body) alone were administered for maintenance by intravenous infusion every 4–6 weeks. By 6 months later, the left lung SCC with lymph node metastases had almost disappeared, whereas the left upper ureteral metastasis and right lung metastases from the RCC showed rapid progression . The patient showed a good performance status and the tumor volumes of all the metastatic tumors in the multiple organs seemed low, and therefore, open intraperitoneal nephroureterectomy was selected, even though treatment with other ICIs, tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), or a combination of the two was considered. Intraoperative exploration showed that the left upper ureteral tumor was tightly adherent to the mesenterium of the descending colon, and the left renal hilum was completely covered with hard bulky inflammatory tissues. Histological examination of the tumor in the ureteral wall compressing the lumen, which measured approximately 20 mm in diameter, revealed features consistent with clear cell carcinoma (WHO/ISUP grade 2) . Then, four right lung metastases measuring less than 20 mm in diameter were treated by partial lobectomy via a small thoracic incision. Histological examination of these tumors also revealed findings consistent with clear cell carcinoma . Two months after nephroureterectomy, a left lung metastasis in the lower lobe that appeared measuring about 10 mm in diameter seemed to be a metastasis from the RCC rather than a primary SCC, based on the previous clinical course. Considering the lack of efficacy of atezolizumab reported previously, it was thought that the lung metastasis would respond to TKI or TKI therapy combined with ICI therapy rather than to sequential ICI therapy . However, after repeated attempts were made to obtain informed consent, the patient expressed a strong desire to continue to work rather than to live longer and rejected the therapies, including TKI therapy, considering the risk of adverse events, such as diarrhea and hand-foot syndrome that occur often and deteriorate the quality of life [, ]. Therefore, ICIs that exert their efficacy via a mechanism of action different from that of avelumab are desirable. The patient was treated with the combination of nivolumab (240 mg) and ipilimumab (1 mg/kg) administered concomitantly by intravenous infusion every 3 weeks . A month later, the patient complained of back pain. Vertebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) performed 2 months later revealed a compression fracture without bone metastasis. After 2 cycles of this regimen, the patient needed hospitalization for general fatigue and appetite loss. The results of thyroid and adrenal hormone tests were almost within normal range, while the hypercalcemia associated with elevated levels of parathyroid hormone-related protein improved with subcutaneous injection of denosumab. While the lung SCC showed sustained response, CT revealed new metastatic lesions in the right lung and progression of the left lung metastasis, accompanied by liver metastasis, peritoneal carcinomatosis, and left retroperitoneal recurrence. Vertebral MRI showed multiple bone metastases. Radiotherapy was administered for the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae to relieve the severe back pain. One week after the hospitalization, the patient was diagnosed as having respiratory insufficiency caused by cancerous lymphangiomatosis with congestive heart failure. Six months after nephroureterectomy, the patient died of RCC. Subsequent studies revealed negative results of IHC (TPS < 1%) for PD-L1 in the primary RCC and ureteral and lung metastases from the RCC , these in RCC could have not routinely been performed in Japanese clinical diagnosis.