A 64-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital with edema that had persisted over 4 mo.
The patient reported edema of the face and lower limbs, particularly in the afternoon, and he had not received any special treatment for this symptom.
No other relevant history of past illness was reported.
No other relevant family history was reported.
On examination, the patient presented with multiple nodules and lumps with a smooth surface that could be seen throughout the body . Enlargement of the cervical, axillary, and inguinal lymph nodes was clearly observed.
Laboratory examinations revealed severe proteinuria (3.77 g/24 h; normal range, 0–0.15 g/24 h), hypoalbuminemia (1.8 g/dL), hyperlipidemia (cholesterol 15.7 mmoL, triglyceride 3.34 mmol/L), and increased serum creatinine levels (152 μmoL; normal range, 44–133 μmoL). These clinical parameters suggested that the patient’s symptoms were a result of nephrotic syndrome.
A kidney biopsy was performed and the analysis of nine glomeruli revealed one glomerulus indicative of glomerulosclerosis and one indicative of segmental glomerulosclerosis with peripheral podocytosis, vacuolation, and granular degeneration in the renal tubular epithelial cells . These pathological findings were indicative of FSGS, not otherwise specified (NOS). Immunohistochemistry of the kidney revealed that the glomerular capillary loop, peritubular capillary, and arterioles were positive for CD34 , and the proximal tubule cells were positive for CD117 but negative for DOG1. Fat degeneration and necrosis were observed in the lymph node, and no tumor metastasis was revealed . Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the skin showed spindle cell tumor-like hyperplasia, which was slightly heteromorphic with focal necrosis and rarely mitotic . Immunohistochemistry staining revealed that the tumor cells were positive for CD34, Bcl-2, CD99, Ki67, and vimentin but negative for smooth muscle actin (SMA) and S-100. Representative immunohistochemical staining for CD34 is shown in Figure . The diagnosis was a desmoid tumor (DT) based on the above immunohistochemistry results.
Then, gastroscopy was performed and the results revealed a 0.6 cm mucosal mass that was hard to the touch, and poor mobility could be seen in the greater curvature of the stomach . Several 0.4-2 cm masses were observed in the anterior wall of the middle and upper of the gastric fundus with fractured surfaces and fresh blood . Moreover, pathological examination revealed the destruction of the gastric solid membrane structure and spindle cell tumor-like hyperplasia with mild dysplasia , and epithelioid cells were occasionally seen with 6-8 mitotic figures/50 high power fields . CD117 , CD34 , and SMA were positive by immunohistochemistry, and DOG1 was probably positive, and S-100 and CK were negative. These findings supported the diagnosis of GIST. Additional immunohistochemistry revealed that the skin was positive for CD117 and DOG1 , the two most sensitive and specific markers for the diagnosis of GIST. In addition, a heterozygous missense mutation was found in the NPHP4 gene of the patient (NPHP4: NM_015102: exon17: c.2198G>A: p.G733D), which explained the occurrence of GIST and FSGS and indicated that this was not a random association.