An 8-year-old neutered female domestic longhair cat was presented for investigation of a 48 h history of progressive lethargy and pelvic limb general proprioceptive ataxia. The general physical examination revealed tachypnoea (56 breaths/min) and no other abnormalities. The cat’s body weight was 5.8 kg. Neurological examination revealed ambulatory paraparesis, general proprioceptive ataxia in both pelvic limbs, mildly delayed postural reactions in the left pelvic limb and suspected discomfort on handling, although no clear focus of pain could be identified. The remainder of the neurological examination, comprising assessment of mentation, behaviour, posture, segmental spinal reflexes and cranial nerves, was unremarkable. The neuroanatomical localisation was to the T3–L3 spinal cord segments.
Haematology and comprehensive biochemistry profiles were performed, and no significant abnormalities were detected apart from elevated creatine kinase (1668 IU/l; reference interval [RI] 70–190). Owing to tachypnoea noted on initial presentation, as well as the discomfort that could not be localised, radiographs of the thorax, abdomen, vertebral column, hips and pelvis were obtained, which were all unremarkable.
MRI was performed using a 1.5 Tesla scanner (Signa EchoSpeed; GE Healthcare), initially of the thoracolumbar spinal cord and vertebral column. No lesions were seen, and therefore the MRI was extended to include the rest of the vertebral column and the brain. No abnormalities were identified, apart from a mildly enlarged presternal lymph node. Immediately following MRI, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples were obtained from both the cerebellomedullary cistern and lumbar subarachnoid space. The cerebellomedullary sample was cytologically and biochemically within normal limits, whereas analysis of the lumbar sample showed elevations in both nucleated cell count (11/µl; RI <8) and protein concentration (1.77 g/l; RI 0.00–0.45) with a normal erythrocyte count (41/µl; RI <250). Nucleated cells comprised 70% lymphocytes, most of which were small with occasional reactive forms, 20% large mononuclear cells and 10% non-degenerate neutrophils. CSF was also submitted for PCR testing for coronavirus, herpesvirus and Toxoplasma gondii. A patient-side ELISA (SNAP Combo FIV/FeLV Combo; IDEXX) was negative for feline leukaemia virus antigen and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) antibodies. A blood sample for serology for T gondii antibodies was submitted. Abdominal ultrasound and urinalysis performed on a sample obtained by cystocentesis were unremarkable.
Considering the rapidity of the onset of the clinical signs, their progressive nature, the absence of visible lesions on MRI and the abnormalities identified on CSF analysis, an inflammatory process was considered most likely. Prednisolone was commenced at anti-inflammatory doses (0.4 mg/kg q12h), pending results of infectious disease testing. The patient’s neurological status markedly deteriorated over the following 48 h. The cat became non-ambulatory tetraparetic, with reduced withdrawal reflexes in both thoracic limbs, leading to a neurolocalisation to the C6–T2 spinal cord segments.
MRI of the spinal cord and vertebral column from the cervicothoracic junction to the T7 vertebrae was repeated ( and ). Images were obtained in T2-weighted (T2W) sequences in dorsal, sagittal and transverse planes, in T1-weighted sequences in sagittal and transverse planes, in STIR (short tau inversion recovery) sequence in a dorsal plane and post-gadolinium (0.1 mmol/kg IV [Gadovist, Bayer]) in fat-saturated T1-weighted (T1W) sequences in transverse and sagittal planes. The transverse sequences showed bilateral, moderate, diffuse thickening, with T2W hyperintensity and T1W hypointensity of the C7, C8 and T1 spinal nerves, with the greatest enlargement at the C8 spinal nerve on the left side. The thickening extended from the dorsal and ventral nerve roots, with mild left-sided cord compression, through the intervertebral foramina and to the brachial plexuses, which were also mildly enlarged on both sides, more so on the left. On post-contrast T1W images, the thickened spinal nerves showed marked contrast enhancement, which was present to a milder degree in both brachial plexuses.
CSF was again obtained from the lumbar subarachnoid space. Analysis revealed albuminocytological dissociation. The nucleated cell count was 2/µl (RI 0–8) and total protein was 1.8 g/l (RI 0.00–0.45). At this stage, important differential diagnoses included hypertrophic neuritis and neoplasia (eg, lymphoma). The previously submitted tests for infectious disease were all negative. The prednisolone dosage was increased to an immunosuppressive dosage (1.7 mg/kg PO q12h) to treat the possible hypertrophic neuritis. Clinical improvement occurred within 48 h. The patient became ambulatory but remained tetraparetic, and was discharged into its owners’ care.
Two weeks later, rapid and marked deterioration occurred over 48 h. The cat became anorexic and lethargic. On re-assessment, dyspnoea, nasal discharge, tachycardia and a paradoxical breathing pattern were present. The neurological examination revealed obtundation, generalised weakness and non-ambulatory tetraparesis. The owners requested euthanasia without further diagnostic investigations and consented to a post-mortem examination.
Macroscopic post-mortem findings included mild ascites, mild hydrothorax, mild multifocal ulcerative gastritis and the presence of multifocal, round, approximately 3 mm diameter white/yellow lesions in the lungs, liver, kidney, perirenal adipose tissue and urinary bladder. Examination of the nerve roots at the level of the cervical intumescence of the spinal cord revealed diffuse, mild-to-moderate thickening with white/yellow discolouration.
Histopathology revealed a malignant round-cell neoplastic proliferation in the liver, kidney, urinary bladder, peritoneal cavity and stomach, characterised by multifocal accumulations of round cells, arranged in sheets, supported by a scant amount of fibrovascular stroma. The neoplastic cells had distinct borders, a moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm and contained one round-to-oval nucleus with prominent nucleoli. Anisokaryosis and anisocytosis were moderate to severe, and several multinucleated cells were identified. On average, there were three mitoses per high-power field with atypical mitotic figures. Atypical round cells were also identified in the lumen of several vessels in the fat adjacent to the lumbosacral spinal cord.
In the cervical intumescence of the spinal cord within the white matter, some axons were mildly swollen and others were replaced by activated macrophages. In the dorsal root ganglia at the level of the cervical intumescence, neuronal degeneration was present with central chromatolysis and accumulation of lipofuscin with concomitant multifocal increase in the number of glial cells and infiltration of small lymphocytes. The lymphocytic infiltration was extending into the nerve roots and spinal nerves, without evidence of the previously described atypical round-cell population. This was therefore considered to be part of a reactive, potentially paraneoplastic, inflammatory process.
On immunohistochemical analysis, the neoplastic cells stained positive for MUM1 (a plasma cell marker). No MUM1-positive cells were detected in the spinal nerve roots or spinal nerves. The final diagnosis was non-cutaneous extramedullary plasmacytoma with multiorgan involvement and paraneoplastic ganglioradiculoneuritis.