A 53-year-old woman underwent left ocular enucleation for choroidal malignant melanoma 13 years prior to admission. Histopathological examination of the enucleated left eye showed a spindle-type choroidal melanoma that did not invade the sclera. Subsequently, the patient was followed up annually by an ophthalmologist (YH).
She visited a clinic with complaints of epigastric pain. A large liver tumor was observed on abdominal ultrasonography, and she was referred to our hospital. There were no elevations in serum tumor markers (AFP, PIVKA-II, 5-SCD, or NSE), and her liver was in good condition: Child-Pugh score was 5 points, class A. Liver damage was defined as grade A, according to the Liver Cancer Study Group of Japan . Endoscopy showed no gastrointestinal malignant lesions. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple liver tumors in the right lobe, 49 mm in diameter with ring enhancement in subsegment (S) 5/6, and 14 and 8 mm without any enhancement in S7 and S5, respectively . Lymph node swelling was not observed. Lung CT revealed no definite lung metastasis except for a small nodule, which had already been detected during the primary surgery. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the main lesion showed very high intensity on T1-weighted with fat suppression, suggesting melanin deposition . The other two lesions indicated low and high intensities on T1-weighted with fat suppression and on T2-weighted imaging, respectively. Subtraction images displayed enhancement in all three tumors. Whole-body F-18-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan revealed FDG deposition in the main tumor, unlike the others . These tumors were diagnosed as multiple liver metastases of choroidal malignant melanoma.
A right hepatectomy was performed. Black swollen lymph nodes in the hepatoduodenal ligament were resected based on the suspicion of lymph node metastases . The operation time was 262 min, and blood loss was 380 ml. She was discharged without postoperative complications.
On gross inspection, the S5/6 and S5 tumors were observed to be melanotic, unlike the third tumor . On microscopy, spindle-shape atypical cells were observed in all three tumors. The S5/6 tumor showed strong immunostaining for Melan A, HMB45, and S-100, while the other two tumors showed weak staining . Programmed death (PD)-ligand 1 expression was not evaluated. Although immunoreactivity was partially different among the three tumors, all tumors were diagnosed as malignant liver metastases with spindle-shape atypical cells and HMB-45-positive cells. Spindle-shape atypical cells were not observed in the perihilar black lymph nodes, although there was a rich melanin deposition. Genetic screening revealed the v-raf murine sarcoma viral oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) status as wild-type. She was treated with nivolumab (3 mg/kg) every 2 weeks, and she was followed up with whole-body PET-CT and head MRI scans every 6 months according to the National Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines for cutaneous melanoma . No recurrence was observed for 22 months after surgery. She has not suffered from any serious adverse events.