A 16-year old male patient visited our outpatient clinic with a chief complaint of decreased vision for about 8 years in his left eye. He had a history of close contact with cats and dogs, with no history of any other systemic illness, trauma or surgery. The best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in his right eye and 20/400 in his left eye. The intraocular pressure was normal in both eyes. There was sensory exotropia in his left eye. No inflammatory cells were found in his anterior chamber or vitreous OU. The fundus exam of his left eye showed a white oval-shaped ERM with the size of of 2.0 papillary diameter, some pigmented chorioretinal scars, and yellow-white round retinochoroidal lesions on the temporal side of the macula . Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) confirmed a thickened ERM with vitreous retinal traction involving the macula, and ellipsoid zone defects in the central macula .
A preliminary diagnosis of parasitic infection was made based on the choroidoretinopathy in the posterior pole of his left eye. To further confirm this diagnosis, 2.0 ml of vitreous humor was collected during the following vitrectomy and sent for parasite testing. Meanwhile, his blood sample was also collected and sent for serological testing. During the surgery, the ERM was peeled off with caution, together with a brown pigmented lesion attached beneath . The proliferative membranes were sent for histopathological examination, which later on reported “hyalinosis of local organization found in the samples” . Vitreous sample analysis found Toxoplasma DNA undetectable, but Toxoplasma IgG to be 6.95 IU/ml (reference range less than 4 IU/ml). His serum Toxoplasma IgG was found to be 20 IU/ml (reference range was less than 20 IU/ml). The Goldmann-Witmer coefficient (GWC) value of Toxoplasma gondii was 36.72 (reference range 0–2). Based on those test results listed above, the final diagnose was ocular toxoplasmosis involving his left eye.
Unfortunately, 1 month after the surgery, the patient’s BCVA was still 20/400 (no effect of correction). His intraocular pressure was still within normal limits. Unexpectedly, his left exotropia resolved after the surgery. The lens and vitreous remained unremarkable. Postoperative fundus examination revealed no obvious changes of the pigmented chorioretinal scars and yellow-white retinochoroidal lesions on the temporal side of the macula. A repeat SD-OCT showed a reduction in central macular thickness .