A 57-year-old woman was diagnosed with SS in stage IVA (T4NXM0B2) in 2011. This patient was treated in first-line with CHOP (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone every two weeks) for three cycles, but this therapy was interrupted for intolerance and absence of response. She subsequently underwent several treatments from May 2011 to April 2014: extracorporeal phototherapy plus bexarotene in 2011, total skin external body irradiation in 2013, extracorporeal phototherapy plus bexarotene again in 2014 and finally gemcitabine (1000mg/m2) plus oxaliplatin (100 mg/m2) for 11 cycles in 2015, with progressive disease after each of them. Because of this reason, in July 2015, this patient was referred to our Institution, where she was enrolled in the MAVORIC trial, and she was randomized in the mogamulizumab arm. She was erythrodermic and symptomatic for intense pruritus and skin exfoliation . The patient received mogamulizumab 1mg/kg once a week for the first cycle, in a 28-days cycle, and then a dosage of 1mg/kg every two weeks. The treatment per protocol was intended until progression.
Our patient obtained an impressively rapid improvement of symptoms already from the third cycle, while a partial response (PR) was achieved after the fifth cycle. A complete response (CR) was documented after the 10th cycle . Therapy was well tolerated and went on without complications until the 27th cycle when the patient developed a plaque skin lesion in the zygomatic area (without pruritus). In the suspect of disease relapse, a punch-cutaneous biopsy was performed in September 2017 and then again in October 2017 for the persistence of this lesion. Results of both biopsies were consistent with a drug-related lesion, with no signs of active disease. Our patient received 30 cycles of mogamulizumab overall, then we decided to discontinue her from the treatment protocol in October 2017, due to the persistence of this lesion compatible with persistent grade 2 drug toxicity, histologically documented.
After mogamulizumab discontinuation, this patient was admitted to the follow-up phase. The cutaneous zygomatic lesion quickly disappeared, and no further lesions appeared after that. At the latest available follow-up, 2.5 years after therapy discontinuation, she is still in CR without having undergone further therapy after mogamulizumab.
The patient gave written, informed consent to publish her data and images.