In November 2014, a 65-year-old white woman with a history of progressive dyspnea presented to our hospital for evaluation. She complained about dyspnea on exertion and had had several infectious exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) during the last year, one requiring hospitalization. During those exacerbations she had been treated with tapering doses of systemic corticosteroids showing improvement in hypoxemia and obstructive symptoms. At the point of presentation her medication for inhalation included: budesonide/formoterol 400 μg/12 μg twice a day, tiotropium bromide 18 μg once a day, and salbutamol as needed, which she was using at least once a day. Her general patient history was negative for atopic diseases or allergies. At the age of 54 she was diagnosed as having COPD due to dyspnea and typical lung function tests. She stated that she had never smoked tobacco. A skin prick test revealed no hypersensitivity. Since the diagnosis of COPD had been established she was regularly followed-up by a pulmonologist. At hospital admission, her general condition was slightly disturbed. She was hypoxic at rest. The saturation level of oxygen in hemoglobin (SaO2) was 92%, without providing indication for oxygen therapy.
A body plethysmography showed forced vital capacity (FVC) 1.47 L (62%), forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) of 0.8 L (40%), airway resistance of 1.62 kPa × second/L (538.9%), residual volume of 3.30 L (188%), and a total lung capacity of 4.50 L (108%). Those results were evaluated as severe obstruction with massive air trapping compatible with the diagnosis of COPD. During the further evaluation process different methods of imaging were conducted. A chest X-ray showed well-ventilated lungs and discreet apical pleural callosity. Transthoracic echocardiography showed normal cardiac structures without evidence of pulmonary hypertension. In a computed tomography (CT) scan, disseminated small nodules between 2 and 4 mm in all lobes, ground glass characteristic, and partial mosaicism on both lungs were strikingly apparent. Focal bronchial thickening could be seen. Furthermore, mediastinal lymph nodes were heightened .
As a result of lung imaging, bronchoscopy was initiated. Forceps biopsies of her central airways were taken, showing normal respiratory mucosa without any changes suspicious for a specific inflammation. In particular, granulomas or giant cells could not be detected. Due to ongoing clinical suspicion for interstitial lung disease a further attempt of forcing a histological diagnosis was made.
By method of transbronchial cryobiopsy (ERBECRYO2, diameter 1.9 mm; Tübingen, Germany), lung tissue samples of the middle and inferior lobes of her right lung were gained. The material was formalin fixed and paraffin embedded, cut into 4 μm-thick sections and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E). The fragmented biopsy measured an overall area of 30.9 mm2 compared with the initial biopsy of 7.5 mm2 (Mirax Viewer Image Software Version 1.12, Zeiss Microimaging, Oberkochen, Germany and 3D Tech, Budapest, Hungary). Besides small airways, a regular lung parenchyma with an alveolar basic structure could be seen. The bronchioles were lined by a regular respiratory epithelium. Furthermore, in her bronchiolic mucosa, linear and nodular proliferates of small uniform cells with round to slightly ovoid nuclei and disperse chromatin were located within the epithelial basement membrane and bulged into the lumina . Peribronchiolar and perivascular aggregates of cells showing this morphology were also found, measuring less than 5 mm in diameter at maximum. No signs of malignancy could be found; neither could we find any mitotic activity, desmoplastic stroma reaction, or any invasive aspect. In association with the described cell cluster, slight fibrosis could be seen. In the Elastica van Gieson stain, the walls of some bronchioles were broadened and contained an increased amount of elastic fibers. Immunostainings revealed strong positivity for synaptophysin , chromogranin A, and CK7 in the cell cluster described. The proliferative index determined by Ki67% (Mib-1) was beneath 1% (antibodies by Roche, Rotkreuz, Switzerland). Based on these findings, the diagnosis of a neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia could be made and a possible association with DIPNECH was noted.
Due to concomitant bronchitis our patient received antibiotic therapy. Obstructive symptoms were treated with inhaled steroids and beta-2-mimetics continuously. Comparing current CT scans of our patient with scans in 2014 no significant changes are described. Last ambulatory checks occurred in January and May of 2016. The course of disease and the extent of limitation of lung function have remained stable.