A 48-year-old right handed male presented to us in the orthopaedics out patient department with chief complaints of deformity in the left forearm and loss of function of left forearm for the last two months. Patient had been earlier operated for bifocal fracture shaft of radius and fracture shaft of ulna by open reduction and internal fixation with square nails 4 years back. According to the patient, the square nail for radius was removed one year after primary surgery because of impingement but no record was available with the patient. Patient, a bus driver by occupation complained of progressive increase in forearm deformity that got aggravated for the last two months prior to seeking consultation in our institution.
On examination, there was gross deformity of left forearm with marked wasting and old healed surgical scar marks on dorsum and ulnar border on inspection ( and ). On palpation, there was painless abnormal mobility at all three fracture sites (two in radius and one in ulna). There was no distal neurovascular deficit.
Radiographs revealed bifocal atrophic non-union of radius with non-union of ulnar shaft fracture with broken square nail for ulna in situ . Patient was subsequently planned for the surgery after the complete workup. Under regional block, ulna was approached through direct subcutaneous approach. Broken square nail was removed followed by freshening of fracture ends and fixation with 7 Hole 3.5 mm Locking Compression Plate with bone grafting using blocks of cortico-cancellous graft harvested from the iliac crest. Using Thompson’s approach, radial non-unions were exposed, fracture ends at both the non-union sites were freshened followed by fixation with single 10 Hole 3.5 mm Locking Compression Plate after filling the gaps in between fracture ends with blocks of cortico-cancellous bone taken from the iliac crest. Wounds were closed on negative suction drains and above elbow back slab was applied . Patient was closely observed for the signs of compartment syndrome but the post operative period was uneventful.
After two weeks, skin staples and back slab was removed and patient was put on physiotherapy in the form of wrist and elbow range of motion exercises.
At 6 weeks follow up, fracture started showing signs ofunion and patient was allowed limited activity. At 12 weeks post operatively, full activities were allowed as fracture had united.
At one year follow up, the patient who could not hold anything in his left hand at the time of presenting to us, had resumed his occupation as a bus driver and was now holding steering wheel of bus using same left hand and had good functional and cosmetic results , with radiographs showing good consolidation of the fractures .