The patient was a 54-year-old Japanese male with no medical treatment history. However, an abdominal ultrasound performed during a routine medical checkup incidentally detected a solid mass in the abdominal cavity. The patient was referred to the medium-scale hospital for a more detailed examination, and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) was performed. The results showed an abdominal mass approximately 3 cm in size in the greater omentum, near the posterior wall of the stomach and transverse colon. Subsequently, the patient was referred to the department of gastrointestinal surgery at our hospital for further examination to obtain a definitive diagnosis.
Results of a detailed examination at our hospital revealed that the patient, working as an office employee, had no significant medical or surgical history. He smoked 20 cigarettes daily since age 20 years and consumed 250 mL of beer daily. The family history was significant for cancer, with his father diagnosed with rectal cancer at age 65 years, his mother with breast cancer at 60 years, and his maternal grandmother with pancreatic cancer at 55 years. Upon physical examination, the patient was asymptomatic with no abnormal physical or neurological findings. Vital signs were within normal limits. Laboratory investigations revealed a normal complete blood count, with white blood cells at 7000/μL, red blood cells at 4.69 million/μL, platelets at 28.1 × 103/μL, and hemoglobin at 15.8 g/dL. Renal function tests were within normal limits, with creatinine at 0.77 mg/dL and blood urea nitrogen at 11 mg/dL. Electrolyte levels were stable, with sodium (Na) at 141 mmol/L, chloride (Cl) at 105 mmol/L, potassium (K) at 4.3 mmol/L, and calcium (Ca) at 9.5 mg/dL. Liver enzymes, including aspartate aminotransferase at 19 U/L, alanine aminotransferase at 18 U/L, gamma-glutamyl transferase at 61 U/L, albumin at 4.5 g/dL, total protein at 7 g/dL, and total bilirubin at 1 mg/dL, were within normal ranges. Inflammatory markers were low, with C-reactive protein at 0.06 mg/dL; hemoglobin A1c was 5.3%, indicating no evidence of diabetes. Regarding the patient’s medication history, there were no medications being taken prior to the diagnosis, and notably, the patient had not undergone any form of chemotherapy before or after surgery. No medications were administered prior to diagnosis, with attention focused on diagnostic assessments and surgical intervention for the primary omental smooth muscle tumor. The patient’s history did not suggest any environmental or occupational exposures contributing to his condition. The case was meticulously documented, considering the detailed family history of cancer and the patient’s lifestyle habits, such as smoking and alcohol consumption, to provide a comprehensive background for diagnosis and management.
The patient had no specific symptoms, such as abdominal pain, and no ascites or other lesions were detected on whole body evaluation. Contrast-enhanced CT at our hospital also demonstrated a 3 cm in size solitary mass in the omentum . Open laparotomy was eventually performed because malignancy could not be ruled out clinically, and a needle biopsy could have caused tumor dissemination. The intraoperative findings were a solitary tumor within the omentum, with no evidence of adhesion to the adjacent posterior wall of the stomach or transverse colon.
Macroscopically, the specimen after formalin fixation was a 27 mm × 25 mm × 20 mm elevated lesion with slight adipose tissue in the periphery. Solid tumors with heterogeneous grayish-white cut surfaces were observed, and no obvious calcification or necrosis was observed . Microscopically, spindle cells were observed and arranged in whorls and fascicles. Individual tumor cells had short spindle-shaped nuclei with a slight increase in chromatin, and a slightly eosinophilic, spindle-shaped cytoplasm was observed. No hyalinization, calcification, or tumor necrosis was observed in the background. The mitotic count was less than 1 per 50 high-power fields. Furthermore, no abundance of blood vessels were observed to suggest angioleiomyoma .
On immunohistochemical examination, tumor cells showed positive immunoreactivity focally to αSMA and diffusely to HHF35 and desmin . The Ki-67 labeling index was 1.76% (261/14806) using the average method, while it was 3.51% (43/1226) using the hotspot method [, ]. We counted the Ki-67 labeling index using the “Patholoscope” analysis software (MITANI Corporation, Japan, URL: ), as previously described [, ]. Meanwhile, the tumor cells showed negative immunoreactivity for CD34, c-kit, DOG-1, STAT6, S100, HMB45, Melan A, CDK4, MDM2, β-catenin, calretinin, WT-1, estrogen receptor, and progesterone receptor . In addition, Epstein–Barr virus-encoded RNA in situ hybridization (EBER ISH) showed negative signals in all tumor cells.
Immunohistochemical examination was performed, and no findings suggestive of malignancy (e.g., irregular nuclear shape, mitotic figures, and tumor necrosis) were noted. The results showed smooth muscle marker expression (positive immunoreactivity for αSMA, HHF35, and desmin). In addition, no findings indicating other histological types were found; thus, leiomyoma was considered. However, primary omentum leiomyomas have rarely been reported, except for parasitic leiomyomas [, ]. It is also sometimes difficult to completely rule out the malignant potential in smooth muscle tumors in deep soft tissue [, ], even in tumors without nuclear atypia, mitotic figures, and coagulopathic tumor necrosis .
Therefore, the patient was finally diagnosed with a primary omental smooth muscle tumor considering leiomyoma. The patient consequently did not undergo additional adjuvant therapy and was followed up. Neither recurrence nor metastasis was found on the 13-month postoperative follow-up.