A girl child, 4 year old attended outpatient department of orthopaedic surgery of VPIMS, Lucknow in july 2013 with painless deformity since birth of neck i.e. torticollis of left side. There was no antenatal history of fever, hypertension, drug intake and any other significant event during pregnancy. Natal History: Full term normal delivery at home and child cried soon after birth. Post natal History. No history of high fever, trauma & child was having complete course of vaccination.
She was having normal over all physical & mental development & started yearly neck holding, sitting, crawling & standing. She started walking in ninth month earlier than her elder brother. She goes to school with satisfactory progress as per her class teacher. She is shy, intelligent and understand all exercises herself. She is independent in all her daily activities. Till the time of presenting to us she was not shown to any doctor.
On examination, she was having good built, short in height, head tilted to left side, low hair line, short neck, the distance between from tip of ear pinna to Trapezius upper border is grossly short as compare to healthy side. Flexion of neck without facial asymmetry .
Mild cervicodorsal scoliosis present on left side neck . Range of movement of cervical spine. She can perform full flexion, partly extension, rotation & lateral bending showed Limitation of movement. There is no tenderness in cervical spine. Shoulder scapula is elevated on left side.
Right shoulder showed normal range of movement whereas left shoulder had limitation of range of movement especially abduction after 90 degree. Cardio respiratory system, urinary system-examination revealed no abnormality.
Radiological examination of cervical spine revealed blocked vertebrae C1, C2, C3 along with spinal bifida C6 & C7 and radiological examination of chest revealed high scapula on left side as compared with normal right shoulder joints .
The girl was also examined by a Senior Plastic Surgeon & was advised for conservative management to begin with. As our case was not having any neurological or any other systemic involvement she was adviced exercises of neck & left shoulder 5 to 6 times a day, Corrective cervical collar was prescribed and the technique of manual traction of cervical spine was explained & demonstrated to her father. Prognosis was explained in detail.