A 25-year-old male presented to the emergency department (ED) for evaluation due to PLP. The patient was noted in the room to be visibly uncomfortable and in excruciating pain (numeric pain rating scale: 10/10.) He described his pain as cramping and burning in nature. This patient had a prior history of PLP consistent with his presentation as corroborated by a significant other at bedside and prior documented ED visits. Past medical history included above the knee amputation secondary to a high-speed motorcycle crash occurring approximately 1.5 years prior. The patient typically managed his chronic pain at home with gabapentin but would occasionally run out of his medication, provoking an exacerbation of PLP symptoms.
The patient was evaluated for an acute episode of PLP the day prior in a different ED within the same health system. At that visit, he was noted to be afebrile and hemodynamically stable. Vitals during the initial ED visit were as follows: blood pressure 104/57 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), heart rate 118 beats per minute, temperature 36.9°Celsius (C), respiratory rate 22 breaths per minute, and his oxygen saturation was 94% on room air. The patient reported a 10 /10 on a numeric pain rating scale (worst pain ever). The patient affirmed that ketamine had worked in the past for breakthrough symptoms of PLP. Therefore, subdissociative ketamine (0.3 mg per kilogram) was ordered. Approximately four minutes after administering subdissociative ketamine, the patient experienced confusion, disorientation, and hallucinations, seemingly consistent with emergence phenomenon. This represented the first occurrence of emergence phenomenon for the patient, and it spontaneously resolved with no intervention provided. Additional pain-relieving medication provided during this hospital stay included intravenous (IV hydromorphone. Upon reassessment, the patient affirmed that his pain had resolved, and he felt comfortable going home.
Approximately 24 hours later, the patient presented to our ED for another acute exacerbation of PLP. He was again noted to be in visible discomfort and reported 10/10 pain. His vitals upon arrival were as follows: blood pressure 127/78 mm Hg; heart rate 118 beats per minute; temperature 36.7°C; respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, and his oxygen saturation was 97% on room air. The ED pharmacist was consulted for analgesic recommendations due to the patient’s recent emergence reaction to ketamine. The pharmacist either subdissociative ketamine—with a plan to treat emergence if it occurred—or droperidol. The patient was presented with each option but was hesitant to receive subdissociative ketamine based on his prior emergence reaction. Droperidol was suggested due to its wide array of pharmacologic activity, safety profile, and the fact that most pain has some degree of psychogenic component.
Pharmacy recommended a dose of droperidol 5 mg administered via IV. Approximately 15 minutes after receiving droperidol, the patient’s pain had visibly improved, and he reported a 5/10 on the numeric pain rating scale. Thirty minutes later his pain continued to improve, noting a numeric pain rating scale score of 3/10. An hour later, the patient was in no acute distress, his pain was relieved, and he was ready to be discharged home from the ED. The patient was notably satisfied with the efficacy, safety, and onset of pain relief. Additionally, he has not presented again to our healthcare system for management of an acute exacerbation of PLP. However, it is difficult to appreciate whether this was due to long-term effects of droperidol or other factors as this case represents a single success.