An 82-year-old woman with a history of paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, hypertension, and dyslipidaemia presented with intermittent claudication and was diagnosed with spinal stenosis. Laminectomy for symptomatic relief was scheduled within a month of initial presentation. However, screening of the pre-operative laboratory values revealed elevated levels of N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (1209 pg/mL, normal range < 125 pg/mL); thus, a heart disease was suspected. Therefore, a transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) was pre-operatively ordered, which identified severe aortic stenosis. Accordingly, the patient was referred to our division. The patient had no cardiac symptoms. Blood pressure was 130/72 mmHg, heart rate was 72 b.p.m., and oxygen saturation was 98% in room air. Physical examination revealed normal respiratory sounds, an ejection systolic murmur, and no pedal oedema. Electrocardiography revealed normal sinus rhythm and normal atrial-ventricular conduction. Chest radiography showed neither cardiomegaly nor pulmonary congestion. TTE showed a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction (65%) with severe aortic stenosis (mean pressure gradient, 40 mmHg; indexed aortic valve area, 0.63 cm2) accompanied with mild–moderate aortic regurgitation. Laboratory values revealed elevated creatinine (1.53 mg/dL, normal range < 0.79 mg/dL) level .
To safely perform the orthopaedic surgery, which was performed in prone position, an anaesthesiologist required to prioritize treatment of aortic stenosis over spinal stenosis. The patient’s Society of Thoracic Surgeons score was 6.4%; our heart team considered TAVR to be an appropriate solution to allow the orthopaedic surgery to proceed without delay.
Pre-procedural computed tomography (CT) showed a suitable ilio-femoral artery for transfemoral TAVR. Based on pre-procedural CT measurements of the aortic root , we considered a TAVR procedure using either a 23-mm SAPIEN 3 balloon-expandable valve (Edwards Lifesciences, Irvine, CA) with underfilling or a 20-mm one with overfilling, or a 26-mm Evolut-Pro+ self-expandable valve (EVP+; Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN). However, pre-procedural CT did indicate two calcified nodules in the LVOT. (, and see , ) Length of the larger calcification at non-coronary cusp side was 10.5 mm, and the LVOT calcification covered 21.6% of the perimeter of LVOT. These findings met the criteria of severe LVOT calcification, which led us to reconsider the TAVR procedure because of the high risk of aortic root rupture and significant PVR. To perform TAVR safely, we considered the use of a 26-mm EVP+ to control PVR.
The usual implantation depth of an EVP+ at 3.0–5.0 mm below the aortic annulus, as recommended by the manufacturer, might cause significant PVR because of the gap between the stent-frame and the LVOT wall . Therefore, we considered an implantation depth of 0–1.0 mm above the aortic annulus. Calcification at 0.5 mm above the aortic annulus protruded less into the lumen compared with that at 3.0 mm below the aortic annulus. The total area of calcification at 0.5 mm above the aortic annulus was less than that at 3.0 mm below the aortic annulus (31.6 mm2 and 40.1 mm2, respectively). These findings suggested that it would be possible to control PVR by reducing the gap with a more adequate stent-frame expansion . Moreover, the LVOT calcification protruding into the lumen could be utilized as a landing place for the EVP+ stent tip during deployment, to fix the valve position when deployment was started from above the aortic annulus (‘touchdown’ technique) . Thus, we planned transfemoral TAVR with a 26-mm EVP+ using the ‘touchdown’ technique.
The procedure was performed under conscious sedation and TTE guidance. After a Safari-XS wire (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) was placed into the left ventricle, we started to deploy a 26-mm EVP+ from above the aortic annulus without pre-balloon dilation . The EVP+ stent tip landed on the LVOT calcification which was protruding into the lumen from the side of the ascending aorta . Thereafter, we continued to deploy the EVP+, while confirming that the EVP+ stent tip maintained contact with the top of the LVOT calcification without moving [, and see , ]. The valve was successfully deployed in the intended position (, and see , ). TTE detected only mild PVR from a small gap, between the EVP+ stent-frame and aortic annulus, where we predicted (see , ).
The aortic pressure gradient between the ascending aorta and left ventricle, measured by 5-Fr pigtail catheters, decreased from 39 mmHg pre-TAVR to 3 mmHg immediately post-TAVR. We finished the procedure without post-balloon dilation.
Post-procedural serial TTE examinations at 1-, 6-, and 12-months post-TAVR showed that the valve performed well without migration, and that the PVR and pressure gradient remained stable.