In January 2012, a 41-year-old lady from Shiraz, a city in the south of Iran, Referred to Nemazee Hospital and sought medical attention. She was complaining of abdominal pain, nausea, and experienced significant weight loss since one month prior to the admission. Past medical history and personal history were not significant, and she had no specific risk factor exposure. On physical examination temperature was 38.5°C (101.3°F) and the signs of anemia, including pale conjunctiva were obvious. Also, she had mild generalized abdominal tenderness with no peritoneal sign. The patient was so cachexic and ill that hospital admission was advised; however, the main concern was the possible underlying malignancy versus infectious diseases like tuberculosis.
Laboratory studies revealed high ESR titer and CRP level (80 mm/hour and 112 mg/L respectively), elevated alkaline phosphatase level and PMN, dominant leukocytosis accompanied by significant eosinophilia (12%). Cultures from different sites, stool examination and urinalysis were inconclusive, and tumor marker levels, including CEA, CA125, CA19-9, and AFP were within the normal ranges. Other paraclinical workup such as malaria smear, mammography, HBsAg, HCV Antibody, HIV and sputum Acid-fast bacilli smear were negative .
CT-scan of the abdomen and pelvic showed increased thickness of the cecum with infiltrative or tumoral process and round hypoattenuating lesions in the liver, supporting liver abscesses or metastasis with central necrosis ( and ).
The first colonoscopy study showed an infiltrative mass with nodularity and multiple ulcers involving the base of cecum and ileocecal valve , but the pathology study revealed ulceration with acute and chronic inflammation and granulation tissue formation with negative tuberculosis PCR study. The same results were reported for the two other consecutive colonoscopies with similar morphologic findings ( and ).
Tru-cut liver biopsy from the hepatic lesions was done, which revealed granuloma with eosinophilic infiltration. Right hemicolectomy was done for the patient and pathology studies on the tissues of the resected cecum, and terminal ileum revealed the presence of the fungal elements, necrotizing granuloma, eosinophilic infiltration and Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon (the deposition of amorphous, eosinophilic, hyaline material around pathogenic organisms). Therefore , the diagnosis of GI basidiobolomycosis was confirmed.
Finally, the patient was treated with itraconazole 200 mg twice a day for 4 months. ESR titer and alkaline phosphatase level returned to normal and eosinophilia resolved within the first 3 weeks of treatment. The patient health status showed significant improvement, and no evidence of active liver lesions was detected in follow-up imaging study ( and ). In the next year of follow-up, the patient was healthy and symptom free.