A 40-year-old female had a history of vaccination for COVID-19 with a second dose 4 months prior to the visit. Then suddenly, after a day of vaccination, she developed an imbalance in gait and vertigo for more than a month. She was investigated by a primary care physician 2 days after the onset of symptoms and was prescribed drugs for her symptomatic management. With the symptoms persisting, the patient was admitted to our hospital after 4 months of vaccination.
Her general physical examination revealed an imbalance in gait and eyes closed most of the time. No petechiae, purpura, or ecchymotic lesions were seen and there was no evidence of mucosal bleeding. She was febrile (body temperature 99.6°F), although the temperature record showed an increasing pattern. Hemodynamic parameters were within normal limits. On neurological assessment, the patient had a Glasgow Coma Scale score 14/15(E4V5M5), had normal pupil size, as well as light reaction, normal fundus, normal deep tendon reflexes and bilateral extensor plantar response, pain and temperature sensation, proprioception, vibration sensation, and cranial nerve examination were normal. Meningeal signs were absent. Ear examination was normal and the patient had no history suggestive of peripheral causes of vertigo. The patient had no history of alcohol intake. The patient had no history of altered sensorium, personality changes, seizures, or any focal neurological deficits.
Investigation revealed hemoglobin of 10.9 g/dl, white blood cell count of 22.76 × 103/μl (neutrophils 92.3%, lymphocytes 7.2%, basophils 0%, eosinophils 0%), platelet count of 284 × 103/μl, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 25 mm/h, C-reactive protein (CRP) of 32 mg/l, blood urea of 46 mg/dl, serum creatinine of 1.4 mg/dl, blood glucose of 225.23 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase of (AST) 128 U/l, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 96 U/l, total bilirubin of 1.2 mg/dl, total protein of 5.7 g/dl, albumin of 3.2 g/dl, serum sodium of 132 mEq/l and serum potassium of 3.7 mEq/l. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis showed 10 cells (all lymphocytes), mildly raised proteins (58 mg/dl) and normal glucose (68 mg%). Platelet count was monitored daily and values were reported to be within normal limits. Laboratory tests for the SARS-CoV-2 RNA using NAAT (Nucleic Acid Amplification Test) was negative. Peripheral smear for malaria parasite was negative and blood culture was sterile. Serological tests for human immune deficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and hepatitis C were negative.
Development of CNS manifestations during the recovery phase of fever along with typical MRI findings , the diagnosis of para-infectious ADEM with COVID-19 vaccination was made. The patient was treated with 1 g daily dose of methylprednisolone sodium succinate injection 1 vial with 200 ml normal saline for 5 days, ceftriaxone injection (1 g) bd (bis in die – twice a day), omeprazole injection (40 mg) bd, ondansetron injection (8 mg) tds (ter die sumendus – three times a day) was given. After slight improvement, the patient was discharged with prednisolone in tapering dose, vestibular sedatives, namely betahistine and prochlorperazine and antiemetic ondansetron. The patient showed further clinical improvement in the next 2 weeks of follow-up.