A 66-year-old man presented with paroxysmal low-grade fever for 2 years. Except for age, he did not have any common risk factor for coronary artery disease. He had a medical history of acute inferior wall myocardial infarction 3 years before the current presentation (July 2014), for which he had undergone emergency PCI of the right coronary artery (RCA) and DES implantation (Taxus Liberte, 3.5× 24 mm, Boston Scientific). He had an uneventful post-procedure stay. Five months later, he presented with chest pain. His cardiac biomarkers were positive, suggestive of non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Repeat coronary angiogram revealed total occlusion of the RCA stent. Repeat PCI of the RCA was performed using two DES (Promus Element 3.0 × 38 mm and 3.5 × 32 mm, Boston Scientific).
He was asymptomatic for 1 year, after which he started developing low-grade fever without any localizing signs or symptoms. Multiple evaluations for the fever by the family physician did not yield any discrete diagnosis. Empirical antibiotics led to symptomatic relief, but he continued to have breakthrough fever. He presented to us with continuous fever and chills for 2 months, with gradual worsening in the last few days. His vital signs were normal. There was no skin rash. Cardiovascular and respiratory examination was normal. Per abdominal examination revealed no abnormality. Comprehensive in-patient evaluation revealed leucocytosis (13 100 white blood cells/mm3, normal = 4000–11 000/mm3), neutrophilia, negative blood and urine cultures, and normal chest radiograph and abdominal ultrasound. Region-specific serology for infectious diseases such as malaria, dengue fever, enteric fever, brucellosis, and leptospirosis was conducted and found negative.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the chest showed mild enhancing nodular lesions in the upper lobes of both lungs and the presence of mediastinal lymphadenopathy. A whole-body positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) showed increased tracer uptake surrounding the proximal and mid segments of RCA and a perivascular abscess of size 3.7 × 4.2 × 2.7 cm involving the lateral wall of the right ventricle, adjacent pericardium, and right paracardiac region . Secondary dissemination of infection to the bilateral lung field and mediastinal lymph nodes, secondary splenomegaly, and reactive bone marrow hyperplasia were observed. Transthoracic echocardiography and transoesophageal echocardiography showed a homogenous mass along the free wall of the right ventricle with continuous flow into the RA, superior to tricuspid valve . Vegetations were present over tricuspid and pulmonary valve leaflets.
Based on the available information, the patient was diagnosed with RCA stent infection and secondary involvement of tricuspid and pulmonary valves with dissemination to lungs. Preoperative coronary angiogram confirmed the presence of small coronary-cameral fistula of the RCA draining into the RA . Repeat blood cultures showed growth of P. aeruginosa. The patient responded clinically to culture-guided intravenous antibiotic therapy (Injection Cefipime, Ciprofloxacin, and Gentamycin). He underwent surgery 2 weeks later. Of note, 2 days before the scheduled surgery, he had leucopenia and thrombocytopenia. Bicytopenia was considered secondary to sepsis after primary bone marrow pathology was ruled out by bone marrow biopsy. The patient underwent surgery through median sternotomy, using cardiopulmonary bypass and cardioplegic arrest. Operative findings included pericardial adhesions, inflamed fibrotic tissues around proximal, and mid segments of RCA and two small pedunculated vegetations over the tricuspid valve. No vegetations were observed over the pulmonary valve. The procedure involved removal of the RCA stent and debridement of the adjacent myocardial tissue . The RCA was clipped proximal and distal to the stent removal site. Vegetations over the tricuspid valve were removed through right atriotomy. Coronary cameral fistula opening into the RA (2 × 2 mm in size) was closed with a prolene suture. In view of chronic total occlusion and good retrograde filling through collaterals from the left system, revascularisation of the RCA was deferred. We also wanted to avoid the potential risk of vein graft infection. The culture of the resected segments of stents was negative. Postoperative recovery was favourable, with no recurrence of fever in 3 months of follow-up.