A 9-year-old boy (height, 125 cm; weight, 25 kg) was scheduled for a left sialolithotomy for sialolithiasis at a general hospital. He had a history of surgery for tetralogy of Fallot and had undergone vocal cord fusion for postoperative left-sided vocal cord paralysis. The preoperative examination revealed left vocal cord paralysis, although the blood test and cardiac function results were normal. His usual activities of daily living were unrestricted.
There was a strong request by the mother to avoid tracheal intubation to reduce the risk of bilateral vocal cord paralysis. Management without intubation was initially considered in the preoperative anesthesia plan. The surgery was to be performed orally, and the sublingual area needed to be deployed for surgical manipulation. Therefore, airway management was planned using an LT (VBM LTS-D, Medizintechnik GmbH, Sulz am Neckar, Germany), among other supraglottic airway-securing devices. Written informed consent was obtained from the mother to publish this report.
Slow induction of anesthesia was performed using 2 L/min of oxygen, 4 L/min of nitrous oxide, and 8% sevoflurane. After administering 20 mg of rocuronium and direct laryngoscopy using a laryngoscope, LTS#2 was inserted. After insertion, 30 mL of air was injected into the cuff. The shaft of the LT was moved to the side of the tongue to prevent interference with the tongue during surgery under direct laryngoscopy. Once confirmation was obtained that ventilation was possible, the pressure was reduced to 20 cmH2O using a cuff manometer. Intraoperative general anesthesia was maintained with 1 L/min oxygen, 2 L/min nitrous oxide, and 1.5% sevoflurane. Respiration was managed with a fraction of inspired oxygen of 0.4, peak inspiratory pressure of 15 cmH2O, respiratory rate of 18/min, and pressure-controlled ventilation with a single ventilation volume of 150–200 mL. Although some leakage was observed during intraoral surgery, the problem was easily solved by adjusting the position of the LT from outside the sterile surgical field.
The operation time was 12 min, the anesthesia time was 47 min, and the duration between LT insertion and LT removal was 26 min. After recovery from anesthesia, the patient showed no issues, including upper respiratory tract symptoms, and was subsequently transferred to the ward. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged the following day. No complications were noted at the follow-up a week later.