The patient was 63-year-old man who sought treatment in our hospital due to decreased vision in the left eye for more than 10 d on August 27, 2018. His uncorrected visual acuity was 20/50 in the right eye, which could be corrected to 20/25, and 20/50 in the left eye, which could not be corrected. Slit-lamp examination revealed superficial congestion of the sclera , shallow but clear anterior chamber, slight opacification of the lens, and mild vitreal haze in the right eye. Slit-lamp examination of the left eye showed tortuous and dilated blood vessels on the scleral surface , shallow anterior chamber with aqueous flare, iris bombe, stellate keratic precipitates (KP), slight opacification of the lens, and mild vitreal haze. Dilated funduscopic examination showed 360° choroidal detachment in the peripheral area, retinal detachment, retinal folds and macular oedema in the left eye but no retinal break , and no abnormalities in the right eye. The IOP of the right eye was14mmHg and the left eye was 13.7 mmHg. B-ultrasound scan showed normal right eye and relatively thickened retina and choroid of the left eye. B-ultrasound coronary scanning results showed a rosette sign (+), suggesting retinal detachment and choroidal detachment . Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) showed a shallow anterior chamber in both eyes, narrow chamber angle, iris bombe, forward lens location, ciliary process pronation, superciliary body effusion, and no communication with the anterior chamber . The diagnosis of UES was based on the criteria proposed by Uyama : (1) detection of RD in the lower periphery by fundus examination, without retinal break; (2) presence of subretinal fluid shifting with head position; (3) no leakage from the choroid membrane into the subretinal space revealed by fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA); (4) RD accompanied by peripheral flat or annular ciliochoroidal detachment; (5) detectable ora serrata without the compression of the sclera; (6) exclusion of other causes of ciliochoroidal detachment, including decreased intraocular tension, intraocular tumour, rhegmatogenous retinal detachment, and intraocular inflammation. This patient met criteria 1 and 4, so bilateral uveal effusion syndrome (UES) was preliminarily diagnosed. Further examination showed that the subretinal fluid changed with the patient’s head position, and the subretinal fluid always flowed to the place where the head position was low. Fundus examination after mydriasis showed serrated margins in the superior temporal periphery of the left eye. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) showed that the macular area of the right eye was normal, but retinal diffuse oedema and thickening in the posterior pole of the left eye were observed, combined with effusion under neuroepithelium. FFA showed that the arteriovenous filling time was normal, and fine punctate hyperfluorescence leakage was seen in the retina of the left eye that became gradually enhanced. There was subretinal diffuse hyperfluorescence at the late stage; a choroidal fold was seen in the posterior pole; the peripheral retinal vessels were tortuous; the optic disc had hyperfluorescence at the late stage; the fluorescence was masked in the peripheral retina due to choroidal detachment . Retinal punctate fluorescence leakage was found within approximately 1PD above the nasal side of the right eye and gradually increased. Indocyanine green angiogram showed diffuse hyperfluorescence in the choroid at the early stage that gradually leaked at the late stage. The axial length was 20.62 mm in the right eye and 21.44 mm in the left eye. Orbital magnetic resonance showed no abnormality of the scleral wall.
According to the basic ocular examination, B-ultrasound, UBM, FFA, auxiliary examination by OCT, axial length measurement and orbital MR, the patient was diagnosed with bilateral UES syndrome and bilateral age-related cataract. Some authors classify UES into three types. Given the clinical characteristics of the patient, he was diagnosed with type III UES. Surgery is usually ineffective for type III UES . The effect of oral and peribulbar hormone treatment was better than that of self-healing , so the patient was treated with oral prednisone, 70 mg per day. Our planned treatment regimen was 70 mg orally every day for 2 weeks; reducing the dosage by 10 mg per week until it reached 30 mg; then reducing the dosage by 5 mg per week until the dosage reached 15 mg; and taking 15 mg every day for another 6-8months. However, the patient stopped taking the medication himself 2 weeks later on finding no improvement of his left eye. We performed triamcinolone acetonide periocular injections at a dose of 20 mg into his left eye. Our plan was to give 6–8 injections in total, once a month. After the eighth TA injection, the UCVA in the left eye of the patient was 20/100. The posterior lens capsule was slightly opaque, and the fundus was blurred. Peripheral 360° retinal detachment and choroidal detachment were still observed in the fundus, and many orange-red leopard spots were observed in the posterior pole of the retina . B-ultrasound scan showed that the right eye was normal, but the retina and choroid of the left eye were still thickened. Coronal scan by B-mode ultrasound showed the rosette sign (+), suggesting retinal detachment and choroidal detachment .
After that, the patient gave up treatment because he thought it was not effective, and no further medication was given to either eye. Re-examination after 5 months showed that the UCVA in the right eye was 20/200, and the BCVA was 20/20; the UCVA in the left eye was 20/200, which could not be corrected, and the intraocular pressure was 14.0 mmHg. There was posterior capsular lens opacity in the left eye, the retinas and choroid of both eyes were in place . B-ultrasound scan showed that the retina and choroid of the left eye were thickened . Left eye cataract extraction 3 months later was recommended. Because of the COVID-19 pandemic, the patient visited again after 4 months. Fundus photography showed the retina was in place . B-ultrasound scan showed that the left eyeball wall had already returned to normal, and there was no thickening . The preoperative BCVA was 0.04.
Left eye phacoemulsification with intraocular lens (PHACO + IOL) implantation was performed. The postoperative BCVA was 20/50.Re-examination 1 year after surgery showed that the left eye BCVA was 20/50. The retina was in place, and many orange leopard spots were observed . Fundus autofluorescence images showed many hyperfluorescent dots . B-scan results corresponding to the OCT showed hyperpigmentation. The disease of the patient is currently stable.