A 62 year old female presented to the emergency department after 6 hours of sustaining injury due to a fall while working in wheat farms with chief complaints of pain, swelling and inability to use her right upper dominant extremity. Gentle clinical examination was done and a clinical possibility of fracture shaft humerus was made. Patient was also evaluated for associated vascular and neurological involvement and any obvious nerve/vascular involvement was ruled out clinically. Radiological investigations revealed fracture of proximal 3rd of shaft of right humerus with ipsilateral anterior dislocation of shoulder ( and ). Gentle immediate close reduction was attempted for both fracture and dislocation but without any success. Surgical intervention was planned and pre-operative investigations revealed hypertension with elevated blood sugar levels (fasting bloosugar:180 mg% and glycosylated haemoglobin of 6.8%),medical consultation including that of cardiology and pulmonology was sought and patient was operated on 5th post admission day with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) for fracture shaft humerus with long proximal humerus locking plate because of proximal extension of long oblique fracture line through standard delto-pectoral approach with anterolateral distal extension of surgical approach. Radial nerve was identified and protected. Following fixation of shaft, close reduction was carried out for anterior shoulder dislocation. Reduction was found satisfactory under image intensifier and further on post- operative x-rays . On 4th post operative day, serous discharge was noted in surgical wound and full gaping/dehiscence of surgical wound was noticed on 12th post operative day , for which secondary suturing was done. Patient was discharged on 21st post op day following primary surgery. She continued to improve on regular follow-up and was instructed for gradual progressive active range of motion exercises ( and ). At 1 year follow-up, there was satisfactory bone union (. And ) with painless, nearly full and free range of motion with patient returning to her pre-injury activities ( and ).