A 45-year-old Chinese female herdsman was admitted to our hospital with dry mouth for 3 months and anasarca and proteinuria for 2 months. She also had chest tightness, wheezing and weight loss of 10 kg within 3 months. CT revealed an abnormal tissue mass in the thymus area and multiple enlarged lymph nodes located in the mediastinum, subclavian, and bilateral underarm. Laboratory tests showed hypoalbuminemia (25.2 g/L), proteinuria (4.9 g/g creatinine) and normal renal function (eGFR 96 mL/min/1.73m2). She underwent anterior mediastinal mass and partial pericardial resection with the pathological findings “reactive hyperplasia of the mediastinal lymph nodes and thymic hyperplasia”. The symptoms did not improve after the operation. Her body temperature rose to 38.1 °C, with cough and sputum, and returned to normal after antibiotics. One month later, she had a fever again that did not subside after antibiotic treatment. On admission, her temperature was 37.4 °C, and her blood pressure was 116/70 mmHg. Superficial lymph nodes were palpable in the subclavian, bilateral underarm and groin. Edema of the bilateral lower extremities was present. Laboratory findings revealed normal white blood cell, red blood cell (RBC), and platelet counts and a serum creatinine level of 69 μmol/L; microscopic hematuria (RBC 11–30/HP), proteinuria (2.6 g/24 h), lowered serum albumin (31 g/L), high ESR (50 mm/h), high CRP (15.9 mg/L), high IgG (22.1 g/L, normal rangen 6.94–16.18 g/L), normal IgA and IgM and extremely elevated IL-6 (4601 pg/mL, normal range < 3 pg/mL) levels in serum were also detected. There was no monoclonal peak on immunoelectrophoresis for either the serum or urine. ANA was 1:320. Both anti-SSA and anti-SSB were positive. Serum lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibody, anti-phospholipase A2 receptor antibody and complement levels were normal. Hepatitis viruses A, B and C, HIV, EBV and cytomegalovirus were negative. Unstimulated salivary flow was 1.2 mL/15 min. Lip biopsy showed focal lymphocytic sialadenitis. Thoracic and abdominal ultrasound scans indicated polyserositis with pleural and pericardial effusions and ascites. Thoracentesis was performed but failed to draw any pleural effusion. Nonetheless, 700 mL ascites was drained from the abdominal cavity; the ascites fluid culture was sterile.
Kidney biopsy findings were as follows. By light microscopy, diffuse global endocapillary and mesangial cell proliferation in 11 glomeruli with glomerular capillary wall expansion were detected, as was prominent lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration in the tubulointerstitium . According to immunofluorescence microscopy, fine granular deposition of IgG was observed along the glomerular capillary walls and in the mesangium. IgA, IgM, C1q, C3, IgG4, PLA2R and fibrinogen were negative . Electron microscopy showed expanded glomerular capillary walls, subepithelial electron-dense deposits and diffuse podocyte foot process fusion . The diagnosis was “secondary membranous nephropathy”.
Lymph node biopsy findings were as follows. Mediastinal and inguinal lymph node biopsy showed hyperplastic germinal centers as well as occasional atrophic germinal centers with small vessels reaching the germinal centers as well as interfollicular plasmacytosis. Immunohistochemistry revealed interfollicular plasmacytosis based on CD138 staining. CD20+B cells were mainly observed in follicular regions and occasionally in interfollicular regions. CD3+ T cells were mainly observed in interfollicular regions and sparsely in follicular regions. Ki-67, a cellular marker for proliferation, was highly expressed within the germinal centers. HHV-8 was negative. The diagnosis was “multicentric Castleman disease”.
Idiopathic multicentric Castleman disease Sjögren’s syndrome Secondary membranous nephropathy
The clinical course is illustrated in Fig. . Oral MP alone at a dose of 20 mg/d was ineffective after 1 month and was enhanced to 40 mg/d for another month without remission. Anti-IL-6 receptor antibody (tocilizumab) was started based on the result of elevated IL-6 (4062 pg/mL) in the serum and administered in a total of five sessions at 3–4-week intervals. Serum IL-6 level returned to normal after the first dose of 480 mg, remained normal after the second dose of 480 mg, rose after tocilizumab was reduced to 80 mg at the third dose and returned to normal after the fourth and the fifth 480 mg doses of tocilizumab. As the serum IL-6 level decreased, protein in the urine returned to the normal range, and her edema, fever, polyserositis, and serum albumin improved. CyS was added orally at a dose of 150 mg/week after tocilizumab was stopped and MP tapered. The IL-6 level, blood and urine tests and clinical manifestations all remained normal at the one-year follow-up after discharge with oral MP of 2 mg/day and CyS of 50 mg/week. Her symptoms of dry mouth were relieved, and her serum IgG returned to normal (12.8 g/L). However, but her ANA was still 1:320, and anti-SSA and anti-SSB were positive after 11 months of therapy.