A 28-month-old boy was transferred to our emergency department from a local hospital in assisted ventilation for a respiratory insufficiency in June 2009. MRI performed during diagnostic work up revealed a bulky mass with cystic component extending from medulla into cervical spinal cord to C5 and dislocating the pons, the floor of the IV ventricle, the cerebellar vermis and tonsils . As gross total resection (GTR) was not considered feasible, surgical decompression and a biopsy of the exophitic portion of the lesion were performed revealing a LGG with features compatible with PA. Polysomnographic exam revealed a relevant number of episodes of oxygen desaturation >4% of central origin. Tracheotomy was performed and chemotherapy according to the SIOP LGG 2004 protocol started. Unfortunately, the tumour did not respond to treatment showing a gradual clinical and radiological progression with worsening of the nocturnal episodes of desaturation and progressive increase of size of both a cystic portion of the lesion and the solid component . A second surgery was performed in 2012 in order to reduce the cystic component of the lesion. The histological examination of the residual lesion showed the presence, in addition to the glial component, of mature ganglion cells, leading to a diagnosis of ganglioglioma (GG) with classical morphology, i.e. neoplastic astrocytes and ganglion cells with dysplastic, binucleated neuron, embedded in tissue with eosinhophilic granular body and lymphocytic intratumoral infiltrate. MRI 3 months after surgery revealed a new disease progression with evidence of multicystic component in the brainstem and cervical spine, which appeared to be related to syringobulbia and syringomyelia secondary to cerebrospinal fluid outflow impairment . In order to improve local control of the cystic component, a new attempt of debulking was performed; intraoperative brainstem monitoring showed functional responses in the context of the solid component of the tumour and further resection was then abandoned. Two syringe-subarachnoid stents were then inserted to achieve decompression of the cysts. Unfortunately, after an initial stabilization, slow clinical and radiological progression were documented and the child began to experience swallowing difficulties and worsening of nocturnal oxygen desaturations. Radiotherapy was not advised due to patient’s age and proton beam therapy was not deemed feasible due to extension of disease in a critical location.
Considering the progressive clinical deterioration of the patient and the absence of other effective options, molecular testing for evaluation of a target therapy was performed on the tumour tissue from the first biopsy: according to data from the literature, the KIAA-BRAF fusion gene detection and BRAFV600E testing were performed on fresh frozen (FF) tumor tissue by RT-PCR, PCR amplification and subsequent sequencing.
DNA was extracted from FF tissue specimen using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit, as described by the manufacturer (Qiagen S.A., Courtaboeuf France). Total RNA was extracted from FF tissue using Eurogold Trifast (by Euroclone). DNA and RNA concentrations were quantified using the Nanodrop ND-1000 UV–vis spectrophotometer (Labtech France, Palaiseau, France) and the integrity of nucleic acid was determinated using Quanti-it RNA Assay kit and quanti-dsDNA BR assay kit with Quibit fluorometer (by Invitrogen- Life Technologies). Final products were stored at −20°C until use.
Moreover standard diagnostic procedure were performed. Sections were stained with ematoxilin and eosin, and immunohistochemical stain for synaptophysin (Mouse Monoclonal Antibody Synaptophysin diluition 1:200, Novocastra Clone 27G12), was performed on paraffin section using labelled strepavidin-biotin peroxidise technique. Antigen retrieval was effected by pressure cooking in citrate buffer pH6. The sections was counterstained with hematoxilin.
Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was performed on 1 μg of total RNA using High Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcriptionkit (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The integrity of the resulting cDNA was checked by amplifying the wild-type locus of the BRAF gene (in exon 6 / 7) and then submitted to PCR with specific pairs of primers flanking the fusion point between the KIAA1549 (in exon 15 or 16) and BRAF (in exon 9 or 11) genes as described by Jones et al. . The purified PCR products were then sequenced using the BigDye Terminator v1.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems, Courtaboeuf, France) with the forward and reverse primer used to perform the PCR. Sequencing was performed using the ABI 3130 XL DNA analyser (Applied Biosystem). The sequences of primers used were as follows: KIAA1549 exon 15: 5′-CGG AAA CAC CAG GTC AAC GG-3′; KIAA1549 exon 16: 5′-AAA CAG CAC CCC TTC CCA GG-3′; BRAF exon 9: 5′-CTC CAT CAC CAC GAA ATC CTT G-3′; BRAF exon 11: 5′-GTT CCA AAT GAT CCA GAT CCA TTC-3′. RT-PCR from RNA didn’t show the presence of the KIAA1549-BRAF fusion gene (data not shown).
Mutational analysis was performed amplifying DNA with the primers as follows: BRAF exon 15, 5′- TCA TAA TGC TTG CTC TGA TAG GA-3′ (sense) and 5′-GGC CAA AAA TTT AAT CAG TGG A-3′ (antisense). The PCR products were purified using the automated system Biomek NXp by Beckman Coulter and Agentcourt AMPure XP reagents. Purified products were submitted to PCR cycle sequencing conditions as follow: denaturation at 95°C for 30 s, annealing at 50°C for 15 s, and extention at 60°C for 240 s. The cycle sequencing products were purified using the same automated system and Agentcourt Clean SEQ reagents. Sequencing analysis was performed using the ABI 3130 XL DNA analyser (Applied Biosystem). DNA analysis sequencing revealed BRAFV600E mutation .
Based on these results, a treatment with Vemurafenib was started on compassionate use in November 2013 (240 mg, 370 mg/m2, twice a day (BID), equivalent to the minimal dose that proved active in the adult cohort). The therapy was overall well tolerated: accurate dermatological and ECG monitoring were performed and no ECG changes nor skin lesions were observed. The only side effect reported was a transient grade 3 Common Toxicity Criteria (version 4) skin rash that resolved spontaneously. MRI performed 3 months after the start of treatment revealed, for the first time, a reduction in size of both the solid and the cystic components of the disease, a trend confirmed after 6 months of treatment . Accordingly, clinical symptoms improved with complete restoration of the swallowing function and reduction of the nocturnal episodes of desaturation.