We evaluated a 68-year-old man, who presented with drowsiness, progressive memory loss, dysarthria and muscular weakness, which was observed 6 months previously. On physical examination, the patient was somnolent and not adequately orientated. Neurological examination revealed complete paresis of the oculomotor nerve and incomplete paresis of the abducent nerves, mild weakness of bilateral lower limbs and a left Babinski sign. The patient's past medical history was remarkable for WD. In 1992, the patient experienced weight loss and diarrhoea resulting in a severe malabsorption syndrome combined with diffuse arthropathy. WD was diagnosed upon positive staining of macrophages of the duodenal mucosa for peroxidase acid-Schiff (PAS) reagent. Long-term antibiotic therapy was carried out with doxycycline (2 × 100 mg), which was changed later to trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole (2 × 160/800 mg) because of photoallergic reactions. The symptoms improved rapidly accompanied with gradual reconstitution of the villous architecture of the small intestine. Antibiotic therapy was discontinued in 1995 after 36 months of treatment.
The patient's past medical history further revealed a thoracotomy in 1987 for complete removal of a bronchial carcinoid of the left bronchus. No chemotherapy was administered and there was no sign of relapse or metastasis in follow-up examinations.
He represented after an interval of 12 years. Laboratory tests on admission to the hospital displayed an increased C-reactive protein level (18.6 mg/l: normal range -5) and an elevated leukocyte count (11.3 × 109 leucocytes/l: normal range 4 to 9/nl). All other routine laboratory results were within normal limits. Lumbar puncture revealed a mildly elevated protein level (510 mg/l: normal range 150 to 450 mg/l) and a modest pleocytosis (6 Mpt/l). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) glucose was within normal limits. Examinations of cell pellets obtained by cytocentrifugation of CSF samples were positive for PAS staining . Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing of the CSF for the causative agent of WD was positive resulting in strong presumptive evidence of CNS infection by Tropheryma whipplei. Brain computed tomography (CT) displayed diffuse hypodense lesions in subependymal grey matter. An endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract revealed erosive duodenitis with no histopathological characteristics for WD. Brain biopsy was not performed. Intravenous antibiotic treatment with meropenem (2 × 1 g) for 2 weeks was carried out followed by treatment with oral trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole (2 × 160/800 mg) according to the study protocol of the first prospective antibiotic trial in WD ('Study for the Initial treatment of Morbus Whipple' (SIMW)) . While receiving antibiotic therapy, the patient's vigilance improved. However, his memory ability remained impaired in the follow-up examination indicating possible irreversible damage to the brain caused by WD disease of the CNS.