A 55-year-old right handed male with a past medical history of diabetes, hypertension, and a greater than 10 pack-year history of cigarette smoking, presented with headache, nausea, vomiting, and worsening double vision. On physical examination, the patient was alert and oriented. His cranial nerves were intact. He was noted to have facial asymmetry and slight mass over the right forehead. Further on examination it was noted that he had a lesion on his right breast and nipple that he reported had been present for approximately one year, with occasional enlargement, bleeding, and purulent discharge. He had no lymphadenopathy on examination. Noncontrast computed tomography (CT) head indicated a 4.3 × 2.2 × 1.7 cm right frontal calvarial lesion, with internal trabeculated bone mixed with fatty components, and no associated involvement of overlying soft tissue or brain parenchyma . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain confirmed the presence of a right sided heterogeneously enhancing calvarial lesion with mild mass effect on the adjacent frontal lobe . A CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed a soft tissue density in the right retroareolar space, corresponding to the location of the painful breast lesion, and associated with enlarged right hilar and subcarinal lymph nodes.
The patient initially underwent a punch biopsy of the breast lesion and subsequent histopathologic analysis revealed the lesion to be invasive ductal carcinoma. In order to obtain a tissue diagnosis and relieve symptoms caused by the calvarial lesion, the patient underwent a right frontal image-guided craniectomy. A modified bicoronal incision was carried out with exposure of the mass. Using image guidance, a craniectomy was carried out with en-bloc calvarial tumor resection. There was no dural involvement. A titanium mesh cranioplasty was performed. Postoperative imaging showed no residual tumor and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 2 with improvement in his headaches. The patient later underwent a modified radical mastectomy and biopsy of an axillary sentinel node. Pathology and staging demonstrated a T4aN1aM0 Stage IIIB infiltrating ductal carcinoma.
The pathologic calvarial specimen consisted of a 5.5 × 5.5 × 0.8 cm portion of calvarium involved by an expansile lesion measuring 3.5 × 3.5 × 1.5 cm. The lesion was well-circumscribed and showed mixed areas of firm-to-soft tan and red lobulated tissue. Histopathologic analysis performed on the specimen proved the tumor to be an angiolipoma. Microscopically, the lesion consisted of mature trabecular bone intermixed with mature adipocytes and variably sized dilated vascular channels . The adipose component was mature and composed of normal appearing lobules separated by thin, fibrous septa. No cytologicalatypia, hyperchromasia, mitoses, or lipoblasts were present. No increased cellularity or epithelioid cells were noted, and immunohistochemical stains for pankeratin were negative.