An 81-year-old woman with a palpable mass in the right upper breast presented to our hospital 3 months after noticing her lump for the first time. There were no swollen lymph nodes in the axilla or neck, and she had no past medical or family history of the disease. Blood counts and laboratory tests, including tumor markers, were within normal limits.
Mammography showed an irregularly shaped high-density mass shadow with micro-lobulated right upper margin and outer areas. Ultrasonography showed a well-circumscribed irregularly shaped hypoechoic lesion . The mass was heterogeneously enhanced on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). It had intense fluorodeoxyglucose uptake on positron emission tomography–computed tomography , which suggested that the mass was malignant.
The histology of specimens obtained via vacuum-assisted biopsy was almost indicative of a non-carcinomatous malignant tumor but could not completely be diagnosed. Considering the possibility of the lesion being an invasive carcinoma and the patient’s eager request, we performed a mastectomy and sampling of axillary lymph nodes. Macroscopically, the surgical specimen showed a 35-mm grayish-white lesion, intermingled with bleeding, located on the right upper quadrant of the breast . Microscopically, the neoplastic cells showed large, grooved, eccentrically placed, oval nuclei with vesicular chromatin and a prominent single, irregular nucleolus. The cytoplasm was abundant and eosinophilic in nature, with numerous mitoses identified. Bleeding and necrosis were observed, as well as scattered multinucleated giant cells, lymphocytes, and eosinophils . An extensive immunohistochemical (IHC) panel was performed. The atypical cells were negative for the estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER2 receptor, and the Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 30%. Other IHC findings are summarized in Table . The histiocytic markers CD68, CD163, and CD206 were positive.
S-100 cells showed focal positivity. The tumor cells were negative for the epithelial markers AE1/AE3, dendritic cell markers CD1a and Langerin, and mesenchymal markers desmin and SMA. Based on the morphology and immunohistochemistry results, the tumor was diagnosed as HS . No lymph node metastasis was detected.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged on the 5th postoperative day. Considering the patient’s wishes and lack of validated evidence, we followed the patient up without systemic treatment. The patient survived for 50 months after the surgery without recurrence.