A 28-year-old Asian woman in the first trimester of her second pregnancy was referred to the neurology department from the obstetric department for multidisciplinary antenatal care regarding her muscle weakness. Her milestone history showed she was born prematurely at 32 weeks gestational age, with low birth weight of 1800 g. She was developmentally delayed and the ability to walk independently was reached at the age of 26 months old. At the age of 8 years, she started to stumble and lose balance while walking. She had no family history of hereditary muscle weakness. At this age, SMA was suspected because of her clinical presentations, without any molecular genetic testing. She underwent physical and occupational therapy in a district hospital for 1 year, but her parents decided to stop the therapy due to financial problems. There was no universal national health insurance coverage in Indonesia in the early 2000s. It was quite troublesome for a family with a disadvantaged child who lived in the rural area to visit a district hospital located in the downtown of the city. At the age of 12 years, she could no longer walk on her own, started ambulating using a wheelchair, and stopped going to the formal school.
Despite her progressive muscle weakness, the patient could be reproductively active. She was married at the age of 25 years and was soon pregnant with her first child. She went to a district hospital for antenatal care. At 32 weeks gestation, she had an emergency caesarean section because of premature rupture of the membranes. The baby girl was born prematurely with a birth weight of 2600 g. She continued to grow healthily to date without any observed muscle weakness.
In this second pregnancy, she and her first daughter underwent genetic testing for SMA, which has been readily available in our institution since 2018, to confirm the diagnosis and prepare for genetic counseling. The results showed homozygous deletion of SMN1 exons 7 and 8 in the patient, but not her daughter, confirming that the mother and daughter were patient and carrier, respectively. However, copy number analyses and prenatal diagnostic testing for SMA were not readily available in our hospital. The patient and her family underwent genetic counseling in which they were determined to continue the pregnancy. No particular concern was raised regarding the fetal development in utero until the third trimester. She was planned for a scheduled caesarean section at 38 weeks of gestational age. This was done considering that at this gestational age, fetal respiratory insufficiency and prematurity could be prevented.
In the neurology clinic, the patient presented in a wheelchair with severe scoliosis and disability to walk or stand independently. There was evidence of flaccid weakness in all her limbs, particularly the lower ones, with decreased muscle tone, trophy, and strength. Muscle weakness was more prominent in the proximal parts of her lower limbs .
Electroneuromyography showed an axonal neuropathy of the spinal nerve roots innervating the lower limbs and bilateral median nerves axonopathies without cervical radiculopathy. Electromyography showed a chronic denervation without reinnervation. Molecular genetic testing for SMA showed a homozygous deletion of SMN1 exons 7 and 8, and retention of SMN2 exons 7 and 8, as well as NLR family apoptosis inhibitory protein (NAIP) exon 5 Despite the current successful treatment of SMA using antisense oligonucleotide Nusinersen and gene replacement therapy, none of these drugs were available in Indonesia. Therefore, the patient did not receive specific medication for her muscle weakness condition. She did not continue her physical and occupational therapy. At first, this was due to the lack of universal health coverage, but currently it was due to her difficulty in managing her time and lack of readiness to pay a visit to the hospital.
The patient’s second child was delivered at 38 weeks gestational age. The elective caesarean section was followed by Pomeroy sterilization on indications of a mother with SMA, history of previous caesarean section in the last 3 years, and having enough children. The second child was male with a birth weight and length of 2932 g and 42 cm, respectively. No adverse event was found in this procedure, either for the mother or the baby. Genetic testing for SMA was performed on the newborn soon after birth The results showed the retention of SMN1 exons 7 and 8, indicating that this baby was a carrier. Until this case report was made, there were no reports on the patient’s children that suggested any muscle weakness concerning SMA or other neuromuscular disorders