A 48-year-old Caucasian male ex smoker (10 pack-year tobacco exposure) presented in 2011 with cough and back pain. Computerized tomography (CT) imaging showed a lung primary and metastases to both lungs, spine, and left adrenal. A computerized tomography (CT)-guided biopsy confirmed TTF1 positive, EGFR wild-type adenocarcinoma of the lung. He received three cycles of cisplatin-pemetrexed chemotherapy with a differential response, and then second-line erlotinib for two months before further radiological evidence of disease progression. Erlotinib was administered based on the findings of the BR.21 phase III trial, which demonstrated that erlotinib prolonged survival in relapsed NSCLC unselected by EGFR genotype following progression on first- or second-line chemotherapy compared to placebo (6.7 months vs 4.7 months) . He subsequently received radiotherapy to the spine for palliation (8Gy, single fraction) followed by radiotherapy to the mediastinum due to lymphadenopathy (20Gy, 5 fractions). Thereafter, he was referred for further evaluation, where analysis of his diagnostic specimen identified an ALK rearrangement by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using the Vysis (Abbott) LSI ALK dual colour, break apart rearrangement probe (Abbott molecular, Illinois, Figure ). Following a baseline staging CT , which confirmed multiple metastatic sites, including the lungs and adrenal gland, as well as a chronically collapsed left lung (first seen on CT prior to commencing erlotinib), he was commenced on crizotinib therapy 250 mg orally twice-daily. At his 2-week assessment, he reported marginal clinical improvement. At his 4-week assessment he complained of worsening dyspnoea, and a chest radiograph identified a large left-sided pneumothorax with disease response evident on the right. Chest CT confirmed a 50% left-sided pneumothorax on a background of overall disease response with improvement in mediastinal nodal disease, lung metastases, and re-canalization of the left main bronchus. The patient was admitted and chest tube was placed with an underwater seal. Crizotinib was continued throughout. The left lung re-expanded fully within 24 hours, with correspondent symptomatic improvement and remained fully expanded after removal of the chest tube at which point the patient was discharged. A few weeks later he deteriorated clinically due to likely disease progression, active treatment was discontinued and his care was transferred to the community palliative care team.