A 65-year-old male presented to our clinical center with the chief complaint of acute onset of vision loss in the right eye for 2 weeks without a clear cause before the onset. He reported neither trauma nor a special systemic medical history. Ophthalmic inspections showed that the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was hand movements in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. The affected right eye presented a positive result of relative afferent pupillary defect (RAPD) test. Other signs of anterior segment and intraocular pressure were unremarkable. Dilated fundus examination revealed extensive spreading of cotton-wool spots confined to the peripapillary and posterior pole with slight retinal haemorrhage, as well as Purtscher flecken around the macular fovea in the right eye. The contralateral eye was almost normal except for mild arteriosclerosis. Fluorescence angiography (FA) indicated a slight delayed arteriovenous circulation time (14 s) and mottled hypofluorescence corresponding to cotton-wool spots and Purtscher flecken. OCT presented retinal thickening and oedema, especially at the inner layer. In addition, OCT revealed lesions of the hyperreflective band at the inner nuclear layer (INL) and on either side of the fovea corresponding to perifoveal wedge-shaped white-gray lesions, which is similar to paracentral acute middle maculopathy (PAMM). OCT-A revealed reduced blood flow in both the inner and deep retinal vascular plexuses and a honeycomb-like hypointense signal pattern at the choriocapillaris layer. .
He was diagnosed with PUR due to the lack of trauma or other specific systemic diseases. We ordered laboratory testing to exclude common aetiologies, such as systemic lupus erythaematosus (SLE) and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP). The results, including antinuclear antibodies (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), C-reactive protein (CRP) and routine blood examination, were all within normal limits. He was also referred to the internal medical department for further investigation. Only obsolete lacunar infarctions were detected after a thorough review of the whole body. Alprostadil (Pfizer, ATTN: CAVERJECT®) 10 U intravenous injection (Q.D. for 10 days) was prescribed as vascular dilation therapy to improve retinal blood flow and prevent further damage. After 3 months of rehabilitation, his visual acuity recovered to 20/400. The retinal haemorrhage, cotton wood spots and Purtscher flecken were mostly resolved. OCT indicated remission of retinal oedema, but the PAMM lesions (the hyperreflective band at the INL) remained visible. OCT-A revealed that the honeycomb-like pattern in the choriocapillaris had turned into a homogeneous reduction in blood flow with some small patches of hypointense signal areas. .