A 51-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for further examination and treatment, including surgery for a pancreatic tumor, detected using abdominal ultrasound (US) and computed tomography (CT). He had no history of malignancy, and physical and laboratory examinations, including tumor markers, revealed no specific findings. Contrast-enhanced CT and gadolinium-ethoxybenzyl-diethylenetriamine pantaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DPTA)–enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a nodule that was gradually contrasted in the pancreatic head . No enlarged lymph nodes or distant metastases were evident. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography showed no pancreatic duct dilation or irregularity. Pancreatic juice cytology showed no malignancy. Endoscopic US revealed a well-defined hypoechoic 19 × 13 mm mass on the ventral side of the pancreatic head. Accordingly, pancreatic cancer was suspected and PD with D2 lymph node dissection was performed. A macroscopic examination of the resected specimen showed a well-circumscribed 21 × 15 mm nodule in the pancreatic head . A postoperative pathological examination revealed a well-differentiated invasive ductal adenocarcinoma with lymphatic invasion and lymph node metastasis (N1; 1/19) . The tumor was classified as stage IIB (pT2N1M0) according to the 8th edition of the International Union Against Cancer Tumor Node Metastasis classification. The patient experienced postoperative pancreatic fistula (Clavien–Dindo grade IIIa) , which was treated with drainage and antibiotic agents, and was discharged on postoperative day 50. Two months after the surgery, adjuvant chemotherapy containing gemcitabine was administered at a dose of 1700 mg (1000 mg/m2) on days 1, 8, and 15 every 4 weeks for 1 year. Thereafter, the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) level was within the normal range and a follow-up CT revealed no local recurrence or distant metastasis. However, at 8 years after the first surgery, the serum CA19-9 level was elevated (130.3 U/mL). Additionally, CT identified a 10-mm low-density area in liver segment 5 , while Gd-EOB-DPTA–enhanced MRI revealed a well-defined mass in the area . Positron emission tomography/CT also revealed high fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose uptake only in this hepatic tumor . Furthermore, upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed no malignant findings. No other distant metastases were observed. Accordingly, he was diagnosed with liver metastasis of PDAC. Because the liver metastasis was isolated long after the initial surgery, we decided to resect it using laparoscopic partial hepatectomy of segment 5 at 8 years and 1 month after the PD. A macroscopic examination of the resected specimen revealed a 10 × 9 mm nodular tumor under the liver subcapsular region . A postoperative pathological examination demonstrated well to moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with no continuity between the liver tumor and the peripheral bile duct. Additionally, immunostaining was positive for cytokeratin 17 (CK17) and MUC5AC, and the immunostaining findings of the metastatic lesion were consistent with those of the primary lesion . Based on the above results, the final pathological diagnosis was liver metastasis of PDAC. We planned to administer chemotherapy for 6 months. However, the patient strongly hoped to continue adjuvant chemotherapy beyond that period. For this reason, he received adjuvant chemotherapy for 1 year. No evidence of recurrence was noted at 11 years after the PD and 3 years after the hepatic resection.