The patient was a 68-year-old postmenopausal woman. Since birth, she had had an accessory nipple below her left normal breast. Since the past 20 years, she occasionally experienced a slightly bloody discharge from the accessory nipple, but cytologic examination revealed no malignancy.
In March 2020, she noticed a slightly tender mass without any discharge under the accessory nipple. She visited a nearby clinic and underwent fine-needle aspiration cytology. She presented to our department 2 weeks after she had noticed the mass because cytology showed that the mass was malignant.
On physical examination, an adzuki bean-sized accessory nipple that was pale pink in tone and with a narrow areola was seen in the IMR below her left normal breast, and a hard mass was palpable beneath it . Mammography, ultrasonography (US), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an irregular and heterogeneous mass with an unclear margin approximately 1.7 × 1.4 × 1.0 cm in size below her left normal gland. The mass appeared to be connected to the dermal nodule, suggesting an accessory nipple, and was clearly visible in contrast-enhanced MRI . Computed tomography, bone scintigraphy, and US showed neither distant nor nodal metastasis.
US-guided core needle biopsy revealed the mass to be an invasive ductal carcinoma. We diagnosed her tumor as ABC in the left IMR (cT1cN0M0, stage IA).
One month after her first visit, she underwent wide resection and SNB. According to the map drawn with US guidance, the mass and surrounding adipose tissue and skin, including the accessory nipple and areola, were removed en bloc with 1–2 cm of horizontal margin around the entire circumference . For SNB, technetium-99 m phytate 74 MBq radioisotope (RI) was intradermally injected into the left normal areola on the day before surgery, and indocyanine green (ICG) 5 mg was injected into the skin at the side of the accessory nipple just before surgery. We used a gamma ray-detecting probe and a fluorescence ICG detector to detect and remove three axillary nodes that contained RI and/or ICG. One node that contained both RI and ICG was diagnosed as free from carcinoma by frozen section procedure, and the other two nodes that included ICG were diagnosed as permanent section procedures .
Histopathological examination including immunochemical staining revealed that the tumor was an invasive ductal carcinoma (pT1cN0(sn)M0, stage IA) arising from the ABT, scirrhous type, and 1.7 × 1.4 × 1.0 cm in size, including the intraductal component. Its invasive size was 1.4 cm in diameter, there was no lymphovascular infiltration, and the surgical margin was 1.5 cm or more. The tumor was estrogen and progesterone receptor-positive and Her2/neu-negative and had a Ki-67 labeling index of 20%. None of the three resected nodes showed involvement. The carcinoma was located just beneath the accessory nipple and was connected to it by the usual mammary ducts . Eight months after surgery, the patient is well. Letrozole 2.5 mg per day will be administered for 5 years as adjuvant hormonal therapy.