We report a 73-year-old man who presented to our outpatient department with a 3-year history of painless but progressive hearing impairment in the right ear, culminating in hearing loss about 2 months before the presentation. There were associated dizziness and mild gait disturbances. He has well-controlled diabetes and hypertension and is a gastric cancer survivor with no feature of recurrence for more than 20 years.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a right-sided CPA meningioma measuring 26 × 15 × 30 mm filling the cistern and significant cerebellar peduncular compression [-]. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed no calcification and normal-sized and symmetrical internal acoustic meatus [ and ].
Significant examination findings were a conscious man with intact higher cerebral function (Mini-mental state examination 30). He had sensorineural hearing loss in the right ear, pure-tone audiometry (PTA) was 90 decibels (dB), and the speech discrimination test was 0 (AAO-HNS class D) . Other cranial nerves, including the trigeminal and facial nerves, were intact. Long tract signs and cerebellar function were preserved except for positive Bruns nystagmus and mild derangement in tandem walk.
The routine workup was done, and he had a right retrosigmoid craniotomy in the supine-lateral position. Facial nerve monitoring was done using motor-evoked potential and electromyography; however, auditory brainstem response was not performed due to the profound hearing loss. The tumor was firm and occupied the right CPA cistern with attachment to the dura anterior to the internal acoustic meatus and adjacent parts of the petrous bone and extending posteriorly. It displaced the facial-vestibulocochlear nerve complex superolateral and the lower cranial nerves inferiorly. About 95% of tumor resection was achieved with an operating microscope and cavitron ultrasonic aspirator; however, a minute segment of the lesion that was morbidly adherent to the right facial and vestibulocochlear nerves was left in situ. Internal acoustic meatus was not drilled because the tumor did not invade it. Intraoperative video indocyanine green fluorescent angiography and micro-Doppler ultrasound were used to confirm the patency of regional vessels during tumor resection and before wound closure. Hemostasis was secured, and the wound was closed without drainage.
Postoperative recovery was uneventful, and he was discharged home after about 1 week of admission. Postoperative MRI showed satisfactory tumor excision with small remnant of the tumor around the rihgt facial-vestibulocochlear nerve complex [ and ]. He had subjective hearing improvement in the immediate postoperative period, which persisted on follow-up. An audiometry examination repeated 2 months after discharge showed significant improvement in hearing with PTA 18.8 dB and speech discrimination score (SDS) 100% (AAO-HNS Class A) . The histology showed World Health Organization central nervous system grade 1 meningothelial meningioma. The patient is still being followed up in our department.