A 28-year-old man with morbid obesity was admitted to Beijing Tsinghua Changgung Hospital in 2021. His body mass index was 44.2 kg/m2. He had a past medical history of hypertension and hyperlipidemia. LSG was performed after laboratory tests and preoperative examination. Patient was placed in supine position. After general anesthesia and sterilization, a 12 mm Hg pneumoperitoneum was formed by inflation with carbon dioxide. Laparoscopic instruments were placed through the trocars. The gastrocolic ligament was cut off by Ligasure from 3–4 cm left to the pylorus. The His angle was completely separated, and the posterior wall of the gastric fundus, the esophagus, and the foot of the diaphragm were exposed. Sleeve gastrectomy was performed with staplers under the guidance of the gastric tube. The greater curvature of the stomach was removed completely. The stump of the stomach was closed by continuous suture. Neither the superior mesenteric vein nor the portal vein was retracted during the surgery. The operation time was 116 min. The patient began to drink on postoperative day (POD) 1 and consumed liquid food on POD 2. Because of good food tolerance, pain control, and no signs of infection, he was discharged on POD 3. We prescribed aspirin 100 mg (oral intake OD) for him. He returned to the emergency room (ER) on POD 16. He experienced intermittent abdominal pain for 2 days. It was a colic pain without radiation. The pain was accompanied by nausea and abdominal distension. He had stopped passing stool or gas for 2 days. There was no fever, vomiting, melena, hematochezia, or hematemesis.
The heart rate was 127/min and the blood pressure was 126/101 mm Hg. The other vital signs were normal. The abdomen was soft. There was mild tenderness in the upper abdomen. There were no signs of peritonitis. The bowel movement sound could not be heard.
Laboratory tests suggested that the white blood cell (WBC) count and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were elevated. The CT scan without contrast demonstrated the dilated bowel.
The ER doctor diagnosed the patient with intestinal obstruction. Fasting, IV antibiotics, fluid resuscitation, and enema were prescribed. The symptoms did not disappear, and the patient was admitted to the gastrointestinal department on POD 19. After admission, IV antibiotics, fluid resuscitation, enema, and enoxaparin (6,000 IU ih QD) were prescribed. On POD 24, the abdominal pain became severe and peritonitis appeared suddenly. Laboratory test results showed that WBC levels and D-dimer levels were elevated, as shown in . We performed CTA immediately. The results suggested thrombosis in the superior mesenteric vein and the portal vein, ascites in the abdomen, and small intestine wall thickening, as shown in . We confirmed the diagnosis of VAMI and suspected intestinal necrosis.
The patient underwent laparotomy on POD 24. During the operation, we found 70-cm necrotic bowel in the jejunum, as shown in . Resection of the necrotic bowel and ostomy of the proximal and distal jejunum were performed. The operation time was 283 min. The amount of intraoperative blood loss was 50 mL.
IV antibiotics, fluid resuscitation, parenteral nutrition, and anticoagulation therapy (10,000 IU ih Q12 h) were prescribed. We inserted a tube into the distal stoma. The enteral nutrition and the fluid collected from the proximal stoma were infused through the tube. He was discharged after 30 days of hospitalization. The CTA on POD 39 showed nearly no thrombosis in the portal vein but still in the superior mesenteric vein, as shown in . Home enteral nutrition and rivaroxaban (20 mg once a day) were prescribed. The continuity of the jejunum was restored 3 months after the second operation.