A 74-year-old woman (height, 146 cm; weight, 36 kg) with cancer of the right breast was scheduled to undergo mastectomy under general anesthesia. The patient’s medical history included permanent dual-chamber pacemaker implantation (Adapta L ADDRL1, Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) for complete atrioventricular block at the age of 59. The pacemaker had been programmed in DDD mode at 60–120 beats/min with atrial output 1.5 V-0.4 ms, ventricular output 1.5 V-0.4 ms, atrial sensitivity 0.5 mV, and ventricular sensitivity 2.8 mV. The patient’s preoperative electrocardiogram showed A-sense V-pace with an intrinsic atrial rate of 84 beats/min.
In the operating room, general anesthesia was induced with fentanyl 100 μg, remifentanil 0.2 μg/kg/min, propofol 50 mg, and rocuronium 40 mg intravenously. After tracheal intubation, the pacemaker mode was switched to VVI mode. The patient was pacemaker dependent, and her intrinsic ventricular rate was less than 40 beats/min. The ventricular pacing threshold (0.6 V-0.4 ms) was confirmed. The pacing mode was changed to VOO at a fixed rate of 80 beats/min intraoperatively because the surgical site was very close to the generator, and we expected electromagnetic interference due to the use of unipolar electrocautery. General anesthesia was maintained with 3.5% desflurane and 0.2–0.4 μg/kg/min of remifentanil. The patient remained hemodynamically stable intraoperatively, and the surgical procedure was uneventful.
Prior to recovery from general anesthesia, the pacemaker was programmed to the preoperative setting, in DDD mode at a pacing rate of 60–120 beats/min. Immediately afterwards, diaphragmatic twitching was observed, mimicking bucking type of movements. The electrocardiogram of the patient showed AV sequential pacing; after the minimum heart rate was set to 40 beats/min, the pacing switched to A-sense V-pace, and the twitching ceased. The twitching was reproducible by arterial pacing with a threshold of 1.5 V-0.4 ms, same as the original atrial output. The patient’s intrinsic atrial rate was approximately 50 beats/min. No structural problems, including displacement of the pacing leads, perforation, cardiac dilatation, or pericardial effusion were noted on the chest radiograph . The atrial pacing threshold (0.6 V-0.4 ms) and impedance (611 Ω) was not modified after a generator change at the age of 68. After recovery from general anesthesia and extubation, the patient’s intrinsic atrial rate increased to 80–90 beats/min. The DDD pacing range was switched to the preoperative setting (60–120 beats/min), and the patient was transferred to the ward. The postoperative course was uneventful, and no further diaphragmatic twitching was observed. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 4.