A 23-year-old female, a Munda, gravida 1 para 0, at 36 weeks and 5 days of amenorrhea presented to the emergency department of Mal Super Specialty Hospital on 2 June 2021 as a referral from another facility in a semiconscious state due to a severe attack of tonic–clonic seizures. A detailed history taken from the husband was insignificant except for a persistent cough for the last 7 days. She denied any visual changes, headaches, or vaginal discharge. In the emergency department, her physical examination revealed tachycardia of 150 beats per minute, elevated blood pressure of 187/111 mmHg, tachypnea of 36 breaths per minute, and oxygen saturation of 94% on room air. Routine COVID-19 rapid antigen test (RAT) was positive, and urine dipstick was +3. Her blood was sent for additional laboratory tests and a chest X-ray was ordered . A diagnosis of COVID-19 in eclampsia was made.
Chest radiography images revealed prominent interstitial markings, and a bedside transabdominal ultrasonography revealed a live single intrauterine fetus in cephalic presentation with normal cardiac activity and movements.
On admission, she was promptly started on intravenous labetalol 20 mg that was repeated for one more dose after 15 minutes to control the blood pressure. She had been given a loading dose of intravenous magnesium sulfate (MgSO4) 4 g of 20% at 8:30 am from the referring facility for suspected eclampsia, and maintenance doses of 5 g of 50% MgSO4 were administered at 12:30 pm and 4:30 pm while monitoring for toxicity with patellar reflexes and respiratory rate prior to each dose at Mal Superspeciality Hospital. She was shifted to the critical care unit (CCU) and monitored. Within an hour of admission, she had a spontaneous rupture of the amniotic membranes, with meconium-stained liquor (grade 2); however, the fetal heart of 148 beats per minute was reassuring. The cervix dilated progressively up to 10 cm, leading to an uncomplicated vaginal delivery of a healthy, live-born male neonate. Shortly after delivery, she developed slight respiratory distress and her renal function worsened suddenly, resulting in significant volume overload and acute kidney injury. However, diuresis with intravenous furosemide 40 mg was administered on the evening of the delivery and followed up with the same dose after 12 hours, resulting in stabilization of her serum creatinine levels at 1.0 mg/dL as her hypoxic condition improved
COVID-19 reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) came back negative for the neonate, while that of the mother returned positive the next day; she was shifted to the COVID-19 high-dependency unit (HDU). Due to her COVID-19-positive state, contact between mother and child was limited. During her entire stay at the COVID HDU, she was kept on a course of tablets ivermectin (once daily for 5 days),tab zinc (once a day), tab vitamin C (once daily), tab montelukast (once a day for 7 days), antibiotics ceftriaxone IV (for 5 days) and azithromycin 500 (for 7 days) each once daily, paracetamol 100 mg intravenously after delivery followed by tab paracetamol 650 three times per day, metronidazole 400 three times per day, and injection of pantoprazole 40 mg intravenously for 3 days followed by tab pantoprazole 40 mg orally twice daily. Mother and infant were discharged on day 15 after achieving complete recovery and a negative COVID-19 nasopharyngeal swab.