A 52-year-old Thai woman had been diagnosed anti-IFNɣ autoantibodies for 4 years. Four years ago (March 2015), she presented with prolonged fever, a weight loss of approximately 10 kg, bilateral tonsillar enlargement, and multiple cervical lymphadenopathy. A lymph node biopsy from the left cervical node showed the growth of Mycobacterium absessus. Disseminated Mycobacterium abscessus infection was diagnosed. She denied using illicit drugs, herbal medicines, or corticosteroids. Immunological studies, including anti-HIV testing, were all negative, but anti-IFNɣ autoantibodies tested highly positive. She received intravenous imipenem and amikacin for a primary anti-mycobacterial therapy, which were later switched to oral clarithromycin and ciprofloxacin for maintenance therapy. She had relapse infections twice during the course of treatment. Thereafter, the anti-mycobacterial regimen was changed to oral clarithromycin and linezolid. Following the new regimen, she complied well with the treatment, and her condition was in remission for 1 year. Before this admission, she had a sore throat, which was particularly more painful at the right side of the pharynx, odynophagia, and hoarseness for 3 weeks. She also had febrile symptoms and lost 5 kg in weight. She received oral amoxicillin 1.5 g/day from a primary physician, but her symptoms did not resolve. She denied foreign body sensation, and had no dysphagia, stridor, or difficult breathing. Physical examination revealed marked swelling and hyperemia of both sides of the tonsils, including the uvula and palatal arches , and a single left submandibular lymph node, sized approximately 1 cm, was identified. Indirect laryngoscopy demonstrated a moderate swelling of the epiglottis, arytenoid, and vocal cord with normal airway opening. There were no skin papules or nodules, including no hepatosplenomegaly found. Blood chemistries, including plain chest radiography, were unremarkable. The patient was performed right tonsillar biopsy at 1 day following admission. The tissue biopsy Gram stain , including the pathological sections, exhibited a few intracellular oval and elongated yeast-like organisms with some central transverse septum seen with dense small lymphoid cell and plasma cell infiltrates. Acid fast and modified acid fast staining from the pathological sections were negative. One week later, the tissue biopsy grew few mold colonies with the typical diffusible red-colored pigment on the fungal cultures . Morphological identification based on lactophenol cotton blue microscopic examination demonstrated these to be hyaline septate molds, with branched and non-branched conidiophores consisting of brush-like phialides with long chains of round and elliptical conidia . All of the findings were suggestive of T. marneffei. However, antifungal susceptibility testing was not performed due to there being no standard breakpoint criteria for interpretation. The tissue sent for bacterial and mycobacterial culture showed no significant growth. Routine blood cultures (BD BACTEC™, Becton, Dickinson and Company), including fungal and mycobacterial blood cultures (BD BACTEC™ Myco/F Lytic, Becton, Dickinson and Company) were negative for any microorganisms. Thus, no evidence of relapsed mycobacterial disease or other pathogen co-infections was detected.
Following the diagnosis of T. marneffei infection, amphotericin B deoxycholate 45 mg/day (0.6 mg/kg/day) was commenced as the primary antifungal therapy. The patient continued receiving oral clarithromycin and linezolid for M. abscessus maintenance therapy. Following 5 days of amphotericin therapy, the patient developed acute kidney injury with a rising creatinine level from 0.86. to 2.44 mg/dL. Her blood potassium, magnesium, and bicarbonate levels were 3.4, 1.7, and 24 mEq/L, respectively. Finally, the antifungal regimen was changed to itraconazole oral solution with a daily dose of 400 mg/day after receiving amphotericin B for 5 days. The presenting symptoms of a sore throat and odynophagia disappeared after 1 week of the antifungal therapy. Four weeks after the treatment, the swelling of the pharynx and larynx were markedly reduced. She was continued with itraconazole for 4 months, and later a dose of 200 mg/day was used for long-term secondary prophylaxis. Her symptoms completely resolved with no complication. She still has been receiving the itraconazole prophylaxis until now.