A 6-year-old, previously healthy Indigenous male was accidentally shot in the left supraorbital area with a BB gun while playing at home. He was emergently flown to a tertiary trauma center for further management. On examination, his Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) was 13 (E3V4M6). He displayed no focal neurological deficits. A small entry wound was visible just superior to his right eye, with no exit wound identified. Urgent computed tomography (CT) imaging (including CT angiography, or CTA) revealed two intracranial foreign bodies (that is, shrapnel), with surrounding subarachnoid hemorrhage in the Sylvian fissures, suprasellar cistern, ambient cisterns, and frontal lobes . Ventricular caliber was normal, and there was no evidence of parenchymal injury or ischemic stroke. CTA of the circle of Willis was limited due to metallic streak artifacts, but confirmed proximity of one piece of shrapnel 2 mm lateral to the left A2 segment in the frontal lobe. The second foreign body localized to the region of the anterior communicating artery. The distal vasculature appeared intact, with no signs of vasospasm. An early cerebral angiogram was performed, confirming these findings.
Given his neurological and hemodynamic stability, the patient was admitted for close clinical observation. He was started on phenytoin for seizure prophylaxis and antibiotic therapy (that is, empiric ceftriaxone, vancomycin, and metronidazole), given the nature of the penetrating traumatic injury. Seven days following admission to hospital, the patient acutely developed right-sided weakness affecting his arm (motor grade 4/5) and leg (motor grade 4+/5). He was otherwise hemodynamically stable, with minimal headache and normal level of consciousness. Urgent CTA imaging revealed narrowing of the left middle and anterior cerebral arteries, along with the supraclinoid portion of the left internal cerebral artery. The patient was thus transferred to the intensive care unit to initiate hypertensive therapy for vasospasm. Maintenance intravenous fluids were started, using fluid boluses and norepinephrine to maintain a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of greater than 90 mmHg, which improved his weakness.
The following day, though his weakness was improved, the patient became disoriented and developed expressive speech dysarthria. A cerebral angiogram was performed showing persistent vasospasm in the affected vessels, and balloon angioplasty of the left internal carotid, left middle cerebral, left anterior cerebral, and right anterior cerebral arteries was subsequently performed, as shown in Fig. A, B. Five milligrams of intra-arterial milrinone were delivered, and the patient was started on nimodipine at a dose of 15 mg every 6 hours (roughly 1.5 mg per kg per day). His MAP was maintained at greater than 90 mmHg for 3 days, then greater than 85 mmHg for 4 days, totaling 7 days of MAP-directed therapy. The patient’s symptoms resolved, and repeat CTA imaging revealed radiographic resolution of the previously identified vasospasm in the affected vessels. The patient remained stable and was discharged from hospital 6 weeks post-admission.