A full-term, non-dysmorphic 3-day-old female in the newborn nursery had an apneic episode with hypoxia upon feeding, most likely due to aspiration, and was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit. Her screening electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm at 124 beats per minute (bpm.), a northwest axis, right ventricular hypertrophy with strain pattern, possible left ventricular hypertrophy, and T-wave inversion in the lateral leads. There was no family history of arrhythmias or congenital heart disease. She was feeding well with no further apneic episodes, therefore was discharged home at 4 days of age with plan for outpatient cardiology follow-up.
The baby was seen by her primary care provider at 5 days. Heart rate variability from 97 to 120 bpm was noted during feeding without further apnoea. She was otherwise doing well without cyanosis, sweating, or tachypnoea during feeds.
The electrocardiogram in the cardiology clinic at 8 days of life showed sinus tachycardia at 182 bpm, a northwest axis, right ventricular hypertrophy with strain pattern, paucity of left ventricular forces, and a borderline QT interval . Her corrected QT interval (QTc) was 448 msec. An echocardiogram revealed a non-apex forming left ventricle with increased trabeculations (Video 1, ), low normal left ventricular systolic function, and partial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR) of the right upper pulmonary vein with no evidence of right heart dilation ( and ). Notably, the baby had a normal trileaflet aortic valve, no evidence of coarctation of the aorta, and no gradient in the blood pressures between the right arm and right leg. While undergoing her echocardiogram, she developed atrial flutter with an atrial rate of 320 bpm and 2:1 atrioventricular conduction (Video 2) associated with mottling and cyanosis. The rhythm transitioned to SVT at a rate of 350 bpm that was terminated by the application of ice to the face. She was admitted to the pediatric intensive care unit (PICU) and started on oral propranolol at 1 mg/kg/day spread over 3 doses per day. She had two breakthrough episodes of SVT that required intravenous adenosine (0.2 mg/kg) and titration of propranolol up to 3 mg/kg/day. She was hemodynamically stable during all episodes of SVT. She had no further events and was discharged home with a 24-hour Holter monitor at 13 days of age.
At 19 days of age, she was brought back to the emergency department after a 3-hour episode of SVT at 288 bpm was noted on her Holter monitor . Upon arrival, she was found to be in SVT, which again terminated with application of ice to the face. She was readmitted to the PICU, and propranolol was switched to sotalol (54 mg/m2/day). After a few days of monitoring with no-repeat events, she was discharged home.
The patient has been seen every 1–2 months in the cardiology outpatient clinic without breakthrough episodes of SVT or increase in her QTc. Due to the patient’s cardiac findings, a genetics evaluation was pursued. Chromosomal microarray revealed Turner syndrome with complete monosomy X (45, X). The infant was successfully weaned off of sotalol at 12 months of age and remains hemodynamically stable without further arrhythmias to date.