A 60-year-old man visited our institution because of dysphagia. He was diagnosed with early gastric carcinoma in the middle third of the stomach, based on upper gastrointestinal endoscopy and computed tomography (CT) imaging. The preoperative carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19–9) values were within the normal ranges. He underwent a distal gastrectomy with a D1+ lymph node dissection. Pathologic histology of the resected stomach macroscopically revealed a tumor, 25 × 20 mm in diameter, with a depressed and elevated form (Type IIa/IIc) . A diagnosis of moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma was confirmed. Poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (solid type) infiltrated the submucosa with nodal involvement (4 of 63 nodes were positive for metastases) but without venous invasion; there was pathologically moderate lymphatic invasion. The gastric cancer fulfilled the criteria of T1bN2M0, stage IIB, based on the American Joint Committee on Cancer TNM staging classification for carcinoma of the stomach (7th edition, 2012) . The patient received one cycle of oral chemotherapy consisting of S-1; however, treatment was discontinued because of the adverse events of nausea, loss of appetite, and loss of body weight.
Twelve months after the surgery, an abdominal CT scan showed a low-density lesion, 17 mm in diameter, at the upper pole of the spleen . Whole body fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (18F–FDG) positron emission tomography/computed tomography (PET/CT) showed a hypodense mass in the spleen and intense 18F–FDG uptake with a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of 9.0. Extrasplenic tumor dissemination or metastasis was not suspected .
Six weeks later, a follow-up CT scan revealed enlargement of the splenic lesions (22 × 17 mm) with obvious contrast enhancement and no evidence of other metastasis. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy findings were negative in the residual stomach. Colonoscopy revealed no abnormalities. During the postoperative follow-up, the serum CEA and CA19–9 levels were within normal limits.
We finally suspected that the tumor was a solitary splenic metastasis of the gastric cancer. The patient underwent a laparotomy because his splenic metastasis was isolated and resectable. In addition, there were no other metastases.
The laparotomy revealed no lymph node involvement, hepatic metastasis, or peritoneal dissemination. The tumor was in the upper pole of the spleen. The splenectomy preserved the residual stomach. The patient’s postoperative period was uneventful.
The specimen was a white mass without a capsule that measured 20 × 18 mm; it was at the upper pole of the spleen . Histological examination revealed a moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma and poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (solid type). These features were similar to those of the primary gastric cancer. The immunohistochemical expression of CEA was positive both in the primary gastric cancer and in the splenic tumor . These histological and immunohistochemical profile findings were consistent with the metastasis of a splenic tumor from the primary gastric cancer.
The patient refused to receive adjuvant chemotherapy. For 18 months, he has been well and healthy without any evidence of gastric cancer recurrence.