A 5 months old female infant presented with fast and labored breathing, grunting, and bluish discoloration of the lips and extremities. The bluish discoloration was noticed by the mother at birth and it worsened with crying. The perinatal history was unremarkable. There was no family history of consanguinity, cardiac illness or sudden cardiac death. Vital signs were normal except she was having tachycardia. Oxygen saturation was 64% (atmospheric air). She had wasting, flaring of the ala-nasi, central cyanosis, and grade I clubbing. There was an inter-costal retraction, but the air entry was good bilaterally. Peripheral pulses were palpable and full in volume. The precordium was quiet with the point of maximal impulse at the 4th intercostal space medial to the midclavicular line. There was a fairly audible holo-systolic murmur at the left lower sternal border radiating to the back. There was no organomegaly. The capillary refill time was less than 2 s.
Coarse in the hospital were marked with an episode of respiratory arrest, bradycardia and hypoglycemia (admission RBS- 43 mg/dl), for which bag-mask ventilation, chest compression, and bolus IV dextrose (2 ml/kg) was given. She was put on respiratory support. Subsequently, Random blood sugar was 145 mg/dl, WBC—14, 400/mm3, hematocrit- 41.9%, platelet count -97,000/mm3,C- reactive protein of 8 IU/L. Liver function, renal function and serum electrolyte tests were all with in normal limit. Blood culture grew once coagulase-negative staphylococcus aureus. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with a cardiothoracic ratio (CTR) of 66%, reduced vascular markings in both lungs field. Echocardiographic examination showed Cameral coronary artery fistula involving the left main artery draining into the left ventricle. There was also secundum ASD, VSD with a right to left shunt, and tricuspid valve dysplasia . Chest CT-scan- showed a markedly dilated left aortic sinus, and left main coronary artery involving the left anterior descending branch entering on the lateral wall of the left ventricle. . Figure showed atretic tricuspid valve with hypoplastic right ventricle. She had a repeated episode of the cyanotic spells specially following excessive crying. Her oxygen saturation (SaO2) dropped to 40% while she had protracted acidotic breathing for which she was given oxygen by facemask, sodium bicarbonate 1 meq/kg IV before she developed cardio- respiratory arrest and died despite the resuscitative measures.