A 67-year-old man was presented to our hospital with persistent duodenal leakage after resection and in-situ repair of an infected aortic bifurcation prosthesis. The patient’s medical history showed a right-sided hemicolectomy (2005), elective open aneurysm repair with an aorto-bi-iliac prosthesis (2006), and incisional hernia repair with a mesh (2007). Three weeks before admission, in April 2013, replacement of an infected aorto-bi-iliac prosthesis was performed. The infection was caused by a secondary ADF. The patient underwent open repair with an aorto-bi-femoral prosthetic graft, which was complicated by right ureteric damage which was treated with a local ureter-plasty. After renewed sepsis due to persistent duodenal leakage, the patient was referred to our hospital. An extra-anatomical reconstruction was performed with a right-sided 8-mm Dacron® axillo-bi-femoral bypass, removal of the recent aorto-bi-femoral prosthesis, aortic stump formation and an eight-centimeter resection of the duodenum with a duodenojejunal anastomosis. The aortic stump was infra-renally closed with double rowed Prolene® 3.0 sutures incorporating felt drenched in Rifampicin®.
Twelve weeks after surgery, the patient was still hospitalized and suddenly developed severe hematemesis with immediate hemodynamic instability. He was re-admitted to the Intensive Care Unit and was resuscitated and massively transfused with packed cells, fresh frozen plasma and thrombocytes. Gastroscopy showed large amounts of blood in the stomach but no active bleeding. The duodenum however, could not be reached. Computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed large amounts of blood in the duodenum and stomach, and extravasation of blood from the aortic stump into the duodenum . Because of multiple prior abdominal operations, the patient was not considered suitable for open surgical repair. More important, he was in a hemorrhagic shock with a systolic blood pressure of 40 mmHg and therefore immediately transferred to the angiosuite. Percutaneous access was created by ultrasound-guided puncture of the axillo-bi-femoral bypass graft with introduction of an 8 mm sheath. Using a 4F multipurpose catheter within a 8F guiding catheter (Cardinal Health, Dublin, Ohio) we performed an angiography which confirmed the massive bleeding from the aortic stump towards the duodenal loop. A 16-mm AVP (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, California) was implanted within the aortic stump, which stabilized the patient within minutes. No other material or coils were used to cessate the bleeding. The second angiography performed 23 min after placement of the AVP confirmed that the bleeding had stopped . Three months later, CTA demonstrated thrombosis of the aortic stump with the AVP in situ . The patient was treated with intravenous antibiotics for half a year. He was discharged in a good clinical health to a rehabilitation clinic. After a follow-up of 4 years the patient was still alive.