A thirty-year-old male presented to the outpatient department with a one-month history of dysphonia, following an episode of upper respiratory tract infection. He was a nonsmoker and had no history of throat pain, cough, difficulty in breathing or swallowing. On clinical examination, there was a 2x2 cm midline neck swelling which was unnoticed by the patient. The swelling was a well-defined cystic swelling which moved with deglutition and with protrusion of the tongue. Laryngoscopy revealed an anterior subglottic submucosal cyst with mobile vocal cords Computed tomography revealed an ovoid well-defined non-enhancing cystic lesion in the anterior midline of the neck of size 2.5x2.8x2.1cm between the thyroid and cricoid cartilage with scalloping of the superior aspect of the cricoid. Posteriorly the lesion projected into the subglottic region and upper trachea causing mild compromise of the airway. Due to the critical location of the cyst a Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was not performed in this case .
He underwent laryngofissure with cyst excision under general anaesthesia. A 2x2 centimetre cystic swelling was delineated by methylene blue dye injection in the midline between the thyroid and cricoid cartilage extending posteriorly to the ala of the thyroid cartilage. The entire cyst was excised in toto without any complications and was sent for histopathologic examination. Gross examination revealed a dye-stained collapsed and cut opened cystic specimen measuring 2x1.5x1cm. Microscopy revealed a cyst wall lined by respiratory epithelial lining with focal squamous metaplasia. Foci of ulceration showing granulation tissue were noted. The wall was fibro collagenous with few blood vessels, mild mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate and occasional glands. There were focal fibrosis and myxoid changes. The histopathologic examination was consistent with a thyroglossal cyst .
The patient did not have any postoperative complications and was discharged on oral antibiotics on postoperative day 2. Following surgery patient is asymptomatic and on regular follow-up.