A 32-year-old female, gestational age 22+5 wk, presented to the department of obstetrics of our hospital complaining of abdominal distension, chest tightness and limb weakness lasting approximately 4 wk. Ovarian tumors were found 14 d ago.
Fifty-five days prior (gestational age: 14+6 wk), her ultrasound showed no mass in the bilateral adnexal area. According to the patient, her abdominal distension, chest tightness, and limb weakness began approximately 4 wk prior (gestational age: approximately 19 wk), but she did not seek treatment. Fourteen days ago, she was diagnosed with bilateral ovarian tumors in another hospital by ultrasound showing a hypoechoic mass measuring 9.2 cm × 6.7 cm on the right side of the uterus, a hypoechoic mass measuring 9.2 cm × 6.9 cm on the left side of the uterus, an anechoic mass measuring 4.3 cm × 3.6 cm beside the uterus and pelvic effusion.
The patient noted a history of gastritis for more than 10 years.
Her parents had a history of hypertension. She had no family history of malignancies.
Her face showed signs of anemia. Her chest percussion was voiced, and her abdomen was swollen. A trimanual gynecologic examination after induced labor revealed a uterus with poor mobility, irregular masses in the bilateral adnexal area with poor mobility, a rectal fossa filled with lesions and a narrow space between the intestines.
Upon admission, her laboratory results were as follows: hemoglobin 66 g/L, hematocrit 20.4%, reticulocyte 3.28%, serum albumin 35.1 g/L, free triiodothyonine 2.34 pmol/L, and free thyroxine 16.35 pmol/L. Tumor marker levels were as follows: CA125 578.50 U/mL, alpha-fetoprotein 157.84 ng/mL, carcinoembryonic antigen 0.53 ng/mL, CA199 16.13 U/mL, Cyfra21-1 2.60 ng/mL, Fer 749.58 ng/mL, β 2-microglobulin 5.56 μg/mL, neuron-specific enolase 15.84 ng/mL, CA50 7.19 U/mL, CA153 25.70 U/mL and serum lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) 1160 U/L.
At admission, ultrasound indicated a hypoechoic mass measuring 10.7 cm × 7.8 cm in the right adnexal area and a hypoechoic mass measuring 11.2 cm × 8.2 in the left adnexa. Then, pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a soft tissue mass shadow in the pelvic cavity measuring approximately 12.7 cm in the largest diameter and lesions involving the posterior wall of the bladder, adjacent bowel, cervix, upper part of the vagina and bilateral iliac vessels. The patient was diagnosed with a bilateral adnexal malignant tumor, and the pelvic mass was not excluded as metastasis . MRI also revealed pelvic effusion, soft tissue swelling in the pelvic wall and buttock, changes in the pelvic bone and bilateral ureteral dilatation.
Ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT) showed massive peritoneal and bilateral pleural effusion. Therefore, we performed ultrasound-guided puncture catheter drainage in the abdominal cavity and right thoracic cavity. Whole-abdomen CT showed bilateral pleural effusion, abdominal and pelvic effusion and malignancies of the bilateral adnexal origin that did not involve the rectum and bladder . Whole-abdomen CT also revealed an irregularly shaped uterus and cervix that were not excluded as metastases, multiple soft tissue masses in the abdomen believed to be metastases, a nodular shadow in the left lateral lobe of the liver that was not excluded as metastasis, tumor involvement in the bilateral middle and lower ureters, secondary left kidney atrophy, bilateral hydronephrosis, bilateral upper ureteral dilatation and bilateral inguinal lymph nodes. After receiving the pathological results, positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) was performed and revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes throughout the body with increased metabolism (indicative of lymphoma), some lesions that were unclearly demarcated from the uterus and adnexa, thickening of the bilateral pleural wall, pleura, pericardium, peritoneum, omentum and mesentery with increased metabolism (indicative of lymphoma infiltration), lymphoma in the right breast and increased systemic skeletal metabolism (indicative of lymphoma infiltration).
The exfoliative cytology of hydrothorax and hydroperitoneum showed many lymphocytes without cancer cells. The pathological results supported high-grade B-cell lymphoma, and the immunohistochemical staining results were as follows: LCA (+), CD20 (+), CD3 (-), CD5 (-), Cyclin D1 (-), Ki67 (positive rate 90%), CK (AE1/AE3) (-), BCL-6 (+), TdT (-), MPO (-), CgA (-), Syn (-), CD56 (-), PAX-5 (+), CD34 (-), CD10 (+), BCL-2 (+), MUM1 (-), MYC (+), CD21 (-) and CD99 (weakly +). The pathological consultation at the superior hospital resulted in a diagnosis of non-Hodgkin high-grade B-cell lymphoma with rearrangements of the MYC gene and BCL2 gene (DHL). Immunohistochemistry revealed MUM-1+, CD10+, CD38+ and LMO 2- and in situ hybridization revealed EBER-.