A 53-year-old female patient reported a chief complaint of 3 months of pain upon chewing on her upper left posterior teeth. There was no history of trauma or any hereditary conditions. The medical history of the patient was noncontributory. An abraded anomalous cusp-like structure on the buccal surface of tooth 26 that extended from the cervical edge of the tooth towards the mesiobuccal cusp was discovered during an oral cavity examination . In addition, four other typical cusps with normal shape and size could be seen from the occlusal view. The tooth showed no response to an electric pulp and cold test, and subsequently, the provisional diagnosis of pulp necrosis was suggested.
On radiographic examination, three roots that were generally normal in shape and size were identified, and extensive periapical radiolucency was observed around tooth 26 . In addition, extensive periapical radiolucency was observed around tooth 26. However, it was unclear from the radiolucent globe regions if the protostylid had its own root canal. Thus, a cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) (DCTPRO, VATECH, Yongin-Si, Republic of Korea) which was scanned at a voltage of 110 kV and a current of 7.60 mA, was recommended for the patient. The involved tooth was observed, and the CBCT image demonstrated the complex anatomy of tooth 26, in which the pulp chamber of the protostylid was independent in the anterior third of the root and fused with the mesiobuccal (MB) root canal in the apical half of the root . A 3D image of tooth 26 was obtained to indicate that the base of projection of the protostylid was related to the mesiobuccal root . Therefore, on the basis of the clinical and radiographic findings, the tooth was diagnosed as apical periodontitis according to the AAE’s Guide to Clinical Endodontics . The CBCTPAI score is a scoring system for radiographic assessment of apical periodontitis that has some advantages for clinical applications due to precise measurement of lesion extension and reduced observer interference . In this case, tooth 26 was rated with a score of D due to the extensive destruction of cortical bone. Thus, endodontic treatment of the tooth was planned after the confirmed diagnosis was made.
An endodontic access cavity was prepared on the occlusal surface using a fissure bur and a No. 2 round bur. The tooth was isolated immediately upon the discovert of the root canal, following which root canal therapy was conducted. Next, the pulp chamber was examined under 8 × magnification by an operational microscope (OMS2350, ZUMAX, Jiangsu, China). Interestingly, we found that it had 5 root canals: the mesiobuccal (MB) canal, the second mesiobuccal (MB2) canal, the distalbuccal (DB) canal, the palatal (P) canal and the root canal in the protostylid, which is fused with the MB root canal in the middle of the root . The root canal system was initially prepared with a size 10 C-file (Dentsply Maillefer, Ballaigues, Switzerland) and the working length was determined using a dental apex locator (Raypex6, VDW GmbH, Munich, Germany) combined with a radiograph. Then, the M3 NiTi rotary instruments (M3, United Dental, Shanghai, China) were used to instrument the root canal, and the canals were enlarged by the M3(size 30, 04 taper) to their full working lengths.
During the treatment, the root canal was copiously irrigated with 20 mL of 3% sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl). The root canal was dried with paper points and filled with Vitapex paste (Neo Dental, Tokyo, Japan). Afterwards, the access was sealed with Cavit (3 M ESPE AG, Seefeld, Germany).
The patient was called back after 3 months for obturation. Although the clinical examination, it was found that the tooth was functioning and showed no symptoms of oedema. During the appointment, the Vitapex paste was removed using 1% NaOCl, and the root canals were sealed with the iRoot SP root canal sealant (Innovative BioCreamix Inc, Vancouver, Canada) and warm gutta-percha using a vertical condensation technique . CBCT and periapical radiographs were taken to test the filling effect. The access cavity was then restored with a posterior composite restoration. (Z350, 3 M Dental Products, St. Paul, Minn).
The patient was scheduled for follow-up visits and seen again at 6 months and 1 year after treatment. At the 6-month follow-up, a periapical radiograph was taken, and the image revealed a reduced apical area . At the 1-year follow-up, the tooth remained to be free of symptoms and radiographic evaluation of tooth 26 showed a healing apical area.