A 39-year old woman, known with NF1 and Sickle cell anaemia, was referred to our hospital with complaints of pain and notable growth of multiple neurofibromas . At examination, the patient had multiple cutaneously and subcutaneously located neurofibromas, most notably at the following locations: left ankle, left lower leg, right upper leg, right buttock (two) and right hip, varying in size from four to eight centimetres . MRI studies of the suspected area's showed well-defined, circumscribed lesions having a homogenous aspect without signs of invasion of surrounding structures. The signal intensity was low on T1, moderate on T2 and high on STIR. Thus, the MRI-studies were consistent with multiple, complete benign appearing neurofibromas. 18FDG PET-scanning however, showed multiple sites of increased 18FDG accumulation . The corresponding lesions were clearly detectable on the MRI-studies and palpable on clinical examination. Therefore, ten neurofibromas were selected for surgical resection (I-X, Table ), including four lesions with increased 18FDG accumulation. Seven months post-operative, 18FDG PET-studies showed no increased 18FDG accumulation in new areas, nor in the neurofibromas left in situ, nor at the sites of resected neurofibroma. One year postoperative however, the patient started to complain about pain and discomfort from neurofibromas that previously had been asymptomatic (XI-XX, Table ). On clinical examination most notable locations were: dorsal side of the left and right wrist, right scapula and left shoulder (previously documented), varying in size on palpation from two to eight centimetres. 18FDG PET was performed revealing multiple new as well as previously documented sites of increased 18FDG accumulation . Again, ten neurofibromas (XI-XX) are selected for surgical resection. The surgical interventions were both uneventful.
The PET-studies were performed using an ECAT EXACT HR+ scanner (Siemens/CTI) after injection of 370 MBq of [18F]-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (18FDG) and 2D-images are obtained 60 minutes after injection. All scans were corrected for decay, scatter and randoms and were reconstructed using ordered subset expectation maximization (OSEM) with 2 iterations and 16 subsets followed by post smoothing of the reconstructed images using a 5 mm FWHM Gaussian filter. No attenuation correction was applied. Visual analysis of the PET scans was performed with regard to size and intensity of 18FDG accumulation, using a 4-point scale; 1: no uptake, 2: sparse uptake, 3: moderate uptake, and 4: high uptake.
In total, twenty neurofibromas were resected during the two separate surgical interventions (ten each) and the specimens were analyzed both, histopathologically and immunohistochemically. All specimens were fixed in neutral 4% buffered formaldehyde for at least 24 hours. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed on 4 μm thick tissue sections. After deparaffination and rehydration, endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked. After antigen retrieval, a cooling-off period preceeds the incubation of the antibodies for the glucose transporter protein (Glut-1; DAKO, Glostrup, Denmark) and hexokinase II (HK II; Chemicon, UK). Specific binding was detected with a biotinylated swine-anti-rabbit-antibody (DAKO) and an avidin-biotin complex (DAKO). Staining was developed with diamminobenzidine and counterstained with haematoxylin/eosin. Intensity of staining was categorized as negative (-), weak (+), positive (++) and strongly positive (+++). Negative (obtained by omission of the primary antibody) and positive controls were used throughout. For Glut-1 staining an internal control was staining of erythrocytes (positive for glucosetransporter-1).
Statistical analysis of correlation between complaints (pain and growth), size, tumour type, semi-quantitative measurement of 18FDG accumulation and morphologic (pseudo capsule formation) and immunohistochemical characteristics (Glut 1 and HK II expression) was performed using Spearman's Rank Correlation Coefficient. SPSS software (Release v12.0, SPSS Inc, Chicago, Ill, USA) was used for the statistical analyses. P-values < 0.05 were designated significant.