A 55-year-old female patient was admitted to the hospital with pain in the liver area lasting for more than 1 year.
The patient presented with persistent pain in the liver area with a burning sensation on the skin for 1 year, and one instance of a small amount of bloody vaginal secretion was found six months ago.
The patient has had hypertension for more than 5 years.
Her mother died of stomach cancer, and her father died of emphysema.
A lymph node measuring approximately 0.6 cm × 0.6 cm was palpated in the right inguinal region of the patient. There was an irregular active mass palpable on the left anterior side of the uterus, approximately 8 cm × 6 cm × 6 cm in size.
Her blood pressure was elevated, with a maximum systolic pressure of 180 mmHg, and HPV type 39/53 (+) was detected. Her serum thyroglobulin (TG) concentration was > 500 ng/mL, which decreased to 39.13 ng/mL after gynecological surgery (normal range: 3.50-77.00 ng/mL). The other laboratory examinations (including routine blood and urine tests, coagulation function tests, liver and kidney function tests, and evaluations of tumor marker levels) were normal, with CA125 (-).
Computed tomography (CT) examination showed an irregular mass with mixed density in the right adnexal region, measuring approximately 8.7 cm × 7.6 cm × 6.5 cm, with a clear boundary . A contrast-enhanced scan showed obvious heterogeneous enhancement, and multiple thickened and tortuous vessel shadows were found in the lesion, which was mainly supplied by the right reproductive artery . In addition, there was a fat density shadow in the left portion of the mass, which was not enhanced on the contrast-enhanced scan . In the right retroperitoneum, there was a rounded mass with soft tissue density that was approximately 4.3 cm × 3.2 cm × 4.6 cm in size, with a well-defined boundary . The mass located to the right in front of the inferior vena cava was closely associated with the inferior vena cava, which was mildly compressed. Additionally, a contrast-enhanced scan showed heterogeneous marked enhancement .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an irregular mass with mixed signal in the right adnexal region with an iso/hypointense signal on T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) , a slightly high heterogeneous signal intensity on T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) and short tau inversion recovery (STIR) imaging , hyperintense signal on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) , and further hyperintense signal at the edge of the lesion (each sequence), suggesting the possibility of hemorrhage within the lesion. The mass in the right retroperitoneum was characterized by low signal intensity on T1WI , inhomogeneous slightly high/high signal intensity on T2WI , and inhomogeneous high signal intensity on STIR imaging .
Surgically resected specimens revealed thyroid-like tissue with local papillary structure and necrosis in the tumor of the right adnexa . Immunohistochemistry showed CK19(+), TG(+), TTF-1(+), galectin-3(+), HBME-1(+), and CD56 (partially absent) in the lesion . Thyroid-like tissue with localized papillary structures was identified within the tumor in the right retroperitoneum; this lesion was closely associated with the retroperitoneal lymph nodes .