A 74-year-old woman who experienced dyspnea exacerbation and left back pain for 10 days was diagnosed with an LA caused by odontogenic infection. Her medical history revealed comorbidities, such as hypertension, angina pectoris, untreated dental caries, and periodontitis. Although the patient was administered meropenem (MPMN) for 5 days, her body temperature reached 37.8 °C and inflammatory marker levels increased. Chest radiography revealed pleural effusion exacerbation . The patient’s white blood cell count and C-reactive protein level markedly increased to 21,130/µL and 33.74 mg/dL, respectively, and her procalcitonin level was elevated (0.28 ng/mL). Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a large, multilocular pleural effusion and an LA in the left lower lobe . Although the patient immediately underwent chest drainage, poor drainage was observed in the apex. The pH of the pleural effusion markedly decreased to 6.9, and surgery was planned accordingly. First, thoracoscopic debridement was attempted; however, both the parietal and visceral pleura were markedly thickened. Therefore, we converted to thoracotomy, and performed parietal and visceral decortication. An LA was also observed in the lateral basal segment. The cause of empyema was perforation of the LA, and the abscess wall was fragile and torn during decortication . Large amounts of pus and air leakage were observed in the ruptured abscess cavity. Because the tissue was fragile, it was difficult to close with sutures. Therefore, FPF was implanted in the ruptured abscess cavity , fixed with fibrin glue, and sutured to the abscess wall . The thoracic cavity was irrigated with 10,000 mL of saline using a pulse lavage irrigation system. Air leakage was not observed with the 20cmH2O during the intraoperative leak test. Therefore, we considered that the abscess was sufficiently reduced, and that filling of the omental flap and reinforcement of the muscle flap were not necessary. Three drainage tubes were placed over the ventral lung apex, dorsal lung apex, and diaphragm. The operative time was 151 min, and the blood loss volume was 300 mL. Immediately after surgery, air leakage was not observed. On postoperative day (POD) 1, type 1 respiratory failure did not improve; therefore, bronchial sputum toileting was performed. Chest CT showed poor drainage on the mediastinal side; therefore, the patient underwent fibrinolytic therapy with intrathoracic urokinase to promote lung expansion on PODs 2 and 5. The culture detected Streptococcus intermedius was detected in the intraoperative pleural fluid and pus in the LA. Therefore, Streptococcus intermedius was the causative bacterium, and antibiotics treatment was de-escalated from MPEM to sulbactam/ampicillin on POD 6. Signs of postoperative air leakage and infection of the implanted FPF were not observed . All drainage tubes were removed by POD 9. The patient was discharged on POD 12 and underwent careful observation as an outpatient. At 1 year and 2 months after surgery, empyema recurrence was not observed.