A 63-year-old male was admitted with a history of diabetes mellitus of 20-year duration and ischemic heart disease. He was keeping good health and could successfully complete his Hajj pilgrimage. However, few months after returning from pilgrimage, the patient experienced bouts of abdominal colic which was suspected to be cholecystitis but could not be confirmed. The patient continued to have very poor appetite, abdominal pain, loose stools, loss of about 7 kg weight in 1 year, fatigue, and headache. He later developed slowness of gait and falls. He had also developed feeling of the subjective weakness of the left side of the body, tendency to lose balance, slurring of speech, involuntary movement of eye, face, limbs, and swallowing difficulty in the form of coughing while swallowing. He lacked initiative to do work, had forgetfulness for recent events, visual hallucinations which were formed nonstereotyped, recurrent and patient lacked insight that the images are hallucinatory and was treated as Parkinson's disease at regional hospital with no improvement. As the patient was steadily deteriorating, he was brought to our center. At the time of admission, the patient had a HMSE score of 19. The patient had involuntary closing and opening of each eye in disconjugate arrhythmic manner, eyebrow lifting movements, dyskinesia movements of upper lips, cheek, as well as mild elevation of shoulders and twisting of trunk infrequently . He had skew deviation of eyes with saccadic initiation defect, broken saccades, slow vertical saccades, and multiple saccadic oscillations. He had a tendency to stoop forward, swaying while walking, with two person support, anteroposterior trunk movement while sitting, mild finger-nose incoordination, and completely illegible effortless speech diagnosed as mixed dysarthria with drooling and choking on and off. Poor respiratory support while speaking, poor lip seal, slowness of tongue movements, his general examination revealed itchy skin lesions over scalp, cheek, nose, and chin. The lesions were scaly, had nodularity with pigmentation and serous ooze. They were slightly tender .
Investigations showed normal routine blood counts, liver functions, renal functions, and thyroid functions. Vasculitic workup, HIV, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory, and ultrasound abdomen were normal. Vitamin B12 levels were low 188.11 pg/ml. CSF showed chloride 121, sugar 154, protein 72, and cells 3. India ink preparation and culture were normal. PCR for WD could not be done due to lack of availability. N-methyl-D-aspartate, voltage-gated potassium channel, (glutamic acid dehydragenase) anti-GAD turned negative. The cardiac evaluation reported apical hypokinesia. Duodenal biopsy showed lamina propria showing focal lymphoplasmacytic cell collections and few histiocytes. Grams-stain, PAS, and GMS did not reveal any bacilli.
Magnetic resonance imaging: T1 and T2 images showed multiple areas of signal changes in the left middle cerebellar peduncle, midbrain, cerebellum, with diffuse cerebral and cerebellar atrophy; creatine peak was seen in the area of signal change . DOPA uptake scan showed poor uptake in putamen.
In view of the typical phenotype, the patient was treated with injection ceftriaxone 2 g twice a day for 2 weeks. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole twice a day, doxycycline 100 mg a day, Vitamin B12 injections and other drugs he was on for Parkinson's disease were withdrawn.
The patient slowly showed signs of improvement, his clarity of speech and swallowing improved; he could walk with one person support . His abdominal symptoms improved and skin lesions improved. On telephonic inquiry, it was learned from relatives that the patient passed away due to pneumonia 5 months later.