This is a study of a 53-year-old male patient operated on for a laryngeal tumor in our ENT and cervico-facial surgery department. The patient was referred to us from another hospital. It should be noted that the patient was a chronic smoker and suffered from ischemic heart disease and high blood pressure.
The history of the disease dates back 2 years to the onset of chronic dysphonia complicated 1 year later by inspiratory dyspnea requiring emergency tracheotomy . On physical examination, a median cervical ulcerating mass was noted, without other associated signs, notably the patient had no dysphagia and no lymphadenopathy .
Nasofibroscopy reveals a mass that obstructs totally the glottic airway, occupying the glottic and supraglottic stages of the larynx, with both vocal cords fixed .
The cervical CT scan revealed a voluminous laryngeal process occupying all laryngeal subunits (supraglottic, glottic, subglottic), measuring 7 cm in long axis and invading the anterior commissure, lysing the thyroid, cricoid and arytenoid cartilages .
After being stabilized, the patient underwent suspension laryngoscopy with tumor biopsy. This revealed a tumor of all three laryngeal stages, extending far forward, beyond the anterior commissure, invading the infrahyoid muscles, the subcutaneous layers and externalizing through the skin. The tumor did not extend into the piriform fossa or the post-cricoid region, and the entrance to the esophagus was unobstructed. The base of the tongue was not invaded.
Pathological examination is consistent with undifferentiated squamous cell carcinoma.
The decision adopted at a multidisciplinary consultation meeting was to perform a total laryngectomy extended anteriorly to the infrahyoid muscles and the skin opposite, with bilateral cervical lymph node dissection and reconstruction of the tissue defect using a flap of the pectoralis major muscle, followed by adjuvant radiotherapy. The choice of this type of flap is based on the patient's cardiovascular condition and the large volume of the tumor, which may compromise the viability of a free flap (, ).
The surgery was performed by an ENT specialist, performing a wide dissection of the peripheral skin and subcutaneous tissue over the skin paddle of the pectoralis major muscle up to the clavicle to expose the pectoralis major muscle and facilitate skin suturing, once the flap is made. The main objective when raising the flap was to clearly visualize the nourishing pedicle located on the deep surface of the pectoralis major muscle, and to preserve it during dissection and translation of the flap towards the cervical region .
On definitive anatomopathological examination, we identified a squamous cell carcinoma of the larynx, invading the thyroid cartilage and infrahyoid muscles. Bilateral lymph node metastases were present, the largest measuring 2 cm on the right and 3 cm on the left. In the light of these data and the preoperative evaluation, we can classify this tumor as T4aN2cM0.
In the immediate postoperative period, we prescribed antibiotics, analgesics and cough suppressants to avoid infection and pressure on the flap's blood circulation. On the second postoperative day, the suction drains were removed. The patient stayed in our department for 7 days after surgery, with daily follow-up, where we checked the color and warmth of the flap to detect any incipient necrosis requiring our emergency intervention, and changed the dressing once a day, making sure it wasn't compressive.
Once the patient has left our department, the patient was advised to stop smoking, and to adopt regular physical activity along with a healthy diet, the aim is to achieve a satisfying blood circulation. We've established a follow-up plan involving consultations every 15 days for the first two months, then every month for the rest of the year. The sutures were removed by the doctor on the 15th postoperative day. All check-ups were favorable.