A 68-year-old woman was admitted to gynecological surgery of our Institute for the presence of a suspect right ovarian mass. After a careful medical history, we discovered that the patient had been operated 12 years before for a neoplastic lesion in the left colon, with a diagnosis of “moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma infiltrating the muscularis B1 sec. Dukes, pT2 N0 G2”. No history of endometriosis was reported.
The patient complained of abdominopelvic pain for two months. Vaginal examination revealed a solid mass in the right adnexal site attached to pelvis and uterus (diameter 15 cm Ø approximately) and CA125 levels were slightly increased (49.4 IU/ml). Contrast-enhanced CT scan of abdomen and pelvis revealed a “complex” pelvic mass (with both cystic and solid components) in the anatomical location of the right adnexa (maximum diameter 17 cm), not dissociable from uterus and contiguous bowel, with slight peritoneal effusion .
At laparotomy, there was a right adnexal tumor (maximum diameter 15 cm) with deep uterine and visceral adhesions; a total hysterectomy with right salpingo-oophorectomy and infracolic omentectomy was performed .
Microscopically, the lesion was characterized by a solid adenofibromatous component with solid nests of transitional epithelial cells with pale cytoplasm, indented nuclei and cystic formations lined by mucinous columnar epithelium and by an exuberant papillary transitional cellular component with mild nuclear atypia .
The definitive pathological examination showed a Brenner borderline ovarian tumor with atypia and no adjuvant treatment was recommended. The patient status was NED (no evidence of disease) at 12-month follow-up visit.
IHC in transitional cells was strongly positive for CK7, CA125, thrombomodulin and EMA, and negative for CDX2, CK 20 and p53 (Additional file : Figure S1). Moreover, transitional papillary epithelial cells showed a strong positivity for p63 and EGFR, while p16 appeared positive in the basal, parabasal and intermediate layer of exophytic papillary epithelial component .
In order to find p16 promoter hyper-methylation, molecular analysis was carried out using a commercial kit (Methylation Kit, Diachem, Naples, Italy) and it showed the absence of molecular alteration. Mutational analyses of KRAS and PK3CA were performed by direct sequencing, after specific PCR amplification, as previously reported . The analyses did not reveal the presence of the mutations described in literature (data not shown). Finally, mutational analysis of EGFR was performed by a commercial kit (EGFR Mutation Analysis Kit, EntroGen, Tarzana, CA, USA), containing a distinct primer/probe mix in order to detect, by Real Time PCR system, all EGFR point mutations described in literature (Exons 18, 19, 20, 21). No activating mutations were present in our sample.
Beside, FISH analysis (LSI EGFR SpectrumOrange/CEP 7 SpectrumGreen Probe, Vysis Abbott) did not reveal gene amplification or gene copies number gain .
However, morphology and immuno-profile of the sample were consistent with the diagnosis of a borderline Brenner tumor of the ovary.