A 21-year-old woman presented with a 2-year history of focal swelling on the right side of her neck. She did not have any other significant symptoms. Past medical history was unremarkable and she denied any family history of similar lesions or other skin lesions. Physical examination revealed a 7 cm × 5 cm soft-tissue mass on the right side of her neck, and widespread cafe-au-lait spots on her body . The mass had smooth surface and was non-pulsatile; it had mobility in lateral direction but not in vertical direction. No hoarseness of voice or change in heart rate was observed on compression of the mass.
Her neurological examinations were otherwise normal. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging with a 1.5 TMR scanner (Skyra, Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) showed a 7.7 cm × 4.1 cm × 3.0 cm well-defined mass adjacent to the right internal carotid artery . Ultrasonography (US) performed with a linear probe (Philips Healthcare IU22, Bothell, WA, USA), revealed an almost elliptical, well-circumscribed heterogeneously hypoechoic mass centered on the right carotid sheath between the internal jugular vein and the common carotid artery . On grayscale images, the mass appeared heterogeneously hypoechoic with no evidence of calcification, cystic change or internal necrosis. Color Doppler US showed strip-like low-velocity arterial flows within the mass. Furthermore, both the proximal and distal ends of the mass were in continuity with a thick cord like structure which possibly represented the vagus nerve. The left carotid sheath also showed an elongated homogenously hypoechoic nodular mass, and both the proximal and distal ends of the mass were seen in continuity with vagus nerve . Homogeneous mass lesions from right thigh intermuscular space and surface of left gastrocnemius also were detected on US. Flexible laryngoscopy showed no evidence of vocal cord paralysis.
A right radical neck dissection was performed. Intraoperatively, the tumor was confirmed to originate from the vagus nerve ; no adhesions to the adjacent common carotid artery or internal jugular vein were noted. Stimulation of the mass did not induce any obvious electrocardiogram abnormalities. The tumor extended up to the jugular foramen and down to the thyroid cartilage. The gross tumor was totally resected from the proximal and distal vagus nerve. After the mass was removed, we found that the distal vagus nerve was also infiltrated, and therefore we cut the affected distal vagus nerve further .
The pathological examination was consistent with the diagnosis of neurofibroma . Immunohistochemical staining showed positivity for S-100 protein, while glial fibrillary acidic portein (GFAP) and oligodendrocyte transcription factor-2 (Olig-2) were negative. The Ki-67 labeling index was low (<2%) . Considering that the mass on the left side of her neck was still small, no surgery was performed. However, both the proximal and distal ends of the mass were in continuity with the left vagus nerve, and the peritumoral fibers in the left vagus nerve were also thickened. Combined with the cafe-au-lait spots and multifocal tumors, a diagnosis of NF-1 was established . Postoperatively, there were no cardiac complications, nevertheless a laryngoscopy revealed the right vocal cord palsy. A regular ultrasonographic follow-up was scheduled. During a follow-up period of 8 months, no recurrence or progression of the tumors was observed.