The case regards a 59-year-old Caucasian man with a history of previous sensitization to Hymenoptera sting, the result of which was that, a few years earlier, he had facial edema due to both bee and wasp stings, then confirmed by skin tests. Anamnestic data were negative for cardiovascular and respiratory diseases.
On the day of his death, the man contacted an employee by phone, asking for help and reporting that he was probably stung by bees.
Once arrived, the employee found the man unconscious, lying on the ground, and with a transparent liquid coming out of his mouth, and contacted an ambulance. The medical staff found the man in cardiorespiratory arrest and began resuscitation, but the man died. The autopsy was performed at 24 h after death.
Body inspection showed no signs of bee puncture. The gross examination revealed mild edema of the larynx, whitish foamy liquid in the bronchial tree, and red-brownish foamy dense liquid in the lungs.
The routine histology was also performed, showing subacute pulmonary emphysema, endo-alveolar edema and hemorrhage, marked congestion of the interalveolar septa, bronchospasm, and scattered bronchial obstruction due to mucus hyperproduction (A–C). Myocardial tissue showed hypertrophic myocytes, myofiber break up, and foci of wavy fibers (D–E); atherosclerotic plaques were observed in coronary arteries.
The toxicological investigations performed were negative for alcohol, abused substances, and psychotropic drugs.
Biochemical investigations have been performed on the peripheral blood (femoral vein), showing an increased level of tryptase equal to 189 µg/L, troponin I 100,000 pg/mL, and proBNP 579 pg/mL. In addition, the Immuno-CAP method was applied for the determination of total IgE antibodies, which was found to be equal to 200 kU/L. ImmunoCap (Thermo Fisher Scientific/Phadia, Uppsala, Sweden) was carried out for the specific IgE dosage against honey bee (i1), white-faced hornet (i2), common wasp (Yellow Jacket–i3), paper wasp (i4) and yellow hornet (i5); the analysis allowed the identification of honey bee IgE equal to 5.30 kUA/L and yellow jacket IgE of 3.00 kUA/L.
For immunohistochemical procedures, 4-micron thick sections obtained from larynx, lung, heart, and spleen tissue blocks were deparaffinized, then washed in descending alcohol scale, treated with 3% hydrogen peroxide for 10 min, washed again in deionized water three times, and incubated with normal sheep serum to prevent unspecific adherence of serum proteins for 30 min at room temperature. After, slides were washed with deionized water and incubated for 30 min at 37 °C with primary anti-human antisera monoclonal mouse anti-tryptase antibody (Roche Diagnostics code 760-4276). Next, the sections were washed three times with PBS and incubated with a biotinylated goat anti-mouse IgG secondary antibody (1:300; Abcam, code ab7064) for 20 min at room temperature, subsequently incubated with horseradish peroxidase-labeled secondary antibody for 30 min, developed with diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride, and counterstained with hematoxylin using the ULTRA Staining system (Ventana Medical Systems). Negative controls were obtained by omitting the specific antisera and substituting PBS for the primary antibody. Immunohistochemical reaction revealed intense expression in the larynx and lungs, showing several immunopositive mast cells and spread immunopositivity for degranulated tryptase (A–D); mild expression in both coronary arteries’ walls and myocardial tissue characterized by scattered positive mast cells and foci of tryptase degranulation (E–G); and mild positivity in splenic tissue showing mast cells and spread degranulated tryptase expression (H).