A 66-year old man with medical history of bipolar disorder treated with lithium therapy for 20 years presented to primary care doctor’s office with significant edema and decreased urine output for 4 weeks. The past medical history was also significant for hyperlipidemia, essential hypertension, chronic kidney disease and benign prostatic hyperplasia. His daily home medications included lithium 600 mg/day, atorvastatin 20 mg/day, bupropion 100 mg/day, lisinopril 10 mg/day, calcium carbonate 600 mg/day, cholecalciferol 2000 units daily, and omeprazole 20 mg/day. Further laboratory work revealed supratherapeutic lithium level of 2.17 mmol/L, acute kidney injury with creatinine of 2.92 mg/dL (baseline of 1.5–1.6 mg/dL), albumin of 1.9 g/dL (baseline of 3.8 g/dL) hyperkalemia with potassium of 6.0 mmol/L, and 24-h urine protein 7,382 mg (no albuminuria reported previously). The patient was advised to go to the emergency department for further evaluation.
On admission, the patient’s blood pressure was 110/80 mmHg, heart rate 77 beats/min, and respiratory rate 17 breaths /min. Past medical history, chart review and evaluations did not reveal any history of reported HIV, tuberculosis exposure or malignancy. Chest X-ray performed did not show any evidence of acute or latent TB. Physical examination revealed bilateral upper and lower extremity edema, scrotal edema, slow response to questions, but otherwise normal findings. Urinalysis showed absence of white and red blood cells. Kidney ultrasound was unremarkable with no kidney calculi or hydronephrosis.
Lithium therapy was discontinued immediately; the patient treated with intravenous fluids for hyperkalemia. Given the nephrotic range proteinuria and anasarca, he underwent a kidney biopsy. On light microscopy, approximately ten glomeruli were present for evaluation, five of which are globally sclerotic. The glomeruli showed no proliferative features or segmental sclerosis. Microscopic evaluation of tubules and interstitium revealed mild tubular atrophy and interstitial fibrosis. In the fibrotic areas, some of the glomeruli appeared ischemic. The glomeruli showed no FSGS or proliferative features. The immunofluorescence study was negative. Electron microscopy demonstrated severe diffuse and global foot process effacement. Taken together, the biopsy findings were consistent with a minimal change disease .
The patient was discharged, and steroids were started outpatient based on the biopsy findings. His symptoms did not improve after discontinuing lithium therapy and steroid treatment; he continued to have significant edema. He presented to the hospital within 2 weeks with worsening kidney function, hyperkalemia, weight gain, edema in upper and lower extremities, and scrotal swelling. He had creatinine of 3.55 mg/dl, potassium of 5.1 mEq/dL and albumin of 1.6 g/dL. He continued to have nephrotic range proteinuria. He was treated with oral and intravenous diuretics with no relief in his anasarca. His steroids were also continued during the second admission. His creatinine continued to be elevated (2.94 mg/dl) and after discussing with the patient, a decision was made to initiate hemodialysis for anasarca refractory to diuretics and acute kidney injury. Patient continues to require hemodialysis 3 times a week and had progressed to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) with no improvement in kidney function as evidenced by significantly elevated intradialytic creatinine levels. The creatinine on 6-month follow-up was 5.86 mg/dl.