A 45-year-old multiparous Korean woman with regular menstrual cycles presented with dyspepsia and abdominal distension. On physical examination, the abdomen was distended with a tense cystic mass arising from the pelvis, corresponding to a 20-week gravid uterus, which was palpable bimanually. Liver function tests showed normal ranges, including total bilirubin (0.4 mg/dL), aspartate aminotransferase (27 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (27 U/L), and alkaline phosphatase (52 U/L). The serum level of cancer antigen 125 (CA125) was increased to a level of 61.6 U/mL, and cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9) was in the normal range (8.6 U/mL).
Large multiloculated ovarian masses, measuring 16 × 15 × 11 cm on the right side and 5 × 5 × 4 cm on the left side were detected on magnetic resonance imaging . A subsequent computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen showed diffuse wall thickening of the gallbladder fundus and body portion without distension . The imaging and test results suggested primary ovarian cancer with an incidental focal adenomyomatosis. Additional lesions were not detected by gastrointestinal fiberscopy and colonoscopy.
A laparotomy was performed based on the preoperative diagnosis of a primary ovarian malignant neoplasm with pathologic finding of gallbladder. The patient underwent a total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy, paraaortic lymphadenectomy, omentectomy, and peritoneal washings for cytology. A large multilobulated well-capsulated neoplasm of both ovaries was found, and mucinous adenocarcinoma was detected in both ovaries through a frozen biopsy. No peritoneal dissemination was observed. Immediately following the gynecological operation, the patient underwent radical cholecystectomy by hepatobiliary pancreas surgery team.
Adenocarcinoma was detected in the gallbladder . Microscopic examination of both ovarian neoplasms showed bilateral mucinous adenocarcinoma , which was a metastasis from the gallbladder. Immunohistochemistry showed that gallbladder adenocarcinoma was focally positive for CDX2 . Ovarian adenocarcinoma was also positive for CDX2 while negative for an estrogen receptor. Lymph node metastasis was noted in one left external iliac lymph node.
Following surgery, the patient had adjuvant chemotherapy with six cycles of cisplatin and gemcitabine. There was no clinical and radiologic recurrence noted at the 12-month follow-up after surgery.