A 19-year-old man presented to the emergency room at 4:00 p.m. with a severe, recurrent left-sided neck abscess that manifested itself over the previous week. The patient had a high fever, ranging from 39.3–40.0 °C with left-sided odynophagia. A fluctuant neck mass could be felt, and the temperature of the skin over the mass was higher than normal. A complete blood examination revealed a WBC count of 15.98 × 109/L, D-dimer levels that reached 1.92 μg/mL, and levels of plasma fibrinogen at 6.96 g/L. Ultrasonography indicated swelling of the tissues in the left side of the neck, and computerized tomography (CT) of axial sections of the neck showed an air pocket on the left side of the pharynx . The patient had presented with a similar condition 2 years ago and was managed by incision and drainage of the neck abscess. At 8:47 p.m., the patient was sent to the operating room for incision and drainage, and at 9:27 p.m. (just before the administration of general anesthesia), his blood pressure suddenly dropped to 80/50 mm Hg and his blood oxygen saturation continuously decreased to 75 %. The patient also became tachycardic and dysphoric. A tracheotomy was performed and a laryngoscope was inserted instantly, which showed that there was purulence with blood rushing into the pharyngeal cavity. The condition of the patient continued to deteriorate, and all rescue measures proved ineffectual. He was ultimately pronounced dead at 11:00 p.m.
A forensic autopsy was performed on the 4th day after the patient’s death. A 5.0-cm-long vertical skin suture from the tracheotomy was observed in the middle of the anterior neck and a 3.0-cm-long horizontal and old surgical scar was observed above the skin suture. We found a 10.0 cm × 5.0 cm × 4.0-cm mass with suppurative necrosis and hemorrhage on the left side of the neck, and a 1.0-cm vertical tracheal incision was found under the isthmus of the thyroid gland. Hemorrhage and necrosis of the left lobe of the thyroid gland could also be observed. The cervical muscles were difficult to separate due to severe adhesion and inflammation of neck tissues, and remarkable swelling and a sinus were observed in the cranial end of the left-sided pyriform fossa . Several small abscesses were also found on the root of the tongue. Brain edema was obvious and splinter subarachnoid hemorrhages could be seen externally. The heart weighed 315 g, and the thicknesses of the left and right ventricular walls were 1.3 and 0.3 cm, respectively. We additionally found some blood with purulence in the cavities of the trachea and bronchus. Edema was obvious in both lungs and numerous hemorrhagic spots could be found on the surface. No meaningful lesion was observed in other organs.
We found hemorrhages and necrosis with numerous inflammatory cells within the tissues of the anterior left neck. Squamous epithelial cells with keratinizing or non-keratinizing cells and fibroplasia could be observed in the mesenchyme of the tissues in the left neck. Edema was severe in the submucosa of the left pyriform fossa, which contained numerous small abscesses. Multiple hemorrhages and necrosis with many inflammatory cells could be observed within the tissues of the tongue root. We found focal and scattered hemorrhages under the capsule of the left thyroid, and most of the acinar cells appeared atrophied. The mesenchyme of the left lobe of the thyroid became fibrotic with infiltration of numerous neutrophil granulocytes. Fibroplasia with infiltration of numerous inflammatory cells was also observed in the membrane of the left submandibular gland. Fistulas surrounded by squamous epithelial cells with keratinizing and/or non-keratinizing cells were found within the tissues of the pyriform fossa sinus. P63 was highly expressed in the squamous epithelial cells of the pyriform fossa sinus on IHC examinations. Squamous epithelial cells of variable maturity and fistular structures (which were positive for PCK and/or P63 on IHC), were distributed in the left cervical muscles ; and their nuclei were of different sizes. Numerous small abscesses could be observed in the sternocleidomastoid muscle. Some of the cytoplasm of the neck muscles was quite acidophilic and even appeared to be dissolving. Severe infiltration of lymphocytes and neutrophil granulocytes, and proliferation of fibers were observed in the mesenchyme. Microthrombi were found in many small vessels of vital organs such as brain, lungs, kidney and spleen; and the proportion of inflammatory cells in partial small vessels was high. Minor splinter hemorrhages were found in the myocardial mesenchyme of the interventricular septum. Emphysema and focal hemorrhage in some alveoli were also observed. In addition to edema and minor anemia, there were no significant pathologic changes in other organs; and toxicologic examination ruled out the presence of all common drug substances.
Postmortem findings and the neck CT manifestations (such as fistulas surrounded by squamous epithelial cells, severe neck swelling and thyroiditis; and the left-sided pyriform sinus and air bags) all conformed to the clinical presentations and pathologic changes typical of third bronchial fistula. The histopathologic examinations together with complete blood examinations revealed that the patient had a severe infection before death and the blood was in a hypercoagulable state. Thus, the cause of death was considered to be septic shock following a neck infection.