A 76-year-old female presented with new-onset gradually worsening hirsutism over the face, upper chest, upper abdomen, and arms and frontal balding for six months. She had not noticed acne, clitoromegaly, or changing voice. There was no abdominal pain, bloating, bowel or urinary symptoms. She had attained puberty at 13 years and had regular menstruation up to 55 years. Her two childbirths were uncomplicated. She had not experienced postmenopausal bleeding or hot flushes. There was no exposure to exogenous androgenic substances.
Past medical history included satisfactorily controlled diabetes and hypertension for 15 years and right total hip replacement for osteoarthritis 10 years ago. There was no history of microvascular or macrovascular complications of diabetes.
On examination, she was of average built and looking well. She had thick terminal hair over her face, upper chest, upper abdomen, and arms and there was no clitoromegaly. Abdominal examination revealed a firm pelvic mass up to the level of the umbilicus. The examination was otherwise normal.
Total testosterone and serum DHEAS were markedly elevated and confirmed on repeat testing. Serum DHEAS was performed using the chemiluminescence method on the IMMULITE platform. The results of her blood investigations are summarised in Table .
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a heterogeneously enhancing complex mass measuring 11 × 8 cm in the left adnexal region. There was no calcification, fat content, or air-fluid level within . Bilateral adrenal glands appeared normal. There were no focal lesions in the liver.
She underwent total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salphingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy. A left ovarian tumour adherent to the lateral pelvic wall, measuring 16 cm × 8 cm × 9 cm showing a yellowish-brown cut surface with haemorrhagic and necrotic areas was removed completely . The tumour was friable on removal. Pelvic or para-aortic nodes were not palpable. Uterus, right ovary, fallopian tubes, pouch of Douglas, liver, diaphragm, stomach, spleen, adrenals and lesser sac were macroscopically normal. Washing was not performed. Recovery was uneventful. One week after surgery, total testosterone dropped to 0.3 ng/ml (0.124–0.357) and serum DHEAS was 83 µg/dL. Whole-body Fluorodeoxyglucose-Positron emission testing (FDG-PET) scan after surgery did not show any additional FDG avid foci.
Figure shows the microscopic appearance of the Haematoxylin and Eosin-stained surgical specimen in × 400 magnification (10 × 40 objective lenses) taken on an Olympus Bx43 microscope using an Olympus U-TV0.35XC-2 camera. The figure was acquired using the Olympus cellSens software with a resolution of 96 psi. Microscopically the tumour consisted of closely packed polygonal and occasional spindle-shaped cells with focal intervening vasculature. Cells were plump and focally contained moderately pleomorphic, enlarged nuclei with coarsely clumped chromatin. The cytoplasm was eosinophilic and abundant with occasional cells showing vacuolated cytoplasm. The reticulin stain highlighted reticulin fibres around the nests of cells. Capsular invasion, areas of necrosis, haemorrhage, and brisk mitotic activity (15/10 high power fields) were noted. Lymphovascular invasion was not detected. There were no tumour deposits on the ovarian surface. A nest of tumour cells suspicious of a deposit was seen on the right fallopian tube. Reinke crystals characteristic of Leydig cells were not seen in Haematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) and PAS (Periodic Acid-Schiff) stains. Pancytokeratin immunohistochemical stain showed strong and diffuse cytoplasmic staining of the tumour cells. There was intense cytoplasmic positivity with Calretinin, whereas the tumour cells were negative for inhibin stain. Histology was in keeping with a potentially malignant sex cord-stromal tumour of the left ovary. A steroid cell tumour showing potential malignant behaviour was the favoured diagnosis.
The patient showed improvement of alopecia and hirsutism three months after surgery. Considering the malignant potential of the tumour, options of chemotherapy and pelvic radiotherapy were discussed with the patient and she opted for radiotherapy.