A 2-year-old boy previously healthy, he has no history of any birth or congenital abnormalities. In addition, there was no familial history of tumors referred with his parents to our orthopedic oncology department in Al Razi Hospital complaining of swelling on his left shoulder noticed by his mother 2 weeks ago. The boy was completely healthy and he meets his developmental milestone and immunizations.
On physical examination, he is afebrile and vitally stable, there was an approximately 2 cm firm mass rapidly increasing in size in a progressive course on his left shoulder, it was not tender at all, no warmness, no erythema, or any skin discoloration. His laboratory investigations and inflammatory markers were all within the normal range.
Ultrasound-guided biopsy is done for the boy and revealed a heterogeneous intramuscular lesion, measured 2.3 cm with fair vascularity at the center, suggesting for biopsy.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) for the left shoulder with contrast is requested and demonstrated that there is intramuscular lesion arising from the posteroinferior fibers of the deltoid muscle, the lesion is lobulated, contains internal thin separations, and has areas of fat intensity (, ). Two enlarged axillary lymph nodes are noted 6*3 mm and 8*4 mm. The lesion is separable from axillary nerve and circumflex arteries .
The histopathology grossly described the mass as 4.5*2.5*2.0 cm with lobulated smooth outer surface, the mass was tan in color with focally bluish and yellowish areas. Cut section was solid and showed fatty lobules separated by fine white fibrous trabeculae. Occasional areas of hemorrhage were seen.
The microscopic description of the biopsy was presenting features of lipoblastoma, characterized by sheets of adipocytes separated by fibrovascular septa within myxoid background . The fat cells showed a spectrum of maturation, ranging from primitive stellate and/or spindled mesenchymal cells to multivacuolated with mature adipocytes at the center . The background myxoid areas showed plexiform vascular pattern . No increased mitosis and necrosis were seen.
Shortly after the biopsy result, the boy was taken to the operation theater . The mass was completely excised . The operation went uneventful; there were no surgical or post-surgical complications. The patient is followed up in the outpatient clinic for 24 months with great outcome.