A 77-year-old Japanese woman presented to our emergency department with hematemesis. As given on the report from her nursing home, she had experienced a sudden onset of vomiting dark red fluid at least four or five times over the prior 12 hours. Her medical history included hypertension for six years, and cerebral hemorrhage three years previously with left-sided paresis and decreased mentation. Her medications included a calcium-channel blocker, an atypical anti-psychotic (sulpiride), and sodium valproate.
On physical examination, she was afebrile, had a pulse rate of 117 beats per minute, and a blood pressure of 111/62mmHg. The differential diagnosis included ulcer, gastrointestinal (GI) tumor, angiodysplasia and diverticulitis of the small intestine, enteroaortic fistula associated with dissection or aneurysm, and small bowel ischemia with necrosis. However, no GI bleeding or evidence of ulcer was detected on emergent gastroendoscopy. A primary pulmonary source was also considered, and a chest X-ray revealed a 40mm mass in the inferior lobe of the right lung; our patient’s symptoms were initially ascribed to swallowed and regurgitated blood from lung tumor-associated hemoptysis. However, subsequent serial physical examinations of the abdomen revealed signs of continuing, severe abdominal pain, with our patient grimacing during the examination, though without significant rigidity or guarding. Full characterization of the pain was limited by our patient’s low level of consciousness due to past cerebrovascular accident. In addition to abdominal pain, our patient continued to have decreased urine output despite aggressive hydration, leading us to search for a possibly severe, occult abdominal pathology.
Laboratory test results revealed a white blood cell count of 18,000 cells/μL, C-reactive protein level of 9.03mg/dL, lactate dehydrogenase level of 342IU/L, and creatine kinase level of 1324IU/L. With an increasing likelihood of abdominal pathology, emergent CT imaging was ordered. Abdominal helical CT revealed ascites and dilated small bowel. On coronal views, a membranous structure was visualized in the center of the upper abdomen between the diaphragm and the left lobe of the liver; dilated, edematous intestine was seen on the right side of it, while air-dilated intestine was seen on the left side and in the lower abdomen . We suspected that air introduced by prior gastroendoscopy may have been the cause of this dilation. On horizontal views, a closed loop of intestine was identified against the liver (S4 and S5); the membranous structure was identified as the falciform ligament in the center of the abdomen. On the left side, dilation of proximal intestines and collapse of distal intestine was seen . Another cephalic horizontal view showed strangulated distal intestine through a hilar defect in the falciform ligament . Based on the radiographic assessment, a pre-operative diagnosis of strangulated internal hernia through a defect in the falciform ligament was made.
In addition to ascites, CT demonstrated strangulated intestine with decreased contrast enhancement. We suspected necrosis of the strangulated intestines through the falciform ligament defect. Our patient was therefore taken to the operating room urgently. Abdominal exploration revealed bloody ascites and a gangrenous bowel. Approximately 50cm of small intestine, 2m distal to Treitz’ ligament, was looped over a defect in the falciform ligament. Prolonged strangulation had resulted in massive necrosis of tissue. The round ligament of the liver was cut, opening the falciform ligament and releasing the herniated bowel loop. The necrotic bowel was resected and primary anastomosis was performed. Our patient had a stable post-operative course with no gastrointestinal complications and was subsequently transferred five days after surgery for investigation of lung cancer.