A farmer of 38-year-old man was admitted to a hospital with fever (39 °C), chills, malaise, anorexia, generalized pallor, hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, weight loss, facial edema, and an ulcerous skin lesion in his left leg. The patient was born and always lived in a locality of La Maná-Cotopaxi province; a subtropical area located in the western foothills of the Andes, close to the central Pacific coastal region, some 130 km from the capital Quito. The patient reported neither receiving blood transfusions nor travelling within or outside Ecuador.
Since December 2014, he had a 22-day history of high fever, chills and malaise being treated with antibiotics and antipyretics in a public health center. Five days prior to hospital admission, he was diagnosed with T. cruzi infection via microscopic observation in peripheral blood. Due to unavailability of anti-T. cruzi drugs, he was transferred to a hospital. The patient reported of having an insect bite in his left leg approximately 10 days prior to the development of the fever. The bite became a pruritic indurated papule, which subsequently ulcerated and did not heal even with the use of an antibiotic cream. The patient was hospitalized with a diagnosis of acute Chagas disease, in order to receive treatment with benznidazole, the drug recommended by the Ecuadorian MPH .
At the beginning of hospitalization, microscopic examination of thick and thin smears of peripheral blood confirmed the presence of T. cruzi, and was negative for malaria parasites. T. cruzi was cultured in LIT medium. The parasites were spotted on FTA Classic Card (Whatman, Newton Center, MA). Blood tests showed a white blood cell count of 6.8 × 109/L, with 44.8% neutrophils, 45.9% lymphocytes, 7.3% monocytes, 1.2% eosinophils and 0.8% basophils. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 40 mm/hour, with a hemoglobin of 8.4 g/dL, a hematocrit of 25.4%, and a platelet count of 152,000/μL. VDRL, HBsAg, HBcAg, HCV, ELISA and Western blot for HIV, and the test for febrile agglutinations (Brucella spp., typhoid and paratyphoid fevers), were all negative. Serum glucose, urea and creatinine were 77, 173 and 7.7 mg/dL, respectively. Serological tests for anti-T. cruzi IgG and IgM (Chagatest ELISA recombinant, Version 3.0. Wiener-Argentina) were negative. Blood, urine and skin ulcer cultures for bacteria were negative. Paracetamol (1 g) was administered every 8 h as an anti-febrile agent.
The EKG showed left anterior fascicular hemi block, QRS 0.10mms, marked deviation of the axis to the left (positive QRS in I and negative in AVF), small R waves and large S waves in III and AVF. The chest X-ray demonstrated an increased heart area. An abdominal CT scan showed bilateral pleural effusion, liver and spleen enlargement, and liquid in the pelvic cavity.
During the 11-day hospitalization period, the patient’s temperature fluctuated from normal to 38 °C. Hydration and electrolytes were normal. Creatinine levels initially rose to 10.4 and later to 13.1 mg/dL, requiring hemodialysis. The patient received six blood transfusions in total, elevating the hemoglobin to 11.8 g/dL. The patient died of respiratory distress due to acute failure of heart and kidneys. He never did receive benznidazole because of hospital shortage. Parents did not consent to an autopsy.
T. cruzi DNA was extracted from the FTA card. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP, following the methodology developed by Lewis et al. (2009) . Briefly, fragments of the D7 divergent domain of the 24Sα rRNA locus (LSU rDNA), glucose-6-phosphate isomerase (GPI) and heat shock protein 60 (HSP60) genes were amplified with specific primers; the size of amplicons and restriction fragments after digestion with restriction enzymes (Eco RV for HSP60 and Hha I for GPI) were compared to those of reference T. cruzi strains . Additionally, a multiplex PCR assay targeting the mini-exon gene was also performed . In both cases, the T. cruzi isolate from the patient matched the pattern of DTU TcI. Written consent to publish the case was provided by the patient’s wife.