A 45-year-old man with a history of alcohol-use disorder and altered mental status was hospitalized due to confusion and clonic convulsion. Three days later, this patient was transferred to our hospital. On examination, his body temperature was 38.4°C. The patient fell into coma, and his pupils were equal, round, and reactive to light. Pulmonary moist rales, neck stiffness, and limited limb strength were presented. Chest X-ray showed multiple patches and nodules with observable cavity in his lungs . The enlargement of the bilateral ventricle was observed in cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). T1-weighted image showed enhanced nodules in gray matter and white matter border at the right frontal region, as well as lateral meningeal enhancement at the left temporal lobe . A lumbar puncture was successfully performed and revealed an opening pressure of 35 cm H2O. Analysis of CSF showed a neutrocytic pleocytosis (white blood cell count [WBC] 236 × 106/L, 77% neutrophils) . Further, reduced glucose of 1.26 mmol/L, declined chlorine of 108 mmol/L, and remarkable increased protein of 2.17 g/L were observed in CSF . Biochemical analyses also showed substantial increased ADA of 58.7 U/L. Using modified Ziehl-Neelsen staining, few acid-fast bacilli (AFB) were detected in his CSF , while Gram staining and India ink preparations showed no microorganisms. All these laboratory results lead to clinical diagnosis of tuberculous meningitis. He was immediately administered with rifampin (600 mg/d), isoniazid (600 mg/d), pyrazinamide (1500 mg/d), ethambutol (750 mg/d), and dexamethasone (10 mg/d).
On day 3 of admission, clinical assessment of the patient showed unconsciousness, tachycardic (plus 130 beats/min), with a respiratory rate of 35 breaths/min. The patient had an excessive sputum but with difficulty to cough up. He needed a 10 L/min oxygen via a face mask, resulting in an arterial PaO2 of 6.8 kPa. The patient still presented substantial hypoxemia (SpO2 78%), necessitating oral incubation and mechanical ventilation. A repeat lumbar puncture showed an increased opening pressure (40 cm H2O), pleocytosis (WBC 226 × 106/L, 27% neutrophils) . During the following 5 days, the lumbar puncture still showed a high opening pressure, dynamic fluctuated WBC with gradually declining neutrophils to 5.8% . However, lumbar CSF tested positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis by both modified acid-fast staining and Xpert Mycobacterium tuberculosis/rifampicin (MTB/RIF) assay. On day 8, the patient's mental status progressively improved. He was able to blink, and no neck stiffness was present. CSF analysis also revealed almost disappearance of neutrophils. However, AFB staining was still positive .
Day 9, the patient became alert and oriented. CSF revealed progressively declined ADA and protein level . Oral incubation and mechanical ventilation were removed. The patient could open his eye on his own on day 11. Despite his speech ability was improved, his speech output was irrelevant. He was able to move his limbs spontaneously and against gravity. Lumbar CSF on day 14 showed a progressively declining pleocytosis with smaller percentage of neutrophils (4%) and increased percentage of macrophages (14%) engulfing Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Elevated ADA level and AFB were detected again .
On day 17, the patient clinically improved and speech ability was fully recovered. For the first time, AFB were not detected. Cytological examination of CSF disclosed a lymphocytes-predominant pleocytosis. Given such results, the physician lowered the dose of dexamethasone to 6 mg. After 3 days of reduced dexamethasone treatment, neutrophils-dominating white blood cells (57% neutrophils) were found and protein was dramatically increased, indicating a relapse of tuberculous meningitis. However, clinical assessment of the patients was not worsening. Therefore, the patient was stick to 6 mg of dexamethasone and standard first-line anti-tuberculosis drugs. He was discharged from the hospital on day 34, with 1-year continuation standard anti-tuberculosis therapy, and was clinically resolved from tuberculous meningitis.