A 60-year-old man presented with eating difficulties and dyspnea. Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed two tumors in the cervical and middle thoracic esophagus, causing narrowing of the esophageal lumen, which was diagnosed as ESCC . Computed tomography (CT) revealed that an advanced tumor filled the lumen of the thoracic esophagus and partially compressed the trachea, with lymph node metastases in the bilateral paratracheal and the left supraclavicular lymph node. No findings were suggestive of distant metastasis . Furthermore, bronchoscopy revealed submucosal elevation of the tracheal mucosa and partial direct tumor invasion on the cephalic side of the tracheal bifurcation . 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)-CT showed extensive abnormal accumulation in the thoracic esophagus, partly lumped with lymph nodes. There were no obvious distant metastases . According to the UICC classification (8th ed.), the tumor was diagnosed as EC, UtMt, SCC cT4 (trachea) N2 M0 cStage IVa.
To provide curative treatment, definitive CRT was performed; radiotherapy (1.86 Gy/day, 5 days/week, total 59.6 Gy) with docetaxel (75 mg/m2, 110 mg/body, day 1), cisplatin (70 mg/m2, 110 mg/body, day 1), and 5-fluorouracil (350 mg/m2, 1100 mg/body, days 1–5) continued for three courses. Clinical CR was achieved after definitive CRT; however, an esophagotracheal fistula was detected 2 months after this treatment . After 2 months of fasting and enteral nutrition using a gastrostomy, the esophagotracheal fistula was closed and cured . However, oral intake was impossible owing to severe stenosis after CRT . FDG PET-CT after CRT revealed decreased accumulation of FDG in the thoracic esophagus compared to the initial examination, without discernible evidence of distant metastases .
To allow oral intake and control tumor progression, a two-stage operation was planned. First, 4 months after CRT, an esophageal bypass using a gastric tube with cervical and abdominal lymph node dissection was performed because these areas were not irradiated with radiotherapy. Decompression was successfully accomplished by retrograde insertion of a 14Fr drainage tube into the residual esophagus, with subsequent extracorporeal guidance of the tube. Consequently, oral intake was possible on postoperative day 14 without complications. Following the operation, there was a notable enhancement in the patient's nutritional status, evidenced by a weight gain of 2 kg in comparison to the preoperative baseline. Moreover, the performance status (PS) exhibited substantial improvement, transitioning from 2 to 1 prior to surgery, thereby facilitating a successful discharge home without any episodes of pneumonia. One month after this surgery, no distant metastasis—except for the primary tumor in the remaining esophagus—was confirmed on follow-up FDG PET-CT. Additionally, a contrast-enhanced CT scan revealed a preoperative T stage diagnosis of T4 (trachea). Subsequent to CRT, the tumor exhibited substantial reduction in size, elimination of tracheal protrusion, and relatively distinct demarcation from the trachea. These favorable changes led to the determination of a curatively resectable tumor. Following a seven-month interval post-CRT, a second surgery was performed; a subtotal esophagectomy and mediastinal lymph node dissection. Esophagotracheal fistula scars were detected, and tracheobronchial fistula closure with a latissimus dorsi muscle flap was performed via right open thoracotomy . There were no serious complications except for mild pneumonia (Grade II, according to the Clavien–Dindo classification), and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 31. The pathological findings were diagnosed as CRT-pT1a N0 M0 and CRT-pStage IA (UICC 8th ed.; Fig. C). Figure shows the treatment timeline. Lastly, no recurrence of EC was observed 5 years after the initiation of treatment.