This is a report of a case of a 36-year-old healthy male, who was referred to the oral and maxillofacial surgery department of Taleghani hospital of Chaloos, Iran with the chief complaint of a growing swelling on the left side of his lower jaw. There was no history of underlying systemic conditions, trauma to the affected region, smoking, alcohol or substance abuse, and no hereditary diseases. The patient initially had presented to an outside dental clinic 4 months prior to being referred to us with the chief complaint of an extra-oral lesion measuring at 1 × 1 cm in the left submandibular region. Treatment with antibiotics and mouthwash rinses was erroneously prescribed by the dentist without further evaluating the etiology and nature of the lesion. Four months following the initial manifestations, the patient presented to an outside general surgeon’s clinic and an incisional biopsy of the lesion with an extraoral approach of the left submandibular region under local anesthesia was obtained. The pathology report confirmed the definitive diagnosis of malignant melanoma and therefore the patient was referred to the oral and maxillofacial department of Imam Hosein hospital of Tehran, Iran for further management.
Upon the initial presentation, evaluations revealed an evident facial asymmetry in the frontal view with a firm, non-tender swelling measuring at approximately 5 × 4 cm in the left submandibular region, leaving the left inferior border of the mandible extra-orally non-palpable. A thorough and comprehensive examination of the whole-body skin and mucosa was undertaken based on the diagnosis of melanoma in order to identify potential sites of primary cutaneous melanomas, which were unavailing. Intraoral examination revealed a swelling measuring at 1 × 1 cm in the left mandibular distobuccal mucosa with no evidence of alterations in consistency, color, mucosal integrity, and tenderness on palpation. Furthermore, in intraoral examination, multiple patches of purple gingival discolorations measuring at 1 × 4 cm in dimensions were evident on the left side of the maxilla, expanding from the midline to the first premolar with no symptoms of pain or tenderness on palpation; however, the patient had not noticed this gingival discoloration previously and was unaware of its etiology and time of occurrence.
Initial orthopantomogram did not reveal any alterations in the trabeculation or normal anatomy and morphology of the jaws and the surrounding structures. A soft tissue ultrasonography of the left submandibular gland and anterior region of mandible was subsequently ordered which revealed a hypoechoic cystic mass with numerous micro-echoes with a diameter of 25 mm and a further septum were observed. Following these observations and the need for further cementing evidence, cone-beam computed tomography (CBCT) of the head and neck was ordered. In the evaluation of the CBCT, a soft tissue mass in the left submandibular area measuring at 41 × 33 mm and several oval shape cervical lymph nodes with maximum SAD: 5.5 mm were observed . Whole-body bone scanning was preformed following IV injection of 740 MBq of Technetium 99 m-methyl diphosphonate (99mTc-MDP) both in anterior and posterior projections. Normal distribution of radiotracer throughout the skeleton was observed and no significant osteopathology was detected. Therefore, it was concluded that no evidence of distant osteometastasis was evident in the whole-body scans . Moreover, axial spiral chest and abdominopelvic CT-scans with contrast medium both demonstrated normal findings. In Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) with and without contrast, on T1 Weighted view, evidence of a 28 × 24 mm mass was observed in the left submandibular space which can be attributed to lymphadenopathy . Regarding the alteration in color of the aforementioned maxillary gingiva, an incisional biopsy was obtained in order to find whether there are any correlations between this lesion and the melanoma of the submandibular gland. Fortunately, no evidence of malignancy was observed in the histopathological evaluations and the lesion was definitively diagnosed as melanoacanthoma; therefore, ruling out the possibility of metastasis of the mandibular melanoma to the maxilla.
The consensus of a surgical approach utilizing excision of the submandibular salivary gland and selective neck dissection under general anesthesia was reached. Following standard surgical prepping and draping for oral surgery, the incision was made by detecting margins of the lesion on skin taking into consideration a 1 cm safety margin. Local anesthesia was subsequently administered subcutaneously. Following the dissection of the cervical cutaneous layers, undermining and sharp dissection of the platysma muscle was undertaken in order to reach the superficial layer of the deep cervical fascia. The dissection was carried out through the deep cervical fascia and under the fascia to the inferior border of the mandible . In this manner, the facial artery and vein and marginal mandibular branch of the facial nerve were detected and were subsequently preserved. The submandibular gland was spotted, suspensory elements incised, and the gland was excised without any tear or rupture in its structure . Selective neck resection was undertaken through excision of lymph nodes of cervical levels IA, IB, IIA, IIB, III, and V. They were all then sent for frozen section biopsy analysis which all came back negative for metastasis. The excised submandibular gland was then preserved in formalin and sent for further pathological evaluations. The incised planes were subsequently reapproximated and sutured accordingly. The left maxillary oral melanoacanthoma didn’t need any surgical excision or treatment.
The H&E-stained specimens of submandibular sections demonstrated lymphoid tissue associated with a malignant neoplasm composed of sheets of highly atypical cells with pleomorphic large vesicular, prominent nuclei . Extensive necrosis and the perivascular rosette could also be seen. Furthermore, result from immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis yielded positive for HMB45 which further cemented the definitive diagnosis of melanoma . Further IHC staining results are as follows: Pan CK (negative), Vimentin (positive), CD20 (negative in malignant cells), LCA (negative in malignant cells), Melan A (positive in malignant cells), Ki67 (60% proliferation rate) .
Hematoxylin and eosin stain (H&E) sections of left maxillary gingival mucosa demonstrated an oral melanoacanthoma which was irrelevant to the melanoma.
The patient’s 12-month follow up did not show any signs of recurrence.