A 50-year-old man of European descent presented to the emergency department with a six-day history of productive cough with putrid secretion, fever up to 39 °C and a pounding headache. C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were elevated (188.7 mg/l, normal range < 5 mg/l), and chest X-Ray showed a slight infiltration in the left lower lobe. A diagnosis of non-severe community acquired pneumonia (CAP) was established. Oral treatment with amoxicillin/clavulanic acid and clarithromycin was prescribed and the patient was discharged. Two days later, he presented again to the emergency department. His condition had worsened, and he had developed severe erosive stomatitis, cheilitis and conjunctivitis with photophobia on both eyes . According to the patient, conjunctivitis was observed prior to the first dose of oral antibiotics. He also complained of dysuria (urethritis) and rapidly developed vesiculobullous lesions on his trunk (first lesions), palms, and the scrotum . He was admitted to the infectious diseases ward. Antibiotic treatment was changed to levofloxacin, and due to the severity and rapid expansion of the mucocutaneous lesions, a supportive treatment with intravenous prednisolone was initiated by the consultant dermatologist .
The medical history revealed that the patient had previously suffered from recurring respiratory tract infections, mainly bronchitis, up to five times per year. He had known allergies to grass-pollen and house dust mite with mild symptoms of allergic rhino-conjunctivitis. Of note, he had previously suffered from recurring enoral aphthous ulcers and recurring conjunctivitis in the past, the latter of which almost exclusively occurred in conjunction with respiratory infections. The family history revealed that his father, sister and son also suffered from recurring aphthous stomatitis. Immunological testing performed two years prior to the onset of mucocutaneous disease had not shown abnormal findings, with the exception of an isolated mannose-binding lectin deficiency (37.6 ng/ml; values > 50 ng/ml were considered normal) and slightly elevated serum levels of serum IgE (368.8 kU/l, values < 100 kU/l were considered normal).
In the days prior to presenting to the emergency department, the patient had taken the following medication; paracetamol (started six days prior to conjunctivitis, which was the first sign of mucocutaneous disease), ibuprofen (started four days prior to conjunctivits) and metamizole (started two days prior to conjunctivitis) , a non-opioid analgesic commonly used in Germany but not available in all countries. He reported that he had taken paracetamol several times in the past without any adverse reactions to the drug. In contrast, he reported that it was his first-time exposure to ibuprofen and metamizole. Extensive microbiological and virological testing revealed weakly positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) results for Bordetella parapertussis (B. parapertussis) in pharyngeal swabs, positive Mycoplasma pneumoniae serology and subsequent seroconversion (on admission: IgM 11.2, IgG negative; seven weeks later: IgM 35.0, IgG 19.1, values < 8.5 were considered normal) and marginally positive Human Herpesvirus 6 (HHV6)-IgM serology. Neither of these pathogens (B. parapertussis, Mp and HHV-6) could be detected by PCR in cutaneous blister fluid (BF). All other microbiological and virological analyses, including HSV-1/2 (PCR in peripheral blood (PB), BF, throat wash and eye smear negative, HSV1/2-IgM and IgG negative, serology negative also 2 years before), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV, DNA in PB 2260 copies/ml, limit of detection 1000 copies/ml, PCR in BF and throat wash negative, EBNA1-IgG 72,9; VCA-IgG > 750; EBV-IgM negative, tested twice 3 days apart), cytomegalovirus (CMV, PCR negative in PB, BF and throat wash), were not indicative of infection or reactivation.
The clinical presentation was characteristic of EMM, with mainly round target lesions showing central blistering and mucosal involvement of two mucosal sites (oral and ocular mucosa) . As there was no indication of recent HSV infection/reactivation and neither HHV-6, nor B. parapertussis have been reported as causes of EMM in the literature, Mp was considered the most likely trigger of mucocutaneous disease. Drugs have also been associated with EM , however, in retrospect these associations were often misclassified . Therefore, drugs may not be considered likely triggers in a patient with EM lesions. In our patient, antibiotics could be excluded as causative triggers, since first symptoms (conjunctivitis) appeared prior to first exposure. Since the patient had been previously exposed to paracetamol without adverse reactions, this drug was also considered an unlikely trigger of the eruptions. Ibuprofen and metamizole, which were taken four days (ibuprofen) and two days (metamizole) before onset of conjunctivitis, cannot be completely ruled out as (co-) triggers—especially as it has been reported that Mp and non-opioid analgesics might also synergistically trigger disease . Lymphocyte transformation testing (LTT) to assess for potential drug involvement was not conclusive when performed during the acute phase, as the positive control tested negative, potentially due to systemic high-dose corticosteroid (CS) treatment, and it did not retrieve positive results for any of the drugs four months after the acute phase. LTT often produces negative results after the acute phase and, therefore, it does not exclude drug causality .
The skin lesions as well as stomatitis and cheilitis slowly receded over the course of several weeks on symptomatic treatment and systemic CS. Pneumonic infiltration in chest X-ray had also largely dissolved at the time of discharge. In contrast, ocular lesions persisted and required prolonged treatment with topical CS and locally administered cyclosporine. The patient also reported a persistent dry cough over five months after discharge, as well as exertional dyspnea (which he had not experienced before) and pulmonary function test abnormalities (hyperinflation and airflow obstruction) that did not respond to treatment with systemic or inhaled CS and long-acting beta-2 agonists and were still present 1.5 years after the acute phase.
In order to better characterize the immunological changes, we analyzed the immune cell composition in PB and in cutaneous BF. Flow cytometry analyses on day five after initiation of CS treatment revealed that the inflammatory infiltrate in blisters was dominated by neutrophils (52%) and T cells (32%), with only minor representation of monocytes (6.9%), eosinophils (3.5%) and Natural Killer (NK) cells (1.5%). B cells (0.08%) were virtually absent in BF. We found that approximately 50% of BF T cells were double positive for CD4 and CD8 (48.5% three days, and 50.7% five days after initiation of CS treatment, Fig. a). A similarly expanded CD4+CD8+ T cell population was also detected in the patient’s PB (24.9% of all T cells before CS treatment, Fig. b; 13.4% (panel 1) or 11.0% (panel 2) five days after initiation of CS, Fig. a). This finding was verified by independent staining panels , largely excluding technical artefacts. CD4+CD8+ T cells belonged to the CD4lowCD8high subgroup of CD4+CD8+ T cells and therefore likely might have derived from mature CD8+ T cells [, ]. TCRVβ clonotyping revealed that nearly all of the CD4+CD8+ T cells were TCRVβ2+ cells (99.2% in BF, 92.6% in PB, Fig. c), indicating a mono- (or oligo-) clonal expansion of the CD4+CD8+ T cells. A previous assessment two years before the onset of disease had shown a normal percentage of CD4+CD8+ T cells in PB (1.86% of T cells, Figs. , b). Over time, and potentially under the influence of systemic CS, which are known to decrease T cell activation and proliferation , the population size of CD4+CD8+ T cells in PB gradually declined to baseline levels , along with the regression of mucocutaneous lesions . We therefore hypothesize that this clonally expanded CD4+CD8+ T cell population was involved in disease pathophysiology in our patient.
Granulysin has been identified as an important effector molecule in bullous skin disorders mediated by cytotoxic T cells [–], including EMM [, ]. CD4+CD8+ T cells in BF in our patient expressed high levels of granulysin, along with perforin, and the frequency of cells expressing these cytotoxic markers among CD4+CD8+ was higher than among CD4+ or CD8+ single positive T cells (37,6% of cells among vs. 10,8% among CD4−CD8+ and 0,02% among CD4+CD8− T cells, Fig. d), further indicating a pathogenic role of these cells in disease pathophysiology.
BF T cells displayed a highly activated (CD69+, HLA-DR+, CD11a+), highly differentiated (CD28−, CD57+) and Natural Killer T (NKT) cell -like (CD16/56+) phenotype . Their counterpart population in PB displayed a similar phenotype, yet with different expression patterns of the activation marker CD69 and CD45RA .
More than half (57.0%) of CD4+CD8+ T cells in PB displayed a “T effector memory RA” (TEMRA, CCR7−CD45RA+) phenotype and were negative for CD69, whereas most BF CD4+CD8+ T cells did not express CD45RA and were CD69+ . Only a minority of BF T cells was CD69+CD103+ (6,23% of total BF T cells, 6,91% of CD4+CD8+ BF T cells, Table ), indicating that BF T cells did not represent “classical” long term Tissue Resident Memory T cells (TRM) of the epithelium , which have been previously implicated as potential triggers of tissue-specific restriction of symptoms in mucocutaneous diseases such as SJS/TEN . Mucosal-Associated Invariant T (MAIT) cells, a semi-invariant T cell population that has been shown to display high cytotoxicity against bacterially infected epithelial cells were also present only in low frequencies (1,25% of total BF T cells, Table ).