A 27-year-old female patient referred with swelling in the left breast. The patient, who lived in the city of Konya, Turkey, was admitted to the hospital on 11 September 2012. Her past history was notable regarding a two-week pregnancy and giving birth to two children. Her family history was negative for breast cancer. Physical examination showed a smooth-contour, mobile, painless mass, about 4 cm, at the border of the areola at the six o’clock position in left breast. Ultrasonographic size of the mass was 42 × 22 × 13 mm. The mass was lobulated, heterogeneous, hypoechoic and solid, and was first identified as a fibroadenoma. As she was at the first trimester of her pregnancy, medical follow-up was scheduled. She did not attend her subsequent follow-ups and returned with a full-grown mass at the eighth month of pregnancy. A 15 cm, lobulated, mobile mass in the left breast was detected, extending from the areola to the inferior part of the breast. Ultrasonographic examination revealed a mass, 55 × 125 × 61 mm, which was primarily defined as a phyllodes tumor. She avoided performing excision because of pregnancy. Therefore, a tru-cut biopsy was performed. Pathological examination showed fibrosis and adenosis. The patient returned two months after giving birth, while lactating. The ultrasonographic examination result revealed a mass, 124 × 151 × 63 mm, which was heterogeneous, hypoechoic, and solid. She was again offered excision. This time she accepted excision and underwent operation under general anesthesia. The mass was completely excised . The mass was 580 g and 14 × 12 × 6 cm. Pathological examination revealed diffuse adenosis and complex fibroadenosis, showing lactational changes . After the operation it showed no prominent deformity. Milk oozing from the lateral edge of the circumareolar incision continued for two months after the operation and then stopped. Physical and ultrasonographic examinations 13 months after the operation (14 November 2013) did not show mass in the breast and the patient continued the routine follow-ups.