The patient is a Japanese female infant who is the second child of a healthy non-consanguineous 34-year-old mother and 35-year-old father. The infant has a healthy sister, and the family history is unremarkable. The mother was admitted to the Center of Maternal, Fetal, and Neonatal Medicine, Hospital of the University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, Japan at the end of the 31st week of gestation, because the pregnancy was complicated with severe symmetrical fetal growth restriction, decreased fetal movement, and dilatation of patent ductus venosus. The preterm infant was born by cesarean section at the 32nd week of gestation because of severe decrease in fetal movement. The infant had respiratory distress with Apgar scores of 5 and 8 at 1 and 5 minutes after birth, respectively, and required neonatal cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Thus, the patient was intubated after birth and was transferred to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit. At birth, the infant’s weight, length, and head circumference measurements were 995 g [± 3.4 standard deviation (SD)], 34 cm (± 3.3 SD), 26.7 cm (± 1.6 SD).
To investigate the cause of the fetal growth restriction, we checked the infant for congenital TORCH infections (Toxoplasma gondii, rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, and Treponema), but none were found.
The patient’s face was characteristic (hawknosed, micrognathia, interocular dissociation) and the cry was cat-like. The chromosome G-banding analysis and cytogenetic fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis showed that the infant had a karyotype of 46,XX,der(5)t(5;6)(p15.2;p22.3) . The patient’s parents agreed to undergo chromosome analysis after genetic counseling. The chromosome analysis showed that the mother’s chromosome was normal, whereas the father’s chromosome showed reciprocal translocation as 46,XY,t(5;6)(p15.2;p22.3).
The patient had patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) and left mild ventriculomegaly was detected by ultrasound. Tube feeding was started at day 1 after birth. The patient was treated with indomethacin at 2, 3, 4, 7, 8, and 9 days old for hemodynamically significant PDA. The PDA closed at 21 days old and no side effects of indomethacin were detected. However, the levels of aspartate aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, and direct bilirubin gradually increased from birth. The infant excreted a white-ish stool at 15 days old. Mutations in JAG1 on chromosome 20 or NOTCH2 on chromosome 1 are known to cause AGS. Therefore, we analyzed the JAG1 and NOTCH sequences to detect mutations that can cause liver dysfunction, but no such mutations were found. We analyzed the bile acids and no abnormal bile acids were found. We performed magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) to elucidate the etiology of cholangiolitic hepatitis and found that the structures of the patient’s liver, gallbladder, and bile duct were normal, but a congenital portosystemic shunt was observed. The patient was treated with ursodeoxycholic acid and phenobarbital, but her condition got worse after treatment. Furthermore, the PDA reopened when the patient was 25 days old.
Because the cause of the cholangiolitic hepatitis was unclear, we performed a liver biopsy. The pathological findings showed the patient had cholestatic liver disease with abnormal portal triad, compatible with AGS. We suspected that the patient had AGS-like or incomplete AGS. The patient’s hepatic condition worsened, the aspartate aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, and direct bilirubin levels were very high (peak values were 500 U/l, 326 U/l, and 19.0 mg/dl, respectively), and a blood coagulation disorder was discovered. The only treatment was liver transplantation, and therefore the patient was transferred for transplantation. PDA banding was required for the transplant, but the operation caused pulmonary bleeding and the infant died at 190 days old.