A 71-year-old female with a history of peripheral neuropathy of unknown etiology presented with a one-year history of intermittent pallor of both hands which was precipitated with cold objects. She fell from a chair onto her elbows and hands one year earlier, but no fractures or dislocations were sustained. There was no history of rest or claudication pain and no prior instrumentation of the vessels. She had no family history of autoimmune or hypercoagulable conditions and no history of smoking, alcohol, or illicit drug use.
On examination, her blood pressure was 120/60 mmHg on the right arm and 100/50 mmHg on the left, pulse 86 beats per minute, and respiratory rate 18 breaths per minute. Her radial pulses were reduced bilaterally. There were no sensory deficits in her bilateral upper extremities and no palmar atrophy. Other aspects of her clinical examination were unremarkable. There was no pallor or cyanosis of the palms of her hand at the encounter. However, prior photos taken showed marked pallor of the distal fingers of the palms of both hands . Laboratory investigations including autoimmune screen, ESR, CRP, and prothrombotic panels were unremarkable. HIV testing was negative. Echocardiography was normal with an ejection fraction of 65–70%. CT angiography showed a focal right brachial artery stenosis and a short segment 2 cm occlusion of left brachial artery with distal reconstitution by muscular collateral branches. She further underwent conventional angiography which showed tapered high grade stenosis of the proximal right brachial artery and on the left a short focal tapered occlusion, with likely dissection of the left brachial artery reconstituted with collateral muscular branches .
Treatment was undertaken on the right with low pressure balloon angioplasty across the affected segment. After angioplasty there was modest improvement in luminal diameter with no extravasation of contrast and a 5 mm × 5 cm Viabahn covered stent was inserted and then postdilated with 4 mm mustang balloon. Repeat angiography showed excellent positioning of the stent and no residual stenosis. Runoff angiogram showed widely patent runoff arteries . A stent was applied to the focal dissection on the left and a 5 mm mustang angioplasty balloon was advanced across the occluded segment and used for low pressure balloon angioplasty. The occluded segment was stented with 2 overlapping stents, 5 mm × 2.5 cm Viabahn stents. The stents were postdilated with a 5 mm mustang balloon. Poststent angiogram showed good poststenting positioning and no residual stenosis and unimpeded flow of contrast to the hand . There was no evidence of embolic phenomenon. There were no postprocedural complications and dual antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel was commenced. Five months later the patient remained asymptomatic without further episodes of hand pallor.