A 36-year-old woman with a history of chronic kidney failure, under thrice-weekly haemodialysis since 2014 due to polycystic kidney disease, presented with hypogastric pain, left lower quadrant pain and nausea. Since 1997, the patient had developed several episodes of urinary tract infection (UTI). The last UTI occurred one month before hospitalization, and she received ciprofloxacin treatment. On admission, she also presented tenderness in the lower abdomen and fist positive lumbar percussion. Laboratory testing revealed 9800 white blood cells mm−3 and elevated urea and creatinine levels (158 mg dl−1 and 10.2 mg dl−1, respectively).
Kidney ultrasound revealed a bilateral 30 mm pyelocalyceal dilatation and multiple cysts in both kidneys.
The midstream urine sample was subject to microbiological testing. The urine testing showed 15–20 leukocytes per high-power field (HPF) and 2–5 erythrocyte per HPF. The urine sample was aerobically cultured on CLDE agar (Britania) and on chromogenic agar CPS ID medium (bioMérieux) at 35 °C. Urine culture showed significant bacterial growth (>105 c.f.u. ml−1). Slightly glistening colonies of 1 mm in diameter were observed after a 24 h incubation. Gram staining showed coryneform Gram-positive rods.
The isolate was identified by using conventional biochemical tests according to the identification scheme proposed by Funke et al. and adapted by Bernard . Colonies were about 1–1.5 mm in diameter after 24 h (non-lipophilic colonies). Catalase reaction was positive, fermentative metabolism was observed as well as a strong positive CAMP reaction. Pyrazinamidase and alkaline phosphatase were also positive. Nitrate reduction, β-glucuronidase, β-galactosidase, α-glucosidase, N-acetyl-β-glucosaminidase, aesculin, gelatin hydrolysis and urease were all negative. Acid was only produced from glucose.
Mass spectra were acquired using a MALDI–TOF MS spectrometer in a linear positive mode (Microflex, Bruker Daltonics) and were analyzed in an m/z range of 2.000 to 20.000. The MALDI Biotyper library version 3.0 and MALDI Biotyper software version 3.1 were used for bacterial identification. The MALDI–TOF MS analysis showed a score of 1.979 for Corynebacterium coyleae.
Antimicrobial susceptibility was determined using the E-test technique (bioMérieux) on Mueller–Hinton agar supplemented with 5 % sheep blood and the inoculum size was equivalent to a No. 0.5 Mc Farland standard . Plates were incubated aerobically at 37 °C for 24 h. Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) results showed resistance to penicillin (8 µg ml−1), ceftriaxone (32 µg ml−1), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMS) (64 µg ml−1), susceptibility to vancomycin (0.5 µg ml−1), and intermediate susceptibility to ciprofloxacin (2 µg ml−1). The interpretative categories for the MICs obtained were used following Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI), M45 .
The patient was diagnosed as having a complicated urinary tract infection. She was empirically treated with piperacillin–tazobactam at 2.25 g every 12 h and 750 mg post-haemodialysis and then rotated to ciprofloxacin 400 mg every 12 h for 14 days. Due to her clinical condition (chronic kidney failure, polycystic kidneys) and several recurrent urinary tract infections, a bilateral nephrectomy was performed on the fourth hospitalization day. A supraumbilical laparotomy was carried out and a splenectomy was performed due to surgical complications.
Two samples of kidney tissue were sent for culture .
Direct examination of the material revealed the presence of abundant inflammatory reaction and Gram-stain-positive diphtheroid rods.
Since no microbial growth was observed at 24 h incubation, neither in 5 % sheep blood agar nor in chocolate agar incubated in 5 % CO2, we inoculated a bottle of Bactec Aerobic/F culture medium in order to neutralize the antibiotic effect from both samples. Culture plates were incubated for several days, however, at 24 h a positive culture was obtained from Bactec Aerobic/F culture medium. The organism was identified using MALDI–TOF and conventional biochemical tests, and in both isolates further identification was performed by PCR amplification and sequence analysis of the rpoB gene. The PCR product of the rpoB gene, using the primers described by Khamis et al. was generated with Taq DNA polymerase based on the manufacturer’s specifications (Qiagen). Sequencing of the 450 bp PCR product was performed on both DNA strands using an ABI Prism 3100 BioAnalyzer equipment at the Macrogen Inc. sequencing facility, Seoul, Republic of Korea. The sequences were analysed with the blast V2.0 software . Sequence analysis revealed a 96 % identity with the sequences corresponding to the rpoB gene of Corynebacterium coyleae. The GenBank accession number for the rpoB gene sequence is MG764567.
To determine the relatedness of the two strains, a PCR assay using degenerate oligonucleotide primers (DO-PCR) was carried out. The DNA amplification pattern obtained by DO-PCR was identical in both samples (urine and kidney tissue; ).