Our patient is a 64 years old man from Sidi Slimane in the center of Morocco where he currently lives and works as a farmer. He is married and has five children in good health. He presented ten years ago a history of a nodule located in the dorsal surface of his right forefoot, which has progressively increased in size until becoming a swelling and slightly painful polyfistulised tumor emitting dark grains. No previous trauma or injury of the foot has been noticed by the patient and no travel to endemic zone in Africa or outside Africa has been reported. He was hospitalized in the Dermatology department of the University Hospital Ibn Sina of Rabat, and the diagnosis of eumycetoma due to Madurella mycetomatis was detected. The patient was initially treated with oral itraconazole at a dosage of 400 mg/day during 2 years. After antifungal treatment, the lesions did not improve substantially and itraconazole was substituted by terbinafine 500 mg/day, associated with surgical debridement of the tumor. The outcome was good with total healing of the lesions, and treatment with terbinafine was continued to achieve a total length of 6 months.
The current history goes back to 6 months by the appearance of a nodule localized on the previous scar, having the same evolution than the previous one. On physical examination, he had an indurated inflammatory tumor of the dorsal surface of the right forefoot, measuring 15x10cm, adherent to the skin and to deep structures, with many visible openings, which let emerge seropurulent sometimes hematic fluid and small black grains of 1 to 2 mm . Moreover, inflammatory inguinal lymphadenopathy was found in the right side, and macerated toes intertrigos were present in the right foot. Furthermore, there was no fever or alteration of the general condition.
On the other hand, several differential diagnoses of mycetoma such as cutaneous tuberculosis, profound mycosis, fistulised osteitis, leprosy, and cutaneous metastatic lesions were considered. Complementary examinations showed a normal aspect on foot X-rays. The biological assessment didn’t show any signs of bacterial infection. A biopsy was performed and during this procedure, a serohematic discharge was witnessed with conglomerates of small and firm blackish pellets, evoking eumycetoma . Tissue and black grain samples were analyzed for bacterial, mycological and histological evaluation. The anatomopathological aspect showed a polymorphic inflammatory cell reaction. The bacterial analysis was negative, and the mycological study revealed on direct examination septated hyphae containing numerous chlamydoconidia measuring 2 to 5 μm in diameter with terminal dilatations giving a vesicle appearance . The fungal culture on Sabouraud media established the diagnosis of certainty and identified Madurella mycetomatis after 3 weeks of growth . A magnetic resonance imaging of the right foot was performed to determine the lesions extension. This examination identified multiple collections of the right forefoot soft tissues, fusing along extensor and flexor tendons without associated joint or bone invasion . A treatment with oral terbinafine at a dosage of 750 mg/day for at least 1 year was started because of its previous efficiency in our patient. We performed monthly liver function tests (liver transaminases) to assess treatment tolerability. Within 6 months, the lesions evolution was slow with a fistulas drying up, and no liver damage was noted.