A 56-year-old man who had diabetes mellitus and a recent diagnosis of prostate cancer presented with acute abdomen to the emergency room about two hours after having received endorectal prostate MRI examination. Prior to the event, he had been initially referred to our hospital because of one-month history of gross hematuria. Serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) was 3.99 ng per milliliter. Examination of transrectal ultrasound-guided (TRUS) biopsy specimen of the prostate revealed prostate adenocarcinoma in the right anterior and posterior aspect with Gleason score of 9 (4 + 5). A whole-body bone scan reported bone metastasis to the thoracic spine (T11). Therefore, endorectal prostate MRI was arranged to evaluate the extent of cancer for the best treatment path. Patient had a light diet 1 day before and undergone cleansing enema early morning at the hospital prior to the procedure, while metal and electronic objects were removed. A 1.5 T endorectal MRI/MRSI was used . The endorectal coil was covered with latex condom to prevent contamination. During endorectal prostate MRI examination, patient maintained a left lateral decubitus position. The probe was lubricated with xylocaine jelly adequately and inserted through the anus to the rectum with mild force in cephalad fashion. Slight painful sensation of the lower abdomen was experienced momentarily but soon dissipated. The intrarectal balloon was inflated with 70 to 80 ml of carbon dioxide to reach maximal image resolution. Patient tolerated the procedure well without immediate complications and was sent home afterwards. The MRI result revealed advanced prostate cancer with transcapsular invasion to periprostatic tissue, right seminal vesicle and urinary bladder, metastatic regional lymphadenopathies and multiple bony metastases.
Approximately two hours following the examination, patient was seen in the emergency room because of a sudden onset of severe lower abdominal pain. A supine abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse pneumoperitoneum and perirectal extraluminal air with fat stranding , prompting an emergency exploratory laparotomy. Intra-operatively, a rectal perforation about 2 cm in diameter at the anterior wall of the upper rectum was identified, suggesting an iatrogenic relation during endorectal prostate MRI examination . A primary closure of the rectal perforation with sigmoid loop colostomy was performed. Nasogastric decompression was applied until the third day post-operatively. The intraoperative ascites culture result revealed ESBL-producing Escherichia coli infection. A concomitant urinary tract infection with Pseudomonas aeruginosa was reported. A colonoscopy was performed to evaluate the perforation site 10 days later. An approximately 8-mm residual perforation still presented in the anterior wall of the rectum, which was repaired by intraluminal endoclipping for perforation closure. The follow-up computed tomoraphy scan 20 days later showed absence of intra-abdominal free air. A good healing process of the perforation was seen during the colonoscopic examination.