We present a case of a 28-year-old white man with an 8-month history of clinical symptoms of anemia, such as fatigue and breathlessness, without any abdominal complaint. He had autoimmune hemolytic anemia treated by corticosteroids for more than 6 months but with a relapse of disease after steroid remission. For this reason, he was a candidate for a splenectomy. His occupation is a student. He did not smoke tobacco or consume alcohol, and he was taking prednisone, bisphosphonates, vitamin D, and calcium. No other immune disorders were found. On admission, his blood pressure was 90/70 mmhg, his heart rate was 70 beats/minute, and his body temperature was 36 °C. Physical examination of the patient revealed a severe pale conjunctiva and icteric sclera with no evidence of abdominal mass or other physical abnormalities. Laboratory analysis results on admission are shown in Table .
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) performed before the splenectomy showed a large cystic mass between the stomach and the spleen with no evidence of communication with the stomach or pancreas. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed a cystic mass located along the greater curvature with no mucosal abnormality or communication with the gastric lumen. Magnetic resonance imaging performed for more characterization showed a cystic mass between the stomach and spleen with a high signal intensity on T2-weighted fat-saturated magnetic resonance images and peripheral enhancement after gadolinium injection . At this stage, the differential diagnoses included hydatid cyst, mesenteric cyst, and pancreatic pseudocyst.
The patient underwent exploratory laparotomy with complete cyst resection and splenectomy. At gross examination, the cystic mass, measuring 8 × 5.5 × 4 cm, was well-circumscribed, unilocular, and filled with a mucoid yellowish fluid. Histologically, the cystic mass was lined by gastric epithelium with pyloric glands , transitioning focally into squamous epithelium and in some areas into pseudostratified columnar ciliated epithelium . A small part of the mucosa-like wall had ulceration accompanied by inflammation . There was no evidence of cartilaginous tissue in the wall. There were also bundles of smooth muscle in the wall. This finding suggested a GDC .
The histological examination of splenectomy showed pronounced cord congestion with reactive follicular hyperplasia and increased deposition of hemosiderin. After 10 months, there were no signs of local complication, and the patient was successfully weaned from steroids and had complete resolution of hemolytic anemia with negative direct antiglobulin tests.