Our patient is a 48-year-old African American male who was referred to UCLA after an incidental discovery of an intracranial mass while undergoing metastatic workup for a shoulder mass. The patient had a distant history of retroperitoneal paraganglioma that was discovered at the age of 10 as a painless expanding abdominal mass. The patient underwent seven abdominal surgeries over the course of the next 4 years with the last operation occurring in 1975 and was found to be disease free at 5-year follow-up. The patient reported that he never underwent chemotherapy or radiation therapy prior to or after his abdominal operations. He reported that he was symptom free for the next 34 years with no reported episodes of diaphoresis, palpitations, headaches, arrhythmias, or other symptoms concerning for catecholamine secretion. The patient reported that his only health problem in this interval was hypertension that was managed with three hypertensive medications.
However, in the winter of 2009, the patient began noticing an expanding, painful, erythematous swelling in his left shoulder. A workup at an outside hospital found a large expansile left acromial mass that was biopsied and initially read as possible sarcoma. However, upon referral to UCLA and repeat biopsy, the diagnosis was determined to be consistent with metastatic paraganglioma. Microscopic examination demonstrated “packets of bland-appearing round blue cells present in nests lining numerous pericytoma-like vascular proliferation” that were found to stain positive for chromogranin, S100, synaptophysin, and neuron-specific enolase (NSE). During his oncologic workup, CT and MRI of the brain were performed, which demonstrated a large left extra-axial occipital lesion measuring 2.9 × 4.5 cm compressing the torcula, left transverse sinus, and posterior sagittal sinus with the invasion of and through the occipital calvarium into the soft tissues of the scalp . Urine metanephrines were within normal limits but serum chromogranin A levels were elevated to 20 times the normal range suggesting a nonfunctioning neuroendocrine tumor. CT of the abdomen was negative for abdominal recurrence. The patient was neurologically intact with no neurologic deficits other than 3/5 weakness of his left shoulder. Distal extremity strength was intact.
The patient underwent excisional biopsy of his occipital tumor. Microscopic examination revealed an infiltrating neoplasm composed of nests of round blue cells with round-to-ovoid nuclei, smudgy chromatin, moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm, and distinct cytoplasmic border with no necrosis appreciated, and rare mitotic figures which were determined to be consistent with metastatic paraganglioma . The patient tolerated all procedures well, had an uncomplicated postoperative course, and was discharged on postoperative day 3 at his neurologic baseline.
Following his discharge, the patient underwent an outpatient metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scan that demonstrated an abnormal tracer activity in the left occiput and left scapula corresponding to the known residual tumor and shoulder mass as well as small foci of abnormal activity in the left upper arm proximal to the elbow and left thigh proximal to the knee. Follow-up MRI of the left humerus and left femur demonstrated intramedullary masses that are consistent with metastatic paraganglioma. The patient later underwent successful gross total resection of his large left scapular mass with orthopedic surgery. Treatment for his left humeral and left femoral masses remains to be determined.