A 27-year-old man was admitted to the hospital owing to “double vision 6d.” His admission examination results revealed absence of left eye adduction, and he had an outward squint. His auxiliary examination results were as follows: proteinuria: 3+, urinary occult blood: 1+, 24-h proteinuria: 3.44 g/24 h (normal: < 0.20 g/24 h); cerebrospinal fluid pressure: 240 mmHg, glucose: 2.05 mmol/L, white blood cell count: 23 × 106/L, protein: 0.67 g/L, and cerebrospinal fluid immunoglobulin IgG: 68.00 mg/L (normal: 0–34.0 mg/L); activity of α-galactosidase A: 0.9 nmol/(h.mg) (normal: 25.5~64.1 nmol/(h.mg)). MR-fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) imaging of the brain showed abnormal signals in the left oculomotor nucleus , and no obvious abnormality was noted on three-dimensional time-of-flight magnetic resonance angiography (3D-TOF-MRA) . The black-blood sequence showed partial thickening and mild enhancement of basilar artery and bilateral posterior cerebral artery . A pathological biopsy of the kidney revealed a large number of myeloid bodies and zebra bodies . Genetic testing revealed a nucleotide mutation in the GLA gene c.426C > A (nucleotide in the coding region 426 from C to A), which caused the Cys 142 amino acid-translating codon to function as a stop codon (p. Cys142Ter); this phenomenon led to the early termination of peptide chain synthesis. The mutation has been reported in the literature to be associated with Fabry disease (reference databases HGMD Pro and PubMed) . The frequency of this mutation in the population is extremely low (reference databases: 1000 Genomes, dbSNP). According to the abovementioned test results, the diagnosis was Fabry disease. Subsequently, we treated our patient with corticosteroids, and he was discharged after his symptoms ameliorated. The patient was treated with long-term aspirin after discharge from the hospital. The patient returned to our observation after 2 months; MR-FLAIR imaging of the patient’s brain revealed new abnormal signals in the left temporal lobe , but we could not detect any obvious abnormality on the 3D-TOF-MRA . Furthermore, the black-blood sequence revealed an abnormal enhancement of the left middle cerebral artery , and the abnormal enhancement of the basilar artery and bilateral posterior cerebral artery had disappeared . Four months later after initial treatment, the black-blood sequence revealed that the abnormal enhancement of the left middle cerebral artery had disappeared, and no obvious abnormality could be detected in the 3D-TOF-MRA ; however, local thickness and abnormal enhancement of the right middle cerebral artery was detected in the black-blood sequence . There were no symptoms during follow-up.