Mrs. M. is a 50-year-old woman with a history of metastatic breast cancer who presented with a 2-week history of headaches, nausea, and vomiting. History and physical exam revealed no photophobia or focal neurologic deficits, however, generalized lower extremity weakness reduced her ability to ambulate significantly below baseline. Considering her history of metastatic breast cancer, a magnetic resonance imaging of the brain was ordered which showed a stable or slightly reduced size of a previously treated lesion in the left insular cortex. Given the ongoing symptoms, lumbar puncture with CSF cytology was performed, which confirmed metastatic carcinoma consistent with breast primary, establishing a diagnosis of LM.
Mrs. M had been diagnosed 12 years prior with a T2 N0 multicentric lobular breast carcinoma at the age of 38. She was treated with lumpectomy, axillary lymph node dissection followed by completion mastectomy, adjuvant chemotherapy and chest wall radiation. This was followed by 5 years of tamoxifen therapy. Ten and a half years after her initial diagnosis at the age of 48 years, her cancer recurred in her brain and bones. She received stereotactic radiosurgery to a solitary, gradually growing lesion in her left insular cortex. At the same time, she was found to have lesions in her thoracic spine and right scapula. She received a single fraction of radiation to her scapula and was restarted on tamoxifen with excellent response in her thoracic spine. She went just over 1 year without recurrence.
Upon her diagnosis of LM, Mrs. M received intrathecal methotrexate and cytarabine with no resolution of her symptoms and persistently positive CSF cytology. She was then switched to six cycles of intrathecal liposomal cytarabine along with oral capecitabine. Despite several cycles of intrathecal and systemic chemotherapy treatments there was no clearance of her CSF cytology and she had only partial resolution of her headaches and nausea. There was no treatable solid tumor identified on CT or MRI imaging of her brain to account for her symptoms.
Mrs. M's case was discussed at multidisciplinary tumor boards. Given the persistent positivity on CSF cytology it was decided she would receive palliative CSI to a dose of 36Gy in 20 fractions over 4 weeks time prescribed to cover the anterior spinal canal with 95% of the prescription dose . She had significant toxicities during this treatment, including sore throat, odynophagia, and significant fatigue. Of significance, despite being on a relatively modest dose of dexamethasone, she also developed severe proximal muscle weakness requiring an early and rapid tapering of her steroid. This increased her fatigue, nausea and general malaise on treatment.
Following her radiation, her acute side effects rapidly resolved over 4–6 weeks. Her proximal muscle weakness was slower to respond, nonetheless she was ambulating short distances with a walker at 1 month of follow-up. After 3 months, her strength had almost returned to baseline and she was walking slowly, without assistance. She remained on tamoxifen and received 1 year of oral capecitabine.
She did very well for 2 years following her radiation treatment, at which point she developed rapid vision loss and was found to have hydrocephalus requiring a ventriculoperitoneal shunt. Vision and general strength did not fully recover following this and she declined despite the procedure. The cause of her hydrocephalus was never clear but was not aggressively investigated due to the rapid deterioration of the patient's health at this point. Ultimately, she died from her disease 2 years and 11 months following her initial presentation with LM and 2½ years following her CSI .