A 25-year-old woman was referred to Loghman hospital with complaint of a right posterior auricular mass since three years and a recent development of pain and increase in size. There was no palpable lump in the region of the right parotid gland, paresthesia, or evidence of cranial nerve VII dysfunction. However, an ill-defined firm mass just posterior to right earlobe at the tip of mastoid was observed. Computed tomography revealed a moderately enhanced lesion measuring 28 mm in diameter in the posterior portion of the right parotid gland . The decision was made to resect the mass. Intraoperatively, a firm mass was found to be mainly located at the tip of right mastoid bone with narrow connection to the parotid gland parenchyma. The gross entirety of the mass was carefully dissected from the mastoid bone to the tragus cartilage as well as parotid gland with preservation of the facial nerve.
The gross specimen, which was received in two separate formalin containers, was labeled as:
A) “parotid gland”: consisted of a portion of parotid gland tissue measuring 3*3*1.5 cm accompanied by multiple small fragments of parotid gland tissue measuring 2*2*1 cm in aggregates. The cut surface showed a relatively well-demarcated homogenous gray fibrotic mass at the periphery of the gland measuring 2 cm in greatest diameter.
B) “Posterior auricular mass”: consisted of an irregular gray elastic to fibrous tissue, measuring 1.8*1*0.6 cm, with homogenous grayish cut surfaces.
The specimen was inked and entirely processed routinely: sections were fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin, processed, embedded in paraffin, sectioned, then stained with hematoxylin-eosin. Ethics and Research Committee of Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Science approved the study protocol.
Microscopically, the vast majority of the tumor was composed of a densely sclerotic stroma, made up of haphazardly arranged collagen bands and fibroblasts, infiltrated by conspicuous chronic inflammatory cells especially at the peripheral zone with scattered irregular tumor islands located more centrally .
Tumor nests were predominantly cystic and composed of a more prominent mucin-producing cells with vague intercellular bridges and intermediate cells with eosinophilic granular cytoplasms . Small pools and droplets of extra- vasated mucin were identified throughout the tumor .
There was no nuclear anaplasia, perineural invasion, significant mitotic activity, or necrosis on serial sections. A focus of tumor invasion to peripheral skeletal muscle tissue was identified. The parotid gland showed partial parenchymal sclerosis, acinar atrophy, lymphoplasmacytic periductal and stromal infiltrates with scattered tumor islands and small mucin droplets extended to the margin of resection focally.