A 35-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room due to general weakness, complaining of headaches, palpitation, chest discomfort, nausea, fever, weight loss, and tremor. The patient declared a history of fatty liver disease and elevated liver transaminases. The history of testing for viral hepatitis markers was negative. He reported no history of smoking, hypertension, cardiac problems, and kidney disease. There was a history of thyroid cancer in her mother.
On initial assessment, the patient was fully alert; his blood pressure was 154/90 mmHg; he had a regular pulse (130 beats/minute), a respiration rate of 18 times/minute, and a body temperature of 37.2°C, and peripheral oxygen was 97% on room air. Clinical examination revealed lid retraction, Goiter with no bruit, enlarged liver, hyperreflexia, and tremor. There were no gastrointestinal or central nervous system manifestations. The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. Laboratory tests revealed white blood cells (WBC) = 4.5 × 109/L, hemoglobin = 125 g/L, HDL cholesterol = 25 mg/dL, triglyceride = 195 mg/dL, ALT = 123 U/L, TSH = 0.005 µIU/mL, and FT4 = 7.77 ng/dL (, day 0). Markers for viral hepatitis (A, B, C, and E) were non-reactive. Ultrasonography of the thyroid gland showed enlargement of the right lobe, left lobe, isthmus, and increased thyroid parenchymal vascularization. Abdominal ultrasonographic examination revealed mild hepatomegaly with mild fat infiltration. Other sonographic findings included a normal-sized gall bladder, no thickening of the gall bladder wall, no biliary ductal dilatation, and no cholelithiasis. The patient was diagnosed with GD with a suspected thyroid storm and elevated liver transaminases due to fatty liver disease. The patient daily received 20 mg of methimazole, 120 mg of oral propranolol (divided into two doses), and 80 mg of glycyrrhizin (intravenously). The patient was admitted to the General ward to closely monitor his clinical condition.
During observation, the patient developed anorexia, fever (39.4°C), hypotension (blood pressure: 79/52 mmHg), and tachycardia of 120 beats/minute. Laboratory findings showed increased liver transaminases and bilirubin levels (, day 6). The patient was diagnosed with a thyroid storm and transferred to the intensive care unit. The patient had an intravenous fluid infusion, received dobutamine intravenously, 300 mg of intravenous hydrocortisone (daily, divided in three doses), 120 mg of glycyrrhizin (intravenous, daily), and 750 mg of ursodeoxycholic acid (oral, daily, divided in three doses). Methimazole was also continued. On day 9th of hospitalization, the fever subsided, and vital signs were within the normal range. However, icteric signs worsened, and laboratory findings showed a significant increase in liver transaminases and bilirubin levels (, day 9). The patient was diagnosed with suspected impending liver failure due to drug-induced liver injury. Therefore, methimazole and hydrocortisone were stopped since there were no signs of thyroid storm. On day 11th of hospitalization, the patient was transferred to the general ward, on day 15th of hospitalization, the patient was discharged from the hospital as his clinical condition improved.
During the follow-up period (days 19 - 26), thyrotoxicosis symptoms returned along with an increase in thyroxine levels after the discontinuation of ATDs. Radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU) was 28.1%, and the patient was prepared for total thyroidectomy as a definitive treatment.
Since the patient had a history of methimazole-induced liver injury, ATD was stopped. Therefore, TPE was initially performed to reduce thyroxine levels. The patient was admitted again for TPE and preoperative preparations. Albumin 5% served as the replacement fluid. The plasma volume exchanged was 2700 - 3000 mL/session. The patient daily received 3 grams (three ampules) of calcium gluconate intravenously given in three doses along with daily 5000 IU vitamin D3 peroral to prevent hypocalcemia.
After five sessions of TPE, thyroxine and antibody levels substantially decreased (, days 37 - 46). During the preoperative period, the patient daily received 60 mg of oral propranolol (divided into three doses), Lugol’s solution (oral, 15 drops given in 3 doses from five days before the surgery), and 60 mg of hydrocortisone peroral (given in 3 doses from three days before surgery).
On the day of the surgery, the dose of hydrocortisone was changed to 200 mg daily (given in 2 intravenous doses until three days after surgery). There was no sign of adrenal crisis, and tapering off was performed. The patient was discharged from the hospital five days after the surgery with the medications CaCO3 (1500 mg daily, given in 3 doses), calcitriol (0.25 mcg daily), and vitamin D3 (5000 IU daily). Levothyroxine (50 mcg daily) was started ten days after the surgery when the thyroid hormone started to decline.
Thyroid histopathology showed follicles of varying sizes lined with simple cuboidal to columnar epithelium. Parts of the epithelium were hyperplastic and invaginated as papillary folds into the lumen. The lumen contained colloids, some of which had a "scalloping" appearance. Local epithelial cells with vesicular nuclei and a "clearing" appearance were noticed. Moderate infiltration by inflammatory cells was observed in the local stroma, and areas with congestive blood vessels and fibrosis were evident .