A 60-year-old man with repaired tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) and mitral valve (MV) repair for endocarditis as well as an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator for secondary prevention in situ was admitted with haemodynamic compromising monomorphic VT despite Bisoprolol 5 mg. His cardiovascular examination showed a mid-sternotomy scar and when in sinus rhythm the auscultation showed normal heart sounds with no murmurs. His jugular venous pressure was not raised with a blood pressure measured at 110/60 mmHg. His respiratory examination was unremarkable. A 12-lead electrocardiography documentation of the monomorphic VT demonstrated a right bundle branch block QRS morphology, transition in lead V4 with south-west axis, suggesting a VT exit from the LV lateral wall. Patient underwent VT ablation with three-dimensional (3D) EAM under general anaesthesia. The initial 3D-EAM of the LV was performed using the Orion catheter. After completion of the initial mapping, an ablation catheter was used for further point-by-point mapping at sites of interest. An irrigated 4-mm tip bidirectional steerable catheter (IntellaNav OI, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) was positioned in the LV for EAM via a steerable bidirectional sheath (Agilis, St. Jude Medical Inc., St. Paul, MN, USA) following an anterograde approach via a transseptal puncture.
The catheter moved freely within the LV until it became stuck. Fluoroscope suggested an extracardiac position. Contrast injection via the irrigation port of the catheters confirmed pericardial staining , but it only became apparent on further withdraw of the catheter that the catheter was inside a coronary vein (see Figure and see ). Transthoracic echocardiography confirmed the intubation of basal LV wall with the catheter tip which then exited into the epicardial space . The catheter was removed without any further sequelae. Subsequently the patient’s Bisoprolol was increased and underwent a VT provocation test at 5-month follow-up with a negative result.