A 13-year-old Mexican female patient, height 151.0 cm and weight 48.0 kg, was found to have thrombocytopenia, anemia, abnormal skin pigmentation, dystrophic nails, and leukoplakia on the tongue.
The patient was the product of the second pregnancy of healthy nonconsanguineous parents (both parents were 31 years old at the time of birth). At the age of 5 years, she was detected to have thrombocytopenia and anemia (platelets 26000/mm3 and hemoglobin 9.0 g/dL); peripheral blood cell smears showed normal morphology and no evidence of blasts. She was thought to have primary immune thrombocytopenia. Prednisone (1 mg/kg/d) was administered as therapy for 21 d. After the administration of prednisone, platelet and hemoglobin counts have fluctuated from 32000/mm3 to 110000/mm3 and 9.5 g/dL to 11.7 g/dL, respectively.
When the patient was 9 years old, she was suspected to have systemic lupus erythematosus and mixed connective tissue disease due to her nail dystrophy and neck pigmentation abnormalities, but an antinuclear antibody test was negative. Methotrexate was administered as prophylaxis regardless. Around this time, an esophagogram was performed due to her difficulty swallowing since childhood; this revealed esophageal stenosis requiring two endoscopies for dilation. At the age of 11, dyskeratosis congenita was suspected due to the progression of reticulate pigmentation to the entire upper trunk, the presence of leucoplakia on the tongue, and the evolution of fingernails and toenails dystrophy; a molecular study was subsequently performed.
The patient had no history of other significant diseases.
The patient had a healthy older brother, and family history did not indicate any significant morbidities.
At the age of 6, the patient presented with microcephaly, reticulate pigmentation in the neck, neckline, and axillae, dystrophic nails on hands and feet , and lacrimal obstruction in the right eye. At the age of 11, she showed leukoplakia on the tongue , and her reticulate pigmentation progressed to the entire upper trunk .
A histopathological study of the skin showed dyskeratocytes . Although previous peripheral blood smears showed normal leukocyte counts and the absence of blasts throughout the disease, a bone marrow biopsy was performed, which revealed normal cellularity.
Whole-exome sequencing analysis was performed according to the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA was enzymatically fragmented and hybridized with CentoXomeTM (CENTOGENE, Rostock, Germany). Libraries were generated with Illumina-compatible adapters and sequenced on the Illumina platform (Illumina, Inc., San Diego, CA, United States). Sequenced readings were aligned to the hg19 version of the human genome (Genome Reference Consortium GRCh37) using validated software (Rostock, Germany). All variants reported in the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD®), ClinVar, and CentoMD, as well as those in which the frequency of the least common allele was less than 1% in the Single Nucleotide Polymorphism database (dbSNP) and the Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) were considered. After analysis, a novel mutation, Chr14(GRCh37):g.24709832del NM_001099274.1:c.854delp.(Val285Alafs*32), was identified in exon 6 of the TINF2 gene. This mutation was verified by Sanger sequencing. Bidirectional sequencing and comparison to the coding sequence of TINF2 was performed . The reference sequence was NM_001099274.1.
To assess telomere length, genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes using the Flexigene DNA kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) and qPCR was performed using the Absolute Human Telomere Length and Mitochondrial DNA Copy Number Dual Quantification qPCR kit (ScienCell Research Laboratories, San Diego, CA, United States) on a CFX96 Touch Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, United States) according to the supplier’s recommendations. The analysis showed an absolute telomere length of 2.80 ± 0.09 kb.