An 84-year-old male patient presented with lacrimal discharge and purulent discharge in his right eye for more than 1 month without any obvious cause. Later, the patient came to our hospital for treatment due to aggravation of the symptoms and was admitted to the hospital with chronic dacryocystitis of the right eye. On admission, the patient showed persistent tearing and purulent discharge from the right eye with a localized cystic bulge in the lacrimal sac area. The patient underwent lacrimal duct irrigation and inserted the needle from the upper lacrimal punctum of the right eye. The flushing liquid flowed back from the lower lacrimal punctum, accompanied by a large amount of purulent secretions. Lacrimal duct CT angiography showed the following a high-density shadow in the right lacrimal sac area and a soft-tissue-density shadow in the right nasal cavity, including a high-density shadow. Nasal endoscopy revealed many yellow‒white nasal calculus-like foreign bodies in the right common and inferior nasal meatus .
Inquiring about the patient’s medical history revealed that the patient had received 17 intravenous infusions of zoledronic acid at the other hospital from June 2017 to September 2021 due to severe osteoporosis. In September 2021, the patient was diagnosed at the other hospital with drug-related right maxillary osteonecrosis due to pain and pus in the right maxillary first molar. Then, the zoledronic acid infusions were discontinued, and normal saline was used for daily irrigation. In December 2021, nasal CT at the other hospital showed bone destruction on the right side of the maxilla with soft tissue mass formation and right maxillary sinusitis. Conservative treatment was continued due to the unclear boundary of the bone mass. In June 2022, the patient complained of right nasal obstruction with increased purulent nasal secretion, and in December, he gradually developed chronic dacryocystitis, mainly presenting as lacrimal and purulent discharge from the right eye, and came to our hospital for further diagnosis and treatment. At that time, the patient was transferred to our otolaryngology department for further treatment, and nasal stones were removed under nasal endoscopy. During the operation, it was found that the nasal septum deviated to the right, and there was a large amount of silt-like material in the right inferior meatus and common meatus; the boundary with the surrounding mucosa was clear. Mucosal edema and thickening in the maxillary sinus were found. The pathological results showed the following (D2023-00352): degeneration of bone cells, coagulation necrosis of the stroma, and a small amount of nasal mucosa at the edge of the tissue . After the operation, ceftizoxime was given for anti-infection therapy, dexamethasone for anti-inflammation therapy, and aminocaproic acid sodium chloride for hemostasis.
Three days after surgery, the symptoms affecting the patient's right eye gradually resolved, the lacrimal purulence decreased, and routine blood tests showed the following: white blood cells, 6.06 × 10^9/L (normal range, 3.5–9.5 × 10^9/L); neutrophils, 4.01 × 10^9/L (normal range, 1.8–6.3 × 10^9/L); and lymphocytes, 1.56 × 10^9/L (normal range, 1.1–3.2 × 10^9/L). Other indicators were normal. One month after surgery, the patient underwent a follow-up examination in the ophthalmology clinic; there was no lacrimal purulent discharge from the right eye, and the lacrimal duct could be flushed smoothly. A CT scan of the nasolacrimal duct showed that the right nasolacrimal duct was patent , and there was no soft-tissue-like shadow or high-density shadow in the right nasal cavity.