A 48-year-old Turkish female case was suffering from fever, weakness, and pain in the bilateral pelvic region fort the last 3 months. Therefore, the patient was applied different medical treatments including use of broad-spectrum antibiotics (ceftriaxone, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin, rifampicin, etc), but the complaints were not resolved.
Abdominal examination revealed only moderate tenderness in the bilateral flanks but no masses and the abdomen was soft and relax. But she had bilateral physical signs of psoas inflammation (Maneuvers to test for iliopsoas inflammation - Place your hand just proximal to the patient's ipsilateral knee. Then ask the patient to raise his thigh against your hand. This causes contraction of the psoas against resistance and leads to pain. With patient lying on the unaffected side, hyperextension of the affected hip results in pain due to stretching of the psoas muscle).
Laboratory blood test results were in the normal range except for a white blood cell count of 16,3 × 109/L and ESR 60 mm/hour. Plain X-ray was normal. However, in the contrast abdomen MRI, a collection compatible with the hyperintense abscess was detected in the right ilipsoas muscle as 9 × 7 cm and in the left psoas muscle as 5 × 2 cm .
The case was considered as a primary psoas abscess and was hospitalized in the general surgery service. Comprehensive biochemical tests (including tumor markers, collagen tissue diseases, tuberculosis etc.) were carried out on the patient. Blood cultures (for fungi, aerobic, anaerobic bacteria and mycobacteria) and urine cultures were taken. In the meanwhile, although endoscopic and colonoscopic examinations were carried out (in order to detect unspotted diseases such as tumoral formations, Crohn's etc.), no results were obtained. It was decided to perform a surgical open drainage on the abscess upon detecting that there were no laboratory findings to prove the presence of a problem with immune system and seeing that there was no reproduction according to blood culture results (culture results were negative).
Surgery was done via McBurney incision towards lumbar region, muscle splitting, extra-peritoneally, and the peritoneum was pushed medially until exposure of the right psoas muscle. The muscle was first aspirated then incised and 320 ml of purulent material which impressioned Staphylococcus aureus was drained. A large hemovac drain was inserted into the incised portion of the right psoas muscle and fixed to the skin via a separate incision. The same surgical procedure was performed in the left psoas muscle by positioning the patient. The left psoas muscle was first aspirated then incised and 110 ml of purulent material which impressioned Staphylococcus aureus was drained too (dark white coloured, partly sticky and malodorous). During the operation, separate cultures (for fungi, aerobic, anaerobic bacteria and mycobacteria) were taken from both psoas abscesses (both from the abscess wall and pouch). The wound was closed in layers. Post-operatively, antistaphylococcal antibiotic therapy was started to continue for two weeks. Postoperatively, the patient improved dramatically and the post-operative period was uneventful.
Follow-up CT showed substantial reduction in the size of the collection. The drain was removed after 7 days. The wound was dry and clean. In the last control CT, it was seen that the abscess formation was completely removed [Figure ]. Therewith, the case was discharged from the hospital on the ninth post-operative day.