A 46-year-old Japanese man was referred to our hospital with intrahepatic cholangiocellular carcinoma. The tumor was 3 cm in diameter and located at segment 8, between the root of the middle and right hepatic veins. Preoperative liver function tests were normal, and preoperative blood work was negative for hepatitis virus markers. The patient underwent an extended right hepatectomy without resection of the extrahepatic bile duct. The patient's middle hepatic vein was divided approximately 2 cm upstream from the root of the middle and left hepatic veins.
The patient's postoperative course was uneventful until day 10, when a gradual increase in serum bilirubin levels and ascites formation were noted. Although obstructive jaundice and portal thrombosis were excluded by ultrasound and computed tomography (CT) scans, the patients continued to deteriorate, displaying hyperbilirubinemia, coagulopathy and refractory ascites . Neither circulatory disturbance nor hepatic encephalopathy were seen during this period. The patient's Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) score also increased gradually, and reached 23 seven months after the initial hepatic surgery. MELD scores between 20 and 29 are associated with 3-month mortality rates of over 75%. Repeated abdominal paracentesis were necessary to treat his refractory ascites, which amounted to more than 10,000 ml per week.
In order to rule out an insufficient hepatic regeneration, the patient's liver volume was assessed by CT-volumetry using previously described methods . Seven months after surger, his liver volume was 1290 ml, almost identical to the standard liver volume (1222 ml) which was calculated using Urata's formula . Nevertheless, serum levels of hepatocyte growth factor were elevated to 1.61 ng/ml, signifying that the liver was still being stimulated to regenerate. Serum hyaluronic acid levels were also elevated to 3030 ng/ml, suggesting that sinusoidal endothelial cell function was severely disturbed . An assessment of the patient's hepatic circulation by spectral Doppler ultrasound revealed a good hepatic arterial flow, but a relatively weak intrahepatic portal signal with no diastolic flow. The Doppler waveform of hepatic venous flow was monophasic, suggesting the presence of hepatic venous stenosis . Because axial CT images only were not conclusive regarding the presence of hepatic vein stenosis, multiplanar reconstruction (MPR) images and three-dimensional CT images were also assessed, and the stenosis at the root of the left hepatic vein was clearly visualized .
To further confirm the presence of hepatic venous stenosis, the pressure gradient between the left hepatic vein and right atrium was measured. Hepatic venous catheterization was performed through the jugular vein. The mean hepatic venous pressure was 15.6 mmHg, and the pressure abruptly decreased when the catheter was pulled through the assumed stenotic point into the right atrium. The pressure gradient between the left hepatic vein right atrium was 13.2 mmHg. The normal hepatic venous pressure gradient lies between 1 and 2 mmHg . Thus, we confirmed the presence of hepatic venous stenosis morphologically and functionally.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for endovascular treatment. As an initial treatment option, hepatic venous balloon dilation was performed eight months after surgery. A transluminal angioplasty catheter (Synergy Balloon Catheter, Boston Scientific, Tokyo) with a balloon diameter of 10 mm and a length of 40 mm was used for venous dilatation. Although the pressure gradient across the left hepatic vein and right atrium decreased from 13 to 4 mmHg immediately after intervention, the effect was temporary. Ten minutes after balloon dilatation, the pressure gradient had increased to 10 mmHg. Although serum bilirubin levels decreased unexpectedly to near the normal range, refractory ascites remained. Therefore, the patient underwent endovascular stent placement therapy seven weeks later.
A self-expandable metallic stent (Luminexx, BARD, Covington, GA) with a diameter of 8 mm and a length of 40 mm was placed into the left hepatic vein via the internal jugular vein. Because the large umbilical fissure vein was bifurcated just behind the stenosis, another metallic stent with a diameter of 8 mm and a length of 2 mm was inserted into it using a stent-in-stent technique . At the same time, in order to relieve the symptom of lower leg edema, the retrohepatic inferior vena cava was also dilated with a metallic stent (Spiral Z stent, Wilson-Cook Inc., Winston-Salem, MA) with a diameter of 20 mm and a length of 60 mm. The pressure gradient across the left hepatic vein and right atrium decreased to 3 mmHg just after stent placement, which was maintained even after 10 minutes. A Doppler ultrasound study three weeks after stent placement showed an increased hepatic venous flow velocity and a pulsatile venous waveform . Along with the normalized bilirubin level, the patient's ascitic fluid volume also decreased favorably after the stent placement. Thus, the patient had recovered from his PLF.