A 73-year-old Caucasian woman with a 13-year history of RA complained of a marked decrease in visual acuity (VA) and intense pain in her oculus sinister (OS), which was red, accompanied by a sensation of hot leakage on her cheek, approximately 12 hours before admission to our hospital. For the past 3 weeks she had been treated in another service with gentamicin drops and indomethacin drops four times a day for a previously diagnosed corneal ulceration of the OS. No bandage contact lens was used. Before this episode, the patient did not have regular ophthalmological follow-ups. The patient had no history of hypertension or diabetes.
The patient was using methotrexate 2.5 mg three times a week for treatment of RA. For the dry eye syndrome, preservative-free lubricants were prescribed.
Upon ophthalmic examination, visual acuity (VA) was 20/32 in the oculus dexter (OD) and 20/630 in the OS. Slit lamp examination revealed subtle conjunctival congestion with fine stromal opacities in the OD, and in the OS, moderate ciliary injection, a perforated paracentral corneal ulceration approximately 1 mm in diameter, with a dense perilesional infiltrate, stromal melting, and a few corneal new vessels and stromal opacities around it . The pupil was peaked but reactive and the iris was plugging the perforation. A shallow, almost flat anterior chamber with clear aqueous humor and a clear lens were found . No abnormality was noted in the fundus examination of the eyes. Anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT, Heidelberg Spectralis) revealed the inclavated iris in the ulceration zone and a thin cornea in the OS and an imminent 100 µm minimum corneal thickness at the site of perforation .
Ophthalmological evaluation led us to the diagnosis of paracentral corneal perforation.
Systemic treatment with Ceftriaxone was initiated, 1 g every 12 hours, and topical medication was modified to tobramycin hourly, mydriasis with tropicamide and phenylephrine five times a day, lubricants, and occlusive patch.
Evolution under treatment was stationary without signs of improvement. Therefore, 5 days after admission, cyclosporine 1 mg/ml was added to the topical treatment and it was administered 1 drop a day in the evening. Treatment with Methotrexate 7.5 mg/week was continued.
The danger of this sight-threatening situation required rheumatologist expertise. Taking into account the lack of general symptoms and the normal values of C reactive protein and ESR, neither pulse therapy with methylprednisolone, nor cyclophosphamide addition were taken into consideration.
Fortunately, visual acuity started to improve to 20/63, the perilesional infiltrate decreased in size and depth, the iris was liberated from the perforation site and the corneal transparency improved . At discharge, VA in the OS was 20/25 and the patient was free of symptoms.
Anterior segment optical coherence tomography showed an increase in minimum corneal thickness to 250 µm . We performed a Schirmer test without anesthesia in the OD, and the result was 1 mm at 5 minutes.
After having been discharged, the patient continued topical treatment with tobramycin three times/day and cyclosporine 1mg/ml, one drop/day every evening and preservative-free eye lubricants; 6 months after this episode, the patient experienced no further ocular complains, her vision is 20/20 in both eyes, she is under rheumatologic and ophthalmological supervision and keeps using preservative-free ocular lubricants.