A 13-year-old male adolescent, with no history of any medical illnesses, presented to the emergency room complaining of severe continuous backache and fatigability for 3 days. He had recently traveled to the southern region of Saudi Arabia. No bowel or bladder symptoms were present. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient by King Fahd Hospital of the University, Imam Abdulrahman Bin Faisal University.
Clinical examination revealed tenderness of the lower back region on palpation and a reduction in the strength of both knees and hip during extension and flexion (grade 3/5), with sensory loss in both lower limbs on pinprick examination. Other parameters on neurological examination were intact. Laboratory results revealed anemia with mild leukocytosis and peripheral eosinophilia. All other results of routine laboratory tests were within the reference range.
An X-ray examination of the lumbar spine showed no gross abnormality. Emergent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed cord edema with an abnormal signal intensity in the thoracic and lumbar regions . The clinical and laboratory findings of the radiological features indicated acute transverse myelitis secondary to infectious or inflammatory changes. However, the possibility of other differentials remained. A lumbar puncture was performed using standard procedures. Gram staining and culture of the cerebrospinal fluid yielded negative results. No isolated parasitic eggs were present in the urine or stool specimens. Brain MRI findings were unremarkable. However, the Schistosoma serology titer showed a marked elevation.
Therefore, a presumptive diagnosis of neuroschistosomiasis was made, and an experimental oral treatment for schistosomiasis was prescribed without any spinal intervention. The patient’s symptoms and signs rapidly subsided, with a regression of the spinal myelitis pattern on follow-up MRI examination . Subsequently, he was discharged from the hospital within 1 week in dependable health and continued his anti-microbial regimen for 1 month. Follow-up examinations at the neurology clinic revealed a gradual improvement in the patient’s clinical condition. The patient was referred for further follow-up in the infection clinic. The patient was followed for 1 year and showed a complete long-term resolution of symptoms.