A 52-year-old white man with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 15 pack-years of tobacco smoking history, moderate use of alcohol, and no significant family history presented with pre-syncopal episode and was found to be pancytopenic. His vital signs were temperature 36.7 °C, pulse 93 beats/minute, respiration rate 20 breaths/minute, blood pressure 101/60 mmHg, and blood oxygen saturation (SpO2) 99% at room air. A physical examination including neurological examination was unremarkable. Comprehensive metabolic profile and urine analysis was normal. Complete blood count showed pancytopenia. A peripheral blood smear showed a myeloid left-shift with 5% blasts. Subsequent bone marrow biopsy showed erythroid dyspoiesis, left-shifted granulopoiesis, and grade 3+ fibrosis consistent with MDS with marrow fibrosis. Genetic testing revealed wild-type JAK2 and MPL, a normal male karyotype, lack of BCR-ABL1 translocation, and a negative MDS fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) panel. Based on the lack of cytogenic abnormalities, hemoglobin (Hgb) of 7.8 g/dL, platelets (Plt) of 32 × 109/L, absolute neutrophil count (ANC) of 11.3 × 109/L, and the presence of 5% blasts, an age-adjusted Revised International Prognostic Scoring System (IPSS-R) score of 5.1 was calculated (that is, high risk – with a median survival and time to progression to acute leukemia of 1.6 and 1.4 years, respectively) . He received multiple blood transfusions for pancytopenia and was treated with 5 mg twice a day of the Janus kinase inhibitor, ruxolitinib.
Three months after diagnosis of MDS with fibrosis, during workup for allogenic bone marrow transplantation (BMT), a 4 cm right hepatic lesion was discovered on ultrasound. The lesion was hypoechoic with internal vascularity. Hepatosplenomegaly was also noted with the spleen measuring 19 cm in the craniocaudal dimension. MRI performed with MultiHance® revealed diffuse hepatic iron deposition and a T1 hypointense and T2 isointense (not shown) lesion in segment 7 showing heterogeneous mild arterial phase enhancement with washout to isointensity on portal venous and delayed phase images . Of note, the lesion was not visible on T2*-weighted GRE images suggesting the presence of iron deposition within the lesion similar to that in background hepatic parenchyma. The lesion was also not visible on diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI; Fig. ). The differential diagnosis offered at this point included focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) and adenoma, with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) being less likely and metastasis being unlikely. A few days later, our patient underwent ultrasound-guided core needle biopsy of the lesion, revealing marked sinusoidal EMH with left-shifted granulopoiesis including increased blasts, the latter highlighted on c-KIT immunostain . Perls’ iron stain highlighted 4+ iron in hepatocytes and Kupffer cells .
After approximately 7 months of therapy with ruxolitinib, a repeat bone marrow biopsy did not show any change in the blast count but a peripheral smear showed 7% blasts, meeting criteria for refractory anemia with excess blasts-2 (RAEB-2) using the 2008 World Health Organization (WHO) classification system for MDS subtypes . Two weeks later, while still being evaluated for BMT, pulmonary function tests revealed a poor forced expiratory volume at 1 second (FEV1) of 60% and a disproportionately reduced diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide (DLCO) of 56% predicted. This prompted a computed tomography (CT) angiogram of his chest, which showed an enhancing mass within his right main pulmonary artery suggestive of tumor thrombus . Bronchoscopic aspiration of the mass also showed EMH with dyspoiesis. He shortly developed hemoptysis at which point treatment with ruxolitinib was stopped and he was treated with low-dose radiotherapy to his chest (1 to 2 Gy/5 to 10 fractions) for approximately 10 days. A third bone marrow examination performed shortly afterwards showed similar findings to the previous with the additional finding of a significant peripheral monocytosis, at which point the disease was best classified as chronic myelomonocytic leukemia-2 (CMML-2) . Two weeks after diagnosis of CMML-2 and 3 weeks after the CT angiogram, he developed mediastinal hematoma probably due to progressive CMML-2 and radiation-induced degeneration of the pulmonary arterial EMH; he died shortly afterward, secondary to expanding mediastinal hematoma causing respiratory arrest. An autopsy was not performed to the best of our knowledge.