A 49-year old gentleman from Khania gaon, Assam, India with diabetes, hypertension with end-stage renal disease and decompensated ethanol-related chronic liver disease since 1 year underwent simultaneous living-donor liver transplantation (donor sister) and kidney transplant (donor wife) in our institute. Recipient did not receive any induction therapy and was initiated on tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, and wysolone. Four days post-transplant, patient developed fever and subsegmental patchy consolidation with right sided pleural effusion. Central line blood stream infection was suspected. Blood culture were send which subsequently grew T. asahii. Laboratory analysis of pleural fluid also revealed budding yeast cells identified as T. asahii. Initially liposomal amphotericin B (L-AmB; 3 mg/kg/day) was initiated but due to lack of clinical and microbiological response, micafungin (100 mg/day) was added to L-AmB. His central venous catheter was changed. Because of the continuous fever on micafungin and persistent positive blood cultures with T. asahii an infectious diseases consultation was sought. On examination patient was having respiratory distress, laboratory investigation revealed leukocytosis (1 7007/µL) with neutrophilic (95.7%) predominance with normal creatinine and normal liver enzymes. Echocardiography did not revealed any vegetation. On examination of positive culture plates, there were creamy white colonies on blood agar and characteristic dirty-green colonies on CHROMagar . Microscopy (wet mount, gram stain, and LPCB) revealed hyphae, arthroconidia, and blastospores . The isolates were identified as T. asahii by VITEK MS which uses matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) technology. T. asahii isolates were processed for drug susceptibility testing by broth microdilution according to The Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) Guideline and were sensitive to fluconazole and voriconazole, but resistant to amphotericin B, flucytosine, and anidulafungin. On the basis of this, diagnosis of disseminated T. asahii infection in a combined living-donor liver transplant and kidney transplant recipient was established. Hence, L-AmB with micafungin was discontinued and patient was initiated on voriconazole. Tacrolimus doses were reduced to one-third in view of interaction with voriconazole. The patient improved with resolution of fever. Repeat blood cultures on day 3 were negative. Voriconazole was prescribed for 14 days after the first negative blood culture. He was subsequently discharged and is doing well at 9 months of follow up.
Patient gave written informed consent to publish this case report and related evidence.
Local ethical guidelines state no need of ethical approval for a case report.