A 50-year-old Japanese man presented to the Department of Gastroenterological Center, Shunjukai Shiroyama Hospital with acute right lower quadrant abdominal pain of a few hours’ duration. Physical examination revealed that he was 172 cm tall, weighed 65 kg, and had a body mass index (BMI) of 21.8 kg/m2. The abdominal pain was localized without rebound tenderness or guarding while bowel sounds were normal. The patient had no associated nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. His medical history was unremarkable with no previous abdominal operations or problems. Routine blood tests showed that his white blood cell count was 8900/mm3 and the C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 8.13 mg/dl . Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen revealed twisting of the omentum with a local mass of fat density and fluid distributed in a whirling oval-shaped mass pattern at the right flank and iliac fossa . The fatty mass was situated between the transverse colon and the gallbladder and contained hyperattenuating streaks.
Therefore, the patient was admitted to our hospital, based on a diagnosis of the omental torsion. At first, he was treated with conservative treatment because his vital signs were stable and his symptoms were non-specific and mild. Although his symptoms were ameliorated by oral analgesics, anti-inflammatory drugs, and prophylactic antibiotics, laboratory tests 5 days after admission showed a decreased leukocytosis (white blood cell count 5500/mm3) but increased CRP (18.49 mg/dl). A second CT scan showed that the twisting of the omentum with a local mass of fat density and fluid had been retained; moreover, the fat density and fluid were worsened. Therefore, laparoscopic omentectomy was performed 6 days after admission.
The patient was placed in the supine position under general anesthesia. Initially, the abdominal cavity was reached using a 12-mm trocar from the left of the umbilicus. Four accessory trocars (5 mm each) were placed in the right upper quadrant, left upper quadrant, left lower quadrant, and above the pubis symphysis. During abdominal exploration, a solid ischemic and hemorrhagic portion of the right greater omentum was found adhered to the right side of the abdominal wall and transverse colon . Although this portion was adhered to the transverse colon, the appendix and gallbladder were normal, and Meckel diverticulum was not present. Then we entered the omental bursa, and the adhesion between the transverse colon and omentum was resected. Therefore, this portion was completely free of adhesions due to the resection . The specimen was retrieved in a bag through a small abdominal incision 5.0 cm in length above the umbilical trocar. The total operating time was 200 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 100 ml.
Macroscopically, this specimen was 24 cm × 22 cm in size and was twisted and dark red in color, suggesting infarction . Histological analysis proved the specimen to be ischemic and hemorrhagic omentum, accompanied by inflammatory infiltration, confirming the diagnosis of omental infarction due to the torsion .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, and he was discharged 9 days later.