A 78-year-old Caucasian woman who had been routinely followed at our centre for non-obstructive HCM and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation presented with functional MR lasting more than 10 years. The patient also had chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and chronic renal insufficiency. Her main symptom related to HCM and MR was exertional dyspnoea; when atrial fibrillation occurred, she experienced orthopnoea and dyspnoea at rest. She had never been hospitalized for heart failure, but sometimes reported pedal oedema. Pharmacological management included furosemide 25 mg, apixaban 2.5 mg (twice daily), bisoprolol 1.25 mg, and amiodarone 100 mg.
In June of 2019, the patient experienced a worsening of symptoms including frequent breathlessness and pre-syncope episodes under light stress (e.g. while climbing stairs). In September of 2019, the patient was admitted to our centre to evaluate her global status. Upon physical examination, her blood pressure was 105/70 mmHg and she had normal oxygen saturation, a pulse rate of 70 b.p.m., and a pansystolic murmur over the apex. Intravenous furosemide (40 mg) was administered to treat minor lower leg congestion. The patient did not experience any arrhythmias during hospitalization. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed symmetrical thickening of the LV wall (20 mm at the basal anteroseptal wall) with a small cavity, a LVOT gradient of 3 mmHg, a normal LV ejection fraction (62%), and an inverted mitral filling pattern. Right heart sections were not dilated. Pulmonary artery systolic pressure (PAPs) was 23 mmHg at rest. The degree of MR appeared to have worsened compared to previous echocardiographic findings; transoesophageal echocardiography is shown in . Mitral regurgitation was moderate-to-severe (3+), width of the vena contracta was 7 mm and regurgitant volume was 51 mL. The prevalent jet was central (A2-P2 origin) caused by leaflet tethering secondary to papillary muscle displacement. Moreover, mitral findings (length of the posterior leaflet, 10 mm; mitral valve area, 4.64 cm2; mean gradient across the valve, 1 mmHg; no calcification) were compatible with percutaneous edge-to-edge repair. Angiography revealed no coronary disease and spirometry showed a slight obstructive deficit. During the 6-minute walking test (6MWT), the patient walked 170 m without oxygen desaturation. The patient had no chest pain during an exercise stress test with echocardiography using a bicycle ergometer and a symptom-limited Bruce protocol. Echocardiography during the stress test indicated the absence of an exercise-induced LVOT gradient and an inverted mitral filling pattern. At peak stress, MR grade evolved from moderate-severe to severe and PAPs increased from 20 mmHg to 40 mmHg . Exercise was interrupted at the 50-W stage due to severe hypotension (systolic blood pressure, 70 mmHg) and pre-syncope.
Priorities during the Heart Team discussion included improving patient quality of life [Minnesota Living with Heart Failure Questionnaire (MLHFQ) score, 65] and addressing pre-syncope and exercise-induced hypotension. The patient had already rejected any open surgical intervention; therefore, the Heart Team proposed percutaneous mitral valve repair using the MitraClip system.
In November of 2019, the patient underwent placement of a single MitraClip NTr centrally over the A2-P2 scallops, which produced a reduction in MR grade from moderate-to-severe to mild . Residual MR was located at the A1 segment (antero-lateral) and the final mean gradient across the valve was 2 mmHg. There were no intra-operative or post-operative complications during hospitalization and the patient was discharged in good condition. Medical therapy was unchanged except for the addition of clopidogrel 75 mg daily in the first months after the procedure.
Follow-up was performed at 3, 6, and 12 months post-procedure . At each follow-up visit, the patient was in sinus rhythm and exhibited noticeable improvements in exercise tolerance and symptoms; she did not report further episodes of pre-syncope. At 3 months, the patient’s MLHFQ score had increased to 20 and she walked 374 m during the 6MWT. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a significant reduction in left atrium volume (from 109 mL to 76 mL) and no change in residual mild MR. At 6 months, the patient successfully completed the exercise echocardiography protocol (up to the 75-W stage) without pre-syncope; during peak stress, MR remained mild, the mitral filling pattern evolved from inverted to pseudonormal, systolic blood pressure was 165 mmHg, and the increase in PAPs was well-tolerated. Improvements were sustained at 12 months follow-up.