A 22-year-old woman with gestational age of 28 weeks and 4 days had a blood pressure of 161 /99 mmHg at a routine prenatal visit, and before that, her blood pressure was normal. The physical examination showed the following: Scattered ecchymosis in the neck skin, a purple ecchymosis of 5 × 4 cm size in the skin of the right forearm, and broad, dark, and thick striae in the skin of the lower abdomen . The results of laboratory tests showed that concentrations of serum liver enzymes and creatinine were normal, suggesting that she did not have impaired liver function and renal insufficiency. Moreover, she did not have proteinuria. However, her serum potassium was 2.12 mmol/L, compared with non-pregnant values, serum potassium fell by 0.2–0.4 mmol/L, the rest of the serum electrolyte levels are in the normal range. After the administration of labetalol (300 mg, twice a day) and potassium, her blood pressure was remained in the range of 170 /100 mmHg and serum potassium maintained at 3.0–3.5 mmol/L. The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, while echocardiography indicated that her heart function was normal. Considering that the patient and her family had no previous history of hypertension and kidney disease, the liver and kidney function were normal, and the fetal ultrasound examination showed a fetus with a normal gestational age, the presence of uncontrolled hypertension and hypokalemia increased the suspicion that the problem was due to secondary hypertension rather than preeclampsia. The primary care physician ordered an ultrasound examination of the adrenal glands. The ultrasound showed a solid cystic mass (12.8 × 8.5 cm) in the right suprarenal gland region. Therefore, the patient was admitted to the endocrinology ward of Qilu Hospital of Shandong University with a diagnosis of “hypertension and hypokalemia of unknown origin” at 30 weeks gestation. Laboratory results showed the following values: glucose (−) in the urinalysis and her fasting blood glucose was 5.2 mmol/L, considering that she had no history of diabetes and had no polyuria and polydipsia recently, we ruled out the diagnosis of gestational diabetes. Plasma renin and aldosterone levels were in the normal range and the aldosterone/renin ratio (ARR) was 2.87 (normal range: 0–40). The 24-h urinary free cortisol level was 3357 μg/24 h (normal range: 21–110 μg/24 h), the serum cortisol level of 1246 nmol/L at 08:00 AM, 707 nmol/L at 04:00 PM (normal range: 112–288 nmol/L at 08:00 AM, < 128.7 nmol/L at 04:00 PM). The adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels were 2.18 ng/L at 08:00 AM, 1.6 ng/L at 04:00 PM (normal range: 4.7–48.8 ng/L). The normal circadian rhythm of serum cortisol was lost, moreover, there was no significant inhibition in the low dose dexamethasone test. The above laboratory results supported a diagnosis of “ACTH-independent Cushing Syndrome,” therefore, a high dose dexamethasone test was requested.
In order to localize the adrenal mass and its relationship with surrounding organs, we ordered an adrenal plain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) without contrast agent 3 days after admission. The signal of the mass was slightly longer in T1 and T2-weighted image, and high signal intensity on diffusion-weighted imaging. In the T1-weighted image, multiple dot flake short signals were observed in the interior of the tumor, which had a size of approximately 10.1 × 10.5 × 12.8 cm. A short patchy hyperintensity in the T1-weighted image and a longer striate signal in the T2-weighted image were seen in the lesion. . The above imaging features suggested the presence of hemorrhage in the lesion, and the location of the lesion was very close to the right adrenal gland. The imaging findings combined with the test results showing that a high dose of dexamethasone could not inhibit cortisol; therefore, we considered the possibility that an adrenal tumor was causing the Cushing syndrome.
The hospital held a case discussion board to obtain a consensus regarding the diagnosis and treatment to follow in this patient. Participants in this discussion board belong to various specialties such as obstetrics, urology, and anesthesiology, and they considered that hypertension and hypokalemia were caused by the mass in the adrenal region, and the symptoms would be relieved after the mass was removed. The discussion was focused on the ideal timing of treatment and the best surgical approach. The discussion board concluded that adrenalectomy should be performed by the urological department as soon as possible.
Transabdominal adrenalectomy was performed 12 days after admission. The abdominal cavity was opened using an inverted L-shaped incision 30 cm in length in the right lower abdomen. During the operation, a large mass (15x12x10 cm) was found in the right adrenal gland. The surface of this mass was hard in texture, and the surface envelope was intact and spread out all over the engorged blood vessels. The adhesions between the tumor and the superior, inferior vena cava, and surrounding tissues of the kidney was extreme. Also, the tumor squeezed the inferior vena cava, the right renal vein, and the right kidney, but it did not infiltrate the kidney and renal veins. The tumor were entirely resected during the operation and were sent to routine pathological examination. After tumor extraction, the urological surgeon closed the anterior sheath and placed a vacuum suction device subcutaneously, the skin at the wound was closed with skin staples. Postoperative day 1, ACTH increased to 78 ng/L, and plasma cortisol decreased to 172 nmol/L. Hydrocortisone was administered orally after the operation to prevent the occurrence of adrenal crisis. Unfortunately, the pathological results revealed that the tumoral mass was an ACC, and immunohistochemical staining of tissue specimens showed that: LH (−), HCG (−), and inhibin receptors (−).
Postoperative day 2, the patient was transferred to the maternity ward and treated with magnesium sulfate and ritodrine to inhibit the uterine contractions. At 32 weeks of gestation, she experienced a premature rupture of membranes. Considering her physical condition and disease state, we decided to stop using magnesium sulfate and ritodrine; therefore, her uterus naturally started contractions and entered the labor process. She had a vaginal delivery, the female newborn weighted 1360 g and had Apgar scores of 10 at both 1 and 5 min. Immediately after birth, the infant was transferred to the neonatology ward. Unfortunately, the newborn developed abdominal distension 2 days after birth, and there was no significant improvement after gastrointestinal decompression. Plain abdominal x-ray film showed intestinal perforation. The neonatologist suggested a surgical treatment, but the parents of the newborn refused. The newborn died 1 week after birth. The father of the newborn refused to perform an autopsy, thus, it was difficult to determine whether the death of the newborn was due to the impact of the maternal disease on the newborn or due to premature birth or other effects. Considering the patient’s condition, the oncology department recommended chemotherapy. Therefore, she was transferred to the oncology department for intravenous chemotherapy 3 days after delivery. After 6 months of follow-up, the hypertension and hypokalemia disappeared and she has completed chemotherapy at another hospital and without any clinical evidence of disease recurrence.