A 42-year-old white male presented with blurred vision in his left eye (LE) for 2 weeks and without systemic symptoms. On examination, best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in both eyes. Intraocular pressure was 17 mmHg OU. Clinical examination of the right eye (RE) was unremarkable. Slit lamp examination of the LE did not show any anterior segment abnormalities. Dilated fundoscopy of the LE showed a clear vitreous with multiple retinal yellowish white deposits at the posterior pole and mid-periphery . Optical coherence tomography (OCT) (Spectralis Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) examination showed multiple hyper-reflective deposits under the retinal pigment epitelium (RPE) and a slight subfoveal neuroretinal detachment (SND) . On autofluorescence (AF) and fluorescein angiography (FA), the multifocal sub-RPE deposits appeared hyperautofluorescent and hypofluorescent, respectively, with no leakage on the late-phase angiograms . Indocyanine green angiography (ICGA) late angiograms revealed circumscribed hypofluorescent areas, corresponding to the sites with the most OCT alterations . Through swept-source OCT angiography, after projection removal, (SS-OCT-A, PLEX Elite 9000, Carl Zeiss Meditech Inc, Dublin, CA), multiple hyperreflective alterations were detected on the enface outer retina slabs , corresponding to the alterations identified through fundoscopy, OCT, AF, and FA. Upon SS-OCT-A analysis, the superficial and deep plexuses reconstructions showed no alterations of the retinal vascular network. On the contrary, choriocapillary analysis revealed circumscribed low reflectance areas in the foveal and parafoveal areas , which colocalized with the hypofluorescent areas seen in the late-phase ICGA angiograms .
An extensive workup to rule out infectious posterior uveitis and systemic diseases was performed, including serologies for syphilis, toxoplasmosis, and tuberculosis, as well as screening for liver and renal function, glycemia, homocysteine levels, and inflammatory indexes. The results of all these examinations were negative. Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed and showed no abnormalities.
Based on the clinical presentation and multimodal imaging, a diagnosis of vitreretinal lymphoma was suspected. For confirmation, a diagnostic 27-gauge pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) was performed to obtain a vitreous sample for cytopathology. However, the results of this analysis were also negative.
Interleukin 10/Interleukin 6 (IL-10:IL6) ratio analysis on a vitreous sample was considered but was not available in our laboratory nor in neighboring hospitals. An MYD88 gene sequencing analysis of the aqueous humor, vitreous samples, and vitrectomy cassette fluid was performed, again with negative results. Consequently, a chorioretinal biopsy was planned.
Meanwhile, the patient complained of worsening LE visual acuity. Multimodal imaging showed a progression of the lesions in the LE and new involvement of the RE. One month after the first presentation, multiple new hyperreflective retinal lesions in a vertical shape were detected on OCT in the LE . On midretinal slabs of enface SS-OCT-A, these appeared as hyperreflective spots mainly located near second-order retinal vessels . These lesions were not detectable on baseline examinations and appeared like those previously referred to as perivascular flower-bud-like-lesions (PFBLs) .
Three weeks later, an increase in sub-RPE deposits in the LE was detected on OCT, and the presence of a large flat pigment epithelial detachment (PED) in the superotemporal quadrant was observed, along with an increase in the thickness and reflectivity of overlying retina . In this area, the PFBLs were more numerous and appeared in continuity with the thick and hyperreflective overlying retina . On SS-OCT-A, a choriocapillary analysis showed an extension of the low reflectance areas, which affected the central posterior pole and superotemporal quadrant . In the RE, yellowish white lesions in the upper part of the posterior pole were detected upon fundus examination, which appeared as sub-RPE hyper-reflective deposits on OCT, and which were hyperautofluorescent on AF.
A chorioretinal biopsy was performed, collecting a specimen from the thickened tissue in the superior temporal quadrant of the posterior pole. The specimen was put in formaldehyde and sent to a National Referral Center for histological analysis. A dense, large lymphoid population was found, which was immunoreactive for CD20, bcl-2, and MUM-1, partly so for bcl-6, and negative for CD3m and CD10.The immunocytochemical determination of Ki67 (clone 30 − 9) performed on a histological section in paraffin demonstrated about 80–90%. A diagnosis of a large B-cell lymphoma with non-germinal centre B cell-like phenotype was formulated. The patient underwent cancer staging, including a bone marrow biopsy and a Positron Emission Tomography, which showed no other disease foci.
In the meantime, LE visual acuity had decreased to 20/100, while still 20/20 in the RE. Multimodal imaging showed spreading in the mid-periphery of the sub-RPE lesions in the RE, in the same fashion previously seen in the LE.
For the treatment, the patient was referred to a national reference center for Oncological Hematology. He underwent three chemotherapy cycles, followed by autologous bone marrow stem cell sampling, two additional chemotherapy cycles, and a final stem cell reimplantation. Eight months after the chorioretinal biopsy and 2 months after completing chemotherapy and the autologous stem cell transplant, LE visual acuity increased to 20/20.
The patient was then followed-up in our department for three years. Multimodal imaging examination performed during follow up visits showed changing retinal lesions. On OCT examination, sub-RPE deposits had reduced remarkably, SND had disappeared , and the superior temporal flat PED had regressed along with the thickening of the overlying retina . On SS-OCT-A, a reduction in the multiple hyperreflective alterations corresponding to the sub-RPE deposits was detected on enface outer retina slabs . The PFBLs had regressed, and in their sites dystrophic/atrophic RPE alterations were detected on OCT . SS-OCT-A examination showed regression of the hyperreflective spots on the enface midretinal slabs that had corresponded to the PFBLs .
On SS-OCT-A analysis, choriocapillary reconstruction showed a remarkable reduction of the large low reflectance areas, with the persistence of some hyporeflective central spots . Similar changes were detected on ICGA examination .
At the chorioretinal specimen collection site, the scar margins were sharp, and no signs of proliferative vitreoretinopathy (PVR) were present on fundus examination. At the last FU visit, a posterior polar cataract was found in the LE. Follow-up PET and MRI were negative.