A 16-year-old boy presented to our emergency department after being hit by a car coming from the left while riding a bicycle at an intersection and being thrown off the road by approximately 10 m. The patient presented with a Glasgow coma scale (GCS) score of 4 (E1V2M1) with anisocoria (3.5/diffuse), and both direct and indirect light reflexes absent. Head computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple skull base fractures underlying traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage and left acute epidural hematoma [ and ]. The skull fractures involved the right frontal bone, right pyramidal bone, clivus, left anterior clinoid process, and left mastoid process [ and d]. Contrast-enhanced head CT was also performed, but no obvious aneurysm was found on the day of admission [ and ].
Emergency craniotomy was performed to remove the hematoma, and craniectomy was added for decompression. Postoperative management included deep sedation, hyperventilation, and hyperosmolar therapy to control intracranial pressure. Deep sedation was terminated on day 5, but the patient’s level of consciousness continued at a GCS score of 5T (E1VTM4).
Head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed 7 days after surgery and revealed bilateral ICA stenosis, BA stenosis, and a pseudoaneurysm at the apical portion of the BA [ and ]. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) revealed bilateral ICS stenosis [ and ] and an aneurysm protruding irregularly anteriorly from the distal portion of the BA, and the proximal portion of the BA was dissected . The maximum diameter of the pseudoaneurysm was 1.0 cm. After obtaining the guardian’s consent, we decided to perform coil embolization. The aneurysm was gradually thrombosed, resulting in body filling and a volume embolization ratio of 15.7% .
On day 35, that is, 28 days after coil embolization, head CT was performed for follow-up and revealed enlarged ventricles and intraventricular hemorrhage. A second coil embolization was performed following DSA, which revealed a rupture of the aneurysm, resulting in body filling and a volume embolization ratio of 20.9% [ and ].
Head MRI on day 42, 1 week after retreatment, showed no obvious blood flow in the aneurysm, and the BA and bilateral ICA stenoses had improved [ and ]. DSA also showed improved bilateral ICA stenosis [ and ]. At the 6-month follow-up, the patient had a GCS of 8T (E4VTM4) and a modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score of 4.