A 23-year-old Caucasian man with CF was admitted with a one-week history of pleuritic chest pain, increased cough and sputum purulence, accompanied by some minor haemoptysis. Lung function had deteriorated; FEV1 of 2.01L (42% predicted) compared to 2.76L (57% predicted) when well. On examination, he was clubbed and malnourished (body mass index: 18), but not cyanosed. Auscultation of his chest revealed widespread inspiratory crackles over both upper lobes. A diagnosis of an infective exacerbation of his bronchiectasis was made. He was continued on intravenous ceftazidime and tobramycin, regular physiotherapy and nutritional supplementation.
Past medical history consisted of pancreatic insufficiency and chronic airway sepsis related to Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection. Diagnosis had been made at birth and he possessed the ΔF508/1898 + G → CF gene mutation. He was known to have established osteoporosis and significant gastro-oesophageal reflux. Over the preceding two years, he had been admitted to a hospital on 12 occasions with acute exacerbations of his CF lung disease and during this time period, his forced expiratory volume in one second L (FEV1) had deteriorated from 3.17 L (74% predicted) to 2.76L (57% predicted). He also had a past history of recurrent left-sided pneumothoraces.
During the admission, he developed spiking fevers and complained of worsening pleuritic pain. A Computed Tomography (CT) pulmonary angiogram was performed to look for pulmonary emboli. The CT scan showed no emboli, but demonstrated large bilateral upper lobe lung bullae, more prominent on the right side with characteristic bronchiectatic changes elsewhere . Sputum microscopy revealed the expected predominance of PMNs, but also droplets of oily brown material embedded in mucus. PMNs were observed containing vacuoles full of this brown-pigmented substance and elsewhere, these droplets could be seen surrounded by palisades of PMNs . On closer questioning, the patient admitted to several years of marijuana smoking through a bong. He denied use of tobacco. A provisional diagnosis of "bong lung" complicating severe CF bronchiectasis was made. The patient made a slow recovery over three weeks and received counselling about his marijuana use. He was discharged with an FEV1 of 2.33L (48% predicted).