A 50-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for chest tightness and a productive cough.
The patient reported that the chest tightness and productive cough have lasted 2 wk.
The patient had no history of past illness.
The patient was a former heavy smoker and a former heavy drinker.
There were no physical findings to note.
TSPOT-tuberculosis test was negative. His tumor marker levels were as follows: carcinoembryonic antigen 2.1 (0.0-5.0 ng/mL), carbohydrate antigen 199 2.3 (0.0-37.0 ng/mL), cancer antigen 125 115.9 (0.0-35.0 ng/mL), neuron-specific enolase 15.8 (0-30.0 ng/mL), C-terminus of cytokeratin 19 7.0 (0-7.0 ng/mL), squamous cell carcinoma antigen 0.9 (0.0-1.5 ng/mL), and cancer antigen 724 20.8 (0.0-16.4 ng/mL).
Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a 2.3 cm × 2.7 cm nodule in the left superior lobe, many small nodules in left superior and right lungs, and enlarged bilateral hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes . Fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)-CT revealed hypermetabolic activity in the left superior lobe nodule [maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) = 11.8], bilateral pulmonary small nodules (SUVmax = 20.3), and left sacrum (SUVmax = 6.3) as well as lymphadenopathy (right supraclavicular (SUVmax = 8.3) and bilateral hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes (SUVmax = 10.6), suggesting a neoplasm with extensive metastasis .
The left upper lung nodule was diagnosed as adenocarcinoma with concomitant noncaseating granulomas by CT-guided biopsy . The diagnosis was clinical stage IVa (cT3N3M1b) adenocarcinoma. EML4-ALK fusion was detected using the amplification refractory mutation system method. Thus, the patient began receiving crizotinib 250 mg twice daily. CT was repeated 30 d later and revealed that the left upper lung nodule decreased dramatically in size; however, the lesions in the right lung progressed, and the mediastinal lymph nodes did not show a significant reduction except for the lymph nodes in station 5 .
Therefore, this patient was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation. An elevated level of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) (194 U/L, normal value, 24-139 U/L) was noted. Purified protein derivative skin tests and serum calcium levels were normal. The right supraclavicular lymph node was diagnosed with noncaseating granulomatous inflammation with negative acid-fast bacillus staining. Bronchoscope showed multiple nodular infiltrations in the right middle lobe , and the pathological diagnosis was granulomas. The endobronchial ultrasound images showed enlarged lymph nodes in stations 4R, 7, and 11L, but no tumor cells were identified by endobronchial ultrasound-guided transbronchial needle aspiration.
Therefore, he was diagnosed as lung adenocarcinoma accompanied by sarcoidosis (stage II). As the disease progressed within 1 mo, he was administered oral methylprednisolone 8 mg twice daily as well as crizotinib. One week later, repeat chest CT revealed a significant response in all lesions in both lungs . PET-CT showed a dramatic decrease in FDG uptake in all pulmonary lesions and no abnormal metabolic activity in the left sacrum. A magnetic resonance imaging scan of the left sacrum was also normal.