A 64-year-old man was hospitalized for a few-months history of dull pain in the right groin. Physical examination revealed a palpable mass in the right flank with a mild right flank tenderness. His previous history was uneventful. The results of laboratory examination were unremarkable. Screening ultrasound examination revealed a hypoechoic tumor with inhomogeneous interior echoes, 23 × 13 × 7 cm in size. Computerized tomography (CT) confirmed the presence of a solid tumor of the right kidney about 20 cm in diameter . Renal arteriography demonstrated a hypovascular tumor and compressed deformity of pelvis of the right kidney . The left kidney was normal. Suspecting a renal carcinoma the patient underwent a right radical nephrectomy in February 2018. He had an uneventful post-operative recovery, and is currently well without any sign of recurrence.
Grossly, the tumor was solitary and sharply defined, measuring 23 × 13 × 7 cm . The cut surface was solid, elastic hard, and white yellowish without hemorrhage or necrosis . The pyelocaliceal system and the renal vessels were free of tumor involvement. Microscopic examination of the tumor disclosed intersecting fascicles of fibroblastic cells forming a loose crisscross or “storiform” pattern . And we observed that there was a clear boundary between the tumor and the kidney tissue under the microscope, which kept in line with the CT representation . The tumor was basically histiocytic, presenting a great deal of collagenic fibers, upon the presence of foam cells. The multinucleated giant cells and undifferentiated mesenchymal cells were very low. In addition, the cells were well differentiated, and the nuclei were not deep stained with very low heteromorphism.
Immunohistochemical studies showed that the tumor cells were strongly and positive for CD34, vimentin and CD99, the proliferation index of Ki-67 was 1%, but were negative for the smooth muscle actin (SMA), the desmin, SOX10, Bcl-2, CK7, the melanogenesis marker (HMB45), MelanA and the S-100 protein.