A 42-year-old female presented to the Emergency Department with episodes of
hemoptysis amounting to approximately 50 ml of bright-red blood, which occurred
along with coughing a few hours ago. The patient was an otherwise healthy woman with
no previous episodes of hemoptysis, no history of smoking, and no remarkable family
history. Upon further questioning, she disclosed having received, first time in her
life, oral emergency contraceptive medication, containing levonorgestrel (1.5 mg),
3 days prior to the episodes of hemoptysis, with the intention of preventing
unwanted pregnancy. The patient denied having received contraceptive medication,
levonorgestrel, or progestogens in the past. On physical examination she was found
to be hemodynamically stable and afebrile. No apparent bleeding diathesis was
detected. She had mild hypoxemia with SpO2 at 93% on room air, but neither
respiratory failure nor remarkable abnormal breath sounds were noted. Ear, nose and
throat (ENT) examination excluded pathological lesions and active bleeding from the
upper respiratory tract.
Chest X-ray depicted no pathological findings, whereas laboratory tests revealed neutrophilic
leukocytosis [WBC = 13.4 K/μL (normal range: 3.8-10.5 K/μL) – neutrophils = 79.6%
(normal range 45%-75%)]. Erythrocytes, platelets, and coagulation study showed no
deviation from normal values. Furthermore, mild anemia with decrease in Ht was
documented. Urine analysis presented normal results with no detectable
hemoglobinuria. Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the thorax revealed multiple bilateral ground
glass opacities compatible with alveolar hemorrhage. An incidental finding of an
aneurysm, with a maximum diameter of 4cm, was also depicted in the ascending aorta,
without clinical denotation.
The patient underwent emergent bronchoscopy, that showed extensive hemorrhagic areas
in the submucosa throughout the bronchial tree and endobronchial serpentines of
clots at the right middle as well as lower lobe. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) was
highly indicative of alveolar hemorrhage, as it presented the characteristic
progressively more hemorrhagic fluid in sequential aliquots from B8 secondary lobar
bronchus. Blood and BAL samples were collected for immunological, cytological as
well as microbiological analysis. BAL culture presented no pathological findings,
whereas cytological examination revealed numerous red blood
cells, many alveolar hemosiderin-laden macrophages, several inflammatory cells, and
few bronchial epithelial cells, without elements of malignancy. The BAL findings
confirmed diffuse alveolar hemorrhage (DAH) in our patient. Possible differential
diagnosis of DAH included antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody associated
vasculitis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Goodpasture syndrome, collagen vascular
diseases, inhaled toxic gasses, celiac disease, and cytotoxic drug therapy.
Serologic biochemical and immunological findings were normal , thus excluding all the
above-mentioned disorders. As the principal “risk therapy” for alveolar hemorrhage,
pulses of methylprednisolone 500 mg per day were administered for 3 days. The
patient was also put under antibiotic therapy with ampicillin-sulbactam. During
hospitalization period, she received tranexamic acid as a means to ensure the
abatement of hemoptysis. Her clinical condition remained stable and no further
episodes of hemoptysis occurred. On the 4th hospitalization day, corticosteroid
therapy was tapered to 32 mg of oral methylprednisolone and 7 days later the patient
was discharged from the hospital as shown in timeline . At follow-up, one month later,
while methylprednisolone had been tapered to 8 mg per second day, the patient was in
good physical condition with normal oxygen saturation. Her chest X-ray revealed no
pathological entities and both blood laboratory findings and pulmonary function
tests were within normal values. High resolution chest tomography (HRCT) was
performed , which
revealed resolution of the ground glass opacities that had been depicted 1 month
ago. The dimensions of the ascending aorta were measured the same. Urine analysis at
follow-up was normal, without signs of hemoglobinuria, or proteinuria.