A 44-year-old male patient with a 2-mo course of disease of was treated at the Department of Hematology of the Sichuan Academy of Medical Sciences in the Eastern Branch of Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital (Sichuan Institute of Hematology). He came to our hospital in August 2019 due to systemic fatigue and abdominal distension without an obvious cause.
The patient suffered from weight loss and high skin temperature but was not excessively sweating. He had pale conjunctiva, no yellow sclera, no bilateral pupil constriction, and large and round pupils that were sensitive to light reflection. His superficial lymph nodes were non-palpable and enlarged. No rales were detected in the lungs. The patient had arrhythmias, with 132 beats/min, and no murmurs. He was ABO positive and the negative stereotypes of the patient were not related to the disease.
He had no history of prior treatment or chemotherapy.
The patient had no family history of genetic diseases.
A physical examination showed a temperature of 37℃, pulse of 132 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, and blood pressure of 91/58 mmHg.
The laboratory blood test results indicated the following: White blood cells: 13.75 × 109/L [reference range: (3.50–9.50) × 109/L], neutrophils: 4.54 × 109/L, monocytes: 7.01 × 109/L [reference range: (0.10–0.60) × 109/L], lymphocytes: 1.38 × 109/L, red blood cell count: 2.71 × 1012/L [reference range: (4.30–5.80) × 1012/L], hemoglobin: 96 g/L (reference range: 130–175 g/L), platelet count: 17 × 109/L [reference range: (85–303) × 109/L], reticulocyte percentage: 2.84% (reference range: 0.67%-1.92%), mirror inspection: primitive + naive cells: 76%, Auer bodies present. Biochemical results indicated the following: Liver function: Blood sugar: 6.31 mmol/L (reference range: 3.90–6.10 mmol/L), alanine aminotransferase 59 U/L (reference range: 9–50 U/L), total albumin: 68.2 g/L, albumin: 39.7 g/L, lactate dehydrogenase: 1629 U/L (reference range: 120–250 U/L), renal function and electrolytes: Normal. Immune results indicated the following: Hepatitis C virus IgG antibody: Positive (consider AML-M2) (reference range: Negative); the results of flow cytometry showed that the leukemia was a partially mature type, and the leukocyte differentiation antigens, CD34, CD117, CD13, CD33, and myeloperoxidase were positive, while CD10, CD19, CD7, CD20, and CD14 were negative; karyotype analysis indicated the following: 46, XY, del(9)( q22)/46, XY, the fusion gene was normal. Comprehensive clinical manifestations and laboratory findings were diagnosed as acute M2 Leukemia.
Imaging was not included in this case.
The following experimental instruments were used: ORTHOVISION Max automatic blood group analyzer, Orsondor Medical Equipment Trading (China) Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China; Microlab STAR Line automatic blood group analyzer, Changchun Boxun Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Changchun, China; SLAN-96P Real-time fluorescent quantitative PCR, Shanghai Hongshi Medical Technology Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China; and American Bio-Rad 3130 gene sequencer, Bó Lè Life Medical Products (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China.
The following experimental reagents were used: ORTHO ABO positive and negative typing and RhD blood typing reagent card (column agglutination method) (lot number: ABR207J), Orsendo Medical Equipment Trading (China) Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China; Changchun Boxun ABO, RhD blood type testing microcolumn card: (Lot No.: 20200904), ABO blood group anti-typing reagent: Changchun Boxun (Lot No.: 2017040201); Changchun Boxun Irregular Antibody Screening Cells (Lot No.: 20201001); Changchun Boxun Biotechnology Co., Ltd., Changchun, China; ALBA Company RhD (IgM) blood typing reagent (monoclonal antibody) (batch number: v177217), British Alba Biotechnology Co., Ltd.; Beijing Jinhao anti-A, anti-B reagent (batch number: 2016083003), Beijing Jinhao Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd. Company, Beijing, China; and Human anti-A and anti-B serums were made by our laboratory.
ABO blood typing: A 2 mL of whole venous blood, with EDTA-K2 for anticoagulation, was taken from patient’s wife, parents, and a daughter; 1000 g were centrifuged for 5 min to do a serological pedigree investigation. ABO blood group was identified by the gel microcolumn method, an immunological method for the agglutination of erythrocyte antigen and corresponding antibody in the gel microcolumn medium. After adding reagents and specimens, the results were directly observed by the naked eye or analyzed by blood group meter after centrifugation with special centrifuge or card blood matching system. This method has standardized operation and quantitative sample to ensure the accuracy of the results. Two kinds of ABO blood types were tested by Changchun and Johnson according to the reagents’ instructions, and the Jinhao blood typing reagent was used to test positive and negative ABO blood types.
Irregular antibody, also known as accidental antibody, refers to the anti-A and anti-B antibodies of other blood groups in the serum. Irregular antibodies in other blood group systems can lead to transfusion reactions. Mild cases can cause chills and fever, which can affect the therapeutic effect of the treatment. In severe cases, the incoherent red blood cells will be destroyed, or their life will be shortened, resulting in hemolytic transfusion reactions and endangering the patient’s life. Therefore, irregular antibody detection is necessary. A variety of erythrocyte antigens present on screening cells are used to react with the tested serum. If there is agglutination, there is irregular antibody in the serum. Changchun Boxin and Johnson reagent screening was used for irregular antibody screening.
A test tube was used to detect the surface H red blood cell membrane.
The patient's saliva was collected and tested according to the National Clinical Laboratory Procedures, and the plasma and red blood cells of the patient were also absorbed and released according to the National Clinical Laboratory Procedures.
As there is still no unified standard for blood transfusion strategies for ABO subtypes in China, the principle of homotypic or compatible infusion is usually followed. According to the relevant provisions of Technical Specifications for Clinical Transfusion and combined with the characteristics of patients with subtype A AML, HB < 60 g/L was injected into suspended red blood cells, PLT < 20 × 109/L was injected into platelets. The process was completed while avoiding the infusion of red blood cell antigens corresponding to the antibodies in the plasma of the recipient and red blood cell antibodies corresponding to the antigens of the red blood cell, thus minimizing the input of the antigens of the abnormal red blood cells to prevent the production of alloantibodies due to the immune reaction. Considering the difficulty in obtaining type A2 blood, the patient was given an infusion of type O washed of red blood cells, and the monitoring during transfusion was strengthened to actively prevent the occurrence of adverse reactions. During the course of the disease, the patient received a total of 32 blood transfusions, including 16 (34 U) infusions of type O washed of red blood cells and 16 (16 U) infusions of type A platelets. The experimental data and clinical manifestations after blood transfusion suggested that the expected therapeutic effect of blood transfusion was achieved, and adverse blood transfusion reactions such as chills and fever after blood transfusion were not likely to occur. In the later treatment, the blood group serological test results were compared with those before transfusion, and anti-A1 was not detected. After the blood transfusion, the patient's hemoglobin was maintained at about 90 g/L, and platelet increased to more than 50 × 109/L.
The patient’s blood transfusion process was smooth, with no rash, fever, lumbago, soy-colored urination, chills or other symptoms. After the infusion, the patient’s fatigue, soft limbs, tired and tightness of the heart were significantly relieved, the complexion and mucosa were rosy, the hemoglobin was significantly increased, monitoring showed no significant increase in the reexamination of the reticulata, bilirubin was normal, urochologen was negative, and the lactate dehydrogenase did not decrease.
ABO blood group identification is extremely important in clinical transfusion practice. Blood group identification errors lead to incorrect transfusion of blood products and often serious transfusion reactions. Therefore, in the case of inconsistency between positive and negative serotypes, it is suggested to further improve the detection method and recommend the supplementation of molecular biological methods to avoid blood group identification errors as often as possible, to ensure the safety of transfusion.
For exons 6, 7 of ABO genes, partial 5 and 6 introns were amplified and sequenced. First, DNA was extracted from the samples (DNA concentration between 30–50 ng/mL with A260/A280 values ranging from 1.8 to 2.0). The PCR instrument was amplified, and the amplified products were purified and sequenced according to the instructions of the kit.
Since a low titer anti-A1 was found in the patient, O washing red blood cells were used for cross-matching test.
The results of the ABO blood typing serological test showed that the ABO of the patient was not consistent, the erythrocyte and anti-A, anti-AB were agglutinated, the plasma and A1 erythrocyte were weakly agglutinated, and the B cells were agglutinated. The ABO blood type and anti-H results of the patient's parents, wife, and daughter were normal . Two reagent irregular antibody screening for antigen spectra response in three cells was negative .
The results showed secretory substances A in the patient's saliva substance .
The results of the ABO testing indicated that the individual was A 02/O01 genotype. In sequencing ABO exons 6 and 7, we found that the changes were single base substitution (C/T) at 467 and C deletion at 1061 (467C>T, 1061del C).