A 41 year old Caucasian woman who was normally very active presented with progressive dyspnoea over the previous five months with an exercise tolerance deteriorating to twenty yards. She was a never-smoker and her past medical history only mentioned spinal fusion surgery in her thirties for congenital spinal scoliosis. Her only medication was Microgynon (a combined oral contraceptive pill). She denied any cough and was otherwise systemically well. A short course of oral steroids from her GP had temporarily improved her symptoms. Clinical examination was non-contributory; in particular, her chest was clear to auscultation and there was no peripherally palpable lymphadenopathy.
Postero-anterior chest radiograph was unremarkable. Computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) was performed on suspicion of pulmonary embolism and she was given a single therapeutic dose of dalteparin. This demonstrated adequate opacification of the pulmonary arterial tree with no evidence of filling defect. There were diffuse tiny centrilobular soft tissue nodules forming a tree-in-bud appearance with their adjacent vessels, as well as small volume enlarged lymph nodes in the mediastinum (measuring 11 mm in short axis diameter at the left hilum and adjacent to the aortic arch) . The combination of lymphadenopathy and nodular infiltrates especially along the fissures and peripherally, in conjunction with the clinical presentation, led to a provisional diagnosis of sarcoidosis, although it was noted at the time that the differential diagnosis for this radiological picture is far wider.
An electrocardiogram showed fixed T wave inversion in leads III, aVF and V1. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a mildly dilated right ventricle (RV) with paradoxical motion of the RV septum indicating RV overload (although the estimated pulmonary artery pressures were not significantly elevated). Spirometry showed a normal FEV1 and FVC with an FEV1/FVC ratio of 73.4 %; lung volumes and transfer factors were normal . Adjusted calcium was within the normal range; serum angiotensin-converting enzyme levels were requested (later reported as normal at 26 IU/l). She was discharged two days later with an appointment for an outpatient bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy.
She re-presented three days later feeling generally unwell with worsening dyspnoea, nausea, loss of appetite and diffuse headache. She was now tachycardic (100 bpm), tachypnoeic (24/min) and hypoxic (SpO2 93 % on air). Clinical examination was once again non-contributory. Arterial blood gas analysis showed type 1 respiratory failure (PaO2 8.18 kPa with FiO2 21 %). Electrocardiography showed progression of the right ventricular strain pattern with T wave inversion now in leads III, aVF, and V1–4.
She was noted to have an isolated thrombocytopaenia (93 x109/L); there was no clinical or laboratory evidence of a hypercoagulable state. She was supported with oxygen (up to 4 L/min via nasal cannulae) and also started on co-amoxiclav and clarithromycin as she had a mild neutrophilia (13.17 x109/L with C-reactive protein (CRP) 73 mg/l) to cover for an infective cause for her deterioration. Bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy, previously intended to be an outpatient investigation, was organised as an inpatient to confirm the diagnosis of pulmonary sarcoidosis. Corticosteroid therapy was not initiated in order to maximise the diagnostic yield of lung biopsy.
Two days after her readmission, whilst awaiting bronchoscopy, she developed persistent tachycardia (100–130 bpm) and tachypnoea (22–30/min) but with normal blood pressure and stable peripheral oxygen saturations on 2–4 L/min oxygen. She was noted to have an episode of unresponsiveness similar to an absence seizure lasting twenty seconds, followed by around thirty seconds of abnormal posturing (flexion but no jerking of limbs) and urinary incontinence. Magnetic resonance imaging of her head was performed to exclude neurosarcoidosis; this was normal. Later the following day, eight days since her first presentation, she suddenly deteriorated over a few minutes and went into cardio-respiratory arrest with pulseless electrical activity (PEA)/asystole. Despite a prolonged resuscitation attempt she passed away.
Post mortem examination revealed widespread tumour emboli with associated thromboemboli in the subsegmental branches of the pulmonary arterial tree; microscopically, the appearances were consistent with a diagnosis of pulmonary tumour thrombotic microangiopathy. The antecedent cause for this was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with signet ring cells in the anterior wall of the stomach . Miliary metastases were found in the lung parenchyma as well as metastatic deposits in the kidneys and bone marrow. Sections taken from the brain showed no evidence of occlusive thrombosis or thromboemboli within the intracranial blood vessels; the cause for the neurological event which the patient experienced remains unknown. Retrospective review of the history did not reveal any symptoms indicative of dyspepsia, gastric malignancy, or (other than several weeks of general malaise) occult malignant disease.