A 58-year-old woman, divorced and living with two children aged around 18 years, was diagnosed with locally advanced breast cancer 2 years before the current event. Primary treatment consisted of chemotherapy, mastectomy and locoregional radiotherapy. During follow-up, the oncologists repeatedly recorded various somatic complaints without organic substrate as well as psychological distress.
Four months before the event, the patient was diagnosed with metastatic disease consisting of liver and bone metastases and CMF-chemotherapy, containing cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil, in combination with trastuzumab was initiated. At the time of psychiatric referral, the first part of the third course of CMF-chemotherapy had been administered.
After the diagnosis of recurrent metastatic disease, and before the start of chemotherapy, the patient was referred to the Psycho-oncology Service, for additional psychological support. There she was considered to be overwhelmed by the bad news of the recurrence of the cancer for which there was no curative treatment option anymore, to have limited coping abilities, a tendency to react passively, and restricted abilities to benefit from psychotherapy. She had been using oxazepam and temazepam for a considerable time period. Also, some 15 years ago, she had been admitted to a psychiatric facility for unspecified problems.
Four weeks before hospital admission, she presented vague complaints of “restlessness” to her GP and her oncologist which were attributed to “hyperventilation”.
The weekend immediately preceding admission, she frequently phoned the GP and the oncology department of the hospital and was finally seen by the oncologist on call. She complained of restlessness and of insomnia for several days. Physical examination and laboratory tests were unremarkable. After various fruitless efforts to reassure her, she was admitted to the oncology ward. For purposes of sedation, pipamperon 40 mg was added to the benzodiazepines already used and a psychiatric referral was arranged for the following day.
During psychiatric consultation, the patient was seen pacing up and down the corridor of the oncology ward. When spoken separately, she was unable to remain seated on a chair and she kept walking up and down the room: a classic presentation of akathisia. In addition to this, the general impression was one of severe suffering: she was clingy and dependent, appeared both desperate and dysphoric, and taking a history was only possible to a limited degree as the patient constantly iterated: “I want other medication”, “Don’t you have other medication for me” and “I can’t stand this any longer”. She performed well on simple tests for registration, recall and concentration, her consciousness was not impaired, she was not grossly incoherent, denied having delusions or hallucinations, her mood was difficult to assess but was probably best described as despondent, and she denied suicidal ideation.
She denied having a history of anxiety disorders such as panic attacks or phobias and denied excessive alcohol use. After having lost her own mother to cancer 40 years ago, she had always been afraid of developing and dying of cancer.
In spite of the unmistakable clinical picture of akathisia, initially, we considered an adjustment disorder as she denied using drugs other than benzodiazepines and paracetamol. Only after repeated questioning and additional checking with different outpatient pharmacies, it became clear that at the initiation of CMF-chemotherapy she had been prescribed a large quantity of metoclopramide suppositories (20 mg) to use in case of nausea or vomiting. For reasons that she could not clarify, she had begun using these suppositories on a regular basis 2–4 times a day over the past weeks. Probably because prescribing metoclopramide was routinely done at the start of chemotherapy, no entry of this prescription had been made in her medical chart.
The patient and her family were informed of the role of metoclopramide in her agitation, she was advised to stop the drug, and was discharged. That same evening, however, she was readmitted with anxiety and suicidal ideation. She received temazepam and one dose of haloperidol 1 mg (also a DA-antagonist!). The akathisia subsided in 4 days time and did not recur, while she continued on the same dose of benzodiazepines as before, but without metoclopramide and haloperidol. Afterwards, on genotyping, no variant alleles of cytochrome P450 2D6 with diminished or absent metabolic activity possibly predisposing for psychomotor side effects of metoclopramide were found .