Our patient is a fourteen-year-old boy with background of mild attention-deficit and hyperactive disorder. He has insignificant family history of neurological, psychological or immunological disorders. Preceded by two weeks of viral illness-like prodromal symptoms, he progressively developed hypersomnolence, confused speech with echolalia, self-muttering, dysarthria, mood fluctuation, bilateral upper limbs tremor, and headache. Physical examination was unremarkable, apart from having confusion, inappropriate speech with foul languages, urine and fecal incontinence. Investigations showed normal complete blood count, liver and renal function tests. Autoimmune markers including anti-nuclear antibodies and anti-double stranded DNA antibody were negative. His serum C3 levels were within normal range between 109 and 115 mg/dL, but his C4 levels were persistently below 8 mg/dL . MRI brain was normal. Electroencephalogram showed a mild slowing of background activities. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis demonstrated a total white cell count of 33 cells/mm2, with normal protein and glucose levels. Oligoclonal protein was detected in the CSF. Microbiological investigations including bacterial cultures and viral polymerase chain reactions for herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus and enteroviruses were all negative. Anti-NMDA receptor antibodies based on commercial assay (Euroimmune®, Lueback, Germany) were detectable (titer < 1:10) in the CSF but not the serum.
The diagnosis of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis was made based on the diagnostic criteria published by Graus et al. He was immediately given intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 1 g/kg for on day 2 of admission for two consecutive days followed by pulse methylprednisolone 1 g on day 6 of admission for five days with gradual taper. However, he did not demonstrate any clinical improvement after IVIG and pulse methylprednisolone.
Plasmapheresis was therefore performed for a total of 7 sessions between day 14 and 29 of admission, with sedation required for the initial two sessions. He demonstrated significant improvement after the second session and was able to complete the remaining plasmapheresis without sedations. Nevertheless, his cognitive improvement remained slow and four doses of rituximab at 375 mg/m2/dose at weekly intervals were given between day 35 and 56 of admission. Accelerated improvement was observed after the second dose in terms his self-care abilities, behavior and cognitive functions. He was discharged after eight weeks of admission with some residual cognitive impairment requiring rehabilitation.
In view of his low C4 protein levels, an in-depth genetic analysis of the index patient, his parents and his maternal stepbrother was performed . Long-range mapping by pulsed field gel electrophoresis of PmeI-digested genomic DNA revealed heterozygosity with bimodular (LL) and monomodular (L) RP-C4-CYP21-TNX (RCCX) haplotypes (panel A). Regular Southern blots of TaqI digested genomic DNA revealed the presence of three long C4 genes in LL/L configurations (panel B), by which two C4 genes belong to the C4A isotype and one C4 gene belongs to the C4B isotype, as shown by PshAI/PvuII Southern blot (panel C). Immunofixation experiment of EDTA-plasma showed that the patient expressed C4A protein but no C4B protein (panel D) . In other words, the patient contained a C4B gene that did not produce a C4B protein (panels C and D, arrows) and thus assigned a C4B mutant. Concurrent study of the patient’s parents and maternal stepbrother suggested the patient inherited the mutant C4B gene originated from their mother with a LL haplotype consisting of one long C4A gene coding for C4A3 protein, and one long mutant C4B gene with no product.