Our Nephrology team was asked to provide consultation for a 51-year-old female, hospitalized in the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology who had a 2-day history of weakness, tachypnea, anorexia, vomiting, and mild abdominal pain. Six days prior to the consultation she underwent an elective hysterectomy due to uterine fibroids. Her past medical history included T2DM and peptic ulcer. She was a former smoker. Her medications included a combination of metformin/vildagliptin 850/50 mg b.i.d., empagliflozin 25 mg o.d. and omeprazole 20 mg o.d. The patient remained fasting for the 1st and 2nd postoperative day and, after feeding was re-instituted on the 3rd day, she reported episodes of vomiting during the 4th and the 5th postoperative day. On day 5, she also began to feel increasingly weak and fatigued, while on day 6 she became febrile, and was started on intravenous antibiotics (piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g t.i.d.)
On clinical examination, the patient appeared generally fatigued. Temperature was 37.7 °C, blood pressure was 160/80 mmHg, and heart rate 105 beats/min. The patient was tachypnoic with a respiratory rate of 35 breaths/min. Her abdominal examination revealed a fresh surgical incision, and diffuse tenderness with no focal guarding or rebound. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. Her diuresis was excessive, with a urine flow rate up to 300 ml/hour. Due to postoperative fever, blood and urine cultures were withdrawn, and an abdominal ultrasound was performed revealing no pathological findings. In patient’s initial laboratory investigation the white cell count was 31.2 K/μL (N:81%, L:7%, M:11%) and serum glucose level was 121 mg/dl. Serum creatinine was 0.67 mg/dl and urea 27 mg/dl, while albumin and calcium values were within the normal range. Liver function tests, bilirubin, and lipase were normal . Arterial blood gas revealed severe metabolic acidosis, with a pH of 7.05, [HCO3−]: 3 mmol/L, PCO2: 12 mmHg, anion gap: 16.9 mEq/L, lactate: 0.6 mmol/L, [Na+]: 133 mmol/L, [K+]: 3.8 mmol/L and [Cl−]: 113 mmol/L.
The patient was transferred in the Department of Nephrology, where during a more detailed examination of her medical history, she reported that she had continued taking her antidiabetic medication by herself, although this information was not formally recorded in her medical file and charts. Furthermore, she remained fasting for 48 h postoperatively. As severe acidosis with only mildly increased glucose levels was revealed, euDKA due to SGLT-2 inhibitor was highly suspected and blood and urine samples were drawn for ketone examination. The urinalysis was remarkable with more than 160 mg/dl of ketones, as well as more than 1000 mg/dl of glucose. The profound glycosuria with only mildly elevated blood glucose was highly suggestive of treatment with an SGLT-2 inhibitor, which act by inhibiting glucose reabsorption and are the only antidiabetic agents increasing urine glucose concentration.
With the diagnosis of euDKA confirmed, as HCO3 levels were extremely low and the anion gap only mildly elevated, 100 mmol of NaHCO3 were initially infused over 2 h. In parallel, intravenous fluids and insulin administration were started based on DKA protocol. Serum HCO3 levels were only minimally increased at 3 h, but with the DKA causes being removed and on the basis of normal renal function they were further improved over time. Blood gases at 12 and 24 h post the initiation of treatment are presented in Table , suggesting that the pH was normalized in 24 h. As profound hypophosphatemia with serum phosphate of 0.7 mg/dl was noted 24 h after admission, phosphate infusion was also administered (20 mmol of sodium glycerophosphate over 16 h). The patient regained her appetite and was switched to a basal and pre-prandial insulin regimen. At that time, clinical signs of postsurgical cellulitis became apparent. At 48 h, the patient was transferred back to the Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology for continuation of treatment for post-surgical infection with proper antibiotics. The laboratory results at 48 h are presented in Table . The patient was discharged 5 days later (Day 12) at good shape with antidiabetic regimen consisting only of metformin/vildagliptin 850/50 mg b.i.d. At 3 months the patient visited out Nephrology Outpatient Clinic; she reported no symptoms, had a pH of 7.37, [HCO3] 25 mmol/L and normal renal function and she was referred back to her general practitioner for further follow-up.