A 1-year-old male Miniature Bull Terrier dog was presented with a 2-month history of chronic weight loss, regurgitation, lethargy, vomiting and diarrhoea. The dog received prokinetic treatment, antiemetics, antimicrobial agents, and intravenous fluid therapy, without significant clinical improvement. Abdominal radiographs revealed marked small intestinal dilation. On exploratory laparotomy, the small intestine was not obstructed but appeared markedly distended and a full-thickness biopsy of the jejunum was taken. Histological examination revealed severe atrophy of the tunica muscularis and fibrosis of the tunica submucosa and a diagnosis of CIPO or neuromuscular disorder was suspected. Following the histopathological examination, the dog was unsuccessfully treated with glucocorticoids. Due to the persistent clinical signs of dysmotility, the dog’s clinical condition severely deteriorated thus euthanasia was elected.
At necropsy the dog appeared dehydrated, in poor nutritional condition and with minimal body fat amounts. The small intestine was severely dilated and filled by a variable amount of grey-greenish fluid . The esophagus, stomach and the large intestine were also dilated but to a lesser extent. The small intestinal wall was diffusely thinned and atonic. Tissues samples, including specimens of the thoracic and abdominal organs, the skin and skeletal muscle were taken for histopathology as were parts of the oesophagus, the stomach, the duodenum, the jejunum, the ileum, the cecum, the colon and the rectum. The samples were fixed in 4% neutral-buffered formaldehyde for 48 h. After fixation, the specimens were processed by an automatic histoprocessor and embedded in paraffin. Serial sections (3 µm) were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE), periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) technique and Masson’s trichrome method. For immunohistochemistry, sections of stomach, duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, colon and rectum tract were mounted on Superfrost®Plus slides and an avidin–biotin–peroxidase-complex (ABC) technique with diaminobenzidine as the chromogen was performed. A panel of antibodies to the following antigens was used: alpha-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA) (smooth muscle cells, myofibroblast; monoclonal, clone 1A4, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), CD3 (T-lymphocytes; monoclonal, clone CD3-12 Bio-Rad, UK), CD79a (B-lymphocytes; monoclonal, clone HM57, Bio-Rad, UK), CD117 (interstitial cells of Cajal, polyclonal, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, USA), glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP) (enteric glial cells; polyclonal, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), neurofilaments (neurons; monoclonal, clone2F11, Dako), neuron specific enolase (NSE) (neuronal and neuroendocrine cells; polyclonal, Calbiochem, USA), S-100 (enteric glial cells; polyclonal, Dako), and synaptophysin (neuronal and neuroendocrine cells; monoclonal, Dako). Appropriate negative and positive controls including gastrointestinal tissue sections of an healthy dog were used for the immunohistochemical analyses. The specificity of the different antibodies was evaluated considering the information available in the datasheet for each antibody. Moreover, the specificity and cross-reactivity of the antibodies were evaluated based on published studies [–].
Histological findings for duodenum, jejunum, ileum, cecum, colon and rectum consisted of severe diffuse atrophy of the tunica muscularis and severe locally-extensive to diffuse fibrosis of tunica submucosa as demonstrated by Masson’s trichrome stain . Similar but less severe fibrosis was present within the submucosa of the stomach. The lamina muscularis mucosae appeared moderately hypertrophic . Additionally, the intestinal mucosa of duodenum and ileum appeared multifocally eroded and within the tunica submucosa and the tunica muscularis, multifocal moderate to severe lymphangiectasia was observed. The myenteric and submucosal nerve plexuses of all segments of the gastrointestinal tract had intact neurons confirmed by immunohistochemistry for NSE, neurofilaments and synaptophysin . Few lymphocytes as well as cells staining positive for GFAP were observed within interstitium or within myenteric plexuses respectively. Also interstitial cells of Cajal were preserved and were strongly stained for CD117 . However, α-SMA immunoreactivity was diffusely and markedly reduced in the muscular layers of all gastrointestinal segments examined with foci of complete loss compared to the control .