A 37-year-old Caucasian female presented to the ophthalmology department complaining of a six-day history of a ring-like floater in the central visual field of her left eye. She was otherwise systemically well. She had no relevant past medical or ophthalmic history. Visual acuity was 20/20 in each eye. Both anterior segments and the posterior segment of the right eye were normal. Slit lamp biomicroscopy with a 90-diopter lens revealed a large semi-translucent cyst with a pigmented surface free-floating in the mid-vitreous cavity of the left eye. The fundus was normal, there was no intraocular inflammation and the posterior vitreous was not detached.
Complete blood count with differential, serology screen (including cysticercosis and echinococcus), chest x-ray and abdominal ultrasound found no evidence of systemic infective or cystic disease.
A diagnosis of a primary peripheral cyst of the pigmented iris epithelium was made, based on Shield’s classification . The cyst had presumably become symptomatic after being dislodged and migrating to the vitreous cavity.
A high-quality color photograph (FF450plus Fundus Camera with VISUPAC® image processing system, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Germany) and B-scan ultrasound (Scanmate DGH8000, DGH Technology Inc., USA) confirmed a 4.31 mm vitreous cyst with a hyperechogenic, pigmented surface and faint internal strands suspended in the mid-vitreous cavity, in the visual axis. The cyst moved with ocular movements, but only within the vitreous lacuna it resided in. Humphrey and Goldmann visual fields were normal. However, spectral domain OCT (Cirrus™ HD-OCT, Carl Zeiss Meditec, Germany) demonstrated shadowing on either side of the fovea , consistent with the ring-like scotoma described by the patient . Removing the retinal layers from the 3D-reconstructed macular cube OCT revealed a circular shadow cast on the macula .
The benign nature of the cyst was explained to the patient and the risks and benefits of vitrectomy discussed. The images presented were used to aid the discussion, and the possibility of the cyst moving from the central visual axis was explained. The patient elected for conservative management and at 3-month follow-up her symptoms had almost fully resolved as the cyst migrated to the inferior vitreous cavity, thereby no longer casting a shadow on the macula.