A 29-year-old business woman of African descent from Kongwa district, Dodoma, Tanzania, presented at a non-communicable disease screening event organized by the Ministry of Health in February 2017. She had an unremarkable past medical history. She had had two uneventful pregnancies and among other things she tested negative for HIV in both pregnancies. She is of a Christian faith, however through her husband she has visited traditional healers a couple of times.
The purpose of coming to the screening event was to confirm her HIV status and she was accompanied by her husband. She reported a febrile illness accompanied by painful enlarged lymph nodes of her neck 3 weeks prior. She was then investigated for malaria, urinary tract infection, and typhoid which revealed negative results. In addition, she was counseled and tested for HIV which was reactive. Before this index visit, she had gone to three other care and treatment clinics (CTC) because of her disbelief regarding her HIV status; the serostatus results remained unswerving. A rapid HIV test (Determine and SD Bioline) conducted at the screening grounds was reactive for her but her husband tested negative.
She denied ever being blood transfused or having extramarital affairs. However, approximately 4 months ago she reported being taken to a traditional healer by her husband to take an oath. One of her husband’s professional roles requires him to leave home for a couple of days. To ensure that during his absence his wife avoids extramarital affairs, he takes her to a traditional healer to take an oath of remaining faithful. The oath apart from a verbal declaration involved the healer cutting himself and then cutting our patient using the same blade.
We referred her to our facility for further investigations and management. She had stable vital signs (blood pressure 114/71 mmHg, pulse rate 77 beats/minute, respiratory rate 14 breaths/minute, and temperature 37.1 °C) but her body mass index (BMI) fell in the obese range (36 kg/m2). Her full blood count, electrolytes, and renal, liver, and thyroid functions were unremarkable. Electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiography (ECHO) revealed essentially normal cardiac functions. We performed enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for HIV for our patient and her husband; she was reactive while her husband was not. Sputum for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) was negative and she had a CD4 count of 316 cells/mL. Furthermore, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test and hepatitis B and C serologies were negative. Her lipid profile revealed elevated total cholesterol (7.2 mmol/L) and low density lipoproteins (5.6 mmol/L) and triglycerides (3.1 mmol/L). She was further screened for depression using a Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) which revealed moderate depressive symptoms. Based on the history and laboratory findings, we were convinced that she was a low-risk patient and the most probable source of infection was through the unsterile instrument used during a traditional healer’s ritual.
We further referred her to a CTC within our institution and she was started on a tenofovir, lamivudine, and efavirenz antiretroviral combination. In addition, multivitamins and atorvastatin 40 mg once daily were prescribed. Moreover, we consulted a psychologist for psychoanalysis, psychotherapy, and management of depression.