A 55-year-old Caucasian postmenopausal woman with a history of penicillin allergy, dyslipidemia with hypolipidemic diet treatment and no substance abuse, was referred to our Breast Pathology Unit when a left axillary lymph node was noted on palpation.
The examination revealed a hard fixed matted lymph node mass of 5×3.5cm on her left axilla, and a 1×1cm lump in her left breast axillary tail. The mammography showed a 20 to 24mm, dense, well-defined left breast nodule (upper external quadrant), and dense well-defined nodules in the left axillary space, the largest one measuring 4 to 5cm. In addition, an ultrasound scan revealed a 2cm well-defined, hypo to anechoic nodule in the upper outer quadrant of her left breast tail. The left axillary nodules were abnormally enlarged lymph nodes, all of them hypoechoic with cortical thickening. Eccentric hilum was absent in some of the nodes.
The examination was completed with a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her breasts, which detected a lesion at the junction of the outer quadrants, close to the retroareolar region of her left breast. The lesion had undefined margins and two adjacent areas of focal uptake measuring 2×1.7×2cm, and multiple enlarged left axillary lymph nodes extending from her breast tail to levels I and II.
A biopsy of the retroareolar area was consistent with infiltrating lobular carcinoma, 100% of the tumor cells were positive for estrogen receptor, negative for progesterone receptors (PR) and without overexpression of c-erbB-2 (score 1).
A needle biopsy from two of the enlarged axillary lymph nodes and the enlarged intramammary lymph node in her breast tail was consistent with metastasis of carcinoma.
The staging evaluation showed no evidence of distant spread.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was administered based on the high burden of axillary disease and the risk of microscopic dissemination, and on the hormone status (PR negative) that suggested a luminal B tumor type which is likely to benefit from chemotherapy and evidence of response after neoadjuvant chemotherapy in lobular-type tumor . The patient received four cycles of Adriamycin® (doxorubicin, 60mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (600mg/m2) every 3 weeks, achieving partial response on physical examination. Docetaxel (100mg/m2) was started subsequently, with cycles every 21 days for 4 planned courses.
After cycle 1, the patient developed grade 3 skin toxicity (with a predominance of erythrodysesthesia on the soles of her feet and on the palms and dorsa of her hands), grade 3 arthralgia and myalgia, and grade 2 asthenia . This significant toxicity promoted a 1-week chemotherapy delay. Symptoms were managed with anti-inflammatory drugs and oral and topical steroids; signs and symptoms improved to grade 1.
Subsequently, the severity of the skin toxicity associated with docetaxel involved treatment-switching to paclitaxel 80mg/m2 weekly. After the first week of this treatment neither new toxicities occurred nor pre-existing toxicities increased. After the second week, the patient developed paclitaxel toxicities that included grade 1 diarrhea and grade 1 peripheral neuropathy.
Tolerability of treatment decreased after the third week of paclitaxel, and toxicities included grade 2 asthenia, grade 2 peripheral neuropathy, grade 2 diarrhea, and grade 2 skin and nail toxicity. These toxicities promoted chemotherapy delay and she was treated with gabapentin, loperamide, and oral and topical steroids. The fourth dose of paclitaxel was administered 1 week later; the patient developed the same symptoms and the treatment required a further delay.
As a consequence of her symptoms and the importance of chemotherapy dose intensity in the neoadjuvant setting, paclitaxel was switched to nab-paclitaxel 100mg/m2 weekly. Standard paclitaxel would have required a dose reduction or further delays in treatment .
Tolerability was acceptable with resolution of diarrhea, improvements in skin toxicity and asthenia to grade 1, and persistence of grade 2 neuropathy. She completed the five planned weeks of treatment without delays or dose adjustment.
Post-treatment breast imaging with mammography, ultrasound, and posterior MRI, showed complete response of the retroareolar lesion and partial response of the enlarged intramammary lymph node and axillary lymph nodes.
As a result of this good response, tumorectomy with axillary lymph node removal were performed. Histology showed infiltrating lobular carcinoma measuring 1.5cm with lower anterior and posterior margins involved, and metastases from infiltrating lobular carcinoma with pleomorphic areas and signet ring cells in 20/20 isolated lymph nodes, the largest one measuring 2cm in longest diameter.
As margins were involved, a mastectomy was performed at a second stage and no residual malignancy was found.