A 53-year old Caucasian gentleman was referred to the Glaucoma Clinic by the community optometrist due to raised intraocular pressure (IOP). He was asymptomatic, and did not have any past medical history or family history of note. His distance vision was 6/6 unaided in both eyes, and his near vision was N5 bilaterally. 24-2 Humphrey visual fields were full. His Goldmann applanation IOPs were 18 mmHg in both eyes. Central corneal thickness measurements were normal at 544 microns in the right and 540 microns in the left. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable, with deep-looking anterior chambers and mild lens opacities. Both optic discs had healthy neuroretinal rims with a central cup-to-disc ratio of 0.3. The iris profile was smooth, with no atrophy, thinning, elevations or bulges. However, gonioscopy revealed bilateral narrow iridotrabecular angles with plateau iris configuration throughout the entire circumference, with the characteristic 'double-hump' of the iris seen on indentation. There were no areas of peripheral anterior synaechiae. He was therefore given the provisional diagnosis of narrow iridotrabecular angles with plateau iris configuration.
In order to confirm the diagnosis, neodymium:yttrium-aluminium-garnet (Nd:YAG) laser peripheral iridotomy was performed. The 'gush' of fluid and pigment from the iridotomy sites at the time of laser confirmed successful full-thickness iris penetration. At the next follow-up visit, repeat gonioscopy did not reveal any change in the iridotrabecular angle configuration despite the presence of a patent iridotomy in both eyes. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) of the angles was then performed, and confirmed the typical features of plateau iris – very narrow or apposed iridotrabecular angle, a flat or slightly convex contour of the iris, and absence of the iridociliary sulcus. In addition, multiple cysts were found at the iris root and iridociliary junction in many, but not all, meridians. The laser iridotomies were also confirmed to be patent in both eyes.
The decision was then made to perform argon laser peripheral iridoplasty, initially in the left eye. Using an Abraham iridectomy contact lens, 24 argon laser burns (500 micron spot size, 500 ms duration, 350 mW power) were placed circumferentially at the periphery of the iris as close to the limbus as possible. He was given a 1-week course of topical dexamethasone 0.1% qid to the left eye post-laser. On review 1 month later, gonioscopy still showed no change in the drainage angle configuration, with apposed or very narrow iridotrabecular angles. This was confirmed on UBM . During that visit, his IOPs were measured at 26 mmHg in both eyes, without any topical medication. Since he was asymptomatic and had no signs of glaucoma damage, we elected to monitor him closely with a view to commencing treatment if required. As there had been no effect from laser iridoplasty in the left eye, this was not performed in the right eye. At the last clinic visit, his IOPs were 22 mmHg with apposed or very narrow iridotrabecular angles and healthy optic discs in both eyes. So far, he has not developed any symptoms of acute angle closure glaucoma over the past 12 months since diagnosis. He remains under regular review at the glaucoma clinic.