A 61-year-old married man referred to the orthopedic clinic of our hospital, complaining of inability to extend his left hand fingers and wrist. The patient was admitted in the orthopedic ward. He reported a gradual onset of pain and tingling sensation in the affected extremity with three week duration; however, the night before admission while watching TV he had rested his hand under his head for a long period of time. In the morning, he found that he was unable to extend the wrist and fingers of his left hand. The patient had no history of chronic metabolic or inflammatory diseases, diabetes, hypertension or sensory-motor and balance disturbances; in addition, he did not have any history of trauma. He did not report a history of smoking or use of a specific medication. Clinical examinations revealed normal systemic functions. Examination of the affected extremity revealed complete motor palsy of the extensors of the wrist and fingers. The sensation of the dermatome of the distal radial nerve to the wrist was nonexistent. The pulse, temperature and color of the affected extremity were completely symmetrical and normal compared to the unaffected extremity. Laboratory examinations: Plain radiographs of the affected extremity did not reveal any signs of previous fractures, foreign bodies or masses with external pressure. Electromyography revealed poor and absent nerve impulse conduction of the radial nerve in relation to movement and sensation, respectively. In addition, evaluation of brachioradialis, extensor carpi radialis longus and extensor muscles of the fingers showed very poor or absent motor unit action potential (MUAP). In summary, electromyography demonstrated severe lesion of the radial nerve of the left extremity in the proximal area of the arm, along with significant axonal loss without any evidence of regeneration in the muscles mentioned.
Surgery was done under general anesthesia and tourniquet control and the radial nerve was explored. The surgical findings were two sausage-shaped areas at the distal third of the nerve . A neuroma (1.5 cm in length) was excised and the two ends of the nerve were coapted under magnification using 6-0 prolene suture. The limb was placed in a splint at 60 degrees flexion with the shoulder in adduction. The excised nerve segment was submitted for pathological evaluation, which yielded a diagnosis of neuroma . The patient achieved complete recovery of upper extremity movements after 9 months.