History for a 36-year-old previously medically free man was presented in the clinic with a long-standing history of abnormal facial movements and facial pain. He was labeled rediagnosed by many neurologists as trigeminal neuralgia (TGN) and underwent a trial line of medical therapy without a pronounced response. A case is presented with sudden electric pain in the middle of the forehead accompanied by a feeling of this kind down in the throat followed by an involuntary uncontrolled movement as repetitive gag reflexes with tongue protrusion and jaw movements lasting only a second. These symptoms are usually precipitated by eating and drinking and worsen at nighttime. The clinical picture of the case showed a string susceptibility of cooccurrence of OMD and GPN. Accordingly, the treatment plan included adding the Movement Disorder Neurologist, and the patient had been initiated on clonazepam. During his follow-up at the clinic, his involuntary movements came under control; however, due to the tapering down of other medicines, the electrical pain component overrode it.
The radiological images in the multiple magnetic resonance imaging, magnetic resonance angiography, and fast imaging employing steady-state acquisition images indicated that there existed a constant offending vascular loop of the superior cerebellar artery as well as that of the anterior inferior cerebellar artery, crossing over to cause compression of the glossopharyngeal and the trigeminal nerve on the left side of the individual .
Microvascular decompression over the left side of the glossopharyngeal nerve, together with the trigeminal nerve, was done. Intraoperative findings were offending vessels, which were isolated and dissected away from the nerves by Teflon material application .
The patient gradually improved postoperatively till the complete resolution of his symptoms after one year. The patient was following up regularly, with a trial of weaning his current medicines for about a year without any relapse.