A 70-year-old Caucasian man was admitted for the second time to the Department of Neurosurgery at our hospital. His personal history included symptomatic epilepsy and chronic anemia after nephrectomy because of kidney carcinoma two years before admission to our clinic.
Two months before the current admission, he underwent surgery for a giant left frontotemporal meningioma which was removed "gross totally." One month after this intervention, there was seen a fistula with emission of pus in the middle third of the operative scar. After another neurosurgical consultation, he was admitted to our department for surgery. At this occasion, the patient presented afebrile, with a blood pressure (BP) of 150/70 mmHg and a heart rate (HR) of 82 beats per minute (beats/minute), complaining of headache as well as vomiting. In the neurological examination, there was seen a right-side horizontal nystagmus, a right-side hemiparesis (MRC grade 3) and complete motor aphasia. The only medication that he was taking was carbamazepine 2× 200 mg for epileptic prophylaxis. On the cranial computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast performed in our hospital, a partial osteolysis of the frontotemporal bone flap was demonstrated, the surrounding tissues (including the dura) were seen as thicker (due to the associated inflammation), and a subdural collection with capsule organization and peri-lesional brain edema on the side of the previous tumor was described (see Figures , , and ). On cranial CT bone reconstruction, the osteolytic foci and fistula were clearly visible. The laboratory examination showed, besides the chronic anemia, normal C-reactive protein but a monocytosis of 1.04 10-9/L (normal value, 0.1 to 0.8). The patient was diagnosed with a subdural empyema and an indication for the operative treatment was set.
The patient underwent surgery several days after this second hospitalization. No pre-operative antibiotics were given. The patient fasted for eight hours prior to surgery. Routine monitoring during surgery included electrocardiography (ECG), end-tidal (ET) concentration of CO2 and sevoflurane, and pulse oximetry. All hemodynamic parameters were monitored continuously and recorded throughout the neurosurgical procedure. Anesthesia was induced with midazolam (1 mg total dosage) and propofol (2 mg/kg) followed by suxamethonium chloride (1.1 mg/kg), atracurium (0.6 mg/kg), and fentanyl (100 μg total dosage). After the trachea was intubated, the lungs were mechanically ventilated (S/5 Aespire Config; Datex-Ohmeda Ins., Madison, WI, USA) with a mixture of air and O2. Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane (1%). An additional 50 mg of propofol and 1 mg of midazolam were applied during the intervention when necessary.
A frontotemporal skin incision was made using the same method used in the first intervention. Between the bone flap and galea aponeurotica in the left frontotemporal region, a large quantity (approximately 7-12 ml) of pus was removed. Intraoperatively, the bone flap was found to be changed by the osteomyelitic process. It was eroded by the inflammation, with multiple pus-filled channels connecting the inner and outer bone tables. After opening the dura, a gray-white thick pus was removed. During the whole intervention, the patient's baseline mean arterial blood pressure (MABP) was 91.0 mmHg (range, 76.7-98.7 mmHg), and baseline mean heart rate (HR) was 82.5 bpm (range, 80-89 bpm). One hour and 20 minutes after skin incision during the removal of subdural pus and working around the dura, the patient's blood pressure dropped to 37/0 mmHg (MABP, 12.3 mmHg; a 86.49% drop from baseline) and concomitantly HR dropped to 61 bpm (a 26.07% drop from baseline). There was no significant blood loss at the time of the incident. The surgical procedure was discontinued, and the patient was given ephedrin (20 mg), atropin (0.5 mg), and methylprednisolone (60 mg) (see Figure ). Two to three minutes after the administration of these drugs, the patient's hemodynamic parameters returned to normal, and the surgical intervention was continued. This phenomenon was reproducible. The skin fistulae were excised, and two subgaleal drainage systems (Dainobag Lock 300 V; B. Braun, Melsungen, Germany) with a diameter of 12 mm were left. The patient's postoperative period was uneventful, and he presented with no additional neurological deficit. On microbiological examination, actinomycosis was reported as the cause of the empyema that was treated with cefoperazone 2× 1 g for 12 days. The patient's C-reactive protein and leucocyte count remained normal. The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient was discharged from our hospital 13 days after the intervention.