A 47-year-old male presented to ophthalmology clinic of Prof. R. D. Kandou General Hospital with sudden blurred vision in the left eye. Two weeks prior, he was hospitalized due to redness, pain, tearing, eye movement difficulty, and swelling in the left eye. He also experienced nasal congestion, yellowish purulent discharge, and fever. An internal medicine specialist referred him with uncontrolled T2DM for 5 years, without any history of hypertension or eye surgery. During hospitalization, the patient was administered ofloxacin eye drops 4×/day, hydrocortisone and chloramphenicol eye ointment 3×/day in the left eye, and 500 mg metronidazole IV 3×/day for 5 days, followed by oral administration of the same dose.
Ophthalmology examination was performed. The right eye showed no abnormalities, but the left eye showed no light perception, 17.3 mmHg intraocular pressure, orthophoric position, and limited movement. Hypaesthesia was present on the left side of the face. Eyelid swelling, drooping, redness, ciliary injection, and chemosis were also observed in the front segment. The cornea was clear, the anterior chamber deep (VH4), the iris brown with intact crypts, and there was no neovascularization. The pupil was round, 5 mm in diameter, and had no light reflexes or relative afferent pupillary defect. Lens clarity was graded as NO2NC2 .
On fundoscopy, the posterior segment showed a non-uniform fundus reflex. Retinal oedema, a round, pale optic disc with unclear borders, and a 2:3 arteriovenous ratio were observed . The fovea was hyperaemic (cherry-red spot). These findings suggest severe abnormalities in the left eye.
Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis (15 300/µl), high total cholesterol (226 mg/dl), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (146 mg/dl), HbA1C (13.9%), low albumin (3.08 g/dl), and low total calcium (8.33 mg/dl).
Optical coherence tomography was conducted . The right eye showed a normal foveal contour with no shadows in the intraretinal and subretinal layers. The left eye showed a foveal contour with a potential macular hole. A hypo-reflective shadow was observed in the subretinal space and the retina was elevated at the posterior pole. No hypo- or hyper-reflective shadows were present in the intraretinal layers, and the retinal layers were not visible. Computed tomography of the central head, with emphasis on the orbital regions, showed intact orbital cavities. Hyperdense shadows were observed in the left orbital cavity and both maxillary sinuses .
The patient was diagnosed with emmetropia, CRAO, orbital cellulitis, bilateral rhinosinusitis, and T2DM. Treatment plan included levofloxacin eye drops, artificial tears, ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone, metronidazole, citicoline, and ENT consultation. The patient missed follow-up appointments for therapy evaluation.