An 86-year-old woman presented with severe pain in the anterior aspect of the right thigh and was unable to walk for the past 2 weeks. She was febrile for 5 days before presentation. There was no associated history of trauma radiculopathy, parethesias, weakness, weight loss, abdominal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, urinary symptoms, alcohol, or drug use. On examination, the lower limb was in an attitude of flexion and external rotation. There was a tender swelling of 10 cm χ 8 cm in the right flank, and a positive psoas sign was elicited. The other findings of the examination were normal. Investigations: Laboratory examinations revealed the following: Hemoglobin, 8 g/dL; whole blood cell count, 28,000/^L (neutrophils 85%); and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, 140 mm/h. Radiographs of the pelvis with bilateral hip joints, right thigh, and lumbosacral spine showed no abnormal findings. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the abdomen showed a right-sided IPA measuring 16 cm χ 9 cm χ 9 cm, extending from the third lumbar vertebra up to the proximal thigh .
Psoas abscess drainage was performed through a lateral incision above the right iliac crest by splitting the muscles. On draining the pus, the mucinous material was noted, emerging from a small opening in a rounded structure located lateral to the psoas muscle, which could not be identified . On pressing this structure, bits of tissues emerged from the same opening. Samples of the pus and tissue were sent for microbiological and histopathological analysis. On post-operative day 2, the right flank swelling recurred. Culture report showed a polymicrobial infection with viridans group Streptococci and Pseudomonas aeruginosa was reported. Treatment with oral linezolid 600 mg and ciprofloxacin 750 mg twice a day was initiated. The abscess was re-explored and drained histopathological examination of the tissue sample revealed metastatic cells of a mucin-secreting adenocarcinoma that had infiltrated the psoas muscle with a pyogenic abscess.