A 63-year old woman presented in 1993 with a short history of right iliac fossa pain, localised peritonitis, and an elevated white cell count. She reported a two-year history of intermittent colicky abdominal pain. At operation, a 5 cm ileal tumour was found, situated 10 cm proximal from the ileocaecal valve. This was resected. Histopathological assessment confirmed a carcinoid tumour with locally involved nodes (three positive lymph nodes). Nine years later, she re-presented with right-sided abdominal pain, a two-week history of diarrhoea, and a two month history of episodes of her face getting "hot and blushing". A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a liver nodule (30 mm diameter) and a mass (60 × 40 mm) in the right iliac fossa, which was in contact with a small intestinal loop . Octreotide scanning (indium-111 labelled pentreotide scintigraphy) demonstrated that the liver, the ascending colon, the right iliac fossa, and an area in the superior half abdomen had positive foci . In addition, the tumour marker CA-125 was raised (40.5 U/ml)) and so were the urine levels of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) (41.2 mg/day). Percutaneous biopsy of the liver lesion confirmed a carcinoid tumour.
At operation in January 2003, peritoneal carcinomatosis was discovered with tumoural implants over the greater omentum, the parietal peritoneum, the left ovary, the terminal ileum (with stenotic and fibrous lesion), and a liver metastasis in segment IV. The peritoneal deposits, left ovary and fallopian tube, the involved distal ileum, and the liver metastasis were surgically removed. All deposits were histologically metastases from the original carcinoid tumour, although the distal ileal tumour metastasis only affected the serosal and muscular layers. Following an uneventful postoperative recovery, she commenced six cycles of chemotherapy with Streptozotocine and 5-fluorouracil.
In October 2004, she was admitted with abdominal cramps and vomiting. A CT scan revealed dilated intestinal loops that appeared to be attached to each other and with the anterior abdominal wall. In view of the previous surgery and the history of carcinomatosis, she underwent a further laparotomy. However, at operation, the cause was adhesional obstruction, although some foci were found in the parietal peritoneum and in the Pouch of Douglas. These implants were less than 4 mm in length and were excised. All the biopsies were positive for carcinoid tumour and after an uneventful recovery she was discharged. Further therapy with Somatostatin with the aim to control the progression of the disease and because she reported occasional flushing, achieved a good quality of life. At review in March of 2006, the patient reported some abdominal pain and infrequent flushing, but is otherwise well. A further Octreotide scan revealed no disease activity.