The first 52-year-old woman, who revealed exertional dyspnea and occasional chest pain for four months, came to us for surgical treatment. She reported no symptoms at rest and no hemoptysis. Her arterial blood gas analysis at admission showed SaO2 of 92.1% and PO2 as low as 66.8 mmHg. A computed tomography (CT) thorax with contrast scan revealed a low-density nodular opacity in the lingual segment of the left upper lobe measuring 8 mm. The lesion was demonstrated as a PAVM on a contrast-enhanced scan, presenting with the feeding lingual artery and the twisted draining vein . Percutaneous transcatheter embolization (PTE) was not adopted due to the high risk of recanalization. Furthermore, such a peripherally located solitary nodule was an excellent candidate for VATS resection. The second patient was a 72-year-old man. His checkup enhanced CT scan detected both a vascular malformation and a striped high-density shadow in the right lung. Due to increased FDG uptake in positron emission tomography-CT analysis, the nodule was further determined as cancer, which indicated a confined operation. Similarly, the thoracic CT imaging showed a tortuous vascular mass at the pleura of the anterior basal segment of the right lower lobe formed by an aberrant artery and a branch of the vein . After contraindication assessment and multidisciplinary discussion, we decided to perform thoracoscopic wedge resection for the PAVM under the aid of near-infrared (NIR) fluorescence imaging with ICG during the confined operation for the tumor. For both patients, the reconstruction of PAVMs by preoperative 3-dimensional CT scan could be a reference .
The two patients were anesthetized with double-lumen endotracheal intubation, and operations were completed on constant single-lung ventilation. Two trocar ports were used to enter the thoracic cavity. The entire procedure was performed using a D-light P® NIR thoracoscope system (KARL STORZ GmbH & Co, Germany) through the observation port.
For the 52-year-old woman, a sac-like lesion (green arrow) could be seen at the surface of the lingual segment of the left upper lobe under normal thoracoscopic mode , whereas the boundary was unclear. Despite extensive manual palpation, the lesion remained unclear. To minimize the impact on respiratory function, we chose NIR fluorescence with ICG for further inspection. We rapidly injected 25 mg ICG (Dandong Yichuang Pharmaceutical Co. Ltd., China) at 5 mg/ml into her left radial vein, and the surgical field was viewed under fluorescence mode. The targeted PAVM began to display a prominent fluorescence signal five seconds after ICG injection and earlier than the surrounding area, permitting distinction of the lesion from the normal lung . The perfused ICG allowed the remainder of the lung to become fluorescent green five seconds afterward . It took approximately 20 s for the whole surgical area to develop. We encountered a similar occasion in operation for the second man . Under the NIR light, there was also a circumscribed area that fluoresced preceding other parts and was consistent with the preoperative CT scan. Therefore, we could ascertain the location and determine the resection line. Parenchymal wedge resections were then performed just outside the boundary using surgical staplers for two patients. Subsequently, no air leak from the anastomosis was detected by inflation of the lung under water. As for the second patient’s cancerous nodule in the upper lobe, we first performed a wedge resection. We continued to perform a lobectomy after the intraoperative frozen section revealed its malignant nature.
Signal-to-background ratios (SBR) over time were calculated using ImageJ digital analysis software for them, the maximum of which was 2.2 for the woman and 1.3 for the man .
After the operation, the arterial blood gas analyses found oxygenation greatly improved; the SaO2 was 99.9%, PO2 was 295.3 mmHg without oxygen inhalation for the woman, and FiO2 elevated to 462.2 mmHg for the man. Their postoperative pathological findings confirmed dilated vascular malformations. Ultimately, both patients were discharged after uneventful postoperative courses.