A 19-year-old single female patient was transferred to our hospital with a 2-day history of left hip pain. The pain was so severe that any movement of her hip would result in severe pain, and she was not able to bear weight or walk. A few days before, her family noticed that she developed a slight limping, but they did not seek any help as they though it could be due to a muscular cause. Her left hip pain was sudden in onset, spastic in nature, not radiating, exacerbated by any movement. It was continuous and lasted for about 2 h followed by the development of the same pain in her right hip. This was the first time she experienced this.
She denied any history of trauma, falls, current nausea, vomiting, pruritus, metallic taste, dysuria, hematuria, diarrhea, constipation, abdominal pain, weakness, back pain, fever, chills, cough, muscle spasm, peri-oral numbness, photophobia, skin rash, oral ulcers, joint pain or swelling, chest pain, shortness of breath, or weight loss. No history of seizures, smoking, or steroid use. Her family history was significant for a 27-year-old aunt who has chronic kidney disease (CKD). She denies any family history of autoimmune diseases. Her medical history was significant for anemia and Vitamin D deficiency in the past 5 years and she was not compliant to the treatment.
On physical examination, she was awake, alert and in pain. There was tenderness to palpation in both thighs. Lower-limb pulses were intact bilaterally, there was no lower limb edema, no hotness or discoloration, no swelling, and no joint tenderness. Sensation was intact. Power and reflexes were difficult to assess due to muscle pain. Negative Chvostek’s and Trousseau’s signs. No periorbital edema or facial rash.
Her work-up was significant for anemia, elevated serum creatinine which was 5.34 mg/dL (N: 0.6–1.2 mg/dL), hypocalcemia, and elevated parathyroid hormone. She also had elevated alkaline phosphatase (ALP), creatine phosphokinase (CPK), erythrocyte sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein (CRP). Furthermore, her arterial blood gas (ABG) showed metabolic acidosis on presentation. Results of her investigations are shown in .
Renal ultrasound was done showing an atrophied echogenic right kidney and a small left kidney. No hydronephrosis was present bilaterally.
Her pelvis and femur X-ray showed bilateral Garden 4 femur neck fractures.
Urinary tract computed tomography (UTCT) scan showed an atrophied right kidney with cortical thinning, along with a small left kidney and deep cortical calcifications in both kidneys .
Her fractures were repaired surgically 3 days following her admission after the stabilization of her medical condition. The patient’s management involved performing basic laboratory investigations, sending a blood crossmatch, and administering analgesia. These steps are crucial for ensuring proper care and treatment.
The operation was done under general anesthesia. Starting at the left side, closed reduction, and fixation were done. Three cannulated screws were inserted inferiorly, anterosuperiorly, and posterosuperiorly. On the right side, it was difficult to achieve reduction in a closed manner, so open reduction and internal fixation were achieved through an anterior approach and three cannulated screws were inserted . The surgery went uneventful. The patient is comfortable in bed. She is under investigation for a definitive diagnosis of her stage 5 CKD. Furthermore, she is planned for dialysis and a possible kidney transplant.