A patient aged 33 years of Asian origin Indian national (with Hindu religion), reported missing her menstruation by 10 days and tested positive for pregnancy. Her obstetric history read third gravida with parity two, but one living child. The last time she was pregnant she had retained placenta following full-term vaginal delivery at home, complicated by post-partum haemorrhage.
Thereafter, being taken to a private hospital, she underwent three unsuccessful attempts of manual removal and uterine curettage and five units of blood transfusion interspersed with repeated episodes of excessive bleeding per vaginally. Failing to be managed by this surgical approach, she was referred for hysterectomy. Her first gestation period and vaginal delivery were uneventful.
On admission at Maharishi Markendeshwar Institute of Medical Sciences and Research (MMIMSR) after 18 days of parturition, she was conscious, cooperative, moderately built with body weight-50 kg, having stable general condition and normal vitals but with significant pallor, no cyanosis and nothing abnormal detected on respiratory or cardio-vascular system examination. On abdominal examination- uterus was felt enlarged to 20 weeks size, well contracted with Pelvic examination showing moderate amount of bleeding per vaginum and patulous but closed os of 20-22 wks sized uterus.
Investigations revealed her Haemoglobin to be 7.5 gm%, blood group B positive; rest of the haemogram, urine routine examination, platelet count, coagulation profile, liver function and renal function tests were normal. Vaginal swab was sent for culture and sensitivity which later reported sterile. Sonography of abdomen revealed uterus to be enlarged with endometrial cavity showing an echogenic mass of dimensions 8.1 cm × 5.8 cm attached posteriorly, suggestive of placenta, with Colour Doppler confirming it to be posterior, low lying placenta accreta with no definite myometrial invasion .
Supportive measures, like one unit blood transfusion and broad-spectrum antibiotics, initiated. Considering the haemodynamically stable condition and minimal vaginal bleeding, she was managed conservatively. Modality adopted: placenta left insitu and injection methotrexate given intramuscularly in the dosage of 1 mg/kg body weight (i.e. single dose of 50 mg) repeated at 72-96 hourly intervals for a total three doses depending upon the dimension and vascularity of the endometrial mass representing adherent placenta with serial Ultrasonography and colour Doppler studies which showed gradual reduction. Total and Differential Leucocyte counts were routinely done and remained within normal limits. Size of the uterus decreased remarkably and was not palpable per-abdomen after 7 days. Vaginally, bleeding never became alarming and the discharge never appeared infected.
Patient was discharged satisfactorily after 11 days. On subsequent three follow-up visits, every 5 days, patient remained afebrile with no evidence of infection, and near normal ultrasonographic findings after a fornight. Patient started menstruating regularly after about four months. Present pregnancy happened after 8 months of the above mentioned previous eventful post-natal period. In her regular antenatal visits, Ultrasonography and colour Doppler were conducted at frequent intervals to rule out any evidence of recurrent Placenta accreta. At term, she had caesarean section for foetal indication. The placental separation was normal and post natal period uneventful