A 53-year-old Caucasian female presented to emergency medicine for abrupt onset of hematemesis and melena and was discharged after she was determined medically stable. The following day she returned with left lower extremity weakness, headache, and fever of 102°F, without recurrence of hematemesis or melena.
There was no significant past medical history, but the patient did have a 60-pack-year smoking history, continuing to smoke 1.5 packs of cigarettes daily. The patient also had a 13-year history of alcohol dependence at 12 drinks per day, but reported quitting drinking 4 weeks prior to presentation. Clinical examination was significant for left-sided upper and lower extremity weakness. Admission investigations revealed normocytic anemia with hemoglobin at 9.1 g/dL (reference range 11.7–14.7 g/dL), low albumin at 1.9 g/dl (reference range 3.4–5.0 g/dL), and low total protein at 4.8 g/dL (reference range 6.4–8.2 g/dL). Her coagulation profile, electrolytes, and liver function were within the normal limits.
Noncontrast brain CT scan revealed an intra-axial lesion centered in the right thalamic region measuring 3.5 cm in maximal diameter with associated midline shift and downward herniation, most likely representing an abscess. Subsequent MRI of the brain with and without contrast confirmed CT scan findings, showing a right thalamic ring-enhancing lesion with vasogenic edema, right to left midline shift, and mild downward herniation .
The patient was admitted to the neurosurgical intensive care unit (NSICU) and then the operating room for further management. The thalamic abscess was drained under stereotactic guidance, and an intracavitary drain was placed. Operative findings included frank purulence from the abscess cavity. She remained intubated and sedated and was returned to the NSICU in stable condition. Cultures from the abscess grew S. intermedius, and, based on bacterial sensitivities, she was maintained on vancomycin, ceftriaxone, and metronidazole. No malignant cells were identified in abscess fluid.
Given a history of hematemesis, melena, anemia, and chronic alcohol abuse, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was scheduled to rule out possible causes of upper gastrointestinal bleed. EGD showed a large obstructing mid-esophageal mass at 25 cm, beyond which the scope could not be advanced despite moderate pressure . Biopsies of the esophageal mass revealed invasive squamous cell carcinoma .
Subsequent staging CT scan of the chest/abdomen/pelvis showed the esophageal mass measured up to 38 × 26 mm in transverse and anteroposterior dimensions, respectively, causing severe luminal compromise with proximal esophageal dilatation. CT scan findings also included mediastinal and right hilar lymphadenopathy. There was no metastatic disease within the abdomen and pelvis and no signs of extracerebral infection.
Postoperative recovery was uneventful; the patient was weaned off mechanical ventilation and successfully extubated on day four after surgery. She was able to follow simple and complex commands with normal motor function on her right side, but paralysis remained in the left upper and lower extremities. There was progressive improvement in sensory and motor function with therapy. After sufficient drainage, the intracavitary drain was removed.
Total parental nutrition was initially used due to complaints of dysphagia. General surgery was then consulted for palliative esophageal stent placement; this was well-tolerated and oral nutrition was resumed.
The patient was not considered a candidate for any chemotherapy or radiation out of concern regarding infection exacerbation. Carcinoma treatment, then, would be reevaluated after the patient completed a 6-week prescription of antibiotics.