A 22-year-old female from a distant Southern Philippines city was presented with a large, painful mass in her right leg. A biopsy 6 years earlier had revealed an intraosseous haemangioma, but the patient had refused amputation and did not seek further consultation.
The physical examination showed a large, tender, bony mass over the anteromedial portion of the proximal right leg. The patient retained full motion of the ipsilateral ankle and knee joints. There were no other masses . The radiographs showed an extensive lesion of the right tibial shaft extending from the proximal epiphyseal line to the distal third of the tibia with an associated huge anterior soft tissue mass. There was a lattice-like pattern with horizontally and vertically oriented striations within the entire lesion . Magnetic resonance T2-weighted images showed multiple high signal intensity lobules with multiple septations containing several round areas of low signal intensity ( to ).
A repeat open biopsy confirmed the histopathology to be that of a haemangioma of the bone. During the biopsy, the mass was noted to be extremely vascular. The continuous intense bleeding was controlled only by packing the biopsy cavity with bone cement.
In anticipation of increased intraoperative bleeding, the patient was referred for embolisation 2 days before surgery. At surgery, the tumour mass was exposed with an incision beginning medial parapatellar proximally, extending distally to include the previous biopsy site and proceeding distally over the medial tibia just above the ankle joint. After detaching the medial gastrocnemius muscle origin and pes anserinus insertions, the popliteal vessels were identified and protected. Given the long duration of the tumour, the extensive bleeding on biopsy and that the patient resided far away from the treating establishment, thus making regular follow-up monitoring impractical, the agreement reached pre-operatively with the patient was to achieve a marginal resection as far as possible even if it meant a longer segment of bone would be resected distally in order to decrease the chance of a local recurrence. Proximally, however, based on the magnetic resonance images, barely 1 cm of normal tibia remained and resection at this level would have included the tibial tubercle. A cut was therefore made 4 cm distal to the plateau, preserving the tibial tubercle. At this level, the cortex had not been infiltrated; but since tumour had extended beyond this point within the intramedullary canal, curettage and high-speed burring of the medullary contents were undertaken, leaving only the outer cortical shell of the proximal tibial epiphysis. Distally, the tibia was cut 1 cm beyond the intramedullary extent of the tumour, leaving 3 cm of distal tibia . The entire resected specimen measured 24 cm in length and 12 cm in maximum diameter .
It was decided that this huge tibial defect would be reconstructed with the ipsilateral fibula. The remaining proximal and distal tibia were aligned and fixed with tensioned transfixation wires clamped to an Ilizarov circular frame. Added stability was achieved with olive wires. The fibula was then fixed with three olive wires with the olives on the lateral side of the fibula. On the medial side, Ilizarov components were configured to pull the fibula via olive wires anteromedially. The fibula was percutaneously osteotomised at two levels corresponding to the cuts of the remaining portions of the proximal and distal tibia ( to ).
Gradual medial translation of the fibula at the rate of 1 mm/day was initiated after a week of latency. Bone grafting at the two docking sites of the fibula to the tibia was undertaken a month later. At 6 months, radiographs showed healing at both distal and proximal ends . The fixator was then removed and a posterior splint applied to protect the leg.
Weight-bearing with bilateral axillary crutches commenced at 16 months, and fibular hypertrophy was noted on radiographs at 22 months. Radiographs at 38 months showed union at proximal and distal graft–host sites with fibular hypertrophy . At review, the patient has no pain, has full knee extension and has up to 100° of knee flexion . There is a 1.5-cm leg length discrepancy, which does not affect walking. And at latest follow-up at 45 months, the patient is fully weight-bearing without any assistive device. There are no signs of local recurrence, and the patient has resumed previous activities with an MTS score of 26, scoring 5 for pain, 4 on function, 4 on emotional, 4 on supports, 4 on walking and lastly, 5 on gait. The final histopathology confirmed the diagnosis of haemangioma.