An eight-years-old girl presented with a painful right wrist after falling onto her outstretched right arm. The anteroposterior (AP) and lateral (L) X-ray of the right forearm revealed a greenstick fracture of distal radius with minimal dorsal angulation ( A, B). The forearm was immobilized in a below-elbow cast. X-ray examination at one week showed no change in the alignment and the cast was removed at three weeks. The final X-ray showed the complete healing of the fracture . Patient reported a new trauma on the same arm four months later and new X-rays were taken. While the final radiographs revealed healing process of the fracture, subsequent X-rays four months later showed a well-circumscribed radiolucent lesion without surrounding adjacent sclerosis to the site of the previous fracture ( A, B). The child was comfortable and afebrile with no signs of local inflammation at the cystic site. Whole blood cell count, C-reactive protein (CPR) levels (<1mg/L) and erythrocytes sedimentation rate (VES) were normal. Differential diagnosis needs to be done, included a pre-existing lesion (which was ruled out by the re-examination of the initial X-rays), infection as Brodie abscess formation or a true post-fracture cystic lesion. MRI of the right wrist showed a heterogeneous subperiosteal cystic structure at the dorsal aspect of the right distal radius, measuring 10 mm (Anteroposterior) x 12 mm (Transverse) x 10 mm (Craniocaudal). It contained an upper layer of T1W hyperintensity which was suppressed on fat sat sequence consistent with fat content ( A, B). The lower layer was T1W hypointense and T2W hyperintense and likely represented a chronic subperiosteal haematoma. The MRI features confirmed a fat-fluid level within the subperiosteal cystic lesion in MRI typical of post-traumatic osseous cystic lesion in children. Different from other literature cases, we performed a biopsy to obtain a histological confirmation of the benign nature of the cyst. The histological report of “a fibrous tissue without neoplastic cells and microcalcifications” confirmed the imaging. Clinically the child remained asymptomatic and was allowed to return to her normal sports activities and monitoring her as outpatient at six months. Radiographs at six months and one year from trauma showed that the cyst like lesion had disappeared and distal radius fracture had completely remodelled. ( A, B)