A 69-year-old female was admitted at our hospital after complaining for epigastric pain for one month. She had not received any treatment regarding the complication prior to the visit. She had no nausea and vomiting, no diarrhea, and no cachexia. Physical examination revealed mild tenderness in the right upper abdomen, but no rebound pain, no jaundice, no abdominal mass and other signs were normal. Blood tests showed normal tumor markers such as alpha fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, CA125, CA199, CA153, except CA724 which was 7.61 U/ml (reference value 0.00–6.90 U/ml). There were no significant abnormalities in liver function, kidney function, blood routine, urine routine, stool routine, and coagulation function. Radiological examinations revealed SIT that included symmetrical reversal of the liver, stomach, pancreas, duodenum, gallbladder, biliary tract and spleen. In addition, the entire colon was located in the left abdominal cavity and iliac fossa. However, the portal vein which was normal. Other complications included hepatic artery type IX variation, the common hepatic artery (CHA) arising from the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). She additionally presented with gallbladder and pancreatic tail tumors and polysplenia. There was no evidence of metastasis to distant organs beyond the abdominal cavity . The two sons, a grandson, granddaughter, younger brother, two older sisters, three younger sisters and 11 nephews to the woman underwent computerized tomography (CT) screening. Except for one son with multiple spleens, the rest of the relatives displayed normal organ anatomy.
After careful assessment, the patient underwent a surgery. The whole gallbladder including the “gallbladder bed” was removed, then the common hepatic duct invaded by the gallbladder tumor was cut off . After the proximal gastric body was cut off, it was discovered that the hepatic artery arose from the SMA, then the pancreatic neck and splenic vein were removed and it was found that pancreatic mass had spread to the horizontal segment of the duodenum. SMA branched at the horizontal segment of the duodenum, where one branch entered the mass of the body, whereas there was metastasis to the other branch (CHA) before its passage through the head of the pancreas. Therefore, a decision was made to retain the part of CHA above the pancreas and in the parenchyma of the pancreatic head and the superior mesenteric vein (SMV), but the pancreatic head and the duodenum were resected . Because of the resection of the body and tail of pancreas, the splenic artery freed from the celiac trunk was severed for about 3 cm. The body and tail of the pancreas (including the tumor), multiple spleens and the horizontal segment of the duodenum where the cancer had spread were all removed. Then the end-to-end rebuilding of the splenic and hepatic arteries was performed , and anastomosis of jejunal-biliary duct and jejunal-stomach were executed to reconstruct the digestive tract . Overall, the surgery involved radical cholecystectomy, total pancreatectomy, splenectomy, cholangiojejunostomy, gastrojejunostomy and proper hepatic artery-splenic artery reconstruction.
The adenosquamous carcinoma of the neck and body of the gallbladder measured 3 * 2.5 * 2.5 cm. The cancer had also spread to the liver, pancreas (tumor size 5*5*4 cm), the gastric wall and the muscular layer of the duodenum (horizontal section). Dysplasia was also observed in gallbladder mucosa, which had transformed to adenosquamous carcinoma . Therefore, gallbladder cancer and pancreatic metastasis were the main the main pathological diagnoses. The cancer had not spread to the lining of the common bile duct, stomach, jejunum, posterior peritoneum and the spleen but it had however spread to peripheral lymph nodes (1/5). Overall, the tumor could be described as T3N1M1 according to the AJCC/TNM staging system . Immunohistochemistry tests revealed the same several parameters about the gallbladder and pancreatic tumors : MUC1(+) MUC2(−) MUC5AC(part +) MUC6(−) CK14(part+) P63(part+) CK5/6(part+) CK20(part+) GATA3(Part+) CDX2(−) Ki67(+ 40%) CK7(+) P53(+), which suggested that the pancreatic tumor metastasized from the gallbladder when combined with the pathological results of HE , but not a synchronous double cancer . All pathological images with high-resolution were obtained by a Leica DM2500 LED microscope (Leica Microsystems) and captured by Leica Application Suite software (Leica Microsystems), and without any downstream processing.
However, this patient opted against chemotherapy. Blood flow in CHA resumed after reconstruction. The patient did not develop complications such as biliary fistula, intestinal leakage and abdominal infection, and developed no adverse condition after insulin and pancreatin supplement when total pancreatectomy. The tumor had not recurred after 16 months of follow-up.