A 59-year-old postmenopausal woman (gravida 2, para 2) was referred to the gynecologist because of abnormal vaginal bleeding. She had a past medical history of hyperthyroidism and was on thyroid hormone replacement therapy at presentation. She denied any familial history of ovarian and/or breast cancer. Blood tests revealed that serum CA125 was slightly high (96.2 U/mL). Pelvic ultrasonography was notable for a polycystic mass, measuring 117 × 71 mm, adjacent to the normal-appearing uterus. Abdominopelvic computed tomography showed a polycystic and solid mass, measuring 135 × 92 × 100 mm, which was connected to the right ovarian vein. In addition, contrast enhanced-magnetic resonance imaging revealed enhancement in the septal area and heterogeneity of intracystic signal intensity, suggesting ovarian mucinous carcinoma . Her disease was diagnosed as early ovarian cancer, FIGO Stage IA (cT1aN0M0); then, she received total hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy, intra-pelvic and para-aortic lymphadenectomy.
The right ovarian tumor contained a serous fluid; the inside was multicystic and partially solid . Histologically, the cancer cells showed high-grade nuclear atypia and various histological patterns, including solid , pseudo-endometrioid , and transitional cell-like patterns . Such SET-type patterns were observed in approximately 90% of the tumor, while conventional HGSC histology was limited. In addition, Alcian blue and PAS staining demonstrated that some of the cancer cells contained intracytoplasmic mucin . The mucinous differentiated foci, which overlapped with other morphological patterns, were approximately 30% of the tumor, suggesting that the degree of deviation from the mucinous phenotype formed the heterogeneous multicystic image in this tumor . The cancer cells had spread into the left ovary and para-aortic lymph nodes, thus confirming the pathological FIGO stage IIIA (pT1bN1aM0). No benign and/or borderline mucin-producing epithelium, STIC, and endometriosis-related lesion were observed in the extensive histological analysis of the ovarian tumor (total 49 slides) and the fallopian tubes.
In our immunohistochemical analyses, the cancer cells showed diffuse positive staining for p53 (clone: DO-7; Fig. i); block positive for p16 ; partial positive for WT1 , ER, PgR , CDX2 and PAX8; and negative for p40, p63, GATA3, Napsin A and vimentin (data not shown). The Ki-67 labeling index of the cancer cells was 60–80% .
Since an aberrant p53 expression pattern was displayed by immunohistochemistry, we performed TP53 mutation analysis of ovarian cancer by direct sequencing according to the methods described previously . The results showed that the cancer cells contain a c.730G>A mutation, which alters glycine to serine in codon 244 of exon 7 in TP53 . Finally, we diagnosed the ovarian tumor as a HGSC with SET feature and mucinous differentiation.