A 78-year-old woman with no smoking history presented to our hospital with a complaint of epigastric distress. Computed tomography identified a 58 × 32-mm space-occupying lesion suggestive of lung cancer in the left upper lobe . The mass lesion involved the mediastinum, and metastases to the lymph nodes on the contralateral side of the mediastinum and to the right lung (21 × 11-mm) were suspected. Histological analysis showed a nest-like proliferation of tumor cells that contained enlarged and rounded nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasm . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the tumor was positive for thyroid transcription factor-1 but negative for ΔNp63 (p40), indicating adenocarcinoma of the lung (data not shown). The tumor cells expressed PD-L1 (clone 22C3; Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) at a rate of more than 95% (data not shown). The lung mass did not contain anaplastic lymphoma kinase or c-ros oncogene 1 receptor tyrosine kinase fusion proteins and harbored epidermal growth factor receptor exon 20 insertions. The tumor was evaluated as cT4bN3M1a based on the TNM Classification of Malignant Tumors 8th edition (Union for International Cancer Control, Geneva, Switzerland). The patient received 17 cycles of 200-mg doses of pembrolizumab. She developed slight interstitial pneumonia and a mild increase in HbA1c during the first four cycles. While these might be irAE, both symptoms had been improved without additional intervention. A partial response to pembrolizumab according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors guidelines was found at 3 months (after three cycles) and 12 months (after 15 doses; Fig. ). After six cycles of treatment, the patient complained of pollakiuria and nocturia accompanied by painful micturition. These symptoms had been present for 6 months. Urine culture did not identify a causative microorganism, and administration of a β3-adrenergic receptor agonist did not improve the symptoms. Urinalysis showed red blood cells >100/HPF and white blood cells >100/HPF. Urine culture did not detect any causative organisms. There was no atypical cell which is suspected of malignant tumor in the three times of urine cytology. Cystoscopy showed that the entire bladder mucosa was red and edematous but there was no evidence of tumor . This was similar to common cystitis. For excluding malignancy, we performed a cold punched bladder biopsy to obtain the pathological findings. Histological analysis revealed numerous infiltrates of CD8-positive cells and/or TIA-1 (TIA-1 cytotoxic granule-associated RNA binding protein)-positive lymphocytes into the urothelium but no atypia suggesting malignancy . Interestingly, the urothelial epithelium infiltrated by lymphocytes and subepithelial inflammatory cells strongly expressed cell boundary PD-L1 (clone E1L3N; Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA, USA) . Small biopsy tissue could not provide definite relationship between CD8-positive cell infiltration and PD-L1 expression in the urothelium. However, at least, urothelial epithelium without lymphocytic infiltration did not express PD-L1. Based on these clinical and pathological findings, we made a diagnosis of irAE cystitis. The patient’s subjective symptoms and findings on cystoscopy improved dramatically after 19 days of treatment with prednisolone 25 mg/day . The prednisolone was tapered and stopped after 2 months. No further pembrolizumab was administered after starting prednisolone and there was no recurrence of dysuria.