The patient was a 53-year-old male who had visited his previous physician 5 days before with fever and abdominal pain. He had a history of ileal resection for small bowel Crohn's disease 5 years prior. His body temperature was 35.6 °C, his blood pressure was 125/89 mmHg, and his pulse rate was 94/min. Conjunctival icterus was not noted. The patient had right hypochondrial pain and a positive Murphy's sign. Abdominal ultrasonography showed an enlarged gallbladder wall but no obvious intracholecystic calculus . The laboratory data of the patient during hospitalization were as follows: white blood cell count of 4920/µl (normal range: 3500–9700/µl); C-reactive protein (CRP) level of 14.54 mg/dl (normal range: < 0.3 mg/dl); total bilirubin level of 2.8 mg/dl (normal range: 0.3–1.2 mg/dl); direct bilirubin level of 1.2 mg/dl (normal range: < 0.4 mg/dl); aspartate aminotransferase level of 27 U/l (normal range: 10–40 mg/dl); and alanine aminotransferase level of 30 U/l (normal range: 5–45 mg/dl). The serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level was 1.7 ng/ml (normal range: < 0.5 ng/ml), while the serum CA19-9 level was significantly elevated to 17,539.1 U/ml (normal range: < 37 U/ml). Contrast-enhanced CT showed gallbladder distention, wall thickening, gallstones in the gallbladder neck, and increased fatty tissue density around the gallbladder. The common bile duct and intrahepatic bile duct were not dilated, and there was no obvious neoplastic lesion . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed no anatomic disruption of the biliary system and no obvious neoplastic lesions . Upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed no specific findings and no obvious neoplastic lesions. During surgery, under general anesthesia and laparoscopic observation of the abdominal cavity, the omentum was observed to be attached to the gallbladder, and the gallbladder was enlarged and showed circumferential wall thickening. Since no obvious malignancy was found, the gallbladder was removed as planned. After removal, the specimen was immediately cut open for gross observation, but no obvious neoplastic lesions were found. The resected specimen showed impacted stones and several other small stones. Histopathological findings showed a diffuse inflammatory cell infiltrate consisting mainly of neutrophils, lymphocytes, and plasma cells and abscess formation on the gallbladder wall, which is a finding of chronic cholecystitis . There were no complications in the patient’s postoperative course, and he was discharged on the fifth postoperative day. At the outpatient clinic in the second postoperative week, the patient’s CA19-9 level was within the normal range.