A 59-year-old female with diabetes and hypertension presented with low back pain, electric shock- like sensations, and a progressive quadriparesis of 10 days duration. For the past 2 days, she had a high-grade fever with chills. Her neurological examination revealed diffuse hyperreflexia 3–4+ accompanied by bilateral Hoffman’s sign, clonus, and Babinski responses.
Preliminary laboratory tests revealed markedly elevated C-reactive protein (CRP: 447 mg/l), a high erythrocytes sedimentation rate (ESR: 119 mm/h), an increased white blood cell count (WBC: 25 × 103/µl), and abnormal serum urea level (11.69 mmol/l).
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an extensive C1-2 through L5 anterior epidural abscess. Postcontrast, there was diffuse meningeal enhancement with localization of fluid maximal in the lumbar region. In addition, a small abscess collection was noted in the right gluteal region.
At surgery, the right paraspinal abscess at the L4-5 level was filled with frank pus and was appropriately drained. Next, the patient underwent L4-5 right side hemilaminectomy allowing for drainage of pus from the ventral spinal canal; tilting the operating table (reverse Trendelenburg) further facilitated such drainage from more cephalad levels. Next, a Nelaton catheter (size 14 gauge and 40 cm long) was gently and gradually guided cephalad along the ventral epidural space. This allowed for further washout of pus and accompanying infectious debris. Once instilled irrigation drained clear fluid, the catheter was then withdrawn, and the wound was closed. Over the next 4 postoperative months, the patient improved dramatically as did the inflammatory markers.
Intraoperative cultures of the ventral pus and blood culture yielded Streptococcus pneumoniae. It was appropriately treated with ceftriaxone (2 g once a day) and vancomycin (1 g twice a day) for 6 weeks intravenously, followed by oral cefuroxime (500 mg twice a day) for an additional 6 weeks on discharge. An incidental finding was an infection involving the right knee requiring arthroscopic washout at both 1 week and 3 weeks after the spine surgery.
The 1-month postoperative MRI showed complete resolution of the ventral epidural collection. Her neurological examination and inflammatory markers returned to normal by the 4th postoperative month as depicted in the infographic - .