A 56 year-old male with diabetes, presented with a 10 days history of multiple episodes of spontaneous painless lower gastrointestinal bleeding requiring massive blood transfusion and symptoms of anemia, Bleeding contained fresh blood and blood clots. After stabilization with >20 Packed red blood cells units, Hemoglobin level ranged from 6.0 to 9.0 g/dL. The patient underwent multiple upper and lower gastrointestinal endoscopies and video capsule endoscopy, without definitive localization of the source of bleeding as there were multiple angiodysplastic lesions in stomach, duodenum, and colon with no obvious active bleeding. He underwent abdomen CT-Angio which revealed extensive serpiginous enhancing tubular structures in-keeping with left colon angiodysplasia extending to the splenic flexure associated with enlarged inferior mesenteric trunk and its feeding arteries and draining veins .
There was no possibility of embolization due to inability to identify a single feeding vessel as there was an extensive large AVM. So he underwent exploratory laparotomy by a colorectal surgeon, there was grossly severely dilated veins of splenic flexure down to sigmoid colon, draining into IMV, with extraluminal extensive AVM of left colon, feeding vessels were mainly from ascending branch of left and middle colic arteries involving left colon mainly splenic flexure , they were isolated and ligated by two Hemolocks, left hemicolectomy with primary end to end colo-colic anastomosis was performed, one Jackson-Pratt drain was inserted. Patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit for post-operative observation, course went without complications, required no blood transfusion and no episodes of active bleeding occurred. He was discharged home 4 days later. Histopathologic examination of the resected segment showed irregular blood-filled spaces with focal spread to the mucosa and submucosa, Features are consistent with intestinal vascular malformation.
Upon follow-up one month post operatively, he reported being well, with no recent post-management complaints, he denied abdominal pain, diarrhea, constipation, hematochezia, fatigue, exertional dyspnea, lightheadedness or symptoms of anemia.
Upon examination, he was vitally stable, well looking, with a well healed laparotomy scar. Abdomen was soft lax with no tenderness to palpation. Rectal examination showed no dark tarry stool or palpable hemorrhoids.
He also did complete blood count and showed hemoglobin levels of 13 g/dL (discharged with hemoglobin of 10.5 g/dL).