A 73-year-old Japanese man presented with a one year history of chronic sinusitis and otitis media that was unresponsive to otorhinolaryngological therapy. Because bilateral lung nodules were revealed by chest radiography, he was admitted to our hospital. He had a history of pneumoconiosis and cerebral infarction. Physical examination on admission revealed fever (36.8°C), pulse of 80 beats per minute, and blood pressure of 118/70 mmHg. The abnormal findings on physical examination were remarkable bilateral hearing loss, a saddle-nose deformity, and rhonchi in the middle left lung field.
Laboratory tests revealed the following: white blood cells count (WBC) of 7,900/mm3 (68.5% neutrophils, 0.6% eosinophils, 19.5% lymphocytes); hematocrit, 38.3%; hemoglobin, 12.7 g/dL; platelet count, 501,000/mm3; C-reactive protein (CRP), 16.2 mg/dL (normal, < 0.3 mg/dL); and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), 108 mm/hr. Laboratory tests for renal function, including urinalysis, were normal. c-ANCA was negative but RF was high (154 IU/ml, latex agglutination assay [normal, < 20 IU/mL]).
Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) showed multiple nodules and infiltrates with cavitations in the bilateral lung . A bronchoscopic examination revealed multiple bronchial ulcers with pus . Biopsies of the bronchial and nasal mucosa showed nonspecific acute and chronic inflamed tissue with multinucleated giant cells; however, there was no evidence of malignancy or tuberculosis in these tissues. WG (limited disease) was diagnosed despite negative c-ANCA because our case met the American College of Rheumatology Diagnosis Criteria of 1990 for WG .
He received remission induction therapy with prednisolone (PSL) 30 mg/day and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (1:5) 960 mg/day, which improved his symptoms and laboratory test abnormalities. In particular, there was a decrease in serum RF level . CT scans revealed that the multiple lung nodules reduced in size or had changed to cystic lesions .
Four weeks after the onset of therapy, his condition was complicated by severe pyothorax and pneumothorax . He was successfully treated with antibiotics (linezolid and meropenem) and tube thoracostomy drainage. Although CRP, WBC, and ESR were elevated during the infection, serum RF level continued to decrease and CT scans showed a reduction in the size of the multiple lung nodules. We therefore realized that we were controlling WG. Because we feared deterioration in patient condition due to infection, cyclophosphamide 50 mg/day was added to the induction therapy and PSL was rapidly tapered to a maintenance dose of 5 mg/day.
Fourteen weeks after the onset of therapy, he complained of fever again, although there were no signs of infection. A CT scan revealed an increase in the size of the lung nodules and slight elevation in serum RF level, suggesting recurrence of WG, and the PSL was increased to 15 mg/day. Consequently, his fever abated and serum RF normalized.