A 14-year-old male was admitted to our hospital with right lower abdominal pain and vomiting. He had no history of abdominal surgery or trauma. Physical examination revealed deep tenderness at McBurney’s point without abdominal distension. A blood test on admission revealed slight leukocytosis (9840/μl) without elevation of the C-reactive protein level (0.01 mg/dl). Enhanced computed tomography scan showed a slightly enhanced, thickened appendiceal wall . Although a slightly dilated ileum and ascites at the recto-vesical pouch were also observed , intestinal obstruction was not diagnosed by these imaging studies. These abnormalities were thought to be inflammatory changes due to appendicitis. The initial diagnosis was mild acute appendicitis based on the physical examination findings and blood test and imaging results, and appendectomy with small laparotomy was therefore planned. However, the patient’s abdominal pain was so severe that analgesics were completely ineffective; continuous vomiting was also observed. Additionally, the ascites at the recto-vesical pouch was unusual considering the mild appendicitis. We performed laparoscopic surgery to explore the abdominal cavity and obtain a definitive diagnosis.
Laparoscopic surgery with three trocars was performed (12-mm camera trocar in the infra-umbilical position and two 5-mm trocars in the left lower quadrant and lower median abdomen). Strangulated small bowel obstruction caused by trapping of ileal bowel loops by a band was observed . After reduction, the band was found to be connecting the right medial umbilical fold to the ileal mesentery and was resected using laparoscopic coagulation shears. The band was connected to the ileal mesentery, 30 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve, and neither Meckel’s diverticulum nor ischemic change of the trapped ileum was detected . The appendix showed slight inflammatory change , and appendectomy was also performed. Serous ascites was found at the recto-vesical pouch and was thought to be caused by strangulated small bowel obstruction. The patient was discharged without complications on postoperative day 4.
Pathological examination revealed that the band consisted of blood vessels, and it was diagnosed as a vitelline vascular remnant . The macroscopic view of the resected appendix is shown in Fig. . Fecal stones were found on the proximal side of the appendix, and the wall was slightly thickened. Pathological examination revealed diffuse infiltration of lymphocytes and eosinophils throughout the muscularis propria, and the patient was diagnosed with mild chronic appendicitis .