A one-year-old non-neutered female cat, raised in a rural area, was admitted to the Companion Animal Hospital-PUCPR, São José dos Pinhais, State of Paraná, Brazil. The cat had a history a progressive facial lesion, difficulty apprehending food, loss of appetite, apathy and emaciation for approximately five months. The animal had no history of lesions in the mandibular region or mouth. Clinical examination showed fever, submandibular lymphadenitis and a painless, 8 cm diameter mass, which was irregular-shaped, of firm consistency, and located in the region of the left mandible . The skin around the lesion was friable, with diffuse inflammation (cellulitis), multiple draining sinuses, and exudation of serosanguinous material containing whitish “sulfur” granules. A blood sample for a complete blood count (CBC) was taken. Hematologic abnormalities included leukocytosis (21,400/μL, reference interval [RI] 6,000-17,000/μL), neutrophilia (18,200/μL, RI 3,000-11,500/μL), monocytosis (2,640/μL, RI 200–1,400/μL), and normocytic, normochromic, non-regenerative anemia (RBC 1.2x106/μL, RI 5.5-8.5 x106/μL; HCT 18%, RI 37-55%). Biochemical tests for renal and hepatic function were normal. Serological tests for feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) and feline leukemia virus (FeLV) were negative (Snap FIV Antibody/FeLV Antigen Combo Test – IDEXX Laboratories, USA).
Radiography of the mandible showed intense bone proliferation and osteolysis . Initially, fine needle aspiration was performed in the lesion and sample was submitted simultaneously for cytological analysis and microbiological culture. Sample obtained by fine needle aspiration was stained with Gram and Panoptic stains, and showed numerous gram-positive, filamentous branching organisms. Furthermore, biopsy of lesion was taken. This fragment was stained with haemathoxilin-eosin and revealed a central region of necrosis and suppuration containing filamentous organisms, surrounded by neutrophils, macrophages, epithelioid cells and fibroblasts. Specimens were cultured on sheep blood agar and Sabouraud agar, incubated aerobically at 37°C for 72–96 h. After 72 h, numerous whitish-orange, circular, convex, dry, with powdery surface colonies were observed in sheep blood agar and Sabouraud agar . From these colonies, gram-positive, partially acid-fast (modified Ziehl-Neelsen), filamentous microorganisms were observed, suggestive of the genus Nocardia.
Classical biochemical tests based on casein, xanthine, hypoxanthine, and tyrosine assimilation were carried out, as well use of other substrates in a commercial kit (API 20C AUX strips, BioMeriex, Hazelwood, MO.) . These tests allowed the preliminary phenotypic classification of isolate as Nocardia nova complex .
Molecular analysis of the isolate was based on a subunit 16S rDNA gene sequence. Genomic DNA for sequencing was performed using guanidinium thiocyanate method . DNA sequences were determined with an automatic sequence analyzer (Abi Prismtm 3130; Applied Biosystems), using the same primers and dye terminator cycle sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems). Nearly complete 16S rRNA gene sequence of approximately 1400 bases was obtained. The sequence was compared against GenBank database using BLAST, and sequences of related Nocardia type strains were retrieved from the database. Phylogenetic trees were constructed using the neighbor-joining method . Topology of the trees was evaluated using bootstrap analysis of the sequence data using Mega4 software . The sequencing analysis of the 16S rDNA identified the organism as N. africana, based on 99% sequence similarity with the reference sequence. The obtained sequence was submitted to GenBank/JJBJ/EMBL (accession No. AB636472 for the strain IFM 11168).
In vitro antimicrobial susceptibility test using the disk diffusion method showed that the isolate was susceptible to trimethoprim-sulfonamide, amikacin, gentamicin, enrofloxacin, ceftiofur and amoxicillin/potassium clavulanate.
Trimethoprim-sulfonamide (30 mg/kg, PO, 12 h, for 21 days), combined with fluid therapy, debridement and infusion of topical (1%) iodine solution into the lesion were used initially in therapy. However, the clinical picture worsened, and treatment was changed to amikacin (10 mg/kg, IV, 12 h) and ceftiofur (4,4 mg/kg, SC, 12 h). After eight weeks of treatment, the animal still presented fever, weight loss, apathy, anorexia, and progressive worsening of body condition, which lead to death. Post-mortem examination showed abscess formation in the submandibular lymph nodes, severe osteolysis in the left mandibular ramus, and signs of periodontitis in mandibular region of lesion. There were no lesions in other organs. Purulent secretions from the lesions were submitted for cytological, histophatological, microbiological and molecular analysis, and confirmed the diagnosis of Nocardia africana.