This study involved a 38-year-old female who was followed up by her previous ophthalmologist from 1 month prior to presentation for decreased vision in her right eye. Examination revealed retinal phlebitis in that eye, and she was subsequently referred to our department at Osaka Medical College Hospital in order to obtain a more detailed examination and medical treatment.
Nothing notable was observed in the patient's medical history.
In the patient's right and left eye, respectively, visual acuity (VA) was 0.04 (0.05 × s − 1.75 dpt) and 0.3 (1.5 × s − 1.25 dpt = cylinder − 0.5 dpt, axis 10°), intraocular pressure was 10 mm Hg and 12 mm Hg, and no abnormality of the anterior segment was observed. In the right eye, we observed a few inflammatory cells in the anterior chamber, retinal phlebitis accompanied by retinal hemorrhage and soft exudate, and remarkable exudative changes in the retinal vessels from the upper arcade to the macula region . Ophthalmoscopy also revealed obvious cystoid macular edema. No abnormalities in the left eye fundus were observed . Fluorescein angiography revealed obstructive retinal vasculitis along the upper vascular arcade of the right eye. A general health examination showed a positive tuberculin skin test result; however, a chest X-ray of the patient showed no abnormalities. A general blood examination revealed a positive rapid plasma regain syphilis serology test result, positive results for Treponema pallidum antibodies (rapid plasma regain 8-fold, T. pallidum antibodies 8.8 cutoff index), and positive results for fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption immunoglobulin M antibodies. Testing for collagen disease revealed positive results for anticardiolipin antibodies, yet there were no abnormal neurological findings. A magnetic resonance imaging examination of the patients head revealed no abnormal findings, yet dermatological findings included a painless rash on the pudenda of 4 months previously. Other than that, no syphilis-related skin conditions were found.
Administration of anticoagulants was initiated to treat the retinal vasculitis. However, triamcinolone acetonide was injected into the Tenon capsule at 3 weeks after the start of treatment due to worsening of the vasculitis. Moreover, administration of a broad-spectrum penicillin preparation was started to treat the syphilis infection. However, at 50 days after the initial examination, new neovascularization appeared from the optic disc to the upper retinal vascular arcade, causing vitreous hemorrhage , and the corrected VA of the patient's right eye decreased to 0.02. Fluorescein angiography revealed dye leakage from the disc neovascularization and enlargement of the nonperfusion area in the affected retina . At 3 months after the initial examination, photocoagulation was performed on the nonperfusion area of the retina. However, no regression of the neovascularization was observed, and vitreous rebleeding occurred. At 4 months after the initial examination, vitreous surgery was performed because the patient's corrected VA had worsened to counting fingers. Surgical procedures included a core vitrectomy, creation of an artificial posterior detachment from the optic disc to the peripheral region, removal of the fibrovascular membrane from the optic disc to the upper retinal vascular arcade, and laser endophotocoagulation to the ischemic area of the retina. Since the patient was only 38 years old (i.e., relatively young), the lens was preserved. A postoperative syphilis test of a fixed quantity of collected vitreous humor showed a glass plate test value of 1, and a T. pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA) value of 5,120. Simultaneously, serum from collected blood showed a glass plate test value of 2 and a TPHA value of 640, thus confirming the diagnosis of syphilitic uveitis. At 3 months postoperatively, the intraocular neovascularization had disappeared , the fluorescein leakage from the retinal blood vessels had clearly decreased , and the corrected VA had improved to 0.3.