A 62-year-old woman with a 2-year history of slowly progressive, recurrent hemoptysis was referred to our hospital. On physical examination, she was afebrile and without dyspnea or hypoxemia. Chest radiography demonstrated a slightly opaque right hemithorax with nonvisualization of the heart, which was shifted to the same side, and a scimitar vein. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a mildly enlarged right atrium and right ventricle. Other findings, such as atrial and/or ventricular septal defect, were not confirmed. Color Doppler study showed the anomalous pulmonary vein draining into the IVC. Three-dimensional volume-rendered computed tomography (3DCT-VR) and multiplanar reformation with contrast material revealed three main findings as combined congenital anomalies of the lung and vascular system. First, the right lung was hypoplastic compared with the left lung, and bronchial deformation with dextroposition of the heart was present. Bronchoscopy revealed that the right main bronchus was obviously short, and the major bronchial branches were normal without bronchial atresia, indicating that sequestration of the lung was not confirmed. Second, the anomalous drainage of the right pulmonary veins (scimitar vein) was to the suprahepatic portion of the IVC . Third, an anomalous thick and tortuous artery, which originated from the aorta near the right inferior phrenic artery, supplied the right basal lung . The patient was diagnosed as having scimitar syndrome associated with anomalous systemic arterial supply to the right basal lung. Hemodynamic parameters obtained by right heart catheterization including a mean pulmonary capillary wedge pressure of 14 mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure of 30/12 (19) mmHg, and cardiac index of 3.73 L/min/m2, indicating no pulmonary hypertension. Her pulmonary-to-systemic blood flow ratio (Qp/Qs) was 1.88. An oxygen saturation step-up from the infrahepatic IVC to the right atrium was revealed (73.5 and 81.1 %, respectively). TAE of the anomalous systemic arterial supply was then planned.
First, right pulmonary angiography was performed with a 7-Fr Berman angiographic balloon catheter (Arrow International, Inc., Reading, PA, USA) through the right femoral vein under local anesthesia. The right pulmonary artery was hypoplastic and was not distributed in the basal lung . It returned to the right pulmonary vein (scimitar vein) via the normal lung parenchyma . We then cannulated the anomalous artery that originated from the aorta near the right inferior phrenic artery using a 5-Fr catheter through the right femoral artery. Selective angiography revealed several thick and tortuous arteries localized in right basal lung, which was strongly enhanced , with flow returned to right pulmonary vein (scimitar vein) . No arteriovenous malformations such as an anomalous artery to the scimitar vein were observed. These anomalous arteries were suspected to be the most likely cause of the hemoptysis rather than occlusion or stenosis of the scimitar vein. Therefore, the proximal anomalous artery was embolized using 5 fibered interlocking detachable coils (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA); one 6 mm × 20 cm, one 10 mm × 30 cm, and three 14 mm × 30 cm, after the injection of a small amount of hand-cut gelatin sponge particles of approximately 2 mm in size.
Afterwards, selective angiography showed occlusion of the anomalous systemic arterial flow to the localized region of the right lower lobe . After the procedure, the patient complained of a low-grade fever lasting for 10 days, and contrast-enhanced CT showed a localized wedge-shaped pulmonary opacity closely approximating the pleura, which was thought to indicate pulmonary infarction . During this period, the patient’s C-reactive protein level was slightly elevated at 2.5 mg/dL. Other laboratory findings (including leukocyte count, D-dimer, and LDH levels) were within normal limits. It resolved with conservative treatment, and no other complications were seen. She has not experienced any subsequent recurrence of the hemoptysis during a follow-up period of 6 months.