A 55-year-old female presented with dyspnoea, mild chest pain during physical activity, and palpitations. We reviewed her medical history, clinical course, physical examination, laboratory findings, treatments, and current condition. Her past medical history indicated high blood pressure and elevated blood lipid levels. The electrocardiogram showed frequent supraventricular premature beats. Echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular function without wall motion abnormalities. We performed a coronary angiography, which showed a single, large coronary artery arising from the right coronary sinus ( and ).
The anterior wall perfusion is provided by one small branch originating from the initial part of the RCA in the absence of the left main . The dominant RCA branch travels posteriorly, bifurcating into a posterior descending artery (PDA) and a posterolateral artery branch, which is located where the left circumflex (LCX) is typically found. This branch supplies most of the coronary circulation, including the left ventricle . There were no significant atherosclerotic calcifications or stenosis. A computed tomography angiography examination was conducted using a Siemens-Somatom CT device from Germany. The SCA arises from the right coronary sinus. Approximately 2 mm from the ostium, this artery divides into two branches: a dominant RCA and a smaller branch responsible for the anterior wall perfusion . Stress echocardiography, conducted in an ambulatory setting, revealed no significant wall motion abnormalities, and no inducible arrhythmias were observed. A cardiac MRI was not possible due to the patient’s claustrophobia.
Based on the results of invasive and non-invasive diagnostics, we decided not to qualify the patient for invasive treatment. Due to our patient’s clinical situation, we decided to optimize pharmacological treatment. The following pharmacotherapy was recommended: atorvastatin 40 mg, amlodipine 2.5 mg, and acetylsalicylic acid 100 mg, and β-blocker therapy was discontinued because of temporary sinus bradycardia. Regular cardiological monitoring and risk factor reduction were recommended.