A 71-year-old male presented for elective coronary angiography for worsening exertional dyspnoea in the context of anterior STEMI with percutaneous intervention to LAD 15 years prior. Stress TTE was equivocal for ischaemia prompting referral for angiogram. Further echocardiographic findings were not provided. Cardiovascular risk factors included hypercholesterolaemia, hypertension, being an ex-smoker, and having a first-degree relative with premature coronary artery disease (CAD). Medications included aspirin, clopidogrel, isosorbide mononitrate, atenolol, candesartan, hydrochlorothiazide, and pravastatin.
The patient reported a 2–3 month decline in exercise tolerance without angina. Physical examination revealed bipedal oedema. Metabolic profile was unremarkable. Electrocardiogram (ECG) demonstrated sinus bradycardia, with narrow QRS complexes, extensive Q-waves, ST-elevation in leads V2 andV3, and T-wave inversion in V3–V6 .
Invasive coronary angiography demonstrated mild distal stenosis of the left main coronary artery, with proximally occluded LAD in keeping with prior STEMI (see , and ). The circumflex artery was mildly diseased, while the right coronary artery was ectatic, heavily calcified with severe proximal and mid-vessel disease, and supplied collaterals to the left system. Marked apical calcification concerning for calcified aneurysm was noted . Left ventriculography was not performed given possibility of LV thrombus.
Transthoracic echocardiogram (see , ) demonstrated a mildly dilated and thickened LV, with mild-to-moderate segmental systolic dysfunction and LVEF of 40 ± 5%. Apical segments were thinned and aneurysmal, while mid-anterior and mid-septal segments were thinned and akinetic. Grade II diastolic dysfunction and elevated filling pressure was noted. Contrast study identified a filling defect near the apico-inferior/infero-septal segments favoured to be thrombus . The left atrium was moderately dilated, while the right atrium and ventricle were of normal size and function. There was no significant valvular disease.
The patient was discussed at the institutions’ heart team conference, involving cardiology, cardiac surgery, and cardiac anaesthesia. Dyspnoea was attributed to chronic right coronary artery (RCA) ischaemia with concurrent mild–moderate systolic and moderate diastolic dysfunction. Contribution of LAD disease to symptomatology was also postulated. Consensus to proceed with surgical intervention of aneurysmectomy and CABG was achieved. Aneurysmectomy was aimed at improving LV function and reducing risk of stroke, and hence, CABG was favoured for revascularization. Collateral supply from RCA to the left system suggested some viability of LAD territory myocardium, and distal LAD was planned for revascularization to address potential contribution to symptomatology.
The patient commenced warfarin and continued dual antiplatelet therapy. Guideline-based therapy for heart failure was instituted. Chest X-rays (CXRs) were obtained for surgical planning . Computed tomography (CT) was not undertaken, as it would not alter surgical approach. Viability study with cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may have assisted decision-making regarding revascularization of the LAD; however, it was not available.
Elective CABG and aneurysmectomy with LV reconstruction was undertaken. The pericardium was opened, LVA observed at the apex, and then resected completely with bovine pericardial patch repair. The left internal mammary artery and left radial artery were grafted to the LAD and posterior descending artery, respectively. Resected specimen measured 30 × 50 × 36 mm and was dome shaped with new and old friable thrombus centrally and surrounding calcification . Histological analysis demonstrated extensive replacement of myocardium by hyalinized, collagenous stroma with focal calcification and adherent thrombus.
The patient recovered uneventfully. Day 7 TTE demonstrated no intraventricular thrombus and LVEF of 40%. The patient reported improvement in exercise tolerance after a period of recovery and cardiac rehabilitation, which persists at 2 years post-op.