An 80-year-old male with no known heart disease presented to the emergency department with decreased mental alertness with a Glasgow Coma Scale of 13/15, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, a pulse rate of 170 bpm, blood pressure of 90/60 mmHg, and decreased oxygen saturation. Before the onset of altered mental status, the patient had multiple episodes of vomiting, epigastric discomfort, and tingling in the extremities for 2–3 h. There was no significant past medical history and no history of drug allergy. Family history was insignificant.
His continuous telemetry recorded monomorphic ventricular tachycardia (VT) for which bipolar DC shock 150J was delivered along with an immediate cardiology consultation. There was transient reversion of ventricular tachycardia to sinus rhythm with frequent recurrences requiring multiple episodes of repeated DC shocks with increased energy (200J). All the routine blood investigations, urinalysis, and ABG were normal. On detailed interrogation with the patient’s wife found that about 30 min before the onset of the symptoms, the patient had consumed Nirmashi to treat the gastric acidity.
The continuity of care was provided in the coronary care unit where intravenous amiodarone was administered followed by a continuous infusion simultaneously. Intravenous amiodarone followed by continuous infusion was administered simultaneously. In addition, the patient received intravenous calcium gluconate, magnesium sulfate, and sodium bicarbonate. Despite these measures, the patient continued to have episodes of non-sustained VT with varying morphology. So, additional antiarrhythmic drugs were administered (injection lignocaine followed by continuous infusion & intravenous phenytoin). Over 12 h of continuous cardiac monitoring, the arrhythmias were fairly under control, though the patient continued to have low grade II–IVa PVCs for which antiarrhythmics were continued with a titrating dose.
Meanwhile, the results of the routine blood test were consistently normal and troponin level was within the normal limits thus, ruling out the ischaemic changes and electrolyte imbalance . The echocardiogram showed an essentially normal study. On the second day of admission, he had episodes of hypotension requiring vasopressor support with Noradrenaline (3 mcg/kg/h), which was down-titrated on subsequent days based on tolerability. Subsequent ECG evaluation showed junctional rhythms, after which the antiarrhythmic drugs were discontinued. Gradually, sinus rhythm was restored with first-degree AV block, which recovered on subsequent days. However, the toxicological reports of the ingested herbal medicine could not be documented due to the lack of specific detection methods.
The patient was then discharged on day 6 of admission. The patient followed up after a week and a month of discharge and was asymptomatic. His repeat ECG showed sinus rhythm with no evidence of arrhythmias .