A 31-year-old woman, gravida 5, para 5 (G5P5), at 38 weeks of gestation, presented to the emergency department of hospital. The patient's chief complaint was lower abdominal pain following a tonic-clonic epileptic seizure. Her obstetric history revealed five previous cesarean sections, with the last one being three years ago. The patient was diagnosed with epilepsy seven years ago and treated with sodium valproate. The medication was discontinued in the seventh month of pregnancy, but the patient reported taking one pill a few hours before to the seizure episode.
Upon inspection, the patient was pale and distressed, with a slim and underweight appearance. Her blood pressure was 100/70 mmHg, and her pulse rate was 88 beats per minute. Abdominal palpation revealed tenderness with a decrease in the expected uterine fundal height. The pelvic examination was normal. Echography imaging showed normal amniotic fluid and placenta location, with a femur length of 64 mm (33 week), biparietal diameter of 85 mm (34 week), and fetal heart rate of 100 beats per minute. Considering the recent epileptic seizure, increased uterine contractions, patient's history of five cesarean sections, and fetal distress, the doctors decided to perform an emergency cesarean section.
The patient underwent an upper vertical incision, which revealed a ruptured uterus. During surgery, two units of blood and two units of plasma were transfused. A neonate weighing 1800 g was delivered, with a 1-min Apgar score of 4 and 5-min Apgar score of 6. The ruptured uterus was closed in two layers, and open drainage system with a 25 mm multichannel PVC drainage sheet was inserted in the right inguinal region. Two days after surgery, an unfortunate complication occurred during the removal of the drainage tube. The ampulla and infundibulum were stuck in the drainage tube, and during the removal process, they were pulled and herniated through a drainage incision . Consequently, the patient was transferred for emergency surgery, and the previous incision was reopened. The surgical team attempted to reduce the herniated structures without breaching the fascia of Scarpa, but was unsuccessful. Therefore, the remaining layers were reopened and the hernia reduced, fallopian tube was not removed because patient refused tube removal. As a precautionary measure and because of adhesions, another drainage tube was inserted on the opposite side to remove excess fluid and blood to increase healing and decrease the chance of infection. The patient was closely monitored in the hospital for a few days before discharge.