A 12-year-old boy presented with a left avulsion fracture of the ischial tuberosity. Informed consent was obtained from this patient and his family. The patient’s family history and previous medical history were unremarkable. The patient was a track-and-field athlete who felt severe pain in his left buttock while running. He visited a local hospital, where plain radiographs and computed tomography (CT) of the pelvis showed an avulsion fracture of the left ischium . The fragment was displaced 20 mm. No neurological deficit was present. Complete non-weight-bearing therapy was performed as a conservative treatment, but the patient’s symptoms continued, and he visited our hospital two months after injury. During the preoperative assessment, he complained of pain in the gluteal area during walking. The patient also described muscle weakness of the hamstrings, and straight leg raising (SLR) was limited to 80°/60°. The results of a blood test were all within normal ranges. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at two months postinjury revealed a displacement of approximately 20 mm, with fluid accumulation between the avulsed fragments .
At eight weeks postinjury, we performed open reduction and anchor fixation because of non-union and displacement of the fragment after conservative therapy . Following administration of general anesthesia, the patient was placed in a prone position. A 10-cm incision was made longitudinally around the ischial tuberosity, and subgluteal approach was used. The plane between the gluteus maximus and the hamstring muscles were divided. The inferior edge of the gluteus maximus was elevated to identify the ischial tuberosity. The avulsed fragment was distally displaced. The hamstrings were fully mobilized distally to reduce the avulsed fragment without excessive strain. Three suture anchors were placed in the exposed ischium . Two holes were drilled 1 cm distal to the proximal edge of the fragment, each in line with the distal suture anchors. Three drill holes were made through the avulsed fragment, taking into account the anchor locations. The fragment was reduced with the hip extended and the knee flexed and fixed with five biodegradable suture anchors (HEALIX ADVANCE 5.5; DePuy Synthes, Tokyo, Japan) using the suture bridge technique .
A Snyder sling (Hashimoto Artificial Limb Manufacture Co., Okayama, Japan) was used to restrict knee movement to within 45° of flexion in postoperative week 3 and to within 10° of flexion in week 5, while passive assistive hamstring stretches were performed; then, active ROM exercises were started from week 6 . The next day after surgery, he started non-weight-bearing walking with crutches. One-third weight-bearing was permitted from week 6, and full weight-bearing was permitted from week 8. Union was confirmed on radiography and CT in week 9 , and the patient was therefore permitted to start jogging and gradually building up training with squats and jumps involving quick hamstring stretching. The patient returned to competitive athletics in week 13. At the final follow-up, no bilateral difference was evident in hip ROM, at 120°/120° flexion or 30°/30° internal rotation. The SLR test was 80°/80°, and no pain was experienced in the ischial tuberosity during jogging. The manual muscle testing (MMT) score was 5 for both the gluteus maximus and hamstring muscles. Assessment when the patient returned to competition found no restriction of hip joint ROM, and his visual analog pain score was zero. The Lower Extremity Functional Scale (LEFS) at the final follow-up was 80 points (100%).