A 74-year-old man was admitted to our hospital due to an 8-month history of arthralgia without any family history. He had a past history of glaucoma and benign prostatic hyperplasia in addition to left patella dislocation that had been operatively recentered at the age of 15 years. On admission, his body temperature was 37.2 °C and other vital signs were normal. Physical examination revealed multiple swollen joints, including bilateral wrist, metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints, bilateral elbows and right shoulder. Additionally, he showed dysplasia of bilateral thumb nails on the ulnar border and triangular lunules from birth, which were also observed in his sister . Laboratory data showed elevated levels of serum C-reactive protein and rheumatoid factor and an elevated titer of anti-SS-A antibodies, while estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), titers of serum complements, anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (CCP), anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA), anti-double stranded DNA antibodies (dsDNA) and myeloperoxidase (MPO)/proteinase 3 (PR3)-anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), and the results of a urinary test were normal . X-rays of the joints showed deformity of bilateral radial heads and the right elbow, mild hypoplasia of bilateral patellae (height/width/thickness (mm): 35.2/34.8/15.6 (right) and 38.0/39.9/10.6 (left), respectively, ) and the right humeral capitellum and radius, and degenerative change of the left knee without evidence of destruction of the feet . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his hands showed synovitis with synovial hyperplasia, bone marrow edema and erosion in bilateral wrists, proximal interphalangeal and metacarpal phalangeal joints . In addition to these findings that were consistent with RA, an X-ray of his pelvis showed bilateral iliac horns, which are rarely observed in RA .
In view of these physical and radiographic findings including nail deformity that was also observed in his sister, patella hypoplasia, iliac horns and a history of dislocation of the left knee, we finally made a diagnosis of NPS in addition to RA presenting articular synovitis. Additionally, lip biopsy examination disclosed Sjogren’ syndrome (focus score = 3) without sicca syndrome.
He was treated with oral methotrexate (MTX) in combination with a biologic drug, which failed to improve his condition and was replaced with an oral Janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor, and he achieved remission.