A 13-year-old boy was admitted to the hospital because of a lesion in the right submandibular area that had persisted for six months.
The patient was referred from a dentist, and was generally healthy and without allergies.
There was no obvious history of illness related to the disease.
There was no significant personal or family history related to the disease.
Clinically, the lesion was firm, homogeneous, compact, painless to palpation, and 2.5 cm × 2.0 cm in size. No skin discoloration was observed. The boy did not complain of any sensory disorders and denied any growth changes.
Routine blood test (November 2022) results were as follows: Neutrophil cell count, 3.88 × 109/L (reference value: 2-7 × 109/L); neutrophil percentage: 58.6% (reference value: 40%-74%).
The first computed tomography (CT) (Siemens Somatom Definition Flash; Siemens Healthcare, Germany) was performed on June 23, 2022. It showed a lesion under the mandible on the right side with smooth edges. It was not connected to the sublingual or submandibular glands. Owing to the nonspecific CT image, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (1.5T MR Magnetom Aera Flash; Siemens Healthcare, Germany) with contrast (Gadovist, 5 mL) was performed on July 25, 2022. In the submandibular space on the right side, heterogeneous high signal intensity was observed on T2-weighted images, with a hemorrhagic component measuring 18 mm × 25 mm × 13 mm. The lesion adhered to the digastric muscle and the body of the mandible and involved the platysma .
Conclusion: A venous malformation was suspected. The radiologist suggested extending the diagnosis using ultrasonography to plan the treatment. The large interval between diagnostic imaging and testing is due to the patient’s lack of cooperation and not reporting for follow-up to the Department of Maxillofacial Surgery.
Fine-needle aspiration (FNA) was performed on October 27, 2022. In the submandibular space on the right side, visible polycyclic, solid, isoechogenic, and hypoechogenic lesions up to 23 mm × 24 mm × 14 mm were observed. The mass was hard with congenital vascularity. It was not equivalent to lymphatic or lymphatic-venous malformations.
Microscopic results of FNA: The cervical smear included sparse, incorrupt extravasation of blood and several crushed parts of tissues. Furthermore, a few cells were similar to each other, such as cells with an oval nucleus and no mitosis. FNA does not reveal the characteristics of the lesion. Surgical excision of the entire lesion was necessary .
Single bland cell with oval nucleus, smooth nuclear membranes, and conspicuous nucleolus.
None of these tests provided a diagnosis, and the patient was eligible for surgery under general anesthesia. The surgical procedure included an excisional biopsy. Before that, we extended the diagnostics with cone beam CT (CBCT) on November 10, 2022, which revealed a 3 mm lesion in the cortical layer of the mandible on the right side .