A 34-year-old white man of Central European descent was admitted to our department after falling off a motorcycle onto his left shoulder. He had undergone an acromioclavicular joint repair procedure with the use of two Kirschner wires (K-wires) and a tension band 7 years ago. The implants were never removed. His chief complaint was of painful sensation around the area of his left clavicle and left side of his neck. No neurological deficit was detected. An X-ray performed at our department showed two broken K-wires and a tension band. One of the wires penetrated the suprascapular soft tissues; the other had migrated toward his cervical spine . A computed tomography angiography revealed that the K-wire penetrated his C6 vertebra and was in direct contact with his vertebral artery without breaching the lumen . Furthermore, a dislocated left clavicle shaft fracture was detected without injury to the underlying vascular and neural structures. After proper diagnosis and preparation, he was scheduled for an elective surgery. During surgery, the position of the K-wire was located by anterior-posterior fluoroscopy. A skin incision was made parallel to the lateral wall of his sternocleidomastoid muscle (SCM) as seen in Fig. . His platysma muscle was then incised and the SCM, with the cervical vessels, was retracted medially. Further exploration of the lateral cervical triangle was carried out by careful blunt and sharp dissection to reach components of the brachial plexus and to visualize the scalene muscles .
At this time the K-wire was not palpable and further dissection between the scalene muscles was necessary. When the K-wire became visible, the free end was dissected from the surrounding tissues and removed. No injury to his brachial plexus was detected and no bleeding was noted. The remaining wires were removed from his clavicle and supraclavicular area without complications through a second incision performed alongside the clavicle. Fluoroscopy was performed to determine the location of the remaining implants and to make sure that no other metal components were overlooked. Through the same incision the fractured clavicle was reduced and stabilized using a locking compression plate (LCP) system as seen in Fig. . During the post-surgical evaluation a paresthesia was noted on his C8 dermatome radiating to his fourth and fifth finger. However, this resolved spontaneously within 3 days. He was discharged on the seventh day with no neurological deficits. The angiography unit was informed about the operation and possible intraoperative vertebral artery injury, in the event endovascular intervention would be needed.