A 16-year-old previously well Tamil girl was brought to the emergency department by her elder sister, in an unarousable state for about 2–3 hours. The sister disclosed that the patient was found unconscious in their home garden. The exact time of onset and the nature of the symptoms were unknown. Apart from the history of a recent argument with her parents, there was nothing else significant. There was no preceding history of febrile illness, headache, seizure disorder, or major gastrointestinal, urinary, or menstrual disturbances. Her last period of menstruation was unknown. There were no previous medical or surgical comorbidities, and she was not on any long-term medications. The accompanying relative revealed that the patient’s mother was on certain medications for several diseases, including diabetes, but the exact details of the medications were unknown. There were no suicidal notes or empty pill boxes at the scene. The patient had not been acting suspiciously or expressing any ideas of self-harm. There was no history of alcohol intake, smoking, or use of illicit substances. Given the acute presentation of unconsciousness, central nervous system ischemic or hemorrhagic vascular events, acute metabolic encephalopathies, medication overdose, plant poison ingestion, and even snake bites with neurological envenomation features were considered as top differentials.
Examination revealed a thin-built (body mass index 17.5 kg m−2) girl who was unarousable and unconscious with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) of 8 (eye-opening 2, best verbal response 1, best motor response 5). She had a normal temperature (36 °C). The heart rate was 125 beats per minute, regular in rhythm, blood pressure was 95/50 mmHg, peripheries were warm and nonedematous, and cardiac auscultation was normal. Abdominothoracic respiration was noted at a rate of 15 breaths per minute, with saturation at 97% on air. Lungs were clear and had normal percussion notes. The prominent and unmistakable feature upon opening the eyelids was the divergent strabismus (exotropia), which was previously nonexistent according to the relative . Her pupils were mydriatic (4 mm) and were sluggishly responsive to light. Ophthalmoscopic examination showed normal retina and optic discs. There were no signs of menigism and no evidence of facial weakness, with intact corneal and vestibular–ocular reflexes. All four limbs were floppy but had brisk reflexes (3+), sustained ankle clonus, and bilaterally positive Babinski response. The only striking abnormality in the abdomen was a dull, palpable pelvic mass, up to the level of the umbilicus, which disappeared upon urinary catheterization. Urine catheterization revealed an immediate output of 2800 ml of clear urine. A thorough examination of the skin did not show any evidence of rashes, animal bites, or fang marks. There was no evidence of injuries to any part of the body, frothing, or lateral tongue bites to suggest recent seizure activity.
An urgent electroencephalogram (ECG) showed no arrhythmia, with a QRS duration of 89 ms, a corrected QT interval of 456 ms, and an R wave/S wave ratio in lead aVR of less than 0.7 . Bedside venous blood gas showed pH 7.33, pvO2 of 43.8 mmHg, pvCO2 of 41.5 mmHg, SpvO2 of 75%, HCO3− of 22.4 mmol/L, lactate of 0.9 mmol/L, sodium of 139 mmol/L, potassium of 3.5 mmol/L, ionized calcium of 0.9 mmol/L, and glucose of 86 mg/dL. An urgent noncontrast computerized tomography (NCCT) of the brain was reported as normal . Urine levels of human chorionic gonadotropin were negative, excluding the possibility of an established pregnancy. Whole blood clotting time, a popular tool to screen for snake-venom-related coagulopathy, was unremarkable. A facility for urine toxicology screening was not available, and hence it was not performed.
We tentatively suspected an overdose of amitriptyline as it is commonly prescribed as an analgesic for neuropathic pain in the locality, and the resulting anticholinergic effect would explain most of the clinical examination findings. Activated charcoal (50 g) was administered through a nasogastric tube, and she was transferred immediately to the intensive care unit for continuous ECG and monitoring for neurological deterioration and the development of seizures. Even though there were no sinister ECG abnormalities, the presence of significant neurological deterioration and acidosis made us commence an intravenous 8.4% sodium bicarbonate 100 mg bolus followed by infusion at a rate of 10 mmol/hour. The infusion was withheld after 10 hours as the arterial pH reached 7.45. Intravenous hydration with 10% dextrose at 60 ml/hour and intravenous infusion of 2 g of magnesium sulfate in 100 ml of normal saline were also continued. The results of her investigations are given in Table . In 24 hours, her GCS, muscle tone, and heart rate normalized spontaneously. The patient then revealed the information about an impulsive self-overdose of about ten tablets of amitriptyline, which her mother was taking as an analgesic for neuropathic back pain. Subsequently, she was transferred to a general medical ward for further observation. The exotropia completely resolved by 36 hours . Hyperreflexia and sustained ankle clonus disappeared after 72 hours. She was seen by a specialist psychiatry team and was discharged after 72 hours. An outpatient visit after 1 week did not reveal any residual neurological deficits. Outpatient counseling sessions were continued by the psychiatry team.