A 32-year old woman presented herself to her family doctor with intermittent fever, unclear blood loss, malaise and pain in the right flank 4 mo postpartum.
The patient reported that the symptoms began 4 mo after she gave birth to her healthy child. She complaint about fatigue and right upper quadrant abdominal pain. She had recurrent episodes of fever up to 38.5 °C, but no jaundice or pruritus.
There was no significant history of past illnesses.
Personal and family history was unremarkable. She gave birth to a healthy child 4 mo before she was treated at our institution.
Vital signs were within the normal range, body temperature was 38.5 °C. On examination, the patient had a right upper quadrant tenderness, without jaundice or hepatosplenomegaly.
Urine and most blood analyses were without any pathological findings including a normal liver function and normal ferritin levels. While the white blood cell count was normal, CRP was elevated to 181 mg/L. The liver enzymes (aspartate-aminotransferase 31 U/L, alkalic-aminotransferase 49 U/L) and cholestasis parameters (alkalic-phosphatase 466 U/L, y-glutamyl transferase 424 U/L) showed an increase while the serum bilirubin (6 μmol/L) stayed normal.
An ultrasound of the abdomen revealed a round, encapsulated liver lesion in segment IVa/b of unclear dignity, a non-contrast computed tomography of the abdomen ruled out urolithiasis, but confirmed the suspicious lesion of 8 cm in the liver as an incidental finding. The computer tomography (CT) and, same day magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the upper abdomen showed an 8 cm × 8 cm tumor in segment IVa/b of the liver suspected to be a liver adenoma. Additional serological tests for hepatitis, the tumor markers carbohydrate-antigen 19-9 and alpha-fetoprotein, and markers for echinococcosis were all negative. After discussion of the case in our interdisciplinary liver tumor board on the next day, we performed a positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) which showed the known lesion as a metabolically active tumor resembling an inflammatory pseudotumor of the liver or a malignant tumor of unclear origin. No other lesions was detected in any of the performed scans.
The pathologist macroscopically described the size of the resected specimen as wedge-shaped and nodular, 9.5 cm × 7.0 cm × 7.5 cm. The capsule of the liver was about unremarkable on one-half of the supplement. An area of 7.5 cm × 7.5 cm × 6.2 cm was sharply circumscribed, whitish/creamy and fibrous. No clearly definable capsule. The remaining liver tissue was inconspicuous and showed no further hereditary findings. The total weight of the tumor was 198 g. Immunohistochemistry showed a clear expression of cytoplasmic ALK and a weak expression of smooth muscle actin. Cytokeratin-PAN (CK Pan), Cytokeratin 18 (CK18), signal transducer and activator of transcription protein 6 (STAT6), Desmin, tyrosin-protein (C-kit), discovered on gastrointestinal stromal tumors 1 (DOG1), ETS related gene (ERG), family of calcium binding protein (S100) and SRY-related HMG-box 10 Protein (SOX10) showed no expression. The intra-tumoral immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-positive plasma cells were slightly increased, but displayed only a very small percentage of all plasma cells . The pathological diagnosis revealed an IMTL with no fibrosis and no malignancy.