A male infant, aged 3 months 22 days, weighing 6.3 kgs, was brought to the OPD on July 27, 2020 with complaints of high-grade fever, cough, noisy chest, irritability, and a generalized feeling of unwellness as reported by the parents since the last five days.
Looking at the age of the patient, the presenting complaints, and the associated symptoms, the initial diagnosis that was suspected was bronchial pneumonia with probable sepsis.
To confirm the diagnosis, the parents of the child were ordered to get his blood and urine cultures done. Both the reports came showing an obvious growth of Enterococcus.
The child was immediately started on a course of intramuscular antibiotics, including injection Linezolid, injection Amikacin, and injection Claforan. Despite receiving these injections, the child was febrile and the fever was still high grade. Therefore, he was again sent for a blood culture to rule out underlying sepsis, if any were present. A lumbar puncture (LP) was ordered this time as well. The findings of both these investigations came out to be unremarkable. Knowing that the child had no further progression of the disease, as seen from his lab reports, it was decided that the antibiotic injections would be continued as usual from the first time.
Apart from that, new injections, including injection Vancomycin and injection Meropenem were started to ward off any underlying infection. But again, the child fever was persistently present and it was still in the high-grade category.
Now, it was decided that the patient should be started on Azomax. But before starting Azomax, it was decided that both the injections of Vancomycin and Meornem would be stopped and only Azomax would be continued until the resolution of the infection. However, this time a new development was seen. The child developed fits while still having fever. There were two reported episodes of fits with fever and also, the child was now unable to maintain oxygen at room air level.
While starting the child at a constant infusion of 1 L O2, his third blood culture was set for further evaluations and progressions. The blood culture was still showing a Gram-positive culture growth. Meanwhile, the child's bone marrow biopsy and culture were also scheduled to be performed within two weeks from the current date. His bone marrow aspiration was, however, done in the meantime.
This bone marrow aspiration report revealed that the child was suffering from Hemophagocytic Lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) Syndrome.
This syndrome is a potentially life-threatening and aggressive condition in which there is excessive, unwanted activation of the immune system. It is most prevalent in infants up to the age of 18 months, but adults could be affected too .
As of the last written notes in the patient's files, his bone marrow biopsy and culture reports were awaited to date.
Since the condition of the child kept on deteriorating and getting severe with time, therefore it was decided that his investigations would be constantly kept in the loop to assess his condition and check for any progressions or regressions in his lab reports.
Therefore, in a summarized form, here is an overview of all the investigations that were reported for the child along with the comments on them.
The summary of the drug history that was administered to the patient until the last time is summarized as follows:
Throughout the management course, his vitals were hourly measured. Despite the timely administration of the child antibiotic doses, his fever kept on waxing and waning and it never touched to baseline.
This child soon succumbed to his prevailing conditions and was unable to make it through. As devastating as this was for the parents, there were still some samples left of the child, which could serve as an important means for detecting if there was any other abnormality or even a genetic mutation that made diagnosis and treatment so difficult. The child was scheduled for chemotherapy, to stabilize the patient for bone marrow transplant. The death of child occurred during third cycle of chemotherapy.
Therefore, not only the child samples, but also those of his parents, who were involved in a consanguineous marriage, and also that of the child elder brother were sent for a genetic analysis, which would then detect whatever was wrong within his body.
Sanger sequencing was used to check for RAG1 gene mutation, which are detected in people suffering Omenn syndrome. The elder brother of the child was tested clear and has no active gene or the carrier gene for this mutation. The father of the child was found to possess a carrier gene for this pathogenic mutation, whereas the mother of the child was also found to possess the same carrier gene.
This report was sufficient enough to confirm that the deceased child was indeed suffering from Omenn syndrome that had been passed on to him from the pathogenic variant that was present in both his parents and had ultimately resulted in his death.