A 64-year-old Caucasian woman living in a nursing home for people with psychiatric disorders was brought to the emergency department (ED) for drowsiness, general deterioration, and hypotension, with a systolic blood pressure (sBP) of around 75–80 mmHg (normally ranging around 115–120 mmHg) at her residence. The patient’s medical history included dyslipidemia, schizophrenia which was refractory and stabilized with high dose clozapine, anorexia and bulimia with associated laxative abuse, vitamin B12 deficiency, overactive bladder, and an intramedullary rod in the left shin bone associated with chronic pain since 2009. According to the nursing home, she had not abused any laxatives in the last 2 years or used any recreational drugs, alcohol, or tobacco. She had no known allergies and her caffeine consumption was limited to one to five times per month. Medications were dispensed in a pillbox at the nursing home and taken under supervision: clozapine 700 mg daily, citalopram 40 mg daily, flurazepam 30 mg daily at bedtime, procyclidine 5 mg twice daily, oxybutynin 5 mg daily at bedtime, bisoprolol 2.5 mg daily, pantoprazole 40 mg daily, atorvastatin 10 mg daily, celecoxib 200 mg daily, vitamin B12 1200 μg daily, calcium/vitamin D 500 mg–400 IU twice daily, and acetaminophen as needed. The clozapine dose was stable for over 3 years, and there were no recent changes in her medications. The patient was admitted to the internal medicine ward.
One to two weeks prior to the ED visit, she suffered from abdominal pain with diarrhea, vomiting, loss of appetite with decreased intake, and she gradually developed sedation and confusion. No fever was reported, but temperature was not measured at the nursing home. The review of systems was otherwise unremarkable.
On arrival, the patient was lethargic with fluctuating confusion, sedation, loss of appetite, and abdominal pain. The diarrhea had resolved several days prior to admission. Acute constipation was suspected. The initial evaluation in the ED revealed an initial Glasgow score of 14, blood pressure of 90/59 mmHg, heart rate of 89 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate of 16 breaths per minute, and rectal temperature of 37.5 °C. Shortly after, a fever was recorded (38.4 °C orally). Physical examination was unremarkable and did not offer any substantial information. Laboratory tests revealed hypokalemia (3.2 mmol/L), elevated C-reactive protein (CRP) (320 mg/L), acute kidney injury (creatinine 115 µmol/L, baseline 85 µmol/L), anemia (hemoglobin 112 g/L), lymphopenia (0.5 × 109 cells/L), and neutropenia (1.5 × 109 cells/L) with a normal leukocyte count (4.6 × 109 cells/L). Peripheral blood smear showed Döhle bodies and toxic granulations. Six days earlier, the neutrophil count was 3.7 × 109 cells/L and hemoglobin concentration was 122 g/L. A chest radiograph was completed and appeared normal. A cerebral computed tomography (CT) scan without contrast was normal without any signs of acute intracranial process. The acute abdominal series showed light dilated loops with small air-fluid levels and diffuse stercoral retention with numerous feces formed at the rectal level without actual fecal impaction. She was successfully treated with an enema, and oxybutynin was discontinued. Developing intestinal paralytic ileus was suspected. Her blood pressure and renal function returned to normal following rehydration by intravenous (IV) fluids. Hypokalemia was corrected with potassium supplements. From this point forward, the patient’s blood pressure and heart rate remained stable during the hospital stay, at around 110–120/55–65 mmHg and 100–115 bpm, respectively. The first diagnostic hypothesis was sepsis from a gastrointestinal origin.
The next day (day 2) another febrile episode of 39.1 °C was recorded. The precise source of the infection was still unknown, but infectious colitis with possible bacterial translocation was suspected. The patient was still drowsy, had nausea, and her abdominal pain was still present. Toxicology screen was unremarkable. Concomitant drug intoxication by clozapine, citalopram, or flurazepam was considered. Blood samples were drawn to measure serum levels of clozapine/norclozapine, and CRP. The CRP level was 148 mg/L. Subsequently, piperacillin-tazobactam 3.375 g IV every 6 hours was empirically started. Clozapine, citalopram, and procyclidine doses were empirically decreased (400 mg daily, 20 mg daily, and 2.5 mg twice daily, respectively) and flurazepam was discontinued. An abdominal and pelvic CT scan revealed a thickened sigmoid colon without distension or signs of inflammation and presence of some of the small bowel loops being distended and interpreted by the radiologist as early signs of occlusion. A colonoscopy was performed 3 days later and was normal. Completed blood and stool cultures were negative.
On day 5, the results for clozapine and norclozapine serum concentrations (drawn on day 2) were available: 1315 ng/mL and 653 ng/mL, respectively. The high clozapine serum concentration, taken in the context of general deterioration, altered mental status, neutropenia, and ileus, confirmed the hypothesis of clozapine intoxication. The general condition of the patient had improved, including gastrointestinal transit, in the days following the reduction of clozapine, citalopram, and procyclidine doses, discontinuation of flurazepam, and antibiotic initiation. A total antibiotic course of 7 days was completed. Clozapine dose was raised to 500 mg daily as the patient’s condition improved. In order to maintain clozapine therapy despite the neutropenia and to avoid issues with the clozapine regulatory program, the patient received one subcutaneous dose of filgrastim 300 μg while the neutrophil and leukocyte counts were 1.6 × 109 cells/L and 2.5 × 109 cells/L, respectively.
On day 6, the CRP decreased (18 mg/L) and the neutrophil count increased to 21.5 × 109 cells/L. On day 7, clozapine dose was increased to 550 mg daily, citalopram dose was increased to 30 mg daily, and procyclidine was discontinued. At this point, the clozapine and norclozapine serum concentrations had decreased to 894 ng/mL and 443 ng/mL, respectively. At hospital discharge, on day 9, the clozapine and norclozapine serum concentrations were 859 ng/mL and 582 ng/mL respectively, while the neutrophil count was back to normal (5.2 × 109 cells/L). The patient was discharged with a clozapine dose of 600 mg daily.
Clozapine and norclozapine serum concentrations obtained 4 days after hospital discharge were 831 ng/mL and 582 ng/mL, respectively, and the neutrophil count was 3.6 × 109 cells/L. Two years later, the patient remained clinically stable on clozapine 600 mg daily with a clozapine and norclozapine serum concentrations of 828 ng/mL and 685 ng/mL, respectively.