An 18-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of NF-1 presented to the emergency department with pain in her left hip following minor trauma. She had tripped over her dog and landed on her left side. NF-1 had been diagnosed clinically in childhood. She had a histologically proven neurofibroma excised from her right forearm four years previously. She had a strong family history of NF-1, her mother and three second degree relatives exhibited clinical features.
On examination, we saw that her left leg was shortened, internally rotated, and adducted. There was decreased range of movement. She had diffuse swelling of her left lower limb with a distinct soft tissue mass above her right lateral malleolus. She had six cafβ-au-lait patches on her trunk and bilateral axillary freckling. A radiograph of the pelvis revealed a superior dislocation of her left hip with an abnormal appearing femoral neck .
Her hip was relocated under general anaesthetic and this was maintained with skin traction. A computed tomography (CT) of her pelvis displayed a smooth erosion of the lateral margin of her left ileum and femoral neck, markedly increased femoral neck offset, a concave abnormality superior to the left acetabulum and thinning of the left inferior pubic ramus. These changes, which appeared to be long standing, were accepted to be a result of a local neurofibroma causing bone erosion. Eight days post-operatively she experienced a sudden onset of left hip pain on attempting to move in bed. A radiograph of her hip revealed repeat dislocation. Relocation of her hip was performed under general anaesthetic and balanced skeletal traction was maintained by inserting a pin to her left proximal tibia. Skeletal traction was maintained for six weeks. She was mobilizing without aids at eight weeks and follow-up at three months revealed a normal hip examination.
She presented to the orthopaedic clinic six years later complaining of disfiguring hypertrophy of her left lower limb which had worsened markedly over the preceding two years. She was referred to plastic surgeons with a view toward performing a cosmetic debulking procedure. A pre-operative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her lower limb demonstrated soft tissue swelling of her entire lower limb consistent with plexiform neurofibromatosis . An MRI of her pelvis displayed a 6 × 4 cm enhancing mass at the superior aspect of the left acetabulum extending into the left hip joint . There was smooth erosion of the neck of the femur but the head of the femur appeared to be in joint. An MRI of her lumbar spine was normal. A CT-guided biopsy of this hip lesion histologically confirmed it to be a neurofibroma. CT reconstructions demonstrated no further changes to the bone architecture of her left hip . In view of her lack of symptoms and the degree of operative difficulty expected, the peri-articular neurofibroma was not excised. She underwent several debulking procedures of her lower limb with excellent cosmetic results. At 12 years follow-up she has experienced no further dislocations of her left hip and mobilizes without aids with a normal gait. A radiograph of her pelvis demonstrated her left hip to be in joint .