A 70-year-old woman (height, 155 cm; weight 37 kg), who had no medical history, presented with uveitis and bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy . She was referred to the cardiology department with worsening exertional dyspnoea and syncope. Electrocardiography showed a complete atrioventricular block and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia , whereas echocardiography showed a thinned basal antero/inferoseptum and mildly decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) by 50% (see , ). She was admitted for expedited workup and treatment.
The patient was diagnosed with CS according to the clinical diagnosis group criteria based on the following additive findings: high serum angiotensin-converting enzyme [27.0 U/L; normal range (NR) 8.3–21.4 U/L], serum lysozyme (10.6 μg/mL; NR 5.0–10.2 μg/mL), and soluble interleukin-2 receptor (555 U/mL; NR 122–496 U/mL) levels; abnormal accumulation in the bilateral hilar lymphnodes and intraventricular wall on gallium-67 scintigraphy; abnormal accumulation in the lateral left ventricular (LV) wall and intraventricular septum on 18F-fluoro-2-deoxy-2-D-glucose positron emission tomography (18F-FDG-PET; ); and positive late gadolinium enhancement of the myocardium, basal antero/inferoseptum, mid anterior, and mid inferior LV wall on magnetic resonance imaging.
After admission, a temporary pacemaker (mode: VVI; lower rate, 80 b.p.m.) was placed, and intravenous amiodarone was administered for the complete atrioventricular block and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia presenting with syncope. On hospital Day 2, she experienced cardiac arrest due to ventricular fibrillation and a return to spontaneous circulation after defibrillation . A newly negative T wave and QT prolongation were observed on electrocardiography . Echocardiography showed marked wall hypokinesia in the mid-LV apex (see , ). The LVEF was reduced to 22%. Coronary angiography revealed no significant coronary artery stenosis or occlusion. However, low cardiac output of 2.0 L/min and an elevated pulmonary artery wedge pressure of 20 mmHg were observed, whereas the right atrial pressure was within the normal range (5 mmHg). She presented a persistently low blood pressure of 61/44 (mean, 50) mmHg despite the intravenous administration of dobutamine (maximum dose, 3 μg/kg/min), milrinone (maximum dose, 0.25 μg/kg/min), and noradrenaline (maximum dose, 0.2 μg/kg/min). The patient’s serum lactate level was elevated at 5.9 mmoL/L (NR 0.44–1.78 mmoL/L). We decided to introduce an Impella cardiac power (CP) device ( and ). Her haemodynamics improved immediately thereafter: blood pressure, 93/73 (mean, 80) mmHg; cardiac output, 3.7 L/min; and pulmonary artery wedge pressure, 15 mmHg. Her serum lactate level decreased to 1.3 mmoL/L.
The patient’s clinical course is shown in . High-dose intravenous corticosteroids (methylprednisolone, 1000 mg/day) were administered along with the introduction of the Impella device. One day after the steroid therapy (Day 3), atrioventricular conduction was improved as confirmed with a first-degree atrioventricular block (PQ interval, 520 ms) and a complete right bundle branch block. On hospital Day 4, the QRS morphology was normalized, and the PQ interval was further shortened to 500 ms. The steroids were switched to oral prednisolone (40 mg/day) and weekly tapered to 30 mg/day. The PQ interval improved to 304 ms at discharge (Day 40; ). The LV wall motion also drastically improved after the introduction of the Impella device and steroids. On hospital Day 3, the impaired wall motion in the mid-LV to the apex improved, and the global LVEF was 38% (see , ). On hospital Day 6, the patient was weaned from the ventilator and Impella device. Her LVEF improved to 45% on hospital Day 9 and 50% at discharge (see , ). The B-type natriuretic peptide level decreased from 235 pg/dL (NR <18.4 pg/mL) on admission to 120 pg/dL, and 25 pg/dL on hospital Day 9 and at discharge, respectively. Finally, she was discharged with the concomitant introduction of bisoprolol, spironolactone, and candesartan as heart failure medications and a wearable defibrillator to prevent sudden cardiac death. No apparent cardiac symptoms were observed during discharge. Because pacing was no longer required, no recurrence of ventricular tachycardia was observed, and the LVEF improved after the introduction of steroid therapy, an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator was not placed; rather; thus, a wearable defibrillator was indicated. Follow-up 18F-FDG-PET showed complete disappearance of abnormal accumulation in the mediastinal lymph nodes and myocardium . Magnetic resonance imaging performed before discharge showed that the residually positive late gadolinium enhancement of the myocardium was lower than at pre-treatment. No significant ventricular arrhythmia recurrence or reduced cardiac functions were noted. As the patient strongly rejected implantable devices, the wearable defibrillator was removed without conversion to implantable cardioverter-defibrillator at 3 months of post-discharge. The patient received maintenance steroid therapy with oral prednisolone.