A 70-year-old male retired officer hailing from an upper-middle class contacted the consultant physician at All India Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA) through telephone revealing he has been found positive for COVID-19 through RT-PCR on 22/09/2020 and willingly wanted to be under the supervision of an Ayurvedic doctor and undertake Ayurvedic medicines. Later, he was contacted through video calls, and the case was assessed and managed through virtual media by verbal instructions. The patient reported that he started with mild fever on 19/09/2020 with a temperature at 100.2 F, which gradually increased and reached 103 F in the next 2 days. The patient got tested and found positive for COVID-19 on 22/09/2020. As the patient was elderly, he was advised home isolation under continuous monitoring. On the day of examination, the patient was found to have fever 103F, severe body ache, and headache. His general condition was fair, was conscious, and well oriented to time, place, and person. He was overweight with BMI at 28.5 kg/sq.m (Ht- 1.61 m, Wt- 74 kg). All the components of the general examination were within normal limits. The patient was advised to regularly monitor the vitals 4th hourly and report. On the 1st day of management, BP was 130/85 mm Hg, Pulse 100/min, Heart Rate 100/min, Respiratory rate 22/min. SpO2 95% at rest. The patient gave a history of diabetes mellitus for the last 24 years and was under oral hypoglycemic drugs (OHDs) (metformin 500 mg + pioglitazone 30 mg BD) prescribed by a tertiary care Govt allopathic hospital. Latest blood sugar levels (BSLs) showed a fasting BSL 200 mg/dL. The patient also gave a positive family history for diabetes mellitus. Inspection and interrogation were the only possible mode of examination, and he was found normal with respect to systemic examinations.
Based on a 10-fold Ayurvedic patient examination, he was found to have Pitta-Vata body constitution, least quality of muscle and body fat, moderate compactness, good mental strength, good adaptability, and moderate physical endurance. The patient was more inclined to take dairy products, bread, and biscuits and was physically active for only 3 days a week. On the 2nd day of consultation, the patient started with a cough, shortness of breath, excessive thirst, two episodes of loose stools, reduced appetite, fatigue, and nasal stuffiness. Based on the symptom cluster and food-exercise routine, Kapha and Pitta were the vitiated body humors. Quality of life (QOL) was assessed with Quality of Life Instrument for Indian Diabetes Patients (QOLID), and it was moderately affected. The patient was completely managed by Ayurvedic treatment methods and recovered completely from major symptoms in 4 days and tested negative after 12 days, with no causalities. Post-COVID QOL was assessed with EQ-5D, visual analog scale (VAS). Timeline, investigations, and daily vital chart of the patient are given in .