A 58-year-old female patient presented with general fatigue, abdominal swelling, epigastric fullness, early satiety, progressive bloating sensation, and reddish discoloration of urine lasting for six months before her presentation.
The abdominal swelling started as a small mass in the right flank area, which gradually increased to occupy almost the entire abdomen over months' period. Furthermore, the patient experienced a weight loss of about 6 kg, with a weight of 54 kg at presentation compared to 60 kg, six months prior. Upon examination, a smooth, round, soft, and painless mass was palpable on the entire abdomen, with the dominant portion localized on the right side. Further examination and investigations were conducted to determine the underlying cause of the symptoms presented by the patient, which included abdominal distension, weight loss, and reddish urine.
The complete blood count revealed a moderate level of anemia, indicated by a hemoglobin level of 8.0, while the other parameters fell within the normal range. Urine microscopy revealed microscopic hematuria, but renal function test results were unremarkable.
Following ultrasound examination, a hyper echoic mass measuring approximately 18 cm in size was identified in the right abdominal area, possibly originating from the right kidney. Additionally, computed tomography (CT) revealed a large right renal mass measuring 22 × 18 × 8 cm, which was exophytic and heterogeneous with a large fat component and an enhancing solid part . There were no symptoms or radiological findings suggestive of tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC).
Exploratory laparotomy was performed via a subcostal incision on the right side. However, it was not possible to achieve full exposure through this incision; thus, we extended it to the left side, resulting in a chevron incision. The abdominal muscles were then divided using electrocautery, and the peritoneum was entered. As shown in , we found a large mass occupying the right side of the abdomen, pushing the bowel to the left. The posterolateral peritoneum was incised along the line of Toldt, and the ascending colon and duodenum were reflected medially to expose the renal vein and inferior vena cava and to develop the retroperitoneal space. The renal artery and vein were identified and double-ligated before division. The inferior pole of the kidney was dissected free and the ureter was identified, ligated, and divided. Then, the superior pole was dissected, the kidney with the mass was resected en mass, and hemostasis was secured. The estimated volume of intraoperative blood loss was 500 ml. The patient's recovery was uneventful and supportive care was provided through fluid infusion. The patient was discharged on the sixth postoperative day, with a postoperative hemoglobin level of 8.4 g/dl. On her first appointment, one week after discharge, she complained of mild wound site pain and her hemoglobin was 7.9 g/dl for which she was started and oral iron therapy. The patient was followed up monthly for the next 3 months and then every 3 months until she was discharged from follow-up at one year postoperative, and she was found to be disease-free on her last visit.
Histopathological analysis revealed proliferation of bland adipocytes intermixed with cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and cigar-shaped nuclei . The final diagnosis was based on the histopathological report, which indicated angiomyolipoma of the right kidney, and no immunohistochemical test was performed (not available in the setup).