The patient is a 16-year-old Malaysian Chinese boy who presented with multiple problems from early childhood. These included intellectual disability, dysmorphism, delayed milestones, and recurrent infections. His parents were healthy and non-consanguineous. There was no significant family history and problems during pregnancy until birth. He was seen at the University of Malaya Medical Centre at 2 years old for recurrent infections and investigated for immunodeficiency. No definitive diagnosis was made. Physical examination showed he had congenital scoliosis, right congenital talipes equinovarus (clubfoot), right developmental hip dysplasia, cardiac murmur, and behavioral problems. The dysmorphic features included broad forehead, mild hypertelorism, high arched palate, and arm span that was longer than his height. He had a bilateral hearing impairment and hyperactivity. Investigations showed a normal G-banded karyotype, serum amino acid and urinary organic acid and mucopolysaccharidosis screen, fragile X syndrome DNA screening, and thyroid function test. Echocardiogram showed ventricular septal defect and atrial septal defect. A cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed no structural abnormalities. His cardiac lesions were corrected by cardiac surgery, and he attended special schooling.
Array-CGH analysis at 10 kB resolution (Human Genome CGH Microarray 244A Kit, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) revealed a deletion on chromosome 18q22.3-q23, with the first clone locating at 68,755,265 base pairs on proximal 18q22.3 and the last clone locating at 76,111,164 base pairs on distal 18q23, according to UCSC Genome Browser on Human March 2006 Assembly (NCBI36/hg18) . The size of the deletion was estimated to be about 7.3 MB and encompasses 29 known genes. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis using SALSA MLPA kit P320 Telomere-13 (MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) showed a deletion of ten probes mapping to the 18q22.3-q23 region, which confirms the array-CGH finding , while the parents yielded normal MLPA results, indicating that the deletion occurred de novo .