A previously healthy 60-year-old Caucasian woman presented to a secondary referral centre emergency department (ED) with central chest pain 28 months prior to admission to our clinic. There was a slightly elevated troponin and a non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI) was suspected. Coronary angiography revealed an ostial stenosis in the right coronary artery (RCA) which was successfully treated with a drug-eluting stent (DES) . Afterwards, the patient had a total of five recurrent in-stent thrombosis necessitating either a new DES or dilatation using a drug-eluting balloon (DEB), see Timeline. About 14 months prior to admission, she underwent a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) to assess the myocardial viability due to recurrent NSTEMI. She had normal biventricular function and normal chamber dimensions, and there were no signs of late gadolinium enhancement. Instead, a mild to moderate AR was found with a calculated regurgitation volume of 34 mL (corresponding to a 30% regurgitation fraction) .
Three months prior to admission, she once again developed a NSTEMI due to in-stent thrombosis in the proximal segment of the RCA and a new DEB was placed. She had complaint of progressive dyspnoea in the past 6–12 months, in New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional Class III, and underwent a TTE 2 months prior to admission. This revealed a severe AR with an eccentric regurgitant jet covering almost the whole LVOT, a short pressure half-time (147 ms), significant diastolic reversing in the aortic arch, a dilated LV and a mildly reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 45% (normal value 54–74%) . She had a tricuspid aortic valve with suspected prolapse of the right coronary cusp (RCC), but the mechanism of AR remained uncertain. The patient was accepted for surgery and aortic valve repair was planned, as well as coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) to the RCA. At the admission, she was in a compensated state but experienced exertional dyspnoea corresponding NYHA functional Class IIIA. The physical examination revealed nothing remarkable except for a holodiastolic murmur at the site of the aortic valve.
After induction of general anaesthesia, the routine perioperative transoesophageal echocardiography (TOE) confirmed the diagnosis of a severe AR. In an X-plane view including the mid-oesophageal aortic valve short- and long-axis views, a structure with the appearance of a stent protruding from the right coronary ostium, was found above the RCC . In systole, the RCC seemingly struck the protruding stent. A 3D TOE was carried out to better characterize the nature of the AR but the mechanism remained uncertain. A full median sternotomy was performed, and the heart was accessed after complete opening of the pericardial sac. Retrograde cardioplegia was delivered through the coronary sinus and asystole was induced. First, the distal anastomosis to the RCA was completed using the great saphenous vein as a conduit. The distal anastomosis was placed as proximal as possible to ensure adequate retrograde flow to the proximal parts of the RCA. An aortotomy was subsequently performed above the level of the aortic valve. In line with what was seen on the TOE, a stent was protruding about 1 cm into the Sinuses of Valsalva from the right coronary ostium . The stent was trimmed, and an autologous pericardial patch was used to permanently close the right coronary ostium. The aortic valve was then inspected and the RCC was fibrotic and retracted with poor coaptation to the other cusps, but there was no prolapse. Both the LCC and NCC had normal morphology and function. It was determined that aortic valve repair could not be performed and a mechanical aortic valve prosthesis (Carbomedics 23 mm) was placed instead. Weaning from extra-corporeal circulation was uncomplicated and the patient was extubated a couple of hours after the procedure in the thoracic intensive care unit (ICU).
After spending 1 day in the thoracic ICU, she was transferred to the surgical ward for further post-operative care. The post-operative course was uneventful. Routine post-operative echocardiogram showed a normally functioning mechanical aortic valve prosthesis with adequate max and mean gradients (29/17 mmHg) and no paravalvular leakage. The patient was feeling well and was discharged to her home after a total hospital stay of 7 days. At a 5-month follow-up, she had returned to normal physical activity and was in NYHA Class I. She underwent an elective myocardial scintigraphy at the referral hospital as she had experienced brief episodes of angina-like chest pain during the past 2 weeks. The myocardial scintigraphy showed no signs of ischemia and the symptoms disappeared shortly afterwards and has not recurred ever since.