In March 2020, a 77-year-old man was urgently admitted to the Surgery ward for abdominal pain and fever.
In June 2019, he was diagnosed with a bulky hepatic mass with a maximum diameter of 28 cm involving the whole right lobe, with no evidence of pre-existing liver disease. The condition was diagnosed at another hospital and the patient was subsequently treated with combined extended right hepatectomy, hepatic pedicle lymphadenectomy and cholecystectomy. The histopathological study showed a moderately differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma and confirmed a healthy liver parenchyma. No lymph nodes were involved and the tumour resection margins were clear (staging pT3N0G2 – R0). The 6-mo follow-up total-body computed tomography scan showed early disease recurrence and progression with a small 27 mm nodule compatible with HCC in the Sg4b segment of the liver with a subcapsular location, on the edge of the previous partial resection site, and a 5 cm adrenal metastasis. A subsequent contrast-enhanced ultrasound (US) scan of the liver confirmed the diagnosis . In January 2020, the patient had a multidisciplinary consultation at our hospital and was deemed fit for locoregional treatments. In February 2020, he was admitted in our Surgery ward and, once written informed consent had been obtained, he was treated with chemioembolisation of the adrenal metastasis and percutaneous RFA of the small HCC in Sg4b. The ablation was performed with anaesthesiological support, and under real-time US guidance. The device used to apply the radiofrequency current was a 20 cm long, 17-Gauge electrode with an uninsolated 3 cm tip (RF-AMICA probe, HS Hospital Service, Aprilia, Italy). No immediate complications were reported after the procedure.
The patient’s medical history included arterial hypertension, surgical resection of a parathyroid adenoma and radioactive iodine therapy for Plummer’s disease.
The clinical abdominal examination revealed epigastric tenderness. The patient’s temperature was 38.5 °C, blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg, heart rate was 100 bpm, respiratory rate was 15 breaths per min, and oxygen saturation in room air was 99%.
The patient’s biochemistry tests showed no clear evidence of systemic inflammation. White blood cells and serum C-reactive protein were at the upper limit of the normal range. Serum transaminases, liver function tests and routine blood biochemistry were normal.
A subcutaneous abscess was diagnosed by abdominal ultrasound and treated with percutaneous drainage, observing necrotic and purulent secretion, together with air leak. Since no decrease in drain output was observed over the following d, an abdominal film with oral water-soluble contrast agent was performed. A fistulous tract was documented by the passage of contrast material from the gastric antrum to the abdominal wall .