A 69-year-old male was referred to our hospital because of frequent PVCs and an elevated brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) level of 91.2 pg/mL. He experienced daytime sleepiness. He had a history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension and was taking medications including olmesartan 10 mg, azelnidipine 8 mg, vildagliptin 50 mg, and metformin 500 mg daily. At the time of the outpatient department consultation, his blood pressure was 124/64 mmHg and pulse rate 70 beats/min and irregular. Auscultation revealed normal cardiac sounds and normal breath sounds. The lower extremities had no oedema. He was obese, and his body mass index was 28.3 kg/m2. His HbA1c was 6.0%. The 12-lead electrocardiogram exhibited normal sinus rhythm, a normal axis, and frequent PVCs . The morphology of the PVCs exhibited a northeast axis, left bundle brunch block (LBBB) in V1, and positive concordant R waves in the precordial leads including V2–V6. Those findings indicated that the probable site of the origin of those PVCs was in the direction of 4:00–6:00 in the left anterior oblique view of the tricuspid valve. The echocardiography yielded a mildly reduced LV ejection fraction (LVEF) of 55% calculated by the Teichholz method, LV hypertrophy of 12 mm, enlarged LV end-diastolic and -systolic dimensions (LVDd/s) of 59 and 43 mm, and normal valvular function (; see , ). His chest X-ray revealed an enlarged cardiothoracic ratio (CTR) of 55% without congestion . The 24 h Holter monitoring showed frequent mono-focal PVCs of 26 589 beats/day. The prevalence of frequent PVCs was observed mainly during the daytime . The %PVCs, which was calculated as (the number of PVCs/number of total heart beats per 24 h) × 100, was 24.8%. After admission, a full polysomnography test, which evaluated the electroencephalography, chin electromyogram, nasal pressure and airflow, respiratory efforts of the chest and abdomen, and oxygen saturation , revealed severe OSA with an apnoea/hypopnoea index (AHI) of 59.5/h, and the lowest arterial oxygen saturation value was 90%. Because his height and neck circumference were 173 and 43 cm, respectively, his neck circumference–height ratio was 0.25. His coronary angiography (CAG) and right heart catheterization (RHC) were normal. Moreover, the findings from cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (cMRI) and histology from a right ventricular biopsy (RV-Bx) revealed cardiac hypertrophy and no evidence of SHD including cardiac amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, dilated, hypertrophic, and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy or Fabry disease. Then, a diagnosis of PIC was made. Thus, we planned to perform RFCA of his frequent PVCs 2 months later because of his work schedule. At the same time, we introduced him to CPAP therapy for his OSA. The prescription of his CPAP was the positive airway pressure, where the airflow was introduced from his nose into the airways to maintain a continuous pressure of 4 cm H2O. At the 1-month follow-up after the introduction of the CPAP therapy, surprisingly, his frequent PVCs completely disappeared as confirmed by a 3 min 12-lead electrocardiogram recording. Thus, the RFCA of the PVCs was cancelled. At the 3-month follow-up, his AHI and %PVC on the 24 h Holter monitoring while using CPAP were 2.4/h and 3.0%, respectively. Furthermore, his CTR , LVDd/s, and LVEF improved to 50%, 50 and 29 mm, and 73%, respectively (; see , ). Further, his BNP level normalized was to 8.0 pg/mL. He has remained well without any symptoms or arrhythmias for 2 years after the introduction of the CPAP therapy for the OSA.