A 40-year-old man presented to the orthopedic clinic with a 2-week history of swelling in the right knee and a 1-year history of painless gait disorder. He had previously been diagnosed with idiopathic sensory peripheral neuropathy, for which he had multiple fingertips falling off in his early teens and left leg amputation 5 years prior following massive painless ulceration . The diagnosis of idiopathic sensory peripheral neuropathy follows the approach to the evaluation of peripheral neuropathies , evidenced as the unique clinical manifestation of distally predominant and symmetrical sensory abnormalities, and electrophysiological findings of mainly axonal damage. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease was excluded due to his normal motor function. There was no history of diabetes mellitus and neurosyphilis. He also had no family history of inherited diseases.
On physical examination, a valgus distortion of the knee was noted, with significantly restricted ranges of flexion (105°) and extension (10°). Inspired by a recent study , we used the system of Knee Society Score (KSS) to evaluate the function. The knee score was 46 and the function score was 40 on admission. There was a slight deep tenderness over the superolateral aspect of the patella and the lateral femoral condyle. Despite gross deformity and distinct instability, he complained of no pain during daily activities and sleep. Paracentesis yielded bloody effusions, both negative for biochemical examinations and microbial culture. Laboratory studies showed slight elevation in alkaline phosphatase (ALP) levels (147 U/L; reference: 34-104 U/L) at admission, reflecting abnormal absorption of bone metabolism. Infection was excluded due to the normal ranges of leukocyte count (4.7 × 109/L; reference: 3.5 × 109–9.5 × 109/L), C-reactive protein (10.36 mg/L; reference: 0.00–10.00 mg/L), and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (12 mm/h; reference: 0–21 mm/h) along with negative microbiological and cytological examination of the repeated fluid aspiration. The coagulation and syphilis tests were normal without evidence of hemophilic arthritis and syphilis-induced Charcot arthropathy. Plain radiographs and CT scans showed apparent widening of the joint space and multiple abrasions of the lateral femoral condyle, with abnormal debris close to the posterior plateau . Stress radiography was not conducted due to the high risk of pathologic fractures and incompetency of pain complaint. Plain radiographs, captured under supine and neutral position, showed the femorotibial angle (FTA) was 165°. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a wide impairment of the anterior cruciate ligament, lateral collateral ligament, and meniscus lateralis with massive joint effusions . Idiopathic sensory peripheral neuropathy-induced Charcot neuroarthropathy was diagnosed in collaboration with neurologists.
Partial weight bearing with a hinged knee brace was advocated to correct the abnormal alignment and gait posture, followed by a gradual increase in flexion and extension over a 3-month period for clinical improvement. However, the significant disability determined the joint motion should be protected by the orthosis. Mild swelling of the knee was found in the lateral compartment, but there was no tenderness or redness. Additionally, he was administered physical therapy and rehabilitation along with bisphosphonates to decrease pathological bone resorption. ALP was dynamically monitored and found to be maintained between 108~134 U/L (reference: 50–136 U/L). Plain radiographs at the 12-month follow-up showed the valgus knee with the FTA of 159°, with a slight deterioration restricted in the lateral compartment . The knee was reevaluated with KSS, showing the knee score dropped to 41 and the function score maintained 40. The range of motion was 10°~ 105°, reflecting the flexion and extension in the sagittal plane was not affected. Considering the potential risks of arthroplasty and inherent disadvantages of arthrodesis, protected weightbearing with the orthosis was recommended as the current treatment of choice .