A 78-year-old Caucasian female with no previous cardiac history presented to an outside hospital with chest and jaw discomfort. Her past medical history is significant for hypertension, atrial fibrillation, endovascular stenting of an abdominal aortic aneurysm, fibromyalgia, and dyslipidemia presented to an outside hospital with chest and jaw discomfort. She was found to have sustained a non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction. She underwent cardiac catheterization that revealed three separate 1 cm saccular aneurysms of the LAD with associated focal stenosis. The circumflex coronary artery was angiographically free of disease . The RCA could not be visualized despite multiple attempts. Left ventricular function was preserved. During the procedure, she developed complete heart block necessitating placement of a temporary transvenous pacemaker. However, catecholaminergic support was not needed. In addition, anticoagulative therapy with intravenous heparin was initiated.
The patient was transferred to our institution for further evaluation. Upon arrival, she was found to have an elevated troponin of 1.61 ng/ml (normal high less than 0.03 ng/ml). She underwent a computed tomography (CT) coronary angiography with contrast that revealed a 6.6 × 6.3 cm saccular right coronary artery aneurysm (RCAA) extending 8.8 cm in length with turbulent flow seen within the aneurysm. The RCAA compressed both the right atrium and ventricle with evidence of right ventricular hypokinesis . The distal RCA was poorly visualized but appeared to have some flow. Also noted was a 4.4 cm fusiform ascending aortic aneurysm without leak or dissection. Serological studies (antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, immunoglobulin G4, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein) were all negative.
She was taken to the operative suite. Intraoperative transesophageal echocardiogram confirmed the large RCAA arising from the right coronary sinus with turbulent flow in the aneurysm sac with extrinsic compression of the right atrium and ventricle . There was no evidence of coronary cameral fistulizaton.
The patient underwent double bypass surgery using saphenous vein grafts to the right posterior descending coronary artery (RPDA) and the LAD. A mammary graft was not used due to concerns regarding potential competitive flow. The right coronary aneurysm was opened and found to have no thrombus. Subtotal resection of the aneurysm wall was performed with oversewing of the proximal and distal coronary openings between felt pledgets . Post procedure the patient regained normal sinus rhythm. Pathology of the aneurysm wall revealed calcific atherosclerosis and was negative for vasculitis and connective tissue disease. Her postoperative course was uneventful. She was discharged home on post-operative day five on dual antiplatelet therapy (clopidogrel and aspirin), losartan, and atorvastatin.