A 69-year old man presented with a history of chronic alcoholic pancreatitis and an 8 cm x 6 cm pseudocyst of the pancreatic tail. He complained of long lasting symptoms including chronic abdominal pain, nausea and early satiety.
Preoperative upper endoscopy and multi-slice computer tomography (MSCT) showed no other pathological findings, with normal appearance of the duodenum and the pancreatic head. He underwent an uneventful surgical pseudocystojejunostomy with a normal operative and early postoperative course. Three months postoperatively he presented to the emergency department with epigastric pain, intense nausea, vomiting, intolerance of solid food and profound weight loss. An urgent MSCT showed a markedly enlarged pancreatic head with suspected tumor involvement of the pancreatico-duodenal complex and dilation of the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts . On upper endoscopy, obstruction of the duodenum was apparent with duodenal biopsy showing nonspecific mucosal changes consistent with chronic inflammation. Upper gastrointestinal series also showed obstruction of the duodenum . A decision was made to perform a PD. At laparotomy, the operation was extended into a TP since the pancreatic tail showed marked atrophy with necrotic debris filling the residual psudocyst. Both operative and postoperative courses were uneventful. The patient was released on the 10th postoperative day and after 6 months of follow-up, the patient was unremarkable, with no pain and a weight gain of 7 kg. The control of his diabetes is satisfactory with HbA1c value of 7%.
Apart from chronic pancreatitis the patient had no significant past medical history.
Pathology report showed a thickened duodenal mucosa with cysts ranging in dia-meter up to 0.9 cm containing clear fluid, permeating at the interface between the duodenum and the pancreas. Hyperplasia of Brunner's glands and smooth muscle cells was visible with proliferation of connective tissue in lamina propria, submucosal and subserosal tissues. Pancreatic tissue in the paraduodenal area showed a reduction of the lobular arhitecture that was replaced with connective tissue. Epithelial changes in the pancreatic periferal small ducts were consistent with pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN) 2 and 3 in unaffected pancreatic tissue. Serial sectioning of the specimen revealed the minor papilla proximal to the major papilla. Papilla was affected with the disease .