A 40-year-old Lebanese gentleman was referred from the pre-employment medical commission department for further evaluation of an abnormal chest radiograph. He did not present with any systemic complaints such as fever, cough, chest pain, difficulty breathing, hemoptysis, anorexia, or weight loss. He had no significant past medical, surgical, or family history, except for a sleeve gastrectomy. The patient denied taking any long-term medications, supplements, alcohol, or recreational drugs. However, he had been a chronic smoker for the past 20 years, initially using CCs, smoking a pack per day, but in the last 6 months, he had switched to IQOS and increased his consumption to 1.5 packs of IQOS or more per day over the last few months prior to presentation, due to job-related stress. He recently started working as an entrepreneur and prior to 6 months he was the manager at a printing press with no exposure to printing materials. He does not have any pets at home.
On examination, the patient appeared well built and nourished with vital signs within normal limits. He had no pallor, clubbing, cyanosis, or jaundice on general examination. Chest examination revealed normal bilateral vesicular breath sounds with no added sounds. Other system examinations were unremarkable.
Blood tests revealed leukocytosis, with a white blood cell count of 10.8 × 10^3/μL, and eosinophilia of 3.2 × 10^3/μL. A peripheral smear indicated mild toxic features in the leukocytes, along with some reactive lymphocytes and moderate eosinophilia, possibly reactive in nature. Liver function and renal function tests were within normal limits. Chest radiograph reported ill-defined nodular shadows in the right mid and lower zones. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest revealed multiple scattered variable-sized nodules and patchy, partially solid opacities with surrounding ground glass opacification . These findings were predominantly distributed sub-pleurally and along the peri-bronchovascular region. Centrilobular emphysematous changes were observed bilaterally in the upper lobes, while minimal pleural and pericardial fluid was detected. No significant mediastinal or hilar lymphadenopathy was identified. Bronchoscopy demonstrated normal bronchial anatomy, and the cytology differential showed 89 % macrophages, 5 % neutrophils, 4 % lymphocytes, and 2 % eosinophils. Cultures for bacteria, viruses, fungi, and tuberculosis were negative. Cytopathology results were negative for malignancy.
Considering the differential diagnosis, further assessment with a lung biopsy was recommended, but the patient declined any further invasive interventions. IQOS cessation was strongly advised, leading him to stop using IQOS and switch back to conventional cigarettes. A repeat chest CT scan after 6 weeks showed resolution of the multiple bilateral lung lesions observed in the previous scan. No medications were administered during this period.