A 56-year-old woman presented with a month-long history of nausea and vomit with increased shallowness of the left nasolabial sulcus for 2 days. The patient visited a different local hospital a month ago where they could not find a cause for her symptoms. The patient’s vomiting and headache became worse during the treatment and the patient was transferred to our hospital for further treatment. The patient did not report anorexia and her body weight did not change significantly.
The patient had a history of uterine leiomyoma and did not have a recent history of cold, fever, diarrhea, or clinically significant family history. The patient did not have any history of brainstem tumor. Her family history was unremarkable.
Physical examination on admission revealed that the patient had central facial paralysis, obvious impairment of bilateral eye movement function, and gross horizontal nystagmus.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collected via lumbar puncture was colorless and transparent with a pressure of 140 mm H2O. The white blood cell count in the CSF was 3 × 106/L, with 1.8 × 106/L of lymphocytes, 1.1 × 106/L of monocytes, and 0.1 × 106/L of other white blood cells. The protein concentration was 0.35 g/L, and Pandy’s reaction was negative. The glucose and chloride ion levels were 4.66 and 120 mmol/L, respectively. The CSF was negative for aquaporin-4, myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein, and myelin basic protein antibodies.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head revealed acute pontine infarction (lack of imaging data). Urgent head computed tomography (CT) imaging after admission revealed a thickened brainstem, although the nature of the lesion was unknown. The results of the cranial MRI indicated that the patient had demyelinating lesions of the brainstem. Because of the space occupying effect of the lesion, the possibility of neoplastic lesions (lymphoma) could not be excluded. 18F-FDG PET-CT revealed no obvious signs of tumor . Four weeks later, a head MRI scan revealed a high-grade astrocytoma which differed from a lymphoma. The space-occupying brainstem lesions were resected to make a definitive diagnosis and determine the appropriate treatment, and the frozen section obtained during the operation revealed a high-grade glioma. The final histopathology findings were consistent with an AA (WHO grade III) .
Follow-up: At 6 months follow-up, the patient was still alive, bedridden, and unable to take care of herself.