A 52-year-old woman visited our clinic complaining of pain in the left hip and numbness in the lower extremity of the ipsilateral side when sitting or walking.
The left pelvic and posterior hip pain began 3 years prior and worsened, while the radiating pain to the entire ipsilateral lower extremity increased in intensity over 3 mo.
She was previously diagnosed with a paraovarian cyst and was continuously followed up in the gynecologic department at a tertiary referral hospital. However, her symptoms did not improve, despite various conservative treatments.; She was, therefore, referred to another obstetrics and gynecology department of another tertiary university hospital for operative treatment.
Diagnostic pelviscopy and laparoscopic adnexectomy were performed. However, no specific findings that could cause pain in the female organs were observed during the former procedure; hence, the operation was terminated. She was told that the current symptoms were not seemingly related to gynecologic problems, so she visited our orthopedic surgery department.
The patient had no significant medical history. No specific genetic diseases were found in the family history.
A bimanual pelvic examination revealed a fixed mass measuring 5 cm × 5 cm × 4 cm that was adherent to the left pelvic wall. An orthopedic physical examination revealed severe tenderness of the left buttock. She complained about being unable to sit for 5 minutes because of intense pain and tenderness in the area. She did not, however, experience any sensations.
Serum tumor markers levles were normal (cancer antigen 125, 11.7 U/mL; cancer antigen 19-9, 30 U/mL). No abnormalities was found in the routine blood and urine analyses.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a huge paralabral cyst 5 cm × 5 cm × 4.6 cm stretched to the greater sciatic notch from the left hip joint . However, the cyst was located close to the sciatic nerve and adhered to the piriformis muscle's intrapelvic portion. Following her admission, she was referred to our hospital’s gynecology and neurology departments to ensure a multidisciplinary approach.
We decided to consult the neurology department for the electromyography and nerve conduction studies. The study revealed a mild left sciatic nerve lesion, and the physician recommended a clinical correlation. Accordingly, a laparoscopic examination revealed a tennis ball-sized cystic mass filled with gelatinous liquid stretching deep into the hips, with internal and external iliac vessels. The mass was located below the obturator nerve in the left retroperitoneal space. The mass contained yellowish, sticky, and gelatinous components and was firmly adherent to the surrounding tissues.