A 61-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with complaints of numbness in the lateral half of the 1, 2, 3, and 4 fingers of the right hand and decreased range of motion which started 1 day earlier and increased in severity. With the in-depth analysis of the patient's, he did not have any similar complaints before. An immunohistochemical examination of the biopsy material obtained from the mass on the right shoulder 1 month before the patient's numbness in his fingers was consistent with secondary amyloidosis.
In the physical examination of the patient, active and passive flexions of the fingers were found to be limited and numbness was noticed in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th lateral half of the fingers, which is the innervation area of the median nerve. Even though no atrophy was seen in the thenar muscles, it was observed that the palm of the effected hand was hypertrophic compared to the other palm, and the Tinel and Phalen tests were both positive.
Because the direct radiographs of the patient were interpreted as normal, MRI was requested for further examination. MRI revealed excessive fluid collection and intense synovitis in the intercarpal, radioulnar, and ulnocarpal joints and surrounding para-articular soft tissue planes at the wrist level. The findings were thought to be compatible with amyloidosis, but rheumatologic diseases could also be compatible with the same findings. Because of this, further investigation has been done with clinical examination and laboratory findings. No rheumatologic diseases has been diagnosed after the investigation.
In the patient's EMG, the following are found: (1) The compound muscle action potential of the right median nerve was found to be low amplitude, and the amplitude of the muscle action potential combined with wrist stimulation decreased by more than 50 compared to palm stimulation (partial conduction block). Motor transmission speed was low in the palm-wrist segment. Motor conduction studies of the other nerves of both upper and lower extremities were found to be normal. (2) Sensory action potential of the right median nerve could not be obtained. In conclusion, these findings were consistent with acute carpal tunnel syndrome causing axon and myelin damage on the right upper extremity.
The patient underwent surgery the day after he presented to our outpatient clinic. Incision has been done in the volar side of the right hand following the palmar crisis, and the transverse carpal ligament was loosened completely; afterwards, biopsy was taken for pathology. The median nerve appear to be swelled. It was assured that the nerve was completely decompressed distally and proximally. Neurolysis was performed after the median nerve was loosened. Diffuse synovial thickening has been observed around the flexor tendons which were hypertrophic . Synovectomy has been performed .
According to the results of the pathology samples sent during surgery, AA-type amyloidosis was detected in the samples taken from the median nerve sheath and from the synovial tissue on the flexor tendons .
The Tinel and Phalen tests were found to be negative, and numbness in the fingers disappeared and finger flexion movements were more comfortable after the operation.