A two-month-old, Italian, exclusively breast-fed female was admitted to our Emergency Room for vomiting and weight loss. There was no history of fever, jaundice or abdominal distension.
One month before the admission, she was hospitalized for the same symptoms in a different Hospital. At that time, she was tested with blood and urine culture, blood exams including ammonium concentration, abdomen ultrasound and Rotavirus/Adenovirus faecal antigens. All the investigations were negative, except for the detection of eosinophilia (eosinophils count: 2900/μl). During the first hospitalization, she developed a mild diarrhoea, which was treated with probiotics, and after 4 days she was discharged in good health condition.
Upon presentation to our Clinic, the parents reported a 70 days-journey to South-East Asia (Vietnam and Thailand) during the first trimester of pregnancy, where the mother had presented several episodes of nausea and vomiting, attributed to pregnancy.
On physical examination, the infant was hemodynamically stable, alert and appropriate for age. She was well appearing and well-nourished. The abdomen was soft, and the rest of systemic examination was within normal limits. Physical findings were as follows: body weight 4.75 kg; height 60 cm; heart rate 120 beats/min; body temperature 36 °C; oxygen saturation in room air 96%; blood pressure 70/52 mmHg. On admission to our Hospital, the laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 19,060/μl with 27.1% of eosinophils (5170/μl), platelets count 756,000/μl, haemoglobin 9.1 g/dl, peripheral smear showed microcytic hypochromic red blood cells (RBCs). Given the hemoglobin levels, an oral supplementation with iron and folic acid was started. Electrolytes, renal function and coagulation tests were within the normal range. Serum proteins, albumin, bilirubin and liver enzymes were normal; C-reactive protein (CRP) was negative. The abdomen ultrasound was normal; urinary culture was negative. Grossly, stools looked normal, with no blood appearance or melena; viral antigen and bacterial culture were negative.
The microscopic examination of stools detected the presence of hookworm’s eggs which were confirmed in three different samples from different days . The collected specimens were subsequently sent to the specialist parasitology laboratory of “Ospedale Sacro Cuore Don Calabria” of Negrar, where were tested with molecular biology techniques (Real Time polymerase chain reaction, RT-PCR) which confirmed the species as Ancylostoma duodenale. Parasitic research on parents’ stools resulted negative, suggesting a possible vertical transmission of Ancylostoma infection during pregnancy. The infant was treated with oral Mebendazole (100 mg/die in two doses) for 3 days, which was well tolerated, without any complications. She was discharged in good general conditions.
At a follow-up visit after 1 month, her clinical presentation was normal; blood exams were normal with resolution of anemia and normalization of eosinophils and platelets count, and stool microscopic examination was negative.