A 68-year-old woman with rheumatoid arthritis was admitted to our hospital complaining of fever, dry cough, and night sweats for the past 2 weeks. She had been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis 9 years prior. She had been taking 5 mg/day prednisone and azathioprine, and she had started taking certolizumab pegol from 6 months prior to the current admission.
She reported no malaise, hemoptysis, or weight loss. Other than the aforementioned factors she had no past medical history, including interstitial lung disease or tuberculosis, she was not taking any other medications, and she had no pets. She had never smoked, and she worked as a pharmacist.
On admission her body temperature was 38.2 °C but other vital signs were not remarkable. Chest x-ray revealed bilateral opacity that was more pronounced on her right side . Her white blood cell count was 11,700 μL− 1, hemoglobin was 10.0 g dL− 1, and C-reactive protein was 17.12 mg/dL. An HIV assay for HIV-1 and HIV-2 was negative, as was an interferon gamma release assay.
Chest computed tomography (CT) depicted bilateral opacity on her lower lung and pleural effusion on her right thoracic cavity . Thoracentesis was performed to obtain 150 mL of pleural effusion fluid from the right side. The white blood cell count of that fluid was 12,700/μL− 1 (22.7% lymphocytes), and it contained 5.4 g protein/dL− 1, 2.8 g albumin/dL− 1, and 1503 U lactate dehydrogenase/L− 1.
BAL fluid and pleural fluid culture were performed. Acid-fast bacilli were detected by Ziehl-Neelsen staining but the species could not identified using a DNA-DNA hybridization method or the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). The drug susceptibility testing revealed resistance to amikacin (minimum inhibitory concentration > 32 μg/mL), but reexamination for microbial identification and the drug susceptibility testing suggested susceptibility to amikacin. To investigate contamination or mycobacterial coinfection, growth enhancement on Middlebrook 7H11C agar plate testing was performed. Two types of colonies were developed from both BAL and pleural fluid culture, and the causative microorganisms were identified as M. fortuitum and M. mageritense by MALDI-TOF MS—with each of the hsp65 and rpoB region sequences respectively exhibiting 100 and 99.0% matching with M. fortuitum, and 98.4 and 99.0% matching with M. mageritense.
Eight weeks of treatment with imipenem/cilastatin (500 mg every 6 h intravenously), minocycline (100 mg orally twice a day), and levofloxacin (500 mg orally once a day) were initiated, followed by 4 months maintenance therapy by minocycline and levofloxacin. After the maintenance therapy, Her symptoms and bilateral pulmonary opacity were improved . Now we follow her for 2 years, her sputum culture is still negative and her chest x-ray is still clear.