Our patient is a 71-year-old woman on aspirin (81 mg, daily) with a history of the right internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusion and a giant left cavernous carotid aneurysm that had been followed conservatively by an outside physician. She presented to an outside hospital with a thunderclap headache, nausea, vomiting, meningismus, and confusion consistent with Hunt-Hess Grade III SAH. She was transferred to our facility where noncontrast computed tomography (CT) revealed a Fisher Grade 4 SAH as well as bony erosion and intradural extension of the left cavernous carotid aneurysm [-]. A ventriculostomy catheter was placed, and subsequent CT angiography (CTA) confirmed the left cavernous carotid aneurysm and right ICA occlusion [-]. The patient was admitted to the neurosurgical intensive care unit and placed on SAH protocol, which consisted of levetiracetam (weight-based dosing), nimodipine (60 mg every 4 h), strict blood pressure management, daily transcranial Doppler imaging, and volume maintenance.
On hospital day (HD) 1, she was taken for a diagnostic cerebral angiogram (DSA) to further characterize her vascular lesions. A giant left cavernous carotid aneurysm measuring approximately 24×17 mm was observed. No other vascular lesions were revealed, and SAH protocol was continued. On HD 4, she was taken for Pipeline (Medtronic, Dublin, Ireland) embolization of the left cavernous ICA aneurysm. Flow diversion could not be performed because the nominal diameter of the petrocavernous carotid artery measured close to 9 mm, making it too large for any available adjunctive balloons or intracranial stents [ and ]. Therefore, microsurgical options were considered; and on HD 7, she was taken to the operating room. Following occlusion of the left ICA and hypotension (mean arterial pressure, 50–60 mmHg) induced for 40–45 min without electrophysiologic changes observed on EEG, SSEP, or MEP testing, a left-sided superficial temporal artery-to-middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) “insurance” bypass followed by hunterian ligation of the left ICA was performed . Of note, the occlusion was maintained longer than the typical 20–30 min in an attempt to add additional stress, similar to what may occur as a result of vasospasm in the following days; and given the reassuring results, it was felt that a low-flow bypass was sufficient.
Postoperatively, the patient was at her neurological baseline level, apart from trace weakness in her lower extremities. Through HD 7, the patient’s mentation slowly declined. Perfusion CT imaging demonstrated a lack of vascular reserve in the left hemisphere on acetazolamide challenge. A DSA [ and ] confirmed patency of the left-sided bypass, and EEG showed no seizure activity. Induced hypertension failed to improve mentation, and given concerns about overlap of clinical decline within the SAH vasospasm window, flow augmentation appeared to be an appropriate option.
On HD 8, a right-sided external carotid artery-to-MCA high-flow bypass using an interpositional radial artery graft was performed . The high-flow option was ultimately chosen over an additional low-flow procedure due to the tenuous nature of the patient’s condition and need for aggressive revascularization.
Postoperatively, the patient experienced a protracted hospital course with a poor neurological examination, despite only a few scattered areas of restricted diffusion in the left thalamus and bilateral watershed regions on magnetic resonance (MR) imaging. In addition, changes in flow dynamics consistent with patent bilateral bypasses were observed, including filling of the left-sided circulation from the right-sided high-flow bypass [-]. Intermittent periods of increased responsiveness and appropriate verbal reactions to stimuli were observed. She was discharged to long-term care on HD 29 and continued to make steady progress in functional status. Postoperative CTA showed patency of both bypasses; MR imaging at 6 months showed no chronic ischemic changes; MR and CTA performed at 7 months showed patency of the bypasses as well as compensatory changes in the right vertebral artery [-]. At 9 months, the patient had continued to make significant progress. She was experiencing mild cognitive difficulties and was ambulating independently, despite a recent fall and broken hip with an mRS score of 2.