A 19-year-old woman with a past medical history of schizoaffective disorder presented to the emergency department (ED) with a one-week history of left hip pain and chills. Pain was worsened with hip flexion and described as “searing” while sitting. She saw an orthopedic surgeon at the onset of the hip pain and was diagnosed with left hip bursitis. She was prescribed a course of prednisone and cyclobenzaprine. Despite use of the prednisone, she reported no improvement in symptoms. She also reported low-grade fever, poor appetite, polydipsia, fatigue, diarrhea, and insomnia. The patient had a history of cutting, but it had been over two months since she had last cut her forearms. This history was affirmed by the patient’s mother at bedside.
On initial ED presentation, the patient had a temperature of 36.8° Celsius, blood pressure of 115/59 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg), heart rate of 119 beats per minute (bpm), respiratory rate of 18 breaths per minute (breaths/min), and pulse oximetry measured 98% on room air. Physical examination was remarkable for left lumbar paraspinal tenderness. There was good range of motion of the left hip, with minimal pain on internal rotation and extension. There were multiple, self-inflicted, superficial lacerations in various stages of healing on her bilateral wrists. Serum laboratory studies were significant for a leukocytosis of 21.32 thousands per microliter (K/uL) (Reference [Ref]: 3.90–12.80 K/uL) and hyponatremia of 130 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (Ref: 136–145 mmol/L), otherwise without significant abnormalities. A urinalysis was clear. Abdominal radiographs were normal. The leukocytosis and insomnia were attributed to the recent course of prednisone. She received a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medication and was discharged home.
Three days later, she returned to her primary care doctor with worsening hip pain, fever, and lightheadedness. She was noted to be hypotensive with a blood pressure of 78/45 mm Hg. She was referred back to the ED. On her second ED visit, and fourth healthcare encounter since the onset of symptoms, she was noted to be febrile, with a temperature of 39.4° C, tachycardic, with a heart rate of 118 bpm, a blood pressure of 104/57 mm Hg, a respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min, and pulse oximetry measured 99% on room air. Examination revealed persistent left lumbar paraspinal tenderness with no midline spinal tenderness, and no rigidity to range of motion of hip. Laboratory studies revealed a worsening leukocytosis of 22.2 K/uL (Ref: 3.90–12.80 K/uL), an erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of >120 millimeters per hour (mm/hr) (Ref: 0–36 mm/hr), and a C-reactive protein (CRP) of 478.2 milligrams per liter (mg/L) (Ref: 0.0–8.2 mg/L).
Pelvic MRI was obtained, which revealed multiple bilateral IPAs . A 3.6 x 8.5 x 10.6 centimeter (cm) abscess on her left iliacus involving her sacroiliac joint, a 3.4 x 3.2 x 7.9 cm abscess involving her left paraspinal muscle, and a right iliac abscess measuring 1.5 x 2.4 x 3.6 cm. She received broad-spectrum antibiotic coverage with vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam. Interventional radiology performed CT-guided aspiration with drain placement of the two larger, left-sided abscesses. Both blood and abscess cultures returned positive with methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). Throughout her hospitalization, her white blood cell count continued to trend upward, and a CT revealed enlargement of the right iliacus abscess . Interventional radiology subsequently performed a percutaneous aspiration of the abscess. She was discharged on hospital day 10 on parenteral vancomycin via a peripherally inserted central catheter line.
One month after discharge, the patient returned to the ED, reporting worsening back pain. Repeat MRI revealed persistence of left iliopsoas abscess measuring 3.2 x 1.3 cm, which now extended into the left iliac bone consistent with sacroiliitis/osteomyelitis . She was evaluated by both interventional radiology and orthopedics consults who felt that the fluid collection was too small for aspiration or drain placement. Infectious diseases consult evaluated the patient and recommended a six-week course of intravenous (IV) daptomycin. As an outpatient, antibiotics were adjusted to oral doxycycline. Follow-up MRI two months after discharge revealed resolution of abscess with residual inflammatory edema.