A 65-year-old man with a past history of renal cell carcinoma was incidentally found to have a pituitary tumor. The patient had no apparent symptoms indicating visual impairment or pituitary dysfunction and no excessive pituitary hormone levels. Magnetic resonance imaging showed an intrasuprasellar pituitary tumor with a maximum size of 24 mm, appearing as isointensity on T1-weighted imaging, slight hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging, and compressed the optic nerve assessed as Knosp grade 2 . The sphenoid sinus appeared as the sellar type with no notable findings. ETSS was performed under a relative surgical indication based on tumor compression to the optic nerve and the possibility of metastatic pituitary tumor.
Sphenoidotomy was performed via a right-sided unilateral paraseptal approach. The sphenoid septum was resected for wide sphenoidotomy to expand the surgical corridor. The petrous portion of the left ICA was injured during resection of the sphenoid septum connected with the left carotid prominence using a cutting forceps . Cotton patties were immediately placed on the injured site of the left ICA petrous portion to control the massive bleeding. We also asked the anesthesiologist to initiate rapid fluid infusion, order blood transfusions, maintain normal blood pressure, and compress the left cervical carotid artery to relieve the bleeding. The bleeding was suppressed using two suction cannulas of 4 mm and 3 mm diameter. The natural ostium of the left sphenoid sinus was widely opened to allow manipulation through the bilateral nasal cavities. The surgical assistant harvested muscle tissue and fat from the right thigh and prepared muscle tissue in a crushed form. After temporarily stopping the bleeding, a right-sided vascularized pedicled nasoseptal flap was constructed. Application of pressure to the bleeding site with cotton patties was continued, then the dura was incised following the opening of the sellar floor, and the pituitary tumor was resected with suction technique as far as possible. The tumor resection cavity in the sella turcica was filled with fat to prevent cerebrospinal fluid pulsation. We then tried to replace the cotton patties over the bleeding site with the crushed muscle patch . However, repeated attempts failed to accurately cover the bleeding site with the crushed muscle patch because of the large amount of bleeding caused by removing the cotton patties. We eventually decided not to use the crushed muscle patch and completed the hemostatic procedure by applying two cotton patties to the bleeding site, followed by fibrin glue coating . The surgical field was closed using the right-sided vascularized pedicled nasoseptal flap with fibrin glue coating , followed by fixing with balloon compression.
Cerebral angiography performed immediately after surgery under general anesthesia showed no extravasation from the injured site of the left ICA petrous portion and normal antegrade cerebral hemodynamics . The patient was awakened and withdrawn from the respirator after confirming the absence of abnormal findings on brain imaging the day after surgery. He showed good consciousness with no neurological deficit. However, cerebral angiography following balloon deflation 7 days after surgery revealed the presence of a carotid-cavernous sinus fistula (CCF) originating from the injured site of the left ICA petrous portion . The CCF was believed to result from angiogenesis to repair the injured site of the ICA, which had progressed into the cavernous sinus or ICA laceration extending to the ICA cavernous portion connected to the cavernous sinus. The CCF anterogradely drained into the left inferior petrosal sinus without reflux findings and was asymptomatic. However, we planned to resolve this iatrogenic abnormality.
Superficial temporal artery–middle cerebral artery double bypass followed by complete occlusion of the left ICA due to coil embolization was selected as the treatment plan for the CCF because the patient had cerebral ischemic tolerance in the occlusion test of the left ICA. These procedures were successful, and the postoperative course was uneventful . The patient was discharged on foot without a neurological deficit. The patient complained only of discomfort in the sense of smell in the postoperative outpatient clinic. Histopathology of the pituitary tumor demonstrated a nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma.