A 51-year-old man underwent combined induction chemotherapy (3 cycles of docetaxel-cisplatin-fluorouracil) followed by consolidation chemotherapy (7 cycles of cetuximab) and radiotherapy (70Gy to the tumor bed and 50Gy to the neck) in 2018 for stage cT4a cN2c cM0 squamous cell carcinoma of the floor of the mouth, with complete remission of the disease clinically and radiologically on further otolaryngology follow-up appointments. The patient had a mild untreated dyslipidemia (total cholesterol > 218mg/dL) and active smoking. There was no history of hypertension, stroke or diabetes. In 2021, he presented himself at the emergency department with an 8-day history of glossodynia and pain-related dysphagia, with exclusive nutrition through his feeding tube. The patient denied symptoms of fever, arthralgia, neurologic alterations, weight loss, visual disturbances, jaw claudication, or temporal tenderness. There was no history of vasoconstrictor use, syphilis, cardiac arrest, or embolization.
Physical examination of the head and neck showed worsening of previously restricted tongue movements, highly painful at superficial palpation, and bilateral necrosis of the anterior third of the tongue .
Laboratory workup was normal, except for an elevation of both the C-reactive protein (2,51mg/dL) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (60mm/hr). Serologies were negative for syphilis and other infections. Contrast-enhanced CT scan showed multiple areas of stenosis concerning both external carotid arteries and their branches, and total opacification of lingual arteries . A biopsy of the transition of necrotic to healthy tissue was performed, revealing unspecific inflammatory findings.
His condition was managed conservatively, with broad-spectrum antibiotics, while awaiting natural auto-amputation of the necrotic tissue, which occurred on the fifth day. The area healed by secondary intention. On the 3-month follow-up consultation, the patient denied glossodynia, which allowed him to further progress his oral uptake. The physical examination revealed total healing of the tongue .