A 63 year-old man presented in 2006 with dyspnoea on exertion (New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional class II). He had smoked 20 pack-years and quit smoking in 2003, had no professional exposure, and had a history of hypercholesterolemia treated with atorvastatin, and surgery for prostatic adenocarcinoma followed by complete remission. Clinical examination demonstrated fine ’Velcro‘-like crackles of the lung bases, with no finger clubbing, and the absence of clinical signs of connective tissue disease. The patient’s body mass index was 25 kg/m².
IPF was suspected, however lung volumes were subnormal, with forced vital capacity (FVC) of 91% of predicted, total lung capacity (TLC) of 79%, and a residual volume of 64%. Forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) was 85% of predicted; the FEV1/FVC was 71%. Transfer capacity for carbon monoxide (DLco) was 72% and transfer coefficient was 81%. Partial arterial pressure of oxygen was 11.7 kPa, decreasing to 8.2 kPa with exercise. High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest demonstrated predominantly paraseptal emphysema of the upper zones of the lungs, and interstitial lung disease of the basal regions, with intralobular reticulation and ground glass opacities . Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) differential cell counts showed 10% neutrophils, 1% eosinophils, 2% lymphocytes, and 87% macrophages. Echocardiography did not demonstrate PH. The patient was diagnosed with CPFE syndrome.
In 2007, the patient presented with acute exacerbation of pulmonary fibrosis fulfilling international criteria , and BAL culture was negative; pulmonary embolism and left heart disease were excluded. The patient received intravenous cyclophosphamide (6-monthly pulses), N-acetylcysteine, and short-term anticoagulation treatment, but experienced clinical and HRCT remission of the acute exacerbation. He was further treated with triple combination therapy (prednisone, N-acetylcysteine 1.8 g per day, and azathioprine), with progressive clinical worsening despite therapy.
In 2009, dyspnoea was NYHA functional class III. FVC was 67% of predicted, TLC was 52%, residual volume 33%, FEV1 66%, FEV1/FVC 75%, DLco 21% and Kco 50%. Long-term supplemental oxygen therapy was initiated, and PaO2 under 2 L/min supplemental oxygen was 11.2 kPa. The 6-min walk distance was 240 m, with peripheral oxygen saturation of 76% while breathing 4 L/min supplemental oxygen. The patient presented with episodes of syncope at exertion. Echocardiography demonstrated dilated right heart cavities, with estimated systolic pulmonary arterial pressure of 45 mmHg. Right heart catheterisation confirmed precapillary PH .
In 2011, repeated catheterisation showed worsening of pulmonary haemodynamics, and off-label ambrisentan therapy (5 mg per day) was initiated, with no change in oxygen saturation and PaO2. At follow-up evaluation, dyspnoea was unchanged; however significant haemodynamic improvement was observed , and 6-min walk distance improved by 27 m.