The patient was a 61-year-old male of Japanese ethnicity. He was 167cm tall, weighed 42kg, and had a body mass index (BMI) of 15kg/m2. He was admitted to our hospital to undergo surgery for multiple colorectal tumors. Colonoscopy revealed sigmoid colon cancer, an early cancer in the transverse colon, and several adenomas across the length of the entire colon . Laparoscopic subtotal colectomy was performed under general and epidural anesthesia, after informed consent was obtained from the patient. The inferior mesenteric artery and vein were resected distal the left colic artery branch. The right and left side of the colon and each mesentery and the hepatic and splenic flexure were mobilized after the area between the transverse colon and the greater omentum was resected. During detachment of the splenic flexure, all layers of the transverse colon were damaged and the intestinal contents flowed out. The ileocolic artery and vein, and the right colic and middle colic vessels were resected at each trunk. The rectum was detached up to the peritoneal reflection. Ten centimeters of the colon to the anal side of the sigmoid colon cancer was transected using a linear stapler (Echelon Flex™ Powered Endopath® Stapler 60; Ethicon, USA). After the colon was pulled out from the umbilical region and the ileum end was transected, the colon was excised. Side-to-end ileorectal anastomosis was performed using a circular stapler (Proximate* ILS CDH 29; Ethicon, USA) . Penrose drains were inserted below the left crus of the diaphragm and at the posterior surface of the anastomosis after the peritoneal cavity was washed with 3,000 cc of warm physiological saline. The small bowel was returned to its original position, antiadhesive material was placed inside the cavity, and the abdomen was closed. The duration of surgery was 8 h and 22 min, with 200 cc of blood loss.
The final diagnosis was T2N0M0 stage I moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma for the sigmoid colon cancer, stage 0 (TisN0M0) well differentiated adenocarcinoma for the transverse colon cancer, and tubular adenomas (10 low grade adenomas, 3 high grade adenomas) for other polyps. Bowel obstruction developed on the sixth day after surgery and did not improve, even after an ileus tube was inserted and conservative treatment was performed. He had fever and abdominal distension. Blood tests revealed an elevated inflammatory response, hypoalbuminemia, impaired liver function, and coagulation system abnormalities.
Emergency surgery was performed because bowel obstruction caused by internal hernia was suspected based on abdominal computed tomography (CT) findings . The upper part of the small bowel was dilated because the ileum had protruded into the mesenteric defect, leading to an internal hernia. The tip of the ileus tube had stopped at the oral side of the incarcerated herniated intestine . The area around the anastomosis had hardened and was determined to be an anastomotic stricture. The incarcerated herniated bowel was 30cm long, whereas the ileum to the oral side of the ileorectal anastomosis to the anal side was 40cm long. Re-anastomosis was performed after hernia repair because the situation was treated as a stenosis, even though circulation to the bowel of the ileorectal anastomosis was not interrupted. The mesenteric defect was closed using 3–0 Vicryl, and a Penrose drain was inserted into the posterior of the anastomosis. A loop ileostomy was them constructed. The patient began eating on the third day after emergency surgery and recovered with no major problems. He was discharged 28 days after surgery.