Our patient was a 63-year-old woman who presented with cyanosis at 7 months of age and was suspected to have CHD. At age 6, she complained of shortness of breath and decreased physical activity and was diagnosed with double outlet right ventricle with remote ventricular septal defect and pulmonary stenosis ; at age 10, she underwent a Glenn operation. At ages 30, 36, and 43, the patient experienced shortness of breath and other symptoms, underwent a lateral tunnel Fontan operation and was lost to follow-up, respectively. She visited a referring physician at age 62 because of worsening palpitations; a 12-lead electrocardiogram detected AT . She was prescribed 100 mg of amiodarone, which was subsequently reduced to 50 mg because of the appearance of symptomatic SND; however, this dose was not effective for the AT . The patient required frequent cardioversion, and she was referred to our hospital for catheter ablation (CA). She had a pulse rate of 46 beats per minute, blood pressure of 118/69 mmHg, and oxygen saturation of 89% on room air, with no leg oedema or heart murmur. She was taking azosemide (60 mg) and warfarin (1.5 mg). She had New York Heart Association class III heart failure and chronic kidney disease with an estimated glomerular filtration rate of 49 mL/min/1.73 m2 (normal range: 57–102 mL/min/1.73 m2). Blood tests showed hyperbilirubinaemia with a total bilirubin of 1.9 mg/dL (0.4–1.5 mg/dL). Computed tomography showed a small amount of ascites. Liver ultrasonography revealed congestion and moderate to severe liver fibrosis, leading to a diagnosis of cirrhosis. Echocardiography showed that the systemic ventricle was the left ventricle and its contraction was slightly reduced, with an end-diastolic area of 34.9 cm2 (10–24 cm2), end-systolic area of 23.2 cm2 (3–15 cm2), and fractional area change of 34% (35–56%). Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a left ventricular end-diastolic volume, end-systolic volume, and ejection fraction of 69 mL (42–100 mL), 30 mL (16–52 mL), and 57% (42–68%), respectively. Computed tomography revealed a 45 mm-sized thrombus located in the high right atrium (RA) , confirmed by echocardiography . Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure, right atrial pressure, and systemic ventricle end-diastolic pressure were 14, 12, and 11 mmHg, respectively.
The patient had three coexisting conditions: paroxysmal AT, symptomatic SND, and the right atrial thrombus, for which total cavopulmonary connection (TCPC) conversion with an extracardiac conduit and epicardial PMI would have been effective. However, she had no family support for life after discharge. Given the age, liver cirrhosis, renal impairment, and lack of family support, TCPC conversion was considered a high-risk option. A multidisciplinary team of cardiologists, surgeons, anaesthetists, and paediatricians selected transvenous PMI and antiarrhythmic drugs for treatment because it was less invasive. The patient also preferred a less invasive treatment.
The pectoral approach was avoided because of the high right atrial thrombus and severe tortuosity from the left subclavian vein to the RA. A transvenous pacemaker was implanted via the right CFV.
Venous access was obtained using the left CFV. Right atrial voltage mapping was performed using a multi-electrode mapping catheter (DECANAV, Biosense Webster, Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) with a three-dimensional mapping system (CARTO, Biosense Webster, Inc., Diamond Bar, CA, USA) . While most of the RA had low voltage, suitable pacing tissue was found in the posterior septum, where the voltage remained relatively high. A peel-away sheath for the pacing lead was inserted into the right CFV. An 85-cm active fixation atrial lead (Medtronic, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was implanted and connected to a Medtronic Azure W2SR01 generator ( and ). Subsequently, the patient was prescribed amiodarone and bisoprolol for AT suppression. Lead dislodgement or haematoma was not observed. She was discharged on warfarin with a target international normalised ratio of 2.0–3.0. At the most recent visit (12 months from PMI), chest radiography revealed a stable lead position with normal lead function. Atrial tachycardia occurred once in the third month after discharge. We increased the dose of amiodarone from 100 to 200 mg and she has been tachycardia-free. The dose of bisoprolol was gradually increased to 3.75 mg. The amiodarone dose has been carefully adjusted with regular monitoring of the patient's liver function, amiodarone blood levels, and KL-6 levels.