A 36-year-old woman with dyspnoea upon exertion [New York Heart Association (NYHA) Classification II] presented at the referring hospital. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a secundum-type ASD with dilatation of both the right atrium (RA) and the right ventricle (RV), as indicated by a Qp/Qs ratio of 2.40. She was referred to our hospital for transcatheter closure of the ASD. A systolic murmur was heard at the left sternal border of 2nd intercostal space, which implied relative pulmonary valve stenosis. Cyanosis and clubbed finger were not observed. Her chest radiograph showed cardiomegaly and protrusion of the left second bow. Transthoracic echocardiography performed at our hospital showed not only ASD but also irregular shunt flow in the pulmonary artery (PA), thereby indicating PDA. The transoesophageal echocardiography showed a secundum ASD with a diameter of 19 × 14 mm, and there was a sufficient rim around the defect . In addition, reconstructed three-dimensional computed tomography revealed a PDA [Krichenko Type A ]. The diameters of the PA side and aorta (ampulla) side were 2.5 and 9.7 mm, respectively. The duct length was 6.9 mm. Because simultaneous closure of both the PDA and ASD could lead to serious complications, such as thrombocytopenia or haemolysis, augmented by antiplatelet therapies to prevent device-related thrombus formation after ASD closure, PDA closure was performed before ASD closure. After the transcatheter closure of the PDA using a 6/4 mm Amplatzer Duct Occluder (ADO) (Abbott Vascular, Abbott Park, IL, USA), the Qp/Qs ratio decreased from 4.15 at baseline to 2.11, as measured by cardiac catheterization . The mean PA pressure decreased from 22 mmHg to 16 mmHg on right heart catheterization before and after PDA closure. Echocardiography revealed an estimated PA systolic pressure of 31 mmHg before PDA closure, which decreased to 23 mmHg 3 months after the procedure. Four months after PDA closure, no residual shunt was observed in a subsequent TTE, and then, we successfully completed a transcatheter closure of ASD with a 19 mm Amplatzer Septal Occluder (ASO) (Abbott Vascular, Abbott Park, IL, USA) using intracardiac echocardiography imaging guidance . There was no residual shunt through the ASD, with a decrease in size of both the RA and RV. She exhibited no dyspnoea upon exertion (NYHA Classification I) after the completion of both the PDA and ASD closures.