A 3-year-old domestic short-haired male cat experienced loss of energy and loss of appetite. Physical examination at the initial visit showed a body temperature of 38.0 °C, normal auscultation, normal visible mucosa, and slightly elevated blood pressure (systolic blood pressure: 165 mmHg). The cat also had right-sided Horner's syndrome of undetermined etiology, as no gross pathology was found in the right ear canal or neck. Blood chemistry showed elevated levels of plasma total protein and abnormally high levels of cardiac troponin I (cTnI) (1.18 ng/mL; reference range, 0–0.17 ng/mL: i-STAT Heska ).
Electrocardiogram findings revealed sinus tachycardia (253 bpm), and thoracic radiography showed no abnormalities. Echocardiography revealed irregular hypertrophy of the anterior papillary muscle and increased echogenicity; however, there were no evidence of congestion such as enlargement of the left atrium (Video ). A clinical diagnosis of suspected hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) phenotype (include myocarditis) was made, and the cat was observed on follow-up.
On the 12th day from the initial visit, the cat was brought to the hospital again with the chief complaint of syncope. At the time of admission, the cat presented with open-mouth panting, but no signs of cyanosis were observed. Blood tests showed a higher cTnI level (3.25 ng/mL), and a complete blood count analysis showed eosinophilia. The cat tested positive for both feline immunodeficiency virus and feline leukemia.
Thoracic radiography revealed cardiomegaly (VHS = 8.5; reference range, 7.5 ± 0.3) with slight pleural effusion. Focused cardiac ultrasound revealed pericardial effusion and increased hypertrophy of the papillary muscles and left ventricular posterior wall. The patient also had right atrial collapse, which was diagnosed as cardiac tamponade , and 10 mL of pericardial fluid was removed.
The total protein of the pericardial fluid was 5.2 g/dL, the number of nucleated cells was 8300 /mL, and a mixture of neutrophils; macrophages; and large, medium, and small lymphocytes were observed in the sediment smear. These findings are consistent with chronic active inflammation.
After consultation with the owner, pericardiectomy was performed through thoracotomy. The pericardium was slightly thickened and had abundant blood vessels . The left ventricular free wall myocardium had a reddish and rough surface that was found after pericardial removal . The free wall myocardial surface was punctured six to seven times with a 25-G needle without syringe aspiration. There was minimal bleeding from this procedure, and hemostasis was achieved by adding pressure with a cotton swab. No arrhythmia was observed during the procedure. No problems with this procedure occurred after the operation. Cardiac needle biopsy cytology revealed many large, atypical lymphocytes , which led to a direct diagnosis of cardiac lymphoma on the 12th day from the initial visit.
One day after the diagnosis, the cat received an injection of L-asparaginase (400 IU/kg/subcutaneous injection [SC]), followed by chemotherapy. Subsequently, the following chemotherapy protocol was adhered to: vincristine 0.5 mg/m2/intravenous injection (IV) on the 8th, 22nd, and 36th days after diagnosis; cyclophosphamide 10 mg/kg/IV on the 15th day after diagnosis; methotrexate 0.8 mg/kg/IV on the 29th day after diagnosis; L-Asparaginase 400 IU/kg/SC again on the 43rd day after diagnosis; doxorubicin 1 mg/kg/IV on the 50th day after diagnosis; and cytarabine 100 mg/m2/SC on the 57th and 58th days after diagnosis. We received the results of the pericardial pathological examination six days after the clinical diagnosis. Immunostaining revealed CD3 positive/CD20 negative lymphocytes, and T-cell large cell lymphoma was diagnosed . On the 15th day after diagnosis, cTnI levels returned to normal , and myocardial morphology appeared to have normalized . On the 43rd day after diagnosis, relapse was observed in places other than the heart. The cat died due to neurological symptoms on the 60th day after diagnosis. The owner did not consent for autopsy. Before death, a mild increase in cTnI levels and papillary muscle hypertrophy were noted, a third papillary muscle was more evident (Video ), but there were no signs of left atrial enlargement or heart failure . Postmortem, two-dimensional speckle-tracking echocardiography (2D-STE) analysis was performed using the echocardiographic data before death (4th day after diagnosis). The cardiac needle biopsy site (myocardium near the anterior papillary muscle of the left ventricle) revealed a marked reduction in myocardial deformity and lack of coordination with other areas of the left ventricular myocardium .