The 50-year-old woman in question was diagnosed with optic neuritis in March 2021, presenting with progressive impairment of visual acuity isolated to the right eye, and despite opportune methylpred-nisolone treatment, still had deteriorating vision as determined by a finger-counting test. In September 2021, both fluctuant bilateral limb numbness and unstable gait successively occurred within 1 week, with accompanying palpitations and nausea. In February 2022, the above symptoms were aggravated and spasms were occurring in the left leg. During the course of the disease, the face of the woman was always swelling and her weight was reduced by 7 kg. She was then admitted to our hospital on April 18, 2022. Upon examinations conducted at admission, her blood pressure was 129/91 mmHg; she retained normal left vision and pupillary light reflex, but right pupil light reflex decreased; neurological examinations showed grade 4 muscle strength of the limbs, hypermyotonia of the limb and neck muscles, limb and gait ataxia, and bilateral hyperreflexia with the Babinski sign.
Excluding the abnormally high values for triglycerides, total cholesterol, and low-density lipoprotein, the patient’s blood tests were otherwise normal (including routine, biochemistry, coagulation function tests, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), anti-nuclear antibody (ANA), and thyroid function). Abdominal ultrasonography found suspicious uterine fibroids and gallbladder polyps. Electrocardiogram and chest CT were normal. MRI showed T2 hyperintensity of the dorsal pons near the right surface of the fourth ventricle and spinal cord of the C4-C6 vertebrae . The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed a raised WBC count (8*106/L) and elevated protein (0.528 g/L). Serum and CSF antibodies to AQP4 were positive. Accordingly, the patient was diagnosed with neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD).
She was started on IV methylprednisolone (1 g per day) on April 22, 2022, and a combination of baclofen and clonazepam were used to improve the spasms. During the Initial treatment, her facial swelling exacerbated and blood pressure values indicated hypertension (155/65–175/75 mmHg). On the morning of 27 April 2022, her left vision had markedly deteriorated based on the finger-counting test, and her lower limb muscle strength was reduced. Immediate MRI reexamination indicated new-onset brain edematous lesions of the bilateral frontal, occipital, and parietal lobes . No abnormal hematological rechecks were found. Considering diagnosis of PRES, dehydration and hypertension-controlling measures were applied. The patient’s left vision and muscle strength improved on the next day and recovered to the status of admission after 5 days. With subsequent MRI examination on May 10, 2022, the edematous lesions had disappeared .