A 44-year-old man was referred to our hospital for treatment of a cystic tumor on the pelvic floor. He had been followed up for fatty liver disease at another hospital, and a presacral cystic tumor was unexpectedly detected on computed tomography (CT). He was highly obese, with a body mass index of 36.4 kg/m2. The tumor was neither palpable on digital rectal examination nor detected on colonoscopy. Tumor marker levels were within the normal range. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed a 45 × 40-mm tumor on the left ventral side of the rectum, right side of the ischial spine, dorsal side of the seminal vesicles, and in front of the 5th sacrum . The tumor contained highly and iso-dense areas with no enhancement effects. Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a multilocular cystic tumor with high and low signal intensities on T2-weighted images . The tumor was diagnosed as an epidermoid cyst based on the imaging findings, and the patient was scheduled to undergo surgical treatment. We considered the transsacral or laparoscopic approach and decided to perform a laparoscopic-assisted transabdominal resection since the tumor was in front of away from the sacrum, and a transsacral approach would result in a larger scar due to poor visibility from the thickness of the buttocks.
The patient was placed in the lithotomy position. A 12-mm camera port was placed at the umbilicus, followed by the placement of a 12-mm port in the lower right quadrant of the abdominal region, and three 5-mm ports in the bilateral upper and left lower quadrants. We incised the peritoneum outside the sigmoid colon and entered the Toldt’s fusion fascia . We dissected the left side of the rectum and continued the dissection of the left side of the rectum, preserving the hypogastric nerves, and reached a capsulated tumor in the presacral cavity . The sparse connective tissue around the tumor was dissected with the ultrasonic scalpel and the electric scalpel . The base of the tumor was attached to the levator ani. The levator ani was partially resected with the tumor attached, without injuring the rectum . We placed the tumor in a tissue storage bag, lengthened patient’s umbilical wound slightly, then collected the tumor. The tumor was safely resected under laparoscopic observation. The operation time was 286 min, and total blood loss was 18 ml.
Macroscopically, the tumor size was 45 × 40 mm, and the cystic lesion contained yellowish-white atheromatous material . Microscopically, the wall of the cystic lesion was composed of a squamous epithelium with a granular layer and stratified keratin in the lumen . The pathological diagnosis was epidermoid cyst. The tumor did not invade the anal levator ani; however, the muscles were still resected with the tumor. There were no malignant tumor components. Although he had slight gluteal discomfort after surgery due to partial resection of the levator ani, it resolved within two months, and there was no anal dysfunction. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 8 with good progress. There was no recurrence within one year, and there were no noted symptoms.