A 29-year-old Chinese man was admitted to the hospital with a 2-d history of intermittent fevers of up to 39 °C, and forehead headache without nausea.
Two days prior to onset, he had consumed unpasteurized cooked beef that was stored in the refrigerator for a few days.
His medical history included type 2 diabetes mellitus, which was poorly controlled, fatty liver, smoking, and drinking.
He denied a family history of hypertension and stroke.
The physical examination was unremarkable, except for nuchal rigidity.
The blood laboratory findings showed that glucose, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate were high, while white blood cells (WBCs), red blood cells, hemoglobin, urea, creatinine, serum minerals, and autoimmune antibodies were normal. The first lumbar puncture on admission revealed a turbid cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with 2090 leukocytes/mm3 (30% neutrophils, 70% monocytes), 233.85 mg/dL protein, 1.4 mmol/L glucose (serum glucose 9 mmol/L), and pressure > 33 cmH2O. CSF Gram stain showed Gram-positive rods and was negative for fungi and acid-fast bacilli . On the 8th day, the blood cultures yielded L. monocytogenes, which was susceptible to ampicillin, erythrocin, meropenem, and penicillin but resistant to sulfamethoxazole. CSF and urine cultures were negative. Repeated CSF examination on the 14th and 28th day showed a greater decrease in WBCs and protein .
The initial brain CT was unremarkable, and chest CT showed bilateral bronchopneumonia. On the 4th day of admission, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed an abnormally high T2 flow attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) signal in the right pons and prominent temporal horns with enlargement of the ventricles . On the 14th day, brain CT showed hemorrhage of the right pons and hydrocephalus (bilateral lateral ventricular and the third ventricle hydrocephalus) . The 3rd cerebral CT was performed on the day after extraventricular drainage, revealed significant dilatation of fourth ventricle, and no remission in lateral ventricles . The 4th brain CT on the 29th day showed rehaemorrhagia of the lateral ventricle and a larger ventricular system .