The patient, a 3 years old boy , is the third child of healthy unrelated French parents. The mother, 45 years old at the time of conception, had two healthy children from a previous union.
The patient was born at a gestational age of 37 weeks with a birth weight of 2750 g (32nd percentile), a birth length of 46 cm (13th percentile) and a birth head circumference of 34 cm (55th percentile). As usually, he had vitamin D prescription (1200 UI of cholecalciferol/day) that he received irregularly during the first 2 months of life. At the age of 9 months, he was referred to the Department of Paediatrics due to growth retardation. Biological tests and clinical examination were normal.
At the age of 12 months, he was evaluated for persistent short stature and developmental delay with feeding difficulties and vomiting. A parental abuse was suspected but feeding difficulties and vomiting persisted during hospitalisation. His weight was 6270 g (− 2.5 SD) and his length was 70.5 cm (− 2.5 SD). On evaluation, there was no evidence for a secondary growth disorder. Except a mild developmental delay, neurological examination was normal. Cardiac ultrasonography and cerebral MRI did not reveal any abnormality. Thyroid function tests and concentrations of IGF-1, calcium, inorganic phosphate and alkaline phosphatase were all within normal limits. There was no evidence of a metabolic disease .
Clinical examination suggested a mild facial dysmorphism with a frontal bossing, a high anterior hairline, deep-set eyes, small low-set backward-rotated ears, and a thin upper lip corresponding at 3 out 6 on the Netchine-Harbison clinical scoring system for SRS criteria . The clinical features of our patient are compared to a cohort of UPD(20)mat reviewed by Hjortshøj et al. (Supplementary Table 1).
After this evaluation, calcium/vitamin D supplementation was resumed.
At the age of 18 months, a renal ultrasonography showed a bilateral nephrocalcinosis grade II, associated to hypercalciuria, hypophosphatemia, increased 1,25 OH vitamin D with abnormally low parathyroid hormone level (PTH) .