A 67-year-old male who complained of upper abdominal pain for 1 mo that was aggravated for 5 d was referred to our hospital.
One month previously, he had suffered dull abdominal pain that was around the epigastric area and radiated to the lower back without nausea, hematemesis, melena or fever. This discomfort worsened for 5 d. The patient was referred to our hospital.
The patient had no previous medical history.
He had a long-term drinking personal history for 43 years (liquor 250 g/d) and no family history of malignant tumors or genetic diseases.
His vital signs were stable. Abdominal examination revealed mild tenderness in the epigastric area and negative peritoneal irritation signs.
The serum tumor markers were within the normal range. Other laboratory examinations were normal except for a slight elevation in serum amylase (232 U/L).
Abdominal CT showed enlargement of the pancreatic head with unclear borders and scattered irregular calcifications. The intrapancreatic lesion was slightly enhanced with uneven density on contrast-enhanced imaging , and the main pancreatic duct was markedly dilated , indicating a tumor in the pancreatic head with surrounding inflammation. MRI described the enlargement and deformation of the pancreatic head, and the contrast-enhanced scan showed uniformly mild enhancement within the lesion . The pancreatic duct was generally dilated, and the pancreatic body and tail showed slight atrophy . Neuroendocrine tumors of the pancreatic head with pancreatitis were considered.
Gastroscopy showed that the shape of the duodenal papilla was normal, and there was no abnormal secretion . Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed mild atrophy of the pancreatic body and tail, obvious dilation of the main pancreatic duct that was 10 mm in diameter and no dilation of the bile duct. An irregular cystic lesion (size: 1.5 cm × 1.8 cm) was found in the central parenchyma of the pancreatic head with wall thickness and enhancing nodules . Color doppler flow imaging (CDFI) indicated turbulent blood flow in the lesion with intense vascular flow and connection with the surrounding vessel . Its blood flow filling frequency was consistent with that of the abdominal aorta, and the arterial blood flow signal was indicated by the doppler spectrum . Arteriography was further preformed, and an oval area of contrast medium extravasation was finally discovered at the far-end branch of the superior pancreaticoduodenal artery after two injections of contrast medium .