An 81-year-old Taiwanese woman underwent spinal decompression with posterior lumbar intervertebral fusion for L4-L5 degenerative spinal stenosis at a local hospital in Taiwan 10 years ago. Her past history included hypertension and diabetes with medical control for decades. Her bone mineral density examination showed osteoporosis.
The patient had been suffering from lower back pain with neurologic claudication for 6 months. She went to the same hospital, and the radiographs showed adjacent degenerative spinal stenosis with retrolisthesis of L2-L3 and L3-L4. On May 7, 2013, she underwent wide laminectomies of L2 to L4 with circumferential instrumented fusion from L5 to L1. The T12 and L1 vertebral bodies were augmented with cement. Postoperatively, her lower back pain and neurologic condition improved with good sagittal balance .
On July 1, 2013, she had severe back pain with kyphotic deformity. She denied any trauma since previous surgery. The radiographs showed ASD, with posterior subluxation of T12 on L1 and proximal junctional angle of 52° from T11 to L1. She had preserved muscle power of lower limbs with intact functions of micturition and defecation. On August 29, 2013, she underwent a revision surgery for the correction of T12 subluxation, cephalad extension of instrumented fusion to T9, and prophylactic T8 vertebroplasty., She wore a hyperextension brace postoperatively. The radiographs showed restored alignment of the spine .
On September 17, 2013, she complained of severe upper back pain with Grade B neurologic injury and compromised bladder sphincter function. The radiographs showed ASD with anterior subluxation of T8 and 36° of proximal junctional kyphosis (T7-T9). The magnetic resonance image showed severe cord compression of T8-T9 level. The following surgery was performed on September 19, 2013, that is, extension of the spinal rods reached T2, which was augmented with cement. T1 did not have prophylactic vertebroplasty , and her neurologic grade and low micturition function were improving slowly.
On October 25, 2013, the patient suddenly developed acute pain over the neck area. She had an impairment of the micturition and defecation functions. The magnetic resonance image demonstrated T1 compression fracture involving the inferior end plate and 28° segmental kyphosis with spinal cord compression . Because of her concomitant medical problems and the difficulty and controversy of subsequent surgery, she had conservative management with cervical thoracic orthosis support. She had been on rehabilitation therapy for 6 months after T1-T2 injury. Her neurologic function recovered very slowly with Grade C neurologic deficit 2 years after surgery.