53-year-old man underwent abdominal ultrasonography (USG) during investigation for bilateral renal nephrolithiasis. The patient had normal blood biochemistry, and had no cardiovascular or hormonal disorder. He had been operated 17 years earlier to repair his extrophic bladder by creating an Indiana pouch. His weight was 85 kg.s with a body mass index of 28.7 kg/m2. USG showed a hyperechogenic lesion at the fat intensity filling out right renal sinus completely. Computerized tomography scan confirmed the presence of a fatty mass that extended from the renal sinus down to the pelvis cuffing the right ureter throughout its entire length with severe hydronephrosis. Left kidney was unremarkable except a small scar at the upper pole. The presence of high density regions inside the lesion imparted a suspicion for liposarcoma. The resection of the mass with right radical nephroureterectomy was performed.
Macroscopically, the tumor was 16x13x6 cm in size, fatty in appearance marbled with irregular whitish solid areas or fibrosis . Entrapped ureter was stenotic proximally and distally, but dilated at its middle part. Kidney was hydronephrotic with thinned out atrophic parenchyma. A few small stones were detected inside the collecting system. Microscopic examination of the tumor showed mature fat tissue which was devoid of normal architecture owing to expanded interstitial spaces either because of intense edema or irregular fibrous streaks . Fibrous septa between fat lobules contained mildly increased numbers of stromal fibroblasts, fine collagen, vascular proliferation, multifocal lymphocytic infiltration, occasional lymphoid follicles and foamy histiocytes . Plasma cells were rare, and immunohistochemistry showed only < 2% IgG4+/ IgG+ plasma cell ratio. There were also scattered smooth muscle bundles usually in close association with vessels. Ectatic branching lymphatic channels were not noted. There were neither lipoblasts nor significant cellular atypia. A few scattered fibroblasts carried multilobulated large nuclei which were a bit worrisome , but these were rare and displayed regular chromatin distribution without hyperchromasia, thus thought to be reactive rather than neoplastic. Additionally, the immunohistochemistry for MDM2 and CDK4 gave negative results (insets-Fig. ) as well as stains for pan-keratins, HMB-45 and melan-A. Fluorescent in-situ hybridization analysis did not show MDM2 amplification. The findings were found compatible with MLL. The most possible predisposing factor in this current case appears to be operational trauma which occurred 17 years ago. He did not have lymphedema in the scrotum, legs, abdominal wall, or in the other regions of the body. The patient has stayed recurrence-free for the past 5 years after diagnosis.