A 69-year-old Japanese woman with a right cementless THA undertaken 44 months previously had a right femoral shaft fracture. She recalled that she experienced acute pain in her right thigh while standing. She believed that the fracture occurred at that point in time, after which she fell down. Thus, it was not a result of trauma.
Radiographs showed a noncomminuted transverse fracture located at the tip of the stem as well as localized periosteal thickening of the lateral cortex in the distal fragment. The fracture was complete, extending through both cortices, and was associated with a medial spike in the proximal fragment. There was no apparent loosening of the THA components. A radiograph taken at the 3-year follow-up of THA (8 months before the fracture) shows no abnormal findings .
At 15 years prior to this episode she had been diagnosed with dermatomyositis and subsequently developed interstitial pneumonia. Prednisolone and immunosuppressants (azathioprine, cyclosporine, tacrolimus) were used to treat her dermatomyositis and interstitial pneumonia. She had been on home oxygen therapy for the past 3 years. THA of her right hip had been performed to treat hip joint destruction caused by avascular necrosis of the femoral head induced by steroid use.
At admission, her height was 153.5cm, and she weighed 41kg. Her body mass index was 17.4kg/m2. She was a prior smoker, having stopped 21 years ago. She did not drink alcohol. She had other past medical histories. Hemi-thyroidectomy was performed for a thyroid tumor 23 years ago, and she took thyroid hormone preparation. She also had necrotizing fasciitis of the anterior cervical region that had spread from a gingival abscess 7 months ago. In addition, she underwent total hysterectomy, although she did not remember exactly when it took place. She had been taking an anti-hypertension drug and an H2 blocker for some time.
She had been on alendronate for at least 7 years. Her oral surgeon discontinued it 7 months prior to this fracture. It was replaced by activated vitamin D and vitamin K to treat her osteoporosis. The bone mineral density examined after the fracture of the left femoral neck was 0.644g/cm2, which is 82% of the young adult mean. Radiographs and magnetic resonance imaging revealed no abnormalities in her contralateral femur.
We performed open reduction and internal fixation using a locking plate. We chose a reversed locking compression plate for the distal femur (LCP-DF; Synthes, Tokyo, Japan) for the contralateral side and an LCP cable system (Synthes). We judged that some fracture gap remained after the reduction and fixation, and so placed a small amount of β-tricalcium phosphate bone substitute to fill the gap. Autologous bone grafting was not performed. Bone healing progressed with time, and bony union was obtained 6 months after the surgery .
She regained the ability to walk, although her activity was limited by her comorbidities, especially interstitial pneumonia. The latest follow-up was performed 2 years after the fracture surgery. She had no pain in her right hip joint or thigh. She could walk with a cane at home and used a wheelchair outside the home. A radiographic examination revealed no displacement or loosening of the implants, and the fracture site had remodeled well .