The patient was a 61-year-old man with multiple left rib fractures (1–6 ribs), left pneumothorax, left lung contusion, and left thoracic subcutaneous emphysema due to a fall injury. The examination showed a partial depression in the left front rib and abnormal breathing (see Fig. ).
Admission chest CT examination: 1–6 rib fractures on the left side (of which 3, 4 ribs are long comminuted fractures (see Fig. )); left pneumothorax, left traumatic wet lung; a small amount of liquid pneumothorax on the left side.
Patient was given early chest straps, multiparametric monitoring, analgesia, and oxygen therapy. The chest pain was still severe. The visual analogue scale scored 7–8 points for the pain at rest and 9 points for the cough.
Physical examination revealed that the left chest wall was recessed and abnormally breathed. The CT scan of the rib showed a long comminuted fracture of 3 and 4 ribs. The key to successful operation was the reduction and fixation of these two rib fractures. A preoperative CT scan was performed to reconstruct the 3D model based on the scan results (see Fig. ), and 3D printing technology was used to prepare 3 and 4 rib models (see Fig. ). The three D print models of each fracture segment of the two ribs were adherently reconstructed.
The two rib metal plates were separately shaped according to the reconstruction model (see Figs. and ).
The patient is scheduled to have a open reduction and internal fixation of 3–6 rib fracture. After general anesthesia, right side lying position, small incision about 8 cm was performed under the edge of 4th rib underarm. The skin was sequentially incised and the subcutaneous tissue was freed layer by layer. The front of the latissimus dorsi muscle and the anterior serratus were exposed. The tunnel was established on the 3rd and 4th rib surfaces from the back of the chest and small muscles to the back of the scapula. The special long hooks lifted the scapula and exposed the scapular operation space. With assistance of endoscope, the electrocautery is useful to expose 3 cm outside the outermost fracture lines of the 3 and 4 ribs. The locking plate was molded on the surface of the third rib before operation, and the broken end of the non-fracture at the anterior and posterior portions of the third rib was well fitted. The distance between the two ends of the metal bone plate exceeded the fracture line to 3 nail holes distance. Under the thoracoscope, the metal plate and the ribs were temporarily fixed with long-angled forceps. The MIPO system was used to drill the holes. Two screws were implanted and locked at both ends to firmly fix the metal plate. In turn, each fracture segment was reset and drilled and secured to a metal plate. The fourth rib is fixed in the same way. Intraoperative image . 5, 6 rib fractures given to fix the ribs, not the content of this article, not elaborated. Sufficient to stop the bleeding, the wound was given to leave a negative pressure drainage tube. After a routine thoracoscopic probe of the chest cavity, a closed thoracic drainage tube was placed posterior to the 7th intercostal space and the incision was closed layer by layer. After the chest wall is well-shaped. Three days after surgery review the map .