The patient was a 19-year-old woman born with normal development. She achieved good grades and graduated from elementary school. Her relationships with family and friends were good. At the age of 13 years, she developed obsessive compulsive symptoms, could not go outside, and dropped out of middle school because of worsening symptoms. The following year, she visited a psychiatric hospital and was diagnosed with OCD. After repeated hospitalization, she attended psychiatric daycare programs on her own for several months. However, in year X-1, her slowness relapsed, and she could not live her daily life without help. She was admitted to our hospital in months Y and X.
When admitted to our hospital, she moved extremely slowly and required several hours to eat and use the toilet. Each action was subdivided and ordered such that she was unable to move on to the next action without confirming the action she had performed. When she was unable to carry out such actions as planned, a sense of incompleteness manifested. Such compulsive behaviors were present every day for more than 2 weeks and unrelated to depression, schizophrenia, or Tourette syndrome; therefore, we diagnosed her with OCD. Because she experienced no compulsion for washing, fear of filth, or repetition of the act of checking, we ruled out the possibility of slowing down as a secondary result of these factors. We also interviewed the patient and ruled out any developmental disorders. No history of psychoactive substance or alcohol use ruled out substance use disorders. Her slowness was not based on biased values or perfectionism; therefore, personality disorder was excluded. She experienced no symptoms of parkinsonism, depressive episodes, or catatonia, and we ruled out slowness due to these pathologies. Therefore, she was diagnosed with POS. Her Yale-Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS) score was 28.
Psychoeducation was initiated soon after admission to our hospital and provided weekly. We asked her to review what the segmentation of action meant to her and imagine that eliminating the process would make her daily life easier. By hospitalization day 21, the patient, who had previously deemed her compulsive behavior necessary, reconsidered it to be irrational and resisted it. And then, prompting and modeling was started one month after admission. The behavioral therapy was implemented once or twice a week for about 60 min each time. Prompting and modeling for POS, in which the patient was encouraged and guided by staff and modeled to imitate the actions of others, was provided by a multidisciplinary team, including doctors, nurses, psychologists, and occupational therapists. Modeling the patient herself using videos was also effective. The video recordings were done using the patient’s mobile phone. We recorded medical staffs performing actions such as the movements of holding chopsticks and taking medication. The length of each video was approximately 1 min. Then, we made the videos available for viewing by the patient at any time. While watching a video, the patient tried to hold chopsticks and take medication in accordance with the actions of the medical staffs in the video. On hospitalization day 51, the Y-BOCS score was 31 with no improvement, although the patient could eat and take her medication with simple verbal encouragement. Toileting and bathing remained slow and required more than 1 h, even with assistance.
In order to maintain the therapeutic effect after discharge, we thought that family counseling was very significant. During admission, we also repeatedly conducted psychoeducation for the family members. In particular, we pointed out that excessive family assistance in the performance of daily personal activities deprived the patient of the opportunity to recognize the irrationality of the compulsive behavior and to feel the pain in the performance of the compulsive behavior. We explained that this would inhibit the patient’s motivation for treatments, resulting in chronicity of the obsessive-compulsive symptoms.
The medications included brexpiprazole and low-dose clomipramine before admission. The American Psychiatric Association guidelines recommend selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) as the first-line medication; however, if the patient does not respond to SSRI treatment, switching to other SSRIs, clomipramine, or augmentation with an atypical antipsychotic is recommended. The patient had received multiple SSRIs (paroxetine, sertraline, and escitalopram) before admission, all of which were ineffective and was prescribed with clomipramine at a low dose. After admission, the dose of clomipramine was increased to a maximum. On hospitalization day 52, brexpiprazole was replaced with aripiprazole because of recent findings showing the efficacy of augmentation therapy with aripiprazole , although with off-label use. The aripiprazole dose was increased to 10 mg but worsened obsessive-compulsive slowing and was reduced to 6 mg on day 80. Memantine, which is reportedly effective , was also administered, and the dose was increased to 15 mg.
In month Y + 3 of the same year, the patient was discharged and continued prompting and modeling with the help of her family while visiting our hospital every week. Subsequently, the memantine dose was increased to 20 mg. Two months later, she recovered to perform toileting and bathing independently, and her Y-BOCS score improved to 20.