A 70-year-old Japanese woman had been treated at a nearby orthopedic hospital for 3 years for low back pain and forward-leaning posture. She had a 10-year history of rheumatoid arthritis that had been treated successfully with 8 mg of methotrexate weekly, and, except for the back pain of 3 years duration, there was no swelling or pain in any of the joints in her extremities. During the preceding 1–2 years, the patient had noticed an increased frequency of falls with bilateral muscle weakness in the lower extremities. MRI and x-ray examination of the brain and entire spinal cord revealed only mild paraspinal muscular atrophy without any atlantoaxial dislocation or lumbar spinal canal stenosis . The orthopedic surgeon referred her to our department for evaluation of the difficulty in maintaining an upright posture and lower extremity muscle weakness, which was accompanied by only mild degenerative changes in the spine. The patient has a family history of certain medical conditions. Her older sister has been diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis, and her older brother has Parkinson's disease. However, there is no history of neuromuscular disorders within the family.
On admission, the patient’s body temperature was 36.9 °C, the pulse rate was 78 beats per minute, and the blood pressure was 129/65 mmHg. She was alert, her mental status was normal, and there were no abnormalities in the head and neck region, including cranial nerve function. There were no major deformities of the extremity joints, while slight deformities of the finger joints were noted. Chest examination revealed no lung murmurs, and chest X-rays showed no abnormalities. Heart sounds and an electrocardiogram were normal. The MRI T2-weighted images (T2WI) of the spine showed no significant deformity of the thoracic or lumbar spine, no kyphosis or kyphosis, and only mild atrophy of the paraspinal muscles of the thoracic spine . The MRI Short Tau Inversion Recovery (STIR) sequence of the spine was evaluated for paraspinal muscle inflammation using sagittal sections. However, no evidence of inflammatory changes was detected within the paraspinal muscles (Data not shown). Gait examination revealed a wide-based gait with stooping posture and difficulties with tandem gait or squatting . She could not walk fast, and it took her 34 s to walk 10 m . Symmetrical proximal muscle weakness, notably within the iliopsoas and quadriceps, was observed with Medical Research Council Grade 4/5. The other muscles of the extremities were normal. Deep tendon reflexes were enhanced bilaterally in the biceps brachii and quadriceps femoris and were normal elsewhere. Muscle tone in the upper limbs was normal, but spasticity was observed in the lower limbs. Babinski signs were detected bilaterally. Sensory examination, including deep sensation, showed no abnormalities. Cerebellar function was nearly normal in the finger–nose–finger test, although it was associated with terminal fine tremors in both hands. There was no history of autonomic nervous system symptoms such as frequent urination, constipation, or orthostatic hypotension, while skin dryness was observed from the lower abdomen to both lower extremities, which was thought to be a sweating disturbance.
Respiratory function tests showed mixed ventilatory impairment with a vital capacity of 67.5% and forced expiratory volume in 1 s of 60.61%. Because no abnormalities were detected on chest examination, trunk muscle dysfunction was suspected as the cause of ventilatory impairment. Blood gas test results were pH 7.398, pCO2 42.8 mmHg, pO2 69.9 mmHg, and HCO3 25.9 mmol/L.
Laboratory test results included erythrocyte sedimentation rate (Westergren method) 23 mm/h (normal: 3–15 mm/h), hemoglobin 12.2 g/dL, hematocrit 38.7% (mean corpuscular volume 93.9 fL, mean corpuscular hemoglobin [MCH] 29.6 pg, MCH concentration 31.5 g/dL). White blood cell count was 3980/mm3 and platelet count was 230,000/mm3. Urinalysis, liver, and renal function tests; lipid tests; and thyroid function tests were normal. C-reactive protein level was 0.75 mg/dL (normal: < 0.14 mg/dL), soluble interleukin-2 receptor was 896 U/mL (normal: 122–496 U/mL), and creatine kinase was normal. Immune function analysis showed elevated rheumatoid factor (RF) at 56.3 IU/L (normal: < 13 IU/L) and slightly elevated serum matrix metalloproteinase-3 (MMP-3) at 60.1 ng/mL (17.3–59.7 ng/mL). Levels of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibody were elevated at 67.3 U/mL (normal: < 4.5 U/mL), but all other antibodies tested, including anti-nuclear, anti-dsDNA, anti-Sm, anti-RNP, anti-SS-A, and anti-SS-B antibodies, were not elevated. M-paraproteinemia was not detected. Serum was positive for anti-HTLV-1 antibody by chemiluminescence enzyme immunoassay. HTLV-1 proviral load (PVL) was 10.56 copies per 100 peripheral blood cells. An anti-HIV antibody test was negative. Anti-hepatitis B virus (HBV) core and anti-HBV surface antibody tests were positive, but HBV surface antigen and HBV DNA tests were negative.
Evaluation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed normal cell counts, protein levels, and sugar levels, but neopterin and CXCL10, two markers of inflammation in myelitis, were elevated at 49 pmol/mL (normal: 0–5 pmol/mL) and 5331.9 pg/mL (normal: 0–200 pg/mL), respectively, suggesting an ongoing inflammatory process in the central nervous system . HTLV-1 antibody titer in CSF was elevated (1:1024 dilution) and HTLV-1 PVL was 20.55 copies per 100 CSF cells.
A needle electromyogram revealed a short-duration and polyphasic pattern of motor unit potentials and early recruitment pattern in the iliopsoas muscle, but without increased insertion activity or any fibrillation potential. The needle electromyogram of the tibialis anterior muscle showed no abnormalities. Nerve conduction studies performed in the left upper and lower extremities were within normal limits and F-wave latencies were also within normal limits. The F-wave frequency was > 90% in the right ulnar nerve and right tibial nerve. Somatosensory evoked potential tests performed at the bilateral tibial nerves showed slightly prolonged latencies. P40 latencies were 44.6 ms on the left side and 45.6 ms on the right side. The patient’s height was 153.9 cm. Because peripheral nerve conduction velocities were within normal limits, we concluded that the central conduction time was prolonged. Notably, prolonged central conduction time has been reported to be a possible finding in HAM/TSP [, ].
A pathological study was conducted on biceps brachii muscle tissue because the upper limb muscles are typically not affected in HAM/TSP. Microscopic examination of the biopsied left biceps brachii muscle revealed connective tissue elements with normal morphology . Muscle fibers ranged between 15 and 70 μm in diameter and many fibers appeared to be degenerating without necrosis. Atrophied fibers with irregular sarcolemma and abnormal cytoplasm were common. Modified Gomori–Trichrome staining revealed nemaline rods; when evaluated by electron microscopy, these rods exhibited similar electron densities to those of the muscle Z lines. Likewise, some fibers had a lobulated appearance. The frequency of fibers with rods was estimated to be approximately 5.3%. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide tetrazolium reductase staining revealed focal areas of both decreased and increased activity. Adenosine monophosphate deaminase and cytochrome c oxidase activities were within normal limits. A random checkerboard distribution of histochemical fiber types was preserved. Acid phosphatase activity was increased slightly in some myofibers, although muscle fiber glycogen and lipid content appeared to be normal.
The patient received high-dose intravenous methylprednisolone therapy (1000 mg per day) for 3 days. Testing performed on Day 4 showed marked improvement in the strength of the iliopsoas muscles, as well as in posture and stride when walking . Notably, the time to completion and the number of steps taken in the 10-Meter Walk Test were both remarkably improved, as was the distance covered in the 2-Minute Walk Test . Interestingly, these improvements in function were sustained for approximately 3 months after treatment, at which time the pre-treatment posture returned.