A 76 year-old man was referred to our hospital with a 10 month history of an enlarging plaque on the cutaneous aspect of the upper lip. He had presented six months previously with symptoms of nasal stuffiness and epistaxis. The lesion began as a small nodule.
Past medical history included type-2 diabetes mellitus, ischaemic heart disease and hypertension. The man was born in Italy. In 1952 he immigrated to Australia. He resided in the Northern Territory for seven years then had resided in the outer suburbs of Melbourne, Victoria, since. 19 years prior to presentation he had travelled back to Italy and southern France. He denied any other travel. The man could not recall any similar facial lesions in the past.
Examination revealed a 2 × 1.7 cm plaque involving the cutaneous aspect of the upper lip bordering the nostrils . The lesion had a moderate exudate and some scaling. The patient was afebrile with no splenomegaly.
Two 2 mm × 4 mm biopsies of the lesion were taken. Histopathology revealed mixed suppurative and granulomatous inflammation in the dermis with prominent plasma cells. Innumerable dot-shaped microorganisms of approximately 3 microns in diameter were seen filling histiocytes. Giemsa stain of these microorganisms was positive, morphologically consistent with amastigotes of Leishmania species. Periodic acid Schiff and Grocott (silver) stains for fungi were negative.
The identification and speciation of L. infantum was confirmed by two molecular methods. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) targeting of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region and subsequent digestion of the amplicon with the restriction enzyme HaeIII was performed as previously described . The restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) banding pattern was consistent with L. donovani complex. In order to confirm genotyping results and to further speciate, the sample was analyzed by another PCR-RFLP genotyping method targeting the miniexon gene according to the genotyping scheme described elsewhere . The banding pattern was consistent with L. infantum.
Standard bacterial cultures revealed no growth at 48 hours. A human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody test was negative. Baseline renal function was within normal range. A peripheral lymphocyte count demonstrated a slight decrease in CD4 T- cells (0.48 × 109/L), this persisted post treatment and no cause for this was identified.
Due to the anticipated pain of intra-lesional injections, infection with a species that causes visceral disease and concern regarding mucosal involvement, the patient was given intravenous liposomal amphotericin B (3 mg/kg) daily for five days with a further infusion at day ten. Review a month later showed minor improvement in the size of the lesion with persistent cracking and erythema. Suspecting secondary bacterial infection a course of antibiotics (Cephalexin) was prescribed. A second biopsy was performed three months post treatment. This revealed marked granulomatous and inflammatory reactions with occasional amastigotes. A further dose of liposomal amphotericin B at 3 mg/kg was given. Topical hydrocortisone was prescribed to manage surrounding inflammation. On review eight months after treatment, there was complete resolution of the lesion .