A 63-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital due to aortoiliac occlusive disease . She had a history of hypertension and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and was a former smoker for 50 years. Aortobifemoral graft surgery was performed without any major complications, but there was a perioperative bleeding of 1000 ml requiring blood transfusion, plasma and fluids. She was in pain, was subfebrile and was haemodynamically unstable. Norepinephrine, epidural analgesics, oxycodone tablets, antibiotics and fluids were given. In the morning on postoperative (PO) day 1 she reported dizziness, nausea, and a fluctuating “sensation that the room was turned upside-down”. It was believed that she was overdosed with opioids, and oxycodone and the epidural were discontinued. On the following day she felt much better and was mobilized, but still experienced 3 more episodes with stereotyped visual illusions, and these recurred twice on PO day 3. All episodes occurred while lying in bed. She was not able to tell whether they were triggered by turning of the head or by the use of her arms. The episodes started suddenly and faded gradually away. Each episode lasted 10 to 30 min. She described unspecific dizziness, but an exact 90o rotation of the visual scene in the sagittal plane . She also described a sensation of being translocated to the posterior corner of the ceiling, looking down at the room. No oscillopsia or other associated neurological symptoms were reported. The blood pressure (BP) was not measured during the episodes, and no treatment was given. After the last incident the surgeons asked for a neurological assessment.
Work-up with neurological examination and head CT showed nothing amiss, but the BP on her left arm was consistently around 40 mmHg below that on the right arm. Cerebrovascular Doppler Sonography revealed complete retrograde flow from the V4 and the V2 segment of the left vertebral artery (VA), independent of muscular activity of the arm. Besides the standard postoperative care, no specific treatment was given. No more illusions were experienced, and the patient was discharged from hospital. Further diagnostic workup with a head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed 6 weeks later. This revealed an older ischemic lesion in the right external capsule, and absent flow in the left posterior communicating artery . The proximal left subclavian artery was occluded. On follow-up 3 months after the discharge from hospital, the patient was in good condition and reporting no neurological symptoms after being discharged from the hospital. A diagnosis of subclavian steal grade 3 (permanent retrograde flow in the vertebral artery) was confirmed.