A 70-year old Bangladeshi male presented with exertional shortness of breath and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea for 6 months. He also gave a history of chest pain of sudden onset 6 months prior to this admission, for which he had not sought medical attention. Electrocardiogram showed pathological Q waves in inferior leads and left ventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiography revealed moderate eccentric mitral regurgitation, septal hypertrophy and global hypokinesia with a left ventricular ejection fraction of ~ 35%.
Coronary angiography revealed a dual LAD of anomalous origin. The short LAD giving off the first septal branch arose from the left main coronary artery (LMCA) , and terminated after giving off a large diagonal branch, which continued further down towards the apex . The left circumflex artery (LCx) had a normal origin from the LMCA and followed a normal course . There was mild to moderate disease in the LCx just before the first obtuse marginal branch. The long LAD arose from the proximal RCA, and after traversing a distance, arrived at the AIVS . The long LAD gave off diagonal branches and terminated at the apex . The RCA was totally occluded from its early mid part and well-collateralized with retrograde flow from the left system . This pattern of a short LAD arising from LMCA and terminating before reaching the apex, and a long LAD arising from the proximal RCA and coursing towards the apex, is consistent with a type IV dual LAD which, to the best our knowledge, has not been previously reported in a Bangladeshi subject.
We attributed his symptoms to a prior inferior MI (which possibly occurred when he developed chest pain 6 months ago) and subsequent development of ischaemic secondary mitral regurgitation (MR) owing to a totally occluded RCA. He was offered percutaneous revascularisation and further computerized tomography (CT) evaluation of the anomalous LAD, which he declined due to financial constraints. He was discharged on optimal medical therapy consisting of dual antiplatelet therapy, stains, nitrates, diuretics, beta blockers and ACE inhibitors and was symptomatically well at subsequent follow up.