A 37-year-old immunocompetent man presented with a 1 week-long progressive bilateral lower limb weakness. He had a history of tobacco use, alcohol use (5–6 drinks at a time, 2–4 times per month), and previous L3-5 posterior lumbar fusion for a traumatic L4 burst fracture 20 years earlier and no subsequent residual neurologic deficits. Initial symptoms began 2–3 weeks prior with paresthesias in bilateral feet, which he initially attributed to cold weather and the physical demands of his job as a mechanic. The patient is single and lives with a cat and reported no recent travel. Five days prior to presentation he developed rapidly progressive weakness in his bilateral lower limbs, left greater than right, and decreased sensation starting in his mid-abdomen into the bilateral legs. At presentation to a referring emergency department, he was non-ambulatory with fecal and urinary incontinence and a postvoid residual volume > 1L requiring foley catheter placement. He was transferred to our facility. Examination upon arrival demonstrated a well-developed man in no distress. Blood pressure was 126/94 mmHg, body temperature 37.6 degrees centigrade and oxygen saturation 99%. He had normal strength in his upper limbs, but severe bilateral lower limb weakness (Left: 1/5 hip flexion, 2/5 knee flexion/extension, 4/5 dorsiflexion/plantarflexion; Right 3/5 hip flexion, 4/5 knee flexion/extension, 4/5 dorsiflexion/plantarflexion), patellar and Achilles hyporeflexia, but upgoing plantar reflexes. Sensation was diminished distal to the T10 level. Pertinent laboratory findings included a white blood cell count of 5.7 K/uL (normal 3.8 – 10.5) with 67% neutrophils, C-reactive protein 0.4 mg/dL (normal 0.0 – 1.1), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 18 mm/Hr (normal 0 – 15), HIV serology and PCR negative, COVID-19 PCR negative.
Magnetic resonance (MR) scan of the lumbar and thoracic spine demonstrated an enhancing intramedullary lesion at T10 measuring 2.7 × 0.7 x 0.07 cm with diffuse T2 cord signal extending from T6-12 . Imaging of the head, cervical and lumbar spine was normal. Diagnostic considerations included transverse myelitis versus neoplasm. A lumbar puncture was performed with nucleated cell count < 1/uL (normal < 5), red cell count 1/uL (normal < 1), glucose 92 mg/dl, protein 96 mg/dl, ACE 1.8 U/L (normal 0 – 2.5), oligoclonal bands negative, gram stain and culture negative. Meningitis/encephalitis PCR panel (including Escherichia coli, Haemophilus influenzae, Listeria monocytogenes, Neisseria meningitidis, Streptococcus agalactiae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, CMV, enterovirus, parechovirus, VZV, Cryptococcus neoformans, and HSV) was negative. Flow cytometry was negative for malignancy.
His strength declined over the course of the first several days after admission with near complete paraplegia of the lower limbs. He was started on high-dose IV methylprednisolone (1000 mg) IV every day for 5 days with significant improvement to antigravity strength at the knee and ankle. Repeat MRI performed after one week demonstrated decreased size of the enhancing lesion (from 2.7 × 0.7 × 0.7 cm to 1.7 × 0.7 × 0.7 cm) and decreased surrounding edema.
After completing the initial course of corticosteroids, lower limb strength again declined 4 days later prompting repeat MR imaging demonstrating recurrent extensive T2 cord signal change, similar to the initial scan. The patient’s case was discussed at the institutional multi-disciplinary spine/neuro-oncology conference where inflammatory etiologies were considered most likely. The decision was made to continue corticosteroids, initiate plasmapheresis and perform a 1-month follow-up MRI prior to consideration of spinal cord biopsy.
He underwent five plasmapheresis treatments and a second course of high-dose IV methylprednisolone (1000 mg every other day × 5, alternating with plasmapheresis treatments) and subsequently was placed on an oral prednisone taper (60 mg by mouth (PO) daily (QD) for 26 days followed by 50 mg PO QD for two weeks, 40 mg PO QD for two weeks, 30 mg PO QD for two weeks, and has been on 20 mg PO QD indefinitely as maintenance treatment). Lower limb strength waxed and waned. Repeat imaging (brain and total spine) was again performed as planned approximately 1 month after admission with stable appearance of the thoracic lesion, but progression of T2 cord signal. Repeat CSF sampling showed a similar profile to earlier sampling. Given the stable appearance of the lesion and persistent deficits, spinal cord biopsy was offered. A T9-10 laminectomy was performed with microsurgical partial resection of the lesion using SSEP and MEP monitoring.
Histologic and microbiologic analysis of the spinal cord lesion including examination of both macroscopic and microscopic fungal culture morphology as well as MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry revealed the presence of Sporothrix schenckii [, ]. Given these initial findings, infectious disease was consulted and empiric IV Amphotericin B was initiated. The infectious disease team additionally noted a lesion on the patient’s left arm . This was not observed upon admission, nor mentioned by the patient. Dermatology performed a punch biopsy of the 1.1 cm firm red nodule. Cultures and MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry of this lesion also recovered and identified Sporothrix schenckii. Histology of this lesion revealed extensive granulomatous inflammation in the dermis, extending into the subcutaneous adipose tissue along with several multinucleated giant cells and areas of necrosis . Both cigar-shaped and spherical PAS positive organisms were identified within the multinucleated giant cells . He was subsequently treated with a two-week course of amphotericin B followed by oral itraconazole. He was discharged to rehabilitation and remains wheelchair bound.