An 8-year-old girl was diagnosed at the age of two in her country of origin (Bangladesh) as βE-thalassemic. She was treated with monthly blood transfusions and weekly iron chelation with deferoxamine, plus supplementation with folic acid. A suboptimal regimen of chelation therapy led to severe systemic siderosis, and her family travelled to Italy to undergo HSCT. Since a human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched related donor was unavailable at that time, an HLA-matched (10/10) unrelated donor was identified. The patient was HCMV-seropositive, whereas the donor was HCMV-seronegative, thus posing a high-risk serological combination (D-/R+) for post-transplant HCMV infection and associated complications.
The conditioning regimen consisted of fludarabine, busulfan, thiotepa, and anti-thymocyte globulin (ATG). The infused donor's bone marrow contained 3.79 × 108 total nuclear cells/kg recipient weight, and the vitality of the cells contained in the graft was 96.9%. Tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil were used for graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis. Anti-HCMV prophylaxis commenced at day +1 with commercial pooled anti-HCMV Ig (Megalotect, Biotest Pharma GmbH, Germany) at a dose of 100 U/kg twice a week.
The initial post-transplant period was uneventful. The first occurrence of HCMV viremia (600 viral genome copies/mL) was detected at day +14, and antiviral therapy with foscarnet was started immediately. At day +17, neutrophil engraftment was achieved, but not the platelet and the erythrocyte counterparts. At day +20, the patient presented fever without clinical symptoms and without an increase of C-reactive protein. Afterwards, a full blood count revealed a progressive drop in leukocytes and platelets, whereas HCMV viremia continued to increase despite antiviral therapy. The patient also developed a severe, HCMV-related hemorrhagic cystitis, which required frequent platelet transfusions, initially once daily for 5 days, and thereafter twice daily for 7 days.
As the infection appeared unresponsive to foscarnet, ganciclovir treatment was started at day +25. This switch in antiviral therapy followed an increase in viral load, reaching a maximum titer of 5100 viral genome copies/mL at day +30. Simultaneously, the clinical condition of the patient continued to deteriorate, and the leukocyte count decreased drastically. Therefore, the diagnosis of secondary graft failure due to HCMV infection was established. Because of the failure of anti-HCMV treatment, ganciclovir was withdrawn, and foscarnet therapy was resumed. The possible explanations for treatment failure include the presence of antiviral resistance mutations or an ineffective activity of the Ig administered. As the first option seemed improbable because resistance mutations usually arise later than 6 weeks after HSCT, we opted to address the latter option. Therefore, we considered using antibodies (Abs) that were more likely to inhibit the HCMV strains causing the infection in the patient. Although the diversity of circulating HCMV strains is known to be extensive , we hypothesized that the patient and her relatives may have been exposed to similar strains on a familial basis. As a result, we performed serological tests on the patient's mother, father and brother. We selected the patient's mother, who presented the highest anti-HCMV IgG titer, as the best donor of strain-specific HCMV Ab-rich plasma and virus-specific T-lymphocytes in this situation. At day +32, the patient's mother underwent leukapheresis. The lymphocytes were sent immediately to a cell factory to produce specific anti-HCMV T-lymphocytes. On the same day, the plasma enriched in HCMV strain-specific Abs was infused into the patient. At day +34, the viral load decreased for the first time, to 1100 viral genome copies/mL, and the patient began new conditioning for a haploidentical rescue transplant from her mother. In light of the concurrent bone marrow aplasia, the conditioning regimen was conducted solely with ATG. At day +38, the girl received a second plasma transfusion from her mother. On the day of the second transplant (day +40), complete viral clearance was documented, and the girl received 11.3 × 106 CD34 cells/kg of mother's graft. GVHD prophylaxis was performed with post-transplant cyclophosphamide, tacrolimus, and mycophenolate mofetil. The engraftment was rapid, with a neutrophil count of >500/μL achieved at day +15, and the final platelets and packed red blood cells were transfused at day +20. Since HCMV viremia remained negative during the entire post-transplant period, we discarded the use of the mother's virus-specific T-lymphocytes. The patient was discharged at day +27 in perfect clinical condition, with continuation of antiviral valganciclovir prophylaxis. Immunosuppressive treatment and antiviral prophylaxis were discontinued six months later, and the patient remains in perfect health 2 years after the second transplant.
Therapeutic interventions, HCMV load, and white blood cell count during the entire episode are summarized in . In addition, the HCMV strains present in the patient were characterized by high-throughput sequencing (HTS) of an archived (−80 °C) plasma sample from day +19. DNA was extracted from 800 μl of plasma using a QIAamp MinElute virus spin kit (QIAGEN, Crawley, UK). An aliquot of 50 μl of DNA was used to generate an HCMV-enriched sequencing library as described previously . The library was loaded onto a NextSeq DNA sequencer (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA), generating 150 bp paired-ended reads . HCMV strain enumeration was performed by genotyping 12 hypervariable HCMV genes from the reads as described previously . The detection of four genotypes of the RL13 gene indicated the presence of at least four HCMV strains (a strain being defined as a particular constellation of genotypes of the hypervariable genes analysed), each including one of these RL13 genotypes . The data was also inspected for the presence of resistance mutations in the antiviral target genes (UL54 and UL97) using LoFreq . Briefly, the reads were mapped to the genome of HCMV reference strain Merlin (GenBank accession no. ), and non-synonymous variants known to confer resistance were identified. No resistance mutations were detected.