A 30-year old male patient was referred to our tertiary retina clinic at the University of California Irvine for evaluation of a macular lesion and long-standing vision drop in his left eye. He had a diagnosis of PWS. He was on insulin therapy for type 2 diabetes mellitus, amlodipine for hypertension and testosterone replacement therapy for hypogonadism. He had a history of strabismus surgery in his left eye at the age of 2 years.
His best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/20 in his right eye and 20/150 in his left eye. Intraocular pressure was 16 mmHg in both eyes. He had full visual fields on confrontation. His eyes were orthophoric with full ocular motility in all cardinal directions and no nystagmus. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable. No iris transillumination was noted.
Fundus examination of both eyes revealed mild hypertensive retinopathy and mild nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR). His left fundus showed a subfoveal disciform scar surrounded by a large area of pigmentary disturbance and mottling.
Green (532 nm) fundus autofluorescence (FAF) imaging revealed normal FAF in the right eye, while the left eye showed an area of central decreased FAF surrounded by a ring of increased FAF, which was, in turn, surrounded by an area of decreased FAF. This triple zone corresponds to the disciform scar and surrounding areas of retinal pigment epithelial disturbance and atrophy. There was a large area of mildly increased FAF surrounding the triple zone and occupying almost the entire macula. The latter area most likely corresponded to diseased retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and is suggestive of prior presence of subretinal fluid.
Fluorescein angiography (FA) of both eyes showed scattered microaneurysms. The left eye showed staining of the disciform scar, but no leakage was detected.
Spectral-domain OCT (SD-OCT) of the right eye showed a shallow rudimentary foveal depression, incursion of inner retinal layers, widening of outer nuclear layer (ONL) and lengthening of outer segments; consistent with grade 1 foveal hypoplasia (fovea plana). The left eye had dome-shaped subretinal hyperreflective material (SHRM) beneath the fovea, causing disorganization of the overlying retinal layers. A few tiny cysts were noted overlying the SHRM.
SD-OCT angiography (OCTA) imaging of the right eye demonstrated a very small foveal avascular zone (FAZ) area and the presence of macular foveal capillaries (MFC) crossing the FAZ on the superficial capillary plexus (SCP) slab, and a slightly wider, but still reduced, FAZ on the deep capillary plexus (DCP) slab. OCTA of the left eye showed a type 2 macular neovascular lesion.
Figures and show multimodal imaging findings in the right and left eyes, respectively.