A 46-year-old male was transferred to our tertiary referral centre for consideration of multi vessel and complex percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) on a background of hypertension, a 20 pack year history of cigarette smoking, and a significant family history of premature coronary artery disease. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) demonstrated normal left ventricular systolic function. Recent coronary angiography 1 week prior had already demonstrated severe disease in the distal right coronary artery (RCA) following a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI), and the culprit lesion was stented with a Resolute Onyx zotarolimus drug eluting stent (DES) (Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA) at the regional centre from where he had been referred. Persistent stable angina prompted repeat angiography, showing a patent RCA stent with residual disease in the left anterior descending (LAD) and left circumflex (LCX) arteries. Physiological assessment of these arteries however, demonstrated a fractional flow reserve (FFR) ratio of 0.81 in the LCX and 0.64 in the LAD, and the plan was subsequently for PCI to the LAD undertaken in a tertiary referral centre with significant experience using bio-resorbable scaffold technology.
The target lesion in the proximal LAD was a long segment and involved the bifurcation with the first diagonal branch (Medina 1, 1, 0) . In the context of his young age and suitable target lesion characteristics including the lesion length and the mild degree of calcification, an Absorb bioabsorbable vascular scaffold (BVS) (Abbott Vascular, Santa Clara, CA, USA) was therefore selected, avoiding a permanent metallic implant and preserving future revascularisation options. Following right trans-radial access, the LAD and first diagonal branches were wired employing an angiographic-guided, provisional bifurcation PCI strategy using an EBU 4.0 guide catheter (Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA). The mid LAD was pre-dilated with a 3.0 mm Hiryu (Terumo Medical, Tokyo, Japan) non-compliant monorail balloon and given full balloon expansion was achieved, the target lesion was then covered with a 3.5 × 28 mm Absorb BVS implanted at 14 atm (deployed across the diagonal side-branch, protected by a jailed-wire). Although the target lesion appeared longer (than 28 mm), a strategy of proximal-to-distal scaffolding was planned given the proximal landing zone at the LAD ostium and limited commercially available Absorb BVS scaffold lengths. Ahead of a possible second scaffold distally (with minimal overlap), proximal optimisation was performed with a short 4.0 mm Hiryu (Terumo Medical, Tokyo, Japan) non-compliant monorail balloon. The jailed-wire was then removed having re-wired the diagonal branch through the LAD Absorb struts. In accordance with optimal Absorb BVS implantation technique, this was followed by post-dilation of the distal portion of the scaffold (beyond the side-branch) with a 3.5 mm Hiryu (Terumo Medical, Tokyo, Japan) non-compliant monorail balloon inflated to 20 atm.
Following post-dilation of the distal segment of the scaffold, widespread ST elevation and profound hypotension ensued. Angiography revealed a large, Ellis type III coronary perforation at the distal edge of the scaffold with no flow to the distal LAD beyond the rupture , associated with a large pericardial effusion confirmed on bedside TTE. Prompt intravenous fluid and vasopressor support were administered and stability was initially re-established with a prolonged balloon inflation within the Absorb BVS immediately proximal to the site of perforation, permitting urgent insertion of a pericardial drain (Merit Medical, South Jordan, Utah, USA). 400 ml of blood was aspirated, with resolution of the hypotension, but despite this the chest pain and ST elevation persisted. As angiography during transient balloon deflation showed a large and persistent perforation, a 3.0 × 21 mm BeGraft covered stent (Bentley Innomed, Hechingen, Germany) was passed via the same right radial guide access and deployed across the perforation (distal to the diagonal side-branch) at 14 atm, with approximately 10 mm of overlap between the Absorb BVS and the covered stent. This lower profile device passed easily and smoothly through the Absorb BVS with no hold up. Covered stent implantation restored normal LAD flow angiographically and abolished the perforation . The patient’s chest pain rapidly resolved and correspondingly the ST segments became isoelectric. Heparin reversal was not performed and cardio-pulmonary resuscitation was not required at any stage as despite initial profound hypotension, the patient remained conscious throughout the procedure. Haemodynamic stability was subsequently maintained and there was no re-accumulation of the pericardial effusion post-PCI. Sinus rhythm was maintained throughout with no arrhythmias noted during the event.
Notably, post-dilatation of the BeGraft covered stent was not performed despite the obvious size discrepancy between the 3.0 mm BeGraft covered stent within the 3.5 mm BVS, due to concerns with the risk of re-inflation re-opening the perforation, and subsequently a degree of malapposition was anticipated. No intracoronary imaging was performed during this procedure but a very good final angiographic result was achieved at the treatment site and without compromise of the diagonal side-branch (no side-branch or kissing balloon inflation was performed).
Repeat transthoracic echocardiography one day post-procedure demonstrated normal left ventricular systolic function and no residual pericardial effusion. His pericardial drain catheter was removed and he was transitioned from clopidogrel to prasugrel, and maintained on dual antiplatelet therapy to mitigate the risk of stent thrombosis due to assumed malposition at the site of BeGraft overlap within the larger Absorb BVS.
The patient was discharged 3 days later. In follow up, he remained asymptomatic and continued to demonstrate normal left ventricular systolic function on TTE. There was no evidence of inducible myocardial ischaemia at maximal workload on exercise stress echocardiography at 3 months.
The patient returned for planned, repeat angiography with intracoronary imaging at 3 months.
He had patent stents with TIMI III flow in the distal LAD and a disease free diagonal side-branch. The LCX and RCA were unchanged. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) with an Ilumien OPTIS PCI Optimisation (St Jude Medical, Saint Paul, Minnesota, USA) intravascular imaging system, showed good expansion and apposition of the Absorb BVS proximal to the BeGraft covered stent with incomplete strut coverage by neo-intimal tissue. There was a short segment of malapposition between the two devices at the proximal overlap margin adjacent to the area of sealed rupture and perforation . There was otherwise good expansion and apposition of the BeGraft within the remaining distal overlap segment with the Absorb BVS but incomplete strut coverage . There was evidence of neo-intimal hyperplasia and mild in-stent restenosis in the distal (non-overlap) portion of the Begraft covered stent. Given these findings, no further intervention was performed.
The patient has remained well 4 years after PCI with no major cardiovascular events but still on DAPT (Aspirin and Clopidogrel) .