Forty five year old man had sustained a fall from moving train. After primary stabilization of patient as per ATLS (advance trauma life support) protocol, trauma series radiographs were obtained. Fracture geometry was defined by CT scan which showed posterior dislocation of the hip with transverse fracture with posterior wall fracture of acetabulum and intertrochanteric fracture on the ipsilateral side (-). There was also ipsilateral dislocation of shoulder in this patient . He also had foot drop on ipsilateral side.
He was taken up for surgery in lateral position. Surgical exposure was done by standard Kocher–Langenback approach. On exposure short external rotators and posterior capsules were found torn with ragged margins. The sciatic nerve was found stretched over dislocated head but intact. The trochanteric fracture site was used to pass guide wires in the head of femur, then the trochanteric fracture was reduced under vision and wires were passed in retrograde fashion from head through trochanteric fracture. Head was found vascular on drilling. Stable fixation of intertrochanteric fracture was achieved with dynamic hip screw (DHS) plate fixation supplemented with derotation screw . Then the fracture geometry of pelvis and acetabulum was defined. The floor of acetabulum was cleared of debris and relocation of hip was done. The distal part of hemipelvis was found displaced medially and was pulled out laterally through direct traction on a screw placed in posterior column as jockey and with use of tongs.
The postero-superior wall fragment was displaced superiorly and was pulled down with AO type towel clip. Provisional fixation of wall and column were done with k wires. Definitive fixation was achieved with molded eight hole reconstruction plate on posterior column and two partially threaded cancellous screws were used for wall fracture fixation additionally . The hip was stable after fixation. In the postoperative period, in bed physiotherapy was started after 1 day. Patient could be mobilized with support of a walker after one month because of shoulder dislocation. The radiograph at 6 months shows evidence of fracture union .