A 79-year-old woman presented with palpable tumors in both breasts. Mammography strongly suggested bilateral multicentric breast cancer with a large lesion in the right breast of 4 cm and a 2.5 cm lesion in the left breast. Breast biopsies showed bilateral high grade (G2/3) invasive ductal breast cancer. Staging examination, chest X‑ray and bone scintigraphy showed no evidence of metastases but abdominal sonography revealed a 6 cm mass of the right kidney. Computed tomography suggested an RCC. Because of reduced performance status (multiple comorbidities) and the patient’s wish, chemotherapy was not reasonable. Bilateral mastectomy with bilateral sentinel node biopsy and dissection of the right axilla was performed. Final histology showed multicentric invasive ductal cancer of the right breast (T2N3M0, G3). Immunohistochemical staining revealed the following status of the tumor: estrogen receptors (ER) were 70% positive, progesterone receptors (PR) were 10% positive, the status of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER-2) was highly positive and the proliferation marker Ki67 also showed a high positivity of 80%. In the left breast an invasive ductal cancer was also diagnosed (T2N0M0, G2, ER 80%, PR 70%, HER-2 highly positive and Ki67 70%). Right nephrectomy was performed and histology showed a 6.5 cm RCC (T3aN0M0, G2). The exact examination of the tumor revealed in the center of the tumor a 0.5 cm metastasis from the invasive ductal breast cancer .
Immunohistochemistry (GATA-3 and ER markers were positive) confirmed breast cancer metastatic to the RCC .
The diagnose of metastatic breast disease was established and the patient received trastuzumab, anastrozole and irradiation of the right chest wall as well as the supraclavicular region as palliative therapy. The patient reported pain in the cervical spine and right shoulder 8 months after diagnosis. Bone scintigraphy revealed a new metastasis of the right humerus. The patient subsequently received palliative radiotherapy of the humerus, fulvestrant and denosumab. Worsening of chronic heart failure and subsequent rapid deterioration of the patient’s general health status led to her death 3 years after diagnosis of breast cancer and in almost stable conditions of cancer disease.