A 15-year-old male patient complaining about permanent abdominal pain was referred to Imam Khomeini hospital in Jiroft, Iran. He had experienced abdominal pain, right lower quadrant (RLQ) pain, pain under his bladder, pelvic pain, rebound tenderness, fever, nausea, vomiting, and lack of appetite over the few past days. His vital signs were: temperature = 38°C, blood pressure = 115/70 mmHg, pulse = 73 bpm, and respiratory rate = 17 bpm. The laboratory findings are shown in . The physician performed an examination, and ordered specific tests of the pelvic, liver, and abdominal regions. The CT scans show that the liver was abnormally located in the abdominal midline (under normal circumstances, a large volume of the liver is located on the right side), and the biliary ducts and gallbladder were in their normal location without the presence of any stones. The aorta, pancreas, and kidneys were of normal size and in the normal locations, whereas the location of the appendix was not visible on the CT scan. A 90×90×85 mm cystic lesion was seen posterior to the bladder.
The spleen was not in its anatomical location; however, a cystic lesion with thin walls and size of 85×88×105 mm (similar to the size of the spleen) and solid content (30×30×47 mL), which was probably an ectopic spleen, was detected in the lower abdomen, attached to the omentum. Evidence of echogenic inflammation and edema in the RLQ and left lower quadrant was also seen. According to the findings, the patient underwent emergency laparotomy with the diagnosis of acute abdomen. The abdomen was incised in the midline. The kidneys were in their proper location and the intestine was in the center of the body. The stomach was oriented to the right upper abdominal region (under normal circumstances, the bulk of the stomach tends slightly to the left) and the liver was oriented to the abdominal midline (normally, the bulk of the liver is located in the right upper quadrant [RUQ]). The appendix was seen in the RUQ (normally, the appendix is located in the RLQ), and a large, thrombosed cystic mass attached to the omentum (with a blood supply from the omentum; normally, the splenic artery is responsible for the blood supply to the spleen), twisted around its axis (clockwise), was seen . The mass and the appendix were resected, and the pelvis and abdomen were washed. After achieving hemostasis, the abdomen was sutured and dressed. The lesion was sent to the pathology laboratory. The pathological findings reported both the spleen and cyst. After surgery, the patient was vaccinated and there were no infectious complications after splenectomy. The patient was discharged in good condition after two days.