A 49-year-old male, businessman, was admitted to the Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery for prolonged abdominal pain and distention lasting for 5 months. A left lower abdominal mass had been found for 1 week. There was no obvious inducement for his stabbing abdominal pain for 5 months, which was intermittent and progressive, accompanied by intermittent bloody stool. The frequency of defecation increased, and the patient discharged unformed loose stool, with feeling of incomplete defecation and constipation. The symptoms above are accompanied by fatigue, weight loss, loss of appetite, but without fever, nausea and vomiting. Through abdominal palpation, there is a hard mass in the left lower abdomen. The abdomen is slightly elevated, with slight tenderness and no rebound pain. No obvious abnormality was found in other physical examinations. The patient was in good health before, with no smoking and drinking history. There had been similar patient in his family.
Computed tomography (CT) of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis was performed and confirmed that there was a strip shadow in the anterior segment of the upper lobe of the right lung and a large amount of effusion in abdominal and pelvic cavity, and the local intestinal wall of sigmoid colon was thickened with elevated blood levels of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) of 309.6 ng/ml and CA19-9 of 239.0 u/ml. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the similar results, and the peritoneum and local sigmoid colon were significantly enhanced on enhanced scanning . Colonoscopy revealed that the intestinal cavity was stiff and erosive from 2 to 30 cm away from the anal margin, involving the whole intestinal cavity. The sigmoid colon with circumferential uplift was brittle and easy to bleed, and the intestinal cavity was slightly narrow. A subsequent colonoscopic biopsy revealed a signet cell carcinoma of colon , and the immunohistochemical parameters confirmed: CK(+), CK20(+), CDX-2(+), CEA(+), Ki-67 about 80% (+). The patient was healthy before, but has positive familial history. After discussion, the multidisciplinary team (MDT) considered laparoscopic abdominal exploration. In the operating field, there were a large number of pale yellow bloody ascites in the abdominal cavity, multiple metastatic nodules or planting metastases in the peritoneum, liver, mesentery and pelvic cavity, and the rigid sigmoid colon and mesangium were unable to be dissociated under endoscopy. Resection of sigmoid colon at the first operation was likely to accelerate systemic metastasis of cancer cells after operation. So the patient underwent laparoscopic resection and biopsy of metastatic nodules, and intraperitoneal thermal perfusion chemotherapy after operation. Referring to the pathological results , the patient was finally diagnosed as signet ring cell carcinoma of sigmoid colon with extensive abdominal metastasis (pT4bNxM1c stage IV). Then, the patients were treated with HIPEC (20 mg lobaplatin and 3 L normal saline at 43 °C for 60 min by specific dual circulation instruments), once a day for 5 consecutive days. According to the results of molecular pathological examination, there was no mutation at the common mutation sites of KRAS gene. Then cetuximab (600 mg) and the XELOX chemotherapy regimen comprising oxaliplatin (130 mg/m2) and capecitabine (1000 mg/m2), 21 days per cycle, had been applied to this patient for 8 cycles, 3 weeks per cycle. However, the concentration of CEA (72.1 ng/ml) and CT images suggested that the curative effect was not that satisfactory, and it was found that the pulmonary lesions were partially absorbed, which was considered to be inflammatory or fibrotic lesions. So the adjuvant therapy was replaced by FOLFIRI regimen comprising irinotecan combined with calcium folinate and 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU), every 2 weeks as a cycle. Meanwhile, cetuximab was added to the regimen at a dose of 800 mg. A routine examination revealed that his CEA concentration decreased to 5.7 ng/ml without symptoms after using the FOLFIRI regimen and cetuximab for 24 cycles . Nevertheless, because the patient suffered from myelosuppression, we discontinued this regimen. Four months later, chest and abdominal CT and MRI showed thickening of the distal intestinal wall of sigmoid colon, which was considered as tumor recurrence. Rechallenge of the cetuximab (800 mg) and FOLFIRI regimen (irinotecan 280 mg/dl, calcium folinate 1000 mg/dl, 5-FU 4.0 g CIV) was performed according to the suggestions of MDT discussion. The patient had severe myelosuppression after 2 cycles of chemotherapy, with leukocytes of 0.85 × 109/L and platelets of 21 × 109/L.
In case of distant metastasis of tumor in the abdominal cavity, intraperitoneal thermal perfusion tube placement was performed, followed by intraperitoneal thermal perfusion chemotherapy combined with adjuvant chemotherapy. Following discussion at multidisciplinary team meeting, a recommendation for administration of FOLFIRI was made due to the patients metastatic status and good performance status. One month later, the patient developed acute intestinal obstruction, and was treated by intestinal obstruction catheter. After multidisciplinary discussion and the consent of the patient, he received HIPEC based on lobaplatin (60 mg, the rest remained unchanged), and the next day open total colectomy, CRS + HIPEC and ileorectal anastomosis were performed after intestinal adhesion was released. Figure shows the primary focus of sigmoid colon and the whole segment of colon removed during operation . According to sugarbaker CCR score , the CRS reached CCR0. After that, a large amount of warm normal saline containing lobaplatin was used to flush the abdominal cavity. After careful examination and hemostasis, the abdominal cavity was closed. The whole operation proceeded smoothly. After comprehensive evaluation of the overall situation of the patients, we implemented HIPEC. After 5 times of HIPEC (20 mg lobaplatin and 3 L normal saline at 43 °C for 60 min by specific dual circulation instruments), the tumor indexes showed a significant downward trend and the effect was good . Molecular pathological examination was performed again, and no KRAS gene mutation was found. Gene detection reported that there was no mutation or amplification at KRAS, NRAS, BRAF and ERBB2, and it’s in microsatellite stable (MSS) status. The postoperative complications were slight leakage of anastomosis and chronic inflammatory polyps of digestive tract, and the conditions improved after symptomatic treatment. The treatment strategy was changed to capecitabine as a single drug and 3 months later, the cetuximab and FOLFIRI regimen was restored. After that, the patient has been in relatively stable condition, and no significant bone marrow suppression has occurred. By August 2021, the overall survival is more than 45 months, which displays significant curative effect .