We present the case of a 30-year-old Caucasian woman with sudden onset of thoracic back and chest pain approximately 24 hours after an otherwise unremarkable vaginal delivery.
In consideration of the clinical presentation, a contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) was performed to rule out pulmonary embolism. D-dimer was also elevated (up to 2700μg/L), but since also normal pregnancies cause a progressive increase in blood levels , benefit of this parameter was limited. The CT showed cervical and mediastinal emphysema without proof for pulmonary embolism or aortic dissection. As no reason for her emphysema could be identified, in the context of the preceding delivery her emphysema was interpreted as spontaneous postpartum pneumomediastinum. She received analgesics and was dismissed to the obstetrics department for monitoring. No specific treatment was performed. According to the prescribing information of the contrast agent (Ultravist® 300; Bayer Schering Pharma, Berlin, Germany) nursing was paused for 48 hours.
Within hours after the CT scan, slightly increased levels of troponin I (up to 1.88ng/mL) were observed. The patient’s ECG showed sinus tachycardia, but no other changes such as ST elevation or T inversion. Her left ventricle had an impaired function (ejection fraction, EF, 19%); echocardiography as well as cardiac catheterization revealed basal to midventricular hypokinesia, but were otherwise unremarkable. A cardiac magnetic resonance imaging performed within 24 hours after the initial presentation confirmed these findings . A low-dose treatment for congestive heart failure with beta-blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors was initiated, under which symptoms subsided within days. A peripartum cardiomyopathy was also considered, but the patient’s age, the fact that it was her first pregnancy, missing signs of a dilative cardiomyopathy as well as the course of the cardiac symptoms made the takotsubo cardiomyopathy more likely . Also, symptoms and clinical findings fulfilled the diagnosis criteria of the takotsubo cardiomyopathy . However, a therapy with bromocriptine was initialized to prevent prolactin secretion, as positive effects on the course of patients with peripartum cardiomyopathy have been observed .
After 12 days the patient’s echocardiography showed restored left ventricular function (EF 60%, Table ) and she was dismissed after a noticeable improvement of her general condition. The ECG remained unremarkable.