A 78-yr-old man presented in March 2014 with a 5-week history of an enlarged neck mass, neck pain and B symptoms. A mass at the left thyroid lobe and unilateral cervical lymphadenopathy were detected on physical examination and by cervical ultrasound. The fine needle aspiration biopsy showed a low differentiated pleomorphic carcinoma with a proliferation rate (Ki-67 index) of 75%. Neck ultrasound (US, Fig. ), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) confirmed the cervical mass on the left side with no clear demarcation from the thyroid gland and the sternocleidomastoid muscle, due to a large, partially hemorrhagic lymph node. The mass surrounded the left internal carotid artery and compressed the left internal jugular vein. Additionally disseminated intrapulmonary nodules were detected. For tumor debulking, thyroidectomy and resection of the left internal jugular vein were performed. Intraoperatively a locally advanced tumor with infiltration of the trachea was detected. In order to save the trachea, a R2 resection without further resection of lymph nodes was performed. Histology showed an anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (TNM: pT4b Nx M1; V1; stage IVc) and components of a papillary thyroid carcinoma with a positive BRAF-mutation (c.1799 T > A; p.V600E). Postoperatively no recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis or hypoparathyroidism was detected. A postoperative CT-scan, 20 days after surgery, showed a rapid and marked progression of the pulmonary metastases as well as the locoregional, cervical, hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes.
In May 2014, we initiated a first line adjuvant therapy with the oral BRAF inhibitor vemurafenib (960 mg bid). The condition of the patient improved rapidly, and he was discharged on day 7 after starting vemurafenib. A CT-scan on day 36 showed a significant partial remission of the cervical residual tumor, the lymphatic and pulmonary metastases . Within 5 months, follow-up scans showed an almost complete regression of the pulmonary and lymph node metastases and consistent regression of the residual tumor in the neck. A single pulmonary nodule in segment 6 of the left lung showed a continuous progression (from initially 1.1 cm to 4.3 cm). During treatment the patient developed a xerosis cutis, an itchy eczema, and sporadic papulopustular lesions, treated with a consistent skin moisturizing regimen and antihistamines. Because of B symptoms and fatigue a sip feed nutrition with high energy density was initiated. The patient also developed an acute-on-chronic renal failure. In the overall constellation, we reduced the dose of vemurafenib (720 mg bid). After 7 months of sustained response to vemurafenib, scans revealed progressive disease with new cerebral metastases and new soft tissue metastasis in the right upper arm. The patient received radiotherapy and died in January 2015 6 days after the last radiation and 10 months after first diagnosis.