A 59-year-old woman was admitted to the intensive care unit after sudden onset of fever, chills, and right thigh pain. She had undergone low anterior resection for colon cancer 2 years earlier. After local recurrence, she underwent radiation therapy (30 Gy) for spinal metastasis followed by chemotherapy, which commenced 6 months prior to admission to the intensive care unit. She received chemotherapy with fluorouracil, irinotecan, and bevacizumab 10 days prior to admission. She did not have a history of previous injury or the presence of other risk factors for necrotizing fasciitis such as a decubitus ulcer, diabetes, or liver cirrhosis. Her medications included a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, which is an antiemetic, and a proton pump inhibitor; however, her medications did not include non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, immunosuppressive drugs, or corticosteroids.
She was hypotensive, tachycardic, and tachypneic in the emergency room. The results of the physical examination were normal except for erythema in her right thigh. She had no previous injuries. Hemoglobin level was 118 g/L with a white blood cell count of 2.1 × 109 cells/L and a platelet count of 1.3 × 1011 cells/L. Blood urea nitrogen was 18.9 mmol/L, creatinine was 318.2 μmol/L, and C-reactive protein was 3.8 × 106 μg/L. The results of other blood tests and urinalysis were normal. Computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed normal results. Septic shock was suspected and managed accordingly with supportive measures, such as the use of a vasopressor and supplemental oxygen. Blood cultures were collected, and empirical treatment with meropenem (1 g every 12 hours) and vancomycin (1 g daily) were initiated, adjusted to renal dysfunction. The advancing erythematous margin and her worsening clinical condition prompted us to suspect necrotizing fasciitis and consult the orthopedics department for a fascia biopsy and debridement. Surgical exploration revealed a murky dishwater-colored pus exudate from the incision site and the lack of a shiny appearance of the fascia that also suggested necrotizing fasciitis. The biopsy of the frozen section showed acute necrotizing suppurative inflammation, and extensive debridement was performed. Gram staining of the exudates from the infected site showed the presence of gram-negative rods. On the basis of all of this information, we formally diagnosed the patient with necrotizing fasciitis. On the following day, gram-negative rods were also isolated from the blood cultures. After 2 days, the final results of the blood and exudate cultures confirmed the presence of β-lactamase-negative Hib that was susceptible to ampicillin, cefotaxime, ciprofloxacin, and imipenem. The histopathological findings of the debrided tissue were compatible with a diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis due to Hib.
The patient required recurrent surgical debridement and drainage, but she recovered from the septic shock. The treatment was changed to ampicillin, and she received intravenous ampicillin for a total of 51 days because of residual intermuscular abscesses. She recovered completely and was discharged from the hospital 65 days after admission. Necrotizing fasciitis did not recur; however, she died of metastatic colorectal cancer 6 months after discharge.