A female patient aged 16 years and 11 months presented with severely restricted mouth opening, difficulty in chewing, snoring, and mandibular retrognathism. She was barely able to open her mouth (maximum mouth opening approximately 5.0 mm) . She showed poor sucking reflex from just after birth and mandibular retrognathia was observed by her mother at 6 months of age, although she had no obvious traumatic history. She was also diagnosed with congenital dislocation of the hip joint at 8 months of age. Anamnesis suggested that her trismus was due to TMJ ankylosis. She had undergone bilateral mobilization of the TMJ at the age of 2 years; however, she had experienced a relapse of impaired mouth opening. She was underweight, with a body mass index of 16.0. Her facial profile was convex with severe micrognathia, her maxillary and mandibular incisors extruded significantly, and she had a gummy smile .
Cephalometric analysis indicated a severe skeletal Class II malocclusion, with a reduced SNB angle of 62.5° and an increased ANB angle of 18.0° . The mandibular plane angle was extremely steep (mandibular plane-Frankfort horizontal plane = 45.0°). Computed tomography images showed hypoplasia and ankylosis on both sides of the condyle. Her overjet and overbite were 15.0 and 7.0 mm, respectively, and the molar relationship on both sides was Angle Class II . The arch length discrepancies were −10.5 mm in the maxilla and −12.0 mm in the mandible.
The patient underwent standard polysomnography, which revealed a high AHI, frequent arousals, and depression of lowest oxygen saturation (SaO2) during sleep .
The patient was diagnosed with an Angle Class II malocclusion with severe skeletal Class II, hypoplasia and ankylosis of the TMJ on both sides, and severe OSA. The treatment objectives were as follows: (1) to improve the TMJ ankylosis and impaired mouth opening by mobilizing the TMJ on both sides; (2) to correct the mandibular retrusion and improve the retrognathic appearance of the facial profile by mandibular DO, using miniscrews and miniplates to prevent extrusion of the upper and lower teeth; (3) to bring the tip of the mandible forward by sliding genioplasty; (4) to resolve the severe crowding of the upper and lower anterior segment by extraction of all first premolars and a large damaged upper first molar on the left side; (5) to establish good functional occlusion by achieving an Angle Class I occlusion, and ideal overjet and overbite; (6) to extract the impacted upper third molar on the right side and the impacted lower third molars on both sides; and (7) to expand the upper airway space three-dimensionally by mandibular DO with sliding genioplasty.
Before orthodontic treatment, the patient underwent interpositional arthroplasty. Briefly, an interposition of fascia temporalis and surrounding fat tissue was inserted into the defect after bilateral condylectomy. Bilateral condylar bone was resected at a width of 8 mm at the level of incisura of the mandible. Intra- and postoperative incisal opening of more than 30 mm, and no obvious occlusal changes, were confirmed . Nine months later, all first premolars, the maxillary first molar on the left side, maxillary third molar on the right side, and mandibular third molars were extracted under general anesthesia. A miniscrew (2.0 mm in diameter, 8.0 mm in length; Dual-Top, Jeil Medical Corporation, Seoul, Korea) was implanted into the maxillary alveolar bone between the premolars and first molars on the right side to reinforce anchorage. A preadjusted edgewise appliance (0.018 × 0.025-in. slot) was applied at the maxillary and mandibular arches. After leveling and alignment with nickel-titanium arch wires, canine retraction was initiated using stainless steel round wire. The maxillary incisors were retracted using sliding mechanics. The preoperative orthodontic treatment period was 1 year and 7 months.
After completion of the preoperative orthodontic treatment, miniscrews (2.0 mm in diameter, 8.0 mm in length; Dual-Top) were implanted between the central incisors, and between the lateral incisors and canines on both sides of the maxilla. After extraction of the third molars at 1 year and 9 months, mandibular DO was performed using distraction devices (Zürich Pediatric Ramus Distractor, cloverleaf design, KLS Martin, Tuttlingen, Germany) applied to the posterior region of the body of the mandible, bilaterally . First, a buccal vertical corticotomy was made using a Lindemann bur in the third molar region without exposure of the inferior alveolar nerve. After removal of the adapted distractor, the osteotomy was completed by fracture of the lingual cortex. Finally, Smith forceps were inserted into the buccal osteotomy and mobilization was then confirmed. Furthermore, miniplates (25.0 mm in length; Dentsply, Tokyo, Japan) were implanted between the canines and premolars in the mandibular region of the anterior alveolar bone because the interradicular spaces of these areas on both sides appeared to be narrow on a panoramic radiograph. The distraction device was activated twice a day at a rate of 1.0 mm per day for 17 days, until edge-to-edge occlusion was achieved, including overcorrection . Neurosensory disturbance of the inferior alveolar nerve did not occur after advancement of the mandible. Intermaxillary elastics were used with the miniscrews and miniplates to reduce the downward and backward rotation of the mandible during mandibular elongation. The total amount of mandibular advancement was 15.0 mm on the left side and 11.5 mm on the right.
After mandibular DO, the miniscrews and miniplates linked the canine and first premolar with a 0.25-mm ligature wire to prevent extrusion of the upper and lower teeth, while using up-and-down elastics for 7 months . Sliding genioplasty was performed to bring the tip of the mandible forward when the distraction devices were removed. The mandibular distraction device was maintained in position post-distraction for 7 months. The total duration of active orthodontic treatment was 4 years and 7 months, and lingual bonded retainers were placed in the maxillary and mandibular arch immediately after removal of the edgewise appliance.
Post-treatment facial photographs showed significant improvement of the convex profile and gummy smile . The maxillary incisor was lingually inclined by 14.0° and intruded by 2.0 mm, and the mandibular incisor was lingually inclined by 4.0° and intruded by 2.0 mm . The large overjet and deep overbite were corrected to 2.5 and 1.5 mm, respectively, and good intercuspation with an Angle Class I molar relationship was achieved.
Cephalometric evaluation at 6 months after mandibular DO showed mandibular advancement of 11.5 mm at the menton . At 6 months after mandibular DO, the total relapse of the pogonion in the anteroposterior direction was 4.7% of the mandibular advancement. Accordingly, the SNB angle and facial angle increased by 5.0° and 4.0°, respectively. Furthermore, the chin was moved superiorly by approximately 4.5 mm with sliding genioplasty. The total amount of mandibular advancement was 16.0 mm at the menton .
To examine the three-dimensional morphologic changes in the upper airway, we analyzed the volume data for the upper airway, using volume-rendering software (CephaloMetrics AtoZ, v. 16; Yasunaga, Tokyo, Japan). Although the anteroposterior diameter of the upper airway had increased only slightly, the transverse diameter significantly increased in the retroglossal area . Additionally, the airway length and hyoid bone position decreased from 70.5 to 62.0 mm and from 33.8 to 22.2 mm, respectively .
Polysomnography showed that the AHI had decreased from 37.1 to 8.7 N/h, the lowest SaO2 during sleep increased from 71.0 to 87.0%, and the arousal index decreased from 41.2 to 25.0 N/h . The severity of OSA and snoring significantly improved after orthognathic surgery.
Masticatory jaw movement during unilateral gum chewing was recorded using an optoelectric jaw-tracking system with 6 degrees of freedom (Gnatho-Hexagraph II; GC International, Tokyo, Japan) after orthognathic surgery. There were significant improvements in the severely limited mouth opening and impaired masticatory function . There was no obvious bone resorption or pain in the temporomandibular region, limited mouth opening (maximum mouth opening: 33.0 mm), myofascial pain or headache, downward rotation of the mandible, or lateral shift of mandibular position evident at 5 years and 6 months after mandibular DO.