The patient was a 65-year-old female with a history of obesity as well as chronic left nephrolithiasis, previously having undergone PCNL. Following surveillance computed tomography, a recurrence complete left staghorn calculus composed primarily of uric acid (90%) and calcium oxalate dihydrate (10%) was discovered. Her stone measured roughly 500 Hounsfield units and was accompanied by hydronephrosis in the setting of a left ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction . The combination of a staghorn stone with a UPJ obstruction made a robotic pyelolithotomy an effective method for both stone removal and pyeloplasty for UPJ reconstruction. Due to the size and location of the stone, it was decided that if manual robotic attempts failed to provide efficient stone management, Trilogy lithotripsy would be attempted for more efficient stone fragmentation and removal. The patient was consented to undergo a robotic pyelolithotomy for stone fragmentation and removal using the Trilogy lithotripter along with robotic pyelolithotomy for UPJ reconstruction.
The patient was placed in the standard flank position for robotic pyelolithotomy, and robotic ports were placed under direct vision. A 12-mm assistant port was placed in the periumbilical area, and four 8-mm ports were placed in a linear configuration parallel to the mid axillary line extending from the subcostal area down to the pelvis, approximately 5 – 6 cm apart from one another. The robot was docked, and following insufflation, initial dissection, and mobilization, a hydronephrotic kidney was identified with significant inflammation and adhesions near the upper ureter. No crossing vessels were identified, and ureterolysis of the proximal ureter was performed until the proximal ureter and renal pelvis were completely freed from surround tissue. A small segment of the stenotic proximal ureter was then excised in order to relieve the obstruction and to gain access to the staghorn stone. At this point, a large staghorn stone branching into the upper, middle, and lower calyces was revealed . Initial attempts were made to completely remove the stone manually which proved to be unsuccessful due to involvement of all calyces. The 2.4-mm Trilogy probe was then passed into the abdomen through the 12-mm assistant's port without difficulty and was easily able to gain access to the stone . Under direct vision the stone was segmented into several large fragments which were able to be manually extracted by the robotic graspers . Renal endoscopy was subsequently performed using a disposable LithoVue™ ureteroscope and small remnant fragments were removed using stone basketing . Once the kidney and ureter were determined to be stone free, a 6 × 6 double-J ureteral stent was placed in a retrograde fashion and a posterior and anterior ureteral anastomosis was completed with full renal pelvis closure in a watertight continuous fashion using 3-0 barbed V-lock sutures. The operation was completed successfully with minimal estimated blood loss and no intraoperative complications. The patient was discharged without complications. Follow-up imaging showed full stone clearance with no signs of hydronephrosis .