Fall of 2014: This 51-year-old woman noted a lack of energy and increasing fatigue. Abdominal distention was first noted in mid-2015. Upper endoscopy was performed which showed H. pylori which was treated with antibiotics. Colonoscopy was normal. Abdominal and pelvic MRI was read as normal and symptoms were attributed to menopause.
November 2016: A persistent thrombocytosis was noted. An abdominal ultrasound January of 2017 was abnormal.
January 29, 2017: CT of abdomen and pelvis showed ascites. Fluid and enhancing nodules were depicted in the right upper quadrant. The greater omentum had a nodular infiltrate. Small bowel regions were interpreted to be class 1 . Fluid was seen in right and left pararectal fossa. A nodule was present within a minute umbilical hernia. Chest CT was normal.
February 20, 2017: An ultrasound-guided biopsy revealed diffuse malignant epithelial mesothelioma. CA125 tumor marker was normal.
Family history and review of systems was non-contributory.
March 21, 2017: Physical examination was performed. Chest and abdominal exams were normal except for a 1.5 cm nodule within the umbilicus. Pelvic examination was unremarkable.
The treatment plan that was presented to the patient involved cytoreductive surgery, hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC), early postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy (EPIC), placement of an intraperitoneal port and six cycles of combined normothermic intraperitoneal and systemic chemotherapy (NIPEC) . Consent was obtained.
March 31, 2017: A nine-hour cytoreductive surgical procedure with HIPEC was performed. A midline abdominal incision was made with skin tabs so that the umbilicus could be reconstructed . There was a mesothelioma nodule within the umbilicus requiring the umbilicus to be resected. Skin traction sutures were used . The preperitoneal fat above the bladder, the umbilicus, a small midline hernia in the mid-epigastrium, the falciform ligament and the epigastric fat pad were all removed. They were submitted to the pathologist.
The Thompson retractor was inserted. We could explore the abdomen. There was tumor layered out approximately 2 cm thick beneath the right hemidiaphragm. The left hemidiaphragm was clear. The right retrohepatic space was also layered by mesothelioma. The gallbladder was involved, but the stomach was not. The greater and lesser omentum were infiltrated by tumor. The tumor was densely adherent to the transverse colon, especially at the hepatic and splenic flexure. Both pericolic sulci were layered by tumor. The small bowel contained approximately 1000 tumor nodules on its mesenteric surface . The uterus and ovaries were covered by numerous mesothelioma implants as was the mesentery of the transverse colon and sigmoid colon. It would be necessary to excise these mesenteries and that would include the rectosigmoid colon itself. There was extensive disease in and around the appendix and it would need to be removed. It looked like a complete cytoreduction would be possible, but it would be a long and extensive cytoreductive surgery. Procedures performed included resection of the umbilicus, greater omentectomy, cholecystectomy, lesser omentectomy, peritonectomy of the right upper quadrant, peritonectomy of the small and large bowel mesentery, pelvic peritonectomy, hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, left colectomy with low anastomosis, HIPEC, Tenckhoff catheter insertion for EPIC and insertion of an intraperitoneal port for combined intraperitoneal and systemic chemotherapy long-term.
The mesothelioma covering the small and large bowel mesenteries presented a special problem . The innumerable nodules on the small bowel mesentery were resected using the curved Mayo scissor . The mesentery of the colon was resected completely sparing the ileocolic and middle colic vessels. The entire upper rectum and rectosigmoid colon were removed en bloc with the pelvic peritoneum and uterus, tubes and ovaries . The superior rectal artery was ligated but the left colic artery and vein were spared. Care is taken to spare the intermediate blood supply to the splenic flexure and descending colon. After completion of the HIPEC a two-layer circular stapled anastomosis reinforced by a second layer of silk sutures was used . No diverting ileostomy was performed.
The cytoreductive surgery was followed by HIPEC and EPIC. A pair of curled peritoneal dialysis catheters (Covidien, Mansfield, MA) were used to infuse the chemotherapy solution and four outflow catheters to drain the chemotherapy solution to allow recirculation through the heat pump. Two drugs were administered intraperitoneally in 1.5 l/m2 of 1.5% dextrose peritoneal dialysis solution. The two drugs were doxorubicin at 15 mg/m2 and cisplatin at 50 mg/m2
. The chemotherapy solution was administered as rapidly as possible over approximately 5 min with the infused solution maintained between 41.5 and 43.5 °C within the whole abdomen by a heat pump (Belmont Surgical Instruments, Billerica, MA). A standardized open abdomen technique with manual distribution of the chemotherapy solution was used . Skin edges were elevated on a fixed retractor that formed a rectangle around the open abdomen (Thompson Surgical Instruments, Lansing, MI). A plastic sheet to cover the open abdomen was secured to the retractor by the skin traction sutures. A cruciate incision in the plastic sheet allowed the surgeon's double-gloved hand access to all portions of the abdomen to evenly distribute the heat and chemotherapy solution. The HIPEC treatment was for 90 min. At the initiation of the HIPEC, a continuous infusion of ifosfamide at 1300 mg/m2 was started and was continued throughout the 90 min of HIPEC treatments. To prevent uroepithelial damage, 256 mg/m2 of sodium methanethiolate (Mesna) was infused intravenously as rapidly as possible 15 min prior to the initiation of HIPEC and 4 h and 8 h later . Following completion of the HIPEC, procedures to repair seromuscular tears, bowel anastomoses, and abdominal closure were performed.
The Tenckhoff catheter and closed-suction drains were maintained after the 90 min of intraoperative chemotherapy. EPIC administration was initiated on the first postoperative day. A 1-liter chemotherapy solution containing paclitaxel at 20 mg/m2 was administered intraperitoneally. The carrier solution for the paclitaxel was 6% hetastarch solution (B. Brown, Bethlehem, PA) administered through an infusion pump at 1000 ml/h . At 23 h, the drains and Tenckhoff catheter were unclamped and fluid drained as completely as possible from the peritoneal space prior to instillation of another liter of chemotherapy solution. This procedure was repeated for 5 consecutive days for a total dose of 100 mg/m2. A 20-day hospitalization with the patient on total parenteral nutrition through a peripheral intravenous central catheter (PICC) was necessary before return of bowel function.
Prior to closure of the abdomen, an intraperitoneal port (Smiths Medical ASD Inc., St. Paul, MN) was implanted . At 4–6 weeks postoperatively, the intraperitoneal port was accessed. Patients were treated with intraperitoneal pemetrexed at 500 mg/m2 in 1 l of 1.5% dextrose peritoneal dialysis solution infused at 1000 ml over 1 h. Following intraperitoneal pemetrexed administration, cisplatin at 75 mg/m2 was infused intravenously in 250 ml of normal saline over 120 min. These treatments were repeated for a total of 6 cycles with 3 weeks between each treatment adding approximately 6 months of intensive postoperative management . The patient received all 6 cycles of NIPEC.
CT was performed every 6 months with maximal oral and intravenous contrast. At 4 years, the patient remains disease-free, fully ambulatory with normal bladder and bowel function.