A five-year-old boy with a history of chronic thrombocytopenia, anemia, and focal epilepsy acutely developed binocular vision loss. He was found to be thrombocytopenic at nine months when he presented with conjunctival bleeding and was found to have platelets of 12,000/µL. He was initially suspected to have immune thrombocytopenia, so he was treated with IVIG which resulted in a temporary increase of platelets to 24,000/uL. Bone marrow biopsy was completed and found to be normal. Shortly thereafter he also developed a mild anemia that was thought to be secondary to iron deficiency, and he was started on iron supplementation. Over the next three years he received treatments for thrombocytopenia including repeated infusions of IVIG, corticosteroids (both oral prednisone and several courses of intravenous solumedrol), and mycophenolate. His treatment courses were often fragmented due to inconsistent follow-up, but overall trends of his bloodwork showed that his hemoglobin recovered and platelet count remained low. At age three he was started on eltrombopag, resulting in an increase of platelets to the 40,000–50,000/µL range, though this treatment was interrupted due to elevated transaminases (AST 182 IU/L, ALT of 198 IU/L), a known side effect of the medication.
Regarding his history of epilepsy, he initially presented at two years old with a staring episode suspicious for first-time seizure. One month later he developed generalized convulsive status epilepticus and was subsequently started on levetiracetam 20 mg/kg/day, which he has continued since that time without recurrent seizures.
At age five he presented to the hospital after complaining of blurry vision upon waking from sleep. Upon emergency room evaluation his initial neurologic exam was only remarkable for change in visual acuity, with inability to count fingers in both eyes. He was admitted to the hospital and underwent MRI of the brain, which demonstrated enlargement of the bilateral optic nerves associated with marked gadolinium enhancement of the nerve sheaths and two small T2/FLAIR hyperintense foci in the right frontal white matter . Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was unremarkable (white blood cells 3 cells/µL, red blood cells 76 cells/µL, protein 44 mg/dL, and glucose 46 mg/dL). He was treated for suspected optic neuritis with IV methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg daily for 3 days. The patient had good clinical response; on day 3 of steroids his visual acuity was 20/300 in both eyes, and at follow-up it was reported he experienced full recovery of visual acuity. He was discharged with an oral prednisone taper, starting with 60 mg daily and planned for 24 days. His platelet count was noted to transiently improve with corticosteroid treatment, but he restarted eltrombopag as platelets began to decline at reduced steroid dose.
Four months after this hospitalization the patient returned to the emergency room with recurrence of acute onset blurry vision in both eyes. Exam demonstrated afferent pupillary defect of the right eye, and visual acuity testing showed preserved ability to count fingers only in the nasal fields, suspected to indicate blind spot enlargement. MRI of the brain demonstrated enhancement of the bilateral optic nerves (right more than left), expansion and enhancement of the optic chiasm, and resolution of the prior demyelinating lesions . Due to concern for optic neuritis relapse, he was treated with a five-day course of IV methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg daily. During his hospitalization he experienced moderate improvement of his visual acuity, although he had mild residual deficits in his peripheral vision at time of discharge. In discussion between the patient’s hematologists, immunologists, and neurologists, his eltrombopag was held and he was started on rituximab infusions 375 mg/m2 given weekly for four weeks to prevent future recurrences of optic neuritis while potentially serving as treatment for his chronic thrombocytopenia.
In the setting of optic neuritis recurrence, further immunology work-up was initiated while inpatient. He was found to have normal immunoglobulin levels and absent vaccine antibody responses, although it was noted that he had only received two series of childhood immunizations. Lymphocyte enumeration panel was obtained after 2 or 3 doses of high dose methylprednisolone and revealed low absolute B cell (CD19 86 cells/µL, CD20 84 cells/µL), NK cell (CD16 53 cells/µL and CD56 64 cells/µL), and T cell (CD3 126 cells/µL) counts with poor T cell function with absent response to PHA. Following rituximab treatment, he was started on monthly IVIg to prevent rituximab-induced hypogammaglobulinemia and reduce risk of infection. He was also started on trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis for increased risk of opportunistic infections. Curiously, the patient did not have a history of recurrent infections, which may be related to the family’s persistence in limiting exposures including the decision to home school.
Following discharge, serum MOG-IgG via fluorescence-activated cell sorting assay returned positive with a titer of 1:100, confirming a diagnosis of MOGAD; serum aquaporin 4-IgG was negative. A primary immunodeficiency genetic panel identified a missense mutation in the WAS gene (c. 70 C > T, p.Ser24Pro), which has been previously described in another child with WAS . WAS flow cytometry confirmed decreased WASp expression with staining ratio of 0.22 (ref. 0.71–1.31), consistent with a diagnosis of underlying WAS. He has since transitioned from monthly IVIg to treatment with subcutaneous immunoglobulin 180 mg/kg every 2 weeks for hypogammaglobulinemia and eltrombopag 50 mg daily for thrombocytopenia. The genetic panel also identified a variant of uncertain significance in the AIRE gene (c.560 C > T, p.Ser187Leu), and subsequent testing for anti-interferon-omega antibodies was negative. A subsequent lymphocyte enumeration panel performed 2 years later continued to demonstrate low T cell count (CD3 585 cells/µL). Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has been strongly recommended for definitive WAS treatment but has not been undertaken.
The patient was subsequently lost to neurology follow-up for three years after initial presentation with optic neuritis. When he returned to neurology clinic, his exam showed visual acuity of 20/25 in the right eye and 20/25 − 1 in the left eye, and 5 out of 8 properly identified color plates, with an otherwise unremarkable neurologic exam. Repeat brain MRI and serum MOG-IgG have been recommended and results are pending.