A 42-year-old female patient presented in the Emergency Department of the Emergency County Hospital of Craiova, Romania, on 4 April 2022, reporting pain, epiphora, and blurry vision in her right eye for about five days. Anamnesis revealed a history of chemically treated soil contact with her right eye about seven days before the presentation, as she lives in the countryside and works in agriculture. The patient had not been immunocompromised or treated with steroids. Uncorrected visual acuity was 0.25 in her right eye and 1 in her left eye; the best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) in her right eye was 0.25 (normal visual acuity is 1). Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 17 mmHg in her right eye and 15 mmHg in her left eye (the normal range is between 10 and 21 mmHg). Slit-lamp examination in the right eye revealed conjunctival hyperemia, a 4 mm white–yellow central corneal ulceration with infiltrated margins that retained the methylene blue stain, Descemet folds at the lesion and endothelial edema, a normal-depth anterior chamber, less than five cells in the aqueous, miotic, and reflexive pupil . Due to corneal haze, fundus examination was difficult to perform in the right eye, but it was normal in the left eye. Corneal sensitivity was tested in the right eye, and the result was hyperesthesia. A clinical diagnosis of infectious keratitis of the left eye was established. A SARS-CoV-2 rapid antigen test was performed, and as it was negative the patient was admitted to hospital in the Ophthalmology Clinic.
Conjunctival secretion and corneal scraping samples were collected and sent to the hospital’s laboratory for microbiology diagnosis and antibiogram; standard blood tests were also performed. Intravenous empirical broad-spectrum antibiotherapy was introduced immediately after sampling (third-generation cephalosporin/beta-lactamase inhibitor—cefoperazone/sulbactam), doubled by local antibiotherapy (topical moxifloxacin). Lubricants, mydriatics, topical NSAIDs, and eye patching were also prescribed.
Microbiology results were negative for bacteria and fungi; the rest of the tests were also normal. Fortunately, the evolution was favorable: the ulceration’s size started to decrease daily, the Descemet folds became thinner, and visual acuity was also improving, so on 10 April 2022, the patient was discharged from hospital. Clinical examination of the right eye that day revealed that the uncorrected visual acuity was 0.9, IOP was 16 mmHg, the slit-lamp examination showed minimal conjunctival hyperemia, paracentral corneal 3 mm leucoma, and a quiet anterior chamber, and the fundus was also normal. The recommendation was topical treatment with lubricants, moxifloxacin, and NSAIDs, and ambulatory appointment after one week.
The patient presented ambulatory, one week after hospital discharge, in the Ophthalmology Clinic, where the slit-lamp examination revealed a quiet right eye, no conjunctival hyperemia, paracentral corneal 3 mm leucoma, normal aspect of the fundus, and 0.9 visual acuity. Topical antibiotics and NSAIDs were interrupted after this examination, but the eye lubricants were kept and the patient returned to work.
On 29 April 2022, the patient presented again in the Emergency Department of the Emergency County Hospital of Craiova, Romania, reporting severe pain, photophobia, epiphora, and a severe decrease in visual acuity in her right eye. The symptoms started four to five days before the presentation; she linked the debut with eye trauma caused by plant leaves. Visual acuity in the right eye was counting fingers at two meters, IOP was 18 mmHg, and the slit-lamp examination revealed a 6 mm white corneal abscess with perilesional infiltration, thick Descemet folds, Tyndall ++, and myotic pupil. The clinical diagnosis was corneal abscess with exogenous uveitis of the right eye. A SARS-CoV-2 rapid antigen test was performed, and as it was negative the patient was admitted to hospital in the Ophthalmology Clinic.
Conjunctival secretions and corneal scrapings were again collected and sent to the hospital’s laboratory for microbiology diagnosis and antibiogram; standard blood tests were also performed (10.6 × 103/µL leukocytosis and 87.3%/9.2 × 103/µL neutrophilia). Intravenous empirical double antibiotherapy was introduced immediately after sampling (third-generation cephalosporin/beta-lactamase inhibitor—cefoperazone/sulbactam and gentamycin), doubled by local antibiotherapy (topical levofloxacin). Lubricants, mydriatics, topical NSAIDs, and eye patching were also prescribed. The patient presented dizziness, nausea, and a body temperature raised to 37.5 °C; thus, she was booked for examination in the Internal Medicine Clinic. The general examination did not stress any pathological findings, and blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg. Recommendations were as follows: RT PCR SARS-CoV-2 (which was negative), hemoculture if the temperature rises above 38 °C (did not happen), hydration (according to blood pressure), and NSAIDs in case of fever.
The evolution was unfavorable as the visual acuity decreased to counting fingers at one meter, the corneal abscess remained the same size, a 2 mm hypopyon appeared, and the subjective pain increased (30 April). An infectious disease specialist was asked to see the patient, and the recommendations were as follows: further serological investigations for HIV, cytomegalovirus, and hepatitis viruses B and C, which were negative. It was also recommended to stop cefoperazone/sulbactam + gentamicin therapy and change to a teicoplanin + azithromycin regimen. Despite antibiotic changes, the patient’s state did not improve: visual acuity in the right eye was limited to hand movement, the whole cornea was infiltrated, the abscess was 6–7 mm, and the hypopyon was 3–4 mm (1 May) .
The microbiology results then came in. Bacteriologically, the samples were inoculated under aerobic, anaerobic, and microaerophilic conditions in Columbia blood agar, chocolate agar supplemented with PVX, and MacConkey culture medium for 24 h at 37 °C in aerobiose (48 h in anaerobiose and microaerophily). We observed in both samples on blood agar in large (2–4 mm), convex, non-pigmented, light beige, non-hemolytic, raised aerobiotic colonies, with a dry central portion and wet at the edges .
Biochemically, the strain was glucose-non-fermenting, oxidase-positive, mobile, indole-negative, and urease-positive. The biochemical identification on a VITEK2 automated system (Biomerieux) with a GN card identified R. radiobacter with 99% probability after 3.8 h of analysis .
In the microscopic exam we observed long and thin unsporulated Gram-negative rods with a tendency of adhesion between them .
Antibiotic susceptibility testing on the VITEK2 Compact system using the card AST-N233/AST-XN05 showed susceptibility to ticarcillin and ticarcillin–clavulanate (MIC ≤ 8), piperacillin and piperacillin–tazobactam (MIC ≤ 4), cefepime (MIC ≤ 1), imipenem, and meropenem (MIC ≤ 0.25). Aminoglycosides were also susceptible (amikacin MIC ≤ 2, gentamycin MIC ≤ 1, tobramycin ≤ 1), as were the quinolones (ciprofloxacin/ofloxacin MIC ≤ 0.25 and levofloxacin MIC ≤ 0.12). The strain was resistant to colistin (MIC ≥ 16). The MIC for tigecycline was ≤0.5, which the system interpreted as resistant.
On 2 May 2022, the patient requested transfer to the Emergency Eye Diseases Hospital in Bucharest, Romania, and it was granted. The right eye status was as follows: visual acuity was light perception, severe conjunctival hyperemia, infiltrated cornea, 6–7 mm corneal abscess, 4 mm hypopyon, and fundus examination was not possible due to corneal opacity. The clinical and microbiological diagnosis was severe bacterial keratitis (corneal abscess with R. radiobacter) and exogenous endophthalmitis.
Unfortunately for this patient, the evolution was unfavorable, and within days after she was transferred to Bucharest the eye was eviscerated to prevent orbital, sinus, and cerebral infection complications.