A 76 years-old male patient resorted to the emergency room (ER) because of abdominal pain for the last 72 h, asthenia, anorexia, and fever (39 °C). Neither diarrhea nor constipation was present. No event was associated with the complaints. No jaundice. He had tenderness on the right upper abdominal quadrant, no guarding, Murphy’s sign was absent and peristaltic sounds were normal. No masses. He was hemodynamically normal (130/78 mmHg, 68 bpm). The patient had been diagnosed with a urinary infection the day before and was discharged home medicated with amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid.
Blood samples revealed a WBC (white blood count) of 21.3 × 103/uL, no anemia, platelets 220 × 103/uL, PCR (protein C-reactive) 34.9 mg/dL, total bilirubin 33.0 umol/L (<22), conjugated bilirubin 7.7 umol/L (<5.0), alkaline phosphatase of 204 U/L (38–126), AST (aspartate aminotransferase) 415 U/L (15–46), ALT (alanine aminotransferase) 251 U/L (13–69), LDH (lactate dehydrogenase) 965 U/L (313–618). The urine sample excluded infection. Chest film and plain abdominal X-ray were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) revealed a heterogenic area in the left hepatic lobe with 9 cm, with undefined limits. No foreign body was seen. A CT scan showed in the left hepatic lobe an 8.7 cm undefined image, without enhancement, with multiple septa, without air bubbles, contained a linear and dense foreign body with 3.8 cm. A hepatic abscess was the diagnosis .
Piperacillin plus tazobactam was initiated. CT-guided percutaneous drainage was conducted collecting greyish pus. Two days later there was scarce drainage, and the patient was not getting better. He was tachycardic, with sustained fever (38.5 °C), abdominal pain, and tenderness. Blood tests revealed a WBC of 26.3 × 103/uL and PCR 33.8 mg/dL. A septic shock was diagnosed, and a midline laparotomy was performed to drain the abscess. An occluded fibrous path from the pylorus to the left lobe was noted as the possible site of foreign body migration following duodenum perforation. The 3.8 cm fishbone was removed from inside the liver. . One drain was placed inside the abscess and another under the liver, and the patient went to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). Both blood culture and pus microbiology were positive for Streptococcus constellatus. Levofloxacin was initiated with the previous antibiotic.
On the seventh postoperative day, fever recurred. Drainage was absent for the last 48 h. WBC of 21.6 × 103/uL and PCR 23 mg/dL. An abdominal CT scan was repeated showing an ongoing lobulated image in the left lobe, multiloculated, slightly smaller, with a drain within and moderated peritoneal fluid. . We decided to proceed with an open atypical hepatic resection of segments II and III. The operation was uneventful.
On the fourth postoperative day, the patient was asymptomatic, hemodynamically normal, and without fever. He was transferred to the General Surgery ward on oral diet and normal bowel movements. On postoperative day 12, he was discharged home asymptomatic. At 6 months follow-up patient was asymptomatic.