A 67-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital for chest pain in August 2018. The electrocardiograph showed atrial fibrillation in rhythm and Q wave in the inferior leads. Transthoracic echocardiography showed inferior wall with decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 40%. The patient was admitted in hospital 6 years ago. Unluckily, all the information was untraceable. Coronary angiography (CAG) was suggested and performed on 31st July 2018. We found that his main trunk of RCA was divided into multiple twisting small channels from proximal to distal, which reconnected at the level of posterior descending artery (PDA) with normal blood flow, the posterior lateral branch (PLB) was totally occluded and supplied by contra-lateral collaterals. The LCA was normal . This patient was firstly diagnosed with woven coronary artery because of the angiographic characteristic.
After we traced this patient’s prior CAG data on 12th July 2012, the angiogram showed a tiny hazy lesion with an 80% stenosis in the distal segment of the RCA, which was treated medically based on the patient’s willing, and his left coronary artery (LCA) was normal .
Based on these findings, we surmised that the woven-like change was caused by the progression, organization and re-canalization of thrombus. The program of PCI for the RCA was implemented on 2nd Aug 2018.
Via bilateral radial artery access was selected for contralateral angiogram (Additional file ). Sion and Fielder-XT wires failed in crossing the RCA recanalized segment. With microcatheter supporting, stiffer GAIA second wire was successful in penetrating through the long lesion and reached the distal PDA lumen. As ultrasonic catheter failed in crossing the woven-like lesion at beginning, the lesion was pre-dilated by 2.0 mm*20 mm balloon and then the IVUS examination was implemented successfully. Multiple thrombotic recanalized lumen in RCA was demonstrated in IVUS findings, and the position of guide wire was in the true lumen of RCA .
After pre-dilation, the flow of second PDA was shown in angiogram. With the support of double-lumen catheter, a Pilot 150 wire was used to penetrate and reached the distal lumen of second PDA. Dilation of both first and second PDA vessels was performed, followed by stent implantation. ‘T’-stent technique was performed in the bifurcation site of distal RCA using the second PDA vessel as branch, and followed by 4 stents (36 mm, 33 mm, 28 mm, 28 mm) overlapping from the proximal of first PDA to the ostium of RCA. After kissing balloon inflation in distal bifurcation site and post-dilation of RCA main trunk, the final angiogram showed restored TIMI 3 flow to PDS vessels (Additional file ). However, the stent-jailed PLB vessel was still occluded and supplied by contralateral collaterals. Considering the procedure time (almost 2 h) and contrast consumption(350 ml), we stopped the procedure after restoring the PDA flow. A staged PCI to open the PLB vessel is based on the degree of clinical improvement.
The patient recovered well and discharged 6 days after PCI with clopidogrel (75 mg q d), rivaroxaban (2.5 mg bid) and metoprolol (47.5 mg q d). During 9-months clinical follow-up, the patient had no angina episode, the echocardiography showed systolic function of inferior wall was improved and LVEF was 44%.