A 13-year-old Hispanic male with no past medical history presented to the emergency department with an inability to walk and severe pain in both knees. The patient experienced sudden knee buckling while running after standing up abruptly from the catcher's position (squatted) during a baseball game, causing him to collapse to the ground. There was no direct trauma to the knees during the event. The patient's height is 1.62 m and weight is 59 kg with a BMI of 22.5 kg/m2.
Physical examination revealed an inability to bear weight, swelling over the bilateral tibial tuberosities, inability to fully extend either knee, and joint effusion. Gross examination found no neurovascular deficits. The patient had no prior history of musculoskeletal disease, such as Osgood-Schlatter disease, or any other knee-related issues. Laboratory testing for underlying metabolic or endocrine disorders was unremarkable. No predisposing factors were found. Anteroposterior and lateral plain radiographs of both knees revealed displaced bilateral tibial tubercle avulsion. CT imaging was performed on both knees to evaluate for intra-articular extension of the fractures. CT scan of the right knee demonstrated intra-articular extension with fracture lines extending to the proximal articular surface through the epiphyseal plate. CT imaging of the left knee revealed no intra-articular extension. The fractures were classified as Ogden type III in the right knee (A) and Ogden type IV in the left knee (B).
Due to the fact that operative treatment is indicated for type II-IV fractures , and our patient had a type III fracture on the right knee and type IV fracture on the left knee, surgical intervention was necessary for both fractures, which involved open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) using screws. Since the patient did not present signs of compartment syndrome, he underwent surgery 24 h after the injury. After receiving intravenous (IV) antibiotics and spinal anesthesia, the patient was placed in a supine position and an anterior approach was made over the tibial tubercle on both knees. After soft tissue dissection and hematoma drainage, the fracture bed was cleared of interposed periosteum and the tibial tubercle fractures were reduced anatomically under direct visualization. The right knee (Ogden type III) was internally fixed with three partially threaded cannulated screws of 4.0 mm (Implants for Trauma Surgery [ITS], Austria). The left knee (Ogden type IV) was internally fixed with two partially threaded cannulated screws of 4.0 mm. The periosteum was sutured to the patellar tendon to reinforce the fixation (A–B). Both legs were initially placed in long cylinder splints and later exchanged for bilateral hinged knee braces.
Postoperatively, the patient's legs were immobilized with long cylinder splints and kept non-weight bearing for the first three weeks after surgery. He was then transitioned to hinged knee braces and physical therapy was then started with passive range of motion (ROM) and partial weight-bearing allowed. He continued working with a physical therapist and at six weeks after surgery, full weight-bearing and active ROM exercises with quadriceps strengthening were permitted. Physical therapy with focus on strengthening and increasing ROM continued until the patient regained strength, was back to full ROM and managed to walk without assistance.
At 14 weeks after surgery, the patient displayed great ROM (0°-120°) and regained bilateral knee extension strength. Full sporting activity was withheld until full ROM was achieved by the patient.
Plain radiographs at six months after surgery demonstrated anatomic fracture reduction and alignment with screws in adequate position and fracture healing (A–B). The patient healed without complications and has regained full range of motion (0°–140°) in both knees, without limitations during routine or sporting activities. He has returned to playing baseball and is performing comparable to pre-injury levels.