A 12-year-old Yemeni boy, living in Abha, Aseer province, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, was referred with a 2-month history of diffuse abdominal pain, non-bilious vomiting, poor appetite and weight loss. There was no fever, diarrhoea, constipation or jaundice. He did not have melena or rectal bleeding. There was no pertinent history with regard to the child’s outdoor activities.
Apart from a high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) of 90 mm h−1 and leukocytosis without eosinophilia, his laboratory results were within normal ranges. Abdominal computerized tomography (CT) showed a markedly thickened oedematous wall with stratification of the ascending colon including hepatic flexure with an adjacent part of the transverse colon as well as the caecum and the terminal ileum. A large pericaecal mass of 7×4 cm and multiple enlarged regional lymph nodes were noted. An exploratory laparotomy revealed a mass adhering to the anterior abdominal wall, involving the caecum, ileum and ascending colon, with multiple mesenteric lymph nodes. A right hemicolectomy was carried out with ileocolic anastomosis and resection of the mesenteric lymph nodes, as the provisional diagnosis was lymphoma. Histopathological assessment of the resected material ruled out lymphoma and suggested intestinal tuberculosis. Antituberculous medication was started immediately and the patient’s complaints disappeared.
Two weeks after the relief of symptoms, he was referred to our hospital (King Saud Medical City) because of fever and right upper abdominal discomfort.
On examination, he looked unwell and emaciated, his temperature was 39.5 °C and he had tenderness in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen. His laboratory work-up showed the following: white blood cells (WBCs) 19 000 mm−3, eosinophils 23 %, haemoglobin 9 g/dl, platelets 4×105 mm−3, ESR 120 mm/h and C-reactive protein 90 mg/dl, with normal liver and renal profiles. An abdominal CT revealed multiple small, low-attenuation lesions scattered throughout both hepatic lobes, some showing ring enhancement, an appearance highly suggestive of liver abscess . A percutaneous liver biopsy was done under ultrasound guidance and sent for histopathological evaluation, which revealed pyogranulomatous lesions rich in eosinophils with broad aseptate fungal hyphae surrounded by eosinophilic material (Splendore–Hoeppli phenomenon). A Grimelius methenamine silver stain of the liver specimen also showed broad aseptate fungal hyphae consistence with B. ranarum. ( and ). A molecular diagnosis was not available in the hospital.
Itraconazole treatment was started immediately at a dose of 100 mg twice daily. The itraconazole trough level was checked after 1 week of therapy to confirm its absorption and was >1.0 µg/ml. The general condition of the patient improved after 1 week and he was discharged to be followed up at the outpatient clinic. Seven days after initiation of itraconazole therapy, the patient’s complete blood count showed total WBCs of 11 000 mm−3 with 10 % eosinophils. After 1 month, the WBC count was 9900 mm−3 with 1 % eosinophils.
After complete clinical and radiological improvement , itraconazole was discontinued after 12 months of treatment. A second opinion by histopathological examination of the resected material diagnosed B. ranarum infection.