A 28-year-old man confined in a crowded prison presented to our institution due to respiratory symptoms. During hospitalization he was subjected to a standardized diagnostic approach including physical examination and a detailed clinical history. Routine laboratory tests, CD4 T cell count and HIV viral load were performed. Diagnosis of late HIV infection (CD4 T-cell count of 164 cells/μL and HIV-RNA of 1 030 082 copies/ml; 6.01 log), disseminated tuberculosis involving lymph node and central nervous system, and cytomegalovirus retinitis were established. Appropriate treatment for these conditions was administrated, and after 13 days in hospital he initiated ART with tenofovir, emtricitabine and efavirenz. His clinical condition improved and 5 days later he was discharged. No skin lesions were visible when he attended a routine visit after 13 days on ART. Interestingly, he presented with disseminated itchy dermatosis characterized by hyperkeratotic, hyperpigmented crusted plaques with hemorrhagic fissures after 20 days on ART (Figure
). Microscopic examination of the scale and skin biopsy enabled identification of scabies mites and eggs (Figure
). The temporal relation with ART initiation and the rapid progression of infection by Sarcoptes scabiei, in presence of an exaggerated inflammatory reaction and atypical inflammatory response in the affected tissues, supported the diagnosis of IRIS
. Complete resolution of dermatosis was observed with administration of 3 doses of 12 mg ivermectin given at 1-week intervals, as well as 5-day topical ointment containing balsam of Peru, precipitate sulfur and benzoate butter (Figure
). The confinement center received notification of this case, and was also provided with recommendations for the prevention and control of scabies. Days later the patient was discharged home, where he transmitted Sarcoptes scabiei to his mother, father and pregnant sister. They all received appropriate treatment leading to remission of the lesions. After three months on ART the patient had a CD4 T-cell count of 281 cells/μl and a viral load of 86 HIV RNA copies/ml (1.93 log). At this point, the diagnosis of IRIS was confirmed by the ART-induced decrease of more than 4 log in the viral load.