A 76 year old woman underwent mastectomy for a primary breast malignancy, shown histologically to be a low grade ductal adenocarcinoma (stage T1 N0). Three months after surgery, she complained of visual deterioration in her right eye. A lesion was identified on fundoscopy by the treating oncologists, and a presumptive diagnosis of choroidal metastasis from the breast malignancy was made without ophthalmic consultation. Palliative external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) (20 Gy total) was administered to the right orbit in five daily fractions. The patient was kept under regular review by her oncologist and remained stable with no enlargement of the lesion reported on serial magnetic resonance imaging.
Eighteen months after radiotherapy the patient was referred to our ophthalmic service due to failing vision in the right eye. Corrected visual acuity was 6/18 in the affected eye. Dilated examination using a slit lamp revealed an 11 × 10 mm elevated choroidal mass in the peripheral fundus, mainly yellow in color with some intrinsic pigmentation and with no associated sub-retinal fluid. B-scan ultrasonography showed a mushroom shaped lesion, choroidal excavation due to extension through Bruch's membrane and low internal reflectivity . Fluorescein angiography demonstrated a "double circulation" with intrinsic vasculature seen within the tumour, and the larger normal retinal vessels seen more superficially. Examination of the left eye was unremarkable.
A revised diagnosis was made of a primary choroidal melanoma, partially treated by radiotherapy, in the presence of a concomitant primary breast malignancy. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, chest radiographs and liver function tests demonstrated no evidence of metastatic disease. The patient declined further intervention initially and conservative management was initiated.
Three years later, growth of the lesion was observed and the patient was referred to a regional ocular oncology service. Enucleation was performed, over four years after the initial observation of the ocular lesion, confirming the diagnosis of choroidal melanoma. To date, five years since initial detection of the lesion, the patient remains well with no evidence of metastatic melanoma.