The 71-year-old Caucasian female patient had a medical history significant for bilateral hydronephrosis, bilateral sub-pelvic ureteral obstruction, pneumococcal pneumonia (2008), and restless leg syndrome. She presented to the urology department of a partnering public hospital in Vienna (Austria) on April 3, 2020, with complaints of abdominal pain and a dry cough (see Fig. for a schematized summary of patient’s hospitalization timeline). On day 3 after admission, a chest X-ray was performed, which showed a typical bilateral viral pneumonia. Upon initial assessment, the patient demonstrated partial respiratory insufficiency, with peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO2) of 86%. On day 4, the respiratory insufficiency deteriorated quickly (10 L/minute oxygen required to maintain SpO2>90%), so the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) and intubated. At that time, her Horowitz index (HI) reached 104, corresponding to a moderately severe lung injury [, ]. Laboratory tests revealed lymphopenia and elevated C-reactive protein (CRP), both typical biomarkers of COVID-19 [, ]. After confirmation of SARS-CoV-2 through polymerase chain reaction (PCR) on a nasopharyngeal swab, the patient was transferred (mechanically ventilated) to our ICU, being the main ICU in charge of managing COVID-19 patients in Vienna (IV Med. Dept., Kaiser Franz Josef Hospital). Prior to hospitalization, the patient was living independently and was safely managing a regular solid and thin liquid diet with no history of dysphagia.
Hydroxychloroquine was initiated on day 7 after admission as an antiviral treatment for COVID-19 and discontinued on day 8 due to prolongation of the corrected Q-T interval (QTc). Subsequently, the patient received standard supportive care for a viral pneumonia. Following the initial diagnostic PCR on day 4, PCR for SARS-CoV-2 was performed on tracheal secretions and nasopharyngeal swabs twice a week (as long as secretions could be aspirated). On day 21, the PCR of the nasopharyngeal swab was only weakly positive, while tracheal secretion was still clearly positive. On day 49, the nasopharyngeal swab sample was negative for the first time, at that time tracheal secretion could not be obtained for testing.
On initial admission, ampicillin/sulbactam was started empirically. After transfer to the COVID-19 ICU, the antibacterial treatment was switched to piperacillin/tazobactam, which was stopped after 7 days of treatment in the absence of evidence of a bacterial infection. On day 22, increased putrid pulmonary secretions were observed, and a PCR test was conducted on the patient’s sputum (pneumonia panel plus, bioMérieux®) targeting 33 different kinds of bacteria and viruses. Klebsiella pneumoniae was detected and antimicrobial therapy was started with cefepime. The patient’s general condition worsened on day 27 (see vital signs indicated in Fig. ); as she also developed elevated inflammation parameters (leukocytes and CRP), the antibiotic therapy was escalated to meropenem. The patient’s condition then improved (see vital signs on day 33 indicated in Fig. ), and the therapy was de-escalated to ceftazidime, which was further administered between days 32 and 36.
From day 4 until day 16 of the hospital stay, the patient was mechanically ventilated via endotracheal tube for 12 days and dependent on catecholamine support. Following extubation, the patient received noninvasive ventilation (NIV) with a full face mask (HI=234, indicating a mild lung injury). The next day, she was transitioned to high-flow nasal cannula (HFNC). However, on day 25, the patient’s general health condition deteriorated rapidly (HI=142, severe lung injury). Hence, continuous NIV with full face mask was necessary again until day 29, after which high-flow nasal cannula was restarted. On day 35, the patient was finally put on oxygen insufflation through low-flow nasal cannula and weaned to breathing room air in the following days (HI=262, mild lung injury).
Speech and language therapy services were consulted following endotracheal extubation on day 16 to assess the swallowing function. These assessments were performed initially at bedside; they revealed oral and suspected pharyngeal swallowing dysfunction manifest as poor saliva management with observed drooling, suspected reduced hyolaryngeal elevation as judged via palpation during volitional swallowing, and aphonia. Consequently, “nil by mouth” was recommended by the speech and language therapist (SLT) (Dysphagia Severity Rating Scale score , DSRS = 12; Functional Oral Intake Scale score , FOIS = 1). Due to the COVID-19 pandemic and restrictions on the conduct of aerosol-generating procedures, the SLT was unable to complete an instrumental assessment of the swallow, such as a fibreoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES) or videofluoroscopy (VFS), to more directly assess the patient’s oropharyngeal swallowing function. Hence, dysphagia evaluations were limited to clinical bedside screening and noninvasive assessment tools.
On day 18, the SLT performed a clinical bedside swallow evaluation using the Gugging Swallowing Screen (GUSS) ; the patient reached a total score of 6 out of 20, indicating the presence of “severe dysphagia with a high risk of aspiration.” The diet recommendation of nil by mouth (DSRS = 12; FOIS = 1) was maintained. During the screening, the patient continued to demonstrate poor management of oropharyngeal secretions, with minimal reflexive swallowing, and required frequent suctioning. The SLT administered a trial of thickened water, which was followed by an unproductive cough response, further impacted by continued generalized muscle weakness, a typical feature seen in COVID-19 patients. On day 20, the swallow function was re-assessed via GUSS and the patient received a score of 7 out of 20 , again indicating “severe dysphagia with a high risk of aspiration,” with continued recommendation of nil by mouth [DSRS = 12 ; FOIS= 1 ]; these represented the initial GUSS, DSRS, and FOIS baseline values prior to starting PES on day 22. Informally, the patient was observed having increased difficulty managing secretions, required more frequent suctioning, and had an oxygen saturation of 86%. Subsequently, on day 20 and day 26, the patient developed aspiration pneumonia requiring antibiotic treatment.
Due to persistent severe dysphagia, two cycles of PES therapy were performed: a first cycle between days 22 and 26 (five sessions) and a second cycle on days 33 and 34 (two sessions). Each daily session lasted 10 minutes. This patient was the first COVID-19 patient receiving PES in our department. The delayed start of PES therapy was due to unfounded ambiguities within the team concerning hygiene matters. Stimulation parameters (current, mA) are described in Table .
Following the first three sessions of PES treatment, swallowing improvements were observed, including improved secretion management and increased reflexive swallowing; however, the patient’s medical condition deteriorated on day 25, with increasing inflammation parameters. The persistent extreme muscle weakness caused a moribund state. Hence, on day 27, the behavioral therapy, including PES, was paused. Because of stress related to the necessary NIV treatment, the patient was sedated until day 29, when clinical improvement was observed (normal heart and breathing rates, good vigilance). On day 32, the patient’s medical status and vigilance were stable enough to restart standard behavioral treatment. Therefore, a second PES cycle was performed on days 33 and 34, with the patient receiving seven stimulation sessions in total across two treatment cycles .
On day 38, 4 days following the final PES treatment session, the SLT re-evaluated swallowing and noted a GUSS total score of 15 out of 20, describing “slight dysphagia with a low risk of aspiration”—a significant improvement from baseline GUSS scoring of 7 out of 20 . In light of these functional improvements, the patient’s diet was advanced from nil by mouth (DSRS = 12; FOIS = 1) to mushy homogeneous solid food (International Dysphagia Diet Standardisation Initiative , IDDSI = 4) and thickened fluids (IDDSI = 3) administered in teaspoon amounts using a compensatory chin tuck posture for increased swallow safety (DSRS = 9; FOIS = 2) . On day 41, GUSS was re-assessed, with additional improvement noted, as the patient scored 17 out of 20, indicating “slight dysphagia with a low risk of aspiration” ; the patient’s diet was advanced to semisolids with soft-consistency foods (for example white bread, IDDSI = 5) and concentrated fluid (IDDSI = 2), given while the patient was in an upright position in a transverse bed during meals (DSRS = 6; FOIS = 4) . It is important to note that due to the patient’s overall improved swallowing function and safety, she was discharged to a non-intensive medical department on day 39, and the feeding tube was removed on day 41. Final post-treatment GUSS was completed on day 56 and revealed a total score of 19/20 . The patient’s diet was upgraded to soft solid foods (IDDSI = 6) and thin liquids (IDDSI = 0) (DSRS = 3; FOIS = 6) .
On May 27, 2020 (day 54), the patient was transferred to acute geriatrics for further intensive physiotherapeutic mobilization, with the objective of returning to living independently at home again.