A 3-year-old female patient presented to the paediatric neurology clinic with the primary concern of experiencing muscle weakness and regression in developmental milestones 9 days after an upper respiratory infection, which was diagnosed as a viral infection and managed with outpatient supportive care. Prior to this infection, the patient had an unremarkable medical history and achieved developmental milestones within the expected timeframe. However, following the viral illness, she began to exhibit a range of debilitating symptoms. Seven days after the infection, she lost the ability to walk and speak. Additionally, her mother noticed that she stopped making eye movements to observe her surroundings the day after. This particular issue persisted for a duration of 2 months.
In reference to her familial history, despite having parents who were consanguineous, there were no reported instances of noteworthy medical conditions.
During the physical examination, the patient displayed low-set ears, a high forehead, and muscular weakness, with spasticity observed in both the upper and lower extremities. The patients mother also reported experiencing food regurgitation.
Considering her developmental regression into account, the patient was admitted for investigation. Her laboratory data revealed lactic acidosis and her brain MRI manifested diffuse leukodystrophy .
By the primary suspicion towards metabolic disorders, the genetic assessment using the whole-exome sequencing (WES) method was performed on DNA extracted from peripheral blood in a diagnostic laboratory. Capturing was done using the Twist Human Core Exome Kit.
A homozygous missense variant in the COX10 gene (COX10:c.1130C>T) was identified. This variant leads to the alteration of amino acid 377 from Threonine to Isoleucine in the last transmembrane domain. Most prediction software tools classify this alteration as pathogenic. This variant has not been reported in healthy populations. Based on American College of Medical Genetics (ACMG) classification, this variant is considered a variant of uncertain significance (VUS) leaning pathogenic variant. The parents of the affected individual carried this variant in a heterozygous state via Sanger sequencing.
Additionally, another homozygous missense variant with a lower pathogenicity score was found in this patient’s data (COX10:c.41C>T; p.Thr14Ile). According to ACMG classification, this variant is a VUS. It has been observed in the heterozygous state in healthy populations but hasn’t been reported in the homozygous state among healthy individuals. This variant was also present in the affected individual’s parents in a heterozygous state via Sanger sequencing.
The variant p.Thr377Ile in the COX10 gene appears to be the main cause of the Protoheme IX farnesyltransferase protein’s functional disruption. The p.Thr14Ile variant might play a role as an exacerbating factor. Functional studies might elucidate the impact of these variants on the produced protein by the COX10 gene.
By prioritizing symptom-based management, maintaining optimal health, using preventive measures to prevent symptom worsening during times of physiologic stress, and avoiding mitochondrial toxins; the patient was administered an oral mitochondrial cocktail comprising daily doses of coenzyme-Q10, biotin, thiamine, riboflavin, pyridoxine, L-Carnitine, and folinic acid.
At the 6-month follow-up after admission, the patient’s food regurgitation had improved and she could swallow properly. However, her motor functions for walking, sitting, and speaking had not recovered. Additionally, she had experienced focal convulsions that were managed with 150 mg of levetiracetam and 10 mg of clobazam.