A 65-year-old female with rheumatoid arthritis treated with a TNF-α inhibitor (Adalimumab) presented to her primary care physician with episodes of malaise, dyspnea, fever, weight loss and pleural effusions on and off for six months. She underwent medical evaluation at another institution without obtaining a clear diagnosis. Since Adalimumab has also been associated with lymphoma and other cancers, the patient underwent an abdominal computerized tomography (CT) that revealed multiple hypoattenuating lesions in the spleen and retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy in the periportal, peripancreatic and mesenteric regions, some with necrotic appearance . A needle biopsy was done on the spleen, which showed multiple caseating granulomas and the use of special stains revealed the absence of acid fast bacilli but identified thin-walled yeast-like organisms with distinctive histopathological characteristics consistent with histoplasmosis. The patient was then referred to our institution and hospitalized due to disseminated Histoplasmosis.
At presentation the patient looked chronically ill, but was afebrile with stable vital signs. The physical examination was unremarkable except for her advanced interphalangeal joint deformities. Additional laboratory studies showed the white blood cell (WBC) count was 8,100/μL with a neutrophil count of 80.9%, the C-reactive protein level (CRP) was 10.20 mg/dL and ferritin was 1,827.34 ng/mL. The blood chemistry data revealed low protein levels (5.2 g/dL), low albumin levels (2.5 g/dL), no electrolyte imbalance and preserved renal and hepatic functions. An HIV test and Histoplasma serology came back negative. A Chest X-ray was negative.
During detailed history the patient reported a hobby of caring for pigeons. Further history revealed she had positive tuberculosis skin tests (TST) on multiple occasions, in addition to caring for a family member with tuberculosis. Despite this, the patient had never received treatment for latent tuberculosis as she had normal chest x-rays. Treatment for disseminated histoplasmosis was started with amphotericin B lipid formulation while further evaluation for tuberculosis was initiated. Reevaluation for tuberculosis revealed a positive TST at 30 mm. Additional lung evaluation was done with a CT scan which showed extensive bilateral centrilobular nodules with areas of cavitation in the upper lung lobes in a miliary pattern . The CT also revealed additional findings such as prevascular lymphadenopathy and parenchymal lesions. The patient’s sputum smear was evaluated due to concern of further Histoplasma spreading. It was negative for fungus by KOH/Calcofluor test yet was positive for acid fast bacilli (AFB). The culture identified by DNA probe was positive for M. tuberculosis complex, and subsequently positive for M. tuberculosis by specific Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR). The bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) smear and culture were also negative for fungus and positive for AFB and identified by DNA probe and PCR as M. tuberculosis. This allowed us to rule out Histoplasmosis as the cause of the miliary pattern observed on her CT, and to move towards a diagnosis of concomitant disseminated histoplasmosis and tuberculosis.
A four-drug regimen of isoniazid, rifampin, ethambutol and pyrazinamide for tuberculosis was started which was well tolerated. The patient did not tolerate the full cycle of amphotericin B, so transition to itraconazole was started before the 2 week induction regimen could be completed. Given a severe interaction between rifampin and itraconazole, rifampin was later replaced with levofloxacin. Though initially well tolerated, our patient developed a clinical respiratory deterioration that required mechanical ventilation. We suspected Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome (IRIS), thus methylprednisolone was added to the treatment. However, after 72 h of treatment the medication was withdrawn due to upper gastrointestinal bleeding. The tuberculosis treatment was not withdrawn or altered further. After a week of supportive treatment the patient improved clinically and was extubated. After 35 days of intra-hospital care, the sputum samples cleared and the patient was discharged to continue outpatient treatment at the Puerto Rico Health Department Tuberculosis Clinics.