The patient was a female in her 30s with Marfan syndrome who had undergone the Bentall procedure with a mechanical valve and total arch replacement for acute aortic dissection Stanford A type and rupture of the ascending aorta. She was administered warfarin to prevent thromboembolism. The dose of warfarin was 5–7 mg per day, which controlled the PT-INR at 1.8–2.4. One year ago, the patient underwent total arch replacement surgery for a suspected prosthetic vascular infection of unknown origin, but developed a postoperative aortoesophageal fistula and mediastinitis caused by Candida albicans. After continuous lavage and endoscopic-assisted esophagectomy (esophagostomy and gastrostomy), the patient was discharged home with infection controlled by continuous suction therapy and fluconazole administered via gastrostomy.
After discharge from the hospital, the patient visited the outpatient clinic every month. Table shows the medications the patient was taking during outpatient visits. Capsules were decapsulated and tablets were crushed and administered via gastrostomy as follows: FLCZ 200 mg once a day in the morning and warfarin 1.75 mg once a day in the evening. The PT-INR was stable at approximately 2.0 and within the therapeutic range . In an outpatient visit, the attending physician did not change the dosage of warfarin, but changed the timing of its administration to the morning, which was concurrent with FLCZ, in order to improve medication compliance. In an outpatient visit 42 days later, there was no apparent bleeding event; however, the PT-INR was prolonged by approximately 3-fold to 6.25. Therefore, the patient was urgently admitted to the hospital on the same day. Warfarin was discontinued, intravenous vitamin K 5 mg was administered, and the PT-INR decreased to 1.77 the day after admission. The administration of warfarin 1 mg once a day in the evening was resumed and the patient was discharged on the second day of admission. In an outpatient visit 6 days later, a decrease in the PT-INR to 1.58 was observed; therefore, the dose of warfarin was increased to 1.75 mg once a day in the evening, the same dose as that before the marked increase in the PT-INR. Thereafter, the PT-INR decreased to the original level of approximately 2.0 and remained stable for more than 6 months.