The patient was a 30-year-old man, Caucasian type, without any specific medical personal or familial history. He was referred to our institution in November 2006 for diagnosis and treatment of a huge tumour of the left chest wall, detected for the first time 4 years earlier. Indeed, in May 2002, he presented a 3-cm painless, mobile, intramuscular mass on the left shoulder near scapula, three months after a benign trauma on this region. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed elements in favour of a myositis ossificans circumscripta. Percutaneous biopsy showed areas of osteogenesis with mature bone trabeculae in muscle. The intertrabecular space revealed benign-appearing fibroblastic proliferation. The retained diagnosis was myositis ossificans. The benignity of this disease with usual spontaneous stabilisation or regression , and the lack of functional impact of the lesion led the physicians to decide observation.
However, the patient was lost to follow-up, and the mass continued to grow slowly during two years. A second percutaneous biopsy was performed in May 2004. Histological analysis showed an intramuscular tumour made of bland fusiform cells with few mitoses and mature bone trabeculae . The morphological features were quite similar to that of the first biopsy, but with some worrisome features such as the absence of classical "zonal phenomenon", and more florid fusiform proliferation and bone forming. Because of the long clinical history and the pathological aspect, the diagnoses of "atypical" myositis ossificans or heterotopic ossification were evoked and a surgical removal was proposed. The patient refused, and consulted another physician who prescribed diphosphonate treatment during a few months.
The patient was then lost to follow-up during 17 months until November 2006, when he was referred to our institution because the mass had kept growing, leading to a shoulder immobilisation. The ECOG status was 1, and the patient presented a frozen left shoulder associated with ipsilateral radial and cubital paralysis and cervical pain. Physical examination found a voluminous, plane, hard and immobile mass extended from the basicervical region to the scapulo-humeral joint and from the left side of the chest wall to the axillary region. Biologically, there was not any abnormality except an elevation of serum alkaline phosphatases. Radiological images were impressive. CT scan showed a huge calcified heterogeneous mass, with kystic and solid elements . The mass had a 25-cm transversal diameter, an 18-cm antero-posterior diameter and a 30-cm cranio-caudal diameter. It included the left scapula, the periscapular muscles and the chest wall, with intercostal invasion to the pleura and muscular extension to the left arm (triceps). Tc99 bone scan showed a large hyperfixation of the whole left side of the chest . PET-scan with 18-FDG showed the mass localised in the chest left side, crossing the median line at the first sternocostal joint. Hyperfixation was heterogeneous and moderate with a few highly metabolic zones. A subcutaneous lesion was also observed in the right pectoral muscle (SUV max = 7 g/ml), as well as pleural abnormalities.
The diagnosis of low-grade ESOS was strongly suspected. For confirmation, the pathological samples removed in May 2004 were collected for re-examination, and notably for molecular analysis of MDM2 and CDK4 oncogenes, whose amplification had been reported in low-grade intraosseous and parosteal osteosarcomas [-]. As shown in Figure , CDK4 displayed a strong nuclear staining of fusiform cells by immunohistochemistry (IHC), whereas MDM2 had a more focal positivity. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis showed high amplification for both MDM2 and CDK4 , confirming the diagnosis of low-grade ESOS.
Unfortunately at this time, more than 4 years after the first symptoms, curative surgical resection was not possible because of to the loco-regional extension. We delivered chemotherapy with an API/AI sequential regimen, which combined adriamycin (A), cisplatinum (P) and ifosfamide (I). The disease was stable after 2 API/AI cycles. After 4 additional API cycles, the disease progressed with extension of cutaneous nodules and tumour mass associated to the apparition of left pleuritis. The ECOG status was 3, and the patient complained of thoracic pain and dyspnoea. Palliative radiation therapy was not possible technically due to the tumour volume. A thoracoscopic talcage was done, followed by trabectedin-based chemotherapy. Three weeks after the first cycle, the patient deteriorated rapidly and died of respiratory failure secondary to loco-regional extension, 5 years after the initial symptoms.