A 16-year-old Caucasian woman with a known history of asthma was admitted to the hospital for severe asthma exacerbation. No significant medical family history or any past severe asthmatic events were reported. The clinical examination showed widespread wheezing and shortness of breath. The initial blood gas showed pH 7.20, partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2) of 53 mm Hg, and partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of 50 mm Hg. She failed to respond to nebulized salbutamol and ipratropium and to intravenous salbutamol and magnesium, and therefore was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), where noninvasive ventilation (NIV) was started. Despite this strategy, she exhibited pronounced use of accessory respiratory muscles and rapidly required orotracheal intubation (OTI). The ventilator was set according to guidelines of mechanical ventilation for severe acute asthma, based on low tidal volume 5–6 mL/kg of ideal body weight (IBW), respiratory rate of 10–12 breaths/minute, and prolonged expiratory time. Sedation and neuromuscular-blocking agents were needed to ensure this degree of hypoventilation. The dynamic hyperinflation was assessed by measuring the plateau pressure (after a transient inspiratory pause), which was about 30 mmHg with low blood pressure. We performed a 60-second apnea test, which confirmed the correlation between the lung hyperinflation and the hemodynamic sufferance. Therefore, the ventilatory patterns were modified by reducing tidal volume to 4 mL/kg and respiratory rate to 10 breaths/min (timeline T0) . After 48 hours of ventilation, the arterial blood gas showed increased PaCO2 (more than 115 mmHg), pH of 7.01, and PaO2 of 60 mmHg. A first chest computed tomography (CT) scan was performed , which revealed pneumomediastinum.
The worsening of alveolar hypoventilation following these ventilator settings, and the extension of the pulmonary barotraumas prompted the implantation of an ECCO2R ProLUNG® membrane (Estor) (timeline T1) . Under ultrasound guidance, a 13.0 French double-lumen catheter was inserted into the right femoral vein using the Seldinger technique. The system was primed with saline and heparin and attached to the vascular catheter. The CO2 filtration fraction was 20%. The decapneization period lasted about 48 hours, in conjunction with drug therapy consisting of nebulized adrenaline (2–4 mg in 2–4 mL), 30 mcg/minute of salbutamol by continuous infusion, and 40 mg/day of intravenously administered methylprednisolone. No adjustments were made to the setting of the mechanical ventilation in order to keep the lung-protective strategy by maintaining very low tidal volumes (about 4 mL/kg) and decreased respiratory rate (RR about 10 breaths/minute). Sedation and neuromuscular-blocking agents continued to be applied. No hypotension or other hemodynamic complications occurred during the CO2 removal. Several arterial blood gases were taken to monitor the gas exchange, and a gradual improvement of hypercapnia was observed. After 48 hours of decapneization, the patient’s clinical status was significantly improved, with decreased wheezing and return to normal pH value, with a marked reduction in PaCo2 (55 mmHg) (timeline T2) .
A period of weaning was started, and after 36 hours the patient was extubated and transferred from the ICU to the respiratory care department (timeline T3) . A second chest CT scan was performed 12 days after the first scan and showed the disappearance of barotraumas (timeline T4) .