A previously healthy 54-year-old female presented to emergency services with acute onset of malaise, nausea, palpitations, and presyncope. Her ECG showed monomorphic ventricular tachycardia at 230 bpm, and she underwent successful cardioversion. Hemodynamic stability was restored, and she was admitted to the cardiac intensive care unit.
Initial cardiovascular examination was pertinent for a positive abdominojugular reflux sign and a third heart sound. There was no clinical evidence of pulmonary or systemic congestion or low cardiac output state, and no other manifestations of systemic disorders were present.
ECG in sinus rhythm revealed a nonspecific intraventricular conduction delay with a QRS duration of 130 ms, a P wave of 1 mm in the lead II, a PR interval of 166 ms, and a QTc of 507 ms at a heart rate of 96 bpm. Transthoracic echocardiography showed left ventricular systolic dysfunction with an estimated ejection fraction of 35%, preserved right ventricular function, and no valvular abnormalities (aortic root dimension of 2.9 cm, left atrium of 3.2 cm, LV diastole of 4.9 cm, LV systole of 4.0 cm, fractional shortening of 18.6%, interventricular septum of 0.85 cm, posterior wall of 0.78 cm, left atrium volume index of 36.3 ml/m2, left ventricular mass of 79.3 grams/m2, left ventricular outflow tract diameter of 2.2 cm, stroke volume of 39.9 ml, end diastolic volume (MOD-bp) of 128.5 ml, ejection fraction (MOD-bp) of 31.1%, cardiac output (LVOT) of 4.9 l/min, stroke volume (LVOT) of 57.3 cc, TAPSE of 2.2 cm, and RV S' velocity of 11.5 cm/sec). Coronary arteries were angiographically normal. On cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, there was extensive, midwall patchy late gadolinium enhancement consistent with acute myocarditis .
A serum blood work revealed a hemoglobin count of 141 g/l with an MCV of 92 fl, a platelet count of 182 × 109/l, a WBC of 12.3 × 109/l with a differential (neutrophil 8.2 × 109/l, lymphocytes 2.8 × 109/l, monocytes 0.9 × 109/l, eosinophils 0.3 × 109/l, and basophils 0.1 × 109/l), a high-sensitivity troponin T of 46 ng/l, an NT-proBNP of 261 ng/l, an ESR of 11 mm/h, and a CRP of 3.2 mg/l. An infectious panel was negative for cytomegalovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, herpes simplex virus, HIV, mumps, toxoplasmosis, and varicella.
Right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy was performed. This demonstrated features typical of GCM, including extensive myocyte damage, multinucleated giant cells, and mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate. There was no granuloma formation . Autoimmune and connective tissue disease serology was unremarkable (negative anti-nuclear antibody, glomerular basement membrane antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, myeloperoxidase antibody, proteinase 3 antibody, and lymphotoxic antibody screening). Anti-heart autoantibodies were not tested on the patient and may be a limitation in the diagnosis of GCM.
The patient was treated with standard heart failure therapy including a beta-blocker, angiotensin receptor inhibitor, and mineral corticoid receptor antagonist. Once the diagnosis of GCM was confirmed, a combined immunosuppressive therapy with high-dose prednisone (60 mg daily), tacrolimus (alternating doses of 1 mg and 2 mg daily), and mycophenolate mofetil (1000 mg BID) was added. She also underwent implantation of a secondary prevention dual chamber ICD. In total, the diagnosis of GCM was established within 8 days of presentation, immunosuppressive therapy prescribed on day 9, and ICD implanted on day 14. Total hospital stay was 16 days, and there was no recurrence of VA or heart failure progression. She was discharged in stable condition and remained NYHA II at her follow-up appointments. Her echocardiogram at 6 and 12 months is unchanged with severe LV systolic dysfunction with minor regional variability and mild RV dysfunction. Repeat biopsy performed at 6 months demonstrated interstitial fibrosis and myocyte hypertrophy. Currently, our patient remains on her current immunosuppressive therapies aside from a tapering of her steroid dose to 5 mg daily.