A 50-year old man was admitted to the Department of Urology, Clinical Hospital Centre Zagreb in June 2008, due to the hydronephrosis and raised creatinine blood level disclosed incidentally during his rehabilitation from brain stroke from which he had suffered in May 2008.
He had a history of subtotal gastrectomy for gastric cancer four years ago, stage T3N1M0. He received adjuvant chemo-radiotherapy. The patient had no pain at the admission. Routine blood test results were normal except elevated creatinine (192 μmol/L; normal range 63–107), urea (11.8 mmol/L; normal range 2.8–8.3) and C-reactive protein (CRP) (105 mg/L; normal range < 5) levels and mild anemia (hemoglobin 109 g/L; normal range 138–175). Urinalysis showed 3–7 erythrocytes and lot of leucocytes. Urine culture revealed Pseudomonas aeruginosa (103 CFU/ml). Multislice computed tomography (MSCT) disclosed atrophic left kidney and right hydronephrosis . Cystoscopy indicated normal bladder. Right retrograde pyelography (RP) was not done successfully because of the obstruction found at the 3 cm from the right ureterovescial junction. Right antegrade pyelography showed hydrourether with contrast stop 4 cm below the right sacroilical joint.
On July 29, 2008, the partial resection of the distal right ureter as well as the resection of the right ureterovesical junction was performed with the implantation of a double J stent.
Histopathology revealed a metastasis of the adenocarcinoma. Fibromuscular and adipose tissue were infiltrated with tumorous tissue consisting of irregular glands lined with atypical colonic epithelial cells. No infiltration of a superficial transitional cell layer was found. The macroscopic observation of the periureteral region and of the retroperitoneal space did not reveal any pathology. Upon thorough comparison, tumour specimens of the resected ureter (year 2008) and gastric cancer (year 2004) were found to be completely identical (,).
After the receipt of the histopathological report gastroscopy and colonoscopy were performed without any evidence of a tumour. Tumour markers were within the normal range: alpha- fetoprotein (AFP) (1.46 μg/L; normal range <13.4), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (1.79 μg/L; normal range < 3.4), cancer antigen 19/9 (CA19-9) (16.93 kIU/L; normal range < 37), prostate-specific antigen (PSA) (1.44 μg/L, normal range < 4).
The patient was further transferred to the Department of Oncology for systemic chemotherapy. Unfortunately, he managed to receive only three cycles of chemotherapy (leucovorin, etoposide and fluorouracil) when presented with severe acute psychosis. Brain CT was without metastasis but his general and mental condition deteriorated and chemotherapy was never resumed. Finally, after several months his mental status gradually improved. Now, twelve months after the last chemotherapy he is well and without any signs of the disease.