A 27-year-old female with chronic symptoms of nausea, vomiting, bloating, diarrhea and epigastric pain that radiated into her back was referred to our clinic.
She experienced these symptoms for several years but they progressively worsened and became disabling until she could no longer work as a truck driver. Specifically, the symptoms were motion-associated and relieved when she was at rest. She denied fevers, fatigue, or unintentional weight loss.
She was otherwise healthy at the time of presentation. He past medical history included recurrent urinary tract infections and remote episodes of pyelonephritis. Her medications included ondansetron for nausea and a hormonal intrauterine device.
Family history was non-contributory.
All vital signs were within normal limits. The physical exam was only notable for epigastric abdominal tenderness with radiation posteriorly.
Her laboratory workup was completely normal (including levels of amylase, lipase, liver enzymes, and catecholamines).
She underwent an abdominal ultrasound, which demonstrated a lobulated, hypoechoic mass (29 mm × 33 mm × 28 mm) in the retroperitoneum. A subsequent abdomen and pelvis computed tomography (CT) showed a benign-appearing, noninvasive hypodense mass (37 mm × 24 mm × 29 mm) abutting the portal vein, celiac axis, common hepatic artery, and the caudate lobe of the liver. A representative image from the CT shows the close proximity to these vital structures. However, there was no evidence of vascular encasement and fat planes were preserved. There was an inferomedial extension of the mass posterior and caudal to the portal vein . Finally, an magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed the location and relationships of the mass (26 mm × 37 mm × 36 mm), also demonstrating no vascular encasement and an enhancing capsule .
Differential diagnoses included retroperitoneal duplication cyst, primary neurogenic tumors (schwannoma, ganglioneuroma, or ganglioneuroblastoma), primary mesenchymal tumors, metastatic disease, or an enlarged lymph node. An endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle aspiration revealed mature, binucleate ganglion cells and other scant neural tissue. The cells were positive for neural markers (S-100 and synaptophysin) and negative for C-Kit, desmin, and DOG-1.