A 43-year-old woman without a history of coronary disease had undergone aortic/mitral valve replacement, tricuspid valvoplasty, and left atrial thrombectomy. Preoperative echocardiography indicated an ejection fraction (EF) of 0.5. Myocardial protection was performed through the antegrade (via the left and right coronary ostia) perfusion of cardioplegia solution during CPB. After aortic cross-clamp release was performed, normal prosthetic valve function was confirmed via transesophageal echocardiography (TEE). The CPB duration was 157 min. No complications were noted during the surgery, except for the additional time required to remove a substantial thrombus in the left atrium. The patient was successfully weaned from CPB, and was intubated and returned to the intensive care unit.
Approximately 12 h after surgery, ECG indicated frequent premature ventricular bigeminy , whereas blood gas analysis indicated an increase in the lactate level to 10.2 mmol/L (reference value < 1.8 mmol/L) and uncorrectable metabolic acidosis. The patient’s serum type B natriuretic peptide (BNP) levels had also progressively increased. In addition, we observed the attenuation of the cardiac contraction amplitude via bedside echocardiography. After 14 h, the patient exhibited unstable hemodynamics, which required high doses of vasoactive drugs for blood pressure maintenance. Her adrenaline levels increased from 0.05 μg/kg/min to 0.1 μg/kg/min, whereas her norepinephrine levels increased from 0.03 μg/kg/min to 0.18 μg/kg/min. ECG indicated arched ST-segment elevation in leads V2–V6 . Bedside echocardiography indicated an EF of approximately 0.3 as well as wall motion abnormalities. Her serum troponin-T and creatinine kinase-MB levels had also increased to a peak of > 10,000 ng/L (reference value < 2.88 ng/L) and 300 μg/mL (reference value < 14 μg/mL), respectively, which indicated the presence of acute myocardial infarction. Coronary angiography indicated marked dissections in the left main coronary artery (LM), circumflex artery (LCX), and anterior descending artery (LAD) . The patient successfully underwent PCI through radial access. The first drug-eluting stent (DES; 2.5 × 36 mm sirolimus-eluting stent; JW Medical Systems, China) was implanted in the LAD , and a second DES (3.5 × 36 mm sirolimus-eluting stent) was implanted in the LM ostium , thus sealing the dissection and recovering distal flow (Additional file ). The LCX dissection was treated with a third DES (3.0 × 36 mm sirolimus-eluting stent) and distal flow was restored . The restoration of TIMI-III flow was confirmed in each branch (the LM, LAD, and LCX; Fig. f, Additional file ) and ST segment had descended . The patient recovered well and was followed up for 3 months after discharge. Echocardiography indicated that the EF significantly increased from 0.24 to 0.45.