A 23-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with a history of longer than 1 year of fatigue, a dim complexion, and mild anorexia. She had no history of hypertension, heart disease, blood transfusions or surgery. A three-generation pedigree did not reveal a history of hepatitis. She had no jaundice. The results of liver function tests were as follows: alanine aminotransferase 22 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 25 U/L, gamma glutamyl transferase 36 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 66 U/L, albumin 35 U/L, total bilirubin 24.8 μmol/L and direct bilirubin 10.9 μmol/L. She had a reduced level of cholinesterase (4343 U/L). A viral hepatitis panel was negative. Her serum copper level was also in the normal range. Autoimmune antibody and immunoglobulin screens were negative. Radiological imaging was performed. CT showed a side-to-side portocaval shunt between the splenic and left renal veins . Three-dimensional (3D) vessel reconstruction revealed a normal orientation of the splenic and superior mesenteric veins. The main portal vein was present but slender . The morphology observed was consistent with type II Abernethy malformation. MRI was undertaken to further characterise the disorders in the patient, and cross-sectional MRI images revealed intrahepatic bile duct dilation in the right lobe of the liver and hepatic fibrosis . CT scans also showed kidney cysts . These findings are consistent with a diagnosis of Caroli’s syndrome. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) also confirmed ectasia of the intrahepatic bile duct and common hepatic/bile duct dilation .
Mutational analysis of the PKHD1 gene was performed to identify any genetic anomalies. Genomic DNA was extracted from the peripheral blood leukocytes of both the patient and her parents. Next-generation (NextGen) sequencing was undertaken. A sequencing library was constructed using an Ion AmpliSeq™ Library Kit 2.0 from Life Technologies. Sequencing was carried out with an Ion Torrent PGM™ 200 Sequencing Kit in an Ion Torrent PGM™ System from Life Technologies, and data analysis was performed using BWA-0.7.12 software with the mem comparison strategy following the Genome Analysis Toolkit best practices developed by the Broad Institute. A heterozygous missense mutation in exon 20 (c.1877A > G, p.Lys626Arg) of PKHD1 was identified in the patient . We further performed a parental analysis in the targeted mutation site via PCR-based exon amplification and direct bidirectional sequencing of both strands of PKHD1 using an ABI 3730XL DNA Analyzer. The same heterozygous missense mutation was identified in the father, and the wild-type genotype was identified in the mother .
A liver biopsy was performed, and it revealed thick fibrous bands containing bile ductular proliferation along with duct dilation . The lobular parenchyma was irregularly shaped and appeared to be separated and surrounded by fibrosis bands, with visible nodules . Based on the radiological imaging, genetic testing and liver biopsy, a diagnosis of type II Abernethy malformation associated with Caroli’s syndrome was made.