A 53-year old Black female presented to the emergency department (ED) with sudden onset of a facial droop and slurring of her words. The patient was last seen well 45 minutes prior to arrival. She had previously been seen three days earlier in the ED for hypertension and admitted to stopping her antihypertensives four months prior. She was prescribed antihypertensives at that time with recommendations to follow up with her primary care provider. A day prior to her presentation she had restarted lisinopril 20 milligrams (mg) daily, amlodipine 5 mg daily, and furosemide 20 mg daily as instructed by her primary care provider. Additional home medications included metformin 500 mg twice daily and potassium chloride.
The patient denied any headache, visual changes, dizziness, or numbness. She was found to be hypertensive upon arrival with blood pressure of 200/106 millimeters mercury (mm Hg), heart rate 130 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 respirations per minute, pulse oximetry of 98% on room air, and temperature of 98.7° Fahrenheit. Initial neurologic exam showed the patient to be oriented to person, place, and time, with an obvious right-sided facial droop, deviation of tongue to the right side, and slurred speech. There were no initial motor deficits noted in her extremities as she was able to lift both her upper and lower extremities against gravity. Visual fields were grossly intact as was finger-to-nose testing. The remainder of her physical exam was otherwise unremarkable. Initial National Institutes of Health (NIH) stroke scale score was calculated to be approximately 2–3. The patient was taken for a computed tomography (CT) angiography of head and neck with and without contrast immediately after her initial exam.
The CT angiography of head and neck with and without contrast showed no acute intracranial findings, and no high-grade stenosis or occlusion in the head and neck through the internal carotid arteries. Vertebral artery imaging was obscured secondary to movement, and a thyroid goiter was also present. Upon return from CT, serial neurological exams were performed, which revealed right upper extremity weakness, thus increasing the NIH stroke scale score to 3–4. Tele-neurology was consulted and tPA was recommended. The patient and her husband agreed with the treatment plan regarding recommendations for tPA infusion. Tissue plasminogen activator was then administered for a total of 72.19 mg. A single dose of labetalol for 10 mg intravenous (IV) was initiated for blood pressure control.
During tPA infusion, the patient developed swelling of the right upper lip and right side of the tongue. It was believed that the tPA was the cause of her angioedema, and she was subsequently given diphenhydramine 50 mg IV in addition to methylprednisolone 125 mg IV. The infusion of tPA had coincidentally finished as the patient first began to develop angioedema. As a result, there was no need to discontinue the infusion, which is usually recommended when angioedema occurs. The patient remained hemodynamically stable, was able to maintain her airway, and did not require intubation while observed in the ED. She was subsequently admitted to the intensive care unit with the diagnosis of acute ischemic stroke.
Prior to leaving the ED, serial neurological exams revealed improvement in her right upper extremity weakness, but she continued to have lingering facial droop. Reassessment of the patient’s angioedema showed improvement with only minimal swelling of the right upper lip and right side of tongue. She continued to maintain a patent airway. Initial laboratory studies included complete blood count, electrolyte panel, and prothrombin time/international normalized ratio and returned normal, except for mild hypokalemia of 3.1 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range 3.5–5.0 mmol/L) and elevated glucose of 226 (60–126 mg/dL).
After admission to the hospital, the patient underwent magnetic resonance imaging, which identified a subacute evolving infarct in the posterior left frontal lobe with a possible additional area of evolving infarct in the right frontal lobe as well. Magnetic resonance angiography revealed no primary vascular lesion such as an aneurysm, arteriovenous malformation, or arterial narrowing. During her hospital course, she continued to show improvement in her right upper extremity weakness and some improvement in the facial droop. Continued observation showed improvement in the angioedema over the course of a couple of days as well.