A 69-year-old Caucasian male, who had received kidney transplantation 12 years earlier because of polycystic renal disease, was admitted to La Chaux-de-Fonds Hospital, Switzerland, with severe fatigue, diarrhea and loss of appetite, lasting for 2 weeks. Current immunosuppressive regimen consisted of cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil (500 mg 2/day) and low dose prednisone (5 mg daily). Severe chronic renal failure (glomerular filtration rate 15 ml/min) was attributed to immunosuppressive treatment and a previous episode of humoral graft rejection 5 years earlier. One week before hospital admission, the patient had had a left-ear basocellular carcinoma resection.
The patient presented a diminished general condition, mild hypotension, but no fever. On clinical examination, the abdomen was tender without signs of local peritoneal irritation. The rest of the physical examination was unremarkable. The day after admission, the patient developed fever with a peak temperature of 37.8 °C, and transient psychomotor slowing with persisting hiccup.
The initial blood cell count was within normal range (leucocytes 9.2 g/l), and blood chemistry revealed acute renal failure (creatinine 577 µmol/l) of pre-renal origin as well as slightly elevated liver enzymes with predominant cholestasis. Stool examination for Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter and Clostridium difficile, parasitologic examination and PCR for Norovirus infection came back negative. Initial CMV serology was positive for IgM only (1.9 U/ml, (0.7–0.9), Vidas, Biomerieux, France), whereas the previous serology 1 year earlier had been negative. Concomitant CMV viral load was elevated to 1′280′000 UI/ml (Cobas Taqman, Roche, Switzerland). Acute seroconversion was confirmed 10 days later with increasing IgM titer (2.4 U/ml) and newly detectable IgG titer (9 UA/ml, limit 4–6, Vidas, Biomerieux, France). Blood cultures returned transiently positive for methicillin- susceptible-Staphylococcus aureus (MSSA), as was a left-ear surgical site excision local swab.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) only revealed a right frontal ischemic sequelae. Fundus examination was normal without sign of retinitis. Upper endoscopy showed erosive gastritis. Immunostaining of gastric biopsies revealed CMV nuclear inclusions , suggesting CMV enteritis in the setting of persisting hiccup and acute diarrhea without other documented pathogens.
Renal-dosed intravenous ganciclovir later replaced by oral valganciclovir after improvement of diarrhea was introduced for 3 weeks. CMV viral load became undetectable after 2 weeks. Antibiotic treatment with flucloxacillin (2 g 4/day) was started for 14 days together with local wound treatment for MSSA surgical site infection. Mycophenolate mofetil was transiently interrupted, and prednisone dosage subsequently increased. The patient made a complete clinical and biological recovery. He was discharged with maintenance half-dose valganciclovir therapy for a total duration of 3 months. No recurrence of CMV infection was reported 1 year later.