A 66-year-old Caucasian woman underwent surgical excision of a cavernous angioma. The surgical intervention was complicated by a cerebral ischemia that caused a low level of consciousness and a prolonged stay in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU). After 3 days, a hydrocephalus occurred, and so an EVD was placed.
On day 12, after EVD placement, the patient presented with meningitis and CSF analysis revealed white blood cell (WBC) count 1,600 cells/µL, glucose 10 mg/dL, and total protein 566 g/L; on that occasion, EVD was changed for the first time. As Gram staining showed Gram-negative rods, and due to the concurrent presence of a Pseudomonas aeruginosa–colonized patient in the ICU, an empiric therapy with IV cefepime (6 g/day by continuous infusion after 2 g loading dose), IV colistin (4.5 million units every 12 hours after 9 million units loading dose), and IVT colistin (10 mg) was started. In fact, CSF culture revealed a multidrug-resistant (MDR) P. aeruginosa only sensitive to colistin with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) value of 0.75 mg/L (Sensititre, Thermo Fisher, Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA; Etest, bioMèrieux, Craponne, France).
Empiric therapy was optimized by using IV colistin, meropenem (2 g every 8 hours extended infusion), and IVT colistin; but after an initial improvement of the CSF parameters, we observed an increase in the CSF WBC count and a decrease in CSF glucose. Moreover, CSF cultures continued to demonstrate growth of P. aeruginosa with colistin MIC increasing from 0.75 to 4–8 mg/L (Sensititre, Etest). Therefore, a second change occurred by setting the antimicrobial therapy as follows: IVT amikacin 30 mg/day and IV cefepime continuous infusion plus IV amikacin 1 g/day. We chose IVT amikacin instead of colistin because, although resistant, amikacin MIC level (32 mg/L) was the nearest to the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing breakpoint (16 mg/L). shows the trend of CSF parameters during the changes in the therapeutic plan, with particular regard to the period when P. aeruginosa became resistant to colistin.
From day 28, P. aeruginosa could be considered pan-resistant rather than MDR.
During IVT amikacin therapy, we measured the intrathecal concentration achieved 1 hour after the end of infusion by a homogeneous Enzyme Multiplied Immuno Assay (EMIT® performed on a VIVA-E® analyzer; Siemens Healthcare Diagnostic, Newark, DE, USA), validated by the manufacturer for use in human serum/plasma matrix. The method was adapted for CSF matrix. The concentration of amikacin in the CSF sample exceeded 200 mg/L; however, this level was adequate, considering the amikacin MIC breakpoint. We did not determine IVT colistin concentration at that time. Moreover, due to the difficulty to accurately control P. aeruginosa colistin MIC level with commercial automatic systems,– we observed variable colistin MIC values with the two distinct analytical methods (Sensititre, Etest).
We also verified the activity of the different therapeutic regimens by evaluating the bactericidal activity of both colistin and amikacin IVT treatments in CSF, maintained at −80°C, by using the microtiter dilution method. The test was performed in duplicate on both the samples taken before and after administration of antibiotics. One hundred microliters of CSF was added to the first well of a microtiter plate (Greiner-bio-One, Frickenhausen, Germany) and serially diluted in 50 µL of Mueller Hinton broth (Oxoid Ltd, Basingstoke, England). We diluted an overnight culture of P. aeruginosa 1:1,000 (5×105 colony-forming units/mL) in Mueller Hinton broth and 50 µL was added to every well of the microplate. The final volume in each well was 100 µL and the dilution range was 1:2–1:1,024. After incubation at 35°C for 18 hours, the inhibitory titer was defined as the highest dilution that prevented visual turbidity. In order to assess the bactericidal activity, 10 µL was removed from each clear well, plated onto Mueller Hinton agar, and incubated at 35°C for 18 hours.
The bactericidal activity of the CSF was defined as the highest dilution that resulted in ≥99.9% killing of the starting inoculum. In the case of IVT colistin treatment, the bactericidal activity was not optimal for trough (trough <1:2, peak=1:64), while it was more effective with amikacin (trough=1:8, peak=1:128).
The success of our strategy was objectively measured by CSF culture (that became negative after 8 days of IVT amikacin therapy) and by progressive improvement of CSF parameters, considering the complex clinical scenario of this fragile ICU patient.
We collected samples from the patient treated in accordance with the ethical standards of the responsible committee on human experimentation and with the Helsinki Declaration. The patient signed the informed consent regarding acceptance of proposed therapies and publication of data for scientific purposes. The Ethics Committee of Humanitas Clinical and Research Center approved this publication as a retrospective study (11/18).
Data collection and processing were carried out in accordance with the Italian law for patient confidentiality and good clinical practice.