A 46-year-old male had been diagnosed with IgA nephropathy based on renal biopsy 3 months before admission. A concurrent diagnosis of chronic kidney dysfunction was established. He was treated with cyclophosphamide and high-dose methylprednisolone, followed by methylprednisolone (40 mg orally per day) for maintenance. He also had hypertension, diabetes mellitus, gout, and leukoderma. He was shown to be allergic to TMP-SMZ when treated for a respiratory infection some years before. The allergic reaction manifested as ulcerations involving the tongue and genitalia, which resolved gradually with discontinuation of TMP-SMZ.
The patient had a fever of 38 °C and sought medical care at a local clinic with complaints of fever, chills, wheezing, and a productive cough. No significant findings were noted on chest X-ray , and the patient was offered symptomatic treatment and discharged. He returned to the local clinic one week later because of worsening symptoms. Arterial blood gas analysis showed type I respiratory failure. A thoracic computed tomography (CT) scan reported bilateral lung infiltrates with ground-glass attenuation . The temperature climbed to 40 °C and the patient was then transferred to the respiratory intensive care unit (RICU).
After transfer to the RICU (day 1), the patient received non-invasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV) for respiratory support with continuous positive airway pressure at 4 cmH2O (FiO2 50 %), and high-flow nasal cannula oxygen supplement (FiO2 50 %) between gaps. Chest auscultation demonstrated bibasilar crepitation. An arterial blood sample was acquired under NIPPV support (FiO2 50 %), and blood gas analysis showed the following: pH, 7.39; PaCO2, 36 mmHg; PaO2, 88 mmHg; and A-a O2 gradient, 68 mmHg. The leukocyte count was 12.2 × 109/L. The procalcitonin level was 22.09 ng/ml. Other laboratory findings included the following: serum urea nitrogen, 30.83 mmol/L; serum creatinine, 478.50 umol/L; potassium, 5.3 mmol/L; and lactic acid dehydrogenase, 729 U/L. The serum 1,3-β-D-glucan level was > 1000 pg/ml (beyond the testing range). The CD4+ T-cell count was 46 cells/mm3. HIV was excluded by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis. Pneumocystis jirovecii was visualized under light microscopy in both induced sputum and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) with Gomori methenamine silver staining. Cytomegalovirus (CMV)-pp65 antigen and CMV-DNA were positive in blood samples. Induced sputum and BALF were collected for real-time PCR analysis, yielding positive P. jirovecii DNA and CMV-DNA. A high-resolution CT (HRCT) scan on day 14 demonstrated aggravation of the bilateral lower lobe consolidation .
Because of the low oxygen index (PaO2/FiO2 = 166 mmHg) and infiltrates, the patient was thought to have developed moderate acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and a 21-day adjunctive corticosteroid therapy was initiated on day 1. Methylprednisolone (80 mg IVggt qd) was administered for the first 5 days, then tapered to 40 mg IVggt qd for another 5 days, and 20 mg po qd for 11 days more. Because the patient was allergic to TMP-SMZ which is a first-line choice for PCP, a TMP-SMZ desensitization protocol (0.12 g po q6h for 2 days, 0.48 g q6h for 2 days, and 0.96 g q6h for 2 days) was instituted on day 2. Ulcers and hemorrhages were observed on the left side of the tongue on day 7, which was believed to be an adverse reaction to TMP-SMZ. Therefore, TMP-SMZ therapy was abandoned on day 7, and was subsequently replaced by a 21-day combination therapy of caspofungin (50 mg IVggt qd) and clindamycin (0.3 g IVggt q6h) from days 8 to 28. Ganciclovir was added to cover CMV infection. Other pathogens, such as bacteria, could not be excluded in this case, thus cefoperazone-sulbactam and moxifloxacin were added empirically.
The patient’s condition gradually remitted and the oxygen index improved. The patient was transferred back to the general ward on day 33. The 1,3-β-D-glucan levels and absolute cell counts of T-cell subsets were carefully monitored. The CD4+ T-cell count decreased when TMP-SMZ was discontinued, but gradually normalized, which was accompanied by a decreasing 1,3-β-D-glucan level . Pneumocystis jirovecii was undetectable microscopically in induced sputum on day 9. The PCR became negative for sputum P. jirovecii and CMV-DNA on days 13 and 29, respectively. On day 20, HRCT revealed that the upper lobe infiltrates and dense consolidations in the lower lobes were absorbed compared to the last scan . A follow-up HRCT was arranged on day 90, which showed significant absorption of the dense consolidations . The symptoms were nearly relieved by the time he was discharged, with the exception of occasional coughing. Because the patient restored his normal CD4+ T-cell count, secondary prophylaxis for PCP was not needed.