The patient was a 49-year-old man with no significant past medical or family history. He was transferred to our hospital with sudden-onset fatigue from working on a farm. At admission, his level of consciousness was alert, his blood pressure was 170/120 mmHg, and his pulse rate was 200 .b.p.m.. On physical examination, S1 and S2 on cardiac auscultation were rhythmic, with no murmur. Coarse crackles were heard in the lung bilaterally. There was no oedema of the lower limbs. A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed monomorphic sustained wide QRS tachycardia with a right bundle branch block pattern and superior axis deviation with a cycle length (CL) of 300 ms . Intravenous administration of 50 mg lidocaine terminated the tachycardia. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a preserved left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 64% and a slightly enlarged right ventricle (RV). We performed cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to further assess for any evidence of underlying cardiomyopathy. A contrast-enhanced cardiac MRI did not show any specific features of arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy with only late gadolinium enhancement in the inferoposterior septum of the LV apex and a slightly enlarged RV with reduced RV function . Hence, we decided to perform coronary angiography. Angiography did not show any significant stenosis of the coronary artery. However, acetylcholine injection into the left anterior descending artery and right coronary artery evoked significant diffuse stenosis with vasospasm. According to the result of coronary angiography, we confirmed that the substrate of VT was myocardial infarction due to vasospasm in this patient. After obtaining the patient’s informed consent, a transvenous ICD was implanted. Dual-chamber ICD was chosen for the diagnosis of supraventricular tachycardia despite no necessity for atrial pacing at the moment. The ICD (Cobalt XT DR ICD: Medtronic, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) was successfully placed by a standard transvenous procedure with the appropriate pacing and sensing thresholds for atrial and ventricular pacing. The tip of the shock lead was placed in the RV apex.
At the time of the patient’s discharge from the hospital, ICD therapy was programmed as shown in , as in the usual clinical set-up. Sequential ATP was programmed to evaluate the efficacy of iATP compared with standard ATP. Standard burst pacing with 3 sequences of 10 pulses at 88% of VTCL was programmed as the first therapy (Rx.1). Subsequently, iATP was programmed as the second therapy (Rx.2).
Nine months after the ICD implantation, a home-monitoring system recorded a clinical VT episode with a VTCL of 300 ms in this patient , which could not be terminated by the three sequences of conventional burst pacing. Subsequently, the first sequence of iATP was delivered with nine S1 pulses (88% of VTCL), followed by an S2 pulse with a CI of 260 ms . The second iATP was delivered with four S1 pulses of 280 ms and one S2 pulse of 240 ms. Ventricular tachycardia was finally terminated by a third iATP sequence of four S1 pulses and one S2 pulse, with CIs of 280 and 220 ms, respectively .
During this episode, the patient did not feel any discomfort. To compare the efficacy of ATP with iATP, we considered to program iATP as the first therapy. Ten months after the first episode, VT episode with a VTCL of 310 ms was observed, and the VT was terminated by the second sequence of iATP without any acceleration. No anti-arrhythmic drug was administered; however, no shock therapy was delivered until today.