A 55-year-old female patient presented to our Department of Dermatology with non-pitting edema and erythema of the upper two-thirds of the face for 5 mo.
The patient had edema and erythema of the upper two-thirds of the face 5 mo ago, and there was no itching or discomfort related to the skin lesions. The patient had previously been treated in two hospitals, where the doctors considered her condition considered to be caused by an allergy and treated her with antihistamines, but this treatment was ineffective. The primary skin lesions gradually became worse.
The patient was previously healthy and denied any history of acne, rosacea, erysipelas, allergies, diabetes, or other diseases.
The patient denied genetic diseases, and there was no similar disease in the family.
On physical examination, temperature, pulse, respiration, and blood pressure were normal. Examination of the heart, lungs, abdomen, and nervous system showed no abnormalities. Dermatological findings showed obvious edema and erythema on the forehead, between the eyebrows, and on both eyelids, nose, and both cheeks. The skin lesions were hard and non-pitting, and had unclear boundaries and obvious infiltration by touch . The rest of the skin showed no abnormalities. No visual field damage was observed.
Routine blood tests, renal function, and electrolytes were all within the normal range. Routine urine test showed positive occult blood (1+), and other values were normal. The tuberculin test, antinuclear antibody spectrum, and anti-double stranded DNA antibody were negative. All immunological indicators were normal. Liver function analysis showed that alanine aminotransferase (ALA) was 44 U/L, and other values were normal. Histopathological examination of skin lesions on the left side of the face revealed mild hyperkeratosis of the epidermis, nodular inflammatory lesions in the dermis, epithelioid granuloma, and inflammatory cell infiltration dominated by lymphocytes and histiocytes around skin appendages and blood vessels . Alcian blue staining, acid fast staining, silver staining, and periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining were all negative .
A chest X-ray showed no abnormalities.