A 33-year-old nulliparous woman was referred to our institution from a private infertility clinic complaining of lower abdominal pain. She reported a history of 5 weeks and 4 days of amenorrhea and had undergone intrauterine insemination (IUI) 27 days previously. Ovarian hyperstimulation for IUI was started with Clomiphene citrate 100 mg daily during the 3rd–7th days of the menstrual cycle, followed by 75 IU hMG (IVF-M HP, LG life science, Seoul, Korea) daily on the 7th–9th days of the menstrual cycle. Transvaginal ultrasound had revealed four dominant follicles in the left ovary after ovarian stimulation.
On physical examination, she had normal vital signs and diffuse lower abdominal tenderness. The serum beta-chorionic gonadotropin level was 3154 mUI/mL. Transvaginal ultrasound performed in the gynecology department revealed a large hyperechoic mass, a suspected hematoma, in the cul-de-sac. It also revealed a normal-sized uterus without an intrauterine gestational sac, and endometrial thickening of 20 mm. Both right and left adnexa were normal on the ultrasound. The initial complete blood count was as follows: hematocrit 35.9%, hemoglobin 11.9 g/dL, white blood cells 9.3 × 109/L and platelets 252 × 109/L. The provisional diagnosis was ruptured ectopic pregnancy with hemoperitoneum, and emergency laparoscopy was performed. Intraoperatively, a dark blood clot of about 800 ml was seen along with a small amount of fresh blood . An approximately 2 × 2 × 1.5 cm unruptured ectopic pregnancy was found in the right fallopian tube , while the left fallopian tube appeared to be normal. While examining the ovaries to locate the cause of the bleeding, we observed minimal bleeding from the proximal pole of the left ovary, where there was a 1.0 × 0.5 × 0.5 cm hemorrhagic mass with surrounding blood clot suggestive of a ruptured ectopic pregnancy . We resected the mass from the left ovary and performed a right salpingectomy using monopolar electrocautery and 5 mm multi-functional bipolar electrocoagulation forceps (LiNA PowerBlade; LiNA Medical, Glostrup, Hovedstaden DK-2600, Denmark) . After intraperitoneal irrigation with 3 L of saline, we ascertained that there were no abnormal findings. We therefore placed drains into the cul-de sac and finished the operation (Additional file ). Histopathological analysis demonstrated a left ovarian pregnancy with presence of chorionic villi within the ovarian tissue, along with a right tubal pregnancy .