A 35-years-old woman complained of severe headache and sudden memory loss. Twelve days ago, she underwent uterine fibroids surgery under general anesthesia. Subsequently, due to postoperative bleeding, the patient received intravenous hem coagulase (2 IU/day) for 7 consecutive days. Three days ago, she developed severe headaches and memory loss. The patient reported no nausea, vomiting, photophobia, or blurred vision.
The patient had a clear previous medical history with a 2-year history of uterine fibroids, without taking any oral medication. Physical examination was unremarkable except for an incision in the lower abdomen. Abnormal neurological signs include the following: slow reactions, poor memory, and decreased ability to perform calculations. The patient limbs had normal muscle strength and motor coordination. No nuchal rigidity or other signs of meningitis were identified.
Routine blood tests were normal, and APTT and international normalized ratio (INR) were normal. Serum D-dimer level was 908 ng/mL. Hepatic enzymogram was slightly increased. The levels of serum tumor markers, such as cancer antigen-125 (CA-125), antigen-CA153, antigen-CA199, α-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, ferritin, and neuron-specific enolase were within normal ranges.
Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed acute multiple infarcts in the right cerebellar hemisphere and left temporal lobe . T1-weighted images and T2-weighted images/fluid-attenuated inversion-recovery showed marked edema and heterogeneous signal in the left temporal lobe by subsequent computed tomography (CT). Hemorrhagic infarction was further identified . Magnetic resonance venography of the brain showed a vague left sigmoid sinus . Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) showed no arterial vascular stenosis or occlusion . Cranial contrast-enhanced MRI showed a cord-like enhanced signals in the left temporal lobe and a strong signal in the left sigmoid sinus , as the results of contrast agent retention. No tumor-like enhanced signs were found. Contrast-enhanced CT of the chest and abdomen showed no abnormality. The final diagnosis in this case was CVST.
The patient received a subcutaneous injection of Low-Molecular-Weight Heparin Sodium 0.4 mL, twice a day (7 days), and oral Warfarin Sodium 3 mg, once a day, while monitoring the INR (international normalized ratio), adjust the warfarin sodium dosage according to the INR level. Dehydrating agents were used to decrease the intracranial pressure.
One week later, the patient headache was relieved and her cognitive function improved significantly. One month later, a follow-up MRI showed a decrease in the area of mixed signal in the left temporal lobe. A cranial CT scan showed that the high density in the left temporal lobe had disappeared . High-resolution MRI with T1-weighted 3D volumetric isotropic turbo spin echo acquisition clearly displayed abnormal high signal in the left sigmoid sinus . The patient was asymptomatic and had normal cognitive assessments.