A 39-year-old man was admitted to the hospital due to hematemesis and melena for 2 wk, with a new episode lasting 1 d.
Two weeks before admission, the patient had hematemesis and melena without obvious known causes. He vomited light red fluids 4-5 times/d and passed tarry stools 3-4 times/d; these events were accompanied by epigastric pain, abdominal distension, and fatigue. He had no dizziness or syncope. He was hospitalized at a local hospital where examinations showed a hemoglobin (Hb) level of 86 g/L. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) showed fresh blood in the descending part of the duodenum but did not show a clear bleeding site. The patient was treated with blood transfusion, acid blockers, and intravenous (IV) fluid and discharged from the hospital after no recurrence of hematemesis or melena was observed.
One day before admission to our hospital, the patient vomited bright red blood once and was admitted to the local hospital. Bedside EGD showed no obvious bleeding in the upper gastrointestinal tract. During his hospitalization, the patient had repeated hematemesis and hematochezia 4-5 times/d accompanied by left upper abdominal pain and fatigue. His minimum Hb level was 42 g/L. After treatment with blood transfusion, IV fluid, acid blockers, and hemostasis, he was transferred to our hospital for emergency admission.
The patient had a history of chronic pancreatitis. He denied chronic diseases such as hypertension, coronary heart disease, and diabetes, a history of abdominal surgery and trauma, and a history of food and drug allergy.
The patient denied a history of smoking and drinking and any history of diseases in family members.
On admission, the patient had a body temperature of 37.2 °C, a pulse of 102 beats/min, a respiratory rate of 19 times/min, a blood pressure of 117/91 mmHg, and an oxygen saturation of 98%. The patient had manifestations of anemia and pale conjunctiva. His abdomen was soft with upper abdominal tenderness. No rebound tenderness was noted. No abdominal mass was palpable. No other obvious abnormality was noted.
The complete blood count on admission was as follows: White blood cell count, 8.00 × 109/L; red blood cell count, 2.34 × 109/L; Hb, 66 g/L; hematocrit, 0.192; platelet count, 108 × 109/L; total amylase, 198 U/L; D-dimer, 6060 µg/L; hypersensitive C-reactive protein, 40.1 mg/L; procalcitonin, 0.12 ng/mL; and serum albumin, 24 g/L . Coagulation function, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, glutamyl transpeptidase, urinalysis results, stool analysis, tumor marker expression, troponin I, and electrocardiogram results were all within normal limits.
A noncontrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis showed pancreatic swelling, uneven density, vague edges, multiple spots of calcifications, and hyperintense opacities in the pancreatic head and body, indicating chronic pancreatitis and pancreatic head hemorrhage.
Subsequent contrast-enhanced CT of the abdomen showed isointense, rounded opacities with a diameter of approximately 41 mm in the pancreatic head that were enhanced with contrast in the arterial phase and were closely related to the gastroduodenal artery, indicating pseudoaneurysm . Furthermore, digital subtraction angiography performed via the celiac trunk showed the formation of pseudoaneurysms at the proximal gastroduodenal artery; the remaining blood vessels were unremarkable .