A 26-year-old Iranian man without any underlying diseases was referred to Razi Hospital, a referral center for skin diseases in Iran that is affiliated to Tehran University of Medical Sciences, with a hyperpigmented patch in the axilla. Based on clinical examination, the diagnosis was made as pityriasis versicolor. However, treatment with clotrimazole cream was not successful and he returned to the hospital after one month.
Direct microscopic examination of the scales after mixing with 10% potassium hydroxide revealed the presence of yeast cells. Furthermore, the scales cultured on Dixon Agar (Quelab, Canada) plates for five days at 32°C produced white and creamy colonies with smooth surfaces. By Lactophenol Cotton Blue Staining of the smears, yeast cells similar to Cryptococcus were observed under microscope .
Genomic DNA was extracted from culture using glass beads method , and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed using universal primers of ITS1 (5'-TCC GTA GGT GAA CCT GCG G-3') and ITS4 (5'-TCC TCC GCT TAT TGA TAT GC-3') (Sinaclon, Iran). The PCR product with the approximate size of 600 bp was applied for sequencing (Macrogen, South Korea). Alignment of the obtained sequence in BLAST revealed high homology (99%) with N. albida, which is indicated with GenBank ID: MG020697.1.
In the following step, the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) values for itraconazole, voriconazole, and amphotericin B were determined using the microbroth dilution method according to the Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) standard protocols . Briefly, the test was performed in 96-well round-bottom microtiter plates. Drug concentration ranges were 0.03 to 16 µg/ml for itraconazole, voriconazole, and amphotericin B. Yeast suspensions were prepared in RPMI-1640 medium and adjusted to provide a final inoculum concentration of about 0.5 × 103 to 2.5 × 103 cells/ml. The culture plates were then incubated at 35°C followed by reading after 48 h according to the M27-S3 supplement of the CLSI guideline . The MIC results were then compared with a drug-free control culture plate.
The MIC values for itraconazole, voriconazole, and amphotericin B were 0.062 µg/ml, 0.062 µg/ml, and 0.062 µg/ml, respectively, revealing the sensitivity of the mentioned causative agent. The patient was finally treated successfully using 100 mg daily of oral itraconazole. The Ethics Committee of Tehran University of Medical Sciences approved this report with the code No. IR.TUMS.SPH.REC.1396.2400.