A 59-year-old man underwent chest radiography during a health check-up at his workplace.
A nodular shadow on the lateral side of the left middle lung was detected. After a close examination by his local doctor, he was diagnosed with descending colon cancer and a simultaneous lung tumour. The patient was then referred to our department for further treatment. His medical history was unremarkable. Laboratory examinations showed mild anaemia only. The other laboratory data, including the tumour markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), were essentially normal. Plain chest computed tomography (CT) revealed a solitary well-defined mass, measuring approximately 30 mm, in the superior region of the upper lobe of the left lung . Abdominal contrast-enhanced CT revealed a subtotal mass lesion with a contrast effect in the middle segment of the descending colon . Positron emission tomography (PET)–CT revealed a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) max of 9.2 for fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation in S3a of the left upper lung lobe and an SUV max of 9.8 with FDG accumulation in the descending colon . Colonoscopy revealed a semicircumferential type 2 lesion in the middle segment of the descending colon . This finding was consistent with the CT colonography findings in the same area . A laparoscopic left hemicolectomy with regional lymph nodes dissection, including nodes around origin of inferior mesenteric artery, was performed. Based on the pathological examination, the patient was diagnosed with moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma. According to the eighth version of the Union for International Cancer Control for International Cancer Control TNM classification for CRC, the patient had cStage IVA disease . Subsequently, he received chemotherapy with tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil (S-1), combined with oxaliplatin (SOX) and bevacizumab for four cycles. Shrinkage of the left lung tumour was observed . The patient underwent close surveillance during chemotherapy treatment to monitor the occurrence of additional lung metastatic lesions or other metastatic lesions. However, there was no evidence of new lesion formations during the observation period. Left upper segmentectomy was performed 6 months after the primary resection. Based on the pathological examination, most of the central part of the tumor was necrotic, and only a few atypical ducts of moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma showing a tendency to coalesce were observed only in the marginal part. In addition, the patient was diagnosed with metastatic lung tumours from CRC. The pathological diagnosis of CRC was well-differentiated adenocarcinoma > moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, pT3N1a(1/9)M1a [PUL], pStage IVA, Ly1a, V0, PM0, DM0. He received adjuvant chemotherapy with SOX for four cycles after undergoing a pneumonectomy. Thereafter, he underwent follow-up for 5 years, during the follow-up evaluation, a contrast-enhanced CT and colonoscopy were performed, and the tumour markers were measured. No recurrence was observed during the follow-up evaluation. However, 9 years and 6 months after the primary resection, he experienced discomfort in the left testicle. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a tumour, measuring 17 mm, with a low signal intensity on T1- and T2-weighted imaging of the cephalic side of the left testis . PET–CT yielded a SUV max of 4.4 FDG accumulation, confined to the testis in the same area . The tumour markers, particularly the human chorionic gonadotropin, fetoprotein, CEA, and CA19-9, were within the normal ranges. In addition to malignancy, epididymal fibroma and epididymitis were raised as radiological differential diagnoses. Epididymal fibroma are mostly treated with radical orchiectomy, because preoperative diagnosis confirming the benign nature is difficult . Therefore, a left orchiectomy was performed for diagnostic purposes. Based on the postoperative pathological examination and immunostaining results, the patient was diagnosed with testicular metastasis from CRC . The carcinoma was located mainly in the testis and epididymis, but it also invaded the spermatic cord. He received adjuvant chemotherapy, consisting of capecitabine and oxaliplatin, but the medications were discontinued after one cycle due to the occurrence of epigastric discomfort after taking capecitabine. The patient was followed up without medication at his request. He is currently healthy, without recurrence, 11 months postoperatively.