A 25-year-old primigravida female was admitted at 25 weeks of gestation with severe dyspnea that had progressed over the last month. Additionaly, she noticed a progressive, productive cough that started six months ago. At presentation, she had a regular pulse rate of 140 beats per minute, a Blood Pressure of 90/50 mmHg, and a respiratory rate of 30 breaths/min. O2 saturation was 94% in the room air, and she was afebrile. Cardiac examinations revealed muffled heart sounds, pulsus paradoxus, and elevated jugular venous pressure. Other examinations and her past medical history were unremarkable, and she denied experiencing any constitutional sign. Her electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia. On echocardiography, the size and the systolic function of the right and left ventricles were normal. There was evidence of a large pericardial effusion with significant right atrial invagination and RVOT diastolic collapse. There were significant respiratory variations of TV and MV inflow velocities, and IVC appeared plethoric. A large extra-cardiac mass at the pulmonary valve site adjacent to distal RVOT was seen, resulting in turbulency in pulmonic outflow without significant gradient and stenosis.
The blood tests showed neutrophilic leukocytosis with a white blood cell count of 16,410 cells/mm3, a hemoglobin level of 9.2 g/dl, a platelet count of 403*103 /mm3, an ESR level of 95 mm/h, an LDH level of 300 IU/L, and CRP more than 90 with standard coagulation test. The results of the pericardial fluid analysis are presented in the Table .
Cardiac magnetic resonance determined a 146*126*136 mm heterogeneous mass in the anterior mediastinum attached to the pericardium with a compressive effect on RVOT Fig. .
A mass biopsy was performed, and the pathology revealed diffuse and nodular infiltration of lymphocytes, neutrophils, eosinophils, and atypical cells with enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei with irregular contours and prominent nucleoli in the fibrotic stroma. The immunohistochemistry showed negative CD15 and positive CD3, CD20, CD30, CD45, PAX5 expression. According to the clinical and paraclinical findings, the diagnosis of gray zone lymphoma was confirmed Fig. .
Subcutaneous Pericardiocentesis under fluoroscopy with a subxiphoid approach was performed, and after drainage of 200CC serous fluid, the pigtail catheter was fixed under negative pressure. While the patient's hemodynamic status improved, it did not fully recover until receiving the high dose of dexamethasone.
An oncology consultation was requested, and dexamethasone was started at 40 mg daily for four days. Three courses of chemotherapy were administered using the CHOP regimen (Cyclophosphamide 750/m2, Hydroxydaunorubicin 50/m2, Vincristine Sulfate 2 mg, and Prednisone 75 mg/m2 day1-day5) with intervals of twenty-one days. The treatment was stopped three weeks before delivery to avoid the coincidence of the next date of chemotherapy with delivery and prevent any potential complications for the mother and fetus, such as bleeding during childbirth and neonatal myelosuppression . The patient demonstrated an improvement in the symptoms that prompted her admission, indicating a suitable response to chemotherapy. All the fetal ultrasounds performed during chemotherapy were normal. After completing two courses of chemotherapy and giving birth, the mother underwent trans-thoracic echocardiography to monitor her cardiac health. The result showed normal LV and RV function, as well as normal LVEF, with no presence of pericardial effusion.
An elective cesarean section was performed at 37 weeks of gestation. The mother's health status during and after delivery was good, and her son was in perfect health with no observable abnormalities. Chemotherapy will commence three weeks after delivery.