A 25-year-old caucasian lady presented to the Accident & Emergency Department of a general hospital complaining of acute onset severe epigastric pain radiating through to the back with associated nausea and vomiting. History, examination and biochemical analysis confirmed a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis, Imrie score 1 . Symptoms commenced after the third dose of Metronidazole therapy prescribed by the patient's dentist for treatment of a periodontal abscess. Amylase was 810 on admission and CRP was 70. CRP peaked to 248 on day 4 and rapidly declined thereafter. Relative negatives in the history included no other concurrent medications, no known drug allergies, alcohol consumption of 3–6 units weekly, and the patient was a nonsmoker.
Relevant past surgical history included; (1) laparoscopic cholecystectomy (June 2006) for symptomatic treatment of suspected biliary colic although gallstones were not identified on imaging and (2) first episode of acute pancreatitis requiring hospital admission (Septmber 2009) following 5 doses to Metronidazole therapy prescribed for dental abscess. Ultrasound scan, Computed Topography of abdomen, and Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangio-Pancreatography all failed to demonstrate gallstones as potential aetiology at that time.
On this admission, a detailed history and biochemical evaluation excluded other risk factors for pancreatitis-gallstones, increased alcohol intake, recent ERCP, hypercalcaemia, hypercholesterolaemia, or viral infections. She was not taking any regular medications nor did she have any known drug allergies. Imaging by ultrasound scan reported previous cholecystectomy, normal common bile duct, and once again no gallstones were visualized. Magnetic Resonance Cholangio-Pancreatography also demonstrated normal intra- and extrahepatic biliary anatomy. These factors combined with past surgical history provided convincing evidence of Metronidazole as the most probable aetiological factor.
Supportive management of IV fluid resusitation, analgesia, antiemetic and, nil per oral was instituted and Metronidazole therapy was immediately discontinued. Her clinical course was uncomplicated and amylase returned to normal on day 4 post admission . She began to tolerate light diet on day 5 and was discharged on day 7.