A 30-month-old male child born to a 32-year-old healthy female was brought by parents to the paediatric outpatient department with complaints of decreased hearing and reduced interaction for 3 months. His parents observed a progressive worsening of his hearing impairment. The child had a normal vaginal delivery at term with no perinatal complications. His developmental history was unremarkable with no neonatal hospitalization and developmental delay. Immunization was completed as per the national schedule. Born to a non-consanguineous marriage, there was no significant family history.
On examination, the baby appeared to have coarse facies with a flat nasal bridge . He had wide-spaced nipples, a prominent coastal ridge, kyphoscoliosis, and multiple Mongolian spots on the trunk . Anthropometric evaluation using the WHO chart revealed that the height for age was at zero S.D., weight for age at zero S.D., and head circumference between +1 to +2 S.D. Upon abdominal examination, the liver was palpable 3 cm below the costal margin on the mid-clavicular line. Left lobe was more enlarged than the right lobe. Ocular examination revealed that the child had simple myopic astigmatism. Otoscopic examination of the ear revealed an intact tympanic membrane on both ears. Rest of the systemic examination findings were within normal limits. Based on the history and examination findings, mucopolysaccharidosis, inclusion cell disease, pseudo-Hurler polydystrophy, galactosialidosis, and sialidosis were considered.
Despite ruling out other causes of hearing loss, no conclusive evidence was found. Subsequently, visual reinforcement orientation audiometry was performed which revealed mild hearing loss of 60 dB bilaterally. However, the transient evoked oto-acoustic emission was inconclusive. Thereafter, auditory brainstem response (ABR) was carried out to estimate the hearing threshold. Wave V, being the highest, most stable, and significant, was traceable only up to 70 decibel neural hearing loss in the right and up to 60 decibel neural hearing loss in the left ear. With the impression of bilateral moderate hearing loss based on ABR, the child was advised for a hearing aid trial.
Various investigations were done to further narrow down the differentials. Routine investigations including complete blood count, liver function test, renal function test, electrocardiogram, echocardiography, thyroid function test, and ultrasonography (USG) abdomen were within normal limits. X-ray of the hand, skull, spine, and pelvis were done. In the anteroposterior view X-ray of right-hand bullet shaped phalanges were noted . On X-ray of the skull, lateral view, sutural diastasis was noted . X-ray pelvis AP view showed mild rounding of the bilateral iliac bone with normal hip joint bilaterally . X-ray of the whole spine lateral view showed deficiency of the cortical element in the anterosuperior aspect with beaking in the anteroinferior region in multiple thoracic and lumbar vertebrae. Slight kyphotic deformity was also noted . These radiological features were suggestive of mucopolysaccharidosis.
Based on this, urinary glycosaminoglycans (GAG) were tested but the results were negative. Additionally, enzyme assays for iduronate-2-sulphate sulphatase, alpha-L iduronidase, arylsulphatase-A, hexosaminidase-A all came within normal limits. Furthermore, enzyme assays done on a blood sample for alpha-Mannosidase and alpha-fucosidase, showed normal enzyme activity. Finally, urinary oligosaccharide analysis was done which came out to be positive.
Whole-exome sequencing revealed a homozygous missense variant in Exon 4 of NEU1 gene at codon 227. This is a proven pathognomic variant of sialidosis and this resulted in amino acid substitution of arginine for glycine. Although the diagnosis of sialidosis was made, optimum therapeutic measures are yet to be identified. So, the patient was advised for symptomatic treatment of hearing and eyesight problems and visited for regular follow-up.