In this study, we report a 27-year-old single man with no history of psychiatric disorder or drug abuse. His illness initiated with some pure psychiatric symptoms; for 3 years, the case had a fear with the feeling of being followed by others, without any external stressor. His symptoms were then exacerbated to hesitation and muttering, irritability, anger outbursts, bad tempering, and antisocial behavior. He thought his colleagues at work are likely to harm him due to his good skills at his job. His symptoms gradually tended toward depression, severe fatigue and loss of energy, loss of appetite, and weight loss and were followed by joint stiffness and loss of movement control at upper and lower limbs. After 6 months from the appearance of symptoms, he was brought to a psychiatric office being uncertain of hallucinogenic drug abuse. The psychiatrist prescribed citalopram 20 mg daily, risperidone 2 mg three times a day, and biperiden 2 mg three times a day; however, no improvements in the symptoms were observed.
Although there was no history of psychiatric disorders and drug abuse, due to some motor neuron involvement, the patient was referred to carry out a brain imaging (magnetic resonance imaging [MRI] without contrast) to rule out organic disorders in a month. He was referred to psychiatrist after 6 months from the appearance of symptoms. The psychiatrist also asked the patient to carry out brain MRI following the medical treatment. The T2-weighted MRI demonstrated periventricular and white matter multiple sclerotic plugs with lesions . Because of the presence of paresthesia, upper and lower limb muscle weakness, ataxia, and urinary incontinency, he was referred to a neurologist. MS diagnosis was made based on the patient’s signs, symptoms, and imaging findings. He took methylprednisolone (5 mg three times a day/until remission) and interferon therapy, which resulted in improvements in sensory and motor neuron involvement and socio-occupational behavior and disappearance of hallucination in 40 days (by the time the treatment began).
Written informed consent was given by the patient for the publication of this case report.