A 43-year old female patient was referred to our department with the clinical diagnosis of ovarian malignancy. Abdominal CT scan revealed a left adnexal mass, moderate perihepatic and perisplenic ascitic fluid collection, retroperitoneal and pelvic lymph node enlargement and omental cake peritoneal seedings; thorax CT identified a paravertebral pleural cystic lesion with thick wall and serous liquid content . Laboratory investigations showed a mildly elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase at 546 IU/L and CA 125 at 1420 IU/L. The patient's previous history was remarkable for a malignant melanoma of the left antecubital region removed surgically 9 years ago. Histopathology report at that time revealed a Breslow 2.36 mm, Clark's level IV, superficial spreading melanoma with a nodular phase growth pattern, with signs of regression and without ulceration. Elective left axillary lymph node dissection and intraoperative isolated limb perfusion of the left upper extremity with cisplatin, melphalan and dacarbazine was performed according to an investigational protocol at the time of initial presentation of the patient. Histopathologic examination showed no evidence of metastatic disease in the excised lymph nodes. After 2 years of well being the patient was lost from follow-up. In order to establish a definite diagnosis of the present clinical scenario, ultra-sound guided aspiration of the ascitic fluid and cytopathological examination was performed. Cytological morphology showed a cellular smear with a single cell population of large pleomorphic round undifferentiated pigmented malignant cells with moderate to abundant cytoplasm. The hyperchromatic nuclei showed great variation in size and contained large nucleoli. There was pigment both within the cytoplasm and in the background. Binucleate and multinucleated cells were also frequent. Immunocytochemistry studies revealed positivity for HMB-45, vimentin and S-100 . The findings were identical to the initial specimen of the same patient and diagnostic of metastatic melanoma. Systemic cisplatin-based cytotoxic chemotherapy was initiated. After a short period of disease stabilization the patient developed brain metastases and died 8 months after the diagnosis of disease relapse.