A 28-year-old man with persistent abdominal pain was examined and found to have a large retroperitoneal tumor measuring 10 cm diameter and a testicular tumor. A retroperitoneal tumor involving the superior mesenteric artery, bilateral renal arteries, and abdominal aorta, and an enlarged subdiaphragmatic lymph node were revealed on computed tomography . In accordance with the guidelines for the treatment of testicular tumors, the patient underwent high orchidectomy. Histological examination showed that the tumor was a seminoma. After chemotherapy—four courses of bleomycin, etoposide, and platinum therapy; two courses of etoposide and cisplatin therapy; and two courses of paclitaxel, ifosfamide, and cisplatin therapy—and shrinkage of the tumor , the subdiaphragmatic lymph node and retroperitoneal tumor with the abdominal aorta were resected. The abdominal aorta was resected from infrarenal aorta to terminal aorta and reconstructed with a prosthetic graft . On the fourth day after surgery, a chest radiograph showed massive pleural effusion and a drainage tube was inserted into the patient’s right chest cavity . When the patient resumed food intake on the seventh day after surgery, the pleural effusion changed from serous to chyle, and the patient was diagnosed with lymphatic leakage. The patient was administered conservative treatment consisting of fasting and somatostatin therapy (300 µg/day); however, the volume of fluid drained continued at approximately 1000 mL/day.
On the thirteenth postoperative day, antegrade lymphangiography of the bilateral inguinal lymph nodes was performed; however, no lymphatic leakage was identified . On the fifteenth day after surgery, a lymphangiography using a retrograde transvenous approach was performed. The procedure of retrograde transvenous approach was shown in the schema . This schema was created based on the report by Sato et al. . The left cephalic vein was percutaneously punctured and an 11-cm 7 Fr sheath was placed. A 7 Fr 65-cm KMP catheter was advanced to the venous angle using a 0.035-in. 180-cm Radifocus guidewire (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) . Cannulation of the thoracic duct was performed using a 0.014-in. 180-cm Asahi Chikai V guidewire (ASAHI INTECC, Aichi, Japan) supported by a 2.0/2.4 Fr 150-cm Leonis Mova catheter (SB-KAWASUMI LABORATORIES, Kanagawa, Japan) . The catheter was advanced to the eleventh thoracic vertebra level through several thoracic duct valves. Lymphangiography revealed interruption of the thoracic duct and spillage of contrast with Lipiodol outside the duct . The thoracic duct was embolized with 0.4 mL of a 1:2 mixture of n-butyl-2-cyanoacrylate and Lipiodol. After thoracic duct embolization, the drainage volume decreased to 100 mL/day, and the drainage tube was removed. The patient was discharged on the twenty-ninth day after surgery without recurrent effusions.