A 70-year-old Afro-Caribbean lady presented with a 4-week history of left eye pain and photophobia. She had a 20-pack-year history of smoking, and she was a glaucoma suspect, with a central corneal thickness of 519 µm on the right eye and 497 µm on the left eye. On examination, she was found to have a right visual acuity (VA) of 6/4 and a left VA of 6/9, with either intraocular pressure (IOP) found to be within normal range. She was diagnosed with left-sided episcleritis and was started on preservative-free 0.2% sodium hyaluronate (Hylo-forte®) four times a day and a tailing-down regimen of preserved dexamethasone 0.1% eye drops (four times a day for 1 week, three times a day for 1 week, once daily for 1 week, and then stop). She was not given any further follow-up.
Six months later, whilst visiting family in Jamaica, she presented to a local ophthalmology unit with recurrent left eye pain and severe photophobia. In view of new iris vessels and an IOP of 32 mm Hg, she was treated for possible rubeotic glaucoma and was started on a combination eye drop of brimonidine tartrate 2 mg/mL and timolol maleate 5 mg/mL twice daily and preservative-free bimatoprost 0.03% ophthalmic solution once daily, both to the left eye. She was initially also started on acetazolamide 250 mg tablets once a day, along with a course of high-dose oral prednisolone, which was stopped after a week due to intolerable gastrointestinal side effects.
Upon arriving back in the UK 2 weeks later, she re-presented to eye casualty to check her treatment progress. Since her first visit, the left VA had dropped to 6/24 improving to 6/12 with pinhole (right VA 6/9). Clinical findings in the left eye included diffuse hyperaemia, a clear anterior chamber, an irregular iris surface with an amelanotic lesion of iris stroma between 2 and 5 o’clock, posterior synechiae, 360-degrees rubeosis iridis, and an IOP of 24 mm Hg. There were also an early nuclear sclerotic cataract and a trace of vitreous inflammation, along with a healthy optic disc. Pupils were both equal and reactive, and right ocular examination was within normal limits, with an IOP of 18 mm Hg. Ultrasound (US) biomicroscopy was done, which revealed a left thickened iris with an associated ciliary body lesion, 2.2 mm thick and 9.6 mm long, shown in . In view of the symptomatology and the examination findings, sarcoid-related ocular inflammation was suspected, and a computed tomography (CT) scan of the lung was organized. This revealed an incidental right upper lobe lesion and she was promptly referred to the Ocular Oncology service and to the respiratory team.
A transcorneal iris biopsy was done. Histopathological examination showed a tumour composed of small round blue cells with nuclear moulding, conspicuous nucleoli, and occasional discernible cytoplasm. Immunohistochemistry was positive for anticytokeratin monoclonal antibodies AE1/AE3, with pancytoplasmic cytokeratin (CK) and CK7 staining. The tumour also exhibited focal positivity for CD56, focal nuclear positivity for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1), and strong positivity throughout for synaptophysin. The proliferation fraction was about 50–60%, CK CAM5.2, chromogranin, SRY-box transcription factor 10 (SOX10), the melanoma markers MelanA and Human Melanoma Black 45 (HMB45) were all negative. In view of these findings, a high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma with cytological features not supporting a small cell subtype, likely metastatic from a lung primary, was suspected. The diagnosis of high-grade metastatic large cell neuroendocrine lung carcinoma was confirmed via a high-resolution CT scan, positron emission tomography scan, and CT-guided lung biopsy, 1 year after her initial presentation. A further CT scan of the abdomen revealed an indeterminate 9 mm left adrenal nodule, but no other metastases were identified.
Treatment options were discussed at a multidisciplinary team meeting, and 4 months after her iris biopsy, she was started on palliative chemotherapy, namely a combination of carboplatin and etoposide, with a plan of eventually doing consolidation thoracic radiotherapy. From the ocular perspective, she was kept on topical cyclopentolate 1% once daily, dexamethasone 0.1% four times a day, dorzolamide hydrochloride and timolol maleate twice a day, preservative-free 0.15% sodium hyaluronate (Hyabak®) as required, and retinol palmitate ointment (VitA-POS®) once at night, all in the left eye. She was also kept on oral acetazolamide 250 mg twice daily, when required.
Around 1 month into her chemotherapy, she reported increased left eye pain. The left VA had deteriorated to 5/60 (right 6/6) and examination of the left eye revealed diffuse hyperaemia, 1+ anterior chamber cells, new posterior synechiae, a raised IOP of 40 mm Hg, and a dense white cataract with no fundal view, on top of the previous findings of rubeosis iridis and iris metastatic deposit. Furthermore, a scleral nodule was noted to have developed at the transcorneal biopsy site, thought to be seeding from the metastatic iris deposits. Because of these findings, she was started on once daily preservative-free latanoprost eye drops in the left eye and advised to use acetazolamide 250 mg twice daily on a regular basis.
She then started to improve, as the left IOP decreased to 22 mm Hg within 3 days, and a restaging CT scan showed a decrease in the size of the lung adenocarcinoma. She was therefore kept on the same topical ocular treatment, oral acetazolamide was stopped 1 week after starting, and the chemotherapy course was continued.
After six chemotherapy cycles, the limbal scleral nodule regressed and US biomicroscopy and B-scan US showed regression of the ciliary body metastatic lesion. There was no evidence of intraocular inflammation and her left IOP was 34 mm Hg. In view of her good response to chemotherapy, radiotherapy was deemed unnecessary. Unfortunately, 3 months after finishing her chemotherapy, the scleral nodule at the previous biopsy site was noted to have recurred and was larger and more prominent than before, shown in . Her left VA was now counting fingers. US biomicroscopy confirmed the progression of the left eye metastatic high-grade neuroendocrine carcinoma, with 360-degree involvement of the left ciliary body, shown in a–d. Furthermore, US B-scan revealed a bi-lobed inferotemporal choroidal lesion (3 mm thick) with adjacent retinal detachment shown in e. In view of this progression, a restaging CT scan was done, which showed doubling in the size of her lung primary with no other distant metastases. Other than some generalized muscle aches, she remained asymptomatic, with no respiratory issues. Second-line chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and vincristine was started, 5 months after completing her platinum-based chemotherapy course. However, vincristine was dropped after her first cycle as she developed vincristine-related peripheral neuropathy, with severe right foot pain affecting her mobility.
Unfortunately, despite this, the tumour continued to worsen with an increase in the size of the lung primary along with the iris and choroidal deposits. A restaging CT scan revealed new right enlarged nasopharyngeal lymph nodes, which were histologically confirmed to be metastases through an US-guided fine needle aspiration. A chemotherapy rechallenge with carboplatin and etoposide did not stop progression, and palliative radiotherapy (30 Gy in 10 fractions) to the iris, nasopharyngeal nodes, and lung primary was given. However, the ocular and nasopharyngeal lymph node metastases continued to worsen, and after discussion with the patient and her family, supportive palliative care was started. She passed away 6 months later, a bit less than 4 years since her initial presentation.