A 58-year-old female patient who was diagnosed with bilateral CBTs during a routine health check-up 3 years prior was admitted to the department of vascular surgery, Shanxi Provincial People's Hospital. She complained of a swelling sensation in her neck. The patient had no local pain, difficulty swallowing or breathing, voice changes, or palpitations. No systemic symptoms, such as fever, chills, and malaise, were present. There were no special records in her past medical history and family history. During a physical examination, a small, painless, firm, and pulseless mass was palpated on the right side of the neck at the carotid triangle located below the angle of the mandible. The Fontaine sign was positive. Physical examination did not reveal a left neck mass. The laboratory analyses did not suggest any other abnormalities, except slightly elevated low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and triglyceride levels. A routine electrocardiogram was normal. A computed tomographic angiography showed an intensely enhanced mass measuring 2.6 × 1.8 × 1.3 cm at the level of the right carotid bifurcation. A smaller mass measuring 1.1 × 0.9 × 0.9 cm was present on the left in a similar location . These findings were consistent with bilateral CBTs. According to the imaging results, the right tumor partially surrounded the carotid vessels, indicating Shambling II group tumor. The left-side tumor was of Shambling I group.
The therapy options were discussed with the patient after admission. She agreed to staged surgical dissection of the tumors. According to most experts' consensus, the smaller tumor should be removed first because of the low operative risk for permanent cranial nerve injury. This strategy facilitates the resection of large tumors in the second stage. However, the risk of manipulation in the right CBT was as low as that in the left after evaluation, and the patient requested removal of the large tumor first. Therefore, it was decided that the right CBT was to be resected in the first stage. The patient was informed of the possible surgical complications, and written consent was obtained before surgery.
Surgery was performed in a supine position under general orotracheal anesthesia, and the neck was slightly hyperextended and rotated to the left. A longitudinal incision along the anterior border of the right sternocleidomastoid muscle was made to expose the carotid bifurcation and the tumor . Proximal and distal arterial control was obtained by exposing the common carotid artery, internal carotid artery, and external carotid artery cephalad to the mass. Then, the tumor was gradually separated from the carotid arteries in cranial to caudal direction along the subadventitial plane using bipolar electrocautery. Cardiac arrest suddenly occurred when dissecting the tumor from the carotid bifurcation. The systolic blood pressure (sBP) dropped from 115 to 40 mmHg. This complication was managed immediately with external cardiac massage and administration of a single intravenous 0.5-mg atropine dose while simultaneously suspending CBT manipulation. The cardiac activity recovered ~40 s after asystole. The heart rate and sBP returned to 72–80 bpm and 120 mmHg, respectively. The manipulation was then completed while gently assisted by topical anesthesia with 2% lidocaine. The patient was closely monitored after surgery and a decrease in the heart rate and blood pressure level was not noted. On the second day after surgery, the patient complained of left chest pain during exercise. Chest X-ray showed no rib fracture, and reexamination of the electrocardiogram indicated normal results. The level of myocardial enzymes was not elevated. The pain was relieved over time without analgesia treatment. The patient had no neurological sequelae or cranial nerve injuries after surgery and was discharged 1 week after surgery. Histopathological examination revealed a zellballen pattern characteristic of paraganglioma and did not show any evidence of malignancy . Immunohistochemical results were positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, and CD56 in the tumor cells and S-100 protein was present in the sustentacular cells (–). Both synaptophysin and chromogranin A are neuroendocrine markers located in neuroendocrine granules. CD56, known as a neuronal cell adhesion molecule, is a membrane glycoprotein present on the neural cell surface. These positive immunohistochemical stain profiles supported the diagnosis of CBT. The patient had no complaints at 1-month follow-up after surgery.