A 14-year-old girl, student who commutes to school daily by bicycle, was admitted in rheumatologic department for severe left S1 lumbosciatica that had been evolving for about three weeks after a sudden onset following efforts to ride her bike. This pain was resistant to the usual analgesics. The patient did not report any particular medical history apart from low back pain occurring intermittently after a certain bicycle ride. At admission, the patient rated her pain on the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) as 10/10. The physical examination noted that the bedridden patient holding an analgesic posture when lying down because standing and walking were impossible. Lumbar spinal syndrome (pain on palpation of the lumbar spinous processes, contracture of the paravertebral muscles) and a positive Lasegue sign at 15 degrees were noted. There were no neurological deficiency.
Blood count, C reactive protein, blood ionogram, and serum creatinine were normal. Computed tomography (CT) of the lumbar spine showed non-displaced bi-isthmic lysis of L5 with a disc void and a compressive L5S1 disc herniation. There was also a transitional anomaly with the type of lumbalization of S1 . The diagnosis of common back pain by disc herniation on an isthmic lysis and a transitional vertebra was retained. The patient was hospitalized. Drug injectable therapy with paracetamol combined with morphine, thiocolchicoside and methyl prednisolone has been initiated. Epidural corticosteroid infiltration was also performed on the fourth day of hospitalization. Faced with the persistence of lumbosciatica which still remained very intense after 08 days of drug treatment above, the diagnosis of severe back pain was arrested and the patient was referred to neurosurgery where percutaneous surgery (ozone L5S1 discolysis) was performed . The postoperative period was simple and marked by a progressive improvement in pain. The patient was discharged from hospital on the second day of discolysis on oral analgesics (paracetamol and tramadol) and hygienic dietary measures. The VAS at the outlet was 1/10. The patient was seen again one week after discharge; she reported no spontaneous pain (but bearable pain was noted after some physical activity). She had been back to school for 2 days. Continued compliance with spinal hygiene measures, analgesics (paracetamol) in case of pain were prescribed. The patient was seen again one month and three months later. The evolution was good without any treatment.