A case of 34-year-old male who presented to the emergency department with spontaneous onset of pain and swelling of the thigh of 12 h duration. The pain started 12 h ago when he was treated in private hospital with analgesia and as the pain did not subside and swelling of the thigh increased, he came to the emergency department.
He had no history of trauma, prolonged exercises before onset of pain. There was no history of bleeding disorders in the past. Three weeks earlier, he had a history of renal colic for which he took analgesia. This patient worked as automobile electrician.
He was assessed by the emergency physician and the following investigation was done. Hemoglobin 16 g/dl, platelets normal, bleeding time and clotting time normal, electrolytes and liver function normal. X-ray of the hip and thigh was normal and ultrasound of the thigh showed no deep vein thrombosis but diffuse thickening and edema of the thigh.
Orthopedic consult was done as the thigh swelling was increasing and the patient was having intractable pain and inability to flex the knee and dorsiflex his foot. The dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial pulses on the right side were weak compared to the left and he had mild subcutaneous bruising of the lateral aspect of thigh.
A CT angiogram was ordered which was reported showed diffuse myositis which could be due to infection, inflammatory myopathy with no localized hematoma.
An MRI of the thigh was reported as picture of diffuse myositis possibly hemorrhagic involving anterior and lateral compartment muscles of thigh with intramuscular hematoma involving rectus femoris and obliteration of intermuscular fat planes with associated edematous and fluid signal changes along same planes as described above.
As the swelling was increasing and pain was not subsiding even strong narcotics and clinical features of compartment syndrome and the pulse of lower limb getting weak, it was decided to decompress the thigh compartment which was done under general anesthesia. The wound was left open and the thigh compartment muscles looked dusky. There was generalized ooze from the wound and few pockets of hematoma is fascial planes
Twelve hours after decompression blood investigation showed a drop in hemoglobin from 16 to 7 g/dl and then to 4.8 g/dl. The patient was started on blood transfusion. The hematologist was consulted and further investigation was done which revealed a very low factor VIII (5.5) very low and antibodies against factor VIII were (60.8) very high.
He was transfused about 22 units of packed cells/18 units of fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitation 16 units, 6 units platelets, factor VII, prednisolone, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab.
Twenty-four hours after decompression, the oozing subsided and the patient was taken for secondary closure of the wound. He made an uneventful post-operative recovery and discharged home.