A 64-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of acute left lower limb ischemia. More than 6 years ago (December 2012), he was treated in our hospital for intermittent claudication, hip pain and impotence. Abdominal aorta angiography showed occlusion of the infrarenal abdominal aorta, bilateral common iliac artery, internal iliac arteries and bilateral superficial femoral arteries. He was diagnosed with Leriche syndrome type III . The patient underwent bilateral axillofemoral bypass in December 2012. The bilateral axillary artery-artificial vessel anastomosis involved end-to-side anastomosis of an artificial vessel-second segment axillary artery, and the bilateral femoral artery anastomosis involved an end-to-side anastomosis of an artificial vessel to the femoral artery. His symptoms improved after surgery. He was able to walk more than 5 km and resumed sexual activity. Postoperative examination showed a pulse in the dorsalis pedis artery and posterior tibial artery of the bilateral lower limbs. Follow-up contrast-enhanced aortic computed tomography angiography (CTA) showed patency of bilateral axillary-femoral arterial bypass vessels . The patient took warfarin orally after surgery. The international normalized ratio (INR) was adjusted to 1.5–2.5. He took hypolipidemic agents and vasodilator prostaglandins orally. Although his condition was controlled well by drug treatment, the patient did not quit smoking. In the most recent episode, the patient complained of numbness, coldness and intermittent claudication of the left lower limb after drinking for 4 days. The symptoms gradually worsened. The patient was admitted to the hospital in February 2019.
On admission, the patient’s vital signs were stable, and the blood pressure in both upper limbs was similar, 130/70 mmHg and 125/75 mmHg. The patient had no symptoms of ischemia in both upper limbs, and the pulses in both radial arteries were palpable. The skin color of the left lower limb was pale, and the skin temperature was significantly reduced, particularly in the lower leg. The muscle strength of the right lower limb was 3/5, and the pulses of the dorsalis pedis artery in the dorsal foot and posterior tibial arteries of the lower left limb were not palpable. The skin color, temperature and muscle strength of the right lower limb were normal, and the pulses of the dorsalis pedis artery and posterior tibial arteries of the right lower limb were palpable. The patient’s symptoms progressed rapidly after admission, including resting pain in the left lower extremity, and foot drop was present the day after admission. Routine preoperative examination showed a normal white blood cell count with an increased neutrophil percentage (86.4%). A biochemical panel showed that most parameters were within normal limits, except increased levels of glucose (9.87 mmol/L), creatine kinase (730 IU/L) and myoglobin (87.90 ng/ml). A coagulation test showed that when taking oral warfarin, the INR was 1.78, and the D-dimer level was increased (0.56 ng/L) (DDU). There were no significant electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, or chest X-ray abnormalities.
Acute left lower limb ischemia can be easily diagnosed based on the patient’s 5P sign and laboratory examination. Additional diagnosis of Leriche syndrome type III, hypertension and diabetes was made based on previous medical history. Although acute ischemia of the left lower limb is likely to be caused by left bypass vascular thrombosis, the diagnosis of artificial vascular thrombosis is not based on objective examination. At the same time, considering the rapid progression of the patient’s symptoms and the presence of neuroischemia, we performed emergency arteriography to confirm further diagnosis and possible treatment.
The patient was in the supine position and under general anesthesia. First, we performed angiography of the bilateral branches of the aortic arch, abdominal aorta, and lower extremity arteries via the brachial artery of the left upper limb. The angiography showed no stenosis at the origin of the left subclavian artery, occlusion of the initial segment of the left axillofemoral bypass, and no blood flow in the artificial vessel . No stenosis was observed in the right brachiocephalic trunk and right subclavian artery. No significant stenosis was observed at the anastomosis of the axillofemoral bypass. Smooth blood flow was noted through the artificial blood vessel. No stenosis was observed at the axillary artery anastomosis . Occlusion of the abdominal aorta below the level of the renal artery and occlusion of the common iliac artery, internal iliac artery and external iliac artery were noted . Superficial femoral artery occlusion of both lower limbs was noted. The left common femoral artery anastomosis was not visible, and delayed contrast filling was noted in the deep femoral artery of the left lower extremity. There was no stenosis in the femoral artery anastomosis of the right lower limb, and the right deep femoral artery was unobstructed . We diagnosed the patient with thrombosis after left axillofemoral bypass.
Initially, we tried to open the blocked graft with intracavitary intervention,but the attempts to use a guidewire catheter to access the left artificial vessel lumen was unsuccessful under angiography . A small incision was made in the left subclavian region to expose the artificial blood vessel in the path of the inflow vessel. A 5.5F double-lumen Forgarty catheter (Edward®) was used to perform thrombectomy at the proximal and distal ends. A purple-reddish thrombus (40 cm in length) was removed. However, repeated attempts failed to pass the thrombectomy catheter through the proximal artificial vessel-axillary artery anastomosis and the distal artificial vessel-femoral artery anastomosis. Because there was no blood flow in the inflow and outflow vessel of the original artificial blood vessel, the procedure was challenging.
Fortunately, there was no obvious stenosis at the initial segment of the left subclavian artery in this patient, and intraoperative arterial blood pressure monitoring showed that the left upper limb arterial blood pressure was within normal limits. Therefore, we decided to use the third segment of the distal axillary artery as the inflow artery. The incision was extended to the axillary fossa to expose the left axillary artery. The axillary artery pulse was palpated very well. A longitudinal incision was made along the groin area of the left lower limb to fully expose the left lower limb artificial vessel-femoral artery anastomosis. The superficial femoral artery was occluded with a sclerotic plaque. We carefully exposed the left deep femoral artery and found no palpable sclerosis in the wall of the left femoral deep artery. We created a subcutaneous tunnel in the posterior axillary line in the thoracic and abdominal walls on the dorsal side of the original artificial blood vessel. The tunnel was turned at the anterior superior spine toward the anterior aspect of the thigh. After systemic heparinization, we clamped the left axillary artery, the left common femoral artery, the deep femoral artery and the superficial femoral artery. We introduced a 7 mm × 60 cm heparin-bonded vascular graft (GORE®PROPATEN®) into the subcutaneous tunnel and used CV-6 (GORE®) nonabsorbable sutures for end-to-side anastomoses between the artificial vessel and the axillary artery and the deep femoral artery . After the clamp was removed, the deep femoral artery pulse at the distal end of the anastomosis was palpable. The incisions were closed in layers. The operative time was 3 h and 50 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 80 ml.
After the surgery, the patient received anticoagulation, vasodilation and anti-infection treatment. The patient’s left lower extremity pain was significantly relieved. The left groin wound healed poorly after surgery due to lymph fluid leakage. However, there were no signs of infection such as fever and local swelling. The wound improved after periodical dressing changes.
Postoperative follow-up enhanced CT showed that the left LAx-PF bypass was unobstructed, the original axillofemoral bypass had no blood flow, and the original right axillofemoral bypass was unobstructed .
The patients continued to receive anticoagulation, vasodilation and lipid-lowering agents. During the one-year follow-up, no intermittent claudication and impotence were reported.