An asymptomatic 32-year-old Caucasian man with no medical history and cardiac risk factors (except for class 2 obesity, body mass index 36 kg/m2) was sent by an occupational health physician to our health care centre because of electrocardiographic (ECG) alterations consisting in low voltages of peripheral leads, absence of R-wave progression in the precordial leads, and prominent negative T waves in III and AVF leads . Familiar anamnesis was negative and free from cardiac events. Physical examination did not show any significant alterations, except for a systolic ejection murmur at the left sternal border. No oedema or congestion signs were found.
Transthoracic echocardiographic examination was immediately performed showing an altered shape of the left ventricle (LV) characterized by a bulge of the apical segments, on the parasternal long axis view, obtained in both standard 2D and X-plane modality. There was also a difficult visualization of the heart from a standard four-chamber apical view that was shifted upper and laterally towards the left anterior axillary line. Furthermore, LV function analysis revealed an abnormal diastolic expansion of the apex with normal systolic wall motion and definitively preserved LV ejection fraction (EF 55%). To confirm the unusual position of the heart in the mediastinum and to study its spatial relationship with adjacent structures, we submitted patient to chest X-ray . This proved the leftward shift of the heart, with the elongation of the left border of cardiac silhouette (‘Snoopy sign’) and further showed the interposition of lung tissue (seen as a black band) between the base of the heart and the left hemidiaphragm. Therefore, owing to the presence of radiological findings suggestive for pericardial agenesis, a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed, confirming the diagnosis of complete left-sided pericardial agenesis. Particularly, MRI revealed the absence of pericardium, the leftward dislocation of the heart, and the dysmorphism of the LV apex that appeared rounded and curved and an excessive movement of the cardiac apex , all typical signs of this cardiac congenital abnormality. Moreover, ventricles had normal systolic function and were non-dilated as demonstrated by normal indexed volumes, mass and EF {LVEDVi = 67 mL/m2 [normal reference range (nrr) 57–105]; LVESVi 30 mL/m2 [nrr 14–38]; LVMi = 64 g/m2 [nrr 49–85]; SVi = 37 mL/m2 [nrr 33–72]; LVEF = 57% [nrr 56–77]; right ventricle: RVEDVi = 68 mL/m2 [nrr 61–121]; RVESVi 24 mL/m2 [nrr 19–59]; SVi = 33 mL/m2 [nrr 28–75]; RVEF = 57% [nrr 52–72]}. Otherwise, there were no signs of inflammatory heart diseases, as demonstrated through T2-weighted sequences not showing myocardial oedema and through the absence of late gadolinium enhancement at the level of the myocardium of both ventricles. Coronary anatomy was not documented with cardiac MRI because of its technical limitations, including reduced spatial resolution, longer acquisition times, and lower signal-to-noise ratios in comparison with cardiac computed tomography. The laboratory tests were within normal ranges.
Owing to the knowledge that pericardial agenesis could be associated with cardiac arrhythmias, we completed our non-invasive work-up with a Holter ECG registration for a length of 48 h and the results were unremarkable for major ventricular events. Furthermore, patient underwent exercise test that did not reveal any inducible myocardial ischaemia and dangerous arrhythmias. However, patient underwent non-invasive coronary angiography by cardiac computed tomography revealing normal coronary tree. Finally, after multidisciplinary team evaluation, patient was scheduled for a loop-recorder implantation, and a 6-month clinical follow-up was advised.