A 36 -year-old woman was seen in clinic for persistent, intermittent biliary colic. She had a past surgical history of two cesarean sections and tubal ligation. She had no past medical history. Her symptoms included right upper quadrant burning after fatty meals with some improvement after dietary modifications. She denied nausea, vomiting, diarrhea. On review of recent labs, she had no leukocytosis, no liver function test derangements and no elevation in total bilirubin. An ultrasound report from an outside hospital was reviewed reporting a 2.3 × 10.6 cm stone within the gallbladder with posterior acoustic shadowing. There was no gallbladder wall thickening, no pericholecystic fluid, and no common bile duct dilation. The patient was consented for laparoscopic cholecystectomy and was electively taken to the operating room.
In the operating room the patient was approached in our standard manner. This included Veress needle placement and insufflation at Palmer's point via a 5 mm incision. Once insufflation was achieved, the Veress needle was removed, and a 5 mm optical view trocar placed under direct visualization at the Palmer’s point incision. We continued with our typical port placement. A 12 mm radially dilating trocar was placed at the umbilicus. We placed two additional 5 mm ports, one in the right midclavicular line, and one in the right anterior axillary line . This is the standard port placement for the operating surgeon for all cholecystectomies. The gallbladder was not identified in its typical position to the right of the falciform ligament. We placed the patient in a reverse Trendelenburg. After further investigation the gallbladder was present on the left side of the falciform ligament. No other organ transposition was noted and the gallbladder was determined to be in true sinistroposition . The two right lateral retractors were used with relative ease when brought under the falciform ligament and the left sided trocar at Palmer’s point was in optimal position for dissection on the left side of the falciform ( and ). We were then able to complete our laparoscopic cholecystectomy in a standard fashion despite the unusual position of the gallbladder.