A 48-year-old man with a medical history of heart murmur for years and hypertension presented with a 5-day history of shortness of breath and peripheral oedema. He denied chest pain. He was afebrile. The blood pressure was 140/63 mmHg, heart rate 127 beats per minute, respiratory rate 20 breaths per minute, and oxygen (O2) saturation 98% on room air. Cardiopulmonary examination showed irregular heart rhythm with a 2/6 systolic murmur over the right upper sternal boarder and no audible diastolic murmur. Lungs were clear to auscultation. He had 1 + bilateral leg pitting oedema.
The presenting electrocardiogram (ECG) showed AFlut with right axis deviation and rapid ventricular response . The complete blood count, metabolic panel, and serial cardiac troponin I levels were unremarkable. The N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide level was elevated at 2405 pg/mL (reference range: 0.0–300.0 pg/mL). The chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly, bibasilar opacity, and small bilateral pleural effusions. The TTE showed severe left ventricular global hypokinesis with left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) estimated 30% (see , ). There was trace mitral regurgitation and trivial aortic regurgitation but no significant valve abnormality otherwise. Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF) was diagnosed. Of note, a left-to-right shunting was noted by colour Doppler imaging, pointing to a ruptured SOV and possibly a coexisting perimembranous ventricular septal defect (VSD) ( and , ). The left-to-right jet was biphasic during both systole and diastole, with maximal flow velocity of 4.5 m/s on TTE Doppler study ( and ). The TEE showed normal aortic valve with no vegetation but a left-to-right jet originating from the non-coronary sinus ( and , ). The coloured shunt flow on TTE and TEE was dynamic with change in its direction during cardiac cycle suggestive of an exit of the shunt to the RA and possibly to the basal right ventricle (RV) as well.
With a view of interventional management, we performed left heart catheterization and right heart catheterization (RHC), coronary angiography, as well as CMR to evaluate the hemodynamics, rule out significant coronary artery disease, delineate the shunt course, and investigate potential coexisting congenital defect or other myocardial diseases. There was no angiographically significant coronary artery disease (CAD) . The left ventricular end-diastolic pressure was elevated (18 mmHg). Aortic root angiography showed a biphasic inverse Y-shaped regurgitant jet from the SOV to the RA and/or the RV (see , ). The RHC showed elevated pulmonary arterial pressure of 43/22 mmHg (mean 32 mmHg). The RA pressure was elevated at 14 mmHg and the pulmonary artery (PA) wedge pressure was also elevated at 18 mmHg. Oximetry study for shunt evaluation showed O2 saturations of 74, 74.8, 74, 79, and 79%, in the inferior vena cava (IVC), superior vena cava (SVC), RA, RV, and the PA, respectively, which revealed a step-up in O2 saturation from RA to RV suggesting the presence of VSD. CMR showed severe biventricular systolic dysfunction with LVEF calculated 23% (see , ). On CMR cine sequences, there was a high velocity jet from the non-coronary sinus, which in most views appeared to be coursing along the ventricular side of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve and, in some views, along the atrial side of the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve to the RA and RV ( and , ). The ratio of total pulmonary blood flow to total systemic blood flow, Qp:Qs, by CMR volumetric analysis was 2.3. There was no significant myocardial late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) .
The patient underwent electrical cardioversion for the AFlut and apixaban was used for thromboembolism prophylaxis. He underwent open heart surgery and a ruptured congenital SOV aneurysm was diagnosed. The aortic valve was normal in appearance. There was an ∼6 mm oval-shaped defect at the base of non-coronary cusp . Through right atriotomy and aortotomy, an aorto-cameral fistula from non-coronary sinus of Valsalva (SOV) to RA was identified coursing through the base of the septal leaflet near its junction with the anterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve, as projected on the root aortogram . Autologous pericardial patch was used to repair the ruptured SOV from both aortic and atrial sides.
LVEF improved to 40–45% by TTE 1.5 months after surgery. The patient has not had recurrent HF since. Of note, during later follow-up, the patient was found to have recurrent paroxysmal AFlut, for which he underwent radiofrequency catheter ablation with a cavotricuspid isthmus line 3 months after the surgery and he has remained in sinus rhythm since. He has been followed up regularly by our cardiology service since the surgical repair of the ruptured SOV. He has been clinically stable and in sinus rhythm in the last more than 3 years.