The case was a 75-year-old male of Somali heritage, who received a deceased donor kidney transplant for presumed diabetic and hypertensive nephropathy. The donor was marginal but immunologically low-risk, being a 4/6 HLA mismatch with a single weak class II donor-specific antibody. At the time of transplant, he received our unit’s standard induction immunosuppression with basiliximab and methylprednisolone, then commenced maintenance immunosuppression with tacrolimus, everolimus, and prednisone. A denovo mTOR inhibitor (mTORi) was chosen in place of mycophenolate mofetil due to the recipients older age, pre-existing leukopenia and known vascular disease in the donor. The transplant was complicated by delayed graft function necessitating haemodialysis on day one. A renal biopsy on day nine demonstrated borderline acute T-cell mediated rejection; as such, the everolimus was replaced with mycophenolate mofetil. The graft function subsequently improved to a baseline creatinine of 170 µmol/L (eGFR 34 ml/min) with minimal proteinuria (albumin: creatinine ratio 2.6 mg/mmol). A protocol biopsy at eight weeks showed no features of rejection.
Seven months post-transplant the recipient presented with bilateral lower limb pain and swelling, and dark macular skin lesions on his legs. He underwent a duplex ultrasound which demonstrated bilateral proximal deep vein thromboses. Anticoagulation with apixaban was commenced. Soon after he presented with a painful papular lesion on his penile shaft, which began as a small macule and had grown rapidly . There was no associated exudate or surrounding erythema, nor associated urinary symptoms. Two small satellite lesions had also erupted on the glans of the penis. The patient was referred for a biopsy.
A biopsy of the penile lesion demonstrated diffuse involvement of the dermis by nodules of mitotically active spindled cells, with irregular slit-like spaces, which stained positive for HHV-8, diagnostic of KS .
A PET scan demonstrated diffusely increased metabolism in the skin and subcutaneous tissues of the feet and lower legs, and over the surface of the penis. There was also abnormally increased metabolism in the paratracheal lymph nodes, with no increased metabolism in the inguinal, femoral, pelvic or abdominal nodes nor visceral organs .
In view of the rapidly progressive disseminated disease, the recipient commenced weekly single-agent paclitaxel chemotherapy with a plan for twelve weeks in total. His immunosuppression was reduced, with the mycophenolate ceased, prednisone dose tapered to 5 mg daily, and the tacrolimus switched to sirolimus, with a dose of 1.5 mg daily maintaining a level of 5-8 µg/L.
The recipient responded well to chemotherapy and reduced immunosuppression. After four weeks of paclitaxel the penile lesion resolved completely with no residual scarring, and the lower limb lesions significantly regressed. A progress PET scan demonstrated decreased metabolism of the skin and subcutaneous tissues of the lower limbs, and absence of previously identified increased metabolism in the penile shaft. There was ongoing increased metabolism in the right paratracheal node. The only complication of chemotherapy was a grade 1 peripheral neuropathy. On most recent review, 11 months following the initial presentation, there has been no recurrence of Kaposi sarcoma.
Throughout the treatment the patient’s transplant function remained stable, with no evidence of rejection despite the reduction in immunosuppression. He is now 18 months post-transplant, with the most recent pathology demonstrating a creatinine of 162 µmol/L, with no proteinuria (ACR 1.3 mg/mmol).