The patient is a 24-year-old female who was referred to our eye center in Mediclinic Dubai Mall, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, because of recent bilateral IOP elevation with a severe drop in vision. She had been hospitalized elsewhere 1 week earlier because of severe bilateral frontal headache, nausea, and vomiting. Initially, she was investigated for possible central nervous system disease. Blood tests and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed and revealed no abnormalities. During her stay, there was a progressive worsening of the condition. After 5 days in hospital, the patient complained of loss of vision in the right eye, and after approximately 6 hours, also in the left. Another brain MRI was normal. The ophthalmology consultant suspected bilateral acute angle-closure glaucoma as a possible cause for the severe bilateral loss of vision. The patient was thus referred to our eye center for urgent management.
Our examination revealed visual acuity of hand movements alone in both eyes. Goldmann applanation pressure was >60 mmHg in both eyes; the patient presented with severely miotic pupils and flat chambers, with almost iridocorneal touch centrally, cloudy corneas, and severe bulbar conjunctival injection. Bilateral diagnostic ultrasound revealed no posterior segment anomalies. The patient’s past history was negative for any medical or surgical diseases and her eye history was also negative. Of note, a routine eye examination had been performed a few months earlier and was reported to be normal. Initial management at our center consisted of multiple topical antiglaucoma medications and intravenous acetazolamide (500 mg). Ultimately, we managed to perform bilateral Nd:YAG laser peripheral iridotomy despite the corneal clouding. After the peripheral iridotomy, the IOP dropped in both eyes to around 45 mmHg, but it rose back to its original level after less than half an hour. The diagnosis of bilateral malignant glaucoma was raised and the patient was admitted to hospital for surgical management. Topical atropine 1% drops and intravenous mannitol (1 g/kg of body weight) were started, and the patient was put under continuous monitoring. In less than 2 hours, the ACs started to deepen in both eyes, with partial clearing of the corneas. The IOP dropped again to 45 mmHg in both eyes. At that stage, the possibility of bilateral malignant glaucoma as a diagnosis was more likely.
The next day, the patient was scheduled for trabeculectomy with mitomycin-C (0.02% for 2 minutes) combined with pars plana vitrectomy. Informed consent was obtained from the patient prior to surgery. In the meantime, overnight treatment with topical atropine and antiglaucoma medications was continued, along with intravenous acetazolamide. A second dose of intravenous mannitol was repeated 1 hour before the planned surgery. At the time of surgery, the IOP in both eyes was around 25 mmHg. Surgery was performed in the right eye as planned, and the same procedure was carried out in the left eye 1 day later. In brief, the surgical procedure was performed in both eyes as follows: a limbus-based conjunctival flap was performed, followed by topical 0.2% mitomycin-C application for 2 minutes; prior to the dissection of a 3×3 mm half-thickness trabeculectomy flap, one-port limited core vitrectomy was performed through a pars plana approach 4 mm from the limbus. After completion of the vitrectomy, the trabeculectomy was completed by entering the AC through a small sclerotomy opening using a super blade. The trabeculectomy flap was sutured back using two 10-0 nylon titrated sutures, and the conjunctiva was closed using running 8-0 VICRYL® (Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, USA). Postoperatively, the patient was put on a topical combination of tobramycin (3 mg/mL) and dexamethasone (1 mg/mL), and atropine was continued once a day for 2 weeks. Both eyes had well-formed superior blebs and, surprisingly, visual acuity returned to 20/20 without correction, and there was no optic nerve (ON) damage in either eye. The IOP remained <18 mmHg all throughout the postoperative follow-up period, which extended for more than 1 year, with both eyes maintaining deep chambers and reactive pupils.
The study was approved by the review board/ethics committee of the Beirut Eye Specialist Hospital, Beirut, Lebanon. All patients signed an informed consent prior to treatment.