A 30 year-old female was admitted with complaints of pain abdomen and something coming out per vaginum since 2 hours following evacuation of the uterus done for an incomplete abortion following 3 months amenorrhoea. She was a gravida 7 para 6 and had taken an abortifacient 15 days before the day of admission to abort an unintended 14 weeks gestation. She had continuous bleeding per vaginum following that, for which she underwent uterine evacuation at a rural hospital. She developed acute pain abdomen and felt something at vaginal introitus following the procedure. She was brought to our hospital for further management. On examination, she was conscious but irritable and the pulse rate was 146/min, blood pressure 80/50 mm Hg, and temperature was 100°F. On abdominal examination, there was a vertical paramedian incision of previous caesarean section present. Abdomen was tense and tender. Bowel sounds were absent. On local examination, congested and edematous intestinal loops were seen outside the vaginal introitus. Per speculum and per vaginum examination was not possible because of the bowel loops obstructing the introitus tightly. Her investigations revealed hemoglobin 7.5 gm/dl, white blood cell count 28,690/-ml, platelet count 3,91,000/ml, blood sugar 100 mg/dl, and serum creatinine 0.9 mg/dl.
A clinical diagnosis of uterine perforation with shock was made, and her exploratory laparotomy was performed after resuscitation. Peroperatively, the perforation was present in the fundal region of the uterus, and about 3 feet of small intestine was pulled out through it, which was gangrenous . The mesenteric vessels supplying the segment were ligated and resected. The gangrenous intestinal segment was resected close to the perforation and an end to end jejunoileal anastomosis was done. The gangrenous intestinal segment was removed through the vagina and primary repair of the uterine perforation was done. Postoperatively she was kept on ventilator support for 2 days and three units of packed red blood cells, broad-spectrum antibiotics, and intravenous fluid were given. She responded well to the treatment and was discharged on the 14th postoperative day.