We report the case of a 41-year-old male who presented to our outpatient department with minor symptoms, including dyspnea during heavy activities. The patient did not have a history of fever, weight loss, malaise, or carotid tenderness but had a 1-year-old history of dyspnea on exertion. The patient never had any previous indications of autoimmune diseases or infections. Approximately 17 years earlier, at the age of 24, the patient experienced a frequent loss of consciousness during exercise. He had no history of hypertension, diabetes, smoking, dyslipidemia, or obesity. The patient was diagnosed with dilated cardiomyopathy a year ago, and echocardiography showed that all chambers were dilated with a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 39%. The patient had received an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, a beta-blocker, and spironolactone and had good compliance and functional outcomes as the patient has presently been classified as New York Heart Association functional class I. Physical examinations revealed blood pressure of < 120/80 mmHg and a heart rate of 60 beats per minute (bpm) because of the optimal medical treatment he had received since last year. The patient had left carotid bruit and an enlarged heart with a grade IV/VI holosystolic murmur on the apex radiating to the axilla. Chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly, and electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm with a heart rate of 64 bpm, poor R wave progression, and left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) showed eccentric LVH with reduced ejection fraction and some hypoechoic lesions resembling cysts at the anterior, anteroseptal, and anterolateral walls, suggestive of myocardial detachment. Both ventricles were dilated with reduced LVEF (31%). A severe functional mitral regurgitation secondary to increased left ventricular end diastolic volume and mild aortic regurgitation due to aortic root dilatation and uncoaptation of the left coronary cusps were detected. Moreover, TTE and TEE data obtained last year showed similar results. The patient underwent cardiac computed tomography (CT), which revealed a large calcified LSVA protruding into the left ventricular anteroseptal, anterior, and anterolateral walls, causing MD. The patient had no plaque, stenosis, or intimal wall thickness on the coronary arteries. CT angiography (CTA) showed diffuse calcification from the aortic arch and main branches of the aorta, extending to the descending thoracic and abdominal aortae. The patient had mural thickness at the left carotid artery as a sign of active disease, and no calcification or thickness was observed on either renal artery on CTA. We performed duplex ultrasonography to assess the involvement of aortic branch arteries. A long-diffuse-homogenous-concentric type IV plaque was detected along the left common carotid artery without the participation of other aortic branch arteries. The venereal disease research laboratory test, treponema pallidum hemagglutination assay, anti-hepatitis B surface antigen, anti-human immunodeficiency virus (anti-HIV), and anti-streptolysin titer O were nonreactive; inflammatory markers were slightly increased, including the C-reactive protein (CRP) (0.51 mg/dL) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (25 mm/h).
The patient was diagnosed with TA with MD complicating LSVA and dilated cardiomyopathy and received the treatment for chronic heart failure treatment: a beta-blocker, an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, and a mineralocorticoid antagonist, which were administered at the optimal dose. The patient has also received a high-dose steroid (40-mg methylprednisolone) as the initial therapy for TA and aspirin (81 mg, daily). Later, azathioprine (50 mg, b.i.d.) was added to further reduce inflammation. The symptoms and signs were improved, and inflammatory markers decreased after 3 months of therapy. Follow-up ESR was 17 mm/h, and the CRP level decreased to 0.3 mg/dL. The patient experienced no adverse events owing to the medications.