A male child, aged 1 year and 3 months, was brought by his mother to the Paediatric Surgery outpatient department (OPD) in Mangalore, Karnataka, India. She complained of noticing a swelling in the left inguino-scrotal region of the child for 1 year. The mother gave history of the swelling being small and localized to the left inguinal region initially, which reduced spontaneously, and reappeared when the child cried. However, over the last 2 days, the mother noticed that the swelling had increased in size and now involved the left inguino-scrotal region, with the swelling not reducing by itself. The child had no complaints of feeding difficulty, abdominal distension, vomiting and bowel or bladder complaints. There were no similar complaints on the right side. The child was born at 39 weeks by a constitutional normal vaginal delivery. There were no complications encountered during delivery and the immediate post delivery period. The child had no jaundice in the immediate neonatal period and was started on breast feeds with kangaroo care. The child has been appropriately immunized for age and has no delay in developmental milestones. This was the 1st child borne by the mother and there is no significant family history.
On inspection there was a left inguinal scrotal swelling noted measuring 4x3cm extending to the root of the scrotum. The swelling was irreducible, with no expansile impulse noted when the child cried. On palpation of the hernia, there was no localized tenderness or warmth. The hernia was seen extending from the superficial inguinal ring to the root of the scrotum and was irreducible with gurgling sounds present, suggestive of enterocoele. Getting above the swelling was not possible. The left testis was palpated separately from the hernial sac. Right hernial orifices were free and right testis was in normal position. Rest of the abdomen examination revealed no organomegaly or free fluid in abdomen. Examination of the external genitalia was normal. At the end of the clinical examination, a diagnosis of left complete irreducible inguinal hernia was made with enterocoele as the content . Respiratory and Cardiovascular system examinations were within normal limits. There were no deformities noted on Musculoskeletal examination.