A 65 year old woman was referred for a second respiratory opinion for persistent MRC grade 4 dyspnoea on a background of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Relevant past history included 33 pack years smoking history with smoking cessation 12 months prior, childhood history of mild asthma, and mild diastolic dysfunction. She required two hospital admissions for exacerbations in the past 12 months, in addition to multiple courses of oral corticosteroids. She had been adherent to her medications, which included total daily doses of budesonide/eformoterol 800/24mcg, ciclesonide 320mcg, aclidinium 322mcg, theophylline slow release 600 mg, and doxycycline 50 mg. In addition, she nebulised salbutamol 5 mg each morning, and took 6-8 additional puffs of salbutamol during the day.
On examination, her body mass index was 25, with normal vital signs and oxygen saturation 95% breathing room air. There was no finger clubbing. The chest was hyperinflated and there were no adventitial sounds.
Spirometry revealed severe airflow obstruction with a forced expiratory ratio of 43% and forced expiratory volume in 1 s (FEV1) of 47% predicted (0.86 L), with a partial bronchodilator response (130 ml and 15.6%). Gas trapping was evident with an elevated residual volume (RV) of 189% predicted, and a Residual Volume to Total Lung Capacity ratio of 55%. The single breath Diffusing Capacity for Carbon Monoxide was measured at 8.2 ml/mmHg/l or 45% predicted. Arterial blood gases were not measured as SpO2 was greater than 90%, and serum standard bicarbonate was 26 mmol/L. The fractional exhaled nitric oxide was 25 ppb. The blood eosinophil count was 200 cells/μl and the IgE was 164 IU [0-200], with elevated serum specific IgE to Aspergillus fumigatus, and non-reactive results to other allergens including grasses and dust mite. The haemoglobin level was 145 g/l. Computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) did not detect pulmonary emboli, and the lungs were noted to be hyperinflated, but without marked emphysematous changes.
The patient was referred for pulmonary rehabilitation, which led to modest improvement, though she remained limited by exertional dyspnoea. At re-evaluation, consideration was given to whether the patient could benefit from an interventional approach such as endobronchial lung volume reduction surgery. A Quantitative CT for emphysema distribution and fissure integrity was requested. This demonstrated a relatively small lung fraction with <− 950 Hounsfield units (9.35%), although more prominent changes were observed in the left lower lobe. As this result did not unequivocally support a diagnosis of COPD, we undertook flexible bronchoscopy to obtain endobronchial biopsies from the left lower lobe. The 2.8 mm channel bronchoscope, Olympus BF-ITH190 (Olympus Australia, Victoria, Australia) was used with the 2.3 mm forceps, and four biopsies up to 5 mm in size were obtained from the subsegmental carina at LB8/9. Histopathology revealed very marked smooth muscle hypertrophy and significant thickening of the basement membrane typical of asthma. Additionally, squamous metaplasia due to cigarette smoking was evident.
As a direct result of the endobronchial biopsy, the treatment approach shifted to advanced therapies for severe asthma. The patient did not meet Australian funding criteria for anti-IgE or anti-interleukin 5 monoclonal antibodies, but she was however a suitable candidate for BT. The patient was treated over three sessions without complication and in keeping with the standard technique .
Six months after BT, the Asthma Control Questionnaire score had reduced from a baseline value of 3.0 to 1.6, where a score of 1.5 indicates well controlled asthma, and a change of 0.5 is regarded as clinically significant. The daily salbutamol use had decreased substantively to 0.5puffs/day. There had been no instances of exacerbations requiring antibiotics or corticosteroids. The prebronchodilator FEV1 improved slightly from 47 to 52% predicted and the RV improved markedly from 189 to 152% predicted.