A 44-year-old woman was found to have a small erythematous skin lesion on the right side of the neck at a routine annual follow-up with an endocrinologist. The patient had a history of PTC diagnosed 10 years ago and was treated with a total thyroidectomy and 120 mCi of adjuvant radioactive iodine (RAI) at an outside hospital. Since her treatment, she had been taking 150 mcg of levothyroxine daily and continued yearly follow-up with her endocrinologist. Prior to the most recent endocrinology visit that revealed the new skin lesion, the patient had no other documented evidence of disease recurrence, and when interviewed further, the patient did not recall when the skin lesion first appeared.
Physical exam revealed a 1.3-cm skin lesion at the edge of the prior thyroidectomy scar . Ultrasound of the neck confirmed a 1.3-cm subcutaneous nodule, consistent with the physical exam finding . Several reactive lymph nodes were also detected at levels 1 and 2 of the right neck, but there was no evidence of local recurrence in the operative bed. Labs were unremarkable with the following results: thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 0.05 uIU/ml; free T3, 2.79 pg/ml; free T4, 1.69 ng/dl; thyroglobulin, 1.00 ng/ml; and anti-thyroglobulin antibody, < 20 U/ml. Differential diagnosis at the time included intradermal nevus, hemangioma, and metastasis from prior thyroid cancer. The patient was referred to dermatology for biopsy of the lesion.
Punch biopsy was performed in two separate sites: the center of the lesion and the periphery of the lesion. The biopsy of the center revealed carcinoma in dermis with a papillary growth pattern and intranuclear pseudoinclusions, consistent with metastatic papillary thyroid carcinoma. The peripheral biopsy showed mild superficial perivascular lymphocytic infiltration. Whole-body PET/CT was then taken , which showed a focal hypermetabolic skin lesion in the right lower neck, consistent with the known cutaneous metastasis; no other abnormal hypermetabolic lesions were found. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with an isolated metastatic site in the skin and was referred to surgery.
The patient underwent surgical excision of the metastatic lesion with an elliptical incision. A small area of underlying subcutaneous fat showed nodularity and was removed as well. Surgical pathology revealed three separate foci of metastatic PTC measuring 1.0 × 0.8 × 0.7 cm, 0.3 × 0.2 cm, and 0.2 × 0.2 cm. The subcutaneous fat harbored no metastasis, and the resection margin was clear . The patient recovered appropriately postoperatively and was discharged home.
Genetic and molecular analysis of the metastatic tumor was performed using the ThyroSeq® v3 Genomic Classifier test, and the results showed both BRAFV600E and TERTC228T mutations. Based on the high-risk profile, the patient was referred to nuclear medicine and received one round of adjuvant RAI therapy with a dose of 100 mCi .