A 64-year-old female was referred to our clinic for a second opinion to re-assess the suggested treatment of an anomalous RCA from the opposite sinus (R-ACAOS). Her medical history included asthma, hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, and nicotine use. Relevant medication included amlodipine for hypertension treatment. She consulted her local cardiologist on an outpatient basis with complaints of palpitations and chest pain for which she was effectively treated with metoprolol. Clinical examination, in particular cardiovascular examination, was normal. Holter monitoring demonstrated 6% premature ventricular contractions. Echocardiography demonstrated a mildly dilated left ventricle with a good left ventricular ejection fraction, dilated atria without significant valvular dysfunctions. Computed tomography (CT) focused on the coronary arteries demonstrated a possible malignant path of the RCA between the aorta and the pulmonary trunk .
Coronary angiography demonstrated an aberrant RCA with a tapered ostium typical for an inter-arterial course . Furthermore, there were no signs of obstructive atherosclerotic coronary artery disease. Coronary artery bypass grafting was advised in a multidisciplinary team meeting with cardiothoracic surgeons in the referring hospital. She was referred to our heart team for a second opinion at the patient’s request. A dobutamine and adenosine stress test, during simultaneously intracoronary flow, pressure, and ultrasound assessment, was proposed to determine its functional significance.
Cardiac catheterization was performed following standard procedure through the radial approach. Coronary angiogram showed a slit like and tapered proximal course. After a bolus of nitroglycerine (200 mcg), intracoronary pressure and flow velocity were assessed during baseline and maximum hyperaemia induced by a bolus of 120 mcg adenosine intracoronary (iC). Baseline flow velocity increased from 14 cm/s to a maximum peak flow velocity of 37 cm/s. Moreover, normal flow waveforms were preserved during both diastole and systole. A sufficient coronary flow velocity reserve (CFVR) of 2.6 was observed, which was above the cut-off value of 2.0 for myocardial ischemia. There was no intracoronary pressure drop during maximal hyperaemia. demonstrates a coronary angiography of the RCA from a left anterior oblique view. The arrow indicates the tip of a ‘flipped’ Combowire (ComboWire XT, Volcano/Philips Corporation, San Diego, CA, USA) stabilizing itself against the RCA intima to obtain stable retrograde Doppler flow velocity signal during dobutamine stress tests.
Thereafter, a dobutamine-atropine stress protocol was followed starting dobutamine 10 µg/kg/min continuous intravenous infusion of 3 min intervals before increasing the dose by 10 µg/kg/min. After a stepwise dosage increase up to 40 µg/kg/min 0.5 mg atropine was administered. Normal diastolic and systolic flow patterns were observed. CFVR after maximum dobutamine stress measured 2.5. demonstrates the flow measurements. The derived fractional flow reserve (FFR) and CFVR were within their normal values used for discriminating for myocardial ischaemia; ie FFR was 0.99 (normal >0.80) and CFVR was 2.5 (normal >2.0). Cross-sectional area (CSA) measurement through intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) (Eagle eye, Volcano/Philips Corporation, San Diego, CA, USA) on the suspected malignant area showed a CSA of 14.6 mm2 . Cross-sectional area decreased to 8.5 mm2 during maximum dobutamine stress . During the test, the patient experienced no symptoms of angina. Fractional flow reserve, CFVR, and CSA remained within normal ranges, even after chemically induced myocardial stress using dobutamine. Therefore, we concluded this aberrant trajectory of the RCA was not of any functional relevance and should be considered as non-malignant. Cardiac surgery was waived and our patient was without complaints or adverse events after 1 year of follow-up.