A 34-year-old female with a history of stage IIB cervical squamous cell carcinoma status post pelvic exenteration and external beam radiation, complicated by a pelvic abscess and chronic drainage catheter with prior erosion into the right internal iliac artery status post embolization 1 year prior, was referred to Interventional Radiology (IR) for management of bleeding around and into the pelvic drain. Laboratory evaluation was significant for an acute 5.1 g/dL and 15% decrease in hemoglobin and hematocrit, respectively, compared to the day prior. Multiphasic computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen/pelvis demonstrated interval development of venous phase hyperattenuation in the chronic pelvic collection, adjacent to a new sac-like dilation of the right EIV, concerning for vascular erosion by the chronic pelvic abscess . The patient was transfused with two units of packed red blood cells with an appropriate increase in hemoglobin/hematocrit. The patient remained hemodynamically stable and was continued on her outpatient intravenous (IV) antibiotic regimen (daptomycin, ceftazidime-avibactam, and metronidazole) for recent Clostridium and vancomycin-sensitive enterococcal bacteremia and chronic pelvic abscess per Infectious Disease (ID) recommendations. Given poor surgical candidacy in the setting of extensive pelvic surgery and prior radiation, a multi-disciplinary decision was made to proceed with right external iliac venogram/arteriogram and possible stenting versus embolization.
Pre-procedure coagulation panel and complete blood count demonstrated normal PT/INR and platelets of 10.5/0.9 and 325, respectively. General anesthesia was administered by a dedicated anesthesia team. The right common femoral vein (CFV) was accessed using standard micropuncture technique. Digital subtraction venography (DSV) of the right CFV to the level of the infrarenal IVC was performed through a transitional sheath, which demonstrated a focal sac-like outpouching arising from the right EIV with eventual contrast extravasation, corresponding to the area of suspected erosion and consequent irregularity of the right EIV seen on cross sectional imaging .
The transitional sheath was then exchanged for a 13 cm long, 12 French (Fr) vascular sheath and a marking catheter was advanced into the right EIV. Based on standard iliac vein averages, a 13 mm × 5 cm Viabahn stent graft was advanced to the targeted area of stenting, and DSV was performed prior to deployment, demonstrating contrast extravasation associated with the pseudoaneurysm . The stent was immediately deployed into the EIV at the level of the mycotic venous aneurysm and postdilated to 14 mm (oversized by 1 mm). Post deployment DSV demonstrated an area of contrast extravasation , along the inferior margin of the newly deployed stent, concerning for venous rupture into the abscess cavity, likely related to tissue friability from chronic infection. An additional 11 mm × 10 cm Viabahn stent graft was placed through the prior stent to exclude the area of rupture and postdilated to 10 mm without oversizing due to initial venous rupture. Completion DSV demonstrated no evidence of persistent hemorrhage, with brisk inline flow throughout the stent complex into the IVC . The sheath was removed and manual pressure was maintained until hemostasis was achieved.
To exclude any superimposed arterial bleeding in this patient with prior hemorrhage related to right internal iliac artery erosion, the decision was made to study the ipsilateral arterial system. The right common femoral artery (CFA) was then accessed using standard micropuncture technique. A 5 Fr straight flush catheter was advanced “bareback” without a sheath with its tip in the proximal right common iliac artery and digital subtraction arteriography (DSA) of the right external iliac artery was performed in multiple projections with no contrast extravasation to suggest superimposed arterial injury .
The patient tolerated the procedure well and remained hemodynamically stable throughout her hospital course. Given recent episode of bleeding and risk of erosion into additional branch vessels in the setting of a chronic infection, the decision was made to hold off on anticoagulation. On post-procedure day 2, she was discharged to home on a one-week course of IV antibiotics (regimen described above) with ID follow-up.
One month post-procedure, the patient presented to the emergency department with right thigh swelling and pelvic pain. Contrast-enhanced CT abdomen/pelvis demonstrated new occlusive right femoral venous thrombosis extending through the stent to the level of the common iliac vein . Given concern for superinfection of the occlusive thrombus and increased procedural risk of septic pulmonary emboli, recanalization of the stent was considered high risk and the patient was started on therapeutic anticoagulation with a heparin drip which was transitioned to enoxaparin. She subsequently developed persistent hematuria, at which time a left femoral approach convertible IVC filter was placed and therapeutic anticoagulation was discontinued with resolution of hematuria.