A 60-year-old Japanese woman was brought to the emergency department of our hospital, complaining of left flank pain. The pain had started the previous day and had gradually increased in severity. On examination, she was found to be alert, with a blood pressure of 173/101 mmHg, heart rate of 110 beats/minute, oxygen saturation of 95% (on room air), and respiratory rate of 20/minute. Her past medical history included myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), hypertension, and cerebral infarction, leading to left hemiplegia. She had no history of pancreatitis and abdominal surgery. She was taking antihypertensive and acid-reducing medications, but no antiplatelet or anticoagulant medication. Her abdomen was flat, but there was moderate tenderness in her left flank. Her laboratory findings included hemoglobin level of 7 g/dL, hematocrit level of 20.8%, platelet count of 118,000/microL, prothrombin time of 13.3 seconds, activated prothrombin time of 31.9 seconds, and fibrinogen level of 209.4 mg/dL. Her normal hemoglobin level was approximately 8 g/dL. Blood chemistry findings were almost within normal limits. A computed tomography (CT) scan of her abdomen with intravenously administered contrast agent showed a solid mass of 5 × 5 × 8 cm in the left middle abdominal quadrant . The mass was found to be fed by a branch of the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). The contrast agent leaked in the mass. An orally administered contrast agent was not used because she had nausea. On completion of CT, the working diagnosis was an impending rupture of an aneurysm located in a branch of SMA. We decided to perform a transcatheter arterial embolization (TAE); however, angiography of SMA and inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) did not indicate extravasation of the contrast agent. Her blood pressure remained stable, but her pulse rate was still fast. We decided to perform surgery in line with the diagnosis of an impending rupture of the visceral artery aneurysm. Her peritoneal cavity was entered with a midline incision, and there were no ascites. The mass was attached to the antrum of her stomach. There was a smooth surfaced mass at the greater curvature of the antrum. We suspected intra-tumor bleeding of the gastric submucosal tumor. We performed a wedge resection of her stomach including the mass with a 1 cm margin. The surgical specimen was opened and it revealed a large amount of clots . There were no tumoral lesions.
Subsequently, pathological findings indicated that the mass had not included tumor cells and was simply filled with a large amount of clots. The etiology of the hematoma was not proven by pathological findings. She was admitted to the general surgical ward after surgery, and she was transfused with six units of packed red blood cells postoperatively. She was discharged from our hospital to a nursing home on day 63 after rehabilitation.