A 62 years old male presented to surgery emergency with chief complaints of multiple openings and faecal discharge from the openings in the right groin since 20 days. One month back he noticed a small swelling in right inguinal region after exertion. A day later, he developed fever with redness over inguinal region and few days later developed multiple openings with discharge of faecal material in the right inguinal region. No history of abdominal pain, constipation or any other bowel disturbances were present. There was no history of trauma and urinary or other abdominal complaints. There was no history suggestive of an inguinal hernia in the past, and nor was there a history of any type of surgical intervention.
Patient was clinically examined and multiple openings were noticed in right inguinal region with faecal and pus discharge . Diagnosis of spontaneous faecal fistula was made and possibilities of appendicular abscess, tuberculosis of intestine, Crohn’s disease carcinoma colon, and actinomycosis were kept. Fistula was a low output fistula and patient was started on medical treatment and investigated thoroughly. On CT scan a small gut loop communicating with anterior abdominal wall and bilateral renal and hepatic cysts was reported with provisional diagnosis of enterocutaneous fistula and autosomal polycystic kidney disease.
There was no improvement in patient’s condition and patient had continuous faecal discharge. Exploratory laparotomy was planned. On opening the abdomen, a loop of distal ileum (about 20 cms proximal to ileocaecal junction) was found to be adherent to the internal inguinal ring which was retrieved back into the abdominal cavity . There was perforation over the loop stuck in the deep inguinal ring. Resection of the segment of ileum involved was done with ileo-ileal hand sewn anastomosis. Mesh repair was not done for hernia defect due to faecal contamination and cellulitis. The internal inguinal ring was closed from inside of the peritoneal cavity with plicating sutures. The openings in the skin over the inguinal region were communicated with each ‘other and laid open due to cellulitis of the area involved and pus discharge. After achieving complete haemostasis and drain placement in pelvis abdomen was closed in layers. Final diagnosis of Richter’s hernia presenting as spontaneous faecal fistula was reached. Secondary suturing of the wound over inguinal region was done on 14th day. Post-operative recovery and hospital stay of patient was smooth and uneventful.