A 12-year-old boy was brought to the emergency department with acute abdominal pain lasting 12 hours, and associated abdominal distension, absolute constipation for two days, vomiting and fever of 38.5°C. When examined he had general abdominal tenderness. White blood cell count was 17.5 k/ml with 85.5% neutrophils, hemoglobin was 10.9 gr/dl, hematocrit 34.7% and platelets 820 k/ml. Abdominal X-rays showed air-fluid levels. Abdominal ultrasound examination revealed a solid intraluminal pattern . The patient gave a history of referred intermittent abdominal pain for a period of 6 months. More detailed clinical information, such as diarrhea for the past 6 months, quick tiredness, no mood to play, lethargy and paleness, was obtained postoperatively.
The patient underwent laparotomy and 30 cm of small bowel with multiple areas of damage was found. The damage included macroscopically a rigid and thickened mass in the ileal portion, creeping fat, multiple granulomas in the external intestinal surface and ulcers, two of which had parietal ruptures with fluid escape. A resection of 45 cm of the ileo-jejunal portion, including all areas of intestinal damage, was performed and a primary end to end ileo-jejunal anastomosis completed the operation . Longitudinal incision of the intestine showed a cobblestone appearance, due to linear ulcers crossing with transverse folds. Linear ulcers were created from interconnected rows of aphthous ulcers. A characteristic large pseudopolyp, 4 cm in diameter, was in the obstructed portion of the mass.
Microscopically, edema and diffuse inflammation of the whole intestinal wall, fissures, granulomas, vascular dilatation, pseudopolyps, mucosal inflammation of the small and large bowel, and granulomas in local lymph nodes were observed. The tip of the appendix was inflamed too .
One month later, endoscopic examinations showed granulomas and other Crohn's lesions in the stomach and colorectum.
The patient was treated with 1.5 g daily dose of Mesalamine for one year, without recurrence of the disease. During this period he also received Modulen complementary oral feeds and his growth was normal.