A 51-year-old man visited our hospital with complaint of fecal occult blood. The laboratory data were with-in normal limits (CEA: 2.3 ng/ml, CA19-9: 38 U/ml). Barium enema and colonoscopy showed an elevated lesion with depression and three subpedenculated polyps in the sigmoid colon. Pathological findings on biopsy confirmed a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. We performed sigmoidectomy with lymphadenectomy in June 1999. Histological examination revealed the tumor to be a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma invading the subserosa with two lymph nodes metastases (T3, N1, M0). Tumor cells were not identified at the surgical margins. One of three subpedenculated polyps was diagnosed histologically as an adenocarcinoma in adenoma, and the others were adenomas .
The patient was referred to our hospital by a general practitioner because of fecal occult blood. The first anastomotic recurrence was suspected by colonoscopy in January 2000. Although an irregular lesion was noticed at the suture line by colonoscopy, pathological examination of the biopsy was unable to confirm malignant cells in the specimen. The next colonoscopy, which was performed nine months later, identified an ulcerated tumor occupying the lumen massively . However, both the serum CEA level (2.4 ng/ml) and the CA19-9 level (39 U/ml) were within normal limits at this time. An operation was performed for this lesion in November 2000. We performed anterior resection, and irrigated the intestinal lumen carefully with 5% povidone-iodine before anastomosis to prevent anastomotic recurrence. The lesion was located in the suture line macroscopically, and was identified as a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma invading the subserosa histologically. There was no metastasis in the regional lymph nodes .
The patient was followed up in the out-patient department with adjuvant chemotherapy of 5-fluorouracil and leucovorin. We suspected recurrence of colon cancer by the elevation of the serum CEA level (6.9 ng/ml) on July 2001, and it was nine months after the prior operation that the second anastomotic recurrence was found. Computed tomography (CT) and ultrasonography (US) did not describe distant organ metastasis or local recurrence in the pelvis, but colonoscopy and barium enema performed in July 2001 showed the second recurrence of disease at the suture line. An operation was performed on December 2001, and the tumor was resected en bloc with a part of the small intestine and bladder to which direct invasion was suspected from the preoperative CT. Although metastasis was also suspected in both the peritoneum and the regional lymph nodes around the tumor intra-operatively, tumor cells were not identified in either the peritoneum or the regional lymph nodes by microscopic examination of a frozen-section specimen histologically. We performed a low anterior resection for the second recurrence of disease, and performed anastomosis by the double-stapling technique after irrigation with 5% povidone-iodine. The pathological examination revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma invading from the muscularis propriae to the submucosal layer in the suture line. There was no invasion of tumor cells to either the small intestine or the surgical margins, to which direct invasion had been suspected based on the preoperative CT .
The patient noticed bleeding per rectum during defecation in July 2002, seven months after the prior operation. Romanoscope and colonoscopy showed a tumor at the suture line, and the pathological examination of the biopsy confirmed a diagnosis of adenocarcinoma. Although the serum CEA level (5.1 ng/ml) was within normal limits, the CA19-9 level was 50.4 U/ml this time. There was no metastasis in either the abdominal cavity or the distant organs by preoperative CT and US preoperatively. We performed abdominoperineal resection with lateral lymphadenectomy for the third anastomotic recurrence on September 2002. The lesion measured 2.0 by 4.0 cm, and was located in the suture line. The pathological examination revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma invading the subserosa, and there was no invasion of tumor cells to any surgical margin. Metastases of tumor cells were not identified histologically in any resected lymph nodes . It has now been seven years and nine months since the first operation, and there has been no further recurrence.