A 19-year-old male patient presented with intermittent shoulder pain and a palpable mass in the right upper quadrant, causing abdominal discomfort. MRI-imaging revealed a hyper intense inhomogeneous mass located in the right lobe of the liver with an approximate size of 9,5 cm in diameter and five nodules in both lower lobes of the lung . The working diagnoses was a hepatic cyst/alveolar echinococcosis.
Definitive diagnosis was made by biopsy of the pulmonary nodule of the left lower lobe, showing an undifferentiated pleomorphic embryonal sarcoma. The staging was cT2b cN0 cM1 (PUL), UICC IV, Intergroup Rhabdomyosarcoma Studies (IRS) stage 4. The multidisciplinary conference recommended neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by a radical surgical resection.
Neoadjuvant chemotherapy was performed according to the Cooperative Soft Tissue Sarcoma Study Group (CWS-2014 guidance, treatment guidelines for soft tissue sarcoma and soft tissue tumors) for 13 weeks, with four cycles of CEVAIE. Primary tumor and pulmonary metastasis showed a good response and shrinking in restaging. The patient had normal liver laboratory values and a preoperative LiMAx of 479 μg/kg/h. A hemihepatectomy (right lobe + segment 4b) with a sFLR of 28,4 % of segments I-IVa was planned (A). Intraoperatively, the liver parenchyma was firm and macroscopically a chemotherapy-associated liver damage was suspected. Therefore, we went for an intraoperative histopathological analysis of the parenchyma in fresh-frozen sections. This revealed cholestasis, beginning portal fibrosis and single cell necrosis . Additionally, invasion of not only the right, but also the middle hepatic vein was noted. Consequently, a FLR of 28 % combined with injured liver parenchyma seemed not to be adequate for a one-stage liver resection. To reduce the risk of a posthepatectomy liver failure, a hypertrophy concept was necessary. We decided to proceed with ALPPS for the induction of hypertrophy. A classical step I with a complete transection between segments I-IVa and IVb-VIII was done down to the vena cava. Intraoperative blood loss was 1.200 ml. No complications occurred and on POD 5 the patient was discharged with normal liver function.
Nine days after step I, re-volumetry based on a CT scan revealed a sFLR of 57,3 % (B). The following day, step-II was performed and the tumor-bearing liver part removed. shows the intraoperative situs before and after resection. The specimen is shown in . LiMAx test on POD 1 was 269 μg/kg/h, presenting a sufficient liver function of the remnant.
The patient developed bile leakage, which was treated with interventional drainage and ERC. Otherwise, the postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged in good conditions on POD 14. The pathological work up demonstrates tumor free margin. Extensive sampling of the tumor bed shows broad areas of fibrosis and necrosis with haemorrhage and resorptive changes with infiltrates of foamy histiocytes. Only a few small spots of residual vital sarcoma could be detected (, ). The therapy-induced tumor regression grade was 99 %. After recovery from surgery, chemotherapy according to the CEVAIE protocol (CWS-2014 guidance) will be resumed and a complete resection of the oligometastatic pulmonary disease is planned.