A 34-year-old morbidly obese male Persian patient was admitted to a secondary care facility following a motor vehicle accident, 6 weeks prior to his referral to our tertiary center. At the secondary center, the general surgeon performed bilateral chest tubes insertion to treat hemothorax resulting from rib fractures sustained in the accident. Additionally, the patient was evaluated by the neurosurgery service for a mild concussion, which required monitoring. After 3 weeks of hospitalization, the patient regained full consciousness and the chest tubes were successfully removed. At this point, he was discharged from the secondary care facility and referred for further evaluation and treatment of the scapula fracture. The patient’s medical history was unremarkable, except for a significantly high BMI of 42 kg/m2, indicative of morbid obesity. Upon presentation at our center, a thorough examination of the patient’s neurovascular status revealed no abnormalities. Plain radiographs, including anteroposterior and lateral views, revealed scapula ANF with increased glenopolar angle (GPA) . Computed tomography (CT) imaging further demonstrated callus formation at the fracture site, along with comminution at the superior part of the fracture line. Additionally, humeral greater tubercle avulsion fracture was also noted .
The patient underwent surgery 6 weeks after the accident. Due to the patient’s morbid obesity, special accommodations were made to optimize surgical access and reduce the potential complications associated with positioning. Large pelvic and thoracic supports were used to allow the patient’s abdomen to hang freely, enabling the diaphragm to move freely and improve oxygenation. The posterolateral limited Dupont–Evrard approach was used because of the patient’s extremely high BMI to minimize the risk of wound-healing complications. This approach used the intermuscular plane between the teres minor and infraspinatus muscles to reach the neck and lateral border of the scapula .
With particular attention to preserving the integrity of the circumflex scapular artery and supraspinatus nerve, the callus formed along the fracture line was carefully resected and the glenoid was released and mobilized . This further allowed for better visualization and manipulation of the fractured segments. Given the deformation and blunting of fracture edges due to chronicity, reduction was conducted under C-arm guidance to achieve an acceptable realignment of fractured fragments, based on the normal radiologic values such as GPA . Following confirmation of the reduction, a 3.5 mm low-profile T-plate was employed to secure the anatomical neck in place. Despite the small size of the fractured segment, proper placement of the horizontal portion of the plate in relation to the glenoid fossa enabled the insertion of three screws into the broken fragment. Subsequently, the lateral pillar fracture was fixed using a reconstruction plate. It is worth noting that the avulsion fracture of greater tubercle remained intact due to its minimal displacement .
Passive movements were initiated on the day following discharge owing to the presence of stable fixation. After 1 month, active movements were performed under the supervision of a physiotherapist for a total of 20 sessions. At the 4 month postoperative evaluation, a radiographic examination was requested for the patient, revealing evidence of complete union. Twelve months after surgery, the patient’s constant score was 79, and shoulder range of motion for abduction, external rotation, and internal rotation, were 100°, 30°, and waist (L3), respectively. The patient reported experiencing pain in stretching the shoulder to its maximum range of motion. His muscle strength was slightly lower than the unaffected side, but he could still abduct his shoulder with up to 15 kg of weight. Figure shows the patient’s 1 year follow-up graph, depicting complete union.