A 41-year-old male (height, 165 cm; body weight, 63 kg) was scheduled for colonoscopy review. He had no history of any remarkable disease, symptom, or drug allergy. He had undergone gastroscopy and colonoscopy with unknown sedative drugs in the physical examination institution two years ago, and colorectal polypectomy by endoscopic mucosal resection by sedation with propofol half a year ago in our hospital. Deep sedation with monitored anesthesia care was induced and maintained with the administration of propofol and alfentanil without any problems.
Before anesthetics administration, the standard vital signs were monitored and were as follows: non-invasive blood pressure (NIBP), 116/69 mmHg; heart rate, 85 bpm; and SpO2, 100%. After starting oxygenation at 2 L/min by nasal oxygen cannula, we administered 10 mg of remimazolam (0.15–0.2 mg/kg) (Yichang Humanwell Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd, China) for introduction. Within 1 min, the patient presented audible laryngeal stridor with marked depression of suprastemal fossa. Immediately, we observed a large area of erythema on his face, neck and chest. We further observed periorbital edema and lip swelling . With a stethoscope, we listened to the breath sounds of both lungs, but these were too light at that moment. Following SpO2 drop to 91%, we performed a jaw thrust maneuver, manual ventilation and 100% oxygen. Spontaneous breathing continued, but the SpO2 level fluctuated between 85–95%. Considering the skin features, we speculated the presence of laryngeal edema, causing severe inspiratory dyspnea. Epiglottic edema was observed under visual laryngoscope, which confirmed our hypothesis . Copious oral secretions were noted, requiring aggressive suctioning. In parallel with respiratory compromise, 1 min after introduction, NIBP was stable at 100/64 mmHg, but after approximately 3 min, NIBP dropped to 77/47 mmHg, and heart rate increased to 95 beats/min. As anaphylaxis was strongly suspected based on the clinical presentations, we intravenously administered 25 μg of adrenaline, but hemodynamics did not change drastically. We then administered 25 μg of intravenous adrenaline repeatedly (total 50 μg) and 2000 mL of crystalloid, which improved NIBP to 116/79 mmHg. Despite improvement in the patient’s blood pressure, SpO2 still fluctuated between 81–87%. We initiated arterial blood pressure monitoring with cannulation of the left radial artery. Blood gas test results showed a significantly elevated PCO2 of 104 mmHg. Considering the patient had previously used propofol without adverse reactions, we intravenously administered 12 mg propofol, combined with 4 mg vecuronium, and inserted a laryngeal mask airway to facilitate mechanical ventilation. Consequently, SpO2 rose gradually to 100% and the patient’s vital signs were stable. After discussion, the physician was allowed to proceed with colonoscopy examination, which revealed a large amount of yellow rectal discharge, and this was consistent with the diarrhea caused by allergy. Furthermore, for a definitive diagnosis, the patient’s intestinal mucosa was biopsied and sent for histopathologic examination.
The whole process lasted 2 and a half hours. The patient naturally awoke and was hemodynamically stable, but complained of eye photophobia and tearing. After 30 min of observation, the patient was returned to the general ward. The change in the patient’s vital signs during the episode is shown in Fig. and the results of blood gas test are shown in Table .
Histopathologic examination showed eosinophil infiltration in the mucosa stroma of the ascending colon, with about 70/HPF in the dense area . Four weeks after the event, the patient underwent skin tests to confirm the causative allergic agent. The intradermal tests for remimazolam, midazolam, dextran 40 were performed with 0.1 ml of each sample. Remimazolam and midazolam were first diluted with saline to 1 mg/ml and further again with saline to a ratio of 1:10 and 1:100. Interestingly, a markedly positive reaction was recorded at the test site with midazolam (erythema of 16 × 11 mm and swelling of 10 × 8 mm), but not with remimazolam and dextran 40 .