A 43-year-old man developed worsening balance problems during the previous 12 months. He had suffered a left middle cerebral artery ischemic stroke 20 years earlier, secondary to thoracic gun-shot wound and associated vascular injury. Despite the right hemiparesis, expressive aphasia, and seizure disorder that resulted, he lived independently and held various jobs (e.g., lawn-mowing). He had a history of IVDA and was Hepatitis C (HepC) seropositive but reported no IV drugs for 2 years before presentation (i.e., >1 year before initial symptoms) and he was human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) negative. There was no clinical or laboratory evidence of immunocompromise.
Soon after his initial symptoms, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) imaging performed at another facility documented encephalomalacia from the earlier stroke but no new abnormalities. With progressive unsteadiness, left-arm clumsiness, headaches, and visual disturbances, the patient could no longer work; so, he was referred to our facility for evaluation.
The patient was alert, appropriate, well nourished, and groomed. With expressive aphasia and moderate dysarthria at baseline, he answered in short phrases rather than complete sentences. With the exception of a central right facial paralysis, cranial nerves II-XII were intact. His right-sided spastic hemiparesis had been stable since his stroke. No dysmetria was noted and Rhomberg sign was negative. He walked with a spastic, unsteady gait that both the patient and his family felt had worsened significantly during the previous year.
After re-review of the initial non-contrast MRI from the first institution 9 months earlier, one author noted a 5 × 7 mm hypointensity at the level of the craniocervical junction dorsal to the spinal cord, with associated diffusion restriction [Figure –]. On Fluid Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) imaging, a subtle edema signal could be appreciated in the cerebellar vermis, without mass effect . After another MRI series with and without contrast, a new 3.1 × 2.3 cm irregular-enhancing vermian mass without significant mass effect on the fourth ventricle was noted [Figure and ]. The previously noted T2-weighted hypointensity was unchanged at the craniocervical junction , whereas additional hypointensity extended superiorly into the cerebellar vermis . No diffusion weighted images were obtained as part of this MRI. Cerebellar edema had significantly increased . No evidence of hydrocephalus or meningeal disease was observed. Contrast computerized tomography (CT) scans of his chest, abdomen, and pelvis revealed no evidence of systemic disease (not shown).
In reviewing all available images, our multidisciplinary neuro-oncology team agreed that the lesion most likely was neoplastic in origin and recommended resection. The interval between the initial MRI and surgery was 10.5 months, that is, approximately 12 months after symptom onset.
Due to the location of the mass, the patient was admitted the night before surgery and a temporary transvenous pacer was placed by cardiology. Electrophysiologic monitoring was established before the patient was secured in a Mayfield head clamp and positioned prone. A suboccipital craniotomy and C1 laminectomy was performed through a midline incision. Immediately on attempting to open the dura in the midline over the cisterna magna, the dura was noted to be very thick and a defined cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) space was not found. Therefore, opening of the dura was approached from over the left cerebellar hemisphere, where initially the cerebellar cortex was easily seen with a clearly defined space between it and the dura. As the dissection moved inferiorly, the dura firmly adhered to the cerebellar cortex. Another approach was made over the right hemisphere with similar result. With careful dissection, the layers could be separated and abnormal tissue was apparent beneath the thickened dura.
During resection of abnormal tissue, which corresponded to the enhancing mass visualized by MRI, a few small pockets of purulent fluid were seen. The fluid was cultured, and a sample of abnormal tissue was reviewed by the neuropathologist (AK). Right-angle, branching hyphae were apparent on a smear prep of the fresh tissue, suggesting the diagnosis of mucormycosis. The remaining abnormal tissue appeared to be scar tissue and was not clearly separable from normal cerebellum. Therefore, further resection could not be safely performed. The dural opening was then closed in a water-tight fashion and the wound closed.
On pathological findings, broad fungal hyphae were present with random (often 90°) branching and occasional septae . In addition, dense fibrosis and granulomatous reaction was noted. The patient was observed in the intensive care unit and IV amphotericin B treatment was initiated. In consultation with the Infectious Disease Service, the patient was evaluated for systemic disease or immunosuppression, including an echocardiogram to evaluate for valve vegetations; CTs of the chest, abdomen and pelvis; and MRI of the spine. No other sites of disease were found and HIV findings were negative. Although findings of HepC serology were positive, no evidence of liver failure was noted after liver function tests. No fungi were cultured from the intraoperative sample; however, scarce coagulase-negative staphylococci were present. Vancomycin was added to his regimen.
From inquiries about IVDA, we learned from the patient and his family that he had been hospitalized 2.5 years earlier for a local infection after injecting heroin into a neck vein. The infection resolved with IV antibiotics and no antifungals had been administered. Despite continued IVDA after this infection, he subsequently quit and had not injected drugs for at least 2 years. His family corroborated that he had not otherwise been ill since that hospitalization and had been followed by a primary care physician.
On postoperative Day 3, he was discharged to a skilled nursing facility for long-term IV amphotericin B. Two weeks into therapy, he developed renal failure, leading to cessation of the IV antifungal treatment and hemodialysis. When kidney function recovered 2 weeks later, the patient declined additional treatment and left the nursing facility against medical advice. He returned to the apartment that he shared with his brother, and missed follow-up MRI and appointments. He continues to be ambulatory, but his family reports that his gait is worsening while his health has remained stable.