We obtained the written informed consent to publication from the parent of the patient for this case report because the patient had slight mental retardation.
A 24-year-old man, with a height of 190 cm and weight of 52 kg, was admitted to our hospital with right neck of femur fracture to undergo closed reduction and internal fixation. He was diagnosed with WHS after birth. Although he had slight mental retardation, he was able to ambulate and perform simple commands. No specific problems were noted on the transthoracic echocardiography, although ventricular premature beats were present on the preoperative electrocardiogram. His blood tests and chest X-ray did not show any abnormal findings.
On the physical examination, the patient had facial features identical to patients with typical WHS. The Greek warrior’s helmet appearance, characterized by a prominent glabella, hypertelorism, micrognathia, low-set malformed ears, and a down-turned mouth, was present . Although mouth opening was more than 3 fingers and neck extension had no limitation, his mandible was small and relatively pushed backward . His tooth alignment and dental hygiene was under poor condition, and Mallampati score was class II. He had undergone an inguinal herniorrhaphy under general anesthesia two years prior without any complications. The information about the previous general anesthesia was limited because it was dependent on the memory from patient’s mother, but any complication has not occurred during anesthetic management including endotracheal intubation. However, as a long anterior-posterior diameter of chest was noticed on computed tomography , difficult intubation and airway management were anticipated.
After entering the operating room, the hemodynamic status of the patient was stable with blood pressure of 115/91 mmHg, heart rate of 80 beats/min, and oxygen saturation of 99%. Total intravenous anesthesia was administered with 2% propofol and remifentanil to avoid malignant hyperthermia that has been previously reported during anesthesia of patients with WHS . We injected 50 mg, about 1.0 mg/kg, of rocuronium intravenously while the neuromuscular transmission was monitored, considering that the usual duration of surgery is about one and a half hours or maximally two hours, the patient had no muscular hypotonia, and his mask ventilation was not challenging. As difficult intubation was anticipated, a video-assisted laryngoscope, C-MAC with D-blade (Karl Storz, Germany) was used, and endotracheal intubation with 7.5 sized reinforced endotracheal tube was delivered smoothly. The operation terminated without any problems under total intravenous anesthesia. Total duration of general anesthesia was one and a half hours and operation time was one hour. The endotracheal tube was extubated as soon as spontaneous breathing was recovered with intravenous administration of 200 mg of sugammadex, and the ratio of train of four was confirmed to be more than 90%. For reducing postoperative pain, 50 µg of intravenous fentanyl was administered with patient-controlled intravenous analgesia at the end of the operation. The patient was discharged on the thirteenth postoperative day without any complications.