A 56-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital in 2019 with complaints of low backache, limited range of motion and pain in the left hip.
In 2019, he had low back pain accompanied with left buttock pain for 5 years and severe movement limitation in the left lower limb for 4 wk.
The patient was generally in good health and had a history of high blood pressure for several years, no history of other chronic, non-communicable and infectious diseases. He had ureterolithiasis surgery a few years back. He did not provide detailed information concerning any major trauma, blood transfusion, drug and food allergy and vaccination status. There was history of dark colored urine with no similar case in the family.
He was of Chinese Han ethnicity, married and had 1 healthy female offspring. No remarkable history was noted.
Upon general examination, the patient was looking well with no obvious abnormalities. No notable skin changes were observed; lesions, rash and erythema were absent. Cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations were within normal range. Palpation and percussion of the spine revealed tenderness and pain in the lumbar5/Sac1 paravertebral and intervertebral space. Lordosis and Kyphosis of the spine were normal despite limited motion of the lumbar region. Flexion of the hip, extension of the knee and toes were normal in both lower limbs; Lasegue and Braqard test were both negative, pain was positive in left femoral trochanter and tenderness was felt in the left inguinal region upon palpation. Left hip “4-sign” positive, external and internal rotation with abduction and adduction of left hip were limited, posterior extension was 5 degrees and flexion was 50 degrees, Harris score of the left hip was 35.
During hospitalization, the left hip joint was thoroughly investigated and laboratory screenings indicated that, basic blood and urine tests were all within normal range. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, antistreptolysin O, rheumatoid factor and urinalysis were also normal or negative.
Thoracolumbar X-ray reported “spondylitis in thoracic vertebra, lumbar vertebra and pelvis, bilateral hip arthritis, aseptic necrosis of left hip joint” . Magnetic resonance imaging of both hips showed “aseptic necrosis of the left femoral head and left hip arthritis, edema of right femoral head and cervical bone marrow, bilateral acetabular cystic ischemia and edema in the left gluteus maximus intermuscular space” . Taking the patient’s history, laboratory and radiology findings into account, the following primary diagnoses were made: Bilateral hip joint osteoarthritis, aseptic necrosis of left femoral head (stage 4), lumbar disc herniation (L5/S1).