A 57-year-old man presented to the emergency department approximately two hours after the onset of chest pain. His chief complaint was severe and persistent chest pain radiating to the back, near-death feeling with associated diaphoresis, pallor, and general fatigue. He denied dyspnea on exertion, abdominal pain, nausea, or vomiting. His past medical history includes uncontrolled hypertension and a 40-pack-year history of smoking. Importantly, there was no family history of MI or sudden death. Vitals on admission were temperature: 36.5 °C, pulse: 72 beats/min, respiration rate: 20/min, blood pressure: 137/87 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa), and oxygen saturation: 98%. Physical examination was unremarkable for the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, respiratory, and nervous systems. A bedside standard 18-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed ST-segment elevation in leads II, III, AVF, V3R-V5 R, and V7-V9. An impression of “acute infero-posterior ST-segment elevation MI complicated by acute right ventricular MI” was made, and dual antiplatelet therapy was initiated with 300 mg aspirin plus 180 mg ticagrelor. Initial laboratory tests were as follows: troponin I, 0.15 μg/L(reference range: 0.01 ~ 0.023 μg/L); creatine kinase isoenzyme MB, 31.7U/L(reference range: 0 ~ 20U/L); D-dimer, 258 μg/L(reference range: 80 ~ 500 μg/L); aspartate aminotransferase, 131U/L(reference range: 0 ~ 40U/L); alanine aminotransferase, 49U/L(reference range: 0 ~ 40U/L); C-reactive protein, 30.6 mg/dL(reference range: 0 ~ 10 mg/L); serum potassium, 3.72 mmol/L(reference range: 3.5 ~ 4.5 mmol/L); cholesterol levels, coagulation profile, renal profile, and N-terminal brain natriuretic peptide precursor were all normal.
As a major acute chest pain national referral center, the cardiac catheterization room was activated for planned emergency coronary angiography (CAG) and PCI after obtaining consent from the patient and the family. CAG showed right coronary dominance, single-vessel lesion, total occlusion of the proximal right coronary artery (RCA), and thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) flow of grade 0 . Considering that the RCA was the occluded vessel and the importance of minimizing door-to-balloon (DTB) time, we performed PCI immediately following CAG.
The patient suddenly lost consciousness when guiding the catheter into the RCA, and ventricular fibrillation (VF) ensued . 200 J asynchronous electrical defibrillation was given immediately. Defibrillation successfully restored sinus rhythm. The second episode of VF was noted three minutes later, electric defibrillation was repeated, and 1 mg epinephrine was administered. One minute later, the third episode of VF occurred again, and a diagnosis of ES was considered. At the time of repeated electric defibrillation, multiple intravenous lines were running to maintain hemodynamic stability, electrolyte replacement (potassium and magnesium) was administered, and a loading dose of amiodarone at 150 mg intravenously followed by a maintenance dose of 1 mg/min. Esmolol was titrated at 0.5 mg/kg intravenously and maintained at 0. 05 ~ 0.20 mg/ (kg. min) through an infusion pump. Due to an impending airway compromise and patient anxiety and agitation, endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation were performed, and induced sedation was achieved with midazolam injection 0.01 mg/ (kg. h). Fourteen additional episodes of VF were recorded during the procedure before reverting to sinus rhythm. Vitals returned to baseline: HR: 62 bpm, BP: 108/69 mmHg, and when blood pressure dropped to 80/47 mmHg, the esmolol dosage was adjusted to 0.05 mg/ (kg. min) and norepinephrine 0. 2 ~ 0.3 μg/ (kg. min) pump was added for maintenance.
Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA) was done for the proximal RCA within a DTB time of 72 min. CAG showed multiple thrombi in the RCA, and the erythrocyte-rich thrombus was aspirated . To reduce the thrombotic load, Tirofiban was administered intravenously with 10 μg/kg for 3 min and maintained at 0.15 μg/ (kg. min). Then a drug-eluting stent was implanted for RCA ostial narrowing. Stent deployment restored TIMI grade 3 flow . The patient was successfully transferred from the operating table to the cardiac care unit (CCU), and the ST-segment elevation of the patient was attenuated after the primary PCI . Esmolol, midazolam, and norepinephrine pumps were discontinued after the blood pressure stabilized. Amiodarone was also discontinued owing to its side effects leading to prolonged QT interval.
Aspirin (100 mg once a day), ticagrelor (90 mg twice a day), pravastatin (20 mg once a night), metoprolol sustained-release tablets (47.5 mg once a day) were continued. Color Doppler echocardiography showed left atrium size (31 mm), left ventricle (40 mm), segmental right ventricular hypokinesis, and left ventricular ejection fraction of 60%. One week after admission, the patient was discharged without any symptoms and with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor(ACEI).