A 56-year-old male patient was evaluated in the emergency room after a motorcycle accident.
In the patient’s physical examination, it was found that the right shoulder had an epaulet sign, the right arm was in external rotation and abduction, and the humeral head could be felt by deep palpation in the anterior part of the glenoid.
The left wrist had a deformity and swelling, and about 3 × 1.5 cm of superficial skin abrasion was found in the wrist’s volar surface.
It was noted that distal pulses were palpable, no neurological damage was found except hypoesthesia in the 5th finger.
Radiologic examination revealed that the right shoulder was dislocated, and there was a dorsally displaced severely comminuted distal radius fracture in the left wrist with a non-displaced fracture of the ulnar styloid . The dislocated right shoulder was reduced under sedoanalgesia. The patient was operated electively 1 day after the injury.
Under infraclavicular blockage anesthesia, with a pneumatic tourniquet inflated, approximately 10 cm skin incision was made on the volar aspect of the left wrist. The radial artery was explored and protected. After the fracture was reduced, it was temporarily fixed with 3 K-wires. Then, permanent fixation was achieved using a distal radius volar anatomic plate and screws .
The patient had symptoms of paresthesia and severe pain on the 4th and 5th fingers at 10th-day follow-up after the procedure.
He was closely monitored, as current symptoms did not improve, and electromyographic examination was obtained at the 4th week postoperatively. The electromyographic analysis revealed severe partial ulnar nerve injury. The surgical exploration of the nerve was decided.
Approximately 10 cm incision was made on the ulnar aspect of the wrist’s volar part. The ulnar nerve and the ulnar artery were found trapped inside the scar tissue .
The compressed ulnar nerve was released. Intimal injury and consequent thrombosis were observed at the ulnar artery. The thrombosed segment was excised till to the edge of the healthy vascular intimal layer .
As the defect was approximately 5 cm, an anastomosis was planned with a vein graft from the forearm. About 8 cm of skin incision was made on the forearm’s volar side, 10 cm below the elbow joint, and 6 cm of vein graft was harvested from the basilic vein, reversed, and the defect was repaired with the graft (-).
The ulnar artery was also decompressed against the probability of further compression. Four weeks after the second operation, finger hypoesthesia started to improve, and clinically, the pain diminished, and wrist and hand functions became better (in complete comparison).
The patient had full functionality and pain-free wrist without any neurovascular impairment; after the 8 months from the second surgery (-).