A nine-year-old premenarchal female presented to the emergency department (ED) for intermittent, right lower quadrant abdominal pain that began two days prior. An abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast showed a “7 × 7.5 [centimeter (cm)] right ovarian hypoenhancing structure with multiple peripheral and internal follicle-like structures highly suspicious for swollen ovary secondary to ovarian torsion.” A pelvic ultrasound completed after the CT showed right adnexal enlargement and “no evidence of ovarian torsion”; thus, no further work-up or consultations were pursued and the patient was discharged and instructed to follow up with her primary care physician (PCP) the next day.
At the appointment with her PCP, the patient was still in significant pain and was referred to the ED again, this time at a different hospital. At her second ED visit, the patient was nauseous without vomiting, and reported no fevers or chills. Her physical examination showed minimal diffuse abdominal tenderness worse in the right lower quadrant and moderate McBurney’s point tenderness with guarding. Labs revealed a white blood cell count within reference range, but the differential showed a high neutrophil count. A repeat ultrasound showed an “8.7 [× 1.3 × 6.1] cm heterogenous, mass-like structure containing small cystic foci and lack of blood flow” on her right ovary and a small amount of free fluid .
A gynecologist was consulted and the patient was admitted and sent for an emergent diagnostic laparoscopy, during which OT was identified and corrected. The patient also required an ovarian cystectomy and partial right ovarian oophorectomy. Postoperatively, the patient recovered well and had no known complications or recurrence of disease as documented by her PCP and had not returned to the ED for any similar complaints in the following year. Since a partial oophorectomy was required, the long-term effects remain to be seen as the patient progresses into her childbearing years.