A 49-year-old muhajir female presented to the cardiology outpatient clinic of an urban tertiary hospital with a 6 month history of shortness of breath and easy fatigability. There was no history of fever, weight loss or night sweats. Physical examination revealed extreme pallor and a diastolic murmur in the aortic region. There was no visceromegaly. Family history was unremarkable. There was no history of past interventions. She was afebrile and her blood pressure was 118/70 mmHg. She had received one unit of packed red cells. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed severely dilated left atrium and mildly dilated right atrium. Ejection fraction was approximately 50 % with mild global hypokinesia. Aortic valve was thickened, calcified and sclerotic with absence of stenosis and severe (eccentric) aortic regurgitation was seen. Mitral valve was also thickened, calcified with absence of stenosis and severe (eccentric) mitral regurgitation was identified. Tricuspid and pulmonary valves were normal with no stenosis. The ascending aorta was dilated. There were no thrombi, vegetations, pericardial effusion or intracardiac shunts. Chest X-ray revealed pulmonary edema and she was given furosemide. Six months later, her dyspnea worsened and she was advised valvuloplasty. However, due to anemia, her surgery was postponed and she was referred to a haematologist.
Complete blood counts revealed haemoglobin: 7.7 gm/dL, haematocrit: 26 %, MCV: 78 fl, MCH: 23 pg, total white cell count: 9.0 × 109/L, absolute neutrophil count: 6.8 × 109/L and platelet count: 227 × 109/L. Peripheral smear showed hypochromic red cells and right-shifted neutrophils. Reticulocyte count was 4.2 %. There was absence of red cell fragmentation and features of hemolysis on peripheral smear. ESR was 100 mm/hr. Direct antiglobulin test was negative. Anti-nuclear, anti-mitochondrial and anti-smooth muscle antibodies were also negative. Serum ferritin levels were 387 ng/mL, serum vitamin B 12 levels were 765 pg/mL and red cell folate levels were 1545 ng/mL. A suspicion of myelodysplastic syndrome was raised and she was advised bone marrow biopsy and cytogenetics, which was not done due to patient’s refusal. She was prescribed erythropoietin, folic acid and ferrous sulphate for 12 weeks after which haemoglobin level rose to 9.3 gm/dL.
She developed chest pain radiating to the mandible due to which she was prescribed glyceryl trinitrate and was advised urgent surgical intervention. She was transfused with packed red cells prior to surgery and her post transfusion haemoglobin was 11.3 gm/dl. She underwent aortic valve replacement, ascending aorta replacement and mitral valve repair. The ascending aorta was grossly abnormal with dilatation and adhesion to pericardium and surrounding structures. The wall of ascending aorta was markedly thick and irregular. The ascending aorta resection and valve cusps were sent for histopathology. It revealed full thickness vessel wall showing moderate degree of fibrous intimal thickening . The medial and adventitial layers showed scattered aggregates of lymphocytes along with granuloma formation. These granulomas were composed of histiocytes with few interspersed multinucleated giant cells. There was absence of caseation necrosis. Ziehl–Neelsen stain for acid fast bacilli and periodic acid-Schiff for fungi was applied and found to be negative. The overall features were suggestive of granulomatous aortitis.
Serum acetylcholinesterase levels were 57 IU/L (normal range up to 52 IU/L). Mantoux test was negative. Venereal disease and rapid plasma reagin tests were also negative. The level of anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide was less than 7 μ/mL (normal range up to 17 μ/mL). Postoperatively, on the basis of histological findings she was started on prednisolone (1 mg/kg/day) for 6 weeks and her haemoglobin improved from 11.6 to 13.1 gm/dL. Azathioprine (150 mg daily) was also begun concomitantly with prednisolone as a long term immunosuppressive therapy.
One month later, she developed complaints of blurred vision in the right eye. She was referred to an ophthalmologist and was diagnosed with central retinal vein occlusion. Clopidogrel (75 mg daily) was added to aspirin (75 mg daily), which she was receiving from time of surgery and her vision improved. Currently, she is receiving warfarin along with aspirin and remains clinically stable.