A 43-year-old male current smoker presented with abnormal findings on chest computed tomography (CT) that was performed after he presented with backache and dyspnea. The patient had no previous medical history, but he had heavy smoking history. His percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) in room air was 97%. Blood tests revealed no abnormalities. Chest contrast-enhanced CT scan revealed a series of dilated vessels forming a mass-like structure, which was the systemic artery to pulmonary vessel fistula (SAPVF), in the anterior segment of the left upper lobe. There were also huge bullae at the apex of the lung near the SAPVF . Right femoral arteriography revealed aneurysmal structures approximately 5–15 mm in size and hypertrophic blood vessels that arose from the left internal thoracic artery, lateral thoracic artery, and superior thoracic artery and drained into the both the left upper pulmonary artery and vein . The cause of dyspnea was thought to be both the SAPVF and huge bullae. Because of the many aberrant blood vessels, embolization was thought to be difficult, and video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) was performed.
The patient was placed in the right lateral position. An Airseal/12-mm port was inserted through the 7th intercostal space (ICS) in the anterior axillary line, and two 12-mm thoracic ports were inserted in the anterior and posterior axillary line through the 4th ICS. The SAPVF seen on the surface of the upper lobe was adherent to the chest wall, with many aberrant blood vessels directed toward the SAPVF . Huge bullae were also found at the apex of the upper lobe. Aberrant vessels were separated from the chest wall using a vessel sealing device. We then performed wedge resection, including the bullae, using autosuture devices. Another SAPVF was also seen in the lingular segment with many abnormal vessels from the chest wall, and wedge resection was performed to remove this lesion .
The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful with resolution of his symptoms. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 9. The patient had an uneventful postoperative course and his dyspnea improved slightly. The patient remains alive without any symptoms after 6 months of follow-up.