A 42-year-old man complained of progressive pain in the left knee region without any limitation in daily activity for 3 months. He visited our institution for initial assessment and underwent radiographic investigation in January 2016. A large radiolucent area caused by osteolytic deconstruction in the epiphyseal part of the left proximal tibia was observed. Computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging, Tomosynthesis-Shimadzu metal artefact reduction technology (T-SMART), bone scan, and biopsy were then performed to assess the precise diagnosis, safe border of the lesion, condition of the surrounding bone, and lung condition. The lesion was finally diagnosed as Campanacci Grade II GCT with no pulmonary metastasis. No fracture of the subchondral bone was detected on the CT scan.
Before surgery, the pain, knee joint function, percentage of affected area of the subchondral bone, and thickness of the residual subchondral bone layer were precisely evaluated. The pain at rest was evaluated according to the Visual Analog Scale (VAS) in which 0 represents no pain and 10 represents the worst pain imaginable. The range of knee joint motion was also recorded. The percentage of affected area of the subchondral bone was calculated as described by Chen . The shortest distance from the articular surface to the nearest margin of the tumour on radiographs was defined as the thickness of the residual pre-operative subchondral bone layer. This distance was measured with imaging generated using the 3D-CT scan and Tomosynthesis-Shimadzu metal artefact reduction technology (T-SMART). Considering the poor condition of the retained subchondral bone, implantation using a 3D-printed scaffold structure and supplemental bone graft were performed to prevent further damage on the subchondral bone that could potentially be caused by the friction between the cement and subchondral bone when cement packing and to avoid formation of non-biological and rigid graft-cement interface that occurs after cement packing combined bone grafting. This study was approved and monitored by the local Ethical Committee. The patient was informed about the risks and benefits of the treatment, after which he provided written informed consent.
The implant was fabricated by Chunli Co, Ltd., Tongzhou, Beijing, China. The primary aims when designing the implant were: maintaining the articular surface in the proper position, preventing collapse of the subchondral bone and joint surface, and promoting healing between the subchondral bone and graft. Therefore, the implant needed a porous bearing surface with a great ability of osseointegration and a porous strut providing effective axial support as per the appropriate length. To analyse and evaluate the size and shape of cavity caused by tumorous deconstruction, importing 3D CT scan data into the Mimics V17.0 software (Materialise Corp. Belgium) was initially performed. The possible size and shape of the implant was preliminarily calculated with the Mimics software using the sagittal, coronal, and transverse images obtained via the CT scan. The implant prototype using the initial data was created by Solidworks 2016 (Dassault Systemes, France). To ensure satisfactory fitting in the tumorous cavity of the proximal tibia, the size and shape of the implant was optimized via computer simulation of implantation. Considering the convenience of implantation, the final implant consisted of two parts that could be assembled, including a truncated ellipsoid cone-shaped plate with 10 mm thickness , and a square frustum-shaped strut with 45 mm axial length . To assemble the two parts tightly, a specialized slideway, which can mechanically prevent dropping and slipping of the strut, was created on the bearing plate; the appropriate slider was required to be located on the strut. Three screw holes were designed to thoroughly affix the strut to the unaffected cortex of the proximal tibia. Except for the specialized slideway and slider, the whole implant was designed using a scaffold structure. For fabricating the implant, Electron Beam Melting technology (ARCAM Q10, Sweden) was applied .
The surgery was performed by a senior surgeon (Chongqi Tu). With the patient under general anaesthesia, the GCT of proximal tibia was exposed through a lateral approach. Before intracurettage, mini drill bites were used to minimize the bone loss caused by the drill. To reduce the rate of local recurrence, the invaded soft tissue over the tumour cortex was removed. Then, extensive intracurettage was performed with a high-speed burr and electrocauterization repeatedly to completely remove the tumour. After the curettage was completed, phenol, hydrogen peroxide solution, and distilled water pulse irrigation was used to rinse the cavity. The bone graft obtained from the patient’s iliac bone was placed directly under the residual subchondral bone to provide biomechanical support. Then, a bearing plate with a porous surface was implanted into the cavity just under the graft and the strut was inserted into the cavity through the slideway on the porous plate . After confirming both locations of the plate and strut of the implant, the three screws were fixed to the contralateral side of the proximal tibia cortex to enhance the primary stability of the implant .
Considering insufficient primary stability in the early postoperative period, the patient was allowed non-weight-bearing standing and walking with two crutches 3 weeks after surgery. However, range of motion exercises of the knee were performed from postoperative week 4. Partial weight-bearing with crutches was encouraged from 6 weeks postoperatively, followed by gradual full weight-bearing. The patient was followed up every month for the first 3 months, then every 3 months thereafter. The postoperative pain, range of motion, degenerative changes, thickness of subchondral bone layer, oncology outcomes, and radiographs were assessed at each follow-up visit to verify the outcomes of the 3D-printed implant reconstruction.
The patient was followed up over a duration of 29 months. The preoperative VAS score was 7, which decreased to 0 after the surgery. There was no detectable difference in the range of knee motion, which was satisfactory in the preoperative and postoperative period, with a normal range. Before the surgery, the percentage of the affected subchondral area was 48.2% and the thickness of the subchondral bone layer was less than 3 mm. However, because of the excellent integration between the graft and retained subchondral bone, the subchondral bone layer was noticeably thicker at the last follow-up, which is 10.9 mm. Furthermore, no degenerative changes were observed during the follow-up period. No fracture or collapse of articular surface was detected. No local recurrence or lung metastasis occurred. Radiography indicated that the implant fitted well with the tibia and no signs of complications, including breakage and displacement, were found .