A 69-year-old non-obese man (BMI 25.2 kg/m2) presented with a 3 month history of progressive symptoms of hypoglycaemia following meals. He noted that symptoms first appeared 14 years ago at which time a formal 72 hour fast failed to show any hypoglycaemia. However, his symptoms had become dramatically worse 2 months after undergoing a recent Nissan fundoplication surgery to repair a paraesophageal hiatus hernia. The episodes were characterized by agitation, sweatiness, rapid heart rate, tremor, light headedness, confusion and cognitive changes likened to alcohol intoxication that occurred an hour or two after meals. One such episode had resulted in loss of consciousness and subsequent involvement in a motor vehicle crash. There were no nocturnal symptoms and no history of weight loss, abdominal pain or diarrhoea. He denied the use of oral hypoglycaemic agents or insulin.
Initial investigations were performed during his first clinical visit when the patient was noticed to become diaphoretic and confused during the history and physical examination. The onset of these symptoms occurred at approximately 1.5 hours after breakfast. Plasma glucose was 0.8 mmol/L, serum ketones were negative, serum insulin 445.6 pmol/L and serum C-peptide of 3.54 nmol/L - values > 18 pmol/L (insulin) and >0.2 nmol/L(Cpeptide) are indicative of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycaemia. The confusion was completely relieved by oral glucose.
Computed tomography of the abdomen showed no focal abnormalities of the pancreas. Abdominal MRI showed good visualization of the pancreas with no dilatation of pancreatic ducts or focal enhancing masses in the pancreas or peripancreatic regions. Endoscopic ultrasound was negative, as was total body Indium111-octreotide scan.
Selective arterial catheterization and calcium stimulation testing was performed with results shown in Table . The presence of a high calcium-stimulated insulin gradient in arteries supplying the body and tail of the pancreas suggested diffuse β-cell hyperplasia and a diagnosis of noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycaemia syndrome (NIPHS). The patient declined subtotal pancreatic resection and was successfully treated with Sandostatin 50 ug subcutaneously prior to each meal. No further significant hypoglycaemia has occurred.