A 67-year-old female with Sjögren’s syndrome was found to have multiple pulmonary nodules in both lungs on chest computed tomography (CT) , because she was found with multiple pulmonary nodules on chest x-ray. She had a history of hypertension and osteoporosis. No increase was observed in the levels of tumor markers, such as carcinoembryonic antigen and squamous cell carcinoma antigen. Pulmonary functions were within normal limits. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed FDG accumulation in all pulmonary nodules . A transbronchial biopsy results in alveolar tissue showing interstitial fibrous thickening and lymphoid cells infiltrations. Since it did not result in a definitive diagnosis, the patient was admitted to our department for a surgical biopsy. Because a substantial amount of tissue is essential for the diagnosis, CT-guided lung biopsy was not performed. Wedge resection was performed for pulmonary nodule located beneath the pleura of left lower lobe. The nodule was gray, elastic, and hard. Intraoperative frozen-section analysis was performed that suspected amyloid nodule with lymphoma. In a permanent pathological section, eosinophilic deposition with lymphoplasmacytic infiltration was noted . Because the eosinophilic deposition stained positive with Congo red , a diagnosis of amyloidosis was established. In addition, immunostaining for AE1/AE3 and CD20 revealed extensive infiltration of B cells to the bronchial epithelial cells (lymphoepithelial lesion) . B cells with monoclonal proliferation predominantly had a κ chain by in situ hybridization (κ chain: λ chain ratio, 20:1) . The findings of immunohistochemical staining were as follows: CD3 (+), CD20 (+), CD138 (+), bcl-2 (+), CD5 (−), CD10 (−), CD23 (−), CD56 (−), and cyclin D1 (−). This nodule was diagnosed as mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma. The postoperative course was uneventful. She was discharged on the fourth day after surgery and received chemotherapy for MALT lymphoma at another hospital.