The patient is a 19-year-old girl, a known case of RRMS starting from 5 years ago. She was well until the time of the MS diagnosis, about 5 years ago. With the disease diagnosis, subcutaneous interferon beta 1-a was started three times a week for the first 3 years of her disease and after that switched to fingolimod 0.5 milligram daily owing to new clinical and radiological relapse. She was stable during fingolimod consumption without disease activity (clinical and imaging aspects). However; she was tiered of taking medicine and discontinued her drug on her own. About 2 weeks after cessation of fingolimod, she developed acute onset of hearing loss and tinnitus in her right ear after cessation of fingolimod for 2 weeks. There was no history of vertigo, headache or ear pain, recent trauma to the head, otitis media, upper respiratory or other viral infections, and family history of hearing loss. She also did not use new medication with ototoxicity side effect in the previous weeks. She was on the MS DMDs and was well since the time of the MS diagnosis, about 5 years ago, until 2 weeks before the onset of the hearing loss (subcutaneous interferon 1a three times a week for 3 years and then daily oral fingolimod because of new clinical and radiological relapse). General and neurological examination, especially of the head and neck parts, was not significant except for a decrease in hearing in the right ear at the time of the hospital admission. On otoscopic evaluation, she had intact bilateral tympanic membranes. After consulting with otolaryngologist and completing audiometric examination and work-up, SNHL was diagnosed. The results of the audiometric tests before and after treatment are demonstrated in . Routine laboratory tests, autoimmune profiles and vasculitis markers all showed to be normal. New brain MRI showed one new T2 lesion in the right side of the pons and 2 small gad enhancing lesions in the supratentorial area .
Thus, with impression of probable new MS attack resulting from fingolimod cessation due to both clinical and radiological activity, she received 5 grams of intravenous (IV) methyl prednisolone and improved significantly with the pulse of the corticosteroid therapy.