A 34-year-old, 80-kg, and alcohol-intoxicated East Asian woman presented to our emergency department after losing control of her motorcycle on a highway and falling from the vehicle . While the patient did occasionally drink, her drinking history was otherwise unremarkable. She also did not smoke and had no history of drug addiction or chronic disease, and was overall a healthy woman. At presentation, pain and swelling of her left shoulder were evident. She also complained of numbness of her left upper limb. Her vital signs upon arrival were as follows: Blood pressure, 135/95 mmHg; heart rate, 82 beats per minute; and respiratory rate, 19 breaths per minute. No blood pressure reading could be obtained from her left upper limb and no blood oxygen readings could be obtained from any of her left fingers. Her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 15.
Closer examination of the patient revealed that capillary refill of all left-hand fingers was disturbed, although the patient’s left arm and hand were warm and radial and ulnar pulses at the wrist were absent. Movement of her left shoulder, elbow, and wrist was also restricted along with a local shoulder injury. However, no bruit could be detected. Laboratory results, including complete blood count, electrolytes, and coagulation panels, were also normal, with hemoglobin and hematocrit results of 13.0 g/dL and 38.4%, respectively.
Plain anterior-posterior radiographs and computed tomography (CT) images were subsequently taken , which revealed multiple fractures of the scapular area, implying that it is a floating shoulder injury. Injuries included a fracture of the left clavicle at the middle third and downward displacement of the distal fragment, a displaced comminuted fracture of the left scapula, and a displaced comminuted fracture of the left proximal humerus. In addition, CT angiography and duplex ultrasonography revealed interruption of blood flow through the axillary artery, with distal flow being maintained through collateral arteries. During observation, the patient reported increasing numbness and coldness of her left arm. To avoid limb-threatening irreversible ischaemia and amputation, it was decided that emergency vascular repair surgery should be performed immediately.
A 34-year-old woman presented to the hospital with 2 h of persistent pain and swelling of her left shoulder and numbness of her left upper limb after losing control of her motorcycle on a highway and falling from the vehicle.
Fracture of the left proximal humerus, left clavicle, and left scapula, left axillary artery rupture, and left brachial plexus injury.
The differential diagnoses included arterial thrombosis and compression. Complete blood count, electrolytes, and coagulation panels, were also normal, with hemoglobin and hematocrit results of 13.0 g/dL and 38.4%, respectively. X-ray and CT images displayed multiple fractures of the shoulder that were indicative of a floating shoulder injury. In addition, CT angiography and duplex ultrasonography revealed interruption of blood flow through the axillary artery, with distal flow being maintained through collateral arteries.
Emergency surgical exploration revealed that the axillary artery was completely amputated by the distal fragment of the left clavicle, and that the brachial plexus had suffered contusions . The proximal axillary artery was also completely occluded by a thrombus that had formed over a tear in the tunica intima. End-to-end anastomoses were thus performed, resulting in shortening of the artery by about 2 cm after excision of traumatized vessel segments . One-stage reconstruction with placement of a locking plate was then performed to treat the patient’s clavicle fracture. The displaced comminuted fracture of the left proximal humerus was treated during the second-stage operation 3 wk after the initial injury (after angiogenesis). The fracture of the scapula was not surgically treated.
Revascularization of the patient’s upper extremity was achieved by emergency surgery about 10 h after the initial injury. Specifically, the patient’s radial and ulnar pulses were restored, and CT angiography confirmed that blood flow was uninterrupted . Furthermore, the blood oxygen concentration of her left upper extremity was 100% and systolic blood pressure measurements were equal in both arms. Postoperative X-ray showed that reduction and internal fixation results were satisfactory . Regarding the injury to the brachial plexus, emergency surgical exploration revealed that the brachial plexus had suffered contusions, and preoperative and postoperative neurological examinations revealed paresthesia resulting from brachial plexus contusion. Before the operation, the patient did not undergo electromyography and magnetic resonance examination due to emergency surgery. The patient was not willing to undergo electromyography and magnetic resonance examination after initial vascular reconstruction. And the patient left our city after discharge before the wound healed. We can only follow her by telephone. During the follow-up period, the patient refused to undergo electromyography and magnetic resonance examination in her city. Three months after injury, the fingers of the left hand can move freely; the movement of the left shoulder, elbow, and wrist became more and more flexible and free; the numbness of the left upper limb was reduced; the strength of the left upper limb was significantly better than before; and she was able to take care of her daily life. At the 4th month of follow-up, the patient felt that the movement, numbness, and strength of the left upper limb were better than before. After the fourth month of follow-up, the patient could not be contacted by telephone and the follow-up was completed, although we have been trying to contact this patient. Overall, the patient showed satisfactory recovery that was observed during 4-mo follow-up.