A 30-year-old Chinese male was admitted to the local hospital with a history of intermittent muscle weakness for over 3 years. He was found with high blood pressure (170/118 mmHg), hypokalemia (2.0 mmol/L), normal thyroid function, and bilateral adrenal masses on computed tomography (CT). He had no history of alcohol or drug abuse, in particular, no history of steroid usage, and no family history of endocrine diseases or malignant tumors. He was treated with a temporary prescription of nifedipine, potassium chloride controlled release tablets, and was referred to our hospital for further investigation.
Upon admission to our hospital on August 11, 2016, physical examinations revealed blood pressure of 153/100 mmHg and pulse rate of 76 beats per minute. His body mass index was 29.1 kg/m2, height 176 cm, weight 90 kg, and waist circumference 98 cm. There were no specific findings on chest or abdominal examination and his muscle power was normal. No edema of the lower extremities was noted and he had no Cushingoid features (i.e., moon face, purple striae, or hirsutism) except slight central obesity.
Routine laboratory tests revealed an extremely low serum potassium (2.12 mmol/L) with relatively high urinary potassium (38.66 mmol/24 h). Twenty-four-hour urinary free cortisol was 140.7 μg and 137.7 μg on two separate occasions (reference range: 20.26–127.55 μg/24 h). Detailed relevant biochemical and endocrinological findings are shown in Table . His aldosterone-to-renin ratio (ARR) was within normal range after discontinuation of nifedipine for more than 2 weeks, when drug-induced false-negative results were likely eliminated. Thus, further screening for PA was not performed . In overnight and standard low-dose dexamethasone suppression tests, dexamethasone failed to suppress endogenous cortisol secretion, indicating CS . Adrenal CT scan revealed one round, homogeneous, low-density mass in each adrenal gland. The mass on the right was 19 × 14 mm while the one on the left was 25 × 15 mm . Bilateral AVS was performed to lateralize the functional side. Concentrations of plasma aldosterone and cortisol were measured in specimens from both adrenal veins (AV) and the inferior vena cava (IVC), and corrected by concentration of plasma epinephrine. As shown in Table , epinephrine concentrations in both AVs were approximately 10-fold higher than that in the IVC, suggesting successful adrenal venous catheterization. Notably, at > 200 ng/dL, the aldosterone concentration in the right adrenal vein was markedly higher than those in the LAV and the IVC, suggesting excess secretion of aldosterone from the right adrenal mass. Additionally, 7701 nmol/L, the cortisol concentration in LAV was 12.81-fold higher than that in the RAV and 27.4-fold higher than that in the IVC, suggesting excess secretion of cortisol from the left adrenal mass. Thus, with AVS, hypersecretion of cortisol from the left adrenal tumor and that of aldosterone from the right tumor was identified.