Dentists at Riyadh Elm University in Saudi Arabia saw a 17-year-old male patient who had a primary complaint of tooth mobility and the need to replace missing teeth. Proper informed consent was taken from the patient, and also an ethical approval letter was taken from Institutional review board of Riyadh Elm University with a number FRP/2021/432/710/685. Photographic consent was also taken from the patient for the same. His family history revealed that his parents were first cousins and had a consanguineous marriage, which may have contributed to his condition. His parents were not affected and had an uneventful pregnancy and delivery. The patient’s elder brother, aged 26 years, showed a similar condition at eight years of age and was treated successfully a few years ago.
The onset of this condition was at four years of age for the patient, as revealed by his parents, and he did not seek any treatment during that period. The symptoms are aggravated during the cold winter season, making it difficult to walk. His nails and hair seemed normal. The patient was sweating profusely.
When he was three years old, he started losing his main teeth, and by the time he was five or six years old, he had lost all of them. However, because of their inherent brittleness, the bulk of permanent teeth is lost through a series of exfoliations rather than all at once. Because of the early loss of primary and permanent teeth, chewing was difficult. There was no medical history that influenced the outcome.
Clinical examination
After a general evaluation, it was found that both the patient's physical and mental growth were normal. A checkup outside of the mouth showed that tooth loss had caused the vertical height of the face to reduce .
Dermatological examination revealed the presence of symmetric, well-demarcated, white, rough, scaly hyperkeratotic confluent plaques affecting the plantar surface of his soles .
The hands were swollen and red in spots. The palms, knees, and elbows, on the other hand, were clear of keratosis .
Intra-oral examination revealed the presence of mobile permanent maxillary left canine, mandibular right canine and mandibular right third molar, left second molar before extraction. Some of these teeth had red and swollen gums that were also showing signs of gingival recession. The edentulous portions have normal mucosa. Offensive oral malodor was present. Extraction of the mobile teeth was done as shown in Figure .
Radiographic examination
A panoramic radiograph showed the presence of maxillary third molars and mandibular left third molar, which were not evident clinically. Generalized alveolar bone loss floating in the air-like appearance of remaining teeth was evident. A decreased vertical facial height was noted. The lateral skull radiograph showed no evidence of intracranial calcifications .
Hematological and biochemical tests were performed in the laboratory. The results of routine blood tests and liver function tests were determined to be within the acceptable range. Based on the patient's family history and clinical and radiological characteristics, the diagnosis of Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome (PLS) was established.
Treatment
Rehabilitation strategies that target both the physical and mental well-being of the patient have been examined. Maxillary and mandibular full dentures were manufactured, and facial height was enhanced after the extraction of the remaining permanent mobile teeth and the installation of dentures . After the age of 18, dental implants may be considered.
Topical use of keratolytic drugs containing 5% salicylic acid was used to treat skin lesions. As a treatment for excessive sweating, antiperspirants and deodorants were recommended Acitretin 25 mg pill, once a day was recommended for the treatment of keratinizing diseases such as PLS, according to the guidelines. In order to minimize social stigma and psychological distress for the patient and to enhance the overall quality of life for developing children, it is necessary to identify and treat PLS as soon as possible.