A 41-year-old man visited the urology department of JR Tokyo General Hospital with complaints of swelling and pain in the scrotum that had commenced 3 days earlier. A urologist diagnosed epididymitis and prescribed levofloxacin at 500 mg/day. However, the symptoms did not improve, and the patient visited the dermatology department of JR Tokyo General Hospital (day 0).
On admission, he presented with a temperature of 36.5°C, a blood pressure of 131/80 mmHg, and a heart rate of 100 beats per minute. His height and weight were 164 cm and 94.8 kg, respectively (body mass index: 35.2 kg/m2). Local examination revealed that the scrotum was markedly swollen. The laboratory workup on day 0 revealed elevated levels of serum C-reactive protein (6.71 mg/dL) (normal: ≤0.30 mg/dL) and white blood cells (13,800/μL) (normal: ≤8600 mg/dL). Furthermore, untreated diabetes was diagnosed owing to high hemoglobin A1c level (11.5%) (normal: ≤6.0%), and insulin-enhancing therapy was initiated on day 0. The patient’s anti-streptolysin O antibody titer was 49 U/mL (normal: ≤239 U/mL), and no renal or hepatic dysfunction was observed. Test results for syphilis (rapid plasma reagin and Treponema pallidum hemagglutination) and human immunodeficiency virus antibodies were negative. The patient had not visited a medical institution for about 20 years; therefore, he declared no medical history. His partner was a woman, and he did not engage in commercial sex. Notably, there was no family history.
Additionally, computed tomography revealed an abscess with a diameter of 5 cm in the scrotum without gas image . There were no abnormal findings in the testes or epididymis. On day 0, the skin above the abscess was incised, which was drained, and the pus obtained was submitted for culture. We do not have a dedicated transport spitz for anaerobic bacteria. Therefore, we contacted the bacterial laboratory before the incision and asked them to prepare the culture in advance. About 5cc of pus was put into a sterilized spitz and transported to the bacterial laboratory within a few minutes for immediate culturing. Additionally, the blood culture was submitted on day 0. Intravenous administration of cefazolin (2 g/8 h) was empirically initiated as an antibacterial treatment for the scrotal abscess. The blood culture was negative. Culturing of the pus in the abscess revealed the presence of Prevotella spp. (RapID ANA II System, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) and Streptococcus agalactiae (group B) spp. (Prolex™ Streptococcal Grouping Latex Kit, IWAKI&CO., LTD., Japan). Furthermore, the antibiotic susceptibility pattern of Streptococcus agalactiae was done according to MICroFAST 7J, BECKMAN COULTER, United States; therefore, intravenous administration of cefazolin was empirically continued . In Japan, the antibiotic susceptibility of Prevotella bivia could not be measured this time because it can be measured only at a specific research facility.
Although the symptoms exhibited improvements, pus drainage continued, and the pain persisted; therefore, a second pus culture was performed on day 7. A large number of gram-negative bacilli were observed and identified as Prevotella bivia (RapID ANA II System, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) on day 10 (the pus culture was negative for Streptococcus agalactiae). At this time, the pain subsided, and the pus drainage slowed. The patient was discharged on day 14 when cefazolin was discontinued and oral amoxicillin (750 mg/day) was commenced. In addition, the patient visited the hospital every week. We determined the need to continue antibiotics based on clinical symptoms. Amoxicillin was continued until day 42, and improvement was clinically confirmed.