A 57-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our hospital with a tumor in her lower ankle. She reported hypesthesia in digiti two to four of her left foot. She also presented with temporary back pain.A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of her lumbar spine revealed a long-segment intraspinal extradural soft-tissue mass in the left L4 - S1 paravertebral region with homogeneous contrast enhancement. The mass was compressing the nerve roots of L4 and L5 and causing bone destruction of the fifth lumbar vertebra . It was at this stage that the diagnosis of a neurinoma was made.An MRI of her left foot revealed a space-occupying lesion at the lower ankle with homogeneous enhancement of contrast medium similar to that of the spinal lesion. The second lesion was also suspected to be a neurinoma. In addition, there was also a cutaneous lesion which could have been a neurofibroma . Overall, a systemic disease like neurofibromatosis (Recklinghausen’s disease) was considered as a diagnosis.To confirm the origin and type of the intraspinal lesion, exploratory surgery was performed over a left-sided hemilaminectomy of L5 and a partial hemilaminectomy of L4 and S1, followed by preparation towards the dura. The location of the lesion was completely extradural along the nerve roots L5 and S1. Abnormal arterialized, dilated, and tortuous vessels suggestive of an AVM were found . A hemostasis procedure and subsequent removal of the lesion followed, using bipolar coagulation. A further decompression of the nerve roots L5 and S1 was then performed.The intra-operative impression of an AVM was confirmed by a neuropathologist. A microscopic examination revealed a conglomerate of irregularly spaced blood vessels of variable size, composed of blood vessels with arterial, venous, and intermediate differentiation with an uneven thickness .
No neurological deficit occurred after the operation. She had an uneventful recovery and was discharged seven days later. During the clinical follow-up three months post-surgery, the pain in her lower back had subsided, but the hypesthesia in digiti two to four of her left foot had remained. An MRI scan showed a regular recovery with no signs of a residuum.