A 17-year-old male was an unrestrained passenger in an automobile travelling between 60 and 70 mph. This car was the involved in a road traffic collision at an oblique angle with another vehicle. The patient in question was a rear seat, nearside passenger.
At the scene of the collision, the passenger-side front seat trapped the patient for approximately 1½ h. Once released the patient was then transferred by helicopter to a local trauma center.
Upon arrival, the patient was stable despite tachydcardia with Glascow coma scale of 15/15. Primary and secondary surveys were performed, and trauma team noted open wounds in both right forearm and left thigh. There were bruises and patient was complaining of pain and difficulty in using his jaw. The abdomen was soft and normal oxygen saturations were maintained. The extremities were neurovascularly intact distally, and the patient was complaining of pain in the right leg.
He had been administered opiate analgesia, oxygen and tranexamic acid. Once stabilized the patient was transferred for an urgent computer aided tomography (CT) scan, which revealed the following injuries: Subcondylar fracture of the mandible, open fracture of the right ulna and radius, open fracture of the left femur, inferior dislocation of the right hip joint, small splenic laceration, and contusion of left pulmonary base.
The same day as admission the patient was taken to the operating theater for reduction under general anesthesia of the inferior dislocation of the right hip joint. With hip abduction traction, external rotation and flexion of the hip joint multiple attempts were made to reduce the hip joint, but unsuccessfully. It was therefore considered necessary to attempt an open reduction of the inferior dislocation. An anterior approach was used and the hip capsule opened anteriorly. The acetabulum was empty and the ligamentum teres ruptured. The femoral head was stuck within the obturator region; inferior to the transverse acetabular ligament. Cuffing of the anterolateral and superior portion of the femoral head was noted. The capsular attachment was torn and buttonholed. The femoral head was reduced into the acetabulum using a bone hook on the neck of the femur. Satisfactory reduction was achieved; several further procedures were also carried out at this visit to theater.
The patient kept immobilized with weight bearing instructions on both hips for 6 weeks and without any skin traction. The patient had IM nailing of the contralateral femur and associated ipsilateral foot fracture treated conservatively. Upon follow-up reviews, the patient is progressing well with no hip pain although weight-bearing status is limited by other injuries sustained. A 3 month follow-up X-ray was satisfactory, and there were no reports of re-dislocation or signs of avascular necrosis of the head.