A 28-year-old south-east Asian female patient, presented with the complaints of ingestion of an insecticide with no active signs or symptoms of poisoning after a suicide attempt. After the initial workup and verification was completed, it was found that the compound that she consumed was approximately 50 ml of Plethora and Eksona , with a chemical composition of 5.25% novaluron, 4.5% indoxacarb, 25% thiamethoxam. She was married for 3 years and had a daughter. She had no history of any drug abuse or alcohol intake.
The patient reported muddy brown urine but did not report any associated nausea, vomiting, or any change in usual activities after insecticide consumption, and she did not seek any first aid. Upon examination, the patient was fully conscious, alert to time, place, and person, hemodynamically stable, and coherent with intact pupillary reflex. Gross motor examination was also unremarkable. However, her oxygen saturation was at 84% room air. Therefore, because of the significant drop in oxygen saturation, arterial blood gas (ABG) was carried out with background oxygen therapy: oxygen by face mask at 4 l/minute to maintain saturation of 95%. Education-corrected Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was performed by the attending psychiatrist, and the patient scored 27/30, which was interpreted as normal. This case report has been reported in line with the Surgical CAse REport (SCARE) criteria .
As one of the components of the compound belongs to organophosphorus compound (OPC), gastric lavage was immediately done to prevent OPC associated cardiac complication; likewise, salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, gastrointestinal upset, and emesis were ruled out. Blood investigations revealed muddy-brown-colored blood sample, raising the suspicion of methemoglobinemia. It was confirmed by ABG analysis, revealing oxygen saturation (SaO2) of 99% , and hence the saturation gap. Methemoglobin levels upon assessment were found to be 12%, whereas normal is below 1% in a healthy individual. Furthermore, the baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus rhythm. Complete blood count, renal function test, liver function test, and serum cholinesterase levels were in the normal range, indicating no significant hemolysis, hence, glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)-induced hemolysis was ruled out, but prime suspect of muddy brown color of blood and urine samples was a big question.
Upon various discussions and reviews, it was considered that the compound indoxacarb in poison has the potential of causing severe methemoglobinemia that usually symptomatically presents as orange-colored urine. Considering it as a case of poison induced methemoglobinemia, vitamin C, and methylene blue being thought of as management. In our patient, to be on safer side, we started her parenteral vitamin C, total dose 2 g/day.
First dose: 1 g in 500 ml of dextrose (5%) over 4 hours given and the next dose thereafter.
Total volume of dextrose administered: 1 l.
Total ascorbate injected: 2 g.
Shortly, significant improvement was noticed in our patient, with a gradual rise in oxygen saturation from 84% to 97% over a period of 2–4 hours. A significant clinical improvement in terms of hypoxemia was noted at the end of 4 hours and improvement in saturation gap was noted after treatment completion (after 8 hours). Repeat methemoglobin levels on assessment showed a massive drop from 12% to 1.2% . The in-hospital psychiatry team assessed the factors in and around her suicidal motive and attempt, and initiated her on interpersonal counseling sessions that involved both the patient and her partner. The patient was advised to stay connected with her loved ones and safeguarding concerns against husband was evaluated, suicide prevention life line numbers and brochures were given to her, and her triggers were addressed by liaising with social support team.
She recovered soon successfully and was discharged home on the second day of hospital admission .