This case is that of a 67-year-old man with schizoaffective disorder. He had developed auditory hallucinations, persecutory delusions, and depressive mood in his 50s, and had been diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder at a psychiatric hospital. His condition had long been stable at least for 10 years under treatment with 12.5 mg/day olanzapine, 2 mg/day biperiden, 20 mg/day promethazine, and 3 mg/day diazepam. Then he had lived alone independently. He had also been administered 40 mg/day valsartan and 2.5 mg/day amlodipine as treatments of hypertension, and 48 μg/day lubiprostone and 150 mg/day aclatonium napadisilate for constipation. He had never drunk alcohol. Written informed consent for reporting his clinical course was obtained from him when he was in a state of clear consciousness on admission to our hospital. This report was approved by the Ethical Review Committee of Yamagata University Faculty of Medicine.
At 3 days before admission to our hospital, he complained of diarrhea, fatigue, and reduced appetite. He visited the psychiatric hospital, where he displayed a pale complexion, diaphoresis, and decreased percutaneous oxygen saturation (SpO2) at 91% and therefore he was transported by ambulance to the emergency department of our hospital. On admission, he was lucid, with 37.7°C body temperature, 120–130 beats/min heart rate (HR), 30/min respiratory rate (RR), and SpO2 was the first half of 90% with nasal oxygen at 4 l/min. He showed mild muscle rigidity in the four extremities and excessive diaphoresis. Laboratory blood tests showed increased levels of creatine kinase (CK) (9811 U/l), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) (256 U/l), lactate dehydrogenase (514 U/l), and white blood cells (12,260/μl). In an arterial blood gas analysis, oxygen partial pressure, carbon dioxide partial pressure, potential of hydrogen, and the ratio between arterial oxygen partial pressure and fraction of inspired oxygen were 102.0, 35.4 mmHg, 7.432, and 280, respectively, suggesting good oxygenation. Chest X-ray, contrast-enhanced whole-body computed tomography (CT) scan, and cardiac and abdominal ultrasound showed no abnormality. The blood concentration of procalcitonin was 0.04 ng/ml. Pathogens of common bacteria, mycobacterium, and fungi were examined in blood, urine, sputum, and nasal mucosa sputum, with no evidence indicating infection of the central nervous system or other organs. According to the criteria of Caroff and colleagues, he was diagnosed as having NMS, possibly triggered by dehydration because of diarrhea under the antipsychotic treatment. Treatment with 40 mg/day dantrolene was started; it was later increased to a dosage of 200 mg/day. Massive infusion (3000 ml/day), cooling, and supportive treatments were applied.
On the second day after the admission, his muscle rigidity had disappeared, but he displayed severe hyperthermia at 41.4°C, increased HR at 131 beats/min, increased RR at 35/min, increased blood pressure at 161/94 mmHg, and impaired consciousness (Glasgow Coma Scale = 11). Blood tests showed increased concentrations of white blood cells (21,400/μl) and blood sugar (175 mg/dl). Tracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation were performed because of respiratory failure. On the third day, he developed myoglobinuria with oliguria (20 ml/h). His severe hyperthermia was mitigated by cooling using the administration of cold water via a nasogastric tube in addition to systemic cooling with an air-blower. Blood tests showed increased concentrations of CK (19,718 U/l), AST (1219 U/l), and alanine aminotransferase (950 U/l). Bromocriptine 5 mg/day was started. On the fourth day, a whole-body CT scan, including the brain, was performed again, revealing no abnormality. Findings implying pulmonary infarction, pneumonia, and venous thromboembolism were not found on the chest X-rays and contrast-enhanced whole-body CT scans. Cerebrospinal fluid examination and magnetic resonance imaging were unable to be performed throughout his course because of the rapid deterioration of his general condition. He went into shock and died thereafter. No postmortem examination was performed because his family did not wish to have an autopsy. Based on the findings on examinations and his clinical course, a doctor in the Department of Emergency and Critical Care Medicine determined the cause of death as multiple organ failure, that is, respiratory, liver, and kidney failures, caused by NMS.