A 47-year-old male presented to the emergency department with severe abdominal pain and headache.
The patient was diagnosed with C4 American Spinal Cord Injury Association (ASIA) impairment scale A due to a car accident 23 years prior. The patient had a good motor grade at the C5 (elbow flexion) and C6 levels (wrist extensor), and zero grade at all levels below C6. For sensory grade, there was altered sensation below the C4 level on right side and C5 on left side, and no sensation below the T1 level . The patient had been using the CIC method for management of neurogenic bladder. He was able to sense bladder fullness by an itching sensation in the nose, at which time a caregiver would empty the bladder with CIC. This was maintained for approximately 23 years. The urine volume emptied by the bladder filling sense was usually 300-400 mL, and the discomfort of nasal itchiness was mild and measured two points on a visual analog scale (VAS). One day, the patient's catheterization was delayed for about five hours since the feeling of bladder fullness. Subsequently, he had to visit an emergency room for severe abdominal pain and headache.
At the time of the car accident with cervical cord injury 23 years earlier, the patient had a fracture of the left femur and underwent fixation surgery. Subsequently the patient underwent transfemoral amputation of the left lower extremity 7 years later due to malunion of the left distal femur fracture.
The patient had an unremarkable family history.
Bladder overdistension (800 mL) and high systolic blood pressure (SBP, 205 mmHg) were noted. An indwelling catheter was inserted, and blood pressure was controlled with a calcium channel blocker (nifedipine 80 mg/d) and nitrates (isosorbide dinitrate 2.5 mg).
After the emergency treatment, the indwelling catheter was removed. Normal SDBE was expected as before the AD event. However, instead of the itching sensation in the nose, there was pain in the abdomen and precordial area (VAS 5), and the filling sensation did not result with a bladder volume of 300-400 mL as before. Instead, it fluctuated significantly between 100 and 400 mL . The patient wanted to restart the SDBE, but the change in the bladder filling sensation was very uncomfortable and unpredictable. Pain killers, including narcotics (tramadol, gabapentin, acetaminophen, celecoxib, and fentanyl), and anticholinergics (solifenacin 5 mg/d, propiverine 20 mg/d, and mirabegron 50 mg/d) did not relieve the pain or address the problem with the bladder volume. The patient underwent an urodynamic study (UDS) to examine the condition of the bladder.
ECG and cardiac echocardiogram were performed for the precordial area pain, but no abnormal findings were observed. Urinalysis did not show pyuria or hematuria. A UDS was performed and in comparison with the UDS findings before the AD event, bladder capacity was reduced, and hypersensitivity was observed even with the use of anticholinergics .
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed for abdominal pain, and chest CT was performed on the precordial area. No abnormal findings were observed. Cystoscopy was performed to rule out bladder injuries due to overdistension. The patient did not show any abnormal findings other than chronic cystitis. The patient’s cervical Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after the car accident is shown in Figure .