A 21-year-old man presented with an enlarged right upper limb and functional difficulty. The arm had been larger than the opposite limb since birth and was occasionally painful and swollen. The pain and swelling were worse when the limb was lowered. Close examination showed multiple separate swollen areas over the whole of the arm and shoulder girdle . These differed in size; they were soft and compressible, and significantly decreased in size with elevation. The right arm was shorter than the left and this reduction in length was due to overall shortening rather than localized shortening within a particular section of the limb. The arm muscles and muscles of the limb girdle were atrophic.
The palm had a bluish discoloration. Other parts of the body showed no abnormalities. The peripheral pulses were palpable with equal volume on both sides. The forearm and hand bones were hypoplastic and tender. There was no sensory deficit. The muscle strength of the right upper limb was Medical Research Council (MRC) grade III to IV. No bruits or thrills were found. No temperature difference was observed. The elbow flexed fully but had restriction of extension when held in a position of 80 degrees of fixed flexion. The cardiovascular system was normal.
Investigation revealed a normal blood picture. Radiographs showed multiple soft tissue swellings and hypotrophy of the bones of right upper limb. There were multiple well-defined radio-opaque lesions consistent with phleboliths in the affected upper limb and periscapular region .
Musculoskeletal ultrasound showed multiple dilated tortuous anechoic lesions involving the upper limb and periscapular region. Echogenic lesions with shadowing suggestive of phleboliths were seen inside the anechoic lesions. The forearm muscles were thinned and replaced by these anechoic lesions.
Color Doppler study showed no flow within the lesion but, while performing a Valsalva maneuver, there was sluggish flow within the lesion suggestive of dilated torturous venous channels involving the superficial venous system. The proximal part of the deep venous system appeared normal but the distal part was not visualized. The arterial system appeared normal.
An MRI study showed multiple dilated veins in the superficial aspect of the right upper limb . The muscles of the limb were replaced by an abnormal signal. The triceps, biceps and deltoid were partially involved. No intra-osseous venous malformation was seen. The arteries were normal.
We managed this case nonoperatively by external compression with graduated compression stockings. Compression therapy helped to diminish the symptoms of venous insufficiency. The patient does not have any complications such as venous thrombosis, consumption coagulopathy, recurrent cellulitis or recurrent bleeding.