A 62-year-old female with a history of rectal cancer four years ago presented with a pancreatic lesion identified during her annual follow-up. She has undergone a low-anterior resection of the rectosigmoid with total mesorectal excision (TME), post neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Histopathology had shown a 3 cm rectal adenocarcinoma, grade II, staged as T4aN0M0 according to the AJCC/TNM 8th Edition. She had also received six cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with irinotecan, capecitabine, and bevacizumab. Two years later, the patient underwent wedge resections of lung metastasis in the right lower and left lower pulmonary lobes for metastatic CRC adenocarcinoma found in her follow-up, via video-assisted thoracoscopy (VATS). Four years after the first operation and almost two after the lung resections, the patient had an abdominal computed tomography (CT).
(see ) followed by a positron emission tomography (PET/CT), which revealed a 1.3 cm lesion in the neck of the pancreas with high 18FDG uptake (SUV-max = 5.8). Tomographic imaging could not differentiate between primary and secondary malignancies, and tumor markers were within a normal range. The lesion had no relation with the portal vein or the celiac/mesenteric vessels and was deemed technically operable. Multidisciplinary meeting decision opted for surgery considering the patient's long disease-free survival and good performance status in the absence of any other metastatic diseases. A near-total distal pancreatectomy with en bloc splenectomy was performed. On the 4th postoperative day, the patient developed a grade A pancreatic fistula, which was treated conservatively with total parenteral nutrition and somatostatin analogue. The patient was discharged on the 9th postoperative day. Final histopathology report showed a 1.6 cm metastatic adenocarcinoma of CRC origin resected in clear surgical margins and 21 negative for metastatic disease peripancreatic lymph nodes. Immunohistochemistry examination was CK7(-), CK20(+), and CDX2(+). The hospital's tumor board decided for further adjuvant chemotherapy. The patient remains disease free one year later on her follow-up visits (see ).