A previously healthy 28-year-old male presented with bilateral gynecomastia and erectile dysfunction for 1 month. The man with normal growth and development was sexually active before, denying history of major physical and psychological trauma. He also had no contact history with chemical, radioactive or toxic substances. The patient had seen a doctor at local hospital for the symptoms of fever, herpes on hands, feet as well as mouth and was diagnosed as HFMD. He recovered quickly after using ibuprofen and ribavirin for 2 days. 2 weeks after the diagnosis, the patient developed the symptoms of hyposexuality, erectile dysfunction with bilateral breast pain and development and clear nipple discharge. He came to our endocrinologist office, and the physical exam showed the patient had gynaecomastia at P2 according to the Tanner-Stage score system, and a ductile mass with a diameter of about 2 cm can be palpated under the nipple, which secreted clear discharge after squeezing. Testicular volume was evaluated about 15 ml, pubic hair P5, with penis length 12 cm, circumference 9 cm. His olfactory function was normal. Laboratory findings showed the level of gonadotropin and gonadal hormones declined. Luteinizing hormone (LH) level was 1.15 mIU/ml (normal range 1.70–8.60 mIU/ml), follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level was 1.26 mIU/ml (normal range 1.50–12.40 mIU/ml), testosterone (T) level was 3.19 nmol/l (normal range 9.90–27.80 mIU/ml), estradiol (E2) level was below 18.35 pmol/l (normal range 99.40–192.00 mIU/ml). Progesterone (P, normal range < 0.159–0.474 nmol/l), insulin (INS, normal range 2.6–24.9 μIU/ml), growth hormone (GH, normal range 0.03–2.47 ng/ml), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1, normal range 60-350 ng/ml), thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH, normal range 0.51–4.30 μIU/ml), free triiodothyronine (T3, normal range 3.10–6.80 pmol/l), free thyroxine (T4, normal range 12.6–21.0 pmol/l) were within normal range. In addition, the result of overnight low-dose dexamethasone suppression test was normal (Cortisol, COR < 50 nmol/L). There was no evident abnormity index showing in carbohydrate antigen 19–9 (CA19-9), carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125), carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and human chorionic gonadotropin-β (HCG-β) (Additional file : Table S1). Semen examination revealed lower sperm count, density and motility. The patient was subjected to a GnRH intramuscular injection (i.m.) infusion test (triptorelin, 100 μg). Our result (Additional file : Table S2) showed that peak LH level (more than 3 times compared to the baseline) after an i.m. infusion test of GnRH occurred at 60 min, while FSH had no noticeable change. With respect to imaging examinations, breast ultrasound image demonstrated gland-like echo at both sides (1.7 × 1.5 × 0.7 cm on the right side and 1.6 × 1.6 × 0.8 cm on the left side). The male reproductive system ultrasound showed calcification of prostate and cyst of right caput epididymidis. Plain chest computerized tomography (CT) showed multiple ground glass attenuation in both lungs and suspicious infectious lesions. Plain adrenal CT and Dynamic enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed there were no obvious abnormal changes in pituitary or adrenal.
Following these conditions, the diagnosis of hypogonadism was established. Clinicians speculated that the disease was caused by HFMD-associated virus attacking hypothalamic neurons. The patient received no drug intervention and was ordered to keep a good mood outward of hospital. The function of hypothalamic-pituitary–gonadal axis (HPG axis) should be revalued after a 1-month observation period when medications are not recommended. The patient came back for a return visit after the 1-month follow-up. The recovery of gonadotropin hormone level was shown in Additional file : Table S3. Other laboratory findings were negative. Semen examination was normal. The patient reported morning erection, spermatorrhea, recovery of sexual desire and satisfying sex life of 4–5 times per week. Physical examination found that his bilateral breast mass and nipple discharge had disappeared.