An 11-year-old female patient weighing 32.1 kg presented with palpitations and symptomatic supraventricular tachycardia resistant to verapamil, flecainide, and bisoprolol fumarate. Physical examination demonstrated no signs of cardiac congestion, such as jugular vein distension or lower leg oedema. Heart auscultation revealed no murmurs. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm without significant ST-segment changes, and the echocardiogram revealed a left ventricular ejection fraction of 70%, and no anatomical abnormalities were identified. Our team decided to perform RFA under intravenous anaesthesia after informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents. Heparin sodium was administered and activated clotting times were maintained above 250 s throughout the procedure. Electrophysiological studies have shown evidence of slow–fast AVNRT. Three attempts at slow-pathway area ablation were made using an ablation catheter (THERMOCOOL SMARTTOUCH DF curve, Biosense Webster, Inc., CA, USA) placed in the posterior septum. Ablation was performed at an initial power of 25 W for 40 s, followed by two additional applications at 30 W for 30 s each.
After ablation, ST elevation was detected on leads II, III, and aVF on electrocardiography . Immediate coronary angiography revealed occlusion of the dominant right coronary artery at the segment 4 atrioventricular branch (4AV) . Intracoronary isosorbide dinitrate (0.5 mg/time) and nicorandil (1.2 mg/time) were administered multiple times with no effect. A floppy wire was passed through the lesion, and thrombus aspiration was performed; however, the thrombus was not aspirated. Reperfusion was achieved using a floppy wire as a guide , and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) was performed. Intravascular ultrasound findings revealed a preserved normal structure in the occluded segment of the coronary artery, although the vessel had a narrowed lumen. An abnormal area of low echogenicity was detected in the adjacent myocardium . Intravascular ultrasound findings showed no evidence of plaque rupture, thrombus, haematoma, coronary artery dissection, or coronary artery spasm at the occlusion site, as well as proximal and distal to the occlusion site; however, they revealed haziness due to slow blood flow caused by stenosis. ( and ). Despite our attempt to discontinue the procedure owing to the vessel narrowness and successful revascularisation, re-occlusion was detected upon the removal of the floppy wire. However, upon floppy wire removal, good blood flow was achieved by dilation with a 1.5 mm diameter balloon , and ST elevation on electrocardiography also improved.
The patient was transferred to the coronary care unit and administered a nicorandil drip at 48 mg/day and a heparin drip at 10 000 units/day for 2 days. Maximum values of 1.31 ng/mL serum troponin T (reference range: <0.1 mg/mL) and 56 U/L creatine kinase MB (reference range: <12 U/L) were observed. No further ST-segment changes or Q waves were found on the resting ECG. Coronary computed tomography angiography (CCTA) was performed 1 week later. CCTA revealed residual stenosis in the right coronary artery at the segment 4AV; however, blood flow to the distal occlusion was preserved . The myocardial region surrounding the culprit lesion exhibited an area of low attenuation compared with that of the normal myocardium . In the image that combined the electro-anatomical view with CCTA, the ablation lesions of the posterior septum and occlusion site of segment 4AV were found to be in close proximity ( and ). Ten days later, the patient was discharged from the hospital on aspirin 100 mg p. o. QD, nicorandil 5 mg p. o. BID, and colchicine 0.25 mg p.o. QD. No arrhythmia episodes were observed after discharge, and the cardiopulmonary exercise test performed 3 months post-discharge revealed no findings of arrhythmia or myocardial ischaemia. Considering the risk of restenosis, coronary angiography was performed 5 months later. Since coronary flow was preserved and no symptoms of angina were observed, a follow-up observation approach was adopted.