A 43 years old female patient was previously submitted to laparoscopic gastric bypass for morbid obesity without co-morbidities. Seven months after the bariatric surgery the patient showed intense episodic epigastric abdominal pain that was aggravated by food ingestion and led to multiple visits to the emergency room.
One month after the onset of pain complaints, the patient was offered hospital admission for further evaluation. Physical examination was unremarkable and routine blood assessment of liver and pancreatic functions were normal. The upper endoscopy and esophageal-gastro-jejunal transit were normal; the abdominal CT and MRI were considered normal despite the presence of a mass in the excluded stomach, as it was ascribed to the anatomical rearrangement after the bypass surgery . During hospital stay the patient did present any evidence of abdominal pain, complaints or need for analgesia; after formal psychiatric evaluation, a major depression was diagnosed and the patient was started on anti-depressants.
Five years after gastric bypass, due to ongoing epigastric pain complaints, abdominal CT and MRI were repeated, with subsequent diagnosis of a 4.5 cm of greater diameter subserosal neoplasm in the antrum .
The patient underwent laparoscopic gastrectomy of the excluded stomach for suspected gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) . Gross examination of the specimen revealed a subserosal polypoid mass in the gastric antrum, which corresponded to a 4.5 cm cystic cavity of greater diameter with creamy yellowish thick content, growing in dependency of the gastric muscular layer . The histology of the mass showed a flap of gastric wall with antral mucosa and a heterotopic pancreatic cist, while in the adipose tissue of the root of the greater omentum six other yellow and lobulated nodules were identified and dissected. All fragments corresponded histologicaly to pancreatic tissue with normal exocrine and endocrine distribution, as displayed by the immunohistochemistry staining for chromogranin A, insulin and glucagon expressing cells, as well as a low proliferation index as revealed by the Ki-67 staining, which are characteristic of the normal pancreatic tissue . After gastrectomy, the patient became asymptomatic and so has remained ever since.