The patient was 50 years old, and she underwent appendectomy + laparoscopic removal of an ovarian cyst + peritonectomy in the external hospital on August 29, 2013, due to “right lower abdominal pain for 3 days”. The postoperative pathology was as follows: (1) mucinous adenocarcinoma of the appendix; (2) luteal haematoma of the ovary; and (3) metastatic mucinous adenocarcinoma nodule of the peritoneum. On September 6, 2013, she was transferred to our hospital. The PET results showed that the intestinal soft tissues in the ileocecal area were slightly parametrized and that metabolism was slightly active . Additional surgery was performed on September 11, 2013, and the surgical method was ileocecal resection + small intestinal mesenteric nodule biopsy + HIPEC . The postoperative pathology results were as follows: (1) (mesenteric lymph nodes) 8 lymph nodes, no cancer metastasis (0/8), and 4 cancer nodes; (2) (mesenteric nodule) under the microscope, there were 5 cancer nodules; (3) (colon tumour resection specimen) local erosion of the colon mucosa, infiltration of mucinous adenocarcinoma in the serous layer, infiltration of a large number of inflammatory cells, with multinucleated giant cell reaction, no tumour thrombus in the vasculature, no cancer infiltration in the nerve bundle, and no cancer involvement in two incisional limbuses; (4) immune group: Ki-67 approximately 10% of cells (+), MH (+), MSH2 (+), MSHB (+), PMS2 (+), CDX2 (+), and HER2 (−) . Regular chemotherapy was used 12 times after surgery, and the adopted regimen was oxaliplatin + 5-FU.
The patient regularly returned to the hospital for a full physical examination after surgery, and the examination revealed tumour recurrence at 26 months after surgery. On November 12, 2015, the results of pelvic MRI showed that multiple cystic lesions were found in the bilateral attachment area . On July 13, 2016, rectal metastasis resection + small intestine partial resection + hysterectomy + bilateral fallopian tube + ovariectomy + HIPEC were performed in open surgery under general anaesthesia. After the operation, regular chemotherapy was performed 8 times, and the adopted regimen was FOLFIRI.
Under general anaesthesia, a laparotomy was performed. During the operation, bilateral attachments were found to be cystic solid tumours, which were fixed to some of the small intestine and rectum, with mucus adhered around and enlarged lymph nodes around the intestine. Abdominal wall mucus was taken intraoperatively for rapid pathology, suggesting that mucus glands were visible in the mucus tissue and the glands with moderate atypia. Rectal metastasis resection + intestinal adhesion lysis + partial intestinal resection + hysterectomy + bilateral fallopian tube + ovariectomy + HIPEC were performed according to the exploration and rapid pathological results. Pipe stapler anastomosis was used in radical operation. The patient recovered smoothly after the operation.
The postoperative pathology was as follows: (rectal specimen) intestinal mucosal infiltration of mucosal adenocarcinoma can be seen at the full thickness of the intestine, with negative margins, and another cancer nodule was present in the mesenteric lymph nodes (0/6); (uterus + double attachments) cervical and bilateral attachments can be found with mucinous adenocarcinoma invasion, and the immunohistochemical results were as follows: CK7 (+), CK20 (+), and CDX2 (+); the results support the origin of the digestive tract . The patient returned to the hospital for regular review after the operation. To date, the follow-up time is 43 months, and no recurrence or metastasis has been found.