A 75-year-old male taxi driver was referred with a diagnosis of severe AS and moderate pericardial effusion. He had a history of ESRD of unknown origin and had been on hemodialysis for 4 years. His primary complaint was dyspnea on effort that had gradually worsened in the previous 3 months. Electrocardiography revealed sinus rhythm, and chest radiography showed cardiomegaly with a cardiothoracic ratio of 68% . Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed pericardial effusion and severe AS with peak and mean pressure gradients of 89 and 48 mmHg, respectively, and an aortic valvular area of 0.86 cm2. A medium volume of pericardial effusion was also observed on computed tomography (CT) . The estimated volume of the pericardial effusion was 700 mL. An aortic valve replacement (AVR) was scheduled. When he was admitted for the AVR 4 weeks after the initial outpatient counseling, he suffered from cough and fever. His white blood cell (WBC) count was 7700/μL and serum C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 9.0 mg/dL. Thus, the operation was postponed. When he was readmitted 2 weeks later, he had general fatigue and persistent inflammation was observed (WBC, 6250/μL; CRP, 6.84 mg/dL). Hepatic dysfunction (aspartate transaminase, 624 U/L; alanine transaminase, 1072 U/L) was newly detected. Electrocardiography revealed paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. The cardiothoracic ratio increased to 71% on chest radiography . Massive pericardial effusion was observed on chest CT . The estimated pericardial effusion volume was 1300 mL. A diagnosis of cardiac tamponade was made. We decided to abort the operation and started the administration of oral loxoprofen at 300 mg/day. Pericardiocentesis was performed, and a total of 1084 mL of bloody pericardial effusion was successfully drained. Examination of the fluid revealed antibody titers to coxsackievirus A4 and B4 elevated 256 times above the normal range. Several tumor marker levels in the pericardial effusion were also elevated (carcinoma antigen-125, 384.9 U/mL; cytokeratin 19 fragment, 43.5 ng/mL); however, cytology of the fluid revealed no malignancy. No abnormal accumulation of fluorodeoxyglucose was detected on positron emission tomography–CT. The inflammation improved immediately. During a 2-month outpatient observation, the inflammation was well-controlled and no recurrence of the pericardial effusion was observed. Thus, the AVR was rescheduled.
The elective operation was performed. The pericardium was thickened and showed almost complete adherence to the heart. Following meticulous dissection of the adhesions, isolation of the right pulmonary veins was performed with a radiofrequency ablator (Isolator Synergy Clamp OSL2; AtriCure Inc., West Chester, OH, USA) before the initiation of cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB). After the establishment of CPB, dissection of the adhesion around the left pulmonary veins was performed and the left pulmonary veins were similarly isolated. Myocardial protection was achieved using intermittent antegrade and retrograde cold blood cardioplegia. The aortic valve was exposed via an aortotomy. A visual inspection revealed calcified cusps and annulus. The cusps were resected, and the calcifications on the annulus were gently removed using an ultrasonic aspirator (Sonopet UST-2001; Stryker Japan Inc., Tokyo, Japan). A 23-mm stentless bioprosthesis (Solo Smart; Sorin Group, Milan, Italy) was implanted with three continuously running 4–0 monofilament polypropylene sutures. Aortic cross-clamp time and CPB time were 72 and 127 min, respectively. The patient tolerated the procedure well and had an uncomplicated postoperative course. Postoperative TTE showed no aortic regurgitation. The effective orifice area (EOA) and indexed EOA of the bioprosthesis were calculated as 1.73 cm2 and 1.08 cm2/m2, respectively, and mean pressure gradient across the prosthetic valve was 10 mmHg. Anti-platelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg/day) was initiated on the first postoperative day. The patients had no adverse events during 1 year and 9 months of follow-up, and his sinus rhythm has been maintained.
Pathological examination of the pericardium showed fibrous pericarditis without active inflammation. There was no malignancy in the immune-stained specimen. We could not detect the specific cause of the pericarditis in the pathological specimen.