A 40-year-old Japanese man who had a non-productive cough for a year presented with difficulty in walking and pollakiuria, both of which had progressed over a 4 month period. Upon visiting a general practitioner, the patient was referred to a neurologist who hospitalized him for further examination and treatment of spastic paraplegia.
A diagnosis of subacute myelitis of unknown etiology was made, and 1000 mg of methylprednisolone was administered for 3 days; however, the symptoms did not improve. Upon further interrogation, the patient disclosed that he had prior sexual encounters with men. Upon examination tests revealed that he was HIV-1 positive, and he was transferred to our hospital. The patient had no recent travel history and was an office worker. Notably, 10 years prior to his admission, he had been treated for herpes zoster with herpetic keratitis on the left eye. About 6 months prior to his admission, he was receiving mianserin hydrochloride, flunitrazepam, and zolpidem tartrate for depression. He was an ex-smoker with a 30 pack-year smoking history who did not drink alcohol or use illicit drugs.
At admission, the patient had a body temperature of 37.4 °C; heart rate of 103 beats/min; respiratory rate of 16 breaths/min; SpO2 of 97% in normal room air; white tongue coating; superficial lymph nodes that were not swollen; and absence of abnormal heart sounds, lung rales, skin, or edema. Examination of the cranial nerves and upper limbs revealed unremarkable results. He manifested spastic gait but no sensory disturbance. The muscle tone had increased, whereas the muscle strength in the lower extremities had weakened, indicating manual muscle testing (MMT) of grade 2. He was unable to rise from the bed on his own. His lower extremity reflexes were brisk bilaterally, and he also had nocturia. Neuropsychological tests conducted by certified neuropsychologists demonstrated normal cognitive function (mini mental state score, 30/30), but revealed attention disorders (trail making test (TMT)-A and -B; 95 and 94 s, respectively) and memory disturbance (Miyake memory test unrelated words score, 5-4-6/10). Eye examination performed by an ophthalmologist revealed mild uveitis in the left eye.
The patient’s blood test results were as follows: leukocytes, 4300/μL (lymphocytes 29.9%); CD4 cell count, 185/μL; HIV-1 viral load, 3.4 × 104 copies/mL; β-d glucan, 35.8 pg/mL (Fungitech G test MK II); Krebs von den Lungen-6, 800 U/mL; and soluble interleukin 2 receptor, 757 U/mL. Serum immunoglobulins were within normal range, and autoantibodies, including rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibodies, and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, were all negative. Vitamin B12 and folate levels were normal, and cryptococcosis antigen test, interferon-gamma release assay, anti-mycobacterium avium complex antibody, toxoplasma IgG test, amoebic antibody, and syphilis screening tests were negative. Hepatitis B virus, hepatitis C virus, and human T cell leukemia virus type I, and cytomegalovirus (CMV), were also negative. The results of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis were as follows: 16 white blood cells/mm3 of which 94% were mononuclear cells; 54 mg/dL glucose; 130 mg/dL protein; and 1.44 IgG index (IgG in CSF, 16.0 mg/dL; albumin in CSF, 24 mg/dL; IgG in serum, 1840 mg/dL; albumin in serum, 3980 mg/dL). CSF viral polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test results were positive for HIV-1 with 4.1 × 105 copies/mL and negative for CMV, herpes simplex virus (HSV), Epstein–Barr virus, varicella zoster virus, John Cunningham virus, BK virus, and Simian vacuolating virus 40. CSF was also negative for cryptococcal antigen testing, and for culture tests for Mycobacterium tuberculosis and bacteria. Cytology of CSF was negative.
The T2-weighed transverse spinal MRI showed focal demyelinating lesions of the spinal cord from the 4th through the 7th vertebral body, and diffuse atrophies of the spinal cord. Axial FLAIR MR images of the brain showed confluent white matter hyperintensity and diffuse brain atrophies, whereas no brain mass lesions were detected. Chest X-ray indicated bilateral reticulonodular opacities predominantly in the lower lung zones. High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the chest showed multiple centrilobular small nodules and branching opacities within all lung lobes, which were associated with small areas of ground-glass opacity (GGO) in the peribronchiolar region and bronchial wall thickening . A mosaic pattern was noted on expiratory HRCT image showing air-trapping in the small airways. Mild mediastinal lymphadenopathies were also observed. A pulmonary function test revealed vital capacity of 4.25 L (103.7%), forced expiratory volume in 1.0 s/forced vital capacity of 78.9%, and decreased diffuse capacity for carbon monoxide of 57.9%. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), and transbronchial lung biopsy (TBLB) were conducted on day 10 of admission. The number of cells in the BAL fluid (BALF) was 5.0 × 105/mL, with a cell differentiation of alveolar macrophages (18.5%), neutrophils (8.4%), lymphocytes (46.6%), and eosinophils (26.5%). The CD4/8 ratio of BALF was 0.05; cultures for bacteria and mycobacteria including tuberculosis were negative; and PCR test results using BALF for HSV, CMV, and Pneumocystis jirovecii were all negative. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the TBLB specimen showed marked lymphoid infiltrate in the alveolar septa . Occasional non-necrotizing granulomas composed of epithelioid histiocytes were found in the lung field . Among lung-infiltrating lymphocytes, T cells were dominant with a relatively higher number of CD8 cells than CD4 cells. Neither dense fibrosis nor microorganisms were found on Elastin van Gieson, Grocott, or Ziehl–Neelsen staining. There were no CMV inclusion bodies or toxoplasma cysts in either the TBLB lung specimen or BALF cytology. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with HIV-associated vacuolar encephalomyelopathy and HIV-associated GLILD.
Treatment with emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide fumarate and dolutegravir and prophylaxis with 1 g of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) per day was initiated on day 9 of admission. An indwelling catheter was inserted due to neurogenic bladder dysfunction. One week after ART introduction, muscle weakness in the lower extremities and bladder disturbance temporarily worsened but improved after 3 weeks. The MMT of the lower extremities recovered from grade 2 to 4, and the patient was able to walk with a walker. The indwelling catheter was removed, and intermittent self-catheterization was started on day 30 of hospitalization. Blood test results 2 months after initiating ART revealed that the CD4 count had increased to 296/μL, HIV viral load decreased to 26 copies/mL, and β-d glucan decreased to a normal level. HIV-RNA was undetectable 4 months after initiating ART. The patient was discharged after 84 days of hospitalization, ambulating with a cane and his dry cough had disappeared. Brain MRI 50 days after initiating ART showed a marked decrease in white matter lesions , and spinal MRI showed no interval change compared with that pre-ART. HRCT of the chest at 2 months after initiating ART showed improvement in interstitial abnormalities of the lung . The neuropsychological test performed after the discharge demonstrated that the patient’s attention disorders had improved (TMT-A and -B were 41 and 60 s, respectively).