A 52-year-old female was admitted to our hospital after suffering from chest pain in the previous weeks. She reported that the pain, which was associated with fatigue and malaise, became worse when breathing and lying down. Her clinical history was positive for asthma and for recurrent fever, arthralgia, and fatigue in the last 2 years. Twelve months before, she was diagnosed with idiopathic pericarditis, and was treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and experienced a rapid remission of symptoms. Since then, she also reported episodes of angioedema treated with glucocorticoids. The patient also had the appearance of painful subcutaneous nodules in the arms and legs, and numbness and tingling sensations in her toes and hands.
Physical examination revealed normal vital parameters with a holosystolic regurgitant murmur at cardiac apex, absence of cutaneous manifestations and neurological signs and her electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a diffuse flattening of T waves in inferior, lateral, and precordial leads . Serum biochemistry showed an inflammatory state with hypereosinophilia (C-reactive protein 101 mg/L, upper limit for a 50-year-old woman 16 mg/L, eosinophils at 2.14 × 109/L upper limit at 0.5 × 109/L), myocardial injury (high-sensible troponin T 193 ng/L, normal <52 ng/L), and an increase in the N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (1153 ng/L, normal in acute setting <300 ng/L). Transthoracic echocardiography showed mild left ventricular dysfunction [left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), 47%], severe mitral regurgitation due to prolapse of the posterior mitral leaflet (confirmed at transoesophageal echocardiography), grade I diastolic dysfunction (E/A 0.8 and E/e′ 9.7), and pericardial effusion of 2.5 mm without haemodynamic impact (Video 1, 2, 3). Given the clinical presentation, elevation of cardiac troponin, and left ventricular dysfunction, we excluded coronary artery disease through angiography. We performed CMR, which showed left ventricular dysfunction (EF 47%) and dilatation (left ventricle end-diastolic volume index 106 mL/m2), the absence of late gadolinium enhancement (LGE), and normal T1 and T2 values; thus, excluding fibrosis, inflammation, and oedema .
Despite a non-conclusive CMR, but given the high clinical suspicion, we proceeded with an endomyocardial biopsy that revealed diffuse infiltration of eosinophils in the connective tissue of the myocardium, with evidence of endocardial thrombi and interstitial fibrosis without myocyte necrosis. These findings established a final diagnosis of eosinophilic perimyocarditis .
A multidisciplinary discussion was undertaken involving cardiology, rheumatology, and infectious diseases specialists to evaluate the causes of the eosinophilia and potential treatments. No history of drugs could explain the hypersensitivity syndrome, and a thorax and abdominal computed tomography scan excluded solid neoplasia (cause of paraneoplastic eosinophilia). A bone marrow biopsy, and a molecular and cytogenetics study excluded a lymphoid and myeloid neoplasm based on mutation analyses of PDGFRA, FGFR1, PDGFRB, and JAK2. A rheumatological work-up [antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA), antinuclear antibodies, extractable nuclear antigens] was also inconclusive. To exclude parasitic infections, a serological work-up was undertaken, which showed a positive ELISA test for Strongyloides stercoralis, which was interpreted as chronic infection based on the clinical presentation. In view of the likely onset of prednisone therapy, a two-dose regime with Ivermectin was administered. Due to the patient’s neurological symptoms, an electromyography was performed, which documented a mononeuritis multiplex, typical of EGPA.
After comprehensive evaluation, the patient received the diagnosis of EM secondary to EGPA based on the presence of four out of six criteria according to the diagnostic criteria defined by the American College of Rheumatology (ACR), namely asthma, eosinophilia, neuropathy, and extravascular eosinophils (in our case in the myocardium) . In addition, pericardial effusion, history of angioedema, subcutaneous nodules, and the absence of ANCA (more frequently associated with cardiac involvement) gave support to this conclusion.
Although the patient was at high risk of poor prognosis (Five-Factor Score or FFS 2 for cardiac involvement and the absence of ear–nose–throat manifestations), we decided to introduce prednisone at 1 mg/kg/day without an additional immunosuppressant for the possible risk of strongyloidiasis hyperinfection. The initiation of therapy led to a normalization of the eosinophilic count within 3 days (0.39 × 109/L), and improvement of symptoms and pericardial effusion (from 2.5 to 1.2 mm) after 14 days. At 9 months follow-up, while tapering the dosage of prednisone and with the initiation of maintenance therapy with methotrexate, the patient did not experience relapse of the disease. Improvement of LVEF (EF, 54%) and the disappearance of pericardial effusion were also observed, while the mitral regurgitation remained unchanged .