A 59-year-old Japanese man was admitted to Kumamoto Saishunso National Hospital for treatment of spontaneous pneumothorax. Now an ex-smoker, he had previously smoked 10–12 cigarettes per day for 25 years. He had not previously experienced a pneumothorax. He did not have fibrous papules on his face or neck. His medical history was unremarkable except for a benign colon polyp at the age of 58. His two daughters and an uncle on the maternal side had episodes of pneumothoraces . His mother had died of cervical cancer, and had had no episode of pneumothorax. Computed tomography showed multiple pulmonary cysts . Renal tumors were not detectable. He underwent pulmonary wedge resection via video assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). Intrathoracic observation revealed transparent cysts 3–30 mm in diameter distributed in the pleura . After VATS, the patient has recovered without complication, and has been receiving periodic medical check-ups. From the family history and radiological and clinical findings, the patient was suspected of BHD.
The resected lung tissue contained several cystic lesions. Microscopically, these cysts were incorporated into peripheral alveolar tissue in one region and interstitial tissue or visceral pleura in another area . Most of the cysts developed in contact with bronchovascular bundles and/or interlobular septa. Flattened pneumocytes lined the inner surface of the cysts, and the lining cells were frequently exfoliated from the wall. The cyst walls showed neither fibrous reaction nor active inflammation, which was distinctively different from the histology of emphysematous bullae. Other cystic lung disorders such as lymphangioleiomyomatosis and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease were also ruled out. The characteristic histological features were consistent with BHD-associated pulmonary cysts [, ].
Genetic counseling was performed, and informed consent was obtained from the patient for FLCN genetic testing and related molecular studies after approval of the Institutional Review Board (IRB) of Yokohama City University. Genetic analysis of FLCN identified a single nucleotide mutation at the 5′-end of intron 9 (c.1062 + 1G > A) . The mutation had been reported as pathogenic in a previous study . In addition, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) was detected in the vicinity of the splice-site mutation (c.1062 + 6C > T). The patient was finally diagnosed with BHD.
Previous studies have identified several sites of exon skipping in FLCN mRNAs in patients with BHD [–]. The mutation in intron 9 (c.1062 + 1G > A) was predicted to cause aberrant FLCN mRNA, but had not been investigated. We therefore analyzed the patient’s FLCN at mRNA and protein levels. Using primers covering exons 8–11 with RT-PCR, two products were clearly detected, i.e., a wild-type band (413 bp) and a larger-sized band between 500 and 600 bp . No candidate band for exon skipping was observed. In Western blotting, predicted size FLCN bands were detected in the BHD lung as well as in a normal lung. No other specific band was detected in the patient’s lung . We further performed sequence analysis of the RT-PCR products. A wild-type band was confirmed to be composed of exons 9–10. On the other hand, the larger-sized band of the mutant allele was found between exons 9–10, extending from the beginning of intron 9 for 130 bp . The size of the mutant mRNA was determined to be 543 bp. The complete size of intron 9 is 1836 bp; however, no larger band was detectable. Moreover, we did not observe other candidates predicting exon skipping. Reanalysis with RT-PCR using different primers designed between exons 8–13 showed again an identical 130 bp intron inserting between exons 9–10 (data not shown). The amino acid sequence predicted by the mutant mRNA caused a frameshift of exon 10, resulting in premature termination after reading 77 amino acids from the 5′-end of intron 9 (Additional file Figure S1).