A 69-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of worsening dysphagia and weight loss in the last year. Twelve years prior the patient had undergone esophago-gastrectomy for caustic ingestion, at another institution. The restoration of the alimentary tract was obtained initially with a retrosternal right colon interposition and esophago-colonic anastomosis since the severity of the caustic injuries did not allow the use of a gastric tube. The postoperative course was characterized by esophago-colonic anastomotic leakage and entero-cutaneous fistula treated with antibiotics and cervical abscess drainage. Thus, the right colonic tract was removed and replaced with left colon transposition through a median sternotomy two months after the first operation. Over the years, the patient presented severe stricture of the colo-jejunal anastomosis, complicated with mediastinal and sternal infection due to a new entero-cutaneous fistula. This was treated surgically with resection of the distal portion of the sternum and a new colo-jejunal anastomosis. Since then, the patient underwent repeated endoscopic dilatation for secondary esophago-colonic anastomotic stricture. A self-expandable endoprosthesis was positioned for worsening dysphagia, however it was removed after 10 days due to severe patient’s discomfort and pain.
Upon presentation at our hospital, the patient complained of severe dysphagia with almost no capability of oral intake. Body weight was 38 kg and body mass index 13.5. A barium swallow test revealed a severe stricture of nearly 90% of the esophageal lumen at the level of the esophago-colonic anastomosis. That completely precluded solid oral intake and severely compromised liquid intake, which resulted in frequent episodes of inhalation . Endoscopy showed a severe and rigid stenosis with about 3–4 mm of residual caliber Considering the failure of endoscopic treatments, surgical esophago-colonic resection and re-anastomosis was planned to restore the upper digestive transit.
Re-median sternotomy was cautiously performed. The anastomotic tract appeared completely encased by fibro-calcific tissue probably due to chronic inflammation and previous surgery . Since it was impossible to separate and free the stenotic tract from the mediastinal fibrocalcific tissue, the uninvolved portion of the transposed left colon was released from mediastinal adherences and isolated. Left colon and cervical esophagus were transected adjacent to the stenosis and after that a residual gap of 15 cm was present between the colonic and the esophageal stump. A cervical incision was performed in order to adequately prepare and release the proximal esophagus and a median laparotomy was performed to achieve adequate colon-jejunal mobilization. Extensive peritoneal adhesions were cautiously divided and mesenteric radial incisions were performed to allow transposition of the colon-jejunal tract as cranially as possible . We took care to avoid excessive de-vascularization, and indocyanine green (ICG) fluorescence was used to assess the proper vascular supply of the cervical esophagus and the transposed intestinal tract. Finally, the esophageal and proximal colonic stumps were re-approximated without tension and the anastomosis was performed using a 3/0 non-absorbable suture. The sternal margins were not re-approximated to avoid compression of the digestive conduit between the extensive fibrocalcific tissue in the upper anterior mediastinum and the sternum. We decided to avoid the use of any prosthetic material for protecting the digestive conduit to reduce the risk of infection, but the anastomosis and the transposed tube were covered and protected using an adequately mobilized flap of both pectoralis major muscles.
The postoperative course was characterized by Klebsiella pneumoniae pulmonary infection successfully treated with antibiotics. No anastomotic complication or chest wall instability were observed. The postoperative barium swallowing test performed on day 10 revealed a proper caliber of the upper digestive tract and absence of strictures and leaks . Therefore, oral intake was started on postoperative day 12 and enteral nutrition was progressively reduced. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 36 and the jejunostomy was removed 20 days later. Six months after surgery nutrition status was significantly improved and no discomfort in oral intake was observed.