A 54-year-old right-handed woman presented to our Emergency Department after experiencing sudden onset left-sided limb weakness. She described a 2-h episode of left upper and lower limb weakness. She had smoked for > 20 years, 20 cigarettes daily. She had no history of drinking alcohol, thrombotic vascular diseases, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, infectious diseases, heart diseases, or family hereditary diseases (e.g., hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia).
On initial physical examination, her vital signs were normal but she had left upper and lower limb weakness (grade 1/5 using the Medical Research Council scale). Her National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score was 8. She was infused a standard dose of intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator. However, the next day’s physical examination yielded six points on the NIHSS, left upper and lower limb weakness (grade 2/5 and 3/5, respectively), and a modified Rankin scale (mRS) of 4 points.
Laboratory findings revealed no obvious abnormalities in immunity, endocrine system, hypercoagulability, and infectiousness. A head computed tomography (CT) screening without contrast found no lesions . A brain diffusion-weighted imaging indicated changes on the right basal ganglia and radiation crown with acute infarction stroke . No obvious abnormality was found in the brain magnetic resonance angiography . The chest x-ray (CXR) showed no abnormal manifestations of cardiopulmonary structure. Following thrombolytic therapy, a repeat head CT demonstrated a lower signal lesion with a mild space-occupying effect in her right basal ganglia and radiation crown. We considered the possibility of cardiogenic embolism. A 24-h ambulatory electrocardiograph and echocardiography revealed no obvious abnormality (eFig.1 in Supplementary Material). However, the patient refused to undergo coronary angiography. The ultrasonography found no signs of thrombosis in the arteries and veins of her upper and lower extremities. A transcranial Doppler ultrasound with bubble study (TCD-b) found significant right-to-left shunts (RLS) (eFig.2 in Supplementary Material). According to the results of contrast transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) with Valsalva maneuver, PFO and ASD were excluded (eFig.3 in Supplementary Material). Contrast transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed RLS graded as 3 (eFig.3 in Supplementary Material). A pulmonary CT angiogram (CTA) demonstrated a 1.5 × 0.8 cm PAVM in the basal segment of the right lower lobe . We thus considered the patient had CS caused by PE due to PAVM.
Fifteen days after intravenous thrombolysis, transcatheter device occlusion of PAVM was successfully undertaken with three coils (1 piece of 10.0 mm, 2 pieces of 8.0 mm) after 2.0% lidocaine local infiltration anesthesia (see video 1 in the online/HTML version of the manuscript). Subsequently, the patient underwent a comprehensive rehabilitation program for 2 h each day. She was discharged from the hospital on day 29 with significant improvement of her neurological deficits. At 15-month follow-up, there were no catheter-related complications or recurrent stroke, and her scores on the NIHSS and mRS were both 0. The process of the diagnosis and treatment is illustrated in eFig.4 in Supplementary Material.
Informed consent and consent for publication were provided by the patient. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of Guangdong Provincial Hospital of Chinese Medicine (no. AF/04–07.0/10.0) and was performed in accordance with the Helsinki Declaration of 1964 and its later amendments.