A 57-year-old female patient with no significant past medical history, presented complaining of ascending weakness of four limbs, followed by speech and swallowing disorders for 15 days before admission. On examination, facial diplegia, impaired swallowing reflexes, and paralytic dysarthria were noted. Motor examination revealed symmetric flaccid quadriplegia with diffuse areflexia. The patient was apyretic and eupneic. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis revealed hyperproteinorachia (0.67 g/l), normal glycorachia (2.8 mmol/l) and normal cytological findings (2 cells/mm3). A Nerve conduction study showed slowing of conduction velocity, and prolonged distal and F-wave latencies on the median and peroneal nerves bilaterally. Diagnosis of the acute inflammatory demyelinating form of GBS was retained. The patient was first treated with intravenous immunoglobulins (0.4 g/Kg weight) for 5 days. No improvement of the neurological symptoms was noted.
Twenty days after the onset of symptom, the patient developed sudden simultaneous headaches and bilateral blindness. On ophthalmic examination, visual acuity was limited to the perception of light bilaterally. The patient's pupil responses were normal with no afferent defect, which is, consistent with a cortical origin of symptoms. Careful anamnesis revealed that the patient exhibited mouth dryness and arthralgia of the large joints eight months before the current episode which was neglected by the patient. The idiopathic origin of GBS was therefore reconsidered.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated bilateral T2-weighted hyperintense signal lesions located in the cortical and subcortical regions of the temporal and occipital lobes (a,b). Sequence for MR angiography revealed segmental narrowing and irregularities of the cerebral arteries, suggestive highly CNS vasculitis (c).
Biological investigations demonstrated lymphopenia (count: 0.9 × 109/l). The C-reactive protein level was 15 mg/l. Albuminemia was in normal range (40.52 g/l). The anti-nuclear antibody titer was 1/1600 and antibodies against DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) were absent. The extractable nuclear panel was strongly positive for anti-SSA antibodies (RO-52, 60) and anti-SSB (La). Screening for antiβ2 glycoprotein and anticardiolipin antibodies (IgG,IgM) was negative. Hypocomplementemia (of C4) was detected. Type II cryoglobulins were identified. The biopsy of the minor salivary glands (performed after initiating corticotherapy) did not reveal abnormalities. The Salivary gland scintigraphy revealed decreased function of the right parotid gland and the bilateral submandibular glands. Schirmer's test was positive (<5 mm min in the two eyes). Based on the American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism classification criteria for pSS .
Both GBS and CNS vasculitis (with both cerebral parenchymal and large-vessel involvement) were considered to be secondary to pSS. pSS disease activity was assessed on the basis of the EULAR Sjögren's Syndrome Disease Activity Index (ESSDAI). The patient activity score was 12 (with high CNS domain score of 3).
Plasma exchange was initiated forty-five days after the first symptom. However, the patient presented breathing difficulties, forcing us to stop this treatment. Intravenous methylprednisolone (1 gr/day for 5 days) followed by oral corticosteroids (1 mg/kg/day) were therefore initiated. A gradual improvement in muscle strength and swallowing difficulties was noted. A check-up brain MRI, performed 22 days after the onset of corticotherapy, demonstrated repermeabilization of the medium and posterior cerebral arteries, despite the persistence of some arterial stenosis especially in the posterior circulation.
Moreover, as a complication of the immunosuppressive therapy, the patient developed a corneal abscess requiring specific antibiotic treatment and a rapid steroid tapering dose. A check-up ophthalmic examination revealed visual acuity limited to counting fingers in both eyes.
The patient was discharged on a treatment dose of 20 mg of prednisolone. A monthly intravenous cyclophosphamide cycle regimen was then initiated and it was maintained for 6 months. Immunosuppressive therapy was continued with 20 mg oral daily doses of azathioprine.
One year later, the patient had an important recovery of motor function. She was able to walk independently., severe visual loss persisted. A check-up electromyography was carried showing improvement of the latency responses and the conduction velocity .