The patient is a 13-years-old female from the Rif rural region of Morocco with a history of a non-consanguineous marriage and without any drug or disease history; she was hypotrophic and was exclusively breastfed for 6 months. Food diversification started after that with boiled vegetables, the rest was introduced starting at the age of 2 with a daily intake adapted to her age. The patient has never been operated on and has not received radiotherapy before; she also has no family history of digestive or tumor diseases. She was initially admitted to another hospital, at the age of 6 months, for the management of a staturo-ponderal delay associated with chronic diarrhea that goes back 2 months prior to her admission. The appearance was watery, sometimes fatty; the symptoms worsened by the appearance of an abdominal distension following moderate ascites. A CT scan as well as a digestive fibroscopy were done, the diagnosis of celiac disease was retained. The patient was put on a gluten-free diet, stopped after 18 months because of non-improvement and persistent diarrhea. Other clinical symptoms appeared; particularly, lymphoedema of the left upper limb at the age of one year causing the lower limb deformation and a staturo-weight delay to become more pronounced. After 3 years, the patient was lost to follow-up due to financial issues.
At the age of 11 years, she was admitted for the first time to our department with oedemato-ascitic syndrome made of very severe abdominal distention, fluid pleural effusion and white soft pitting edema of the lower limbs. The clinical examination found: an asthenic girl with no facial dysmorphism or mental retardation, an estimated staturo-ponderal delay of -4 standard deviation (SD) for height and −3 SD for weight, an ascites of high abundance with an umbilical perimeter at 100 cm. Lymphedema of the left upper limb with a sausage finger aspect and a dorsal face of the hand rounded into a watch glass was found as well. The patient was apyretic and the urinary strip was negative; the osteoarticular examination found a that dates back to the age of 3 years, with an internal bimalleolar distance of 35 cm as well as a small difference in the length of the two lower limbs. Recurrent warts type molluscum contagiosum in the labial and perioral region and the fingers of both hands have also been found .
The diagnosis of exudative enteropathy such as Waldmann's disease was suspected in the presence of this clinical picture and further investigations were carried out. The malabsorption tests showed microcytic hypochromic anemia with a hemoglobin level of 8.5 g/L, VGM 70 fL TCMH 22 pg, low ferritinemia at 3.02 mg/L, severe hypoalbuminemia at 12g/L, total protein level at 35 g/L, hypocalcemia at 58 mg/L, phosphoremia at 33 mg/L, PTH 1–84 increased to 140.7 pg/ml, vitamin D at 4.8 ng/ml, low cholesterol at 1,05 g/L with HDL at 0.21 g/L and LDL at 0.67 g/L, hypo-gamma-globulinemia at 4.8 g/L, IgG decreased to 2.789 g/L. The rest of the laboratory work-up was unremarkable. As a part of the etiological investigations, a serum alpha 1 antitrypsin level of 1.32g/L was found, a faecal alpha 1 antitrypsin level of 0.51g/L with a significantly increased faecal clearance at 224 ml/24H, which is 10 times the normal.
The abdominal ultrasound showed a peritoneal effusion of great abundance with a thickening of the small bowel's wall. A thoraco-abdomino-pelvic CT scan showed, in addition to abundant ascites, an inflammatory digestive thickening associated with significant sclerolipomatosis without visible lymphatic obstruction, which is part of inflammatory digestive pathology. The ascites fluid analysis showed milky-looking chylous ascites rich in triglycerides. Fibroscopy revealed congestive gastritis without vilositary atrophy, the histopathological study of duodenal biopsies was normal. A video-capsule endoscopy was proposed to the family but due to its shortage in Moroccan hospitals as well as the financial situation of the family, it has not been completed. Other biological and radiological tests were used to rule out differential diagnoses, including trans-thoracic ultrasound with no evidence of heart failure, pericarditis or cardiac vein thrombosis, which showed a normal tuberculosis assessment, normal stool copro-parasitology and negative HIV and CMV serologies. An x-ray of the lower limbs showed signs of osteomalacia ; an additional teleradiography was requested to study the lower limb deformation. Hence, the diagnosis of the primary intestinal lymphangiectasia (Waldmann's disease) was retained before all clinical and para-clinical signs, and after the elimination of differential diagnoses. The management was difficult at the beginning because of the unavailability of the diet products in Morocco, and the high cost of octreotide for a family who lives in a low-income country. A lot of foreign associations were contacted to help the family provide the treatment from abroad. The patient was initially put on a high-protein and a lifelong low-fat diet with the supplementation of medium-chain triglycerides, with supplements of calcium, iron, vitamin D and A, and some albumin infusions during hypoalbuminemia episodes with a significant oedematous syndrome. However, the evolution after 7 months of follow-up was deemed to be a failure; hence, monthly intramuscular injection of slow-release octreotide 20 mg was added, which received good returns with clinical and biological improvement (, ).
An electrocardiography with monitoring of blood pressure and heart rate was performed before and after the introduction of octreotide; the patient didn't show any adverse events. After 2 years of follow-up, the patient responded and tolerated the treatment well; but with intermittent accessibility to the slow-release octreotide, because it is not available in our country. Then, during the subsequent follow-up consultations, she did not have pain and subsequent abdominal ultrasounds were proved to be normal. Treatment of lymphedema was symptomatic with multilayer compression bandages. The warts were treated with topical potassium hydroxide aqueous solution and the was treated surgically. The surgical management in our patient was performed by a senior pediatric surgeon with assistance of final year residents.