A 52-year-old Chinese female was admitted to the emergency department for 5-h history of acute onset of right lower quadrant abdominal pain accompanied with nausea and vomiting. The pain was crampy, increasing in intensity, and radiated to the right flank and right lumbar region. No aggravating or relieving factors were noted. She had no headache, palpitation, sweats and hypertension. There was no significant relevant past medical history. The patient had received an open appendectomy at the age of 25 and a left ovarian cystectomy at the age of 27. She also had right salpingectomy due to an ectopic pregnancy at the age of 38. Physical examination of the abdomen showed mild tenderness in the right lower quadrant. The following laboratory data were observed: a hemoglobin concentration of 10.9 g/dL, leukocytes 14.49 × 109/L, neutrophilic granulocyte 87.10%. Abdominal ultrasound showed a large abdominal mass with a clear boarder. Blood flow could be found inside it. The patient suffered from an intolerable acute abdomen. The superior mesenteric artery embolus and abdominal aortic aneurysm were also suspected. Computed Tomography Angiography (CTA) was further done to identify nature of the retroperitoneal tumour and make differential diagnosis.
According to the CTA of superior mesenteric artery, a large retroperitoneal mass measured 9.0 × 7.3 cm was located posterior to the 3rd part of duodenum and below the head of the pancreas. The retroperitoneal mass had a slightly increased but non-uniform density shadow at venous phase. The density of retroperitoneal mass showed no enhancement appearances at arterial phase . The abdominal aorta sent out small branches to supply the tumor (arrow) . There was plentiful effusion around the tumor .
The patient was admitted to our department. From these physical and radiographic findings, we diagnosed a retroperitoneal tumour with haemorrhage. The pain was crampy and intolerable. Emergency surgery was initially recommended after admission. But the patient wished to avoid operation and chose conservative treatment. She received treatment of intravenous fluids, hemagglutinase, and somatostatin. Antibiotic was also used to prevent abdominal infection. It was quite risky that the patient initially refused to follow our advice. We continuously assessed the pain degree of patient and measured haemoglobin concentration. Measurement of tumour markers, including AFP, CA 19-9, and CEA, were also finished. The levels of tumour markers were within the normal range. On the 3rd day of admission, her abdominal pain was slightly relieved, but hemoglobin decreased from 10.9 to 9.4 g/dL in 12 h, suggesting the presence of active bleeding in the abdominal cavity. Hence, she was persuaded to have immediate surgical intervention and underwent an exploratory laparotomy.
Upon the surgical exploration: A scarlet red retroperitoneal tumour was found between the colonic hepatic flexure, the 2nd to 3rd parts of the duodenum, pancreatic uncinate process and the abdominal aorta. The tumour had a complete capsule and dense peritumoural adhesions to the surrounding blood vessels . The feeding vessels of the tumour were carefully stripped and ligated to stop bleeding. Manipulation of the tumour was light to avoid rupture of the capsule. We completely removed the tumour . We also performed a regional lymph node dissection for preventing recurrence of malignant tumour. The tumour body measured 12.5*8*3 cm. Haemorrhage was observed inside the tumour body, and old blood clots could be seen. . The operative time was about 2 h. An estimated blood loss of 600 ml was noted intraoperatively. Haemorrhage was successfully stopped. After achieving haemostasis, we placed a multi-channel intraperitoneal drainage tube in a suitable position in the excised area. The patient didn't have any hypertension or tachycardia crisis during the surgery.
Histopathological assessment of the retroperitoneal tumour demonstrated a scarlet red tumour with a complete capsule containing dark blood clots. Microscopically, the tumour cells were nest-like, arranged in a cribriform pattern, surrounded by a rich network of delicate arborizing vasculature, and showed a characteristic ‘Zellballen’ architecture in haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining . The cells had different sizes, and their nuclei were deeply stained. Although the tumour adhered closely to blood vessels, no actual vascular invasion was seen . There was necrosis of the tumour body around the bleeding area . There was no metastasis in regional lymph nodes.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) revealed the following profile: chromogranin A (CgA) (+), synaptophysin (Syn) (+), DOG1 (−), S-100 (−), CD56 (+), AE1/AE3 (−), CD117 (+), and Ki -67 (10%, +) .
Patient received antibiotic treatment for 5 days. Considering that intraoperative blood loss and high bleeding risk after surgery, she received 4 units (200 ml each) of PRBC transfusions and 640 ml fresh frozen plasma on the first postoperative day. On postoperative day 10, she was discharged, tolerating a regular diet with no further complains. At the 1-year follow-up visit, serum metanephrines of the patient were in normal range and no tumour recurrence was observed by Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography.