An 18-month-old boy of Chinese ethnicity, with a previous urinary tract infection at 4 months of age and complex febrile seizure at 9 months of age, was admitted with a 4-day duration of fever, vomiting and cough, with daily temperatures of ≥38 °C. Other than nasal congestion, his physical examination on presentation was unremarkable. Vital signs recorded were within normal limits for his age. On admission, C-reactive protein (CRP) was significantly elevated at 294.4 mg/L and total white blood cell count (TW) was slightly elevated at 14.92 × 109/L. Urinalysis done showed pyuria and he was started on intravenous ceftriaxone at the dose of 50 mg/kg/day. Urine cultures grew pan-sensitive Escherichia coli, and aerobic blood culture returned sterile. Despite appropriate antibiotic coverage, he continued to have persistent fever, with the daily temperature reaching up to the highest of 41.3 °C on day 5 of fever. The dose of ceftriaxone was optimized to 100 mg/kg/day on day 7 of fever, and a referral to the Paediatric Nephrologist was made. Ultrasound of the kidney, bladder and ureters (US KUB) performed on day 6 of fever showed left focal pyelonephritis, with subsequent repeat US KUB on day 11 showing hypoechoic foci within the lateral aspect of his left kidney indicative of small abscesses (largest measuring 0.8 cm). There was no hydronephrosis or hydroureter noted. Subsequent repeat urine cultures performed on day 9 and 16 of fever returned sterile. Nasopharyngeal aspirate performed on day 7 of fever returned positive for Influenza A and Rhinovirus / Enterovirus infection, for which he was treated symptomatically.
He developed a sudden onset of right scrotal swelling on day 8 of fever. Ultrasound scrotum performed showed a large right hydrocele and a small right testis appendix, with no focal abnormalities noted in left testis or the epididymis. The right hydrocele extended into the inguinal region, in-keeping with a patent processus vaginalis. No whirlpool sign was seen bilaterally. The Paediatric Surgeon opted to manage the child conservatively, as there was no clinical or sonographic evidence of epididymal torsion or infection.
He also developed a generalized maculopapular rash over the trunk and bilateral lower limbs on day 8 of fever. He did not have other new physical examination findings. In view of prolonged fever despite appropriate antibiotics, new onset of rashes and testicular hydrocele, laboratory studies were sent off on day 9 of fever, with Tables and showing the timeline of blood investigations and microbiological investigations performed.
Based on the American Heart Association (AHA) 2017 scientific statement of the diagnosis and management of KD , he had the following laboratory readings supportive of Kawasaki Disease – normocytic normochromic anemia, hypoalbuminemia, raised CRP and Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR). However, he only demonstrated two clinical features of classic KD: prolonged fever and rash.
The child was treated as for atypical Kawasaki Disease, and one dose of intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) 2 g/kg was given on day 9 of fever, and oral aspirin 5 mg/kg/day was started on the same day. The fever resolved within 36 h of completion of the IVIg infusion.
Diagnosis of KD was subsequently confirmed by echocardiography performed on day 14 of illness, with the following results: top normal left coronary artery; mildly dilated left anterior descending artery (LAD); normal right coronary artery (RCA) proximally with no dilatation or aneurysm visualized; left main coronary artery (2.63/2.70/2.76 mm, 2.70 mm (mean), Z-score: + 2.3 (Kobayashi), + 4/5 (Tan-KKH)); LAD (2.36/3.28/2.41 mm, 2.68 mm (mean), Z-score: + 2.9 (Kobayashi)); RCA (2.34/2.12/2.25 mm, 2.24 mm (mean), Z-score: + 1/9 (Kobayashi), + 3/7 (Tan-KKH)) [, ].
At 6 weeks post-discharge, US KUB showed resolution of suppurative changes after a total of 6 weeks of antibiotics, and repeat US scrotum showed complete resolution of right hydrocele with normal sized testes bilaterally. Repeat 2DE in 3 months outpatient showed resolution of dilatation of left anterior descending artery noted previously. Aspirin was stopped in outpatient cardiology clinic on review of 2DE in view of good improvement. Micturating cystourethrography done in 4 months post discharge showed mild dilatation of ureter and pelvicalyceal system, with mild blunting of the fornices, indicative of grade III left vesico-ureteric reflux. Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) scan done in 7 months post discharge showed focal photopenia in upper pole of left kidney suggestive of cortical scarring, with differential renal function of 38.53% on left and 61.47% on the right. The child is continued on cefalexin uroprophylaxis dose of 17 mg/kg once nightly.