A 19-year-old boy was surgically treated for severe right thoracic scoliosis associated with a Chiari Type 1 malformation and a C6 to T7 syringomyelia. The Chiari Type 1 malformation was first operated on at the age of 14; the result was considered satisfactory, and the syringomyelia was considered stable between ages 14 and 19. Because Cobb angle increased to 95° , the patient received surgical treatment for a T2 to L1 correction, with fusion by posterior approach. The patient underwent posterior spinal fusion and instrumentation, using an all-pedicle screw construct except for the two proximal levels, anchored by hooks. The construct was made using the CD HORIZON® SOLERA™ Spinal System (Medtronic, 710 Medtronic Parkway, Minneapolis, MN 55432-5604, USA) and two 5.5-mm diameter cobalt-chromium rods. The patient was operated on by posterior approach on a Hall frame and with permanent sensory-evoked potential (SEP) monitoring. SEP monitoring protocol consisted in a continuous SEP monitoring with bilateral posterior tibial nerve stimulation and cortical and cervical detection. SEP amplitudes and latencies were recorded in a continuous fashion from patient positioning under general anaesthesia to the end of the surgical procedure.
The surgery used a freehand technique of pedicle screw insertion, with anteroposterior and lateral postoperative X-ray control. During the surgery, no SEP modifications were noted during pedicle screw placement. However, after insertion of the second rod and scoliosis correction by posterior translation technique, SEP responses decreased considerably. SEP amplitudes decreased 90 %, while latencies increased significantly . A subsequent wake-up test showed a complete absence of motor function in both lower limbs. The decision was made to decrease the intensity of correction by contouring the rods . This maneuver resulted in improved, but still decreased by 75 % SEP amplitudes and normal (i.e. similar to baseline values) latencies responses, and the patient exhibited no motor or sensory deficit after the procedure. Intraoperative fluoroscopy imaging did not demonstrate any concern for hardware. Daily clinical examinations performed during the first postoperative week showed no motor or sensory deficit. No bowel dysfunction or incontinence were noted during the postoperative course. The details of SEP monitoring values are reported in Table .
Six months after the initial surgery, the patient was referred to our institution after 3 weeks of gait disturbances and repeated falls. Clinical examination showed weakness (4/5) of the right psoas, the right flexor digitorum profundus, and the right triceps. There was a right Babinsky sign with increased deep tendon reflexes in both lower limbs. Romberg sign was positive. The patient also presented severe dysuria with bladder distention requiring urinary catheter. There was no recent history trauma, no fever and no remaining biological sign of infection. Axial, sagittal and coronal planes of a thoracolumbar CT scan confirmed the gross misplacement of the pedicle screw, which crossed the center of the vertebral canal . Spinal MRI was performed to check the C6 to T7 syringomyelia, which showed an increased diameter of the syrinx adjacent to a left T5 pedicle screw crossing the spinal canal . SEP monitoring showed altered responses, with decreased amplitudes and increased latencies .
Revision surgery was performed to remove the misplaced screw. No spinal canal exploration was performed at this time. No cerebrospinal fluid effusion was noted during screw removal, and no meningocele occurred postoperatively. During the first 3 months after screw removal, repeated clinical examinations showed progressive recovery of the neurological deficits. Gait and bladder functions were normal 6 months after screw removal, and clinical signs of spasticity disappeared. The patient reported no motor or sensory deficit at final follow-up, 18 months after screw removal. SEP explorations performed at final follow-up showed similar responses to those performed before the initial surgery for scoliosis correction , and final MRI confirmed the stability of syringomyelia. No loss of correction was noted after the revision procedure. Final follow-up radiographs showed a partially corrected deformity with good global spinal balance and satisfactory functional results. The patient gave his consent for the use of his personal and medical informations for the publication of this case report and any accompanying images.