A 55-year-old male presented with refractory high intraocular pressure (IOP) after hitting his left eyeball on a table corner in an accidental fall 3 days prior. The best corrected visual acuity was hand movement at 15 cm and IOP was 54 mmHg in the left eye. Slit Lamp examination showed an edematous cornea, diffuse black-brown discoloration of the episclera, a deep anterior chamber filled with numerous cells and pigment particles, complete loss of the iris except one strand of tissue in front of the capsular bag, and an intraocular lens (IOL) in situ without phacodonesis. Fundoscopic exam showed trace vitreous cells, attached retina with intact vasculature, and a pale disc. Tracing his history showed advanced glaucoma (Humphrey automated perimetry mean deviation, − 29.24 dB OD, − 21.99 dB OS), bilateral mitomycin C-augmented trabeculectomy 29 years prior, and CCPI in the left eye 8 years previous. The IOP had been controlled while on four topical glaucoma medications before this accident. An elevation in the superior-nasal aspect of the anterior sclera was noted, which showed protruding uvea tissue with overlying conjunctiva adjacent to the site of the trabeculectomy .
After weeks of topical steroid and antibiotic medications, intensive glaucoma treatment including oral acetazolamide, several times of intravenous infusions of mannitol and anterior chamber paracentesis, the anterior segment gradually cleared up and the IOP reduced to 28 mmHg. Gonioscopy revealed a missing iris over 360 degrees of the angle with clear view of the ciliary body . Further treatment options including repeat trabeculectomy, glaucoma drainage device, endoscopic cyclophotocoagulation and transscleral cyclophotocoagulation were suggested for better IOP control. Due to poor optic nerve reserve, limited visual potential, and convenience of post-operative care, the patient chose to receive transscleral cyclophotocoagulation 5 months after trauma. In the latest follow up, which is 1 month after laser treatment, vision of the left eye improved to finger counting in front of 10 cm and IOP was 26 mmHg while under four topical antiglaucoma medications. Fundus exam revealed clear vitreous, attached retain and a pallor disc. However, the patient then lost to follow up.