A 49-year-old man was admitted to the First People’s Hospital of Neijiang, Neijiang City, China, on May 15th, 2022, due to headache, dizziness, and recurrent fever up to 39℃. A detailed history, clinical examination, and investigations were performed upon admission to our institution. The patient accidentally sustained a fall injury at home two weeks ago. He was admitted to the local hospital and diagnosed with L3 vertebral compression fracture. He underwent lumbar surgery (pedicle screw fixation via a posterior approach) on May 5th, 2022, after which he immediately exhibited symptoms of headache, dizziness, and fever. No blood products were used intraoperatively. Four days before admission to our institution, however, the fever persisted with peaks reaching up to 39℃. Pain and discomfort developed in the lower limb despite receiving anti-infective therapy at the local hospital (details are not available). The patient was then sent to our hospital on May 15th due to his deteriorating condition.
The patient exhibited the following positive signs and symptoms: nuchal rigidity, Kernig sign, Brudzinski sign, Hoffmann sign, and spasticity in the muscles of the upper and lower limbs. The surgical incision healed well without any fluid exudation or local tenderness. Secretions had almost ceased in the drain tubes on both sides.
Laboratory tests revealed an increased white blood cell (WBC) count of 25.32 × 109/L (normal range 3.5–9.5 × 109/L) and an elevated neutrophil ratio (NEUT%) of 93.00% (normal range 40-75%). The erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 34 mm/h (normal range 0–15 mm/h). The C-reactive protein (CRP) level was 56.0 mg/L (normal range 0–8 mg/L) and the procalcitonin (PCT) level was 0.14 ng/mL (normal range 0-0.046 ng/mL).
A provisional diagnosis of “meningitis” was made based on the findings mentioned above. Vancomycin (1 g i.v. q12h) and cefotaxime (2 g i.v. q8h) were initiated in anti-meningitic doses to cover the most common bacteria. Blood and CSF samples for bacterial culture should be collected before antibiotic use. Since the patient and his family members initially refused a lumbar puncture, the CSF sample was finally obtained for examination and culture on May 17th (day 3) after detailing the necessity and potential risks involved.
CSF examination showed an elevated protein concentration of 1814.00 mg/L (normal range 150–450 mg/L), a decreased chloride ion level of 117.9 mmol/L (normal range 120.0-130.0 mmol/L), and an increased WBC of 698/µL (20% mononuclear, 80% polymorphonuclear) on May 17th. Generally, normal CSF is cell-free. The normal range of WBC in CSF collected by lumbar puncture is no more than 5/uL, which is composed of lymphocytes and monocytes only in normal circumstances. The patient’s clinical condition improved, including a reduction in headache, normalization of body temperature , and a decrease in WBC, NEUT%, and CRP on day 4 .
However, the recurrent fever persisted, with peaks reaching up to 39.5℃ from day 6 . CSF culture yielded Gram-negative bacteria on May 23 (day 9) after 6 days of incubation, while the blood culture remained negative. The isolates were automatically identified using the VITEK 2 Compact system with its GN card (BioMérieux, France). They were initially identified as R. insidiosa (probability of 98.0%) and later confirmed to be the same pathogen (probability of 99.9%) using MALDI-TOF MS (VITEK MS, BioMérieux, France). R. insidiosa was not included in the susceptibility testing database of the VITEK 2 Compact system. Furthermore, there were no standardized antibiotic susceptibility testing or breakpoints available for this pathogen. Therefore, no antibiotic susceptibility results were provided to doctors in the hospital information system. Clinical pharmacists were once again invited to assist with adjusting the medication regimen. As there was a lack of antibiotic susceptibility testing results (which, as mentioned above, were not available in our microbiology laboratory, and this will be explained further in the discussion section), we conducted a literature review on infections caused by R. insidiosa to make a treatment decision. The patient was treated with cefepime (2 g i.v. q8h ) and levofloxacin (500 mg i.v. qd ) for 21 days. As the patient’s clinical condition improved, levofloxacin was removed from the subsequent medication regimen considering the potential musculoskeletal adverse drug reaction (ADR) associated with fluoroquinolones. Cefepime (2 g i.v. q8h ) was continued for another 7 days until discharge. The patient’s fever resolved with normal WBC, CRP, and PCT levels . He was discharged from the hospital on day 38 with negative Kernig sign, Brudzinski sign, Hoffmann sign, and no other complaints. No adverse reactions occurred during the treatment. No recurrence of infection was found within one year of telephone follow-up till we submitted this manuscript.
In this case, possible differential diagnoses of viral meningitis and vertebral osteomyelitis were ruled out. Digital radiography (DR) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spinal column showed no evidence of osteomyelitis or acute infection. The increased WBC (698 × 106/L, 20% mononuclear, 80% polymorphonuclear) in CSF is more likely to be seen in cases of bacterial meningitis. This is supported by the positive CSF bacteria cultures.