An 80-year-old Japanese female noted swelling of the right side of the submandibular region and underwent a detailed examination at a local hospital. Based on ultrasonography, pleomorphic adenoma was strongly suspected. The patient was referred to our department for further detailed examination and treatment.
On initial presentation, an elastic soft and movable mass measuring 40 × 30 mm, with clear borders and healthy skin color, was palpable in the right submandibular area . No spontaneous pain or pain on pressure was present. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a round mass with relatively clear borders, measuring 29 × 24 × 40 mm, with the anterior edge bordering the right submandibular gland, whereas the posterior deep portion was compressing the right internal jugular vein. The margins were smooth. The mass exhibited a high-signal intensity area that was partially accompanied by a low-intensity signal area in the interior. There was no infiltration into the surrounding tissue, and no other significant lymph node enlargement was observed. Based on these findings, salivary gland tumor was strongly suspected .
The patient was hospitalized in our department. Two days later, tumor resection was carried out under general anesthesia. The tumor was round, encapsulated, and dark purple in color, and was relatively easily separated from the surrounding tissue. As the tumor was not contiguous with the submandibular gland, part of it was resected, and intraoperative frozen-section biopsy was performed. A large amount of blackish-brown, serous fluid was released from the tumor on resection. Inside the tumor, pale-yellow, papillary structures with a granular appearance were observed projecting toward the interior of the cavity . Intraoperative biopsy revealed cells that were suspected to have metastasized from the thyroid carcinoma. Based on this diagnosis, the tumor was separated from the surrounding tissue and excised intact. Two lymph nodes that were 12 × 8 mm and 10 × 6 mm in size adjacent to the underside of the tumor were also excised. No adhesion was observed between the tumor and surrounding tissue, and their separation was simple. The wound was washed with saline, and primary closure was performed to complete the surgery.
The final histological diagnosis demonstrated lymph node metastasis of PTC, with a positive reaction for thyroglobulin (Tg) on immunostaining. No metastasis was observed to the other excised lymph nodes. Based on the pathological diagnosis, postoperative examinations were performed, including neck ultrasonography, positron emission tomography (PET)-computed tomography (CT), blood tests [thyroid gland-related serological tumor markers such as Tg, thyroid-stimulating hormone, free triiodothyronine (T3), thyroxine (T4), and carcinoembryonic antigen], upper gastrointestinal digestive tract endoscopy, and plain chest radiography. The serum Tg level was high at 97.2 ng/ml, but no other abnormalities were observed.
The thyroid gland showed no abnormalities on CT and ultrasonography . After consultation with the Department of Endocrine Surgery at Tokyo Women’s Medical University Hospital, ultrasonography-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy was performed twice in 2 months; however, carcinomatous components were not detected in the thyroid gland. In general, cases of cervical lymph node metastasis of occult thyroid carcinoma require total thyroidectomy. In this case, however, considering the slow progression of PTC, the patient’s age, past history of chronic cardiac insufficiency, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and asthma, and overall physical condition, doctors at Endocrine Surgery could not get informed consent of the patient; therefore, close observational follow-up was selected. As of 8 years after surgery, no recurrence of the neck tumor or change in the size of the thyroid carcinoma has been observed, and the patient is progressing favorably.
Tumor cells had basophilic, polygonal, or cubic cytoplasm, and papillary proliferation. In the cytoplasm, or between cells, uniform structures considered to be slightly basophilic mucin were observed . Furthermore, separate from this area, one or two layers of similar tumor cells encompassed the surrounding area and proliferated in a follicular shape . Follicles were filled with uniform basophilic structures. Surrounding tumor cells often proliferated into the follicles. There was little mitosis or atypia in the tumor cells. Tumor cell nuclei were positive for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), and Tg was positive in the cytoplasm of tumor cells and intrafollicles . These findings suggested PTC. No metastasis was noted in the other lymph nodes.