In December 2017, a 74-year-old male with arterial hypertension and a cured prostate carcinoma planning his travel to Brazil was vaccinated against YF (Stamaril, Sanofi Pasteur, Val de Reuil, France). He had no history during a previous stay in YF endemic areas. Five days post- vaccination the patient experienced nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and general malaise. Two days later he presented to a hospital with the beginnings of multiorgan failure and was immediately transferred to the University Hospital Heidelberg. On admission at the ICU, the patient showed signs of septic shock, including disseminated intravascular coagulation, hepatitis, acute renal failure, and cardiorespiratory insufficiency. At the initial presentation, the patient showed signs of severe septic shock, including hypotonia, lactate acidosis (70 mg/dL), tachypnea, thrombopenia (35/nL), septic encephalopathy, acute renal failure (serum creatinine 4.77 mg/dL, GFR according to MDRD 11.8 mL/min/1.73 qm), and elevated inflammation markers CRP and PCT . According to the criteria defined by the Brighton Collaboration Viscerotropic Working Group, six of seven major criteria for the definition of viscerotropic disease applied, including hepatic, renal, musculoskeletal, respiratory, platelet disorder, and hypotension, confirming level 1 of diagnostic certainty for viscerotropic disease . Septic shock was treated according to international standards. Respiratory insufficiency was observed with progressive systemic hypoxemia and clinical exhaustion, which resulted after a short period of high-flow oxygen therapy in intubation and mechanical ventilation. Due to severe acute respiratory distress syndrome and the inability of reaching lung-protective ventilation (default setting of 6 mL/kg PBW, Horowitz index < 100 mmHg), ventilation was started in a prone position, and nitric oxide ventilation was administered for four days. CT imaging showed no remarkable results.
Specific YF laboratory analyses demonstrated the presence of IgM and IgG antibodies (IgM/IgG YFV IIF, EUROIMMUN, Lübeck, Germany) as well as neutralizing antibodies , with a PRNT 90 titer of 1:13 in a serum sample obtained on day 8 after vaccination. A neutralization antibody titer of 1:10 or higher is considered a surrogate of protection . In the same sample, a high viral load of YFVs RNA was observed with 1.0 × 105 copies/mL . A diagnosis was made of suspected YEL-AVD. Other concomitant infections or causes for the symptoms were not identified, i.e., hepatitis A, B, C, E; HIV; herpes simplex virus; varicella zoster virus; Legionella, Leptospira; and Aspergillus. Due to recurrent inflammation, including respiratory-associated pneumonia, several antibiotics were applied. We saw signs of rhabdomyolysis (CK 68,000 U/L) with clinically indurated right gluteus maximus without need of surgical intervention. Severe paralytic ileus was treated conservatively. Over the course, cytomegalovirus (CMV) retinitis resulted in transient blindness; an MRT imaging showed in spite of atrophy of the optical nerve no further central impairment. Due to renal failure, an intermittent hemodialysis was necessary. The viral load in serum dropped to 3.0 × 102 copies/mL over the next weeks, and YFV neutralizing antibody titers increased over time, reaching peak titers at 50 days after vaccination of ≥1:320. Serial samples of serum, plasma, tracheal secretion, and urine were analyzed for YFV by PCR. In serum, viral RNA was detectable at days 5–17 after vaccination, in plasma at day 36, in tracheal secretion at day 22, and between days 50–88 after vaccination. In urine, an initial viral load of 1.3 × 106 copies/mL was detected in a sample one week after vaccination and, moreover, remained positive more than 100 days after vaccination , definitively confirming the causality of the YF vaccine . Deep sequencing had been employed in order to obtain the full genome of the YFV strain detected in the patient. Complete genome sequencing of the patient-derived isolate, designated as BNI-YFV-17 (GenBank MG922934), did not reveal changes when compared to the sequence of the YFV 17D vaccine (GenBank AVT50843.1).
Altogether the patient was treated for 20 weeks on ICU, ventilated for nine weeks, received hemodialysis for 10 weeks, and was transferred to a another hospital for recovery. At discharge, the multiorgan failure was completely resolved, and only mild anemia was still present. Persistent health problems included impairment in mobility and autonomy in daily life, dysphagia, i.e., the need for recannulation of the tracheostoma to prevent aspiration and a reduced visus with shades of gray and silhouettes.