A 45-year-old woman was referred to our institution at 31 weeks of gestation with a suspected fetal brain anomaly. She had irregular prenatal examinations until 28 weeks of gestation, and a history of chronic hypertension with poor medical compliance was noted prior to pregnancy. Additionally, a high risk of preeclampsia was identified during this pregnancy. Third-trimester ultrasonography showed severe bilateral hydrocephalus (more severe on the right side) in the fetus.
The woman underwent emergency cesarean delivery at 31 weeks and 4 days due to severe maternal hypertension and fetal distress. A female newborn weighing 1,610 g (25–50th percentile) was delivered, with Apgar scores of 4 and 8 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. The maternal postoperative course was uncomplicated, and she was discharged at 4 days postpartum.
The neonate had an occipital-frontal circumference (OFC) of 29 cm (25–50th percentile), and a physical examination showed a flat anterior fontanelle. Brain sonography on the first day revealed bilateral ventriculomegaly, particularly on the right side, with midline deviation to the left side . The anterior horn width (AHW) of the lateral ventricle was 6.1 mm on the right side (97th percentile) and 3.2 mm on the left side (50–97th percentile). The thalamo-occipital distance (TOD) of the lateral ventricle was 29 mm on the right side (greater than 97th percentile + 6 mm) and 21 mm on the left side (greater than 97th percentile). The resistance index was normal, and the OFC remained stable. The neonate did not experience any clinical seizures in the following days. However, follow-up brain sonography every two days showed an increase in the lateral ventricle size. A neonatal brain MRI on the fifth day confirmed bilateral ventriculomegaly with the right side more severely affected than the left side. The MRI also revealed a left shift of the septum pellucidum and normal-sized third and fourth ventricles, which suggested a complete obstruction of the right and partial obstruction of the left of the FOM.
Subsequently, at 8 days of life, the infant underwent neuroendoscopic approach, specifically a ventriculoscopy via the right Kocher's approach. The two layers of the septum pellucidum were fenestrated to connect the lateral ventricles bilaterally. The obstructed right FOM was identified by tracing the choroid plexus, and fenestration of the membranous obstruction of the FOM was conducted with membrane perforator and Fogarty catheter . To relieve the right lateral ventricle hydrocephalus and prevent left-sided hydrocephalus due to suspected partial obstruction, a Monro foraminotomy and septostomy were performed on the right side. The procedures were uneventful, and on the eighth postoperative day, brain sonography revealed a reduction in the size of the bilateral ventricles. Chromosomal abnormalities associated with ventriculomegaly were ruled out by karyotyping. Other potential causes, including congenital infections, were also negative. The infant was initially treated with nasal-prongs continuous positive airway pressure to relieve preterm respiratory distress and was successfully weaned off the ventilator. The infant was also able to tolerate the feeding program appropriately.
The patient was discharged on post operative day 52. Follow-up brain MRI performed 3 months after the operation showed significant regression of bilateral ventriculomegaly . Brainstem auditory-evoked potentials and visual-evoked potentials were normal during outpatient follow-up. Developmental milestones were achieved by the age of 7 months .