A 50-year-old Caucasian woman with a 6-month history of Crohn’s disease and receiving methotrexate for this disease presented with deranged liver function tests to our gastroenterology clinic. She had recently been discharged from the hospital 1 week earlier, following a flare of her Crohn’s disease. On discharge, she was sent home with nasogastric feeding to help with her malnutrition, and as part of recognizing any refeeding syndrome, she was having regular blood tests in the community. Her routine blood tests on 19 December 2016 showed marked derangement in her transaminases, with aspartate transaminase (AST) of 787 U/L and alanine transaminase (ALT) of 1032 U/L. Her bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were normal, and her γ-glutamyl transferase (GGT) was only mildly raised at 51 U/L. Results of her liver tests done 3 days prior, on 16 December, following discharge from the hospital were completely normal. Of note, she was started on 150 mg of bupropion on 13 December, which was increased to 150 mg twice daily 3 days later, on 16 December, to assist with smoking cessation. Results of her remaining blood tests, apart from long-standing stable normocytic anemia, were unremarkable.
The patient had a history of osteoporosis, palpitations, and depression. Her regular medications for these diagnoses included methotrexate 15 mg weekly for Crohn’s colitis, folic acid 5 mg weekly, cholecalciferol, sertraline, melatonin, propranolol, conjugated estrogen (Premarin; Wyeth Pharmaceuticals, Philadelphia, PA, USA) as hormone replacement therapy for menopause, pantoprazole, oxycodone, Coloxyl (Aspen Australia, St. Leonard’s, Australia), and a 7-week weaning course of prednisone (from 35 mg daily) for her recent Crohn’s flare with co-trimoxazole cover to continue until weaned off prednisone.
The patient’s blood tests on 20 December, done following the initial derangement on 19 December, were even more markedly deranged, with AST of 4006 U/L and ALT of 5007 U/L. Her GGT was also mildly more raised at 73 U/L. However, her bilirubin and ALP remained normal. She was reviewed on 22 December in the gastroenterology clinic. She had weaned to 30 mg of prednisone at that point. There had been no new medications other than the bupropion added since her discharge from the hospital. On examination, she did not have any jaundice, bruising, or any signs of chronic liver disease. Because she was feeling subjectively well with a normal bilirubin level, she was managed in the community setting. Her bupropion had already been stopped on 20 December by her general practitioner. All her usual medications, including prednisone and co-trimoxazole, were continued. At her 22 December clinical review, apart from an increase in GGT to 138 U/L, the remaining markers showed significant improvement with the AST decreased to 263 U/L and ALT reduced to 2643 U/L. Hence, a liver biopsy was not pursued, and instead she was followed with further surveillance liver tests, which continued to show improvement with subsequent near-normalization almost 4 weeks later, on 12 January, with ALT of 39 U/L and GGT of 94 U/L. Her AST had already normalized by 27 December. The trends of her liver tests are shown in Fig. .