A 14-year-old previously healthy Hispanic boy presented to the hospital with a two-month history of progressive worsening mid-back pain, bilateral leg pain, leg weakness, and unsteady gait. On examination, our patient had a spastic paraparesis with obvious signs of myelopathy, including lower extremity hyperreflexia, clonus, upgoing toes on Babinski response, impaired proprioception, and a T10 sensory level.
Our patient underwent a workup with a computed tomography (CT) scan of the thoracic spine without contrast with sagittal and coronal reconstructions, and a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the thoracic spine with and without gadolinium. The CT scan showed a large left paraspinous soft tissue mass at T7, growing into and filling much of the spinal canal via an expanded and remodeled left T7-8 neural foramen. There was also focal lysis in the posterior T7 vertebral body as well as the left T7 pars, secondary to tumor erosion. The contrast-enhanced MRI scan demonstrated a 4×5×6.4cm heterogenous-enhancing mass with a partial hypointense center. The mass appeared with a classic dumbbell-shaped formation at the left T7-8 neural foramen with severe spinal cord compression (Figure ).
Our patient was placed in a prone position for a lateral extracavitary approach for resecting this large spinal mass. Pre-incision intraoperative neuromonitoring parameters demonstrated no reproducible somatosensory-evoked (SSEPs) and motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) in the lower extremities. A standard subperiosteal dissection was performed from T6 to T8. Bilateral T6, T7, and T8 pedicle screws were placed, except at the left T7 pedicle. A temporary rod was secured on the right for stabilization. A laminectomy was then performed at these levels, and the tumor was observed exiting both the T7-8 neural foramen. Approximately 6cm of the 7th and 8th ribs were resected to complete the lateral extracavitary approach. The mass was mobilized after dissection using a soft tissue plane between the parietal pleura and extracanalicular portion of the tumor. The tumor was debulked and mobilized with the assistance of a Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA). Once a surgical cavity was created laterally in the pleural cavity from tumor debulking, we mobilized and swept the portion of the tumor in the spinal canal medial-to-lateral away from the spinal cord into the surgical cavity, completing a gross total resection. The spinal construct was then completed including the use of a structural rib autograft spanning the bony defect created by resection of the facet joint, pars, and pedicle. At the end of the case, SSEPs remained baseline; however, MEPs were now present.
Hematoxylin and eosin staining demonstrated predominant Antoni type A pattern with florid formation of Verocay bodies in this spinal tumor. Antoni type B regions were observed as less prominent (Figure ).
Postoperatively, our patient experienced slow improvement of his lower extremity weakness. Our patient was discharged home with a walker six days after surgery. At the six-month follow-up clinical visit, however, he was neurologically intact, and ambulating independently. Postoperative imaging at three months after surgery demonstrated no residual tumor, an evolving fusion mass, and stable posterior fusion construct (Figure ).