An 80-year-old female patient with carcinoma of the middle third of the esophagus was admitted to the Department of Gastroenterology for hemorrhagic shock, following UGIB presenting with hematemesis.
Four months prior to admission, the patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma, assessed as stage T4N2M1 in the middle third of the esophagus. Due to the patient’s age and associated diseases, conservative nonsurgical treatment was decided by the multidisciplinary council. Palliative radiotherapy was performed TD 36 Gy in total after dose fractionation 12 × 3 Gy. Immediately after the completion of palliative radiotherapy, an esophageal self-expandable, fully covered nitinol stent preloaded in a delivery system (type SX-ELLA 85) was inserted across the malignant stricture.
In recent years, the patient was treated for heart failure, atrial fibrillation, arterial hypertension, and hyperlipidemia. Her regular therapy regimen included bisoprolol fumarate, enalapril, fluvastatin, and warfarin, which is an anticoagulant medication.
In the past, the patient was successfully treated with surgery and radio-chemotherapy for breast cancer 15 years ago. During follow-up, no signs of disease recurrence were confirmed.
At admission, the patient was found to have relative hypotension (blood pressure: 114/51), absolute arrhythmia (heart rate: 88 beats/min), signs of anemia, traces of blood in her mouth, and massive melena with blood clots in the rectal ampulla.
A complete blood count (CBC) confirmed anemia: Red blood cell count (RBC) was 2.6 × 1012, hemoglobin (HGB) value was 75 g/L, prothrombin time was 0.35, and international normalized ratio was 2.03.
After initial resuscitation, including the placement of central venous access through the right femoral vein, delivery of crystalloid solutions, intravenous medications (the proton pump inhibitor pantoprazole, the antifibrinolytic agent tranexamic acid, the antiemetic thiethylperazine, and vitamin K preparation), transfusions, and infusions of fresh frozen plasma, we performed emergency computed tomography (CT) angiography. CT imaging confirmed bleeding through the aorto-esophageal fistula 1 cm distal to the distal edge of the esophageal stent . The recommended treatment was a stent graft placed into the aorta to close the fistula.