A 45-year-old man presented with a history of imbalance and progressive gait disorder for the last 8 months, associated with memory impairment. He had a previous history of bipolar disorder and type II diabetes mellitus and reported a COVID19 infection 2 months before initial presentation of neurologic symptoms.
Initial symptoms of SARS-Cov-2 infection were fever, anosmia, dysgeusia and anorexia. A real-time reverse-transcriptase-polymerase-chain-reaction assay (Allplex™ SARS-CoV-2 Assay—N/RdRP/S genes) confirmed the diagnosis. Hospitalization for seven days and oxygen via nasal cannula were necessary. At discharge, he was able to walk unassisted.
Two months after acute COVID19 infection the patient started a progressive gait disorder, complaining that he felt like his feet were glued to the ground. After a few weeks, he started forgetting recent facts and his family complained of excessive daytime sleepiness and blunted affect. He progressed to executive dysfunction and difficulty in performing his labor activities. There was no history of head trauma, subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) or meningitis. There was also no family history of neurologic diseases.
Neurologic examination revealed short-term memory loss, slow processing speed, inattention, difficulty in planning and executive dysfunction. A mild tetraparesis was also perceived, with brisk deep tendon reflexes in four limbs. There was no clonus and flexor plantar responses were observed. There was mild rigidity of the upper limbs, without cogwheeling. Gait was slow and magnetic, with short steps, feet close to the ground and postural instability.
Laboratory evaluation did not reveal any abnormalities . Complete blood count, renal function, liver enzymes and thyroid hormones were normal. Serology was negative for Syphilis and HIV. Vitamin B12 levels were also normal.
Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) disclosed moderately dilated supratentorial ventricular system with callosal angle reduction and aqueduct flow-void . A high-volume (40 ml) lumbar tap test was performed and revealed an opening pressure of 100mmH2O (normal range < 200 mmH2O). There was marked improvement of gait and balance after the procedure—10 m timed up and go (TUG) before the procedure of 18.4 s (32 steps) and after the procedure of 16.7 s (27 steps). CSF analysis was entirely normal .
A diagnosis of Normal Pressure Hydrocephalus was made and a ventriculoperitoneal shunt was placed without adverse events. Thirty days later there was significant improvement of gait, now presenting normal speed and step length. Cognitive functions also improved substantially, and he returned to his previous work activities. The patient reports that his ability to perform his labor activities is normal and is very pleased with his clinical outcome.