A 28-year-old man fell from a height while working as a construction laborer. Roentgenograms displayed combined bilateral fractures of the scaphoid and distal radius. The scaphoid fractures were type B according to the Herbert classification system, and the distal radial fractures were type C according to the AO classification system .
The patient also sustained an anterior compression fracture of the L1 vertebrae. Open reduction of the intra-articular distal radius fractures and scaphoid fractures was performed under general anesthesia. A dissection was made between the flexor carpi radialis and palmaris longus tendons, and it was extended 3 cm distal to the wrist flexion crease to expose the scaphoid. The flexor pollicis longus tendon was retracted in the direction of the radius, while the median nerve and other tendons were retracted in the direction of the ulna, revealing the pronator quadratus. Next, the distal and radial borders of the pronator quadratus were raised and retracted in the direction of the ulna to expose the distal radius. First, the scaphoid fracture was fixed with a Herbert screw; next, open reduction of the distal radius was performed with the aid of intrafocal leverage achieved via elevation, traction, and fixation using temporary Kirschner wires. The entry site for the Herbert screw at the distal pole of the left scaphoid was comminuted, and to gain stable screw purchase, the Herbert screw was inserted from the palmar proximal toward the dorsal distal, which is a relatively infrequent procedure. No cast immobilization or bracing was used after the surgery. The patient began passive and active range of motion exercises immediately.
Finally, the distal radius fractures were fixed with locked volar plates. The results of roentgenographic examination conducted 3 months post injury demonstrated complete union of the scaphoid and distal radius fractures . At 9 months after the injury, the range of wrist motion on the right side was 45° extension to 50° flexion, 20° ulnar deviation and 10° radial deviation, with 80° pronation and 70° supination; that on the left side was 40° extension to 40° flexion, 15° ulnar deviation and 10° radial deviation, with 70° pronation and 70° supination. The L1 compression fracture was treated conservatively. The patient was able to resume work at 3 months post injury.