A 55 years old African American man presented to the emergency room with progressive dyspnea, orthopnea, and peripheral edema. He also complained of severe epigastric pain which started few hours before presentation. His medical problems included dilated cardiomyopathy, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and polysubstance abuse. An implantable cardioverter defibrillator was implanted one year ago for the low ejection fraction (EF) of 25%. His medications included digoxin, lisinopril, amlodipine, aspirin, glipizide, atorvastatin, and furosemide. On examination, he had a S3, bi-basilar crackles, 3+ pitting edema in legs, mild abdominal wall rigidity, but no guarding or rebound tenderness. Otherwise examination was unremarkable. Laboratory studies were remarkable for marginal elevation of amylase and lipase (346 U/L and 155 U/L respectively), and brain natriuretic peptide of 1834 pg/ml. Blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were 79 mg/dl and 2.9 mg/dl respectively. Urine drug screen was positive for cocaine metabolites. He later on confirmed that he consumed cocaine six hours prior to his admission. Computed Tomogram (CT) scan of abdomen and pelvis did not show any acute abnormality on admission. Estimated EF on two-dimensional echocardiography was 15%.
He was started on treatment for exacerbation of congestive heart failure (CHF). Mesenteric ischemia was very high on differential due to multiple risk factors. Mild pancreatitis was also suspected, and a decision was made to monitor him clinically. He started feeling better on standard medical treatment. After two days, he developed severe abdominal pain and hypotension. A repeat non-contrast CT scan of the abdomen showed 'pneumatosis intestinalis' . He was promptly taken for the surgery. Proximal colon was found to be ischemic, and was resected. Mild atherosclerotic disease of the mesenteric arteries was noted. No thrombus or occlusion of the superior mesenteric artery was found at surgery. Patient was transferred to ICU. Pathological report of the resected bowel revealed features of NOMI. His further course in the ICU was complicated by progressive septic shock and death.