A 31-year-old Asian woman diagnosed as having unexplained infertility decided to undergo IVF treatment to achieve a successful pregnancy. She had no past systemic illness like diabetes mellitus or hypertension. She was started on birth control pills, Ovral L tablets (ethinyl estradiol 0.03 mg + levonorgestrel 0.15 mg), to prevent pregnancy before commencing IVF treatment. Daily injections of Gonal-f® (follitropin alfa injection) 225 IU were given during which time the stimulation was monitored using a combination of vaginal ultrasound and blood estrogen level every 2–3 days. The inability of blood estrogen levels to rise adequately prompted the physician to add 450 IU injectable Menopur®, which comprises 75 IU follicle- stimulating hormone (FSH) + 75 IU luteinizing hormone (LH), for multiple egg creation. Injectable Cetrotide® (cetrorelix acetate for injection) 0.25 mg subcutaneously was given for 5 days to prevent premature ovulation. Injectable Ovitrelle® (choriogonadotropin alfa) 250 μg/0.5 ml was given subcutaneously to prepare the largest mature follicles for ovulation. The egg was retrieved, fertilization was achieved, and embryo was transferred to our patient’s uterus for implantation. After embryo transfer, she was started on Endofert tablets (estradiol valerate) 2 mg daily for 2 months along with Susten tablets (progesterone) 200 mg twice daily supplements for the entire length of pregnancy. She had no high blood pressure or blood sugar during her pregnancy. She had a twin delivery. Currently, she is in her third month of post-partum period. She complained of seeing disturbing flashes in peripheral vision beginning in her third trimester. She described these flashes as usually occurring in the morning hours or while walking, coming in sets of three to four, occurring five–six times a day and lasting for less than 5–10 minutes. She says that her symptoms occur even now; however, with reduced frequency. Her flashes were not accompanied by other ocular symptoms such as pain, redness, photophobia, or decrease in vision. She gave no past or family history of migraine. She visited many retina specialists with complaints of persistence of symptoms. Her ocular examination was normal. A physician’s and a neurologist’s opinion were sought to rule out migraine. Plain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of her brain was normal. A diagnosis of IVF treatment-induced visual illusory palinopsia was suspected. She was counselled and reassured regarding her symptoms.