A 43-year-old man presented with recurrent episodes of syncope during exercise for 6 mo.
Previously, the patient had reported two episodes of syncope during exercise (running), 6 mo and 2 mo before the current presentation. The patient was referred to a local hospital, where a 12-lead ECG indicated ventricular tachycardia (VT). An intravenous amiodarone infusion was given, and the VT was terminated. The patient then took amiodarone regularly without further examination or treatment. One hour before admission to our hospital, the patient experienced an episode of syncope with a recovery time of approximately 2 min during exercise (running). The patient recovered spontaneously without cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Subsequently, the patient felt persistent palpitations.
The patient had a 4-year history of hypertension and was treated by nifedipine controlled-release tablets (30 mg/d) with blood pressure controlled at approximately 130/80 mmHg.
The patient had no relevant personal history. The patient denied a family history of premature coronary artery disease or sudden cardiac death. Genetically inherited cardiomyopathies or arrhythmias were also denied.
The patient’s vital signs on arrival were as follows: Blood pressure of 110/68 mmHg, heart rate 192 beats per minute and respiratory rate of 22 breaths per minute. Pulmonary and cardiac examinations showed no significant abnormalities. Jugular vein engorgement and peripheral edema were not found.
The troponin I level was 0.78 ng/mL (normal range < 0.04). The patient’s leukocyte, hemoglobin, inflammatory factor, renal function, liver function, electrolyte, D-dimer and B-type natriuretic peptide levels were not significantly abnormal.
An initial 12-lead ECG at admission demonstrated a regular, wide QRS complex tachycardia at 192 beats per minute of a left bundle-branch block morphology with a broad positive R-wave in lead aVR, an initial R-wave duration greater than 30 ms in lead V2 and an R-to-S interval greater than 100 ms in lead V6. These ECG findings strongly suggested VT (according to the VT morphology criteria in the Brugada algorithm and the initial dominant R-wave in the Vereckei aVR algorithm). The left bundle-branch block morphology and superior axis (positive QRS in lead aVL and negative QRS in leads II, III, and aVF) were consistent with VT originating in the inferior wall of the right ventricle . The VT was terminated with intravenous propafenone (70 mg). A repeat ECG showed a regular sinus rhythm of 65 beats per minute with negative T waves and a delayed S-wave upstroke (60 ms) from leads V1 to V4 .
A coronary angiogram revealed mild coronary stenosis , and RV angiography showed regional RV akinesia and aneurysm . Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMRI) showed RV free wall thinning, regional akinesia, dilatation, aneurysm and fibrofatty infiltration (RV end-diastolic volume to body surface area 127 mL/m2, RV ejection fraction of 38%), and the left ventricular structure and function were normal .
The patient underwent an electrophysiological study, which revealed multiple inducible VTs of a focal mechanism from the right ventricle . Endocardial and epicardial 3D-electroanatomic voltage mapping demonstrated scar tissue (low-voltage < 0.5 mV) in the anterior wall, free wall and posterior wall of the right ventricle . Late potentials were recorded , and the focal mechanism of VT was marked .