A 23-year-old Chinese female (social gender) presented to our hospital to receive treatment for primary amenorrhea. Physical examination showed normal breast development, an immature vulva, development of the vulva in infancy, no pubic hair, a blind end in the deep part of the vagina, no penile or testicular tissue, and no hypospadias. With the consent of the patient, we performed computed tomography (CT); this revealed huge cystic lesions in the pelvic cavity in the right lower abdomen. Many nodules were present in the inner wall of the cyst and a cord shadow was evident on the left edge of the mass. We were unable to visualize the uterus or bilateral fallopian tubes. Ultrasonography revealed a huge mass in the left adnexal region; we were unable to detect a normal uterine sonogram in the anatomical area of the uterus. The area close to the right adnexal region presented with a 3.0 × 1.3 cm2 striped weak echo area by ultrasound; we considered this to be the ‘primordial uterus’.
Following surgical resection, we examined the gross morphology of the specimens. The mass was cystic, and the structure of the mass was papillary. Microscopic observations revealed a multi-stage branching structure and a large number of irregular papillations . These papillations branched gradually from largest to smallest and were covered with a cubic columnar epithelium and a ciliated, eosinophilic, cytoplasm . Abnormal streak ovarian tissue was evident around the mass. A large number of fibrous tissues were also evident in the specimen, although there were no mature follicles. Immunohistochemical staining showed that the tumor cells expressed high levels of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), WT1, PAX8, CK7 and EMA; P53 was expressed but wild type and P16 was only expressed at low levels . The morphological characteristics evident on hematoxylin and eosin staining, along with the immunohistochemical results, were indicative of a serous borderline tumor of the ovary.
The tissue that we considered as the “primordial uterus” by ultrasound was located in an area close to the right adnexal region. Anatomical analysis revealed that this tissue was atrophic, cord-like, and smooth; it was also surrounded by a capsule and was devoid of ligaments and fallopian tubes. We were surprised by the lack of a uterine cavity, endometrium, or muscle wall, although the yellowish, spongy, soft tissue appeared to be denatured and atrophic tubular tissue. These tubules were composed of multiple layers of cells that exhibited cytoplasm that stained in either a rich or light manner with hematoxylin and eosin. We believe that these structures were Sertoli cells in seminiferous tubules . We also observed eosinophils around these seminiferous tubules; we believe that these structures were Leydig cells. Consequently, we believe that this structure was actually an immature testis . Based on microscopic observations of the tissue, we considered that this was not a primordial uterus; rather, this was a case of cryptorchidism. Further examination of the sex chromosomes revealed that the patient was 46, XY ; her disorder was therefore diagnosed definitively as 46, XY DSD. The patient had testes, which were able to secrete Mullerian tube inhibitor, thus inhibiting the development of the uterus and fallopian tubes. The patient had also undergone normal breast development and had a female appearance, although her vagina had a blind end and the external genitalia appeared female without pubic hair. The development of secondary sexual characteristics was abnormal; there was no uterus, no fallopian tubes, and no hypospadias. Although sex hormone tests revealed high levels of testosterone, there was no obvious development of male external genitalia. Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome complicated by a serous borderline tumor of the ovary. After 6-months of follow-up, the patient was in good condition.