A 23-year-old Asian female, with no previous comorbidities, presented to us with a 3-month history of nonradiating postprandial epigastric pain, bilious emesis, and weight loss. She also complained of having bilateral lower limb weakness that started 20 days back. Initially, the patient showed a good response to prokinetic drugs and changes in the diet, but gradually her condition deteriorated. She recorded a 20 kg weight loss.
On arrival at our department, the patient was hemodynamically stable. On physical examination, she appeared cachectic and had a burn injury scar on her face. Her abdominal examination and cardiovascular examination were normal. On neurological examination, she was well oriented in time, place, person, and perception. She had decreased tone in bilateral lower limbs with a power of 2/5. She had absent reflexes with downgoing plantars in bilateral lower limbs. Her sensory examination of lower limbs revealed diminished vibratory and proprioception sensations; however, pain, temperature, and touch sensations were intact. The rest of her central nervous system examination was normal. Additionally, an ophthalmologist was taken on board as she had limitations in gaze across all four quadrants consistent with complex ophthalmoplegia. The rest of the ophthalmic examination was normal.
Previously, the patient had undergone laboratory workup and imaging studies to investigate her gastrointestinal symptoms. All the investigations done, including a computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen as well as pelvis, duodenal, and jejunal mucosal biopsies, were unremarkable except for upper gastrointestinal (GI) endoscopy, which revealed reflux esophagitis. Her stool routine examination was unremarkable. A review of the patient’s past record did not reveal the procedure used to obtain the aforementioned biopsies. Her celiac serology was negative as well. Furthermore, her gastroparesis was confirmed with gastric emptying scintigraphy. Her repeated complete blood profile and smear showed blood hemoglobin of 10.7 g/dL with a microcytic and hypochromic picture. The rest of her investigations including basal metabolic panel, hemoglobin A1c, and lipid profile were normal . Nerve conduction studies (NCS) revealed peripheral sensorimotor neuropathy, demyelinating in type with secondary axonal degeneration. Electromyography (EMG) was advised, which revealed myopathic discharges in proximal as well as distal muscle groups, most prominent in lower limbs. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed extensive lesions suggestive of leukoencephalopathy .
On the basis of the classic clinical signs and symptoms observed along with the imaging studies, MNGIE syndrome was suspected and the patient was advised to undergo genetic testing and blood nucleoside studies. These investigations, however, were not possible. Owing to financial constraints and limited laboratory genetic testing capabilities in our setup, the patient’s plasma thymidine level was not assessed. Nevertheless, in the light of the strong clinical evidence, the patient was diagnosed with MNGIE syndrome.
The patient was managed with a multidisciplinary approach including a gastroenterologist, a specialist nutritionist, and a physiotherapist. She was advised on total parenteral nutrition, which would improve her nutritional status and act as a bridge therapy until a thorough evaluation for a possible jejunostomy tube is done. Thorough counseling of the patient and her family was done regarding the nature and pathology of the disease including the medications she was to avoid. The need for genetic testing of the patient and other family members was reemphasized. However, they denied having further investigations owing to a scarcity of funds.
The patient was managed with an injection of metoclopramide 10 mg intravenously thrice daily, an injection of omeprazole 40 mg intravenously once daily, a tablet of coenzyme Q10 50 mg once daily, and a daily dose of a multivitamin.
Various treatment options, including a possible allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant and liver transplantation, were also discussed with the family. The patient was then referred to the gastroenterology department for a jejunostomy tube; however, the patient decided against the advice. She was discharged on tablet metoclopramide 10 mg thrice daily before meal, tablet omeprazole 40 mg once daily before breakfast, tablet coenzyme Q10 50 mg once daily, and multivitamins. She was advised to maintain strict compliance to nutritional and physiotherapy recommendations and to follow up in 1 month. Unfortunately, the patient was lost to follow-up despite multiple attempts to contact the patient or her family members.