A 40-year-old woman presented to gastroenterology outpatients clinic with a several month history of right iliac fossa pain and loose motions. Apart from longstanding dysmenorrhoea and menorrhagia, she did not have any other symptoms. There was no past medical history to note and no family history of endometriosis. A clinical examination of the patient, including a full gynaecological examination, was within normal limits. Preliminary investigations revealed an iron deficiency anaemia with a haemoglobin level of 11.1 g/dl, a mean corpuscular volume of 71 fl and a low ferritin level of 8.4 ng/ml. A colonoscopy was duly organised which showed a sessile 1 cm polyp in the caecum [see figure ]. On biopsy, this proved to be a metaplastic polyp. A subsequent attempted polypectomy was unsuccessful so the patient was referred to a tertiary centre where another attempt at polypectomy was carried out. At this point, the polyp looked to be arising from the appendix, which itself was inverted. In addition, submucosal nodules in the sigmoid were noted and these were thought to be endometrial in origin as the patient had a long history of painful and heavy periods. The polyp was not removed and the patient was referred to the colorectal surgeons and gynaecologists for a possible right hemicolectomy, total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.
A preoperative CT scan of her abdomen and pelvis did not reveal any firm evidence of endometriosis and only noted small cysts on both ovaries.
At the time of the operation, the appendix had intussuscepted and a simple appendicectomy, rather than a right hemicolectomy, was carried out in the absence of any other findings at laparotomy.
On histology, the wall of the appendix had widespread endometrial deposits [see Figures and ] and there was no evidence of malignancy. In addition, the cervix and fallopian tubes were within normal limits and the ovaries both had multiple follicular cysts and germinal inclusion cysts and there were leiomyomas within the myometrium.