A 69-year-old male developed gradual right hand weakness and dysarthria. He had a medical history of hypertension. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated an acute watershed infarction in the left hemisphere. Carotid MRI and computed tomography (CT) angiography confirmed severe stenosis with marked calcification . We planned to perform CEA under the administration of aspirin.
We performed CEA under general anesthesia with intraoperative somatosensory evoked potential monitoring, which is a standard practice at our institution. The neck was hyperextended, slightly tilted to the right. As the cerebral cross flow during carotid clamping was suspected to be low, we placed an indwelling arterial shunt (Furui’s Double-Balloon Internal Shunt system, Inter Medical, Aichi, Japan). The shunt was inserted smoothly, the balloon was inflated with 0.4 ml saline and after placement, the patency of the shunt was confirmed. Endarterectomy was completed, and as the distal end of the plaque was smoothly resected, we did not add a tacking suture . The arteriotomy was primarily closed with 6-0 Prolene (Ethicon, NJ, USA).
Postoperatively, no neurological deficit was observed. No new cerebral infarction was confirmed by brain MRI on postoperative day (POD) 1 . However, on POD 7, the patient suddenly developed dysarthria and right-sided hemiparesis. Brain MRI showed acute infarction at the left posterior limb of internal capsule . The operated segment of the carotid artery was patent without stenosis on CT angiography, while severe stenosis of the left ICA was observed starting 2.5 cm apart from the endpoint of endarterectomy, which suggested postoperative distal CAD . The left styloid process was elongated and the height of its tip coincided with the beginning of the dissection. On the axial image, the tip of the elongated styloid process was adjacent to the ICA . Carotid artery angiography confirmed distal CAD, which extended about 3 cm distally . As the distal portion of the CAD extended over the Blaisdell’s line, we performed carotid artery stenting (CAS). We first placed the Carotid WALLSTENT (Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA), measuring 8 × 29 mm, to cover the lesion. As the distal half of the stent was insufficiently expanded, we added Enterprise VRD (Codman Neurovascular, Raynham, MA, USA), an intracranial stent measuring 4.0 × 39 mm, to overlap the advanced lesion. Anterograde blood flow was ensured after the second stent placement .
Dysarthria and right-sided hemiplegia improved after the operation and the postoperative course was uneventful. By dynamic assessment with CT for exploration of the pathogenesis, we reproducibly confirmed the tip of the styloid process approaching toward the ICA by moving the head from the neutral neck position to the extended position [ and ]. The patient was discharged home without any deficit.
Patient consent was obtained. IRB/Ethics Committee review/ approval is not required.