A 55-year-old woman presented with complaints of severe neck pain, and leg coordination problems without numbness and radiating pain, which the patient experienced for 2 years. The patient complained of gradually developing a feeling of heaviness and weakness in both legs along with an inability to walk at a brisk pace during the last 2 years. The patient further reported the development of persistent, electric shock-like shooting pain, with numbing that began at the shoulders and radiated down both arms to the 1st and 2nd digits three months after an accidental head injury.
On examination, the cervical spine was found to be stiff. The pain was localized at the cervical paraspinal muscles. The cervical spurling test was positive for bilateral reproduction of upper-extremity pain. The sensations in the patient's bilateral upper forearms and in their 1st and 2nd digits were decreased. The patient had a strength score of 5/5 in their C5–C6 distribution, and Hoffmann's sign in both hands was positive. The patient's knee and ankle reflexes were hyper-reflexive and their Babinski reflexes were present bilaterally.
Computed tomography (CT) of the cervical spine demonstrated prominent extrusion ossification of the posterior longitudinal ligament (OPLL) extending from C2 to C6 . The ossific ligaments occupied nearly 1/3 of the cervical spinal canal in some segments. In addition, continuous anterior calcification of several cervical and thoracic vertebral bodies was observed in the sagittal reconstruction slices, indicating diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH). The left transverse foramina of C4 is significantly bigger and more closed to the ipsilateral uncinate process tip than the right side . The patient's cervical MRI also revealed multiple levels of cervical spinal stenosis .
The patient underwent cervical spinal ACAF. The ACAF process has been reported previously. After general anesthesia and neurophysiologic monitoring were performed, the patient was in a supine position with the neck fully extended. A right Smith–Robinson incision was made to expose the anterior cervical spine. After confirming the surgical level using radiological plain radiography, discectomies were performed from C2 to C6. The proper volumes of the posterior portion of the C2 level and the anterior vertebral bodies of C3–C5 were resected with a high-speed drill to facilitate hoisting of the vertebrae-OPLL complex. Subsequently, bilateral osteotomies of C3–C5 were performed.
Owing to the widened base of the OPLL, the troughs of the left C3–C4 vertebrae were created beyond the uncinate process tip, and significant bleeding was encountered indicating violation of VA at the V2 segment . Hemostatic tamponade was performed immediately with digital pressure and with bone wax. After the bleeding was controlled, intervertebral cages filled with autogenic bone were placed at C2–C6 levels. An appropriate-length pre-curved cervical plate was then fixed at the C2 and C6 vertebrae for temporary fixation. Finally, the screws were gradually tightened in each vertebral body at the same pace to achieve anterior hoisting of the vertebrae-OPLL complex. The fascia and skin were sutured layer by layer.
On postoperative day 6, the patient experienced sudden swelling of their neck incision after coughing. Meanwhile, a spurting stream of blood was detected from the neck incision . The patient's blood pressure and SPO2 continuously decreased as a result of hematoma compression. After emergency tracheotomy and endotracheal intubation were performed, the patient was transferred to an operating room for an endovascular assessment.
An angiogram of the vertebral artery showed that the left side was dominant . Two vertebral artery pseudoaneurysms were detected in the left ruptured transverse foramina at C3 and C4 . The decision was made to use a stent to seal the two pseudoaneurysms and keep the left VA patent. Under fluoroscopic guidance, a balloon-expandable covered stent was placed across the laceration site and deployed; the two pseudoaneurysms were completely covered and later disappeared .
The patient recovered after the angiography without any complications. The patient's neurological symptoms were effectively improved at the 3-month follow-up. CT angiography (CTA) of the vertebral artery revealed a similar diameter of the lumen of the left vertebral artery with good flow compared to the preoperative status .