A 10-year-old boy complaining of left wrist pain was referred to our hospital. He was in a judo class. He fell off his bicycle and hurt his left wrist 4 days prior to the presentation. He had no remarkable history, familial history, or risk for avascular necrosis of bone. During the physical examination, he reported tenderness in the left anatomical snuff box. The range of motion of the left wrist was not disturbed in comparison to the sound side. The Japanese Society for Surgery of the Hand Version of Quick Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder, and Hand ﻿(QuickDASH-JSSH) disability/symptom score [, ] was 6.82. Plain radiography and computed tomography (CT) showed that his scaphoid had not yet undergone complete ossification , and revealed osteosclerosis, segmentation, and collapse of the ossification nucleus of the left scaphoid. MRI demonstrated an abnormal intensity of the left scaphoid, which showed low intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images (WI). In addition, there was no oedematous change or bleeding findings . Firstly, a scaphoid fracture was suspected because the patient complained of wrist pain following the wrist injury. However, plain radiography, CT, and MRI findings were not compatible with scaphoid fractures but with avascular necrosis of the scaphoid. Finally, the patient was diagnosed with idiopathic necrosis of the scaphoid.
Although the ossific nucleus showed segmentation and collapse, the patient was young, thus, conservative treatment was performed. A thumb spica cast was applied for 3 weeks, followed by orthosis immobilisation for 2 months. The orthosis was fixed between thumb and forearm, i.e., metacarpophalangeal joint and wrist joints, and it was applied day and night except for bathing. On plain radiography, the segmentation of the ossification nucleus of the left scaphoid disappeared after 3 weeks of cast fixation. The distal pole of the scaphoid showed remodelling, and the laterality of the size of the ossification nucleus of the scaphoid disappeared after 2 months of orthosis immobilisation, following thumb spica casting . Also, the tenderness of the anatomical snuff box disappeared during the same period.
One year after the first visit, plain radiography showed remodelling of the proximal and distal poles . However, MRI demonstrated that bone marrow intensity in the distal pole of the scaphoid was normalised, although the low-intensity area on the proximal pole remained . Two years after the first visit, plain radiography showed remodelling of the whole scaphoid bone , and MRI showed normalisation of bone marrow intensity . At the last follow-up, 5 years after the first visit, plain radiography showed normal development of the scaphoid , and QuickDASH-JSSH disability/symptom score was 0.