A 62-year-old man without cardiac history was admitted to the cardiac emergency department complaining of chest pain, worsening shortness of breath, and palpitations for 5–6 weeks. His medical history included esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) which was treated with chemoradiotherapy for 1.5 years. The treatment strategy was completed 6 months ago.
On admission, the physical examination revealed extreme frailty with a BMI of 16.2 kg/m2, heart failure signs including elevated jugular venous pressure, rales in the lungs, peripheral edema, hepatomegaly, and low blood pressure of 75/40 mmHg. Oxygen saturation was 89% while breathing ambient air. A 12-lead ECG showed rapid atrial fibrillation, and significant convex STE in leads II, III, and aVF with the presence of reciprocal ST depression in the precordial leads . No prior ECG was available for comparison. Initially, the patient was diagnosed with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI). However, because he had hemodynamic instability and had a history of ESCC, we decided to perform a cardiac POCUS immediately for a more comprehensive assessment before transferring the patient to the catheterization laboratory for urgent percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). The echocardiogram showed two large masses in the left ventricular wall and the apex. The left ventricular systolic function was low. Because of these echo findings, the PCI was deferred. Treatment was initiated with oxygen, dobutamine, furosemide, digitalis, and enoxaparin.
Serial hs-cTnT measurements and ECGs were obtained. A comprehensive transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed on the following day. On serial ECGs, STE persisted and there was no development of pathological Q waves . Laboratory studies showed that hs-cTnT stabilized at a high level: on admission 0 h 173.1 ng/L, 1 h 167.3 ng/L, 3 h 159 ng/L, on discharge 180 ng/L (<14 ng/L); elevated N-terminal pro-B-type brain natriuretic peptide (NT-pro-BNP) was 1391 pmol/L < 14.47 pmol/L). TTE unveiled two large heterogeneous masses, which were characterized by ill-defined borders: one involved the lateral, inferior and posterior portion of the left ventricular wall, and another involved the apex and ventricular septum portion . The involved ventricular walls were significantly thickened and akinetic, which did not correspond to coronary perfusion territories. Left ventricular systolic dysfunction (biplane left ventricular ejection fraction of 35%), and right ventricular systolic dysfunction (tricuspid annular plane systolic excursion of 15 mm and fractional area change of 30%) were detected.
This patient was referred for a thoracic multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) scan and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) for further evaluation of imaging characteristics of the cardiac masses, and other lesions.
On thoracic MDCT, the mediastinal window showed infiltrative lesions causing abnormal wall thickening of the interventricular septum toward the apex, as well as of the inferior, posterior, and lateral walls of the left ventricle corresponding to the lesions observed on TTE. These lesions extended beyond the myocardium to the pericardial fat. The left anterior descending (LAD) artery and the left circumflex (LCx) artery were encased completely and compressed mildly. The adjacent pericardium was irregularly thickened . These lesions were new in comparison with the pre-treatment film . The ESCC was significantly diminished, and there was no longer abnormal esophageal wall thickening . On lung window, two new well-defined solid nodules in the left upper lobe and the right middle lobe were detected compared to before treatment . On CMR, two tumors enhanced mildly on first pass perfusion images but had peripheral heterogeneous enhancement in post-contrast T1-weighted images with central necrosis. In addition, the tumors appeared to have restricted diffusion on the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) .
Although the patient declined invasive coronary angiography and coronary computed tomography angiography, the unremarkable change in serial cardiac biomarkers in the setting of persistent STE strongly argued against STEMI. It was concluded that the patient suffered from cardiac and lung metastases from ESCC. The changes in ECGs were attributed to the patient's cardiac metastases. Given his disease progression and poor prognosis, the patient refused further diagnosis methods during this admission and wished to pursue palliative treatment. The patient was referred to the local hospital for palliative care. He passed away from multiple organ failure one month later.