A 62-year-old female presented to the hospital due to recurrent abdominal pain for 2 months.
The pain location was identified as the middle upper quadrant. She reported that the pain was a feeling of swelling and did not radiate. She denied nausea, vomiting, chills, fever or jaundice. She had no previous history of hepatitis, tuberculosis, or special drug use, and she had no family history of cancer.
She was healthy and had no previous history of hepatitis, tuberculosi.
She had no previous history of special drug use, and she had no family history of cancer.
Specialist examination at admission showed stable vital signs, no swollen superficial lymph nodes throughout the body, no yellow staining of skin and sclera, flat and soft abdomen, mild tenderness in the middle and upper abdomen, no rebound tenderness, no muscle guarding, positive Courvoisier sign, negative percussion pain in the liver and kidney region, nonpalpable liver and spleen under the ribs, negative movement dullness, and bowel sounds at 4 times/min.
The results of a liver function examination at another hospital were as follows: Alanine aminotransferase, 174 U/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 125 U/L; alkaline phosphatase, 195 U/L; and gamma-glutamyl transferase 1036 U/L. Regarding tumour indicators, carbohydrate antigen 199 was 151.50 U/mL, and carcinoembryonic antigen and alpha-fetoprotein were normal.
Total abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed slight dilatation of the intrahepatic bile duct; the gallbladder was full in shape, with no obvious abnormal shadows. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed local discontinuity of the middle segment of the common bile duct, mild dilatation of the upper segment of the common bile duct and intrahepatic bile duct, and a full gallbladder . Enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the upper abdomen showed slight thickening of the local wall of the middle and lower segments of the common bile duct with mild dilatation of the upper segment of the common bile duct and intrahepatic bile duct and an enlarged gallbladder. After admission, the IgG4 test was negative. Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) showed a hypoechoic mass in the middle and lower segments of the common bile duct, with a size of approximately 1.02 cm × 0.9 cm and an irregular boundary . EUS-guided fine needle aspiration was not performed due to the small mass.