A 35-year-old Chinese woman (weight 56kg, height 158cm) discovered a lump on the anterior surface of her neck one month prior to her presentation. Thereafter, she progressively developed difficulty swallowing and breathing. A CT scan and X-ray indicated metastasis of thyroid cancer in and around her trachea, encompassing most of the anterior cervical region and compressed her trachea and esophagus to the left, leaving only a very narrow airway .
Surgery to remove the tumor and reconstruct the airway was immediately required. However, the major difficulty facing our surgical team was the method for safely establishing an airway before anesthesia. Because the tumor was primarily located at the C7 to T2 level, a tracheotomy could not be performed. Our patient had a Mallampati class zero airway, a thyromental distance of 5cm wide and a mouth opening of 4cm wide. We expected little difficulty exposing her vocal cord. According to the CT measurement of the narrowest section of airway opening, an endotracheal tube with inner diameter 5.0mm was chosen to ensure passage of the tube.Dexmedetomidine and target controlled infusion (TCI) remifentanil were infused at rates of 0.5μg/kg/h and 3ng/ml, respectively. Topical anesthesia was applied with 2% lidocaine over her nasopharynx, oral pharynx and laryngopharynx. After 25 minutes, she was properly sedated to endure airway stimulation. Nasal fiberscopic endotracheal intubation was attempted and achieved in spite of a contorted, difficult airway. The tumor under the vocal cord was rubbery with a mobile nature. Spontaneous respiration was maintained successfully. No hypoxia or adverse airway reflex was noted during the procedure. Vital signs were stable . After confirmation of successful airway establishment, sevoflurane inhalation and intravenous propofol were quickly administered to deepen her sedation level. A muscle relaxant was provided to facilitate mechanical ventilation. The subsequent tumor removal surgery was performed and patient woke up breathing with ease.