The patient was a 23-year-old female who was admitted due to a liver mass for more than half a month. The patient had no obvious symptoms.
The liver mass was found by computed tomography (CT) examination during routine physical examination in another hospital half a month ago.
She had chronic gastritis for more than 3 years and had taken medications (including omeprazole and hydrotalcite chewable tablets) intermittently.
The patient’s family history was unremarkable.
No obvious abnormality was found during physical examination.
The laboratory examination was unremarkable. Blood routine tests showed that red blood cell count was 4.40 × 1012 /L; hemoglobin was 128 g/L; white blood cell count was 5.65 × 109 /L; C-reactive protein level was 0.25 mg/L; D-dimer level was 0.57 μg/mL; and, low density lipoprotein level was 1.28 mmol/L, which were all within normal range. The results for viral hepatitis markers were negative. The carcinoembryonic antigen was 0.50 ng/mL; the alpha-fetoprotein was 2.17 ng/mL; and, the carbohydrate antigen 19-9 was 4.47 U/mL, which were all within normal range, indicating negative results for tumor markers.
Ultrasound showed a large hyperechoic mass with a size of 13 cm × 10 cm × 7 cm in the parenchyma of the caudate lobe of the liver, with clear boundary, irregular shape and inhomogeneous internal echo . CT examination showed an irregular mass in the caudate lobe of the liver with a size of about 12 cm × 6 cm × 10 cm, locally protruding beyond the liver outline. It had a clear boundary and inhomogeneous density. The unenhanced CT attenuation value was 5 - 31 HU . The contrast-enhanced CT attenuation value was 21 - 44 HU in the arterial phase , 39 - 66 HU in the portal vein phase , and 21 - 59 HU in the delayed phase . The dynamic enhancement pattern of the lesion was similar to that of the adjacent normal liver parenchyma, and the lesion was hypovascular compared with the background liver in all three contrast-enhanced phases. There were branches of the hepatic artery inside the mass . The intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts, hepatic arteries, and the trunk and branches of the portal vein were compressed and displaced . The stomach and the duodenum were slightly compressed. One nodule in the mass was observed on CT images. The attenuation of the nodule on the unenhanced scan was the same as that of normal liver parenchyma , and the dynamic enhancement-mode of the nodule was synchronous with that of normal liver parenchyma .
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination: T2-weighted non-fat-saturated image showed slight hyperintensity . The signal intensity was reduced on T2- and T1- weighted fat-saturated images . T1-weighted in-phase image showed slight hyperintensity , and the signal intensity of the T1-weighted out-of-phase image decreased obviously . The degree of reduction of the T1-weighted out-of-phase image was higher than that of T1- weighted fat-saturated image. Diffusion-Weighted Imaging (b value = 800) showed slight hypointensity. Apparent diffusion coefficient mapping showed hyperintensity and isointensity. The enhancement pattern of MRI was the same as that of CT. No abnormality was found in the remaining liver parenchyma.