A 56-year-old male admitted to the Urology Department of our hospital with a 10-days history of painless gross hematuria and blood clots.
Physical examination and vital signs were unremarkable. The symptoms were not associated with dysuria, fever or weight loss.
Medical and Family History were unremarkable. Clinically, bladder cancer and lower urinary tract infection were considered as differential diagnoses. The blood test results were all within normal limits.
Urine analysis was positive for red blood cells whereas urine cytology for cancer cells was negative.
Ultrasound examination of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a pedunculated mass measuring (21 × 14 mm) on the right posterior wall of the bladder near the ureterovesical junction ).
Later on, a CT scan was carried out and revealed a bladder diverticulum (26 × 37 mm) with a mass inside it reaching out to the adjacent bladder wall and the right ureterovesical junction. The CT scan also revealed thickening of the bladder dome (7 mm) in addition to 3 enlarged lymph nodes measuring up to (18 mm) in the retroperitoneal space, left to the abdominal aorta ).
Cystoscopy did not reveal the diverticulum due to poor visibility in the bladder.
Based on these findings, the medical team recommended surgical intervention and the surgeon (Dr.Raslan) performed radical cystectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy.
The pathological examination of the diverticulum demonstrated its congenital origin by revealing the muscular layer. Biopsies taken from the tumor mass inside the diverticulum revealed high-grade transitional cell carcinoma invading the perivesical fat (T3a). Other biopsies taken from the main bladder mass also showed high-grade transitional cell carcinoma, infiltrating the subepithelial connective tissue (T1) with the invasion of one regional lymph node (N1). Margins of surgical resection including the prostate and the left ureter were free from neoplastic cells
Surgery was followed up with systemic adjuvant chemotherapy which included Gemcitabine 1100 mg/m2 over 30 minutes intravenously on days 1 and 8, followed on day 1 by Carboplatin 320 mg/m2 intravenously over 1 h. Treatment cycles were repeated every 21 days for five cycles.
The patient was put on a regular follow-up with CT scan every 3 months, however, he did not return to our hospital.