A 35-year-old woman presented to the outpatient clinic for dysphagia that has not responded to various treatment modalities in the past 2 years.
The patient first presented to the hospital with dysphagia that slowly developed around December 2020. The patient had no underlying diseases or any special events that might have triggered dysphagia symptoms. The patient had severe difficulty swallowing food after chewing, with the problem more evident with solid foods. The physician who examined the patient at the time ordered blood test, brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and nerve-motor function test, but the findings were unremarkable. Subsequently, the patient underwent conventional dysphagia treatment for approximately 2 years with neither marked improvements nor exacerbation, and the patient eventually presented to our outpatient clinic. The patient seemed relatively calm considering the tremendous stress she has had for not being able to eat normally for a prolonged period. The patient had been taking nutrients by swallowing the liquid form after chewing and spitting out the remaining solids and by drinking liquid food during gastrointestinal tube feeding. At the time of initial presentation 2 years before treatment initiation, the patient had a normal weight and body mass index (BMI) (48.0 kg, BMI 20.0 kg/m2) but was underweight at the time of presentation to our clinic (42.7 kg, BMI 17.8 kg/m2).
There was no illness in previous medical history.
No abnormalities.
The patient first underwent otolaryngological testing and gastroscopy, and the findings were within normal limits. The basic neurological test findings, including cognition, limb strength, balance, and cranial nerve examination, were also within normal limits. However, the patient exhibited laryngeal elevation and some hesitancy in swallowing.
In the videofluoroscopic swallowing study (VFSS), severe oral phase delay was observed in all types of food boluses. Particularly, solid food boluses were unable to progress to the pharyngeal phase. Fortunately, the patient was able to swallow liquid boluses without aspiration, although in small amounts. No neuromuscular or structural causes that could result in transfer dysphagia were identified. Blood tests were performed to investigate for any possible abnormal findings, anemia, hypoproteinemia, or trace element deficiencies, but all results were within normal limits.
The patient had no restrictions of activities of daily living (ADLs) due to physical problems, as evidenced by a modified Rankin scale score of 0 and modified Barthel Index of 100. However, she scored lower than the normal ranges in assessments that consider psychological aspects in ADLs[-], such as Montgomery and Asberg Depression Rating Scale, Hamilton Depression Inventory, Beck Depression Inventory, EuroQol five-dimension questionnaires, and Patient Health Questionnaire. Additionally, the patient reported discomfort and difficulty with most forms of diet in a survey inquiring about subjective discomfort with dysphagia using a four-point scale (0, no difficulty; 1, mild difficulty; 2, moderate difficulty; 3, severe difficulty).
Brain MRI and c-spine anterior-posterior/lateral X-ray findings were unremarkable.