A 56-year-old hypertensive male with a history of type 2 diabetes, diagnosed with alcohol-related-liver cirrhosis in February 2019, who presented variceal upper gastrointestinal bleeding at the beginning of the disease, was admitted to hospital in February 2020. He presented a 1-week history of general malaise that began with fatigue and then jaundice and acholia, without fever or abdominal pain. His treatment before hospitalization was propranolol 80 mg/day, metformin 850 mg/day and sitagliptin 50 mg/day. He denied any alcohol, cigarettes or illicit drug consumption recently and reported a recent travel to the Argentine coast, where he consumed seafood. Besides, he reveled to have consumed pork meat and no history of blood transfusion.
Physical examination demonstrated he was normotensive, afebrile, with mucocutaneous jaundice. Laboratory investigations showed elevated aspartate aminotransferase (AST) of 1347 IU/mL; alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 1387 IU/mL, total bilirubin of 9 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase of 181 IU/mL, international normalized ratio (INR) of 1.17, plasma prothrombin activity (PPT) of 68%, platelets of 159 mL/mm3, and total protein of 7.21 g/dL . Antinuclear antibody (ANA), antismooth muscle antibody (ASMA) and antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA) were negative. A complete blood count, creatinine and ionogram were in normal parameters. Abdominal magnetic resonance with contrast and cholangioresonance revealed liver that suggested CLD.
Serological tests for hepatitis A, B, and C viruses, Epstein–Barr virus, herpes zoster virus, and cytomegalovirus were negative. IgG and IgM anti-HEV antibodies were tested by third generation ELISA assays, using commercial kits (Diapro, Italy), following the manufacturer’s instructions, revealing that this patient was HEV-IgM and HEV-IgG double positive in February and March, 2020. RT-real time PCR for molecular HEV screening was also carried out. Briefly, to obtain cDNA, retrotranscription was performed using random hexamer primers and the enzyme Reverse Transcriptase (ImPromII -Reverse Transcriptase- Promega), followed by genomic detection of HEV by real time PCR (iTaq Universal Probes Supermix- BIO-RAD) . Both samples, obtained in February and March 2020, resulted positive. A nested-PCR, amplifying a 348 bp fragment of the ORF-2 region for HEV 1–4 genotypes, using the enzyme GoTaq (Promega), previously described , was carried out, obtaining a positive result. The resulting amplicon was purified using a QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA, USA) and subjected to direct nucleotide sequencing in both directions (Macrogen, Inc. Seoul, Korea): the presence of HEV genotype 3 was determined .
Following admission, during the first days of March 2020, the patient’s liver enzyme levels showed a downward trend with AST values of 151 IU/mL, ALT of 150 IU/mL with rising hyperbilirubinemia and total bilirubin of 25.83 mg/dL. At this stage, he evolved with signs of grade I hepatic encephalopathy (bradypsychia). Thus, the patient was diagnosed with acute hepatitis E-on-chronic liver disease and was referred to a transplant center for treatment evaluation with a MELD score of 23 points (INR of 1.29, creatinine of 1.14 mg/dL, total bilirubin of 25.83 mg/dL, Na of 131 mg/dL) and MELD-Na score of 27 points. The patient was transplanted on May 19, 2020. The presence of IgM anti-HEV was negative and IgG anti-HEV was positive for successive serum samples in May, June and October, although HEV RNA could not be amplified during these months , therefore, chronic infection by this agent was ruled out.
Throughout August and September, 2020, the patient had multiple hospitalizations for cholangitis. The following months he manifested a severe graft dysfunction of the liver; therefore, the patient underwent a liver retransplantation in March, 2021. Over the next days, he suffered an arterial thrombotic event and passed away on March 25, 2021.
Table shows the clinicopathological parameters of this patient throughout different stages of hospitalization (during hospital admission, before and after the first and second transplant).