A 60-year-old man, who worked as Hospital General Director, known case of war injured patient with multiple metallic missile fragments in different parts of his body, developed clinical symptoms of spinal canal stenosis (numbness and weakness of lower extremities) for which referred to radiology department for myelography by Neurosurgeon since diagnostic MR was not possible due to the embedded metallic fragments in the body. He had positive medical history for multiple surgical procedures and 5 days ICU admission after laparotomy due to severe undiagnosed illeus after herniorrhaphy. There was no known history of sensitivity to any food or medication in the past. Intrathecal injection performed by anesthesiologist using a 20 Guage disposable spinal needle. Intrathecal injection done at the level of L4–L5 and 14 mL of Meglumine 75% injected into the subarachnoid space. Patient was stable for 40 minutes when he started complaining of intolerable pain and muscle spasm in lower extremities which forced anesthesiologist to intubate and sedated the patient in order to control pain and muscle spasm and patient was transferred to intensive care unit with impression of hypersensitivity to contrast medium injection. First brain CT scan (3 hours post intrathecal injection) showed signs of high ICP, dilated ventricles, severe hydrocephaly and presence of contrast medium in all arachnoidal spaces. Ischaemic change could not be ruled out by radiologist. Ventriculostomy catheter was inserted in right lateral ventricle and patient kept under direct supervision of Intensive care consultants with their multidisciplinary strategy. As reported by neurosurgeon, brain was very edematous and the first measurement of ICP shows 40 cmH2O. In ICU, patient was kept fully sedated with infusion of Midazolam (5 mg/h) and propofol (100-200mg/h). Pupils were 2-3 mm in size with sluggish response to the light. Mean ICP was kept between 10–15 cm water and Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) maintained above 70 mmHg. Patient was put on mechanical ventilator- SIMV mode and Arterial Blood Gas parameters were acceptable during his ICU stay. Patient was hemody namically stable with MAP (Mean Arterial Pressure) above 65 mmHg. Follow up CT Brain scans showed gradual reduction of brain edema and disappearance of contrast medium from arachnoidal spaces . Sedative drugs were gradually tapered after 3 days and patient regained his consciousness and extubated successfully after 7 days. He got discharged from hospital after 10 days without any sequelae.