A 30 year old male patient presented with three episodes of severe left renal colic during a period of one week and each time he had to come to emergency department. He was treated conservatively each time with ultrasound for kidneys being normal and urine showing numerous red blood cells. He was discharged on analgesics from the emergency with the advice to attend surgical outdoor for further investigations.
He presented once again in emergency during late night with acute pain abdomen and distension abdomen. He was looking extremely pale. His pulse was low volume with rate of 130/minute. His blood pressure was 86/50 mm of mercury. His abdomen was distended and tender on palpation. Shifting dullness was present on percussion and bowel sounds were absent on auscultation. The clinical findings were suggestive of some intra-abdominal catastrophe possibly acute hemorrhage. He was resuscitated with intravenous fluids, ionotrops and blood transfusions. Nasogastric aspiration revealed nonbilious aspirate. On urethral catheterization, 50 ml of hemorrhagic urine was drained. His hemoglobin was 5 gm % and routine urine examination revealed numerous red cells. His blood urea was 110 mg% and serum creatinine was 1.8 mg%. Portable X-ray chest and X-ray abdomen (sitting and lying) were done to look for any evidence of gut perforation (free air under the diaphragm) or intestinal obstruction (dilated gut loops with multiple air fluid levels). Only a few dilated gut loops were seen on X-ray abdomen. Portable ultrasound of the abdomen revealed free intra-peritoneal fluid and dilated gut loops. There was no perinephric fluid collection and both the kidneys appeared normal. Blood gas analysis showed metabolic acidosis and hypoxia.
In view of increasing abdominal distension and respiratory distress, tube drain was put in Morrison's pouch under local anesthesia on the bed side in area of maximum dullness in right flank as seen on abdominal percussion. It drained 2 litres of unclotted blood. Since there was continuous bleed as detected through constant trickle of blood in the drain, emergency laparotomy was performed with midline incision. On exploration, 2.5 liters of clotted and fresh blood was evacuated from the abdominal cavity. Liver, spleen, right kidney, stomach and intestines appeared to be normal. There was a large perinephric hematoma on left side of the midline that was gradually expanding. On opening the retroperitoneum on left of midline, the hematoma got disrupted and about 2 litres of blood came out with gush. The pulse and blood pressure of the patient became unrecordable and it was decided to pack the abdominal cavity as a life saving measure.
The patient was kept on ventilatory support in the post-operative period. MR angiography was planned but could not be performed due to poor condition of the patient. The re-exploration was done after 72 hrs when his blood pressure was partially stabilized with ionotropic support. At re-exploration, when sponges were removed, an arterial spurting was seen in left paraaortic region that was secured with vascular clamp. On careful inspection, the site of bleeding was found to be ruptured left renal artery aneurysm. The renal artery was secured proximal to the aneurysm and doubly ligated. The left kidney was removed. The right kidney on palpation appeared normal.
In post-operative period, the patient was again kept on ventilatory support and his condition remained critical. He had unstable vital signs and developed anuria. His blood urea and serum creatinine rose to 230 mg% and 3.8 mg% respectively requiring hemodialysis. However his condition kept on deteriorating and he expired on 3rd post-operative day of second surgery.
The biopsy of the specimen revealed massive areas of renal infarction . There was haemorrhage in the periadrenal tissue with dissecting aneurysm involving the left renal artery and causing its collapse .