A 56-year-old female patient presented to the emergency department of our institution with sore throat, dyspnea, abdominal pain, and diarrhea.
The patient was unable to eat due to a sore throat and had been unable to take her diabetes medication for 5 d prior to the visit.
Subsequently, the patient visited the hospital with abdominal pain, diarrhea, and shortness of breath.
The patient had been prescribed medication for diabetes and hypertension 2 years previously. She also had a history of a canceled surgery for chronic right-sided otitis media.
The patient had diabetes, hypertension, and chronic otitis media.
At the time of admission, the patient’s blood pressure, pulse rate, respiratory rate, body temperature, and oxygen saturation level were 11.3/7.8 kPa, 104, 22, 36 °C, and 90%, respectively. The patient was conscious. Swelling and redness were observed in the left neck and both tonsils. Rales were auscultated throughout the chest. Auscultation of the abdomen revealed a normoactive bowel sound with no tenderness.
No urine was produced after catheter insertion.
Blood tests revealed an evaluated white blood cell count (16.47 × 103/µL), anemia (hemoglobin level, 7.2 g/dL; hematocrit level, 24.4%), renal failure (blood urea nitrogen, 78.8 mg/dL; creatinine level, 4.22 mg/dL). The patient was hyperglycemic, with a glucose level of 32.6 mmol/L. The patient had uncontrolled diabetes, with a glycated hemoglobin level of 11%. The C-reactive protein level was also elevated at 207.58 mg/dL. An arterial blood gas test revealed acidosis of pH 7.27. Additionally, a pCO2 level of 25 mmHg, a pO2 level of 83 mmHg, and a bicarbonate level of 11.5 mEq/L indicated metabolic acidosis.
The anion gap was 21.5 mEq/L, and the serum lactate level was 1.8 mmol/L. Therefore, a provisional diagnosis of lactic acidosis was established. Urine ketone was present in trace amounts. Spot urine microalbumin/creatinine ratio was 123.6 mg/gCr.
Chest radiography showed multiple patchy infiltrations in both lungs .
Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed peribronchial consolidation and ground-glass opacity with cavitary nodules in both lungs. Pulmonary thromboembolism (PTE) in the segmental and subsegmental pulmonary arteries of the right lower lobe was suspected .
Abdominal computed tomography showed extensive thrombosis in the left renal vein, extending to partial thrombosis in the suprarenal inferior vena cava (IVC).
A neck angio CT was performed on the third day to assess left neck swelling. A 13 mm × 10 mm nodular lesion was observed on the left parotid gland .
For further evaluation, blood, sputum, and urine cultures, hypercoagulability test were performed.
The hypercoagulability test showed decreased protein S activity and less free protein S antigen but normal total protein S antigen, protein C activity, and protein C antigen. The von Willebrand factor and factor V Leiden were normal, and lupus anti-coagulant level was elevated. However, anticardiolipin and anti-β2 glycoprotein-1 antibodies were absent.
Additionally, the following findings were noted: prothrombin time, 14.5 s; antithrombin III, 72.1; D-dimer, 2.01; and fibrinogen, 926.1. These results did not meet the diagnostic criteria for disseminated intravascular coagulation.
On the fourth day of hospitalization, as pneumonia was worsening, sputum analysis was performed using bronchoalveolar lavage.
A fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the nodule on the left parotid gland was performed on day 14. The nodule was found on neck angio CT. Biopsy results indicated that the nodule consisted of inflammatory cells. Although there was a possibility of cervical lymphadenopathy, the mass was not removed and was closely observed.
The patient had a history of discontinued treatment for chronic right-sided otitis media. Therefore, she underwent otoscopy after being transferred to a general hospital unit. Chronic otitis media with cholesteatoma was suspected. An additional temporal bone was identified on CT. The focal bone defect was suspected to be the right tegmen mastoideum. Therefore, surgical therapy was considered after the acute inflammation was controlled.
Follow-up chest CT was performed as there was no further clinical improvement in pneumonia. Progression of invasive aspergillosis was observed.
K. pneumoniae was identified on culture of blood samples taken immediately after admission and on culture of sputum samples extracted via bronchoscopy. Except for piperacillin and ampicillin, the bacteria were susceptible to other antibiotics.
Aspergillus niger (A. niger) was identified on a follow-up sputum culture. The (1-3)-β-D-glucan assay confirmed the presence of invasive Aspergillus.