The patient was a 72-year-old male. More than 6 mo after percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty, a left ventricular aneurysm was found during follow-up.
Six months prior, the patient went to the Cardiology Department due to chest pain and was diagnosed with acute myocardial infarction. On the same day, emergency coronary angiography and percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty were performed, and the patient recovered after surgery. He attended the hospital for a follow-up visit 1 d prior. Echocardiography showed that the left ventricular inner diameter had increased, the motion of the middle and lower segments of the interventricular septum and the middle and lower ends of the left ventricular wall was weakened, and the left ventricular apex myocardium was thinned, bulging outward, and showing paradoxical motion, with a range of 70.7 mm × 40.9 mm. The ejection fraction was 27%. He was diagnosed with left ventricular aneurysm, and surgery was recommended.
The patient developed acute myocardial infarction more than 6 mo ago and underwent concurrent coronary angiography and percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty.
The patient denied any family history of cardiovascular disease.
The patient had a temperature of 36.2 °C, heart rate of 81 bpm, blood pressure of 128/65 mmHg with respiratory rate of 18 breaths/min. His height was 176 cm and weight was 70 kg. The patient was fully conscious. The breath sounds were vesicular with no added sound. Heart sounds were normal first and second with no murmur.
Arterial oxygen partial pressure was 80.2 mmHg, carbon dioxide partial pressure was 50.4 mmHg, potassium was 3.3 mmol/L, and pro-brain natriuretic peptide was 694 ng/L.
Preoperative echocardiography showed that the left ventricular volume was significantly increased, systolic function was significantly reduced, and the formation of a huge ventricular aneurysm was seen at the apex . Coronary angiography showed 70%-80% stenosis in the proximal segment of the anterior descending artery, 100% stenosis in the proximal and middle segments, 70% stenosis in the proximal segment of D1, and 70% stenosis in the middle segment of the circumflex artery. Right coronary artery aneurysm-like expansion, proximal 40%-50% stenosis, and 30%-40% stenosis in the distal segment were observed .