A 43-year-old female presented with hearing loss in the left ear and tinnitus for > 1 month. The patient’s condition did not improve significantly after the administration of dexamethasone, and she required referral to our center. The patient’s history revealed a left-sided hearing loss that self-resolved after a period of rest 10 years prior. She had no specific medical or family history of cerebrovascular disease. Audiological function tests showed sensorineural hearing loss, and there was no abnormality in facial nerve function. The lesion in the left CPA area showed isointensity on T1-weighted imaging and mixed hyper and hypointensity on T2- weighted imaging images, and it was not significantly enhanced after contrast administration. It presented as hypointensive signals and hyperintensive signals, which were evident on the margins of lesions on susceptibility weighted images . Cerebral angiogram showed no evidence of cerebral aneurysm or arteriovenous malformation.
After extensive discussions with the patient about various surgical options and risk benefits, microsurgery was performed to remove to the lesion, and the surgery used a left retrosigmoid approach, with the patient in the lateral position under neuromonitoring. The surgeon used the brain spatula reasonably and intermittently, combined with dynamic micro traction technology to explore and treat the lesion in the CPA area. The lesion was dark red and comprised a large number of tortuous small thin-walled vessels mixed with old bleeding, It was well-margined with dimensions of 1.0 × 0.8 × 0.5 cm and was buried in the proximal cisternal portion of the auditory nerve. The angioma was successfully resected en bloc, and the microvessels feeding it were cauterized with 3 w, which was a weak power of electrocoagulation for hemostasis, so as to ensure that no heat was transmitted to the facial nerve. The bulk of the lesion appeared to be located on the vestibular nerve with relatively minor involvement of the cochlear nerve structures whilst sparing the facial nerve. Although the veins of the cerebellopontine fissure adjacent to the lesion were thicker, there was a glial layer between them, and no vascular branches were connected. This cerebellopontine fissure vein did not appear to be the tortuous vein seen in the preoperative digital subtraction angiography .
The pathology was reported to be a cavernous angioma with thrombosis. Immunohistochemical staining for CD31, CD34 and ERG were positive within luminal endothelial cells. Immunostaining for D2-40 was negative . Postoperatively, the patient’s hearing was decreased as before, but there was no facial paralysis. Reexamination of head magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed that the lesion had been completely removed . The postoperative disease course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged.