We describe the case of a 69-year-old Caucasian female patient, housewife and mother of three daughters, in apparent good health, who had never smoked. The patient reported six episodes per year of exacerbation of respiratory failure documented over the previous 10 years. Respiratory symptoms were resolved with steroids and antibiotics. The patient had been hospitalized twice in the last 3 years for acute respiratory failure. She was discharged with a diagnosis of "acute respiratory failure exacerbated by COPD.”
Due to persistence of respiratory symptoms characterized by dyspnea and a dry cough, the patient visited the pulmonary clinic of our department, and a functional assessment was carried out. At a young age, she reported occasional wheezing, sporadic episodes of respiratory exacerbation, especially during the three pregnancies, and intense dyspnea and asthma-like symptoms. She had undergone spirometry several years earlier, for which no written documentation was generated. The patient was being treated with an inhaled corticosteroid and long-acting β2-agonist twice daily, long-acting muscarinic antagonist twice daily, theophylline 200 mg orally twice a day, and montelukast 10 mg per day orally.
The patient complained of worsening dyspnea with wheezing. Spirometry performed at the first visit showed forced vital capacity (FVC) of 2.17 (120%), FEV1 1.64 (113%) and diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) of 4.11 mmol/(minute KPa), 80%. Spirometry performed at the second visit showed FVC 1.95 (100%), FEV1 1.44 (100%), Tiffeneau index of 75% and DLCO 4.11 mmol/(minute KPa), 80%. The six-minute walk test was normal. She was subjected to a methacholine challenge test, which was positive for severe hyperreactivity. Allergic skin tests for inhalants and foods were negative. A paper radioimmunosorbent test (PRIST) showed a level of 39 U/mL. The blood tests were normal except for serum alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) of 67 mg/L (normal value is 0.90–2.00 g/L). Chest computed tomography scan revealed the presence of small areas of air trapping and diffuse bronchiectasis . Sputum cultures performed to exclude colonization of potentially pathogenic microorganisms that could be the cause of exacerbations were negative.
Genetic screening was performed for the AATD inheritance and showed compound heterozygosity for deficient alleles pis and PiLowell.
After informed consent was obtained from the patient, we started intravenous augmentation therapy with human AAT at a dosage of 60 mg/kg every 7 days. At the request of the patient and her family, and after having monitored serum AATD, therapy was performed every 14 days. At 20 months of treatment, the patient showed no exacerbation, dyspnea exertional resolution and stable improvement in respiratory parameters.
After subsequent revaluation diagnostics, this patient, with a rare double heterozygous mutation, was treated with augmentation therapy, obtaining clinical and functional improvement without exacerbation over 2 years of treatment.