A 26-year-old man visited our department complaining of chest tightness. He had no relevant medical or family history and was a non-smoker. His physical findings were essentially normal. His hematological, biochemical, coagulation, and serum tumor marker results were all within the normal range. Chest computed tomography (CT) scans showed a 10-cm encapsulated cystic lesion in the anterior mediastinum, along with a 1.5-cm nodular lesion on the capsule located inside the cystic lesion wall . The nodular lesion had clear boundaries and was strongly enhanced on CT after intravenous administration of the contrast material . Positron emission tomography (PET), which was performed 60 min after the injection of 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (18F-FDG), showed no areas of significant 18F-FDG accumulation . Therefore, we preoperatively diagnosed him with a mature teratoma rather than a malignant mediastinal tumor or thymoma, based on the radiology findings. Surgery via the transsternal approach was then performed to diagnose and treat the lesion. The mediastinal lesion was located on the anterior mediastinum, proximal to the left pulmonary artery and left upper lobe. Complete resection of the mediastinal lesion and wedge resection of the anterior portion of the left upper lobe were performed based on the extent of the tumor.
The resected tumor specimen was soft and measured 13 cm × 9 cm × 5 cm . A small portion of attached lung tissue exhibited no gross evidence of invasion. The cut surface was an encapsulated cyst. The cyst contained debris, and a solid nodule 1.5 cm in size comprised a portion of the walls . Histology findings indicated foam cells and skin appendages within the cystic space and ciliated columnar epithelium, stratified squamous epithelium, and cartilage tissue on the cyst wall. Histological examination of the solid nodule revealed pancreatic tissue, some of which exhibited cord-shaped, ribbon-shaped, and cobblestone-shaped tumor cell proliferation . On immunohistochemical analysis, the tumor cells were positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin A, CD56, glucagon, insulin, and somatostatin . Since the Ki-67 index was < 3%, the tumor was diagnosed as a mature teratoma comprising a neuroendocrine tumor, corresponding to a grade 1 pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor, according to Endocrine Tumours (4th edition). Three years postoperatively, the patient remained healthy, with no signs of recurrence.