A 90-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital because of lethargy with a suspiciously acute onset. He had been actively working as a general practitioner until 3 days before the admission. His past history was unremarkable, except for hypertension and prostatic hypertrophy. He had no evidence of recent falls. He had no family history of psychiatric disease. For 2 days before the admission, he repeated to himself an inconsistent story that did not make sense to his family members, and he talked toward the wall as if someone were there. He was drowsy but suddenly sang cheerfully, although he usually did not like singing.
Upon admission (day 0), his physical examination revealed no remarkable findings, except mild hypertension. His blood pressure was 160/100 mmHg, his body temperature was 36.3 °C, and his pulse was 60 beats/minute. There were no findings of dry skin, hoarseness, nonpitting edema or other obvious symptoms. His mental status examination revealed disturbance of consciousness, concentration, and memory. It was difficult to make an accurate assessment of his cognitive function because he had difficulty in continuously responding to questions. In his neurological examination, he was found to be somnolent and uncooperative with a detailed interview, and he also exhibited delirium by carrying on a monologue as if speaking to someone. He could not correctly answer questions to assess orientation and cognitive function, mistaking the place and date. It also was difficult to evaluate him based on a cognitive function scale. His neurological examination also revealed hearing loss, gait disturbance with small steps and hesitation, no sensory disturbance, and an obvious difference in bilateral muscle strength between the limbs. Blood investigations revealed a thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) of 105.87 mIU/ml (normal range 0.54–4.26 mIU/ml) and free thyroxine (T4) of 0.34 ng/dl (normal range 0.71–1.52 ng/dl). His thyroid peroxidase antibodies and thyroglobulin antibodies were negative. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis revealed a normal cell count but mild protein level elevation (58.5 mg/dl).
Computed tomography of the patient’s whole body revealed pleural effusion on the left side and a moderate amount of ascites. Magnetic resonance imaging of his head revealed crescent-shaped foci of T2 hyperintensity visualized as slight effusion below the dura mater, which was considered brain atrophy. Electroencephalography (EEG) revealed slow α- and θ-waves. N-isopropyl-p-(iodine-123)-iodoamphetamine single-photon emission computed tomography (IMP-SPECT) revealed a decrease of cerebral blood flow in both frontal lobes. We noted that the patient had no organic brain disease and no obvious metabolic abnormalities such as vitamins. He had a high TSH level and a low T4 level, so we diagnosed him with psychosis and disturbance of consciousness with hypothyroidism. For this condition, about 10 days after his admission, we immediately started oral therapy with thyroid hormone replacement (L-thyroxine 50 μg/day). Thyroid testing showed a decreased TSH level to 9.53 mIU/ml and elevated free thyroxine of 1.34 ng/dl after administering an L-thyroxine dose up to 75 μg daily, but his psychotic symptoms did not improve soon thereafter. Following normalization of his thyroid function, both pleural effusion and ascites diminished. Simultaneously, his EEG activity normalized with normal α-wave activity. For 2 months after onset, his consciousness level gradually improved, and he became fully awake; however, his hallucinations and deliriums still persisted. To control his psychotic symptoms, risperidone (0.5 mg/day) was added to his regimen because, as he was elderly, we were concerned about side effects such as hypersomnia. The second IMP-SPECT scan results remained abnormal, with decreased function in his bilateral frontal regions. Fifty days after his admission to our hospital, he was referred to another hospital for rehabilitation because of a decline in his muscle strength due to wasting.