A 60-year-old right-handed Taiwanese woman presented with sudden onset of intense and sharp left shoulder girdle pain without radiating to the arm 4 days prior to visiting our clinic on 17th, Nov, 2022, followed by muscle weakness of her left arm in abduction and elevation 3 days after the onset of pain. Tracking back her history, she received her first dose of COVID-19 vaccine, Moderna mRNA-1273, on 11th, June, and second dose on 20th, July, 2022, without significant side effects other than mild localized pain around the injection site in left deltoid muscle. She had no history of neurologic diseases or allergies and denied recent trauma or infection. The shoulder pain was not significantly relieved by conservative measures, such as massage, and non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents. The severity of weakness progressed rapidly over the next three days, and she could only raise her arm up to 45 degrees. A detailed neurological examination showed decreased muscle power in the supraspinatus (Medical Research Council grade, 3), deltoid (2), biceps (4), brachioradialis (4), and supinator (4), on the left side. The contralateral arm and bilateral lower extremities demonstrated full range of motion, full strength, and normal sensation without any pain. Deep tendon reflexes were normal and there were no sensory deficits.
Blood workup showed normal complete blood count, tumor markers (AFP, CA125, CA19-9, CA15-3, CEA, SCC, CYFRA21-1), free T4, and TSH levels. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the cervical spine without contrast was performed on day 6, which showed degenerative spondylolisthesis grade 1 in cervical vertebra (C) 5 and C6, mild protrusion of intervertebral disc between C4 and C5, and tiny marginal osteophytes with no significant bone lesions or displaced fractures. Magnetic resonance neurography (MRN) imaging revealed no significant abnormality in left brachial plexus but slightly increased T2-weighted signal in left supraspinatus was noted . Electromyogram (EMG) and nerve conduction studies (NCS) were conducted at two weeks and one month, respectively, after the onset of initial symptoms. The first EMG/NCS showed normal sensory nerve action potentials and borderline low compound motor action potentials of the left musculocutaneous and axillary nerves (lower compared to the right), along with decreased recruitment of the deltoid muscle and increased polyphasic waves of long duration in the rhomboid, deltoid, biceps, supraspinatus and supinator muscles on the left side. The results of the second EMG/NCS were similar to the initial one with the additional findings of active denervation in the deltoid and bicep muscles, indicated by fibrillations and positive waves on EMG . The EMG/NCS results showed left brachial plexopathy mainly involving left upper trunk. The 18 F-FDG PET-CT scan obtained one month later showed diffused areas of increased radioactivity uptake (score 1) in the supraspinatus, deltoid and bicep muscles of the left upper limb .
Subsequent treatment with oral prednisolone (40 mg/day) was initiated on day 5 and continued for 12 days without tapering. The level of muscle weakness remained stationary for the first 10 days following treatment and gradually started to improve afterwards. Recovery of muscle strength by 50% was subjectively observed by the patient in the first month and up to 90% of recovery was noted 3 months after the onset of first symptom. Six months later, muscle power had almost resumed to its prior state.