The patient was a 21-year-old female during her first visit to our clinic. Her father had major depressive disorder, and her mother had no history of psychiatric disorders. She was the first child of two siblings. She had been diagnosed with Ebstein's anomaly and had undergone a Blalock–Taussig shunting at 1 month of age. At the age of 9 years, she underwent Fontan surgery, and her physical condition improved considerably. After the surgery, she did not require hospitalization until high school graduation, but her parents raised their physically fragile daughter overprotectively. She had never been subjected to any dietary restriction or weight control, but her growth curve almost progressed with a downward deviation of 1 SD. She did not do well at school and tended to have interpersonal problems, but her classmates helped her adjust well.
In April of her 18th year of age, she became employed as an office worker. Her weight was 45 kg and body mass index (BMI) was 18.5 kg/m2. Six months later, she was transferred to a new position and became fatigued, experienced frequent stomachaches, and lost her appetite and weight. In February of her 19th year of age, hypotension and hypokalemia were noted, and the patient was referred for admission to the internal medicine ward. She was administered daily intravenous drip infusions, discharged from the hospital at a weight of 40 kg, and returned to work. However, her physical condition worsened due to decreased food intake, and she was readmitted to the hospital. Over the subsequent 2 years, she was hospitalized 14 times in the same way.
In June, at the age of 21 years, because an eating disorder was suspected, she was referred to our department. She stated that she did not want to lose weight, and she weighed 31.9 kg and had a BMI of 13.3 kg/m2. Computed tomography (CT) of the head revealed no abnormal findings, and the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale, Third Edition, performed in the third month of hospitalization, showed a full-scale IQ of 74, verbal IQ of 82, and motor IQ of 71. The patient was diagnosed with avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID). We started her on a diet of 1150 kcal with 400 kcal of nutritional supplements. After admission, she consumed all meals; however, on the fifth day, she still weighed just 32 kg. She said, “I don't know why my weight isn't increasing.” She began complaining of nausea and gastralgia regularly but rarely vomited. Since her weight did not increase commensurately with her food intake during the first month of admission, we suspected that physical factors related to her heart disease had suppressed her weight gain. Abdominal CT revealed a large amount of ascites and intestinal edema . There were no significant changes in her blood test results or decreases in protein or albumin levels. According to the pediatric cardiologist, massive ascites and intestinal edema might have originated from a special form of circulation called the Fontan circulation, that is, increased venous pressure of the inferior vena cava. Thus, we considered the possibility that she was unable to consume food because of fear that eating would aggravate her gastrointestinal symptoms. On the 49th day, her weight dropped to 30 kg, and nasogastric tube feeding was required, starting at 1600 kcal. On the 89th day, her weight reached 38.3 kg, and the CT scan that was performed on the 91st day showed that the ascites had almost disappeared. She was able to consume almost 100% of her food orally and was discharged on Day 150. As the patient had a special circulatory condition, the volume of ascites changed depending on the fluctuation of circulating plasma volume and slight changes in nutritional status. Notably, tube feeding improved the patient's nutrition, and her fluid levels normalized.
After 1 month of stable food intake and weight maintenance, she began to vomit after every meal. Her weight decreased drastically, and she was admitted to our hospital for the second time in December. Her weight at admission was 29.4 kg, and her BMI was 12.2 kg/m2. Although she initially accepted nasogastric tube feeding well, when we proposed a specific target weight of 40 kg, she expressed resistance to gaining weight. Nevertheless, on the Day 24, her weight recovered to 33 kg, and she expressed a desire to eat orally. Therefore, the nasogastric tube was removed; however, the patient began to eat less frequently. She also told other patients that she had thrown up so much that she had lost too much weight, which indicated that she was deliberately trying to control her weight. Therefore, we revised her diagnosis to AN.
On Day 101, her weight exceeded 39 kg, she began to express a fear of weight gain, and demanded to be discharged from the hospital. As her weight gain was sluggish, at approximately 40 kg, we respected her wishes and discharged her on Day 191. However, soon thereafter, she lost weight and was readmitted to the hospital.
Over the course of 4 years, this patient was out of the hospital for a total of only 99 days. Thus, including the time spent at the previous hospital, she had been hospitalized for more than 6 years. The family cannot hide their anxiety about caring for her at home due to her existing medical and psychiatric disabilities, and they are searching for the next step, which may involve transferring her to a psychiatric hospital, in anticipation of long-term inpatient care.