A 68-year-old, right-handed, Caucasian female nurse, with a past medical history of TCC of the urinary bladder, presented with a chief complaint of right-sided weakness and seizures. The patient was diagnosed with urinary bladder cancer in 1996. At that time, she was treated with forty-five cycles of gemcitabine, paclitaxel, and cisplatin chemotherapy. In 2005, she received local radiation therapy to the urinary bladder. In 2006, liver metastases were discovered, and the patient responded well to palliative chemotherapy with six additional cycles of cisplatin with gemcitabine. In 2008 she presented with hydronephrosis secondary to a large distal right ureteral recurrence of the TCC. The patient underwent a laparoscopic nephroureterectomy and cystoscopy that year. The patient denied tobacco, alcohol, or drug abuse. At her latest admission in 2010, the patient reported a 2-week history of right arm and leg weakness and a 1-day history of uncontrollable shaking of her right upper and lower extremity. The shaking was brief and resolved spontaneously. The patient denied loss of consciousness, nausea, vomiting, dysarthria, headaches, visual changes, cognitive changes, or difficulty ambulating.
Neurologic examination revealed right-sided gait disturbance, as well as proximal more than distal paresis of muscle groups in her right upper and lower extremity (4 to 4+/5). The medical exam and the remainder of the neurologic exam were without focal deficits.
Initial imaging by the emergency room, noncontrast enhancing computed tomography (CT) of the brain, revealed an isodense lesion of the left frontal lobe with associated vasogenic edema . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain showed a 3.1 × 3.1 × 2.7 cm heterogeneously enhancing mass located along the posterior aspect of the left frontal convexity . The patient was placed on high-dose corticosteroids and antiepileptics. The metastatic evaluation, which included contrast-enhanced CT of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, showed no evidence of local recurrence, lymphadenopathy, or metastatic disease. The patient elected for craniotomy and resection of the tumor with motor strip mapping.
The tumor was accessed via a left parietal craniotomy after the outline of the tumor was marked with the frameless stereotactic system (Germany). A transsulcal approach was used to access the tumor, which was located just anterior to the motor strip. Intraoperative findings consisted of an extra-axial left frontal–parietal tumor that was gray in color with a firm and rubbery consistency. There was a surgical plane around the tumor and we achieved a near complete resection. The posterior margin of the tumor was unresectable given motor strip mapping indicated motor cortex territory, so we left a small rim of tumor to avoid causing the patient further weakness.
Pathological examination included a histologic analysis of three portions of firm tan-white tissue, measuring 1.0 × 1.0 × 0.2 cm in aggregate frozen section. A second brain biopsy, consisting of firm tan-white tissue measuring 3.5 × 2.5 × 0.7 cm in aggregate, was analyzed. The final pathological diagnosis of our left parietal brain tumor biopsy was metastatic carcinoma with features of TCC .
On awakening, the patient showed mild expressive aphasia and weakness, both of which improved on discharge on postoperative day five. No significant complicating factors were noted on postoperative MRI scan . She then underwent adjuvant whole-brain radiation therapy. At her 12-month follow-up, the patient had residual weakness of her right upper extremity, a condition that had improved only slightly since surgery. She evidenced no progression of metastatic disease, and there was no increase in the size of the residual tumor.