A 75-year-old Japanese man was found to have mediastinal lymphadenopathy by computed tomography . Transbronchial aspiration cytology was performed at the Sakura Medical Center, Toho University. The cytological diagnosis confirmed that it was a malignant tumor with the possibility of it being a lymphoreticular tumor or a metastatic carcinoma. Three months later, a lymphadenectomy was performed. The histological findings suggested that the tumor was a malignant lymphoma and was most likely Hodgkin lymphoma or a metastatic carcinoma. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells expressed cytokeratins and vimentin and were negative for lymphoid markers. These findings suggested that the tumor was likely a metastatic carcinoma. However, positron emission tomography/computed tomography showed no other lesions throughout the body except for swollen mediastinal lymph nodes , and gastrointestinal endoscopic examinations revealed no other abnormalities. The levels of serum tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19–9, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, neuron specific enolase (NSE), progastrin-releasing peptide, and cytokeratin 19 fragment, were within the normal ranges. The serum soluble interleukin-2 receptor level was not at a high level (469 U/ml). Based on this result, a CIRC tumor was suspected.
The CIRC tumor responded very well to chemotherapy and became difficult to confirm on imaging, but 12 months later, a new tumor was detected in the hilar region of the right lung on computed tomography. A small cell carcinoma was diagnosed by transbronchial aspiration cytology. The patient underwent chemoradiotherapy, but he later presented with superior vena cava syndrome and passed away. The total clinical course lasted for 29 months.
The completely excised mediastinal lymph node measured approximately 2.7 × 2.0 × 2.1 cm. On microscopic evaluation, the nodal architecture was mostly preserved, except in areas where neoplastic proliferation caused partial effacement . The lymph node was inconspicuously demarcated by fibrous tissue continuing to the capsule. Circumferential tumor cell proliferation around the follicles was conspicuous . Tumor cells were highly atypical, large in size, and round or polygonal in shape. Most of the tumor cells had round vesicular nuclei and prominent nucleoli. The abundant cytoplasm was pale to eosinophilic, with an ill-defined cell border resulting in an epithelioid-like appearance . The tumor cells were admixed with many small lymphocytes, plasma cells, and eosinophils. Tumor cells that resembled Hodgkin’s cells and Reed–Sternberg cells were scattered throughout the tumor. Typical and atypical mitoses were frequent (20/10 high-power fields). Apoptotic cells were also noted. Delicate collagen fibers often intermingled with tumor cells. The tumor cells and collagen fibers were closely associated. The cytoplasm of some tumor cells was hyalinized and appeared to continue to form collagen fibers. The tumor cells were often elongated in areas of increased numbers of collagen fibers. Necrotic foci and hemorrhage were not observed. Metastases of two small mediastinal lymph nodes were recognized.
The tumor cells were immunohistochemically positive for cytokeratin (CK)7, CK8, CK18, CAM5.2, AE1/AE3, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), vimentin, fascin, l-caldesmon, prolyl 4-hydroxylase 1, lysyl hydroxylase 3, and transglutaminase II . Immunoreaction with cytokeratins revealed fine cytoplasmic projections and reticular patterns in the tumor cells. Immunohistochemical staining of tenascin-C, prolyl 3-hydroxylase 1, alpha smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), desmin, FDC markers (CD23, D2–40, clusterin, CNA.42, low affinity NGFR, CD21, and CD35) and histiocytic/dendritic cell markers (CD1a, CD11c, langerin, DC-SIGN, DC-LAMP, CD83, DEC205, S-100 protein, CD68, and Factor XIIIa) were negative. In addition, the staining of other lymphocyte markers, including CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8, CD20, CD30, CD45, CD45RO, CD79a, and PAX5, were all negative. Staining of markers important for distinguishing metastatic tumors (34βE12, prostate-specific antigen, NKX3.1, P504S, polyclonal carcinoembryonic antigen, CK5/6, CK20, TTF-1, Napsin A, p63, p40, Melan A, HMB45, CD34, CD117, and ALK) were negative. Staining of neuroendocrine markers (NSE, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56) were also negative. Detection of Epstein-Barr encoding region (EBER)-1 was negative by in situ hybridization (ISH). Less than 10% of the tumor cells showed weak expression of EGFR. Up to 95% of the tumor cells showed high expression of the p53 protein. The Ki-67 labeling index (LI) was high (greater than 75%).
The ultrastructure of the tumor cells showed large cells with occasional indented nuclei with vesicular chromatin. The cytoplasm of the cells contained intermediate filaments. Some tumor cells exhibited dendritic interdigitating cytoplasmic processes and desmosome-like junctions . The tumor cells, however, had no endocrine granules.
A relapsed CIRC tumor was located that extended from the apex of the right lung to the clavicle fossa. It had progressed to the superior vena cava and was partially obstructing it. The patient presented with superior vena cava syndrome, which was the cause of his death. Histologically, changes in tumor cell morphology were observed, resulting in the formation of spindle cells that formed loose fascicles . The tumor cells showed extremely advanced pleomorphism in the relapsed tumor compared with that in the primary tumor, with numerous bizarre large and multinucleated cells and many typical and atypical mitoses (42/10 high-power fields). The atypical large cells showed greater increases in size and atypia in the relapsed tumor than in the primary tumor. The tumor cells were mixed with delicate collagen fibers. A massive area (approximately 80%) of necrosis was observed. The CIRC tumor had also metastasized to the right paratracheal lymph node.
The tumor cells of relapsed CIRC tumors were positive for CK8, CK18, CAM5.2, AE1/AE3, EMA, vimentin, fascin, l-caldesmon, prolyl 4-hydroxylase 1, lysyl hydroxylase 3, and transglutaminase II, indicating the presence of a CIRC tumor . Immunoreaction with cytokeratins showed dendritic staining patterns in tumor cells. In contrast to the primary lesion, the relapsed tumor was negative for CK7. The relapsed tumor cells were negative for NSE, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, CD56, Napsin A and ALK. They were also negative for prostate-specific antigen, NKX3.1 and P504S, thus ruling out metastatic adenocarcinoma of the prostate. EBER-1 ISH was negative. Twenty percent of the tumor cells showed weak expression of EGFR. Up to 80% of the tumor cells heterogeneously expressed the p53 protein. The Ki-67 LI was very low (15%).
A small cell carcinoma had formed in the hilar region of the right lung. Histologically, the tumor cells showed the typical finding, which is completely different from the morphology of CIRC tumors . Furthermore, immunohistochemical staining of TTF-1 and neuroendocrine cell markers (NSE, chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56) were positive to varying degrees . Immunohistochemical staining was negative for FRC markers, which are useful for diagnosing CIRC tumors . Staining of Napsin A, ALK, and EGFR were negative. The tumor metastasized to the liver, left paratracheal lymph node, and tracheal bifurcation lymph node. The small cell carcinoma and the CIRC tumor were located somewhat close to each other in the hilar region, but there was no clear continuity between them.
In addition, a small adenocarcinoma was found in the left lobe of the prostate. The adenocarcinoma corresponded to a Gleason pattern of 3 + 4, and it had remained within the prostate. There was no lymphatic or vascular invasion. The tumor cells were diffuse and strongly positive for prostate-specific antigen, and the focal cells were weakly positive for NKX3.1.