A 12-year-old female was referred to the University hospital with incapacitating dysmenorrhea, nausea, vomiting, fever, and a palpable abdominal mass in the hypogastric region. The patient described her symptoms as an acute exacerbation of a more chronic history of similar episodes that initially presented soon after the onset of menses at age 11. At first symptoms were relatively mild but they increased in intensity with each subsequent menstrual cycle. The patient reported that since menarche, her menstrual cycles have been irregular with moderate bleeding lasting an average of 5 days.
Upon admission, the patient was prescribed levonorgestrel 0.15 mg and etilnilestradiol 0.30 mg to induce amenorrhea and attenuate her symptoms, however, the medications had no effect. A pelvic ultrasound revealed bifurcation of the uterine body near the uterine cervix, suggesting uterus bicornis. In addition to the ultrasound, computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were performed (, , ), both demonstrating uterus didelphys, left renal agenesis, and the presence of two endometrial cavities: a right-sided cavity with a thickness of 3.8 mm and a left-sided cavity filled with a hypodense material, likely demonstrative of blood.
Under the diagnostic suspicion of Herlyn-Werner-Wunderlich Syndrome, the patient was referred to the University hospital. Initially, injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate was administered to block the hypothalamic-gonadal axis and interrupt the menstrual cycle. A colpo-hysteroscopy was then performed to confirm the clinical hypothesis and to determine the presence of a communication between the patent hemivagina and the atretic hemivagina. Hysteroscopic examination revealed a right-sided patent hemiuterus with a single uterine cervix, uterine tube, and ostium and a left-sided atretic hemiuterus without any lateral vaginal wall bulging or associated left uterine tube ostium . The medical team did not have a clinical suspicion of cervical atresia of the left system prior to hysteroscopy, this diagnosis was made during the procedure. It changed the approach because if the left system wasn’t atretic and if there were a hemivagina with a septum, the septum could have been opened during hysteroscopy and no further treatment would be necessary. Since there was no left cervix and no possibility to drain the left system, hemi-histerectomy was performed. Since there was a huge hidrosalpingis, the medical team chose to remove the left tube with the left hemiuterus, and not only communicate the myometrium between the two uterine segments, because the left system was no longer functional.
In this approach, it was possible to observe a dilated left uterine tube, firmly adhered to the left ovary, which had an inflammatory aspect and a small hemorrhagic cyst. Uterus bicornis was identified, and the left hemiuterus was distended and connected to the right one only by a myometrial strand . A left salpingectomy was performed with preservation of the left ovary, followed by left hemi-hysterectomy, ligation of the left uterine vessels, and resection of the myometrial segment connecting the two hemiuteri at a level adjacent to the cervix of the right hemiuterus . Upon its resection, it was observed that the left hemiuterus had no communication to either the right-sided hemiuterus or right-sided vagina.
One day after the laparoscopic hemi-hysterectomy, the patient was discharged from the hospital. On follow-up, 1 month postoperatively, she had no complaints. One year after surgery, she remains asymptomatic.