A Hispanic 72-year-old female patient presents to the emergency room with a 6-month history of progressive lower limb pain, sensation of paraesthesia, oedema, and limitation to her gait. During the review of systems, the patient reports occasional macroscopic haematuria without any urinary irritative symptom. In her medical records it was relevant one year ago she was diagnosed with preserved ejection-fraction heart failure in management with furosemide 20mg per day and metoprolol tartrate 50mg per day.
Her initial physical examination showed vital signs within normal values, cardiac auscultation did not show any pathological findings, but lung auscultation showed Velcro sound in both pulmonary bases, grade I soft oedema in both inferior extremities, and her neurological examination showed diminished strength in both, flexion, and extension in her toes bilaterally, right knee, right hip, left elbow, and left shoulder. There were found absent in both extremities the Achillean and tricipital reflex. She also had diminished the superficial sensitivity and she presented allodynia. Initial workup in the emergency room showed altered renal function, moderate proteinuria, anaemia, eosinophilia, and positive ANCA, with further analysis showing positive anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies . Based on this, she was admitted for beginning with replacement renal therapy and further studies to rule out immunological or haematological disease.
During her clinical evaluation, her lungs were characterised to ruled out any lung condition, however, later in her hospitalisation she presented tachypnoea, along with haemoptysis and supplementary oxygen need. Initially a chest X-ray was performed, which only showed alveolar opacities with mild cardiomegaly or any vascular congestive signs . A high-resolution tomography chest tomography (HRCT) was performed for characterising these findings, which showed a usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) presented as fibrotic interstitial lung disease . The clinical correlation with these features led to the clinical suspicion of an alveolar haemorrhage; for this reason, the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU), infectious processes were ruled out, and previous antiparasitic therapy and isolation, management with methylprednisolone pulses was performed, with improvement in the chest discomfort and her saturation values. Several days after, a bronchoscopy was performed in order to confirm the diagnosis, and the biopsy showed an important interstitial infiltrate of eosinophils, leucocytoclastic vasculitis with necrosis, fulfilling the diagnostic criteria of eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis. After this, immunomodulator management was initiated, and rituximab was chosen considering the renal function of the patient. Four weeks after the therapy was started the patient had a good response and was discharged without supplementary oxygen therapy, but with inter-day haemodialysis.