A 26-years-old man was referred with decreased visual acuity for one week in the left eye. Headache was a accompanying complaint and he was overwhelmed by oral ulcers. On ophthalmologic examination, he had a visual acuity of 16/20 on both eyes. Color vision tested with Ishihara plates was 12/12. The anterior segment was normal and intraocular pressure measured with applanation tonometer revealed 12 mmHg on the right eye and 11 mmHg on the left eye. Fundus examination disclosed a mild vitritis (+1-2 cells) and optic disc swelling with absence of venous pulsation and cupping on both eyes . As there was no sign of retinal infiltrates, vascular sheathing, engorgement, neovascularization, hemorrhages or cystoid macular edema , a fluorescein angiography has not been performed. The central 30-2 test performed with Humphrey automatized perimetry demonstrated enlarged blind spot on the left eye and no abnormality on the right eye. Regarding the optic disc swelling and the complain of headache, a cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is planned which elicited a peripheral, ring-enhancing lesion with a diameter of 0.5 mm posterior to the optic chiasma on T1-weighted axial images obtained after administration of contrast agent . The lesion was interpreted as cerebral vasculitis by the neuro-radiologist. As the patient fulfilled the 3 major criteria required for the diagnosis according to the examination in the dermatology clinic which revealed oral ulcer and acneiform lesions in addition to positive pathergy test; he was diagnosed to have Behcet's disease and oral treatment of methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg/day together with immunosuppressive therapy is offered. Optic disc swelling was assumed to be due to papilledema related to intracranial hypertension though it could not be proven as the patient denied lumbar puncture. As he had just a mild posterior uveitis we advised no further immunosuppressive drugs and just close follow-up, however Colchium-Dispert was suggested by the dermatology department. Unfortunately, the patient was not able to attend for further controls, so he was referred to another clinic with a detailed epicrisis.