A 21-year-old Ghanaian man presented initially with a 6-year history of progressively worsening pain and swelling in both knee and wrist joints, which moderately affected his activities of daily living. He reported episodes of fever and chills in the past, although these were absent at the time of presentation. He had polyuria, polydipsia, and nocturia but he did not have weight loss, headaches, or loss of vision.
He had profuse diaphoresis particularly of his face, hands, and feet but did not have any other symptoms of hyperthyroidism. He had noticed an increase in the size of his hands and feet and a change in his facial appearance which were his main concerns. He had been treated with analgesics in the past, which only transiently relieved his pain.
There was no past medical history of diabetes or sickle cell disease. He had been diagnosed as having chronic hepatitis B infection 4 years prior to seeing us but was not on any treatment. There is no family history of diabetes, sickle cell disease, or a presentation similar to his.
He is the second of three children of his parents who are both alive; no sibling has any stigmata of PDP. His father has three other children with another woman who have no stigmata of PDP. His mother has one surviving sibling with four children of whom none have stigmata of PDP. His other maternal cousins also do not have any stigmata of PDP.
His illness has taken a psychological toll on him because he has been unable to continue his education after secondary school although he excelled in his examinations and got a scholarship to the university. He is usually at home indoors, because of people’s comments about his appearance when he goes out. His older sister has had two suitors renege on their promise to marry her on meeting him for fear the disorder could be familial and be transmitted to their offspring.
An examination revealed a young man with coarse facial features, hyperhidrosis, cutis verticis gyrata , pectus excavatum, doughy palms, spade like hands and feet , digital clubbing , and pitting pedal edema at his ankles with profusely diaphoretic hands and feet. There was no cyanosis, jaundice, skin rash, or any stigmata of chronic liver disease. He had visual field defects in the superior temporal quadrant bilaterally on confrontation, mild wasting and weakness of proximal muscles, and an antalgic gait. His cardiorespiratory and abdominal examinations were normal.
Significant musculoskeletal findings included massive effusions of both knees with striae of the overlying skin associated with limited range of movement. There was also evidence of bone expansion at his wrist joints without soft tissue swelling, tenderness, or warmth. There was reduced flexion and extension as well as crepitus at his wrist joints. He also had enlarged proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints bilaterally with a good handgrip.
Laboratory tests revealed mild normocytic normochromic anemia with hemoglobin of 10.9 g/dl. However, the following tests were within normal limits: erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), fasting plasma glucose at 5.0 mmol/l, serum insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), liver, renal, thyroid function tests, and serum corrected calcium of 2.32 mmol/L. His serum albumin level was 33 g/L (35–50 g/L). Preliminary investigations for a rheumatological condition such as rheumatoid factor, anticyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP), antinuclear antibody (ANF), and creatinine kinase (CK) were all normal. A chest X-ray, echocardiogram, abdominal ultrasound, pelvic ultrasound, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain were also normal with no pituitary lesion seen; these findings ruled out rheumatological diseases, cardiopulmonary diseases, or acromegaly from a pituitary adenoma as a cause of the clinical features. He has financial constraints as the family is unwilling to support him because he refused to seek alternative treatment.
Arthrocentesis done under aseptic conditions yielded approximately 700 ml of straw colored, normal viscosity aspirate per knee joint. There was residual effusion after this therapeutic and diagnostic aspiration. Gram stain, culture, cytology, cell count, and analysis for crystals were normal with no bacterial growth.
X-rays of his lower limbs showed periosteal thickening of the medial cortices of both femurs with sparing of the lateral cortices . There was uninterrupted thickening of the periosteum of both lateral and medial cortices of his tibia and fibula . Effusions of both knee joints were noted. The X-rays of his wrist joints, radius, and ulna showed diffuse bilateral symmetric periosteal thickening with marginal irregularities of both ulnae and medial aspects of both radial shafts . There was expansion of the ulna shafts with flaring of both distal radii and a suggestion of cortical thickening in the ulna aspects of the second to fourth digits of both hands .
The effusion accumulated rapidly within a week. He was initiated on prednisolone 40 mg daily, which was reduced by 10 mg per week over 6 weeks. He was also given diclofenac 75 mg twice a day and omeprazole 20 mg twice a day over a month. Physiotherapy was started with active and active-assisted exercises of both upper and lower limbs. A bone biopsy was considered but was not done; bone scans or genetic testing were not done either. Three weeks after admission, he was discharged on prednisolone 10 mg which he took until week 4 and was weaned off by week 6. His pain improved but did not resolve completely and he was walking unaided and performing tasks of daily living better than when he was admitted. He is currently on celecoxib 100–200 mg pro re nata (PRN; as needed) and physiotherapy.
At a review, 3 weeks after discharge, with his father, we noticed his father had clubbing of his fingers . There were no other symptoms and signs of pulmonary disease or hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in his father. Genetic testing was considered then but this was not available in our hospital and our patient’s father declined the offer to screen him for cardiopulmonary disease with X-rays. The time course of our patient’s illness is shown in Fig. .