A 48-year-old woman presented with a 2-year history of tingling sensation and numbness of her right fingers. Two years prior to her hospital visit, she began to notice that her right ring finger and little finger were numb and tingling; 7 months later, bruises suddenly appeared on her whole body, and these persisted only on both legs. These multiple purpuric patches developed into painful ulcerated wounds located mostly on the left lateral malleolar areas. The ulcers healed within 2 months, leaving atrophic scars. More and more similar skin lesions developed on both lower extremities, exhibiting a waxing and waning course. During this time, the patient also complained of num-bness and a tingling sensation on the dorsum of both feet, which was more severe on the right.
The patient's family and social history were unremarkable. Her previous medical history included a diagnosis of multiple cysts in the kidney and pancreas. She had also undergone a distal pancreatectomy; the removed tissue had pathologically confirmed serous oligocystic adenoma. There was no drug history, including use of an oral contraceptive pill.
When initially evaluated in our hospital, her cranial nerve function, motor function including muscle bulk, tone, power and deep-tendon reflex, cerebellar function test, and gait were all normal. However, a sensory examination revealed about a 50% hypesthesia for touch and pinprick sensation on the dorsum of both feet, the right fourth and fifth fingers, and the medial palm, which is innervated by the ulnar nerve. Multiple irregularly shaped ulcerative skin lesions and eschar with some healed ivory-white colored atrophic scars were seen in the left lateral malleolar area . The results of the following laboratory studies regarding autoimmune disease and coagulation defects were normal, negative, or nonspecific: complete blood count, routine blood chemistry with blood glucose, urinalysis, serological test for syphilis, human immunodeficiency virus, and hepatitis B, sedimentation rate, antinuclear antibody, anti-double-stranded DNA antibodies, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibodies, antiphospholipid antibody, anticardiolipin antibody, anti-Sjögren's syndrome (SS)A/SSB antibody, protein C, protein S, cryoglobulin, rheumatoid factor, thyroid function test, vitamin B12, folate, creatine kinase, platelet aggregation panel, antithrombin III activity, gene study of factor V Leiden mutation, and prothrombin 20210 G>A. A cerebrospinal-fluid examination and Doppler ultrasound of both lower extremities produced normal results. The initial nerve conduction study revealed a diminished right ulnar sensory nerve action potential, and both sural sensory nerve action potentials were absent, even with repetitive stimulation. The amplitudes of the compound motor nerve action potentials of both the peroneal and posterior tibial nerves were decreased. Other motor and sensory conduction results were normal. A electrophysiological study revealed no abnormal temporal dispersion or partial conduction block.
Skin-punch biopsy sampling was conducted on the left lateral ankle. The findings were consistent with livedoid vasculopathy with fibrin deposition within the vessel walls, and thrombi and scattered perivascular lymphocytic inflammation.
A nerve biopsy sample was removed from the right sural nerve, which revealed endoneurial capillary ectasia and congestion with hemorrhage, with extensive infarct of the peripheral nerve and Schwann cells. Occasional perivascular lymphocytes were observed infiltrating the arterioles in the epineurium. A marked degeneration of axons and the myelin sheath were observed, and the Schwann cell cytoplasm contained many autophagic vacuoles and myelin figures . There was no definite evidence of vasculitis in the form of vessel necrosis and leukocytoclasia. The biopsy findings were suggestive of ischemic peripheral neuropathy.
This patient was diagnosed with ischemic neuropathy associated with livedoid vasculitis and treated with the antithrombotic and antifibrinolytic agents pentoxifylline and clopidogrel, respectively. The patient suffered no further attacks during the subsequent 3-year follow-up period.