A 75-year-old gentleman presented to the urology clinic in 2009 with history of mild
lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) and significantly elevated level of serum
prostate specific antigen (PSA) of 186ng/L. There was no past medical or surgical
history of note. He had no family history of prostate cancer, nor any other
malignancy. He had a 20 pack-year smoking history. Clinically, digital rectal
examination demonstrated a firm prostate suspicious for T2 disease. The rest of the
physical examination was unremarkable. The trans rectal ultrasound guided biopsy
confirmed high-risk prostate cancer, ISUP grade group 5 (Gleason score 4 + 5 = 9)
involving 12/12 cores. Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) was commenced with
Bicultamide 150mg once daily followed by Goserelin subcutaneous injections.
PSA was monitored on a 3 monthly basis and showed a consistent downward trend during
the first two years of ADT treatment reaching lowest level of 3.14ng/L. Fluctuations
in PSA with a rise to 8.4ng/L were documented. Repeated Technetium-99m bone
scintigraphy showed no evidence of bone metastasis. Maximum androgen blockade (MAB)
was commenced in 2014 as indicated with the addition of once daily Bicultamide 50 mg
to Goserelin.
PSA was controlled in the following three years with PSA levels ranging between
1.5 ng/L to 1.6 ng/L. In 2017 and as monitoring with PSA continued, failure of
response to MAB was signalled with an elevation of PSA to 73.4 ng/L. At this stage,
bone scintigraphy remained negative for bone metastatic disease.
Our patient was enrolled in the ARAMIS study for non-metastatic castrate resistant
prostate cancer patients. As part of the study interventions, he underwent screening
with CT scan of Chest, Abdomen, and Pelvis (CAP) that was not otherwise indicated.
Bone scintigraphy was performed every 16 weeks as per trial protocol as well. Serial
CT images confirmed presence of progressive lesion in the pancreatic neck which was
incidentally noted during screening. Due to the progressive nature of pancreatic
lesion, the patient underwent open distal pancreatectomy, splenectomy, portal vein
resection and cholecystectomy. However, the patient did not require neoadjuvant
therapy. Histopathological analysis demonstrated T2 N1 M0 moderately differentiated
pancreatic adenocarcinoma with lymphovascular and perineural invasion, completely
excised.
During assessment for adjuvant chemotherapy for pancreatic cancer, CT imaging
revealed four new lung nodules with the largest measuring up to 7mm that were not
visible 5 months earlier . The nodule was biopsied and histopathologically examined with
immunohistochemistry showing a metastatic adenocarcinoma of upper gastrointestinal
tract origin, likely from the known pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Biopsy also confirmed
a 2mm focus of metastatic adenocarcinoma of the prostate ISUP grade group 4 (Gleason
score 4 + 4 = 8) (NKX3.1 and PSA positive) as well . Subsequent fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET) CT scan, unfortunately, showed widespread
bony metastasis. The patient received Paclitaxel and Gemcitabine for recurrence of
the pancreatic cancer; however, stopped due to side effects. On the other hand, PSA
continued to rise to 128ng/L. The patient continued luteinising hormone-releasing
hormone (LHRH) analogues for metastatic prostate cancer. He succumbed one year after
diagnosis of collision tumour.