A 37-year-old woman, at 34 weeks of pregnancy (144 cm height; 42.5 kg body weight), and body mass index (BMI) 20.5 kg/m2, underwent C-section under general anesthesia for abruptio placentae. Written informed consent was obtained for publication of the case. The patient had associated gestational diabetes; preeclampsia, treated with magnesium sulfate maintenance infusion at 1 g/h after loading infusion at 4 g/20 min; and hypertension, which was being treated with oral nifedipine 20 mg, the last dose of which was taken 5 h before anesthesia induction. Magnesium sulfate infusion was stopped 10 min before anesthesia induction. Its serum concentration was 4.4 mg/dl, measured about 6 h before anesthesia induction, which was within the target concentration for preeclampsia (4.2–8.4 mg/dl ) during maintenance of infusion. Before anesthesia induction, a neuromuscular transmission mechanosensor incorporated in the neuromuscular transmission module (Datex-Ohmeda S/5, GE Healthcare, Tokyo, Japan) was attached to the tips of the left thumb and left index finger; electrodes were attached for stimulating the left ulnar nerve. Neuromuscular monitoring was started with automatic calibration before rocuronium administration. Before rocuronium administration, the train-of-four (TOF) ratio was 1.0. General anesthesia was induced with propofol 100 mg and rocuronium 40 mg (0.94 mg/kg in actual body weight). Laryngoscopy yielded Cormack and Lehane grade 1 view, and the trachea was intubated 40 s after rocuronium administration (TOF count 0). Anesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane 1.0–1.5%, remifentanil 0.1–0.2 mcg/kg/min, and fentanyl 200 mcg, without maintenance with rocuronium. The post-tetanic count (PTC) was 0 postoperatively, 95 min after the induction dose of rocuronium was administered. PTC was performed after an interval of at least 2 min on the monitoring setting. We also used another neuromuscular monitoring method for comparison to detect monitoring failure: the accelerometer of a TOF Watch® (Nippon Koden Co., Tokyo, Japan) attached to the tip of the right thumb with a hand adaptor; electrodes were attached for stimulating the right ulnar nerve. We could not calibrate the TOF Watch®, as there were no muscle contractions. Sugammadex 200 mg (4.7 mg/kg in actual body weight) was administered when PTC 2 was confirmed, 163 min after administration of the induction dose of rocuronium. Atropine 0.5 mg and neostigmine 1.0 mg were administered when the TOF ratio was 0.7, 9 min after sugammadex administration. TOF ratio exceeded 0.9 at 15 min after sugammadex administration. Sevoflurane was turned off 5 min after atropine and neostigmine administration, and the trachea was extubated. The patient recovered uneventfully.