The male proband is the child of a healthy nonconsanguineous Brazilian couple, a 31-year-old mother and a 33-year-old father, and at the time of his first clinical evaluation, he was 1 month old. The proband has an unaffected brother, and the mother denied any illnesses or drug exposure during the pregnancy that was positive for polyhydramnios and intrauterine growth retardation. He was born from a vaginal delivery at 35 weeks of pregnancy with 1.850 kg (<10th percentile), 38 cm height (<10th percentile), and with a head circumference of 30 cm (<10th percentile). At birth, the patient was noted to have a severe cutaneous abnormality with collodion membrane and congenital ichthyosis with taut skin in the face, eclabium, ectropion, microcephaly, cryptorchidism, flattened rudimentary ears, and absence of hair in the scalp, eyebrows, and eyelashes. He also had upper limb malformations characterized by the absence of the right hand, bilateral shortening of the ulna with radius aplasia, fixed elbows, oligodactyly in the right hand with only the fifth digit present, and in the left foot with the absence of the fourth digit. A cardiac ultrasound revealed a patent foramen ovale, and cholesterol biosynthesis pathway testing results were normal.
The patient and his family were seen at the Pontifical Catholic University of Paraná in Curitiba, Brazil, where samples of peripheral blood were collected for genetic testing. Genomic DNA was extracted from biological material following standard procedures. The proband, his unaffected parents, and his brother were submitted to the Baylor-Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics (BHCMG) study through the PhenoDB web-based portal (http://phenodb.net) for consideration of genetic investigation. The Johns Hopkins Institutional Review Board provided local approval for this study, and informed consent was obtained from the parents, which explicitly allowed publication of photographs of the proband.
The patient was first screened for microscopic and submicroscopic chromosomal alterations using the G-banded karyotype and array-CGH analysis, all with normal results. Whole-exome sequencing from the proband and his unaffected parents and brother (kit SureSelect XT Human All Exon V4 from Agilent Technologies, CA, USA) was performed for the detection of single-nucleotide variants and small insertions and deletions, using the HiSeq2500 platform from Illumina (CA, USA). Targeted regions include the coding DNA and untranslated regions. The medium vertical coverage was 100×, horizontal coverage ≥97.5% at 10× and ≥95% at 20×. The raw paired-end reads were aligned to the GRCh37/hg19 reference genome using the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner. Sequencing data were analyzed using the PhenoDB web-based portal (http://phenodb.net). Variant call format files were used for annotation and filtering of genetic variants. Visual verification of the findings was made using data from the Binary Alignment Map (BAM) files with Integrative Genomics Viewer. The following annotation and filtering strategies were used: Variants with population allelic frequency <1% (1000 Genomes; dbSNP; dbVar); Variants in disease-causing genes (OMIM); Missense and loss-of-function variants; and Variants not located in segmental duplications (excluding pseudogenes).
The detected variants were classified according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) guidelines as pathogenic, likely pathogenic, benign, likely benign, or variants of unknown significance (VUS). We tested all modes of inheritance, starting with a dominant hypothesis (investigation of de novo variants), followed by recessive autosomal or X-linked (homozygosity, compound heterozygosis, and hemizygosity). Sanger sequencing was used to validate and perform segregation analysis of the variant in the family.
As a result, we identified a rare de novo missense variant (NM_015884:c.727C>T) in hemizygosity in the MBTPS2 gene. This variant was not present in his parents or brother and has only one entrance on the ClinVar database. Following the ACMG guidelines, the variant was classified as likely pathogenic (PM2/PP3/PS2). presents the case and shows an image of the BAM file displaying the region of the MBTPS2 variant in the proband. Sanger sequencing validated the variant and confirmed its segregation only with the affected phenotype in the family. We also identified two novel missense variants (NM_000213:c.4217G>C and NM_001005619:c.1940C>T) in heterozygosity in the ITGB4 gene that could also be associated with the patient’s skin condition. Both variants were also classified as likely pathogenic (PM2/PS2 and PM2/PS2) and were not seen in any of the population databases consulted.