A 76-year-old female patient presented to our hospital with abdominal distension and a chief complaint of constipation.
The patient’s constipation had lasted for two months, and it was worse after eating. There was no vaginal bleeding, fluid production, or obvious increase in the frequency of urination.
Upon presentation, review of the patient’s medical history revealed a vaginal hysterectomy 20 years prior in response to a mass that was then diagnosed as leiomyomasarcoma.
She denied any family history.
The patient was observed to be short of breath with nominal exercise. The shape of her chest was generally normal. Breath sounds from the right lung were reduced, while those from the left were normal. She had abdominal distention and a palpably large mass, the upper edge of which reached two transverse fingers above the umbilicus. Vulva and vagina revealed no obvious abnormalities.
Laboratory findings measured the levels of the tumor marker cancer antigen 125 at 420.3 U/mL. No tumor cells were found in the pleural or ascitic fluids.
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvic area revealed a large, cystic, and solid mass with unclear bilateral attachments . After assessment by gynecologists, the mass was suspected to be a malignant tumor originating from the appendix that had undergone peritoneal metastasis. Multiple small cysts were identified in the liver accompanied by evident ascites , and another small cyst was found in the left kidney. Chest CT revealed a massive right pleural effusion.
After evaluation, clinicians decided to proceed with surgery. Gynecologists and general surgeons participated in the operation. Intraoperative exploration uncovered bilateral ovarian, mesenteric, and abdominal wall tumors. The right ovary had been replaced by a multinodular mass that was 8.5 cm × 4.5 cm × 3.5 cm in size. The cut surface was grayish and powdery, and some areas were slightly fragile, while others were solid. The tumor had grown as a sheet containing thick collagen fibers; some areas were edematous, and some areas were densely packed. The 24 cm × 15 cm × 13 cm mesenteric mass was also multinodular with local invasion of the intestinal serosa and underlying muscle. The cut surface was yellowish-gray, powdery, and solid. The mass showed signs of edema and degeneration.
Resected samples from the ovarian and mesenteric tumors were sent for frozen section biopsy. Cells from the bilateral ovarian lesions were oval-shaped or short and spindle-shaped; the cells were slightly atypical, but any mitotic figures were unobvious. In some areas, capillary involvement was evident . In contrast, cells of the mesenteric tumor had grown in sheets, bundles, or fishbone-like arrangements. The cells were oval-shaped or short and fusiform. Nuclear atypia was unapparent, and mitotic figures were clearly visible (10-20 cells/10 high-power fields). Tumor involvement in the intestinal smooth muscle was evident, and regions of flaky necrosis were observed .
Considering the patient's medical history and clinical and histopathological findings, we entertained a diagnosis of Meigs syndrome. We initially believed the right ovarian tumor to be a sex cord-stromal cell tumor (e.g., fibroid or follicular membrane fibroma). The mesenteric mass was initially believed to be a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). However, to narrow the differential diagnoses, we opted to perform further immunohistochemistry (IHC) and molecular analyses.
IHC revealed diffuse expressions of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), cluster of differentiation (CD) 10 (CD10), and Wilms' tumor 1 (WT1) in both the ovarian and mesenteric lesions . Calretinin, α-inhibin, desmin, smooth muscle actin, Cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), CD117, Dog-1, and CD34 were not detected. Approximately 30% of cells were Ki-67+, and wild-type P53 was ubiquitously expressed . We further performed fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis on the mesenteric neoplastic tissue. By our analysis, variants of the following genes were not detected: BCL6 corepressor (BCOR), 14-3-3 protein epsilon (YWHAE), and JAZF zinc finger 1 (JAZF1). All three variants are common diagnostic indicators of ESS despite morphologic variation. We also performed next-generation sequencing (NGS) on two specimens separately. Mutations in five cancer-related genes (PTEN, TEK, CDK4, MDM2, and CDKN1C) were detected on the mesenteric mass. The ovarian tumor had mutations in the CHD [c.735G>C (p.E245D)], TSHR [c.928C>T (p.R310C)], and MC1R [c.219G>A (p.M73I)] genes, which have not been reported to cause disease.