Mrs. E was a 57-year-old lady with a 12-year history of COPD, with an FEV1 of 30 %. Furthermore, she had a past medical history of carcinoma of the breast, type 2 diabetes mellitus and left ventricular failure (LVF), which was diagnosed on an echocardiogram (ECHO) in July 2014. Despite a diagnosis of COPD she continued to smoke 20–30 cigarettes/day.
She was prescribed a number of medications to help manage her airways disease including tiotropium, seretide 500, salbutamol, prednisolone and most recently oral theophyline (450 mg twice daily), which was started in April 2013 as an adjunct to her current medications.
She was admitted in June 2015 following a fall with notable decreased sensation bilaterally in her lower limbs and a tachycardia of 133 beats per minute. Spinal cord compression was an initial concern, however this was excluded with a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) spine. There was no change to her theophylline prescription on admission to hospital and no new medication was prescribed that would affect theophylline metabolism.
Over several days additional symptoms were noted, including worsening nausea, blurred vision, increasing fatigue (with stable blood sugars) and worsening speech with slurring of words. Development of vomiting resulted in a decision to measure her theophylline concentration and perform a CT head, as no obvious cause for her symptoms had been elicited. The CT head was reported as clear of any ischaemia, haemorrhage or space-occupying lesion.
The trough theophylline concentration was 59.3 mg/l. The last result obtained in July 2014 during an admission for influenza related infective exacerbation of COPD was reported as 20.2 mg/l, marginally above the 10-20 mg/l recommended reference range. The concentration was then not re-checked either in primary care or in hospital; it therefore became apparent this was a case of chronic theophylline toxicity.
The medical team at The National Poisons Information Service was contacted for advice on management of this patient. The rationale being abnormally high theophylline concentration, furthermore this was a case of chronic, rather than acute toxicity, for which we felt specialist input was required.
The patient was monitored for significant effects of toxicity; these include seizures (reported at trough concentrations of 50 mg/l ), reduced conscious level and tachyarrhythmias. Although Mrs. E suffered a persistent tachycardia, her heart rate remained in sinus rhythm. Cardiac monitoring was started. She was managed conservatively by stopping the theophylline and monitoring symptoms. Due to vomiting, oral activated charcoal was excluded and although charcoal haemoperfusion was discussed, it was not accessible at the RUH and as Mrs. E was haemodynamically stable and not acidotic, it was deemed not to be essential. This point will be discussed further in the conclusion.
Mrs. E developed electrolyte imbalances not long after the vomiting started, suffering hypokalaemia (3.2 mmol/l), hypomagnaesemia (0.56 mmol/l) and hypocalcaemia (1.96 mmol/l). This was postulated to be secondary to both vomiting and theophylline accumulation. This subsequently resulted in a pseudo-obstruction, diagnosed on abdominal x-ray. A nasogastric tube was placed and she was supplemented with appropriate electrolytes via intravenous infusion. An arterial blood gas demonstrated a pH 7.398 (7.34-7.44), pO2 (kPa) 9.24 (11–14), pCO2 (kPa) 6.36 (4.7-6.0), HCO3− (mEq/l) 21.7 (22–26), lactate (mmol/l) 1.5 (0.4-2.2). As no signs of acidosis were present and bicarbonate was at the low end of the normal range, we decided not to prescribe bicarbonate for this patient.
After stopping her theophylline and without any active intervention her serum concentration fell gradually . By the time her theophylline concentration was within therapeutic range, her electrolytes had been corrected and her pseudo-obstruction had resolved. However, she developed signs of fluid overload, her heart rate also remained in persistent sinus tachycardia. Notably, findings of Congestive Cardiac Failure (CCF) were demonstrated on a previous echocardiogram and were substantiated by results of her computed tomography (CT) abdomen/pelvis and ultrasound sonography scan (USS) liver during her current admission; these both showed abnormal appearances of the liver consistent with cardiac dysfunction. It therefore appeared she had developed acute CCF. Ultimately, this resulted in challenging fluid balance management with serial chest x-rays demonstrating worsening bilateral effusions and renal function continuing to decline until the death of the patient.