A 60-year-old female patient presented with low back pain of 4 months duration. Pain was diffusely spread over the entire low back and buttocks. There was no radiculopathy, neurogenic claudication, constitutional symptoms, or previous history of any malignancy.
On physical examination, the patient had tenderness over the lumbar region with a normal neurological examination. There was no lymphadenopathy, organomegaly, or skin abnormality. The patient was investigated with plain radiographs and MRI of the lumbar spine, which showed an osteosclerotic lesion in the L4 vertebra and iliac bone . The laboratory test results revealed a normal result for a complete hemogram, thyroid function tests, renal function tests, and liver function tests. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 6 mm/h, C-reactive protein <4 mg/dl, and normal serum calcium is 9.4 mg/dl. Serum triglycerides were high at 391 mg/dl, Vitamin D3 was 29.4 ng/ml, serum phosphorus was 4.5 mg/dl, and serum parathormone levels were raised 157 pg/ml. Urine Bence–Jones protein test was negative. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan was done which showed multiple osteosclerotic skeletal lesions in the right iliac bone, left femoral neck, thoracic vertebrae T1, T6, T12, and lumbar vertebra L4.
The patient underwent a transpedicular biopsy from L4 vertebra using a Jamshidi needle, as it showed the highest metabolic activity (SUV max 10.2) on PET scan. Two bone cores were obtained from the L4 vertebral body and sent for histopathological examination (HPE). Bone marrow was aspirated from the right iliac crest at the same time and sent for analysis. Bone marrow aspirate showed hypercellular marrow with increase in plasma cells at 9%. Serum immunoelectrophoresis was negative for M-band isolation.
Immunohistochemistry of the bone core sample was positive for CD138, CD38, MUM-1, lambda light chains, and negative for kappa light chains suggesting the diagnosis of plasma cell dyscrasias producing lambda light chains . The serum light chain assay showed increased levels of lambda chains. The patient was started on chemotherapy for light chain myeloma and underwent clinical remission. She had relief of symptoms and was asymptomatic at last follow-up of 12 months.