A 38 year old female presented with history of acute onset fever with body ache for which she took tablet nimesulide and paracetamol combination (100 mg Nimesulide + 500 mg paracetamol tablet), 1 tab three times daily for 4 days, following which she developed rash all over the body. She also complained of itching all over her body and of high colour urine. There was no history of oral or genital ulcerations, photosensitivity or joint pain. There was no history of allergy to drug including paracetamol. There was no history of intake of herbal or dietary supplements.
On examination the patient was afebrile with a pulse rate of 76 beats per minute, blood pressure of 110/70 mmHg and respiratory rate of 16/minute. She had mild icterus, few small (<1 cm) non tender, right upper cervical lymph nodes and a soft and tenderly enlarged liver. Rashes were present over the trunk and all four extremities along with a malar rash over her face . Initially the rash was erythematous in the form of a palpable purpura and the lesions were small and punctate, but later on the lesions increased in size and coalesced to form extensive large blackish deep purple patches in both upper limbs . There were small digital infarcts of her toes bilaterally . Other systems yielded no clinical abnormalities. Blood biochemistry revealed deranged liver function suggestive of cholestatic jaundice with mildly altered coagulation profile. Except for a mild anaemia the haematological profile was normal. Other biochemical parameters (blood glucose, serum electrolytes and renal functions) were normal. The anti nuclear antibody (ANA) and Rheumatoid Factor were negative. The viral markers for HIV-AIDS and hepatitis B & C were non reactive. Blood culture (three samples taken within 12 h of hospitalization), as well as urine culture were sterile. Except for hepatomegaly, the ultra-sonography of abdomen was normal. Arterial and venous Doppler studies of the extremities as well as CT angiography of upper limbs were also normal. Biopsy from the skin lesions of the upper limb showed features of LCV .
Considering the history of nimesulide intake preceding the development of hepatitis and LCV in the absence of any evidence of an infective or autoimmune etiology and normal Doppler and CT-angiography of the extremities, a diagnosis of nimesulide induced hepatitis and LCV has been made.
The patient was treated with systemic corticosteroids (methyl prednisolone in a dose of 1 gm/day intravenously for 3 days followed by oral prednisolone in tapering dose) and other supportive measures. Gradually there was improvement with disappearance of the skin lesions and healing of the digital infarcts. Blood parameters also showed improvement with normalisation of liver function tests by the ninth day . She was discharged on the tenth day and was doing well on follow up after 3 weeks.