A 14-month-old baby girl was brought with complaints of progressive torticollis right side , weakness of left upper limb (UL) progressed to monoplegia for 6 months, and swallowing difficulty for 1 month. She had episodes of regurgitation of food. On examination, she was conscious, active except left UL weakness and neck tilt, and irritable due to hunger. She had black colored pigmented spots with thick dark colored skin on the left side of nap of neck [Figure and ]. It was pulsatile and non-tender. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain and cervicothoracic spine revealed intramedullary lipoma of cervicalthoracic cord from D2 to pontomedullary junction, having exophytic component on the left-side brainstem and cord [Figure –]
The plan was to decompress the cord and remove lipoma without damaging parenchyma. Linear vertical incision was given from occipital protuberance till D3. There was subcutaneous lipoma continuing with cervical lipoma [Figure and ]. The posterior arch of C1 was absent . Midline suboccipital craniotomy and laminectomy of C2–D1 were carried out . Dura was identified at all levels except C1–2 level. The lipoma was originating from the left lower part of ventral side of medulla oblongata and dorsal cervicothoracic cord. It was almost completely occupying the canal at C1–3 level, whereas cord could be identified below it and on the right side. It was pressing left 9th–11th nerves and entering jugular foramen. Partial decompression was carried out . After decompression, duroplasty was carried out with subcutaneous fat and glue . We did not consider fusion of spine to prevent future instability because of young age, unfused spine, avoid any obstacle for future growth of vertebrae. The surgical duration was 10 hours. There was around 200ml blood loss, which was replaced intraoperatively. Overnight ventilatory support was given for relaxation of brainstem and laryngeal edema. Next morning, she was extubated without new deficit. Neck was supported by hard collar to correct torticollis. She received vigorous physiotherapy. Her left hand’s fingers started moving by the fourth day. She was discharged on the 10th postoperative day. After 1 month, she was moving neck in all directions and had left UL power 3/5 (Medical Research Council score). The collar was continued for 6 weeks. At 6-month follow-up, she can sit, walk, speak clearly, use both ULs with right dominance, and move neck in all directions, but mostly keep tilted right side [Figure and ].