A 79-year-old female patient was re-admitted to the hospital 5 days after transfemoral TAVI due to dyspnoea and new-onset angina without elevated cardiac enzymes (Canadian Cardiovascular Society Class II). She underwent PCI with complex coronary revascularization (PCI of the proximal segment of the right coronary artery and subsequent PCI of the left main coronary artery towards left anterior descending artery) 3 days prior to TAVI , however, she was not compliant to prescribed dual antiplatelet and anti-hypertensive therapy. Her past medical history included CAD, arterial hypertension, left ventricle hypertrophy, moderate chronic kidney disease, and chronic sideropenic anaemia. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) and stress magnetic resonance imaging were performed which did not show any signs of aortic bioprosthesis failure, paravalvular leak, or inducible myocardial ischaemia. The chest X-ray was comparable to the previous examinations. The patient was released home with instructions to comply with the prescription.
One month later, the patient represented with recurrent angina symptoms and was re-admitted to the hospital. She was haemodynamically stable with a regular heart rate, elevated arterial blood pressure (155/74 mmHg), and elevated cardiac enzymes (high-sensitivity troponin level fluctuated around 800 ng/L). An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed sinus rhythm of 84 b.p.m. with signs of myocardial ischaemia . TTE revealed normal valve function, but also showed impaired global contractility and mildly decreased left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF = 40%). Non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction was suspected and the patient was transferred directly to the catheterization laboratory. No signs of stent failure, such as underexpansion, undersizing, malapposition, or thrombosis, were seen during coronary angiography. However, the native left coronary leaflet was pushed towards the sinus of Valsalva, potentially causing flow obstruction towards the left coronary sinus. This was the most plausible explanation for the patient’s symptoms. Despite the use of multiple diagnostic catheters, it was not possible to intubate the left coronary artery (LCA) and perform selective contrast injection . Subsequently, the patient underwent cardiac surgery with sternotomy and cardiopulmonary bypass . The calcified native left coronary leaflet was pushed towards the ostium of the LCA by the stent frame of the aortic bioprosthesis causing subtotal occlusion . The transcatheter heart valve (THV) was removed surgically, the calcified leaflets of the native aortic valve excised, and a new surgical aortic bioprosthesis was implanted (Perimount Magna Ease 21 mm, Edwards LifeSciences, Irvine, CA, USA). Pre-procedural ischaemic ECG changes resolved completely. Further post-operative course and the 1-month follow-up were uneventful. TTE revealed a preserved LVEF.