A 74-year-old man with Type 2 diabetes and hypercholesterolaemia arrived to the emergency room with 3-h chest pain that began after emotional stress. The patient was dyspnoeic with SaO2 75%, HR 130 b.p.m., and BP 130/80 mmHg. Jugular venous engorgement and diffuse pulmonary rales were found. The electrocardiogram (ECG) showed broad R waves, 4 mm ST-segment downsloping with RBBB in the right precordial leads. Posterior leads showed pathological Q waves and STEMI and there wasn’t ST elevation in V4R–V6R . Laboratory studies reported: troponin I 2.5 ng/mL (0.01–0.04 ng/mL), CKMB 70.6 ng/dL (0.06–6.3 ng/dL), and NT-proBNP 4075 pg/mL (15–125 pg/mL). The initial management included oxygen, aspirin 300 mg, clopidogrel 600 mg, unfractionated heparin 4000 IU, atorvastatin 80 mg, and furosemide 60 mg. The patient required intubation. Coronary angiography was performed with total thrombotic occlusion TIMI V of the proximal segment of the circumflex artery (CX). Left main artery, left anterior descending artery, and right coronary artery had significant chronic lesions. Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and stenting was done in CX with final flow TIMI 3 , we decide to treat only the culprit vessel because the other arteries present chronic lesions with severe calcification. After PCI the patient developed cardiogenic shock and norepinephrine 0.5 mcg/kg/min, vasopressin 0.02 U/min and dobutamine 10 mcg/kg/min were administered and an intra-aortic balloon pump was placed with clinical improvement. The ECG post-PCI showed RBBB with resolution of the ST-segment downsloping with persistence of acuminated T waves in right precordial leads; the ECG performed 48 h after arrival showed alteration of the process of repolarization attributable to RBBB . The patient developed acute renal failure and haemodialysis was initiated. On his 5th day at the coronary unit, he developed hypotension during a haemodialysis session attributable to sustained ventricular tachycardia with degeneration in asystole. Advance cardiovascular life support was provided but there wasn’t return of spontaneous circulation.