A 54-year-old, 78-kg male patient with a history of hypertension was admitted to the hospital complaining of PNs detected 2 months previously . A VATS lung wedge resection of nodules in the right upper apical lung segment and right lower dorsal lung segments were planned. Because these two PNs were small, preoperative CT-guided localization was performed before surgery on the same day because there might be difficulty localizing the nodules intraoperatively.
The patient was placed in a prone position during localization. The procedure was guided by a multidetector (16-slice) CT helical scanner (GE lightspeed). After local anesthesia with 2% lidocaine, the 18-gauge puncture needle was inserted vertically to reach the localization site around the PNs lesions percutaneously. 0.25 ml cyanoacrylate glue (Compont® medical glue) was injected at each site. One puncture was performed 0.7 cm interior into the lesion with a diameter of approximately 0.4 cm in the upper lobe of the right lung. In contrast, another puncture was performed 0.7 cm above another lesion with a diameter of approximately 0.2 cm in the lower lobe of the right lung; both used cyanoacrylate glue that was injected with an introducer needle by a radiologist . After localization, the patient felt uncomfortable when coughing. The patient was admitted to the operation room after monitoring their oxygen saturation (SpO2) levels, maintained at 99%. Oxygen was supplied immediately, and a 37 F double-lumen left tube was intubated through their mouth after induction to obtain the right lung collapse. In addition, fiberoptic bronchoscopy was used to localize the double-lumen tube for one-lung ventilation. The anesthesiologist found that the position of the double-lumen was proper, but translucent crystallographic material was present, which was different from the secretions, such as sputum, at the bronchial opening of the right upper lobe when the bronchoscope was passed through the tracheal lumen of the tube. Combined with the coughing before anesthesia, it was thought that the crystallographic material that was present in the bronchus could be due to the preoperative CT localization. The thoracic surgeon was informed of the situation. Because the crystalline object was not observed to move in the airway under bronchoscopy and the patient's oxygenation was not affected, after a brief discussion of the patient’s condition, the surgeons and the anesthesiologist decided to perform electronic bronchoscopy immediately after thoracoscopic surgery, because the surgery did not appear to be affected. The patient underwent thoracoscopic wedge resection of the right pulmonary nodule, with a tissue margin of ≥ 2 cm, and mediastinal lymph node dissection. During intraoperative one-lung ventilation, SpO2 levels fluctuated between 96 and 100% , and blood gas analysis showed partial pressure of oxygen (PO2), which was a 91.3 mm Hg fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2 was 50%).
After thoracoscopic surgery, the patient’s position was changed from left lateral to supine. Then, the 37 F double-lumen endotracheal tube was removed, and an 8.0 ID single-lumen endotracheal catheter was inserted instead. During electronic bronchoscopy, the respiratory physician confirmed the presence of a gel-like foreign body in the right upper lobe of the bronchus. These were removed with disposable electric traps and biopsy forceps . Due to the evidence of the existence of many foreign bodies, the removal process lasted for approximately 1 h until no foreign bodies were found under the electronic bronchoscope. After surgery, the patient was awake and returned to the ward after removing the tracheal tube. He had a rapid recovery without a cough, sputum, or dyspnea.
CT reports were reviewed on the first day postoperatively, and a minimum amount of air was found in the right thoracic cavity. Postoperative changes were observed in the upper lobe of the right lung. Inflammation occurred in the lower left lung and the residual right lung. Compared with the previous CT scan, the later CT scan did not diagnose ground glass nodules in the dorsal segment of the lower lobe of the right lung.
The patient was re-examined using electronic bronchoscopy on the second day postoperatively. After endoscopic exploration of the airway under a respiratory endoscope, a gelatinous foreign body was present in the right anterior bronchus. Soon after detection, the foreign body was removed using biopsy forceps. Physiological saline lavage was performed to confirm that no foreign body residue was present .
The patient was discharged successfully three days postoperatively. The pathological reports suggested a histological type of adenocarcinoma present in the lung. One month later, the patient returned to the outpatient clinic for re-examination. Clinicians thoroughly examined them using a CT scan and found no residual foreign bodies in the lung, confirming that they had recovered well without discomfort or congestion.