An 8-year-old girl with a history of congenital profound hearing loss in the left ear presented to a local ENT hospital with an acute onset of ipsilateral facial palsy. She was treated with oral prednisolone; however, the facial palsy progressed to complete paralysis. Otoscopy revealed a pulsatile mass in the left middle ear. A detailed medical history revealed that she had been able to perform tandem walking at the age of four, but became unable to do so at the age of six. She had never been examined by MRI to find the cause of congenital hearing loss.
On physical examination, she had a left complete facial paralysis (House-Brackmann grade VI). Electroneurography showed no visible reaction on the affected side (0%). Her left tympanic membrane was swollen, and a pulsatile tumor was visible in the middle ear, which was first found since the diagnosis of congenital hearing loss. Pure tone audiometry showed profound hearing loss in the left ear and less than 20 dB in the right ear. Auditory brainstem response done at the age of five had revealed 100 dB hearing threshold in the left ear, and auditory steady-state response had showed hearing thresholds of the left ear as 80 dB at 1000 Hz, 85 dB at 2000 Hz, and 90 dB at 4000 Hz. Computed tomography (CT) examination revealed a multilocular tumor in the inner ear extending into the middle ear , and osteosclerosis around the edges of the tumor. In the middle ear, the tumor pressed on the ossicles, and the facial nerve canal could not be identified. On MRI, the tumor presented mixed signals of high and low intensities on T2-weighted images and was sparsely enhanced with gadolinium on T1-weighted images . We performed an endoscopic transcanal biopsy of the tumor. It was soft, with a thick fibrous capsule and filled with mucinous fluid . The pathological findings revealed only blood components in the tissue fluid, and the biopsy specimen revealed collagen fibers, smooth muscle, and small blood vessels.
Subsequently, we decided to perform a transmastoid tumor removal with facial nerve monitoring using nerve integrity monitoring. A retroauricular incision was made, the external auditory canal (EAC) and the tympanic membrane were removed, and a blind sac closure of the EAC and canal wall down mastoidectomy were performed. A hemorrhagic mass was visualized filling the middle ear toward the epitympanum. We removed most of the tumor in the mastoid cavity, the inner ear, and the petrous apex, and the facial nerve was completely dissected and delineated from the horizontal to the vertical portion. However, we decided to spare the tumor in the deep part near the epitympanum and the internal auditory canal because facial nerve monitoring signals were completely lost, and identification of the geniculate ganglion and the labyrinthine portion of the facial nerve was impossible as the tumor had engulfed the nerve at these regions. Anatomical preservation of the facial nerve was considered significant to retain any chances for recovery of the facial palsy after surgery . No intraoperative or postoperative complication such as spinal fluid leakage was observed. Pathological diagnosis showed a malformed salivary gland structures consisting of smooth muscle tissue proliferation on immunostaining, which led to the diagnosis of SGCh. One year after surgery, the palsy recovered to House-Brackmann Grade II. Two years after surgery, MRI showed no increase in size of the residual tumor .