A 68 year old man presented with a change in bowel habit and weight loss. General and abdominal examinations were normal. A barium enema revealed a tight stricture in the descending colon, with no evidence of extra-colonic metastases on a staging CT scan. A multi-disciplinary decision was taken that he should be treated with a left hemicolectomy.
Prior to the operation, he noticed a swelling in the right supraclavicular fossa . The swelling was approximately 5 cm in diameter, with a hard consistency, immobile, non-tender, non-fluctuant and clinically appeared to be arising from the clavicle. There was no history of trauma. A plain X-ray showed an osteolytic lesion in the medial aspect of the right clavicle .
An isotope bone scan revealed diffuse uptake in the cervical vertebrae suggestive of degenerative changes but showed no evidence of metastases in the clavicle . Hence, fine needle aspiration of the lesion was performed which revealed malignant cells arranged in cohesive clusters with nuclear pleomorphism, hyperchromasia and nuclear enlargement . The malignant cells seen were compatible with metastases. At the same time, other causes of bony metastases were excluded using protein electrophoresis and computed tomography.
The patient underwent a palliative left hemicolectomy due to impending obstruction. Histology of the resected specimen revealed the following: macroscopic examination reveals a central annular cancer of 5 cms with perforation and mesenteric extension together with metastatic confluent marginal nodes . Resection margins are clear. Microscopic examination confirms a hemicolectomy specimen with a large extensively ulcerated, focally perforated, and extensively infiltrating adenocarcinoma, with focal mucin pooling. Tumour perforation as stated has occurred. No evidence of any lymphovascular extension is seen. No evidence of lymphovascular involvement within the tumour bed, but 5 marginal nodes are positive out of a total of 12. Resection edges are free of tumour.
The patient had a stable postoperative course and was subsequently discharged home. Out-patient follow-up with the palliative care physicians was arranged and he received palliative radiotherapy to his clavicle and spine. Unfortunately, he died 2 months later.