A 27-year-old female recently married with no comorbidities presented to the surgical outpatient department with a complaint of abdominal pain in the left hypochondrium region for 7 months. The pain was gradual in onset, dull aching in character. She has normal bowel and bladder habits with no history of jaundice, fever, vomiting, and significant weight loss. There is no any relevant drug history, family history, genetic information and psychosocial history related with the case. On general examination, she had a GCS score of 15 and her vitals were normal. On per abdominal examination, the abdomen was soft and non-tender in palpation. On auscultation abdominal sounds were present. The laboratory investigations showed hemoglobin, Red Blood Cells (RBCs), White Blood Cells (WBCs), Platelets, Packed Cell Volume (PCV), Prothrombin Time (PT), International normalized ratio (INR), and Partial Thromboplastin Time (PTT), creatinine, electrolytes, and liver function tests were in the normal range. Abdominal Ultrasound showed a well-defined cystic mass with low-level internal floating debris and an echogenic strap measuring 9.5 cm × 9.6 cm was noted at the dependent portion, the mass was noted in the upper pole of the spleen . It was confirmed by a contrast-enhanced CT scan of the abdomen which showed well defined cystic lesion measuring about 10.8 × 9.6 × 8.5 cm3 in the upper pole of the spleen with exophytic component and minimal homogenous wall enhancement. No calcification, septation, and enhancing solid components were seen. . Laparoscopic splenectomy was performed by Dr. Suresh Parsad Sah with standard four ports. A single cyst of size 11 × 10 × 8 cm3 was present on the upper pole of the spleen. Liver and rest viscera were normal. On the cut section, there was hydatid sand and fluid around 1 L in amount. Patient was compatible with the procedure and there was blood loss of around 100ml. The postoperative period was uneventful and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 6. The postoperative course was uneventful and 400mg of albendazole twice a day was given for three weeks. Patient was satisfied with the laparoscopic procedure done as she felt less pain and less hospital stay and also she was able to resume her daily activities within a week after being discharged. After three weeks patient visited the hospital for follow-up. Echinococcus IgG ELISA serology test was done and it was negative. The patient completely recovered with no complaints.