With a medical history of hypertension, respiratory sleep apnea syndrome, and hyperlipidemia, a 40-year-old male presented to the outpatient neurology clinic for continuous headache on the parietal of the brain for 4 years. Because of the left middle cerebral artery(MCA) severe stenosis, he was treated with percutaneous transluminal angioplasty and stenting. After the operation, the patient immediately developed a headache. There was no history of headache prior to this operation. Written informed consent was obtained from this patient.
More than 4 years ago, without any cause, the patient developed weakness of the right side of the limbs in a quiet state. And this symptom lasted for 20 days. An MRI examination of the brain with and without contrast, a subsequent MR angiogram head without contrast and a DSA examination revealed acute cerebral infarction in the left basal ganglia and corona radiata, stenosis of the left MCA M1 segment, and mild atherosclerosis of the carotid arteries. So the patient was treated with aspirin and clopidogrel. Based on medical history and examination, the patient was considered symptomatic ICAS. So the local doctor recommended stent implantation treatment for him.
Twenty-one days after the onset of the disease, under general anesthesia, the patient underwent stenting of the M1 segment of the left middle cerebral artery and percutaneous transluminal angioplasty. The left middle cerebral artery was first dilated with a 2.0 × 15 mm balloon and then implanted with a stent (4 × 20 mm, Neuroform EZ stent system, Stryker Corporation, USA). Immediately after awakening from general anesthesia, the patient described a persistent sharp pain localized to a circular, approximately 5 cm diameter in the parietal part of the brain. And this headache was not accompanied by nausea or vomiting, phonophobia, bulbar conjunctival congestion, or a runny nose . The Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) score was five. There was no rash in the region and no skin/hair change. The pain was present all day without associated allodynia, frequent paresthesia. He would sometimes feel subjective warmth in the skin of the scalp in that region. In the clinic, his neurologic examination was unremarkable. By his description, this headache most closely resembled the phenotype of a NH, according to the ICHD-3.
The patient was seen in our clinic 4 years after the onset of focal headache. For abortive headache therapies, he had previously tried ibuprofen 2.4 g on 15 days per month. And this therapy was lasting for 2 months. The headache improved when taking the medication and persisted when not taking the medication. The patient was not taking preventative headache therapies. After regular treatment, the patient felt that the symptoms were not well relieved, so he gave up regular treatment and only took medication when he had severe pain.
During the clinic visit, he was diagnosed with nummular headache and started on a trial of gabapentin 300 mg per day. During a follow-up visit, he noted that the 300 mg of gabapentin daily was ineffective. And he did not experience any adverse effects from the medication during follow-up. For this reason, we recommend that patients increase the dose of gabapentin to 600 mg daily. And we advised the patient to re-visit the clinic if there is no significant improvement after the dosing.