A 22-year-old female patient was admitted to our clinic with swelling at the site of the vaccination. She had received her Td vaccination for internship 3 weeks ago, and the swelling had started at the injection site 4 days following this immunization. The vaccine was a toxoid vaccine containing aluminum adjuvant (Tedatif; Turk Drug and Serum Industry Inc). On physical examination, this mass was about 6 × 6 cm in size and fluctuating, but had no pain, and no redness . Oral amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (daily 2 × 1 gram) and local antibiotic (2% cream, Fusidic acid 2 × 1) were applied for 10 days. She had no immunosuppressive disease and no history of recurrent infection. On her medical history, she had received all of her childhood vaccinations and had not experienced any serious side effects. During admission, the patient had no history of trauma, and no fever, and no lymphadenopathy on examination. The laboratory values showed a total white blood cells count of 6500 cells/ McL, with 70% neutrophils, while C3, C4, immunoglobulin (Ig) A, IgM, IgG, IgE, sedimentation rate, and C-reactive protein were within normal ranges. Serology for human immunodeficiency virus was negative. On ultrasound, two interconnected abscesses were seen in the subcutaneous area, and did not involve the muscle tissue . She was not pregnant and did not receive any other vaccines simultaneously. Despite the administration of antibiotics, the swelling did not regress, and on the contrary, continued to increase in size. Later, the abscesses were completely drained, and the samples were cultured. The current antibiotics were continued. The gram staining of the samples revealed abundant leukocytes but no microorganisms. The solid and liquid cultures of the materials remained negative, although they were repeated more than once. Under the current antibiotic treatments, the swelling appeared again at the same site 6 days after the first draining. Then the mass was re-drained. The cultures of samples remained negative and no specific etiology was reached. However, seven days after the second draining, the mass re-appeared. Following the drainage, the abscesses were cultured. The abscess aspirate was not cultured for tuberculous bacilli. The Ehrlich-Ziehl-Neelsen of the sample was negative and other results including cultures and gram staining of the specimens remained negative. After a course of 23 days of treatment, the causal etiology was not identified. Finally, the patient was regarded as having a sterile abscess due to the Td immunization. The antimicrobials were stopped and oral prednisolone (daily 40 mg) and mometasone furoate (0.1% cream, 2 × 1) were initiated. The swelling regressed significantly, and the treatments continued for seven days. The patient has been doing well and no recurrence has been observed for over a year.