An 84-year-old woman with a history of hypertension presented in our hospital after two days of fever and dizziness. She lived in Dangjin-gun, Chungcheongnam-do Province, ROK; her house was located at the base of a mountain, and she often worked in her yard. She was transferred to our hospital because of fever, thrombocytopenia, elevated cardiac enzyme levels and creatinine levels. Upon arrival, her body temperature was 36.0 °C, blood pressure was 92/53 mmHg, and pulse rate was 70 beats per minute. No eschar or skin rash was found on physical examination. Initial laboratory investigations showed a normal leukocyte count of 4.3 × 103/µL and decreased platelet count of 34 × 103/µL. Liver enzyme alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase levels were elevated to 188 and 55 IU/L, respectively. The levels of cardiac enzymes, including creatinine kinase (CK), CK-MB, and troponin I, were increased to 3107, 22.8 ng/mL, and 122.2 pg/mL, respectively. The serum myoglobin level, which indicates the possibility of rhabdomyolysis, was elevated to over 1200 ng/mL. Serum blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine levels were elevated to 58.0 and 2.41 mg/dL, respectively, and the estimated glomerular filtration rate decreased to 19.1. C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were elevated to 17.4 mg/dL.
One day after hospitalisation, her body temperature increased to 39.4 °C, which was accompanied by severe chill sensations, and the pulse rate increased to 120 beats per minute. Electrocardiography (ECG) was performed and new-onset atrial fibrillation was observed. After administering amiodarone, the patient’s ECG returned to the sinus rhythm. The levels of CK, CK-MB, and troponin I remained elevated at 2882, 19.7 ng/mL, and 87.1 pg/mL, respectively. Transthoracic echocardiography was performed to rule out myocardial infarction and the results were normal. A thick PBS was examined for the presence of A. phagocytophilum in the neutrophils (Nikon Y-TV55). On PBS, morula inclusions in neutrophils suggestive of HGA were shown.
We administered 100 mg of doxycycline orally twice a day and 2 g of ceftriaxone intravenously once a day. On the third day of hospitalisation, the patient presented with an improved condition and appetite. Her serum levels of cardiac enzymes, BUN, creatinine, and liver enzymes had improved significantly. Antibiotics were de-escalated to doxycycline monotherapy. However, white blood cell (WBC) and platelet counts continued to decrease to 1.78 × 103/µL and 17 × 103/µL on the third and fourth day of admission, respectively. After four days of hospitalisation, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia were ameliorated.
Blood samples were tested by performing nested PCR with Anaplasma specific primers targeting the ankyrin-repeat protein AnkA gene (AnkA). A portion of the 16S ribosomal RNA gene (16S rRNA) was amplified by PCR. PCR amplicons were purified and directly sequenced using PCR primers. Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) analysis of the sequenced products confirmed A. phagocytophilum infection. The 564 bp AnkA gene sequence (NCBI accession no. OL265754) was 99% identical to that of A. phagocytophilum KZA2 (accession no. MH015219) . Other blood tests were negative for hantavirus, severe fever thrombocytopenia syndrome virus, Orientia tsutsugamushi, and leptospirosis.
On the ninth day of hospitalisation, laboratory tests showed that WBC and platelet counts had normalised to 10.34 × 103/µL and 169 × 103/µL, respectively. Serum CRP and CK levels were decreased to 1.2 mg/dL and 42 IU/L. The patient was discharged after a further three days of doxycycline for a total of 10 days of antibiotic treatment. A week later, she was evaluated in the outpatient unit and found to have recovered completely from renal insufficiency, rhabdomyolysis, and cytopenia.