A 29-year-old Mongolian woman had SLE, which manifested only as skin lesions when she was 12 years old. Because she had leg edema and proteinuria with serological and hematological abnormalities - the titers of anti-nuclear antibody and double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) antibody were increased and the lymphocyte count was decreased - at 23 years old, a renal biopsy was performed. The results revealed lupus nephritis (World Health Organization type IV). Her condition was diagnosed as SLE according to the criteria of the American College of Rheumatology . She had been treated with steroids and immunosuppressants, including cyclophosphamide. She had pancytopenia at 25 years old, and secondary aplastic anemia, probably due to cyclophosphamide, was diagnosed. Pancytopenia was worsening six months after the onset of pancytopenia and therefore cyclosporine A was administered. When she was 28 years old, rheumatoid arthritis was diagnosed because of polyarthralgia and morning stiffness. After 2 months, she had severe headaches, and cerebral venous thrombosis was diagnosed by computed tomography. Laboratory data showed a high level of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), a low level of haptoglobin, and a negative Coombs test result. These results suggested that she had hemolytic anemia, and the dose of steroid was increased. Her condition improved gradually.
When she was 29 years old, she had headaches, nausea, general fatigue, and severe pancytopenia and was admitted to our hospital. A laboratory evaluation showed the following: hemoglobin of 7.3 g/dL, white blood cell count of 11,400/μL, platelets of 4.2 × 104/μL, total protein of 4.9 g/dL, albumin of 2.3 g/dL, LDH of 1085 U/L, total bilirubin of 1.6 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen of 34 mg/dL, creatinine of 1.1 mg/dL, C-reactive protein of 11.5 mg/dL, haptoglobin of less than 6 mg/dL, and dsDNA antibody of 5 IU/L. The results of direct and indirect Coombs tests were negative. Further examination showed a neutrophil alkaline phosphatase score of 46 points, a CD55 value of 18%, and a CD59 value of 78.6%. The results of Ham test and sugar water tests were positive. Her urine was red because of hemolysis . The constellation of symptoms throughout the clinical course and the laboratory findings suggested PNH.