An 85-year-old Japanese woman with squamous cell lung carcinoma presented with rapidly worsening general fatigue and appetite loss over two days, eight days after the eighth cycle of pembrolizumab monotherapy. Stage IV squamous cell lung cancer (T3N2M1a) had been diagnosed seven months prior to this. Pembrolizumab had been administered as first-line therapy because biopsy indicated that the PD-L1 tumor proportion score was 100% and no epidermal growth factor receptor mutations, anaplastic lymphoma kinase rearrangements and c-ros oncogene 1 rearrangements were present. The patient had received eight cycles of 200 mg pembrolizumab every three weeks, resulting in stable disease. Routine examination with thyroid hormones and the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis before each pembrolizumab infusion had shown no significant changes up to the eighth cycle . There was no history of concomitant steroid use during immunotherapy, and the patient denied any recent steroid use.
On physical examination, body mass index was 20.6 kg/m2 (height 153 cm, weight 47 kg), body temperature was 37.0 °C, blood pressure was 112/60 mmHg with a regular pulse of 96 beats/min. The patient was debilitated, but there were no remarkable findings for the head, neck, chest, abdomen or extremities. No visual deficit was apparent according to the confrontation method.
Laboratory examination on arrival (1300 h) revealed a low serum cortisol level with an inappropriately low ACTH level, hyponatremia with a raised antidiuretic hormone (ADH) level, and hypoglycemia, but no eosinophilia . Urine osmolarity was inappropriately high at 630 mOsm/kg despite low plasma osmolarity of 247 mOsm/kg, indicating inappropriate ADH secretion. There was a poor response to standard-dose short ACTH testing . Pituitary magnetic resonance imaging revealed higher intensity on T2-weighted imaging, homogeneous gadolinium distribution in the pituitary and the stalk on enhanced imaging, and the lack of a posterior pituitary bright signal on T1-weighted imaging . However, pituitary enlargement was not apparent. Serum anti-pituitary cell antibody-1 (BML, Inc., Tokyo, Japan) was negative. Urinary free cortisol excretion was 9.8 μg/day (range, 11.2–80.3 μg/day). There were no cortisol responses and poor ACTH (basal at 6.4 to peak at 11.2 pg/mL) secretion responses on corticotropin-releasing hormone testing, and the values for other anterior pituitary hormones on challenge tests were all unremarkable . The insulin tolerance test was avoided in consideration of the patient’s advanced age. The adrenal glands were unremarkable on computed tomography. Thus, the patient was diagnosed as having isolated ACTH deficiency. Hydrocortisone administered at 15 mg/day, split over three times daily (7.5–5-2.5 mg), swiftly improved the patient’s general condition, corrected the inappropriately high ADH level, and normalized serum sodium concentration. While urine volume increased to about 3000 mL/day after hydrocortisone supplementation, the hypertonic saline test showed a substantial ADH response. Polyuria spontaneously improved with time.
The patient was discharged, and levels of ACTH and cortisol after the morning hydrocortisone, and thyroid function, were followed monthly in outpatient care. While cortisol levels ranged from 8.12 to 18.3 μg/dL, ACTH levels were not detectable on any occasion during the observation period (5 months after admission). Thus, ACTH deficiency obviously persisted, while thyroid function remained normal, and white blood cell count, eosinophil count, serum electrolytes and glucose were all unremarkable.