A 63-year-old male was referred to our liver unit because of acute liver injury of unknown origin. One day before admission, he presented himself at the emergency room with a rapid onset and painless jaundice. In the week before, he had had two episodes of chills and night sweats and observed clinical signs of cholestasis, in particular dark urine and pale stools. In the past medical history, the patient suffered from high blood pressure, an asymptomatic cholecystolithiasis and colonic diverticulosis. His only medication was 10 mg of bisoprolol per day for many years. No allergies and no herbal or over-the-counter remedies were reported. He regularly drank 0.5 liters of beer per day. He did not smoke or use illicit drugs. There was no history of surgery or blood transfusions. Consumption or contact to game meat in the last 6 months was also excluded. He was married and had no changing sexual partners. In his family, no autoimmune or genetic diseases were known. He was a retired truck driver and bred poultry as a hobby.
On clinical examination, the patient was in an obese condition with a body-weight of 100 kg. He presented with jaundice. No clinical signs of liver cirrhosis were detected. The abdomen was slightly tender in the right upper quadrant and the liver was extended 4 to 5 cm below the costal margin. An enlargement of the spleen was not detected. There were no clinical signs of hepatic encephalopathy.
On admission, laboratory results revealed an acute liver injury with high transaminases . Additional laboratory results on admission were CRP (C reactive protein) 26 mg/l (normal range <5 mg/l), antithrombin III 51.8% (70-130%), ferritin 22093.0 μg/l (34–400 μg/l), transferrin saturation 95% (16-45%), ceruloplasmin 0.30 g/l (0.22-0,61 g/l) and ANA (antinuclear antibodies) 1:80. AMA (antimitochondrial antibodies), SMA (smooth muscle antibodies), LKM (liver-kidney-microsome antibodes) and SLA/LP-(soluble liver antigen/liver pancreas antigen) antibodies were negative. We excluded hepatotropic viral infections, especially hepatitis A, B and C virus, as well as cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr-virus, adenoviruses and herpes simplex virus. On the first day in our unit, an immunoblot for anti-HEV IgG was intermediate positive. Anti-HEV IgM could not be detected. An initial commercial qualitative PCR (Genosis, Primerdesign, Southhampton, UK) was negative for HEV-RNA.
Abdominal ultrasound showed no signs of liver cirrhosis or intrahepatic masses. Ascites was absent. The gall bladder and the biliary tract were regular. A vascular pathology, such as portal or liver vein thrombosis, was ruled out. On the day after admission, we performed a laparoscopy to examine the liver and to obtain a liver biopsy. On laparoscopic liver examination, retractions of the liver surface could be detected as indication for focal necrosis, typical for acute liver injury . There was no evidence of chronic liver injury or cirrhosis. On histopathology, an acute lobular and cholestatic hepatitis was revealed . There were no typical histological signs of iron overload and steatohepatitis. Based on liver histology, an immune-mediated toxic or drug-induced hepatitis was favored.
The initial working diagnosis was an allergic drug-induced acute liver injury caused by an unidentified substance. Based on distinct immune cell infiltrates in liver biopsy and high risk of acute liver failure, an immunosuppressive therapy with prednisolone (1 mg per kilogram body weight per day) was started immediately after liver biopsy on the second day in our unit. Following chemical response, prednisolone was reduced in a stepwise fashion by 10 mg per week down to a daily dose of 20 mg and then reduced in 5 mg steps per week.
Despite negative initial qualitative PCR analysis for HEV ORF2, we suspected acute HEV infection: The patient had risk factors for acute HEV infection (age, sex, clinical presentation) and an agent for DILI could not be identified in repeated interviews. Therefore and because anti-HEV IgG was intermediate positive, PCR for HEV was repeated by two different real time PCR assays based on the detection of ORF3 HEV (Altona Diagnostics, Hamburg Germany) and a quantitative in-house PCR . Finally, both quantitative PCR analyses were positive and HEV genotyping confirmed HEV genotype 3 infection as the reason for acute liver injury in this patient. As additional confirmation, HEV-RNA was also detected in the liver tissue by both quantitative PCR assays based on ORF3 target region. For viral quantification, the new WHO standard was used and results were normalized to IU/ml. Under sustained steroid treatment, hepatitis E resolved adequately with rapidly declining viral load . Hepatic encephalopathy did not emerge in the further clinical course. The ALT level declined to 50% of its initial value three days after starting steroids. Besides, a 50% reduction of bilirubin was observed 15 days after beginning the steroid course. Because of the benign course under sustained treatment, we decided to continue steroids and did not add ribavirin, which would have been an option for acute severe HEV infection [,].