In January 2017, a 76-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with ascites and dyspnea. In the patient’s history, a portal vein thrombosis was known for more than 10 years due to relapsing, necrotizing biliary pancreatitis. At that time a cholecystectomy with biliodigestive anastomosis was performed. Ascites was analysed after large-volume paracentesis without signs of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis or malignancy. On the second day after hospitalization, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy was performed to screen for esophageal varices. After the intervention, the patient developed fever and chills. Cholangitis was suspected due to biliodigestive anastomosis, increase of cholestasis parameters and an antibiotic treatment with ceftriaxone was started the same day (dose 4 g intravenously). Immediately after drug application the patient complained about nausea, vomited and developed dyspnea, confusion and a positive shock index (systolic RR < 100 mmHg, cardiac frequency 140 /min). The patient was referred to our intensive care unit and the antibiotic regime was escalated to piperacillin/tazobactam and ciprofloxacin for sepsis therapy. The patient received no further dose of ceftriaxone. Laboratory analysis about 1 h after application of ceftriaxone showed first signs of hemolysis with an elevated lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (1,116 U/L (18.6 μkat/l); baseline 290 U/L (4.83 μkat/l)) and a decrease in hemoglobin (6.4 g/dl (3.97 mmol/l), baseline 8.5 g/dl (5.28 mmol/l)). Coagulation parameters were significantly disturbed indicating DIC with an international normalized ratio (INR) of 3.31 (baseline 1.29), fibrinogen not measurable, thrombocytopenia down to 56,000/μl (baseline 203,000/μl). During the next days, the patient developed an increase in leukocytes (up to 23,000/μL) and in infection parameters (peak C-reactive protein (CRP) 9.35 mg/dl (890.48 nmol/l), peak procalcitonin (PCT) 134 μg/l). Additionally, hemolysis aggravated with a nadir hemoglobin of 4.8 g/dl (2.98 mmol/l), an elevated LDH up to 1,734 U/L (28.9 μkat/l) and suppressed haptoglobin < 0.1 g/l. (course of laboratory parameters is depicted in Fig. ). Furthermore, the patient subsequently developed a severe acute kidney failure with uremia (peak creatinine 6.29 mg/dl (556.04 μmol/l), urea 192.3 mg/dl (32.11 mmol/l)) and intermittent hemodialysis was necessary for 14 days. A kidney biopsy was performed and showed a severe acute tubular damage fitting with shock-induced injury and/or tubular-toxic effects of free hemoglobin/hemin.
The massive hemolytic reaction came suddenly and was unexpected. After exclusion of hematological comorbidities, a detailed patient history with current drug exposure was performed. Before admission to our department the patient had been hospitalized in our surgical department due to pneumothorax after pacemaker implantation. During this hospitalisation (< 3 weeks before the current admission) the patient had already been treated with ceftriaxone for at least 6 days and had already developed mild hemolysis in laboratory analysis without further consequences at that time. Further detailed diagnostic showed a positive Coombs’ direct antiglobulin test (DAT) for immunoglobulin M (IgM), immunoglobulin G (IgG) and complement factor C3d. On Naranjo Scale, a probability scale for adverse drug reactions, the patient would have reached a value of 9 points (maximal score 13 points, with values ≥9 points indicating a definite adverse drug reaction) . The suspected DIIHA was proven by reference laboratory analysis (Institute of Transfusion Medicine, Charité, Berlin), confirming the presence of a strongly agglutinating ceftriaxone-dependent antibody .
The patient’s situation stabilized with decrease of hemolysis parameters, stable hemoglobin levels and reconstitution of kidney function after withdrawal of hemodialysis. At the time of discharge from hospital laboratory results were stabilized or even normalized: creatinine 2.04 mg/dl (180.34 μmol/l), bilirubin 0.5 mg/dl (8.55 μmol/l), LDH 207 U/L (3.45 μkat/l), INR 1.26, hemoglobin 7.6 g/dl (4.72 mmol/l). In a follow-up visit 4 months later kidney function was also normalized and the patient had returned to normal daily life.