A 41-year-old female referred to the surgical outpatient department with chief complaints of swelling in the left breast of five years’ duration, which rapidly increasing in size for the last four months with no history of trauma or any constitutional symptoms.
Her general and systemic examination was within normal limit. Local examination showed a well-defined irregular mass of 9 cm in diameter approximately, not fixed to the skin or chest wall, firm in consistency, but soft at places and tender on palpation. Ultrasonograhic evaluation revealed an 8.9 x 6.6 x 3.9 cm heterogeneous soft tissue mass in retroareolar and periareolar regions of the left breast.
The mass was excised and sent to the Department of Pathology, North Bengal Medical College, The West Bengal University of Health sciences, India for histopathological examination.
Gross examination
Gross examination showed a mass with attached overlying skin measuring 10 x 7 x 6 cm. Serial cut sections revealed multiple cystic spaces with mucoid material and few cysts containing whitish material and well defined whitish homogenous areas with one area showing leaf-like mass projecting inside a cystic cavity .
Microscopic examination
Multiple sections were taken from representative areas, processed, and examined. The periphery of the tumor was well-circumscribed. The sections showed features of benign PT characterized by stromal hypercellularity and stromal overgrowth. There was no cellular atypia and mitotic activity was low. The sections also revealed multiple cystic and glandular spaces enclosed within cellular stroma. The spaces were lined by multilayered benign squamous cells and the cystic spaces were filled with keratin material ( and ). Preoperative fine–needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was performed in a private diagnostic centre. The slides were reviewed and they showed features suggestive of benign phyllodes tumor with cystic squamous metaplasia, which was consistent with the histopathological findings .