A 13-year-old male child had complaints of pain and swelling in his right ankle since 1 year. The pain was insidious in onset, had a dull aching character, and was non-radiating. The pain has increased in intensity over the past 1 year. The pain was predominantly aggravated at night and partially relieved by non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). They had noticed a diffuse swelling of his right ankle since about a year, which had gradually progressed in size over the past 6 months. The child did not have any other joint pain. He did not have any history of fever, weight loss, or loss of appetite. There was no history of trauma either. He was able to carry out his day-to-day activities; however, the pain had disturbed his sleep. He was known to have a seizure disorder and was on antiepileptic medications. His developmental milestones were appropriate for age and had no significant family history.
On examination, we found a diffuse, ill-defined, and soft swelling over the anteromedial aspect of the right ankle, which was anterior and inferior to the medial malleolus. There was no local warmth; however, there was tenderness present in the region of the swelling. The skin in the region appeared normal. The range of movements at the ankle joint was restricted, with the child only able to do 20° of dorsiflexion, while he was able to do 40° of plantar flexion. The movements were associated with pain. The patient had full range of inversion and eversion at the subtalar joint and was not associated with pain.
While the anteroposterior radiograph of the ankle appeared normal, the lateral radiograph of ankle revealed a solitary, osteolytic, and circular lesion involving the neck of the talus. The lesions had a homogenous matrix and a sclerotic rim, with a narrow zone of transition. Periosteal reaction was absent and soft-tissue appeared normal. The other bones and joints in the region appeared normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a small T2 hyperintense lesion involving the dorsal aspect of the neck of talus, with diffuse bone marrow edema surrounding it. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the right ankle showed a well-defined, lucent, and intramedullary lesion with sclerotic rim in the neck of talus. It measured 9 × 7 × 8 mm in dimensions. Ill-defined sclerotic foci were noted within the lucent core. No obvious extraosseous extension was visible. The features were suggestive of osteoid osteoma. Blood investigations revealed a marginally elevated C-reactive protein and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, while the total count was within normal limits. The child was diagnosed to have osteoid osteoma in the neck of the talus. We performed radiofrequency ablation (RFA) of the lesion. Under CT guidance, the lesion was identified, and a 1 mm K-wire was drilled into the lesion. The electrode probe was then introduced into the lesion . Ablation was done using radio waves for 6 min with the probe tip temperature set to 90°C. The child had complete resolution of pain after the procedure. The child was followed up for 3 years and was not found to have any complaints of pain.