A 24 year old male underwent an elective living-related kidney transplant (LRRT) for ESRD secondary to neurogenic bladder and vesico-ureteric reflux (VUR). He has a background history of VACTERL association with imperforate anus (previous colostomy creation and subsequent closure), sacral hemivertebrae (neurologically normal) and renal/urological defects: (a) bilateral grade 5 VUR with previous bilateral ureteral re-implantation, (b) neurogenic bladdder status post-colonic bladder augmentation and mitrofanoff creation, (c) crossed fused ectopia of the left with right kidney with prior nephrectomy in preparation for LRRT .
In view of his multiple congenital anomalies and previous surgeries, computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was done for pre-operative planning. The CT revealed aberrant iliac vasculature – the right common and external iliac arteries are not visualized as the abdominal aorta ends with the left common iliac artery bifurcating into the left internal and external iliac arteries . A branch arising from the right distal abdominal aorta superior to the bifurcation gives off a lumbar branch before passing posterior to the right psoas muscle into the pelvis. It gives off several pelvic branches before continuing anteriorly along the pelvic side wall to receive a large anomalous branch from the left internal iliac artery, just proximal to the femoral canal. The large anomalous branch, which is the main vascular supply to the right lower limb, demonstrates a convoluted course across the pelvis from left to right. The combined vessel then continued distally as the right common femoral artery .
Despite the vascular abnormalities detected on radiological imaging, the patient was asymptomatic. He had no evidence of limb ischemia and pulses were symmetrical bilaterally in the lower limbs. He subsequently underwent LRRT with implantation of kidney performed in the left iliac fossa. Intra-operatively, dissection of the left iliac vessels clearly demonstrated the anomalous vessel branching off the left internal iliac artery and this was carefully preserved . The renal artery and vein were anastomosed end-to side to the left external iliac artery and vein, respectively, a significant distance distal to the origin of the anomalous vessel. Ureteral anastomosis was performed to the augmented colonic cystoplasty. Good perfusion to the kidney was observed after vascular clamps were released and bilateral dorsalis pedis pulses were palpable intra-operatively. Post-operatively, the patient did not develop any signs or symptoms of limb ischemia and was able to ambulate without difficulty. Mercaptoacetyltriglycine-3 (MAG-3) and ultrasound scans showed prompt perfusion to the transplant kidney with normal flow velocities and Doppler waveforms . There was immediate graft function and renal function recovered quickly with good urine output. The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged home on post-operative day 12 with a creatinine of 103 μmol/L. Subsequent outpatient follow-up within the first postoperative year did not reveal any features of lower limb ischemia. His graft function also remained stable on an immunosuppression regime consisting of Prednisolone, Azathioprine and Tacrolimus. He did require a reduction in Tacrolimus dose due to an episode primary Cytomegalovirus infection that was treated successfully with valgancyclovir.