A 51-year-old Caucasian man was hospitalized for the management of a relapse of acute myeloid leukemia. He had hyperleukocytosis and complained of mild shortness of breath and generalized weakness. He denied cough, fevers or chills, hemoptysis, or orthopnea. He had smoked 39 pack years. His significant medical history began six months prior to admission, when his condition was diagnosed as acute myelomonocytic leukemia. He had been treated with cytarabine and daunorubicin followed by high-dose cytarabine. Shortly after admission, he required urgent leukopheresis because of worsening hyperleukocytosis and acute respiratory failure. He recovered and had further chemotherapy with clofarabine and cytarabine.
Eighteen days after admission, he was neutropenic and febrile. He developed left axillary burning pain, which evolved in a matter of hours to numbness of his arm. Soon afterward, weakness started in his hand and later moved proximally up his arm. At that time, he had a temperature of 38°C, a respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, a heart rate of 133 beats per minute, blood pressure of 117/77 mm Hg, and an oxygen saturation of 94% on 50% venturi mask. He was dyspneic and a chest examination revealed signs of lung consolidation in the left upper and left lower lobes. A chest radiograph revealed elevation of the left hemidiaphragm, alveolar and interstitial opacities of the left upper lobe and lower lobe with air bronchograms, and blunting of the costophrenic angle. He was started on broad-spectrum antibiotics and voriconazole prophylaxis.
A physical examination revealed edema of the skin over the anterior left chest wall but no erythema, scaling, or discrete skin lesions. In a matter of hours, the numbness spread from a T1 distribution to a C8 distribution. The following day, his left arm was plegic with the exception of trace movement of the deltoid muscle. He was anesthetic to all sensory modalities in the left arm as well as areflexic. He also developed a left Horner syndrome. Further swelling developed in his left arm and anterosuperior chest with fullness in the supraclavicular fossa. Doppler ultrasound showed occlusion of his left distal subclavian, axillary, and brachial arteries and deep vein thrombosis of his left internal jugular, subclavian, and axillary veins. Heparin was started for his thrombosis, but soon after he had mild hemoptysis. A chest computed tomography scan showed extensive edematous changes of the left chest wall and axilla along with left pleural effusion and pulmonary parenchymal consolidation. A bronchoscopy that revealed a blood clot in the left upper lobe bronchus without endobronchial lesions was performed.
Six days after the onset of numbness, a palpable purpuric plaque developed over his left chest and progressed to a 2 cm black eschar. A punch biopsy of the plaque was performed. With failure to respond with broad spectrum antibiotics (which included vancomycin, imipenem, voriconazole and acyclovir), liposomal amphotericin B 5 mg/kg per day was added empirically to his regimen. A histological evaluation of skin biopsy showed abundant angiocentric and angioinvasive ribbon-like hyphae with irregular nonparallel contours, occasional right-angle branching, and rare septae . Cultures from both skin and bronchoalveolar lavage confirmed a diagnosis of mucormycosis by a Rhizopus species. Twenty-four hours later, he developed respiratory distress, shock, and multiorgan failure resulting in death. An autopsy was declined by his next of kin.