The female patient was diagnosed with heritable PAH at 33 years old. She had a history of chronic thyroiditis, which had been treated with oral thyroid hormone replacement. Genetic testing using a method that we reported previously revealed a rare genetic mutation, in which all exon regions in unilateral alleles of the bone morphogenetic protein receptor type II (BMPR2) gene are deleted . Whole exome analysis revealed no other mutations in genes associated with PAH. There was no notable family history of BMPR2 gene mutation.
The patient’s initial symptom was shortness of breath, and her World Health Organization functional class (WHO-FC) was IV at diagnosis. Her mean pulmonary arterial pressure at the start of treatment was markedly high (60 mmHg). Thus, combination therapy including phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor, endothelin receptor antagonist, and subcutaneous infusion of treprostinil was introduced based on the current guidelines. However, 1.5 years after the diagnosis, the mean pulmonary arterial pressure was still high (55 mmHg), and WHO-FC III symptoms persisted . Therefore, subcutaneous infusion of treprostinil was switched to intravenous epoprostenol. Two years after diagnosis, she reported several weeks of fever. Blood tests and computed tomography of the body showed no evidence of infection, although her eosinophil count was markedly elevated, suggesting a possible drug allergy with intravenous epoprostenol as the most likely cause. Therefore, it was switched to intravenous treprostinil, and her fever gradually disappeared. At 2.5 years after diagnosis, she again developed a persistent fever along with gradually worsening anorexia, depression, and general malaise. She was admitted to the hospital for further evaluation.
At admission, her blood pressure was 89/58 mmHg, heart rate 89 b.p.m., body temperature 37.9°C, respiratory rate 18/min, and percutaneous oxygen saturation 97% in room air. Physical examination showed no local signs suggesting focal infection. Jugular venous distension was obvious, suggesting exacerbation of right-sided heart failure. Levine grade II/VI pansystolic murmur and parasternal heave were identified at her left lower sternal border.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography of the chest and abdomen showed no obvious sources of the fever. Multiple lymphadenopathy was present in her bilateral axillary, mediastinal, and inguinal lymph nodes . Blood, urine, and sputum cultures were all negative. Blood tests showed only a mild increase in inflammatory responses, although hypereosinophilia and hyponatremia were present. Because these findings suggested adrenal insufficiency, we conducted an endocrinological evaluation.
Circadian variations in serum ACTH and cortisol concentrations showed low cortisol and low ACTH secretion throughout the day . Rapid ACTH stimulation test revealed impaired adrenal gland function . These results were suggestive of secondary adrenal insufficiency. Therefore, combined anterior pituitary function tests were performed . The results showed secretory disturbance of the ACTH-cortisol system accompanied by mild growth hormone impairment, which was consistent with isolated or combined ACTH deficiency.
These disturbances suggested the presence of a pituitary lesion. Hence, gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary gland was performed, which showed a high-intensity cystic lesion in the anterior pituitary lobe . Although invasive pituitary biopsy was not feasible because the patient had severe PAH, axillary lymph node biopsy was performed to evaluate for malignancy or lymphoproliferative disease. Axillary lymph node histopathology revealed a preserved but hyperplastic follicular structure pattern . Heavy infiltration of T and B lymphocytes was consistent with reactive lymphadenopathy. There was no evidence of malignancy.
We further used a diagnostic scoring system to assess the type of pituitary lesion. Nine factors were assessed to classify the lesion as a pituitary adenoma or hypophysitis . Her total score of −8 points indicated that her MRI findings suggested autoimmune hypophysitis instead of a non-functional pituitary adenoma with a 92% sensitivity, 99% specificity, and 97% positive predictive value. Based on these results, autoimmune hypophysitis was considered to be the most probable aetiology of ACTH deficiency.
Associations with other autoimmune diseases were evaluated. Her anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody was as high as 1482 IU/mL (normal range: 0–5 IU/mL) and anti-thyroglobulin antibody was 107 IU/mL (normal range: 0–21 IU/mL), which were consistent with autoimmune thyroiditis. No other autoimmune diseases were clinically suspected.
After an endocrinology consultation, the patient was started on hydrocortisone 15 mg/day. Her fever, anorexia, depression, and general malaise gradually disappeared. Two weeks later, right-heart catheterization showed a significant decrease in the mean pulmonary arterial pressure from 55 to 39 mmHg. Pulmonary vascular resistance also decreased from 12.8 to 4.7 Wood units, and cardiac output increased from 3.5 to 5.6 L/min. Her brain natriuretic peptide levels also decreased from 118.8 to 12.4 pg/mL, indicating alleviation of the right-sided heart failure. She was discharged since her symptoms improved to WHO-FC II . The administration of hydrocortisone was maintained while she was on prostacyclin.