A 52-year-old female patient was admitted to the authors’ department with hip and thigh pain associated with the inability to full weight bearing on her right leg. In the previous anamnesis, there was no trauma but bilateral congenital developmental hip dysplasia. She gradually became unable to walk during the past 2 weeks. On admission, physical examination revealed no restriction in passive hip motion, but the pain in her right groin. On inspection, there was drainage from a chronic sinus located laterally on the right thigh at the distal third of the previous surgical scar incision. Because of bilateral developmental hip dysplasia (Type B according to Hartofilakidis classification), she underwent THA bilaterally at another institution. Both THAs were performed through a modified anterolateral approach about 20 and 21 years ago. Both cementless THAs were of the type Zweymüller Alloclassic (Alloclassic®Zweymüller® Hip Stem, Zimmer Biomet, Warsaw, Indiana, USA) with Metasul Alloy MoM bearing surfaces and 32 mm ball head. The cup was a cementless titanium screw socket Alloclassic®Zweymüller®. According to the patient’s report, sinus formation and subsequent drainage begun around 3 years before this admission and was treated with oral antibiotics. On admission, the patient had no fever, and the sinus showed a rather mild secretion , the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was elevated to 68 mm/h (normal limits: 0–20 mm/h), the C-reactive protein (CRP) was 3.2 mg/dL (normal limits: 0–0,5 mg/dL), and the white blood cell count was 8.14 K/μL (normal limits: 4–10 K/μL), while the neutrophils were 4.63K/μL (normal limits: 2–7,5 K/μL). On admission, the initial plainroentgenograms of the hip disclosed sclerotic and osteolytic lesionsin both femur and acetabulum, with perforations through the lateral and medial cortices of the proximal femur, and migration of the Zweymuller stem together with the screw socket and ball head to a 90° horizontal position in relation to the longitudinal femoral axis on the frontal plane of the whole prosthesis . A computed tomography (CT) scan and a CT-angiography were performed, to evaluate the exact location of the migrated THA components and any proximity of them to the great leg vessels. CT scan disclosed that the stem and cup were located on the floor of the adductor femoral muscles, subcutaneously close to the medial third of the groin area. The proximal one-third of the femur was perforated by the stem in both medial and lateral cortices . CT angiography revealed the proximity of the screw socket to the superficial branch of the common femoral artery . Through a short longitudinal incision above the dislocated THA, the cup and the femoral ball head were found without disassembly . Samples from periprosthetic granulomatous tissues and fluid for culture and pathology were taken. Debridement with radical excision of the sinus was subsequently made and finally a continuous irrigation and drainage system were placed. Traces of tissue metallosis but no pseudotumor were found intraoperatively . The wounds healed uneventfully. No cement spacer was placed, due to our patient’s refusal for revision THA surgery. The cultures of the retrieved specimens revealed a polymicrobial infection of Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus and proteus mirabilis, while biopsy revealed tissue infiltration of polymorphonuclear leukocytes and macrophage cells, due to both infection and adverse reaction to metal debris (ARMD). The histology of the thigh scar was negative for malignancy. We administrated 6 weeks of intravenous vancomycin and sulfamethoxazole plus trimethoprim followed by 6 weeks’ oral administration of linezolid plus trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole. The final radiographic result was a resection arthroplasty . Fortunately, our patient was able to partially bear weight, with the aid of crutches, 1 month after surgery. The CRP and ESR returned to the normal levels, and our patient was discharged on day 51 after admission. Our patient had followed up, at 3 and 12 months postoperatively, with negative inflammation markers, no sinus formation, and satisfactory clinical and radiographic evaluation .