A 9-month-old boy was brought to the Department of Rehabilitation Medicine of Shenzhen Children's Hospital in August 2023 due to “low muscle tension in the limbs and neck, and the inability to turn over and sit up on his own.” He was the mother’s only child, delivered naturally at full-term, and had no history of neonatal asphyxia. His birth weight was 2,800 g, and he had no history of convulsions, hepatitis, tuberculosis, trauma, or other infectious diseases. He had no history of food or drug allergies. His parents were young and healthy and had no family history of genetic metabolic diseases.
The boy was born with varus deformity and ulnar deviation of the fingers (see ). Since his 26th day of life, he has undergone four intermittent plaster corrective operations at a hospital in Guangdong. At 70 days of age, he was treated with percutaneous loosening and Ponseti plaster fixation of the bilateral Achilles tendons for his congenital equine varus foot; since then, he has worn orthopedic braces for at least 3 h every day. At the age of 5 months, he was given an orthopedic brace at a hospital in Beijing due to his finger contracture deformity.
A physical examination at 9 months showed that the patient's head circumference was 44 cm and that his anterior fontanelle was unenclosed at 1.0 cm × 1.0 cm. His facial features included a broad nasal bridge, large nares, a long philtrum, and micrognathia (see ). There were no abnormalities in eye distance or the palatal arch, and the palmprints of his hands were normal. No obvious abnormalities were found in the lungs, chest, anus, or external genitalia. However, he had a right inguinal hernia that developed when crying and spontaneously recovered. The muscles of the patient's limbs and torso were flaccid, and he had developed hypotonia. Neither the knee reflex nor the Achilles tendon reflex was elicited. He had no sleep problems, breathing problems, or problems when exercising.
Thyroid function and myocardial enzymes showed no abnormalities. The results of a blood test performed on the patient were as follows: myoglobin, 37 ng/ml; creatine kinase, 171 IU/L; lactate dehydrogenase, 280 IU/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 31 IU/L; and creatine kinase–MB, 7.42 ng/ml. The patient's brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and electroencephalogram data were normal, and no characteristic lesions were found via electromyography. A color Doppler ultrasound revealed a patent foramen ovale in his heart (1.4 mm). Due to his low muscle tone, other hospitals suspected that the patient had spinal muscular atrophy (SMA); as a result, he underwent an SMA genetic test via the multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) method. The results showed rsa 5q13.2 (SMN1 exon 7) × 4 and (SMN1 exon 8) × 4 (these are known genetic variants in the SMN1 gene located on chromosome 5q13.2). The variant involved a duplication of exons 7 and 8 of the SMN1 gene; “×4” indicates that each of these duplications was present in four copies. At the age of 9 months, the child had low muscle tension in the limbs and neck, an unstable vertical head position, and could not turn over or sit up on his own. The Bailey Infant Development Scale Assessment: Intelligence revealed the patient's intelligence to be consistent with that expected at 6 months of age, and his developmental index was less than 50, indicating developmental delay. His Peabody Motor Developmental Scale (PMDS) score was low, with a gross motor development score of 62. His fine motor development was at a medium to low level.
We conducted genetic testing to determine the cause of the patient's overall developmental delay and hypotonia. After obtaining approval from the Medical Ethics Committee of the hospital and informed consent from the patient's parents, peripheral blood samples were collected from the child and his parents and subsequently sent to Suzhou Sai fu Medical Laboratory for testing.