An 82-year-old Japanese woman, who had never smoked tobacco, with a past medical history of hypertension, glaucoma, and slight renal dysfunction underwent left upper lobectomy with upper mediastinal lymph node dissection for lung cancer. She had been an office worker with telephone-related duties, and she was taking antihypertensives, proton pump inhibitors, acetaminophen, expectorants, and eye drops for glaucoma. The pathological diagnosis was T3N0M0 stage IIB adenocarcinoma with parietal pleural invasion . She had a point mutation of L858R in exon 21 of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene, and immunohistochemistry was weakly positive for PD-L1 .
Seven months after surgery, she was diagnosed as having contralateral pulmonary metastasis and started the first-line tyrosine kinase inhibitor gefitinib. However, gefitinib was discontinued because of the development of interstitial lung disease (ILD). After cessation of gefitinib, disease progression was seen on positron emission tomography, but her Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status was 0. Because she had left-sided back pain due to metastasis to the left pleura with chest wall invasion around the third thoracic spine, palliative irradiation to her chest wall was performed. After 30 Gy of palliative irradiation, she was given nivolumab 3 mg/kg every 2 weeks as a second-line therapy . During the first two cycles of nivolumab treatment, no adverse events (AEs) were observed, and her platelet count was almost 180 × 103/μL before and after administration of nivolumab. However, laboratory data before the third cycle of nivolumab showed that her platelets were extremely low (2000/μL), although her hemoglobin and white blood cell count (10.6 g/dL and 4500/μL, respectively) remained unchanged compared to the previous examination. Based on this result, she was admitted to our hospital urgently that same day.
On arrival, she was hemodynamically stable (blood pressure 128/79 mmHg, pulse rate 56 beats/minute, temperature 36.2 °C). There was no abnormal finding on her respiratory sounds. Her cardiac, abdominal, and neurological examinations were also without focal findings. Over time, symptoms such as nasal bleeding and bilateral purpura of her lower limbs developed. Her human leukocyte antigen (HLA) subtype was checked after emergency admission, and it was discovered that she had HLA-DRB1*0405 and DRB0901. Although she underwent a platelet transfusion every day, her platelet count remained low , and platelet-associated immunoglobulin G (PA-IgG) antibody was relatively high (223 ng/107 cells). She gradually developed hemoptysis and dyspnea because of alveolar hemorrhage. Four days after admission, she required mechanical ventilation, and she developed upper gastrointestinal bleeding, macroscopic hematuria, renal dysfunction, and liver dysfunction. Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) for 7 days, methylprednisolone pulse with maintenance therapy, and romiplostim (recombinant thrombopoietin receptor agonist; TRA) every week were then added to her treatment. Fifteen days after admission, her platelet counts recovered slightly; however, paradoxical cerebral infarction occurred at the left claustrum. Her general condition did not improve despite intensive therapy ; she died 29 days after admission. There was fatal diffuse microscopic bleeding in the lungs, kidneys, pancreas, and ovaries on autopsy. On the other hand, analysis of the lung tumor showed necrotic change, probably induced by nivolumab, because immunohistochemistry showed CD8-positive tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes that were focally positive around the carcinoma . Bacterial pneumonia with Gram-positive cocci was also found, but there was no interstitial pneumonia. Based on the above findings, immune thrombocytopenia induced by nivolumab was determined to be the cause of death.