An 88-year-old Causasian woman presented with a large mass at the left prescapular region that had progressed in size over several months. Two years prior, she had undergone surgical excision of a SCC at the same site but resection margins were inadequate. She refused further treatment, was lost to follow-up and has been on homeopathy since. She is otherwise healthy with no significant comorbidities and does not smoke tobacco or drink. In fact, she had no attending physician and suffered from no pathology. She was rather resistant to medical treatment and had consulted very few doctors during her lifetime. Thus, she did not take any treatment except homeopathy to keep her in good general shape. She had no other medical history other than the surgical cure of a bladder prolapse and a right native hip luxation which was reduced in an operating room a few months before our first consultation. Socially, she is a retiree from laboratory work, who has been widowed for 5 years, and lives alone with three adult children nearby. She had a normal neurological examination at the consultation. On physical examination, she appeared cachectic and had received food supplements during hospitalization and there were numerous dermatological lesions suspected of being skin tumors. She had a heart rate of 78 beats per minute; her blood pressure was 125 mmHg (systolic) and 75 mmHg (diastolic). Her temperature was normal (37.6 °C). No medication was prescribed prior to surgery. However, on this physical examination, there was a notable fungating mass (measuring 10 cm in its major axis) involving the deeper tissues with contact bleeding . SCC was confirmed on biopsy. Oncological work-up included ultrasonographic evaluation of draining lymph nodes in the axillae and groin bilaterally, and a staging thoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT) scan ; these were negative. Final staging of the SCC was T3N0M0 according to the 8th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) Classification and was considered high risk due to size and recurrence . Surgical resection with 1 cm margins and postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy was recommended following multidisciplinary discussion. Hence, safe and reliable soft tissue coverage would be required.
Oncologic resection was performed with clear separation obtained intraoperatively between the lesion and underlying deep structures. A DICAP flap was then harvested from the contralateral upper back : two perforators were identified using a handheld Doppler and the flap was designed to extend laterally to obtain as much skin as possible, with a final skin paddle of 17 × 9 cm . Flap dissection then proceeded from distal to proximal in a subfascial plane. The two perforators were skeletonized to minimize pedicle kink and enable 180º rotation into the post-resection defect. The flap and donor site were then closed over suction drains . Venous congestion was observed immediately after positioning the flap over the post-excision defect site, but this resolved spontaneously in 15 minutes. Postoperatively, our patient was instructed against supine positioning to protect the flap from overlying pressure for 5 days. Surgical drains were removed on postoperative day (POD) 5. During hospitalization, she benefited in the immediate postoperative period from a volemic expansion by 500 mL of polyionic 5% polyionic as well as anti-emetics (ondansetron 4 mg/2 ml) and painkillers of grade 1 (paracetamol 1 gram) and grade 2 (ketoprofen 50 mg), initially by intravenous and then by oral route. Supplementation with food supplements was introduced (twice a day). In order to prevent thromboembolic complications, preventive anticoagulation was implemented with a low molecular weight heparin called Lovenox (enoxaparin) 0.2 IU. Gastric protection with pantoprazole 20 mg was introduced for a few days. She had a small postoperative anemia that was treated with orally administered iron called Tardyferon (ferrous sulfate) 80 mg. Her cell blood count was normal except for mild regenerative anemia. Her renal and hepatic function was also without particularity. No urinary or microbiological analysis was carried out during hospitalization. Wound healing was complete at POD 21 except for two small areas of minor wound dehiscence < 2 cm and 3 cm at the lateral and superior edges of the flap, respectively, due to slight tension on closure. The former healed by secondary intention but the latter required debridement and closure under local anesthesia. The final postoperative appearance was acceptable to our patient and she did not have functional limitation of her arms .
A histopathological examination revealed a well-differentiated, invasive cutaneous SCC, of the common type, measuring 100 × 20 mm with Clark V level of invasion without neurovascular involvement. Final excision margins were uninvolved at > 9 mm laterally and > 1 mm posteriorly. Due to the large initial tumor size, local recurrence, and close posterior margin of 1 mm, adjuvant radiotherapy was initiated at 10 weeks postoperatively. Surveillance with biannual dermatological and ultrasonographic assessments was arranged. At 6-month follow-up, she was clinically well with no evidence of locoregional or distant SCC recurrence and the flap had completely healed with no bother to our patient.