The patient was a 71-year-old Japanese male who was naturally right-handed, with no history of being forced to use his right hand. He was a university graduate and was an executive officer of a company. His past medical history included atrial fibrillation, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus. Having developed left middle cerebral artery stroke, the patient was treated conservatively because thrombus retrieval therapy and thrombolysis were not yet available in Japan at that time. Seven days after onset, when his condition had stabilized, he started speech-language-hearing therapy (ST). Two months after onset, the patient was discharged from hospital and continued ST on an outpatient basis. However, there was little improvement in speech and language function, so he visited the department of rehabilitation medicine at The Jikei University School of Medicine at 9 months after stroke onset.
The findings at the initial visit were as follows: the patient exhibited good awareness with no paralysis in gross motor function. The cognitive function score by functional independence measurement (FIM) was 31/35 points. The scores were 6, 4, 7, 7, and 7 in the order of communication (comprehension, expression) and social cognition (social interaction, problem solving, and memory), respectively. The brain imaging test using T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the head showed low signal regions from the left temporal lobe to supramarginal gyrus and inferior parietal lobule . The Standard Language Test of Aphasia (SLTA) results showed a greater language loss function in terms of ability to speak and write compared with aural and reading comprehension. His utterance was fluent in short sentences. No anarthria was observed, but phonemic paraphasia and neologism were observed for verbal expression. He had phonological spelling errors in writing. The neuropsychological test findings showed that the Raven’s Colored Progressive Matrices (RCPM) score was 26/36 points (the average in the 70s being 26.9 points).
He underwent inpatient intensive rehabilitation treatment consisting of rTMS and intensive ST (iST) five times in total (at 10 months, 20 months, 27 months, 35 months, and 47 months after stroke onset). Each duration of hospital stay was 13 days. He continued to undergo ST periodically on an outpatient basis. Table shows therapeutic regimens during hospitalization.
The rTMS was performed using a eight-shaped coil with a diameter of 70 mm and MagPro R30 Stimulator (MagVenture Company, Denmark). The location of rTMS stimulation was right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) [, ]. The motor threshold was measured at which movements of the first dorsal interosseous muscle of the left upper limb were visually observed when the right primary motor cortex was stimulated. The stimulation intensity was set at 90% of the motor threshold. The stimulation frequency was set at a low frequency of 1 Hz. The stimulation time was 40 minutes per session. A total of 2400 pulses of rTMS were applied per day. He underwent rTMS session once a day with a total of 12 sessions, excluding Sunday, during hospitalization.
He underwent iST with a total of 120 minutes per day during hospitalization. One-on-one ST training with the intent of improving phonological awareness was performed by a speech-language-hearing therapist. The main training included reading aloud short sentences written only in the Japanese syllabary characters and phonological manipulation tasks (phonological extraction, mora counting, written naming, dictation, and adding Japanese syllabary characters by providing the framework of the mora). He encouraged voluntary training in the wards.Upon discharge from the hospital, he and his family received instruction about communication methods from the speech-language-hearing therapist.
The patient’s language function was evaluated by the Standard Language Test of Aphasia (SLTA), the Supplementary Tests for Standard Language Test of Aphasia (SLTA-ST), the Japanese version of Western Aphasia Battery (J-WAB), and the Japanese version of Token Test (J-Token Test). The speech-language-hearing therapist scored each test according to the prescribed scoring method. The patient underwent the naming task of the SLTA-ST, the shadowing task of the J-WAB and the J-Token Test as the short-term evaluation for language functions at both the time of hospitalization and hospital discharge 2 weeks later. He also received the SLTA as long-term assessment for language functions during hospitalization and at 3 months after hospital discharge.
The SLTA is widely used as the standard language test for people who are native speakers of Japanese [, ]. The SLTA is designed to evaluate language functions including utterance, naming, shadowing, auditory comprehension, reading comprehension, writing, and calculation. Four domains of the SLTA (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) were assessed. The scores of SLTA subtests were converted into Z-scores by utilizing the mean and standard deviation. The mean Z-score of listening, speaking, reading, and writing of the SLTA by each domain, as well as the mean of Z-scores of the SLTA four domains were calculated.
The SLTA-ST consists of more complicated tasks than SLTA and is designed to detect symptoms of mild language disability, which the SLTA cannot . The naming task of the SLTA-ST was performed using 80 words. The J-WAB is designed to measure linguistic skills and auditory comprehension. The shadowing task of the J-WAB was performed with 100 points as the maximum score. The J-Token Test is used to detect slight language comprehension deficits; severity of aphasia correlates to the test score. The maximum score of the J-Token Test was 165 points.
The patient’s regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) was measured with SPECT scan. 99mTc-ethyl cysteine dimer (99mTc-ECD) was used as a tracer. The SPECT scan was performed three times in total (at 20 months, 30 months, and 47 months after stroke onset). The patient was injected intravenously with 99mTc-ECD (600 MBq) and the SPECT scan was performed 20 minutes later. The conditions at SPCET scanning included eyes closed resting states in the decubitus position. The SPECT imaging software used for quantitative analysis included three-dimensional stereotactic regions of interest template (3DSRT) and fine stereotactic regions of interest template (FineSRT).
The 3DSRT and FineSRT are designed to quantitatively calculate CBF in the region of interest (ROI). The rCBF was set at the mean CBF of each ROI (mL/100 g/minute) . A difference of CBF in right and left cerebral hemispheres was calculated using rCBF of language-related ROI as laterality index (LI) as follows :CBF in the affected side of the left cerebral hemisphere decreased. This means the higher LI value is, the more CBF in the right cerebral hemisphere increases compared with the CBF in the left hemisphere.
The patient completed treatment without adverse events. Language function gradually improved over the long term, was maintained, and then stabilized. His speech improved from word level to short sentences, and the frequency of phonemic paraphasia decreased. Table and Fig. show transitions in the short-term evaluation during hospitalization (naming task of the SLTA-ST, shadowing task of the J-WAB and the J-Token Test). His scores for J-WAB improved from 28 to 50 points, and from 97 to 137 points for the J-Token Test during the initial hospitalization. Improvement in short-term language function during hospitalization was remarkable in the initial hospitalization and stabilized after repeated hospitalization. Table and Fig. show the transitions in the long-term language function evaluation (Z-score of the SLTA) for 3 months after hospital discharge. The mean Z-scores of four domains, listening, speaking, reading, and writing, improved from 53.8 to 58.1 points over the course of a long period of time from 10 to 51 months after the onset of stroke. The Z-score of each SLTA domain and the mean Z-scores of the four SLTA domains improved simultaneously. The patient’s speaking and writing improved much more compared with listening and reading comprehension.
LI increased, with CBF in right hemisphere increasing more than that of the left hemisphere. Table shows transitions of rCBF in the parietal lobe, angular gyrus, and temporal lobe, as well as LI transitions using 3DSRT of the SPECT. Table shows transitions of rCBF and LI in each language-related area using FineSRT of the SPECT.