A 54-year-old female patient, with a history of stage IVB squamous cell carcinoma of cervix, was treated by concurrent chemoradiotherapy 6 years ago. Subsequently, 6 months later, bilateral hydroureteronephrosis was found by the follow-up computerized tomography (CT), which showed the stricture segment included the middle third and lower third of both ureters. The level of serum creatinine increased from 1.0 to 2.7 mg/dL. She underwent bilateral insertion of double-J catheter to facilitate the upper urinary tract drainage. Unfortunately, the follow-up CT showed persistent bilateral hydronephrosis (left side worse than right side). Additionally, the renal function deteriorated and a gradual change of serum creatinine from 2.4 to 6.5 mg/dL was found. She underwent right insertion of a parallel second double-J catheter and left percutaneous nephrostomy . The level of serum creatinine decreased to 2.6 mg/dL. It was possible due to the complication of retroperitoneal fibrosis and bilateral ureteral strictures following previous radiation therapy. Afterward, she had periodic change of the right side double-J stents and left percutaneous nephrostomy.
She presented with deterioration of creatinine level from 2.6 to 4.0 mg/dL and repeated catheter-related infection in recent 1 year and transferred to our hospital. Consideration of the stricture length of bilateral ureters, we planned the surgical treatment of segmental resection of bilateral ureteral stricture accompanied with bilateral Boari flap and ureteroneocystostomy.
We made a lower midline transperitoneal incision. After exposing bilateral ureters and bladder, we found a contracted bladder, generalized fibrotic change in the pelvis and bilateral long-segment ureteral strictures including middle third and lower third of ureters. We isolated the both ureters by sharp and blunt dissection and found the both dilated ureters above the junction of middle third and upper third of ureters. It was not available for the procedure of bilateral Boari flap because that the bladder was contracted and the length of bilaterally healthy ureters was not long enough, even though the bilateral upper ureters and bilateral kidneys had been mobilized.
We transected the bilateral ureters at the middle third of ureters, and placed a 3–0 synthetic absorbable stay suture in the proximal cut end of the bilateral ureters and ligated the distal stump of the bilateral ureters. After mobilizing the bladder, a psoas hitch onto the left psoas tendon was done with three interrupted sutures. We designed a Boari flap with the width 2.5 cm at the tip and 5 cm wide at the base. The right ureter was brought to the left side through the retrocolon channel. The bilateral ureters were reconstructed into a common channel, then directly anastomosed the common channel of both ureters to the edge of the Boari flap . Prior to closure, we inserted two double-J catheters into both ureters. We placed two closed-suction drains at the site of perivesical region and Cul-de-sac, and closed the surgical wound.
After operation, she recovered uneventfully and was discharged on postoperative day 7. We removed the two double-J catheters on the fourteenth postoperative day. 18 months latter, a follow-up sonography showed mild hydronephrosis on right kidney and the level of serum creatinine was 2.4 mg/dL .