The patient, a 50-year-old female, was diagnosed with uterine fibroids during a routine medical examination in 2016. In June 2020, she experienced moderate-intensity irregular vaginal bleeding, occasionally accompanied by dark red blood clots. In December 2020, the patient came to our hospital for consultation and underwent a gynecological ultrasound examination. The ultrasound revealed an anteverted uterus measuring approximately 10.5×8.3×9.0 cm. Multiple hypoechoic lesions were found within the myometrium. The largest fibroid, approximately 2.6×1.4 cm in size, was found in the anterior wall. Additionally, a 7.3×5.5×7.0 cm solid cystic echo was observed in the anterior wall muscle. These findings suggest the presence of multiple uterine fibroids and possible changes in the endometrium. Moreover, it was noted that the intrauterine contraceptive device had descended. During the gynecological examination, a significant amount of dark red blood clot tissue was found in the vagina of the patient, accompanied by a foul-smelling discharge. The cervix was difficult to expose, and the uterus appeared to be the size of a 4-month-old pregnancy. It had a firm consistency, irregular shape, and was mobile. No tenderness was observed upon palpation, and no abnormalities were detected in the bilateral adnexa. The patient denied any family history of similar diseases. The findings of auxiliary examinations revealed the levels of tumor markers as follows: carbohydrate antigen 125 (CA125) 22.48 U/mL (normal range: 0-35 U/mL), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) <0.600 U/mL (normal range: 0-27 U/mL), and human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) 73.69 pmol/L (normal range: 0-140 pmol/L). Owing to the enlarged uterus and poor exposure of the cervix, diagnostic dilation and curettage was difficult to perform, severely reducing the accuracy of the biopsy. Therefore, on December 21, 2020, an intrauterine mass biopsy was performed on the patient after a comprehensive evaluation. The postoperative pathological examination revealed a “spindle cell tumor of the uterine cavity,” with immunohistochemistry indicating a tendency toward an LGESS. To further assess the interplay between the lesion and adjacent tissues, the patient underwent chest and abdominal CT scans. The abdominal CT revealed adenomyosis along with multiple leiomyomas, some of which exhibited partial cystic degeneration. There was substantial thickening of the bilateral vasculature, including the arterial and venous systems. In addition, there were lesions within the uterine cavity , and there was evident dilation of the inferior vena cava, left iliac vein, and pelvic veins, indicative of venous leiomyoma . The chest CT did not reveal any major abnormalities. The preoperative diagnosis revealed “LGESS” and “Intravascular tumor”. After a comprehensive evaluation of the patient’s condition, on January 4, 2021, she underwent a “complete abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and tumor resection from the inferior vena cava, left common iliac vein, and left internal iliac vein.” The diagnosis of “HGESS with intravascular metastases” was established based on the postoperative pathology findings.