A 30-year-old woman without underlying disease suffered from unexplained nausea, vomiting, and cough without fever. After 1 month, she was admitted to the emergency department with suddenly deteriorated dyspnea and myoclonic jerks on all limbs. At admission, the chest X-ray showed multifocal patchy ground-glass opacity in the bilateral lungs. ST elevation of the inferior leads on the electrocardiography and increased cardiac markers (creatine kinase-MB, 33.1 ng/mL; troponin I, 10989.0 pg/mL, and N-terminal-pro b-type natriuretic peptide, 3837 pg/mL) were observed. The echocardiography showed severe left ventricular (LV) systolic dysfunction (LV Ejection fraction, LVEF 13%) and regional wall motion abnormalities . Coronary angiography conducted to exclude ischemic etiology was normal. Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) was performed to maintain her vitality under the suspicion of stress cardiomyopathy or acute myocarditis. After 2 days of ECMO with the administration of a vasopressor, hydrocortisone, and antibiotics, dyspnea and lung infiltration were rapidly improved. After 12 days, the LVEF was improved to 40% and was normal after 1 month. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a high signal intensity in the T2-weighted image suggesting focal edema at 1 month after ECMO therapy. Pheochromocytoma was not detected on the abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan and in the 24-h urine collection.
With suspicion of nausea, vomiting, and myoclonus caused by medullary lesion, a brain MRI was done at 1 week after stopping ECMO. The brain MRI showed high signal lesions in the medulla oblongata on the T2 and fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) image . The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis was normal. Fluorescent antinuclear antibody (FANA) was positive with a homogenous pattern, but anti-dsDNA antibodies and Anti Ro/La-Ab were negative. There was no evidence of lupus or paraneoplastic syndrome in the clinical examination and abdomen and chest CT scan. Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis was the initial diagnosis for the medullary lesion and myoclonus. Her initial symptoms including nausea, vomiting, myoclonus, and cough were rapidly improved after the introduction of ECMO and hydrocortisone. And remaining myoclonus was completely resolved by clonazepam 0.5 mg a day for 7 days.
A predisposing neurologic event, rapid recovery of LV dysfunction and regional wall motion abnormality, ST elevation, absence of angiographic evidence of coronary disease, and pheochromocytoma were compatible with stress cardiomyopathy according to the Mayo Clinic diagnostic criteria .
At around 1 month after discharge, sudden hypoesthesia developed on her left hemibody. Spine and brain MRI revealed longitudinal extensive transverse myelitis (LETM), ranging from the medulla to the thoracic spinal cord . Aquaporin-4 antibody (AQP4-Ab) was positive in a cell-based indirect immunofluorescence assay . The immunoglobulin G index was elevated, and oligoclonal bands were negative. Other autoimmune diseases and infectious diseases causing LETM did not match the diagnostic criteria. She was diagnosed with NMO spectrum disorder with AQP4-IgG. Treatment with intravenous methylprednisolone 1 g a day was maintained for 7 consecutive days. After this, her neurologic symptoms were much improved. Although azathioprine 100 mg was prescribed to prevent the recurrence of NMOSD, LETM was recurred at around 2 months after the first relapse. There was no more recurrence until now for 10 months since rituximab administration.