We present the case of a 1-year-old boy who was brought to our attention due to a 4-month history of difficulty swallowing solid foods and frequent episodes of vomiting following ingestion of semisolid and solid foods. Despite seeking treatment from multiple general physicians, the symptoms did not abate.
Upon presentation, the patient exhibited a weight-for-length percentile of 87 and a Z score of 1.15. He appeared pale but was otherwise stable, with no signs of hepatosplenomegaly. On laboratory investigation, a peripheral smear revealed microcytic hypochromic anaemia, which was also a consistent finding in his previous laboratory, and elevated red cell distribution width (RDW) and low ferritin levels [Table ] supported the diagnosis of iron deficiency anaemia.
Although there was no history of atopy, we conducted food allergy tests and IgE assessments, all of which returned normal results, ruling out allergic causes.
An esophagogram revealed circumferential narrowing of the upper thoracic esophagus with a jet phenomenon, mild proximal dilatation, and contrast hold-up [Fig ]. The rest of the esophagus showed normal motility and caliber. No other filling defects or abnormal extrinsic impressions were observed. Endoscopy confirmed the presence of an oesophageal web in the proximal esophagus [Fig ]. Our initial suspicion was an oesophageal web and vascular ring due to the patient’s dysphagia and suggestive esophagogram findings. However, financial constraints prevented us from performing a contrast CT scan to confirm the vascular ring. Therefore, we proceeded with treatment for an oesophageal web based on the esophagography findings.
During endoscopy, we identified an oesophageal web in the proximal esophagus, characterized by a membrane protruding into the lumen. We performed oesophageal dilation using a Savary-Gilliard dilator, gradually increasing from a 5 mm to 9 mm probe [Fig. ].
The patient remained hemodynamically stable post procedure, and his recovery was uneventful. Solid food reintroduction was successful, and the patient was discharged with oral iron supplements. Due to the patient’s remote residence, follow-up was conducted via phone, revealing no recurrence of symptoms after three weeks, with the patient tolerating both liquid and solid diets well. A clinic visit is scheduled for a three-month follow-up.