A 76-year-old female presented with a sudden onset of right hemiparesis and was referred to our hospital 20 min after onset. She had no history of atrial fibrillation. Neurologic examinations performed at admission revealed right hemiparesis, hemisensory disturbance, right facial palsy, and a score of 11 on the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS). At admission, computed tomographic angiography and perfusion imaging were performed, and subsequent analysis with RAPID software revealed acute left ACA occlusion with salvageable penumbra .
The patient was treated with intravenous recombinant tissue plasminogen activator according to current guidelines. Subsequent endovascular treatment was indicated, and written informed consent to conduct MT was obtained from the patient's family. The endovascular procedure was performed with a transfemoral approach under conscious sedation. Cerebral angiography revealed occlusion of the left ACA (A4) . The location of the occlusion was ascertained following the segmentation of the ACA as described by Fischer . A 9-Fr balloon guiding catheter (Optimo; Tokai Medical Products Inc., Kasugai, Japan) was advanced into the left internal carotid artery. A 2.3-Fr microcatheter was navigated over a microguidewire distal to the occlusion site and successful reperfusion (Thrombolysis in Cerebral Infarction [TICI] grade 3) was achieved on the first attempt using a stent retriever (Trevo 3 × 20 mm; Stryker Neurovascular, Kalamazoo, MI, USA) which was fully deployed and retrieved ; 16 and 221 min elapsed from puncture to reperfusion and from onset to reperfusion , respectively. No procedure-related complications occurred. On the day following the procedure, the patient's right hemiparesis receded, and her NIHSS score decreased to 2. Magnetic resonance imaging performed on the day following admission revealed infarcts in the left ACA territory and a small infarct in the left MCA territory . The patient's recovery progressed well, and she was discharged 13 days after admission with a modified Rankin Scale (mRS) score of 1. Her 90-day mRS score was 0.