A 65 year old Greek man with unremarkable previous medical history, was admitted to our ICU because of haemorrhage after renal biopsy. On admission, examination revealed a respiratory rate of 30/min, a pulse rate of 138/min and a blood pressure of 79/58 mmHg. He was in a critical condition with profound hypovolaemic shock, acute renal failure and coagulopathy. Despite volume resuscitation and transfusion of 8 units of Red Blood Cells (RBC) and 4 units of Fresh Frozen Plasma (FFP) the patient developed a rapidly expanding abdomen. He was transported immediately to the operating room for laparotomy.
His preoperative airway examination was unremarkable: mouth opening, oropharyngeal view, thyromental distance, and neck movement were all normal. For anaesthetic induction, after three minutes of pre-oxygenation with 100% O2 and initiation of cricoid pressure, the patient received midazolam 2 mg iv, fentanyl 100 mcg iv, etomidate 16 mg iv, and succinylcholine 80 mg iv.
Anaesthesia was maintained with sevoflurane (MAC 1–1.2) in air and oxygen (FiO2 50%), and intermittent boluses of fentanyl and rocuronium. The standard monitoring included ECG, capnometry, invasive measurement of blood pressure and central venous pressure, pulsoximetry, diuresis, esophageal and tympanic temperature. Bispectral analysis of the electroencephalogram was used as a guide for anaesthetic depth and bispectral index levels were maintained between 40 and 55. Ligation of the bleeding left kidney vessels was accomplished.
After completion of the operation mechanical ventilation was continued in ICU. Four hours later the patient became haemodynamically unstable with a rapid drop of his haematocrit, while he required increased doses of fluids and vasopressors. A 4-lumen central venous catheter and a pulmonary artery catheter were inserted via puncture of the internal jugular vein. In addition, 4 units of RBC, 13 units of FFP and 6 units of platelets were administered. His status did not stabilise and he was taken directly to the operating room where bleeding from splenic vessels was found. The same philosophy of anaesthetic management is being applied to the perioperative period. Emergency splenectomy was carried out. As his condition further deteriorated administration of rFVIIa, as last effort to control his bleeding, was decided. A total dose of 4,8 mg (60 μg/kg) of rFVIIa along with concurrent transfusion of 4 units of FFP, 2 units of RBC and 6 units of platelets were given. Remarkably, all signs of bleeding appeared to cease , the patient's haemodynamic parameters also stabilised and his tissue perfusion and metabolic acidosis gradually improved. There were no further episodes of recurrent haemorrhage. On the second postoperative day, his trachea was extubated in the operating room and thereafter he was discharged home on postoperative day 6.
One month later the patient was operated on for a suspected retroperitoneal infected collection that it was assumed to be the cause of persistent pyrexia. After abdominal washout he suffered another episode of severe intraabdominal bleeding with postoperative coagulopathy. Despite the transfusion of 30 units of FFP, 18 units of RBC and 6 units of platelets to control his bleeding, no substantial benefit was observed. We, thereafter, decided to administer again 12 mg (150 μg/kg) of rFVIIa within 16 hours, which resulted in cessation of bleeding shortly after the last dose of rFVIIa with no recurrent episodes of haemorrhage, and correction of clotting parameters .