A 23-year-old man with an unremarkable medical history presented at the digestive outpatient clinic in our hospital, complaining of persistent fatigue for several weeks and one episode of near syncope yesterday. He also reported increasing abdominal pain and poor appetite over the past 2 weeks, and a previous hospital visit revealed abnormal liver function tests with combined hyperbilirubinemia. Abdominal ultrasound showed only moderate fatty liver disease without biliary tract obstruction. He was admitted for further evaluation and management.
Through an episode of syncope, he had normal consciousness without neurological signs at present. He denied chest pain, palpitation, positional hypotension, fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, arthralgia, body weight loss, history of renal disease, alcohol abuse, or illicit drug use. Physical examination revealed his height (181 cm), body weight (116 kg), blood pressure (193/120 mm Hg), pulse (98 beats per minute, regular), and body temperature (36.2°C). His liver and spleen were not palpable, and there was no sign of meningeal irritation or any other neurological abnormalities. Examination of the head and neck, lungs, heart, and abdomen were normal, and there was no evidence of uveitis on ophthalmic examination. The patient denied penile swelling or induration, and no skin eruption or rash was observed on the trunk or extremities, nor was there pitting edema in the limbs.
Laboratory findings revealed cholestasis with increased alanine aminotransferase of 211 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase of 101 U/L, total bilirubin of 1.41 mg/dL, direct bilirubin of 0.72 mg/dL. He had a low albumin level of 3.2 g/dL. White cell count of 8,000/μL, hemoglobin of 14.5 g/dL, blood urea nitrogen of 12 mg/dL, serum creatinine of 0.96 mg/dL were within the normal range. A workup for hepatitis of virological analyses was negative for viral hepatitis A, B, C, cytomegalovirus, Herpes simplex virus, and Epstein-Barr virus infection. Comprehensive workup for autoimmune and metabolic disorders was unremarkable. Liver MRI demonstrated mild fatty liver disease and borderline splenomegaly with size around 13 cm at the longest diameter, while there were no structural alterations of the kidneys. However, urine protein (3+) was detected on routine dipstick urinalysis at admission. Subsequent quantitative urine protein examinations revealed an increased albumin creatinine ratio of 1,295.8 mg/g Cre and a urine protein creatinine ratio of 972.4 mg/g (<150 mg/g). The A/G ratio was 0.8.
Given the acute onset of proteinuria and persistent hypertension in a young man without renal impairment, we conducted investigations for atypical infections, viral infection, and sexually transmitted disease. The rapid plasma reagent (RPR) test showed a markedly reactive titer of 1:128, and a Treponema pallidum hemagglutination (TPHA) test was positive with an increased titer of 1:2,560. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody test was negative. Serum immunoglobulin (Ig) G level was 1,570 mg/dL (normal range: 540–1,822 mg/dL), IgA was 407 mg/dL (63–484 mg/dL), IgM was 292 mg/dL (22–240 mg/dL), and IgE was 766 IU/mL (<100 IU/mL). The patient reported unprotected sexual contact with a new sexual partner in a homosexual relationship for 2 months, who was diagnosed with syphilis. However, our patient denied penile swelling and induration in the months before admission.
A diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome caused by secondary syphilis was strongly suspected. Kidney biopsy was performed during admission, which revealed 15 well-perfused, non-sclerosed glomeruli. Staining with hematoxylin and eosin, periodic acid-Schiff, and Jones methenamine silver showed focal segmental thickening of capillary loops, focal mild expansion of mesangial matrix, and mild tubular atrophy (shown in a, b). Direct immunofluorescence revealed moderate diffuse granular glomerular capillary wall staining for IgG, C1q, and C3, Kappa, and Lambda. The tentative diagnosis was immune complex-mediated membranous nephritis with full-house immunofluorescence staining (shown in c). Electron microscopy did not show definite electron-dense deposits along capillary loops or in the mesangium, but diffuse granular deposits along the glomerular basement membrane were identified in the immunofluorescence study. So minimal change with equivocal electron-dense deposits and early-stage membranous glomerulonephritis was suspected (shown in d).
Based on the patient’s sexual history, serological markers of syphilis, urine analyses, and kidney biopsy results, a diagnosis of syphilitic hepatitis with concomitant nephrotic syndrome during the secondary syphilis stage was made. The patient received intramuscular administration of three doses of penicillin G benzathine (2.4 million units) once a week. Valsartan and pentoxifylline were prescribed for hypertension and proteinuria due to their antiproteinuric effects. A 4-week follow-up visit showed favorable responses to these treatments. Urine protein levels soon decreased; the urine protein creatinine ratio dropped from 972.4 mg/g to 268.5 mg/g 1 month later. Liver and biliary enzymes returned to normal after penicillin treatment, and nephrotic syndrome completely resolved with normalized urinary protein excretion around 3 months after treatment (94.7 mg/g). And the subsequent titer of RPR showed remarkable decline, decreasing from 1:128 to 1:16 4 months after antibiotic treatment (Clinical course shown in .).