A 25-month-old girl was presented with the chief complaint of progressive abdominal swelling and pain about one year ago . Following further investigations with abdominopelvic plain x-ray by the gastroenterologist team in another hospital, the fluid was tapped from the abdomen, considering the ascites due to the distension and plain x-ray report. Moreover, the fluid serum-ascites albumin gradient was 3.1 g/dl (High SAAG); however, no further evaluations were performed. The abdominal distention diminished, and the abdominopelvic CT scan was normal . After one year, significant distension and abdominal discomfort were developed again, and the patient was admitted to our hospital in a healthy condition for further assessments. The patient's medical history indicated that she was born by natural vaginal delivery with a birth weight of 3.0 kg and had normal development.
Physical examination of the patient showed normal and stable conditions. Additionally, no lower extremities edema was observed. The abdomen was distended with a non-tender mass. Laboratory tests, including complete blood cell count, the white blood cell count, hematocrit, and platelet, the total protein and albumin, electrolytes, and liver function tests, along with urine analysis and stool exam, Amylase, lipase, anti-tissue transglutaminase antibody immunoglobulin A, and serum IgA, the erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein were within normal ranges. Furthermore, her echocardiography did not show any abnormal findings.
The ultrasound and spiral abdominopelvic CT scan with oral and intravenous contrast showed some disseminated homogenous fluids in the abdominal cavity. This enormous cystic lesion pulls away from the hallo viscous to the left side ). Second, mesenteric cyst, omental cyst, and less likely loculated ascites were reported as differential diagnoses. Based on the above findings, the patient decided to have an elective open surgical procedure to remove the aforementioned cysts. After entering the abdominal space, an enormous mass with almost distinct borders and a milky appearance (similar to lymph) was observed . The origin of the mass was extended from the gastrocolic ligament in the epigastric region (greater curvature of the stomach) to the anterior edge of the transverse colon, both sides, and the pelvis. Despite the careful and slow excision of the cyst, almost three liters of milky fluid came out after cyst rupture.
The cyst was totally excised, and an omentectomy was performed subsequently. After surgery, the patient felt full recovery and was ultimately symptom-free. The histology report also suggests a 9*6*0.8 cm mesenteric cyst to be lymphangioma, with endothelial cell lining and a wall containing lymphatic spaces, lymphoid tissue, and smooth muscle . In the subsequent post-operative visits, nothing special was found in the ultrasound and physical exams.