A 19-year-old Greek man was referred to our tertiary referral centre, from a district hospital, due to blunt abdominal trauma with an associated pancreatic injury, 5 days ago. The mechanism of injury was a blow into his epigastrium during an assault.
He was haemodynamically stable and clinically there was mild tenderness in his epigastrium without any signs of peritonism . Laboratory tests showed a mild increase in serum amylase (670U/L, reference values 25 to 125) and C-reactive protein (9.1, reference values 0 to 0.5).An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan documented the injury with a full thickness laceration of his pancreatic neck and an associated 6×2cm fluid collection in this lesser sac with a minimal account of free fluid in the rest of his peritoneal cavity . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a complete MPD disruption at the level of the neck . He was treated conservatively with fasting, total parenteral nutrition and octreotide. During observation and on the 16th postinjury day, he became pyrexial with an increase in his white cell count and amylase level. A repeat CT scan showed enlargement of the fluid collection. Because he remained haemodynamically stable with no signs of peritonism, it was decided to undergo an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with possible stenting of the MPD or internal drainage of the fluid collection. The decision was based on persisting fever and enlargement of the fluid collection despite the already mentioned treatment and antibiotics.An ERCP, performed 20 days postinjury, showed a complete pancreas divisum and cannulation from the minor papilla showed a complete MPD transection with extravasation of contrast . The MPD could not be bridged with a guidewire. A pancreatic pigtail stent (Cook Medical) was placed in the proximal MPD to facilitate drainage of the proximal pancreas to his duodenum. The collection of the lesser sac was bulging into the posterior wall of his stomach and a transmural drainage was performed with simultaneous placement of two 7 Fr, 4cm double pigtail stents (Cook Medical; Figure ). Postoperatively the patient had an elevation of amylase without deterioration of clinical signs. He gradually became asymptomatic and follow-up with sequential ultrasonograms showed resolution of the fluid collection. The pancreatic stent was removed a month later. At 3 months he was admitted for removal of the transgastric stents, but an abdominal X-ray showed that the stents had passed spontaneously. A new MRCP, at 6 months postinjury, showed complete disruption of the MPD with dilatation of the distal remnant . He remains asymptomatic, without steatorrhoea or diabetes, with normal amylase levels 7 months postinjury.