A 35-year-old man with mild intermittent asthma, class I obesity, and no additional personal/familial cardiovascular risk factors presented to the emergency department (ED) complaining of 1 day of intermittent chest discomfort with associated left-sided jaw pain and nausea. The symptoms began while at rest on the morning prior to admission, subsided through the day, and returned with increased severity in the evening, leading to ED presentation.
The patient was in a usual state of health until 1 month previously; at that time, he developed symptoms of cough, non-specific chest pain, dyspnoea, and intermittent fevers (Tmax 38.78°C). His albuterol inhaler provided only mild relief of symptoms. A chest radiograph (CXR) performed at an urgent care centre was reportedly unremarkable. He was presumed to have COVID-19 as well as an asthma exacerbation; however, he did not receive COVID-19 testing. He was prescribed a 5-day course of azithromycin and a combination inhaler (ipratropium bromide and albuterol). His symptoms resolved within 1 week, and he felt well until the day prior to index presentation.
In the ED, temperature was 37.6°C, heart rate 66 b.p.m., respiratory rate 18 breaths/min, and oxygen saturation was 99% on ambient air. Blood pressure was 123/81 mmHg (left arm) and 126/80 mmHg (right arm). The physical exam was unremarkable.
The initial work-up in the ED consisted of a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG), laboratory testing , and CXR. The ECG demonstrated sinus rhythm with inferior T-wave inversions, and non-specific lateral ST depression . Initial laboratory tests were remarkable for a high-sensitivity troponin T (hs-cTnT) of 386 ng/L (normal: ≤22 ng/L). The CXR showed a normal cardiac silhouette and clear lung fields. Given the elevated hs-cTnT, the patient received 325 mg aspirin and 80 mg enoxaparin.
Subsequent hs-cTnT increased to 502 ng/L, and then to 768 ng/L. A nasopharyngeal swab for SARS-CoV-2 RNA was negative. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated a mildly dilated left ventricle [left ventricular (LV) end-diastolic diameter 5.9 cm] and global hypokinesis [ejection fraction (EF) 20–25%] but akinetic inferior and inferolateral walls. A 2.0 cm × 0.7 cm mobile thrombus was visualized in the LV apex (; , Video S1). The patient underwent urgent left heart catheterization.
Coronary angiography revealed a mid right coronary artery (RCA) thrombus causing 100% occlusion with TIMI 0 flow (, Video S2). The left coronary anatomy had no coronary disease and demonstrated no retrograde filling of the RCA. After discussion regarding pros and cons of intervention in this setting, reperfusion was elected given the ongoing symptoms. Intravenous cangrelor bolus was administered (2550 μg). Mechanical aspiration thrombectomy and subsequent mechanical-power aspiration thrombectomy were performed utilizing the Indigo System with CAT RX Coronary Aspiration Catheter (Penumbra). Post-thrombectomy, a large amount of residual thrombus burden remained, causing 70% residual stenosis and TIMI 2 flow (, Video S3). At this time, the cangrelor bolus was complete and the patient was administered a loading dose of 180 mg ticagrelor, and started on a tirofiban infusion (loading dose of 2125 μg followed by 12.75 μg/min for 18 h).
On admission to the cardiac care unit, he was haemodynamically stable. Subsequently, SARS-CoV-2 antibody testing (Elecsys anti-SARS-CoV-2 test, electrochemiluminescence immunoassay) returned positive. Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging with late gadolinium enhancement tissue characterization demonstrated LVEF of 39%, and near transmural myocardial infarction of the basal–mid inferoseptum and inferior segments with a subendocardial non-enhancing central area suggestive of microvascular obstruction . There was no evidence of remote myocardial inflammation on T2-weighted or late gadolinium enhancement imaging.
The patient remained chest pain free post-coronary intervention, completed the 18-h tirofiban infusion, and was moved to the cardiology wards. Serial ECGs performed throughout the admission demonstrated non-dynamic ST and T wave changes, unchanged from that shown in . On hospital Day 6, he developed left-sided hemineglect, confusion, and slurred speech. His antiplatelet/anticoagulation regimen at this time was aspirin 81 mg daily, clopidogrel 75 mg daily, unfractionated heparin infusion [activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) 84.0 s; normal 23.9–34.7 s] and warfarin [international normalized ratio (INR) 1.2; normal 0.9–1.1). Computed tomography head angiography demonstrated a right middle cerebral artery (MCA; M1 branch) thrombus (, Image S1). No carotid disease was visualized. The patient was taken for emergent thrombectomy (, Image S2). Follow-up TTE demonstrated LV apical thrombus, however smaller in size. Post-thrombectomy, he remains with mild left-sided weakness. The patient will be discharged to a rehabilitation facility with planned repeat echocardiogram and thrombophilia testing at 1-month follow-up.