An 80-year-old white female was referred for evaluation of a suspicious vulvar lesion in September of 1997. At that time, the patient was free of complaints. On physical exam, atrophy of the vulva was seen but without evidence of lichen sclerosus. Approximately five millimeters from the clitoris, on the inner aspect of the left labium majus, a 1.5 cm indurated exophytic lesion was noted bleeding on touch . There was no involvement of the urethra or vagina. No regional lymphadenopathy was noted at this time. Biopsy revealed keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma. The patient had a previous history of recurrent adenocarcinoma within the oral cavity but had been free of disease for ten years.
Anterior radical vulvectomy without inguinal lymph node dissection was performed with margins of at least 2 cm from the well defined lesion. Frozen section biopsy revealed a depth of invasion of less than 1 mm. Histopathologic evaluation of the entire specimen showed a well differentiated 1.7 × 1.5 cm superficially invasive keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma . The exophytic tumor had a thickness of 5 mm. The greatest depth of invasion was 0.08 mm using the criteria established by Wilkinson et al. . No lymphvascular space involvement was seen and margins were tumor-free (at least 7 mm at the urethral margin as measured on the paraffin-embedded specimen).
The patient remained free of disease until twenty-one months later when she noticed a painful swelling of the left inguinal area . A five centimeter tumor was noted. A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis did not show any enlarged pelvic or paraaortic lymph nodes. Subsequently, bilateral inguinal lymphadenectomy was performed. The left inguinal tumor was found to be a 4.3 cm metastasis of a well to moderately differentiated keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma consistent with the previous diagnosis of vulvar carcinoma . At that time, there was no evidence of vulvar recurrence and radiation therapy was given to the groin and to the pelvis. The patient remained free of disease for 69 months. She then developed extensive vulvar recurrence and was treated with palliative radiation therapy. She died 8 months later.