An 18-year-old female was presented to the emergency department with a one-day history of fever, vomiting, and progressive shortness of breath. Her past medical history included muco-cutaneous albinism, diffuse hemangioma of the bone and viscera, consumptive coagulopathy status post-splenectomy 10 years ago, and a history of meningitis in the past. She was non-compliant with her penicillin V prophylaxis therapy. On examination, she was vitally stable on room air, and albinism was noted all over the skin. There was no palpable lymphadenopathy and normal audible first and second heart sounds with no added mummers. Chest examination showed decreased chest expansion over the right side with decreased breath sounds, decreased vocal resonance, and dull percussion. Abdomen examination was only remarkable for the splenectomy scar, and nervous system examination was unremarkable. Initial blood results revealed an elevated white blood cell count of 20.31×109/l. Coagulation, renal, and liver profiles were normal.
Her chest X-ray at presentation showed right-sided pleural effusion and multiple lytic lesions with expansion of the ribs and clavicle, as well as the scapula . Subsequently, the patient underwent ultrasound-guided diagnostic and therapeutic pleural tapping with pigtail insertion for pleural fluid drainage. The results of the pleural fluid analysis can be seen in Table .
A high-resolution computed tomography (CT) scan revealed a large right-sided pleural effusion with significant collapse of the right lung . Mildly enlarged lymph nodes were also seen in the mediastinum and the right axilla. Due to the presence of lymph nodes noted in the CT scan, suspicion of malignancy was raised. A free needle aspiration was performed; however, the results were inconclusive. The patient did not wish to undergo a biopsy of the lesion. Therefore, a positive emission tomography-CT was done and was negative for significant uptake. Pleural fluid was continuously drained from the chest pigtail. The patient was then managed conservatively with octreotide and a low-lipid diet. However, the patient did not improve, and the pigtail was draining between 1000 and 1500 ml of pleural fluid daily.
A multidisciplinary team meeting was arranged, and it was decided to conduct a lymphogram study, which confirmed systemic malformation of lymphatic vessels. Accordingly, the patient was started on sirolimus 3 mg orally per day, which was tolerated well, apart from the persistent tachycardia. The patient was also placed on total parenteral nutrition for 4 weeks. The patient had an echocardiogram, demonstrating a large mass in the right atrium attached to the anterolateral wall, measuring 14 mm×11 mm and showing some independent mobility; the mass was suspected to be a potential thrombus. These findings were then confirmed with a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging scan, and the patient was started on enoxaparin. Her tachycardia improved afterward, and a follow-up chest X-ray showed improvement in her pleural effusion; however, persistent small lobulated effusion and shortness of breath were noted.
The patient was seen by the cardiothoracic team, and thoracoscopic evacuation of pleural fluid and thoracic duct clipping was performed to relieve the remainder of the pleural effusion. She then showed almost complete resolution of her pleural effusion and was continued on sirolimus and discharged home with a dermatology follow-up to monitor the treatment.