A 66-year-old male presented to the local hospital with a 2-month history of edema of the right lower extremity in May 2019. B-ultrasound revealed that the right inguinal swollen lymph node was about 2.3 cm*1.0 cm in size. A computed tomography (CT) scan revealed multiple bone destruction of the bone, and ECT showed focal increased bone metabolic activity. PET-CT showed multiple osteolytic bone destruction with increased metabolism, pathological fracture of the right third rib . The right inguinal lymphadenectomy biopsy showed carcinoma of unknown primary site with metastatic poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated strong positivity for Glypican-3 and GATA, negativity for CK7, Napsin, TTF-1, CK20, CDX2, PSA.
After 1 month, the patient was hospitalized for cancer of unknown primary in our hospital. After a detailed medical history inquiry, the patient reported that there has been a rupture in the scrotum for approximately 4 years. Eczema-like change in the skin of the scrotum at the base of the penis was observed, with a size of 2.0x1.5 cm . Then, the scrotal skin lesion biopsy was performed and pathological examination showed primary EMPD with Paget’s cells in the spinous layer . Capture-based ultra-deep targeted sequencing was performed with a panel consisting of all exons and critical introns of 520 cancer-related genes. The next-generation sequencing assay showed that this patient had triple uncommon HER2 mutation, namely HER2 R678Q in exon 17, S310Y in exon 8 and S310F in exon 8 . Laboratory examination showed severe anemia (47g/L), thrombocytopenia (27*109/L), elevated CEA (17.8ng/mL), with ECOG PS 3 scores and pain NRS 6 scores.
Due to poor conditions, the patient could not tolerate any traditional chemotherapy or radiotherapy. Then, the patient participated in a registered clinical trial (NCT03239015) in Shanghai Changzheng Hospital and received HER2 inhibitor pyrotinib (400 mg po qd). After pyrotinib treatment, the general pain and discomfort symptoms were significantly relieved, platelets and hemoglobin were increased . The Mefecon use dose for bone pain was also decreased to 1/3 of the original analgesic dose. After 2 months, CT scans revealed a significant decrease in tumor size of right inguinal lymph. According to the response evaluation criteria in solid tumor (version 1.1), the patient was considered to have a partial response to pyrotinib . The last CT scan showed that the right inguinal lymph node was stable . The follow-up is ongoing. Written informed consent has been provided by the patient to have the case details and any accompanying images published. Institutional approval was not required to publish the case details.