A 76-year-old Korean man presented with upper back pain for 2 months and motor weakness in both lower extremities for 2 days. A chest radiograph and computed tomography (CT) performed at another institution showed a pleural mass in the upper lobe of his right lung. He was referred to our hospital for evaluation of the pleural mass and paraplegia. He had been treated with medication for 4 years for type 2 diabetes mellitus and primary hypertension. He did not have a family history of malignant disease. On chest examination, he had tenderness at the level of the fifth rib on the right side. On neurologic examination, he showed paraplegia with numbness and a sensory deficit below the T5 dermatome.
Laboratory findings showed an elevated C-reactive protein level of 6.84 mg/dL (normal range, 0.0–0.3 mg/dL), blood urea nitrogen of 25 mg/dL (normal range, 7.8–22.0 mg/dL), and a serum creatinine of 1.5 mg/dL (normal range, 0.6–1.4 mg/dL). Urine analysis showed 4+ blood, with many red blood cells and 0–1 white blood cells/high-power field .
A chest radiograph showed a large homogenous opacity in the right superior mediastinum. Contrast-enhanced chest CT showed a 7.3 cm × 4.4 cm × 7.7 cm heterogeneous pleural mass involving the right fifth rib and vertebral body .
Contrast-enhanced abdominopelvic CT showed a mass infiltrating the right renal hilum without vascular occlusion or hydronephrosis . Spine CT and enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a large pleural mass in the right paravertebral area at the level of T3 to T6 . CT-guided percutaneous needle biopsy of the pleural mass was performed.
Histological findings on hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining showed proliferation of spindle cells with infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells . Immunohistochemistry showed neoplastic cells positive for CD68, focally positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), and negative for cytokeratin and desmin . IMT was diagnosed based on the histological examination.
As the tumor could not be completely resected, treatment with glucocorticoids (methylprednisolone 1 mg/kg) and radiotherapy (5 days/week for 3 weeks at 3 Gy/fraction, 45 Gy/15 days) was started. After 1 month, laboratory findings were unremarkable. Hematuria, which is thought to be caused by kidney metastasis of IMT improved after treatment . Chest CT showed reduction in the size of the pleural mass (6.0 cm × 1.8 cm × 5.3 cm) and abdominopelvic CT showed decreased infiltration around the right renal pelvis . The summed-up diameters of both target lesions decreased from 121 mm to 91 mm, that is, a 24.8% reduction of baseline diameter. According to Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST) 1.1 criteria it could be defined as stable disease. He was discharged on orally administered glucocorticoids and showed improvement in symptoms on follow-up 1 month after hospital discharge. Since then, however, he has not attended a follow-up visit.