A 34-year-old female, gravid 1 and para 1, was admitted to emergency ward of Ayatollah Rohani hospital, Babol, Iran in august 2012, 20 days after delivery of her baby with cesarean section. She experienced dyspnea and respiratory distress for 2 days before admission, which increasing from the last 3-4 hours. Around one week after cesarean section, she experienced a very sharp abdominal pain attributed to cesarean section. In physical examination, we just found fine crackles in the right lung and decreased breath sound in the left lung and she described feeling weakness and there was no Marfanoid appearance or other appearances related with aortic dissection. Her blood pressure was 150/80 mmHg, body temperature was 37.5ºC, pulse rate of 118 beats/min and respiratory rate of 30 breaths/min. There was no tenderness, distention of abdomen or rebound pain. Hemoglobin level was 10.4 gr/dL, WBC 12500 with neutrophil count of 88%, platelet 250000, CK-MB 28 U/l (normal< 24), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 68 mm/hr (normal< 20 mm/hr), c-reactive protein (CRP) 3+. Work-up was focused on heart problem. Pro BNP level was 25000 pg/mL (normal < 125) and D-dimer was 4+. Electrocardiogram data showed sinus tachycardia, left anterior hemi block and LVH. Chest X-ray showed left pleural effusion and dilated aortic arch and descending aorta. Transthoracic echocardiography (Sonosite, M-turbo) revealed severe LV systolic dysfunction with ejection fraction of 20-25%, mild dilated aortic root and ascending aorta (4.5 cm), mild to moderate aortic insufficiency, massive left side pleural effusion, initial flap extended from proximal part of descending thoracic aorta to abdominal aorta, abdominal aorta was aneurismal (up to 7 cm) with intimal flap and hematoma and fresh thrombus in false lumen with periaortic hematoma ( and ). Axial contrast enhanced CT-scan and angiography were performed (Multi detector 16 slice CT-angiography Siemens company) and revealed extension of intimal flap that separated true from false lumen from left subclavian artery to descending thoracic and abdominal aorta with periaortic hemorrhage surround dissection (dissection, Stanford's type A) . Peripartum cardiomyopathy and descending aortic dissection were diagnosed. Due to high-risk situation (LV dysfunction and extensive dissection), surgical and intervention procedures had been postponed by multiple surgical and interventional groups for 45 days. An experienced surgeon and interventional teams accepted the responsibility of treatment.
Patient underwent hybrid operation with surgical repair of thoracoabdominal aorta, left common carotid, left subclavian artery, descending thoracic aorta, superior mesenteric artery and right iliac artery (Shariati Hospital, Tehran, Iran). Interventional procedure was performed with stents and grafts of descending thoracic and both iliac and abdominal aorta. Thirty days after surgery she was alive without any serious problem ( and ).