A 38-year-old female is presented with a large pelvic mass. Gynecologic ultrasound showed a large fluid-dominated mass and measuring approximately 28.6×14.2×8.0 cm . Color Doppler ultrasound showed no particular abnormal blood flow signal . Computerized tomography (CT) showed slight dilatation of renal pelvis and right ureter, and compression of adjacent intestine. The lesion size was approximately 15.0×7.1×27.2 cm, with no significant enhancement of the cystic component and more uniform enhancement of the solid component . Carbohydrate antigen 19-9(CA19-9) 29.20 IU/mL, remaining examination were normal.
Two years ago, she developed pharyngeal discomfort, nausea while reading and brushing teeth, which gradually worsened. A year and a half ago, she had inflexible tongue movements, slurred speech, low pitch, choking and coughing. Patient did not take riluzole or other drugs. The neurological examination of this hospitalization said: poor dysarthria, tongue muscle atrophy, eye reflexes not elicited, muscle strength of both upper limbs grade 5-, muscle strength of both lower limbs grade 5. Pulmonary function tests were not performed because the patient had puffing and leaking air. The score of Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis functional rating scale revised (ALSFRS-R) was 44, indicating that most of the daily activities of the patient were not affected. The results of the SDS depression self-assessment scale showed a crude score of 32 and the standard score was 40, indicating that the patient was not depressed. The rest of the examination did not show any significant abnormalities.
With multi-disciplinary treatment (MDT) discussion before operation, the patient finally chose midline laparotomy and underwent right adnexectomy under regional anesthesia with an epidural gap block. The incision reaches above the umbilicus. Intraoperatively, atropine was used to suppress glandular secretion and inhibit saliva production, thereby reducing swallowing action. Lidocaine and ropivacaine can relieve pain, and the block plane reached T10, and the VAS score of tolerable pain during operation was 6. Intraoperative exploration revealed no ascites in the pelvic abdomen and an irregular cyst in the right ovary, approximately 30 cm in diameter, with an intact envelope and smooth surface. Right adnexal resection was performed after aspiration of some intracapsular fluid by puncture. The specimen had smooth walls, viscous intracapsular fluid, locally visible gelatinous tissue, but no cauliflower-like masses or papillae, and normal appearance of the right fallopian tube. During the operation, the patient and her family refused to have a complete staging operation.
After operation, MDT found that the patient recovered well without nausea, vomiting, cough, sputum or dyspnea, and a tolerable pain VAS score of 8, along with good wound healing. And the symptoms of PBP did not worsen. The postoperative pathology suggested (right ovary) junctional mucinous tumor with some areas showing mucinous carcinoma and no clear intravascular carcinoma emboli: the (right) fallopian tube did not show carcinoma . After consultation with the patient and family, it was decided to surveillance. One month after surgery, CA19-9 decreased to 14.50 IU/ml.