A 74-year-old female presented with acute onset of fever (39°C). Her medical cardiac history was notable for asymptomatic severe aortic stenosis, hypertension, and atrial fibrillation. Her medication included dabigatran 150 mg twice daily, digoxin 0.0625 mg daily, and irbesartan 150 mg daily.
On presentation at the referring hospital (day 0), laboratory blood tests showed haemoglobin of 7.1 mmol/L, leukocytes of 19.0 × 109/L creatinine of 60 µmol/L, glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 86 mL/min/1.73 m2 and elevated levels of C-reactive protein at 160 mg/L (normal range, < 10 mg/L) and troponin-I of 1205 ng/L (normal range, < 14 ng/L). There were no endocarditis stigmata. Given her medical history of aortic valve stenosis, a known systolic murmur was present without a diastolic murmur. Electrocardiogram showed atrial fibrillation with diffuse ST-segment elevation indicative of pericarditis. TTE showed a preserved left ventricular ejection fraction of 55% and a known severe aortic valve stenosis with thickened leaflets. PE or vegetations was not observed. She was hospitalized at the cardiac care unit with an initial suspicion of peri-myocarditis.
The next day (day 1) all blood cultures were positive for Staphylococcus lugdunensis and the the patient was prescribed flucloxacillin 12 grams/day. No portal of entry was found. On day 2, a TEE showed a new moderate aortic valve regurgitation, new PE, and a thickened SOV consistent with endocarditis with paravalvular involvement.
A positron emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) was performed to detect a possible portal of entry and potential additional peripheral embolic and metastatic infectious foci for adequate source control. The PET-CT was consistent with aortic valve endocarditis with paravalvular expansion towards the left ventricle (LV) base and showed increased pericardial and pleural effusion. There were no other metastatic infections.
During these first days patient developed shock with acute renal failure with creatinine levels reaching 337 µmol/L, a GFR of 12 mL/min/1.73 m2 and she became anuric, for which noradrenaline was started.
The patient was transferred to a tertiary centre with surgery facilities. On arrival, she was in shock with a lactate of 5.3 mmol/L and an increasing need for a high noradrenaline dose. A second TTE on admission showed a heavily calcified, thickened aortic valve ( and ) without clear valvular vegetation. However, there was a mobile mass (±12 mm) in the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) which was attached to the SOV consistent with vegetation. Furthermore, the colour Doppler showed a continuous flow through the SOV and to the RVOT at the site of the vegetation, suggestive of a perforation. Additionally, there was PE (maximum 15 mm) without echocardiographic signs of tamponade, but with a systolic flow in the pericardial space which suggests a perforation of one of the cardiac chambers or large vessels (see , and ).
Due to refractory cardiogenic shock and SOV perforation, the patient was sent for emergent cardiothoracic surgery. During first inspection, the pericardium was extensively infected and was easily ruptured by manipulation. The aortic valve was severely destructed and could be removed by just a forceps. The myocardium of the right ventricle was infected with a large central perforation of the free wall of the right ventricle. The aortic wall at the level of the annulus of the right coronary cusp was perforated and accompanied by abscess formation deep in the myocardial tissue. The perforation of the right ventricle was closed. Unfortunately, because of the severity of the infection which seemed to be beyond repair, with also refractory shock, the cardiothoracic surgeons had to stop the procedure. The patient died in the operating room.