A 72-year-old man known for hypertension and dyslipidaemia consults for progressive dyspnoea up to New York Heart Association (NYHA) Classes 2–3 over 3 weeks. At physical examination, the patient’s heart rate is 85 beats per minute, respiratory rate is 19 breaths per minute, and the blood pressure is 135/75 mmHg. The electrocardiogram (ECG) shows a sinus rhythm with no disturbance in conduction or repolarization. The biological balance sheet shows a standard haemoglobin of 145 g/L, a C-reactive protein level of 31 mg/L, an N-terminal prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) of 600 ng/L, and surprisingly a high eosinophil level. Echocardiography shows a normal LV function with a mild echodensity fixed to the left apex (20 mm × 13 mm) and mild aortic regurgitation. After exclusion of a secondary cause of hypereosinophilia, diagnosis of endomyocardial fibrosis in the context of a hypereosinophilic syndrome (HES) is therefore made. Following contemporary consensus of 2012, the combination of hypereosinophilia and the patient’s clinical presentation with cardiac involvement leads us to start a treatment with corticosteroids (prednisone 0.75 mg/kg once daily) and antithrombotics (rivaroxaban 20 mg once daily).
The patient is then followed through clinical, echocardiographic, and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) monitoring every 6 months with an initially stable course without complications .
Two years after diagnosis, the patient develops progressive exertional dyspnoea reaching NYHA Class 3, with concomitant peripheral oedema. The ECG shows a sinus rhythm with the appearance of QS complex from V1 to V3, and NT-proBNP rises to 2000 ng/L. Echocardiography shows a preserved LV ejection fraction, but more marked dilatation (left ventricular end-systolic dimension 3.8 cm,left ventricular end-diastolic dimension 6 cm) with decrease in LV volume due to a large echodense fixed mass in the apex (60 mm × 43 mm) . The transmitral flow is restrictive (E/A 3.1, DT 0.31 s, E/e′ 20.9) , and the aortic regurgitation is moderate (vena contracta 4 mm, pressure halt time 366 ms, effective regurgitation orificae area 20 mm2).
In view of this rapid evolution reflecting unsatisfactory response to corticosteroids, and after a ‘Heart Team’ meeting and consensus, resection of the LV mass with concomitant aortic valve replacement is performed.
An aortic bioprosthetic valve (Perimount Magna Ease 25 mm) is implanted with a good final result. Upon inspection of the LV cavity, the surgeons find a fibrotic mass, well bonded to the endocardium, which they are able to remove (cardiopulmonary bypass time 2 h, aortic clamping 1 h 32 min). Histopathology confirms eosinophilic infiltration with chronic inflammation of the myocardial wall and in the aortic valve tissue .
Six days later, the clinical course is gradually favourable with an improvement of dyspnoea (NYHA Class 2), so the patient is moved to cardiac rehabilitation before returning home in excellent condition .
During the 1-year clinical follow-up, the patient is improving under a maintaining dose of prednisone and anticoagulation. He is in good overall condition without increase of dyspnoea and with an improvement of functional capacity. An echocardiography suggests a significant fall in LV filling pressure, with an impaired relaxation pattern of the transmitral flow (E/A 0.62 and DT 0.31 s), without recurrence of the LV mass .