A 58-year-old Belgian woman was admitted to our hospital with complaints of anorexia, fatigue, and dyspnea. A right breast cancer had been diagnosed 1 month before. It was an invasive grade III ductal carcinoma, with no expression of hormone receptors and with human epidermal growth factor 2 (HER2) amplification. The disease was locally advanced with massive invasion of the chest wall, bilateral axillary lymph node involvement, pulmonary metastases, and bulky liver metastases. A weekly paclitaxel, trastuzumab, and pertuzumab schedule was planned as first-line chemotherapy. Our patient had a medical history of pulmonary tuberculosis.
At admission, pulmonary examination showed hypoventilation of the right pulmonary basis. A right pleural effusion was demonstrated by a computed tomography (CT) scan, complicated by a right inferior pneumonia. The chest wound was infected by multiple Gram-negative bacilli. Pleural effusion was punctured, and its culture was sterile. Blood tests at admission showed a high C-reactive protein level (126 mg/L), hyperuricemia (55 mg/dL), high lactate dehydrogenase (983 U/L) and uric acid (12 mg/dL) levels and decreased glomerular filtration rate (53 mL/min), probably due to dehydration. Her urine analysis was normal. Our patient received empiric antibiotic therapy with amoxicillin and clavulanic acid.
Four days later she developed respiratory distress. No pulmonary embolism was demonstrated on the CT scan performed in the emergency department, and symptoms were attributed to the pleural effusion and right pneumonia. Our patient was treated 1 day later with a first course of trastuzumab and pertuzumab. The infusion of paclitaxel was delayed due to the infectious context and was planned to be given later.
On day 2 of the first course of trastuzumab and pertuzumab, she developed refractory hypovolemic shock. Her blood tests showed grade 2 hyperkaliemia (6.4 mmol/L), hyperuricemia (11.4 mg/dL), high lactate dehydrogenase (2473 U/L), grade 3 hypocalcemia (1.73 mmol/L), hyperphosphatemia (1.64 mmol/L), and worsening of the acute renal failure (38 mL/min glomerular filtration rate). Blood gas analysis revealed metabolic acidosis with a pH of 7.11 and lactate at 10.9 mmol/L. A diagnosis of TLS induced by the targeted therapy was made. She was admitted in the intensive care unit where she received vigorous volume expansion and vasopressors. Despite optimal management, her laboratory values and hypovolemic shock did not improve and she died 2 days later due to multiple organ failure.