In August 2003, a 69-year-old female who had hypertension and an abdominal aortic aneurysm complained of dizziness. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 15-mm heterogeneous mass in the cerebral left frontal lobe . Neck clipping of this partially thrombosed DACA aneurysm was unsuccessful because of severe calcification. Therefore, wrapping operation was performed. After the operation, the patient showed no symptoms for 7 years.
In September 2010, magnetic resonance angiography at a local hospital revealed enlargement of the aneurysm, and the patient was admitted to our hospital. Neurological examinations did not show any abnormal findings. A CT scan and magnetic resonance imaging showed a 28-mm giant aneurysm with severe calcification and perifocaledema. Three-dimensional CT angiography (3D-CTA) and three-dimensional digital subtraction angiography (DSA) of the left internal carotid artery (ICA) demonstrated that the aneurysm was located at the left PerA-CMA junction. These examinations showed the presence of five additional aneurysms, including an anterior communicating artery (AcomA) aneurysm and a right middle cerebral artery (MCA) aneurysm.
Because of the obvious enlargement of the aneurysm and perifocaledema, we planned surgical treatment. Standard neck clipping seemed difficult because of severe calcification, similar to that observed in the previous operation. Therefore, three possible strategies were considered for bypass surgery before operation [Figure –]. Reconstruction of the left CMA was necessary because it is a major branch supplying the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) territory. However, the possible need for reconstruction of the left distal PerA was left to be decided during operation.
Intraoperative DSA and transcranial motor-evoked potential (MEP) monitoring were performed in this operation. Bifrontal craniotomy was performed on the patient under general anesthesia. Initially, the neck of an AcomA aneurysm was clipped using the interhemispheric approach. We proceeded distally along both A2 vessels and found the DACA aneurysm at the left PerA–CMA junction. The aneurysm was yellowish and solid because of severe calcification .The left distal PerA was running behind the aneurysm and was densely adherent to the aneurysm because of fibrosis from the previous wrapping operation and could not therefore be dissected from the aneurysm. An occlusion test of the left A2 segment at its proximal portion was performed for 20 min. During this procedure, intraoperative DSA confirmed good retrograde flow in the left distal PerA, and MEP amplitude showed no changes. Based on these findings, the left distal PerA was cut just distal to the aneurysm after clipping without any reconstruction.
Temporary clips were placed on the left A2 segment and left CMA to trap the aneurysm. The aneurysm was incised and the thrombus within the aneurysm was removed. After removal of the thrombus, three lumens were visualized in the aneurysm . Neck clipping with reconstruction was attempted but could not be performed without occlusion of the parent artery because of severe calcification of the neck. MEP amplitude subsequently decreased to 50% of the control level while attempting neck clipping. At this point, it was apparent that the neck of the aneurysm could not be clipped with preservation of the feeding artery. Therefore, aneurysm resection and proximal PerA–CMA end-to-end anastomosis were performed . After anastomosis, intraoperative DSA and microvascular Doppler ultrasonography demonstrated good flow in the left CMA and adequate retrograde flow to the left distal PerA from the left MCA through leptomeningeal anastomosis. MEP amplitude was maintained at the control level until dural closure. Findings from intraoperative DSA are shown in .
The patient had no neurological deficits after operation, and the postoperative CT scan demonstrated no infarction including the left ACA territory . Elimination of the aneurysm and good flow in the left CMA were observed on 3D-CTA .The patient was doing well 6 months after operation.