A 61-year-old woman presented to the outpatient department with an abnormal magnetic resonance image (MRI) finding. She had undergone a medical checkup in another hospital, where she was advised to have a 1-2 cm segment of narrow lumen at the distal common bile duct (CBD) assessed further in another MRI study .
The patient denied having upper or right hypochondrial pain, and no jaundice was observed. She did not have fever or chills. Immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4) levels were slightly elevated (246 mg/dL; normal range: < 200 mg/dL), and initial abdominal ultrasound (US) showed a mildly thickened distal CBD wall and an approximately 1 cm polypoid lesion in the GB ; therefore, IgG4-related cholangitis was suspected. Because the patient had no symptoms, she underwent regular abdominal US exams and measurement of blood IgG4 Levels at 6- to 12-mo intervals. However, the 1-year follow-up abdominal US showed that the GB polyp had grown . After another 6 mo, the polyp was even larger and more hypoechoic in appearance . After an additional 6 mo, abdominal US with Doppler revealed a 2 cm polypoid tumor . Contrast MRI T2-weighted images revealed a 2-cm tumor near the neck of the GB . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography showed that the morphology of the stricture segment of the distal CBD was not significantly changed. The patient subsequently underwent surgery.
The patient’s medical history was unremarkable.
The patient’s family history was unremarkable.
The patient’s physical examination was unremarkable. Her abdomen was soft, nontender and nondistended, with no palpable mass.
Laboratory examinations, including complete blood count and blood chemistry tests, revealed that white blood cell count (9051/mL) and serum levels of C-reactive protein (0.72 mg/dL), alkaline phosphatase (82 IU/L), gamma-glutamyl transferase (32 IU/L), aspartate transaminase (19 U/L), and alanine aminotransferase (28 U/L) were all within normal limits. Serological tests for hepatitis B antigen, anti-hepatitis C antibody, alpha-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were negative. The IgG4 Level at follow-up was also within the normal range.
Two years later, abdominal US showed that the GB polypoid lesion had progressively increased to greater than 2 cm in size. Contrast MRI T2-weighted images revealed a 2-cm tumor near the neck of the GB, and malignancy was highly suspected.