A 49-year-old White male with no significant medical history or family history of iron overload was referred to haematology oncology for further evaluation of an elevated ferritin. The patient had not seen a medical provider for many years before a recent visit to an urgent care clinic for fatigue and left-sided face and left extremity paresthesia. On further workup including possible Vitamin B12 deficiency, he was found to have elevated haemoglobin of 17.6 g/dl, a ferritin level above 1300 ng/mL with a normal Vitamin B12 level, white blood cell and platelet counts. A referral to haematology oncology department was placed.
Four weeks after the urgent care visit, the patient presented to the emergency room with episodes of shortness of breath and chest pain. His chest X-ray showed fine reticular nodular pattern throughout the entirety of both lungs concerning for pulmonary haemosiderosis . His electrolytes and liver function test were within normal limits. His workup showed normal Vitamin B12 levels and an elevated ferritin level of 1913 ng/mL. He denied any major issues or problems. On further workup at the haematology clinic, he specifically denied any history of diabetes, chest tenderness, joint pain, shortness of breath, cough, haemoptysis, history of prior lung disease, frequent respiratory illnesses, fever, chills, night sweats and gastro-oesophageal reflux disease. Before diagnosis, he was going to the gym regularly using the treadmill and light weights without limitation. He endorsed having fatigue and numbness and tingling in his hands and feet. He denied any other joint arthritis or darkening of the skin. He had no family history of iron overload and had no offspring. He was a former smoker and quit 1 week before the visit. He denied any alcohol consumption. His physical examination was completely benign.
The blood haemochromatosis human homeostatic iron regulator protein (HFE) gene analysis showed two copies of the C282Y mutation. This result can take place in patients with HH. However, it does not confirm a diagnosis or predisposition to the development of HH. Computed tomography (CT) chest showed diffuse reticular nodular opacities which are consistent with pulmonary haemosiderosis . Likewise, the patient underwent FerriScan (Resonance Health, Burswood, Western Australia, Australia) which showed no focal abnormality on non-contrast sequences and marked T2 hypointensity of the liver which is consistent with iron deposition. FerriScan transverse relaxation rate shows that TSAT was >45% and his liver iron content per dry liver weight was approximately 29 mg/g (normal is <1.8 mg/g) .