Initial presentation: A 58-year-old Caucasian man of Bulgarian origin was referred to our nephrology department because of progressive renal disease without hypertension or diabetes. The patient was previously known for one episode of hepatitis at age 38 of unclear origin, gastro-intestinal aspecific complaints, and recurrent pulmonary infections. He had no relevant familial or personal history of renal disease. The patient had no consanguinity in his family and reported having potentially being exposed to ionizing radiation in Ukraine during his childhood.
Initial laboratory: Serum creatinine level was 245 μmol/l, (eGFR 24 ml/min/1.73m2), the urinalysis was bland and proteinuria was of less than 1 g, with a minority of albumin. Except for a mild metabolic acidosis, no electrolyte disturbance was noted. A moderate elevation of liver enzymes was observed. Viral serology, serum ANCA, ANA immunofixation and free light chain levels were within the normal range.
Hepatic ultrasound was normal. A hepatic biopsy performed on account of elevated liver enzymes revealed normal hepatic parenchyma. Given intestinal complaints and a slightly elevated PSA, the patients underwent gastric, colonic and prostate biopsies which were all normal. Results for all the biopsies are displayed in Fig. .
A pulmonary CT scan displayed no specific anomalies, and pulmonary functions were normal.
A kidney ultrasound revealed kidneys of decreased size (Right kidney: 7.7 × 3.5 × 4.3 cm, left Kidney 7.4 × 4.5 × 4.0 cm) with a hyperechoic parenchyma and diminution of the cortico-medullary dedifferentiation. A kidney biopsy was performed and analyzed by light microscopy.
The kidney biopsy revealed 43 glomeruli, among which 23 were sclerosed. The remaining glomeruli were slightly enlarged with mesangial hypercellularity, and non-specific chronic lesions. Interstitial fibrosis including inflammatory cells (lymphocytes and histiocytes) was estimated to be around 40% of the cortical surface. The most notable anomaly was enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei in tubular cells, with irregularities, but without visualization of viral inclusions, together with the presence of tubular atrophy. These anomalies were predominant in the proximal tubules of both the cortex and the medulla. Immunofluorescence studies were negative. Additional staining for virus (CMV, EBV) were negative. Electron microscopy displayed tubular cells with signs of chronic injury, together with enlarged mitochondria in tubular cells and podocytes, but no Karyomegalic nuclei were seen on the available material.
Given the renal histological lesions in a patient with a chronic history of hepatitis and recurrent pulmonary infections, a presumptive diagnosis of Karyomegalic nephritis was retained. Genetic testing of the patient DNA by exome sequencing revealed a non-sense mutation c.1102C > T, p.(Gln368*) in exon 2 and a deletion c.2616delA, p.(Asp873Thrfs*17) in exon 12, in the Fanconi anemia associated nuclease 1 (FAN1) gene. Both mutations were confirmed by Sanger sequencing. The non-sense mutation had not been reported before, but was classified as pathogenic, the deletion was already reported as pathogenic, and both consequently explaining the phenotype . His son presented only the c.2616delA deletion, arguing for the compound heterozygote mutations. Compound heterozygote mutations as causative for the phenotype and transmitted with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance have already been reported [, ].
The diagnosis of karyomegalic nephritis related to a FAN1 mutation was retained.
Follow up: Progression towards end-stage renal disease occurred within the following year and the patients was placed on peritoneal dialysis. Peritoneal dialysis was initially difficult because of abdominal pain. A laparoscopy without biopsies was performed and revealed an inflamed peritoneum of unknown cause. The pain spontaneously resolved. The patient was also placed on a kidney transplantation waiting list.