A 44-year-old Mongolian man with a large mass in his right lower abdomen presented to our hospital 15 years ago. After completion of relevant physical and laboratory examinations, abdominal laparotomy was performed under general anesthesia, and the mass was removed. Pathological examination and immunohistochemical staining of tissue samples showed a malignant B-cell lymphoma in the appendix and small bowel. Post-operative chemotherapy with a standard cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunomycin, vincristine (Oncovin®) and prednisolone (CHOP) regimen was given for six cycles. No obvious recurrence was detected during regular follow-up appointments over the following 12 years. Then, three years ago, a mass in the right lung was detected during a regular X-ray follow-up. Our patient reported no chills, fever or cough. The results of a physical examination were unremarkable. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed a mass with lobulation and burr in the dorsal section of the right lung, sized 2.4×2.0cm . An 18 F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) scan showed lesions with obviously increased standardized uptake values (SUVs) in the lower lobe and hilum of the right lung. The maximum SUVs of the lesions on the initial scans were 17.8 and 4.1, respectively, while the maximum values on later scans were elevated to 22.0 and 4.3, respectively . A bone scintigraphy scan, brain magnetic resonance (MRI) and ultrasound examination of the upper abdomen all showed no abnormal signs. The results of an anti-human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) antibody test were negative. A tuberculin test was also negative.
A multidisciplinary discussion of our patient’s case was carried out. Primary lung carcinoma was considered to be the most likely diagnosis. Our patient refused to undergo a CT-guided needle biopsy and asked for exploratory thoracotomy instead. Considering our patient’s wishes, a right exploratory thoracotomy and right upper lobectomy was performed under general anesthesia. Pathological examination of samples showed lung cryptococcal granuloma, with positive staining with periodic acid Schiff (PAS) and periodic acid-silver metheramine (PASM). No acid-fast bacilli were found. All the lymph nodes including six of the bronchial lymph nodes, two of group 2, two of group 3, five of group 4, five of group 7 and one of group 8 showed chronic inflammation . Our patient was treated with fluconazole tablets post-operatively (0.2g once a day orally) for anti-fungal treatment for three months. Our patient was followed up by monthly review; no recurrence had been found to date, more than 18 months after he underwent chest surgery.