A 3-year-old boy born to healthy Japanese parents. He has been suffered from atopic dermatitis and bronchial asthma. He had no history of repeated and severe infectious diseases. He had been suffering from infectious impetigo on both legs and his trunk since 1 month before admission. Five days before, infectious impetigo worsened in his right knee fossa and 3 days before, he complained of back pain in his right lower back and difficulty walking. Because he developed a fever of 38°C on the day of admission, he was referred by a local doctor and thus was admitted to our hospital.
His consciousness was clear at the time of admission. His body temperature was 37.8°C, but there was no respiratory distress or tachycardia. Impetigo was scattered throughout his right popliteal fossa, limbs, and trunk. Although the psoas sign was positive, there was no spinal strike pain. There were no abnormalities in other physical findings. The results of a clinical examination found 19,200/μL of leukocytes, of which 85.4% were neutrophils. Fibrinogen increased to 1,027 mg/ dL, D-dimer increased to 2.31 μg/dL, and C-reactive protein (CRP) increased to 16.48 mg/dL. Despite the increase of Immunoglobulin E (IgE) 595 IU/mL, the rest was normal with Immunoglobulin G (IgG) 834 mg/dL, Immunoglobulin A (IgA) 168 mg/dL, Immunoglobulin M (IgM) 67 mg/dL, CD4 32.1%, and CD8 36.8%. Because he had asthma, a computed tomography (CT) examination was performed without contrast, thus indicating no ascite retention and no high absorption areas in the organs.
The administration of meropenem was initiated and he underwent a simple lumbar-pelvic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan on the 6th day of illness. The T2-enhanced image indicated hyperintensity of marginalization at 2 cm in the right erector spinae muscle, while the diffusion-enhanced image indicated hyperintensity in the posterior to the spinal canal from L4 vertebral body to the sacral region [ and ]. He was diagnosed with an epidural abscess and the right paraspinal erector spinae muscle abscess.
Due to possible development from impetigo, he additionally received vancomycin, targeting methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA), on the 9th day of illness. His fever receded and his back pain improved the following day. Because the blood culture and the culture of the impetigo site were negative, it was considered that the possibility of MRSA was low, so his treatment was changed to cefazolin. He was discharged from the hospital on the 33rd hospital day, following the intravenous injection of antibacterial agents for a total of 4 weeks and a change to the oral administration of ampicillin and clavulanic acid. Subsequently, he progressed without any sequelae such as walking and neurological abnormal findings. A simple MRI of the lumbar spine to pelvic was taken on the 13th day of onset, confirming the reduction of the abscess . One month after discharge from the hospital, another simple MRI of the lumbar spine to pelvic was performed, which confirmed the disappearance of the abscess .