A 48-year-old Caucasian male consulted for dizziness, headache and epileptic crisis. On neurological examination there were no deficits in sensory or motor functions. Brain Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a Right temporal process measuring 32 mm and an accompanying peritumoral Edema . A complete macroscopic resection was performed. Histological examination demonstrated a hypocellular tumor with pleomorphic astrocytes, endothelial proliferation and wide range of necrosis Immunohistochemistry was positive for Glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and negative for anti cytokeratine. A diagnosis of GBM was made.
The patient was then referred to our department and underwent a post-operative radiotherapy treatment using an isocentric field technique, with 6MV and 23MV photons of a linear accelerator, receiving a total dose of 59.4 Gy in 33 fractions (1.8 Gy per fraction) and concurrent temozolomide 75mg/m2 per day 1h before radiotherapy and at weekends,. Adjuvant temozolomide therapy, 150mg/m2 per day 5 days per month, was administered in 5 cycles. Sixteen months after the radiotherapy had been administered; the patient developed a severe headache, a decreased visual acuity, memory problems, sixth nerve palsy and left hemiparesis. Brain MRI showed a right temporoparietal process isointense inT1 sequence, hyperintense in flair, measuring 72/56 mm. The lesion exerts mass effect with compression of the right lateral ventricle and displacement of the midline structures . Total surgical excision was undertaken, but Post operatoire CT scan showed the persistence of a tumor residue in the inner surface of the cavity .
Histopathological examination showed a cerebral parenchyma infiltrated by a biphasic tumoral tissue pattern with alternating areas displaying glial and mesenchymal differentiation . The gliomatous component strongly GFAP positive was intermingled with the sarcomatous tumour cells that demonstrated a vimentine expression . A diagnosis of GS was made. The patient received chemotherapy with a basis of bevacizumab 10mg/kg every 2 weeks and irinotecan 125 mg/m2 every 2 weeks. The patient died from tumor progression after two cycles, approximately 27 months after the diagnosis of GB was made.