In August 2016, a 20-year-old Chinese girl presented to our hospital with a 4-month history of finding a rapidly progressive palpable scalp swelling. Ten years ago, she was diagnosed with medulloblastoma in the fourth ventricle without leptomeningeal dissemination. Histopathologic examination revealed a classic type (WHO grade IV). Then, she received V-P shunt and surgical resection, as well as adjuvant concurrent chemoradiation (craniospinal irradiation 23.4 Gy, posterior fossa irradiation 55 Gy, and adjuvant chemotherapy).
Physical examination revealed that the lesion was under the left occipital scalp beside the up end of the incision, painless, firm in consistency, and immobile. Neurological examination was unremarkable. On MR imaging, the lesion exhibited a well-demarcated hypointense mass on T1­W sequences, slightly hyperintense on T2­W sequences, and peripheral enhancement with obvious “tail sigh” on contrast administration . No biopsy was performed before the first operation. A gross total resection was carried out. Intra-operatively, the tumor was grayish, firm, well-demarcated with insufficient blood supply. The size of the tumor was approximately 35 × 25 cm. The mass was excised with preservation of the overlying scalp and the underlying bone . Post-operative MRI image showed no residual tumor and no adjuvant therapy was administered. The girl made an uneventful recovery and was discharged on the six post-operative days.
Histopathologic examination showed that the tumor was composed of a myxoid matrix, curvilinear capillaries, and solid sheets of spindled cells, which were arranged in fascicles and sheets with a multinodular growth pattern and were supported by delicate, elongated, and curvilinear vasculature. There were more than 20 mitotic figures per high power field and necrosis was found in many areas. Immunohistochemical staining was positive for vimentin and SMA and negative for S-100, EMA, CD34, and myogenin. The Ki67 index is 50% . The tumor was diagnosed as a high-grade MFS. Pathology was reviewed by experts in Peking Union Medical College Hospital.
Unfortunately, the tumor recurred in situ 6 months later. But this time, an extensive resection together with the overlying scalp and the underlying bone was performed, followed by cranioplasty and skin flap transplantation. The surgical margin was about 2 cm and was microscopically free of tumor confirmed by intra-operative frozen pathological examination. After surgery, the patient received radiotherapy (total dose, 60 Gy). No relapse occurred in a 12-month postoperative follow-up.