The medical history of a 20-year-old Caucasian female patient includes the diagnosis of juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, first documented at the age of eight. At 12 years, the patient could stop azathioprine and methylprednisolone therapy due to complete clinical remission. In May 2017, when she was 20 years old, she developed facial edema and Raynaud’s phenomenon after a viral respiratory infection, following 8 years of clinical remission. Two months later, she was admitted to a county hospital due to pericarditis, pleuritis, and ascites. Anemia, leukopenia, and moderate proteinuria were seen in her laboratory results. Her kidney function and estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) were normal at this time. In repeated blood tests, the platelet count was normal in all cases. Antinuclear antibody (ANA) positivity, high anti-Smith antibody (SM), anti-U1-ribonucleoprotein antibodies (anti-U1-RNP), and low complement levels were found with immune serology testing. Following the series of tests conducted, the patient was diagnosed with systemic lupus erythematosus. Nevertheless, azathioprine and methylprednisolone therapy were restarted, and her clinical symptoms definitely improved. Three weeks later, she presented to the emergency department due to severe suffocation. With laboratory testing, she has found severe acute kidney injury. Due to possible autoimmune origin, a high dose of methylprednisolone treatment (intravenously 500 mg/day) was initiated, and she was transmitted to the intensive care unit. Immunological evaluation verified scleroderma-induced renal crisis in the background of the acute kidney injury. The high dose of methylprednisolone therapy was aborted, and bosentan treatment was initiated. One week later, severe pericardial effusion developed, so the patient was transferred to a cardiac surgery center. During the cardiology hospitalization, she underwent pericardiocentesis, and 1200 ml pericardial fluid was removed. The pericardial fluid seemed transudate and did not contain blood or signs of infection. Her kidney function was worsened; her eGFR reached 8.9 ml/minute/1.73 m2, and oliguria developed.
She was admitted to our clinic for the first time on 22 August 2017. From the physical status of the patient, normotension could be highlighted. We started regular hemodialysis treatment through an internal jugular vein hemodialysis catheter. Urine dipstick testing found hematuria and proteinuria; automated sediment revealed leukocytes and erythrocytes but no bacteria. Dysmorphic red blood cells were diagnosed in the urine sediment under a light microscope. Immunologic testing showed ANA positivity, soluble substance A (SSA) of 11 U, soluble substance B (SSB) of 7 U, salivary cortisol level (SCL) of 4 U, Jo1 of 13 U, U1-RNP of 128 U (high), SM of 160 U (high), dsDNA of 28 IU/mL (high), anti-C1q of 53 U (high), complement-3 of 0.62 g/l (low), and complement-4 of 0.06 g/l (low). Based on the results of the immunological tests and the course of the disease, in addition to the renal crisis of scleroderma, the manifestation of Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) could not be excluded, so a kidney biopsy was indicated. Before performing the kidney biopsy, we checked the most important and necessary lab results (hemoglobin of 109 g/l, platelet count of 262 Giga/l, prothrombin of 110%, prothrombin time of 8.5 seconds, international normalized ratio (INR) of 0.95, and activated partial thromboplastin time (APTI) of 36.8 seconds). Based on the normal blood coagulation parameters, there were no contraindications for performing the kidney biopsy.
Three days after admission, we performed a percutaneous and ultrasound-guided biopsy on the lower pole of the left kidney with two punctures. To minimize any probable bleeding complications, we administered 30 ugs (micrograms) of Octostim (desmopressin) intravenously before the procedure. On the following day of the kidney biopsy, an ultrasound examination revealed no signs of bleeding complications. Based on the pathologist’s report, the picture was consistent with scleroderma renal crisis and mixed connective tissue disease . The pathologist described the typical immunocomplex depositions with the thrombotic microangiopathy and the typical “onion leaf” lesions in the smaller arterioles. Based on the established diagnosis, we determined the course of immunosuppressive treatment. We administered a single dose of 500 mg cyclophosphamide intravenously and performed a single plasma exchange treatment with 2500 ml of 5% human albumin substitution. She remained dialysis dependent. On the sixth day of the kidney biopsy, she developed severe clinical signs of acute bleeding complication and was transferred to the intensive care unit. Because of life-threatening anemia (hemoglobin of 26 g/l), she got six doses of blood transfusion, and the left kidney was surgically removed in the operating room to evacuate the hematoma . Following the completion of the life-saving intervention, further continuous bleeding was detected, and further surgery was indicated. An angiographic computed tomography (CT) scan was performed to localize the origin of the bleeding. The angiographic CT confirmed a potential injury to the left iliac artery . A vascular surgeon made an iliac artery stent implantation. After the intervention, we did not experience any clinical symptoms indicating further bleeding. After 15 days later of the admission, the patient returned to our clinic in stable condition. Our patient was still anuric and dialysis dependent. She was discharged with regular hemodialysis treatment after 17 days of the first admission. The management of our patient and the interventions that were implemented have been summarized in Fig. .