A 24-year-old married Arab woman had been admitted to a local health center 2 months prior to referral to our urology department. She had been hospitalized there four times in 1 year for acute pyelonephritis. The fourth episode raised the suspicion for an underlying problem and justified her referral to our urology department after management of the acute pyelonephritis.
On admission, she complained of ascending left-sided flank pain during micturition but did not have dysuria or hematuria. She also had a history of frequent urinary tract infections (UTIs) as a young adult.
She was perfectly asymptomatic on the right side. A physical examination was normal. Her temperature was 37.4 °C, her blood pressure was 128/84 mmHg, and her pulse rate was regular at 76 beats per minute. Laboratory tests were normal; in particular, a urine examination showed no leukocyturia or bacteriuria.
She underwent an abdominal ultrasound which showed an asymmetric size of the kidneys and a bilateral chronic pyelonephritis aspect. Her right kidney measured 10 cm while the left measured 12 cm.
A voiding cystourethrography (VCUG) was performed and showed grade IV VUR on the left side and grade I VUR on the right .
An abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scan detected a left completely duplicated collecting system with hydroureteronephrosis and poor opacification of the upper pole moiety. In addition, the parenchyma of the upper pole moiety was atrophied with secretory and excretory delay. In association with VCUG findings, it appeared that the refluxing ureter was the one that drains the upper pole moiety and inserts lower into the bladder. On the right, a duplex collecting system was detected with hypotonic calyces, pelvis, and ureter of the upper pole moiety. An atrophic parenchyma and poor opacification of the upper pole moiety was also detected . Renal scintigraphy was not available.
We carried out a left heminephrectomy because of the poor functioning of the upper pole moiety based on imaging findings associated with recurrent UTIs . On the right side she underwent dextranomer/hyaluronic acid (Deflux®) injections. Dextranomer/hyaluronic acid (Deflux®) was injected submucosally below the ureteral orifice at the 6 o’clock position to create a prominent bulge and raise the distal ureter and ureteral orifice.
A year after the surgery she has no complaints. The symptoms are completely resolved. Biological and radiological follow-up is unremarkable. A timeline of the case is presented in Figure .