Patient is a 26-year-old female with a past medical history of HIV. She was infected at age 15 and showed poor adherence to antiretroviral medication. She reported the combined use of Tenofovir, Emtricitabine, and Efavirenz intermittently, mostly because she did not seek adequate healthcare due to feelings of shame about being associated with the disease. She also missed most of her follow-ups in the last year, and had no CD4 counts or viral load tests performed in over 6 months. She also suffered from intermittent episodes of coughing, bloody stools, and weight loss during this time; however, she didn't seek any medical attention.
She presented to our emergency room with a 10-day history of intermittent lower abdominal pain, nausea, biliary vomits and asthenia. Approximately 24 h prior to admittance, the pain became worse. On clinical examination, a dehydrated, hypotensive and tachycardic patient was encountered. Her abdomen was diffusely tender, and the pain became more intense on touch. Laboratory exams revealed mild leukocytosis and neutrophilia. An arterial gasometry revealed metabolic acidosis with hyperlactatemia.
In view of these findings, surgical consultation was requested and a diagnosis of diffuse peritonitis was reached. Aggressive fluid resuscitation with crystalloids was started and an emergency laparotomy was decided. At surgery, the peritoneal cavity was filled with 500 ml of pus and 2 bowel perforations were identified: a 1 × 1 cm perforation in the terminal ileum, 50 cm proximal to the ileocecal valve, and a 3 × 2 cm perforation in the cecum (A–C).
A right colectomy was decided, however, the surgical team had doubts about restoring bowel continuity. Nonetheless, since the patient became stable after reanimation and surgery, restoration was considered feasible. Given the context of an HIV patient with poor controls who would be unlikely able to handle an ileostomy, a primary anastomosis with close surveillance was decided. Resection began 10 cm proximal to the ileal perforation and ended near the hepatic flexure of the colon. Then, a side-to-side ileotransverse anastomosis was performed with 75 mm staples (ETHICON Linear Cutter NTLC75, Johnson & Johnson). Extensive washing of the peritoneal cavity was completed and the remainder of the procedure was performed without complications. Based on the historical, clinical, and laboratory data obtained, we initially considered intestinal perforation due to cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection as the probable etiology of peritonitis, and the differentials included, mycobacterial infections, fungal infections, neoplastic disease or Kaposi sarcoma. However, definitive pathology tests for the cause of the perforation were delayed due to the unavailability of an in-house pathologist. Furthermore, other essential tests including CD4 counts and HIV viral loads and antibodies (both IgM and IgG) were not available at our institution.
This situation was further complicated by the lack of resources from the patient and our hospital; nonetheless, we managed to send a blood sample to a nearby hospital for testing. Even under these harsh conditions, the patient had a good recovery. She was placed under broad-spectrum antibiotics (Piperacillin/Tazobactam) and was given a 3-day cycle of Ganciclovir. Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) was initiated as well. Meanwhile, sips of liquids were initiated on the second postoperative day without complications. She didn't have any episodes of fever, nausea, vomiting or signs of anastomosis leak.
At the 7th postoperative day, the patient requested to leave against medical advice (AMA), she signed the hospital consents and left our facility.
Two days after the patient went AMA, CD4 and HIV viral load results arrived along with the pathology report, revealing chronic inflammation of the resected bowel, and multiple ulcers affecting the mucosa of the ileum and the cecum. Also, multiple granulomas surrounded by inflammatory tissue were recognized, as well as some granulomas within the lymph nodes. Bowel perforation due to tuberculosis was confirmed as the final diagnosis, CD4 cell counts were estimated at 94 cells/mm3, and the viral load was estimated at over 106 genome copies (A–C).
Since tuberculosis in Ecuador is a mandatory declaration disease, we searched for the patient and found her in the coastal region of the country. Fortunately, she was stable and without complications. She was taken by the national healthcare system and admitted to a tertiary hospital for HIV and tuberculosis treatment.