A 60-year-old female patient who had been on the haemodialysis for 16 years due to renal sclerosis was admitted to our hospital for chest pain. She also had medical histories of hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and cured breast cancer. There was no family history of the heart disease. Four years prior to presentation, she had suffered TS; coronary angiography (CAG) and left ventriculography (LVG) at the 1st hospitalization are shown in and , Material S1. After full recovery from the first episode of TS, she was followed at a haemodialysis clinic without any symptoms of chest pain, with a prescription of 1.25 mg of carvedilol once daily. Prior to the 2nd admission, she felt chest discomfort during a stressful session of ballroom dancing. Since the symptom has remained even at rest for ∼22 h, she presented to the hospital at the next day.
At admission, her blood pressure (BP) was 82/58 mmHg and heart rate was 78 beat per minutes with preserved systemic oxygenation. On physical examination, she had a systolic murmur of Levine 2/6 at the second left sternal border, clear lung sounds, and no oedema of lower legs. Electrocardiogram (ECG) showed that sinus rhythm with normal axis, ST-segment elevations in II, III, aVF, and V3–6 leads with ST-segment depressions in I, aVL leads. Laboratory tests showed a haemoglobin level of 13.1 g/dL (within normal limits), creatine kinase-muscle/brain (CK-MB) of 12 U/L (within normal limits), creatine level of 10.1 mg/dL (0.48–0.79 mg/dL), and C-reactive protein level of 0.5 mg/dL (<0.33 mg/dL). A maximum troponin-I level and troponin-T level were 5646.7 pg/mL (<26.2 pg/mL) and 1.460 ng/mL (<0.014 ng/mL), respectively. We also checked the laboratory test of eosinophilic leucocyte ratio, thyroid function, blood sugar, HbA1c, and ferrokinetics and confirmed that these values were within normal limits. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated hypokinesia of mid-posterior, inferior, and apical segments of the left ventricle with apical ballooning, sparing the base of each wall, causing a reduced ejection fraction of 40%, accompanied with mild mitral regurgitation (MR). Peak velocity of LVOT was 4.1 m/s. Emergent CAG showed no significant stenosis. Left ventriculography demonstrated an extensive akinesia in both apical and mid portions as well as hyperkinesia in the basal portion of LV with apical ballooning ( and , Material S2). Based on these findings, we confirmed the diagnosis of recurrent TS, and started a standard hospital care including 7 U/kg/h of intravenous unfractionated heparin. The next day, however, she complained of chest pain with haemodialysis although its characteristics were different from initial symptoms. Electrocardiogram did not show any significant changes compared with that on admission. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed that peak systolic velocity and mean pressure gradient (PG) of LVOT were 4.7 m/s and 58 mmHg, respectively. Systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral valve with basal hyperkinesia was also documented ( and , Materials S3 and S4). Considering that her chest pain was likely due to worsening of LVOT obstruction secondary to decreased intravascular volume from haemodialysis, we started continuous landiolol intravenously at 3 μg/kg/min, and uptitrated it using TTE and vital signs. Her symptoms almost completely resolved when the dose reached at 10 μg/kg/min, shown in , while peak systolic velocity and mean PG of LVOT were respectively down to 4.2 m/s and 38 mmHg. Then, the dose of landiolol was gradually decreased and continued at 3 μg/kg/min. On Day 3, TTE showed that both mid-apical akinesia and basal hyperkinesia were slightly improved. Peak systolic velocity and mean PG of LVOT were at persistently low levels at 3.1 m/s and 38 mmHg, respectively, with continuous landiolol of 3 μg/kg/min. She was asymptomatic during the 2nd haemodialysis so we switched intravenous landiolol to oral bisoprolol of 1.25 mg. On Day 6, TTE showed that both mid-apical akinesia and basal hyperkinesia were almost recovered, and LVOT obstruction and SAM were no longer noted. Her systolic BP also recovered up to 120 mmHg. She was discharged on Day 8 without any other complications. Discharge medication were 1.25 mg of bisoprolol, 1500 mg of lanthanum carbonate hydrate, 250 mg of ferric citrate hydrate, 10 mg of vonoprazan, 30 mg of domperidone, 0.5 mg of clonazepam, 2 mg of pitavastatin, and 15 mg of nicorandil per day. The radionuclide imaging using iodine-123 meta-iodo-benzyl-guanidine is useful to detect adrenal or ectopic pheochromocytoma in some cases. However, we decided not to perform the radionuclide imaging because the patient in this case did not have any symptoms of pheochromocytoma such as headache, palpitation, and weight loss before the hospitalization and increases of serum catecholamine levels during the index hospitalization. The patient has been doing well for 4 months after the discharge without any symptom or recurrence. Echocardiography at 1 month after discharge showed normal cardiac function. Inverted T wave in I, aVL, and V2–V4 lead of ECG remained for 4 months after discharge, and then totally restored.