The patient was a 50-year-old man with no history of smoking or alcohol consumption. He had been diagnosed with NTDT since childhood. In 1982, the patient underwent a splenectomy and was routinely given oral aspirin and hydroxyurea after surgery. After that, he was followed up many times and treated with blood transfusions at other sites due to severe hemoglobin decline. The hemogram showed abnormal proliferation of leukocytes and platelets and decreased hemoglobin. In early 2017, he was diagnosed with diabetes and then started on insulin-hypoglycemic treatment. In January 2013, he presented with discomfort in his right ear (aural fullness). The patient was diagnosed with primary non-keratinizing undifferentiated carcinoma of the nasopharynx (cT3N2M0 stage III, p63 positive) based on histopathologic and imaging findings conducted in late February of that same year (, ). The patient received two cycles of TPF (paclitaxel, cisplatin, and fluorouracil) systemic induction chemotherapy combined with radical intensity-modulated radiation therapy and two cycles of TPF adjuvant chemotherapy. On the multiple follow-up magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans after the completion of systemic therapy, the primary lesion of the nasopharynx and metastatic lymph nodes of the neck were continuously reduced. All malignant lesions resolved on 6 March 2014 . At the beginning of 2018, the patient presented with an ulcer on the left side of the edge of the tongue with concurrent pain when eating and speaking, the size of which progressively increased over time. A biopsy of the left tongue revealed squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) with cT2N0M0 stage II at the end of March 2019 . Considering the thalassemia, the patient and his family refused surgical treatment, so he was treated with three-dimensional conformal radiation therapy with a dose of 65Gy in 28 daily fractions from 16 April 2019 to 24 May 2019. MRI scans after radiotherapy showed that the lesion on the left edge of the tongue was smaller than before radiotherapy . The wall of the nasopharynx, which was slightly thicker than before, showed no obvious change. There were many small lymph nodes in the IB area of the right neck, some of which were smaller than before. Considering the residual tumor and the fact that the patient didn't receive concurrent chemotherapy during radiotherapy, the patient received TS-1 maintenance chemotherapy on 13 June 2019 and was in regular follow-up in our department.