The patient provided written informed consent for publication of her information and related images.
A 65-year-old woman who had previously undergone clipping of a right internal carotid artery–posterior communicating artery bifurcation aneurysm was admitted for clipping of an unruptured right-sided VA–PICA aneurysm. Preoperative computed tomography angiography showed that the aneurysm (maximum diameter, 5 mm) was located medially and ventral to the hypoglossal canal . After induction of general anesthesia, the patient was placed in the prone position with her neck flexed and head slightly tilted downward and rotated 10° to the right . The head was fixed in position using the Sugita surgical head frame (Mizuho, Tokyo, Japan). The main body of the ORBEYE exoscope was placed on the surgeon’s right side and the guide arm was placed around the operative field. The monitor was placed beyond the patient and facing the surgeon. A J-shaped skin incision was made from the midline at C4-5 through the inion to the right mastoid groove. A 4 cm × 4 cm craniotomy was performed; 3 cm to the right and 1 cm to the left of midline, and the foramen magnum was opened posteriorly using bone rongeurs. Then, the right occipital bone was resected to the level of the condylar fossa using a drill. C1 laminectomy was not performed. The dura was incised caudally to the midline and cranially to the right lateral bend.
After the visual axis of ORBEYE was set to overhang, rostral retraction of the lateral cerebellum revealed CNs IX, X, and XI. Caudal to the nerves, the right VA and PICA were visible. The aneurysm was found slightly anterior to the origin of the PICA and its distal neck was adherent to CN XII. Using the high magnification function of ORBEYE, CN XII was detached from the aneurysm neck. Although the anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) was found on the ventral side of the aneurysm, the structures were not in contact . A 7 mm mini straight Yasargil® titanium clip (Aesculap, Center Valley, PA, USA) was applied to the aneurysm neck from beneath the lower CNs using forceps with a 15° downward bend [ and d]. Intraoperative indocyanine green angiography showed no blood flow within the aneurysm and preservation of flow in the VA and PICA . The dura was closed in a watertight fashion and the seam line reinforced with fibrin glue. The muscle, fascia, and skin were then closed in layers.
All microsurgical procedures were performed from the rostral end of the patient using ORBEYE. Adjusting the visual axis of ORBEYE enabled surgery to be performed with the surgeon in a comfortable posture. In addition, an extreme head-down position was not required.
No operative complications occurred. Postoperative computed tomography angiography showed complete obliteration of the VA–PICA aneurysm and preservation of the VA and PICA [-].