A 56-year-old male patient presented to our orthopedic outpatient clinic with swelling and pain in both knees with limited range of motion for more than 6 mo.
Six months ago, the patient presented with swelling and pain in both knees, especially in the left knee. The pain worsened over the past 6 mo, he was unable to stand and walk, and his activities were limited.
The patient had a history of gout for more than 10 years and hypertension for more than 20 years. The patient underwent heart valve replacement 9 years ago and took oral warfarin 1.875 mg once daily after surgery (coagulation was never monitored during treatment with the drug). He had a history of gastrointestinal bleeding. He denied having other major medical illnesses, such as diabetes, coronary heart disease, and kidney disease, and a history of infectious diseases, such as hepatitis and tuberculosis.
The patient had swelling and deformities in both knees, pressure pain around both knees, an elevated skin temperature, limited range of motion in both knees, and multiple swollen gout stones visible on both hands and both feet.
The patient’s blood uric acid level was 503 μmol/L. The international normalized ratio was 5.75.
The patient’s X-ray examination showed gouty arthritis in both knees .
After multidisciplinary consultation, the patient underwent left-sided total knee arthroplasty because of relatively severe symptoms to regulate coagulation and renal insufficiency. Postoperative coagulation indicators showed that fibrinogen was 4.81 g/L, activated partial thromboplastin time was 43.7 s, and D-dimer was 4.7 mg/L FEU. The postoperative radiographs showed good prosthesis alignment and good force lines in the lower extremities, and antibiotics anti-infection and low-molecular-weight heparin anticoagulation treatment were given postoperatively.
On the third day after surgery, the patient developed recurrent hyperthermia with a maximum temperature of 38.6 °C. The dressing on the surgical incision was dry and clean, there was no obvious bleeding or oozing from the incision, and the levels of blood flow and sensation in the left lower limb were normal. The procalcitonin, white blood cell (WBC), and C-reactive protein levels were consistently elevated, and the patient was considered to have a surgical site infection. He received anti-infection treatment for 48 d, during which the antibiotics were escalated several times and the patient was given anti-inflammatory treatment and pain relief, but there was still recurrent fever and elevated levels of inflammatory indexes.
The patient was considered to have a periprosthetic infection based on the recurrent elevated temperature and inflammatory indicator levels. We then performed a necrosectomy of the left knee joint, replaced the spacer, and performed vacuum sealing drainage. Intraoperatively, a large amount of white discharge and uric acid crystals were found in the knee joint, but no necrotic tissue or pus was observed. Three days later, the patient had a sudden onset of chest tightness and shortness of breath, nausea, and vomiting, with a temperature of 39 °C. Then the patient began to experience confusion, abdominal distention, and erratic reflux. Later, the patient developed hypotension with shock. The abdominal physical examination showed significant pressure pain in the right upper abdomen but not in the left abdomen.
Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed intestinal emphysema with fluid planes and exudative changes . The patient was considered to have an abdominal infection with possible intestinal necrosis and obstruction, so we immediately performed laparotomy, abdominal flushing and drainage, and terminal ileostomy. During the surgery, we found approximately 200 mL of yellowish turbid exudative ascites in the abdominal cavity, localized thickening and edema in the ascending colon, and obvious distension and dilatation in the transverse sigmoid colon. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) after surgery, and after fluid resuscitation, anti-infection treatment, and other symptomatic treatments, his condition improved, and his vital signs stabilized.
Twenty-eight days later, the patient developed persistent right-sided abdominal pain, fever, and bloody exudate from the stoma, followed by bloody stools. The CT examination of the patient’s abdomen showed thickening of the wall of the ascending colon with multiple exudative changes around it and possible local hematoma . He was transferred to the ICU again and was treated with anti-infection treatment, fluid resuscitation, and coagulation correction. The symptoms did not improve, the fever and abdominal pain were recurrent, and the inflammatory indexes did not decrease, so after his family provided permission, laparotomy was performed again due to aggravated infection.
Forty-two days after the first abdominal surgery, we performed laparotomy, intestinal adhesion release, and right hemicolectomy. Intraoperatively, we found congested and edematous thickening of the ascending colon, hemorrhagic exudation of the prerenal fascia, inflammatory changes in the intestinal wall mucosa, and significant local intestinal adhesions; right hemicolectomy was performed, and a pathological examination was performed. The patient was diagnosed with ascending colon mesenteric ischemic necrosis with infection, and the pathological findings were consistent with colonic mesenteric ischemic changes .