A 34-year-old primipara woman was admitted to the gynecology clinic for an annual control. She had no significant medical history and no prior exogenous hormone use. The patient had a gynecologic history of menarche at the age of 11 and reported 28-day menstrual cycles. The obstetrical history of the patient consisted of a pregnancy resulting in term cesarean delivery. She presented with cyclic eczematous eruptions starting 1 year after the delivery. The lesions occurred ∼ 6 days before the menses and disappeared in between 1 and 2 days after the menstruation ceased. She reported no episodes of skin lesions during the pregnancy or during the breast-feeding period. The physical examination revealed several erythematous macules and patches on the hand, forearms, and elbows. The patient was evaluated by dermatologists. Allergy testing was performed and the results were negative. The patient reported that she had been submitted to a treatment with antihistamines 2 years previously, but this treatment had not improved her symptoms. The pelvic examination and ultrasound assessment were essentially normal. The routine laboratory investigations, the results of the biochemistry, complete blood count, and the hormone profiling revealed no abnormal findings.
We performed an intradermal test using 50 mg/mL progesterone (Progestan, Koçak Farma, Istanbul, Turkey) as a positive control, and normal saline was used as a negative control. Following the first 15 minutes, a 3 cm wide induration appeared on the right arm of the patient, in which the progesterone was injected . After 24 hours, a widespread edema, itchy dermatitis, and eruptions were observed on the arm of the patient in which the progesterone was injected . The test results were evaluated to be positive for progesterone dermatitis. The results revealed a negative immediate response and a positive late response on the left arm of the patient, in which normal saline was injected.
Following the diagnosis, the patient received a combined oral contraceptives therapy with drospirenone (3 mg) and ethinyl estradiol (0.03 mg). Five months after the cessation of the therapy, she remained with no skin lesions.