A 62-year-old female with a 6-year history of paroxysmal narrow-complex tachycardia was referred for an electrophysiologic study. On admission, the patient was asymptomatic and her routine clinical assessment and physical examination were unremarkable. During her electrophysiology study, sustained typical AVNRT was induced and RF ablation was performed with a non-irrigated Navistar ablation catheter (Biosense Webster) using three-dimensional electroanatomic guidance. A total of two RF burns were applied to the region between the coronary sinus and tricuspid annulus. The first RF burn (35 W [W], 12 Ohm impedance drop during 50 s) showed good junction response but more than 2 echo beats persisted after the energy application. A second burn (35 W, 11 Ohm impedance drop during 60 s) resulted in successful slow pathway ablation . Pericardial effusion was ruled out by postprocedural focused cardiac ultrasound which is routinely performed at our centre. During the next days, the patient developed a low-grade fever of 38 degrees Celsius, mild tachycardia, leucocytosis, elevated cardiac markers, and complained of chest pain on inspiration. Creatinine kinase (CK) was elevated at 168 U/L and high sensitivity cardiac Troponin T at 294 pg/mL. A new-onset circumferential pericardial effusion was detected on echocardiography and the electrocardiogram (ECG) showed diffuse saddle-shaped ST segment elevations . An extensive workup for infectious, metabolic, rheumatologic, neoplastic, and toxic causes of pericarditis and myocarditis was unremarkable. Gadolinium-enhanced cardiac magnetic resonance imaging showed no signs of ischemia, infiltrative disease or structural abnormalities. According to current clinical practice guidelines a diagnosis of post-cardiac injury syndrome (PCIS) was made and the patient was started on aspirin and low-dose colchicine. Within three days of treatment, symptoms and ECG changes resolved, the pericardial effusion was reduced, and the patient could be discharged home. One month later, the patient still showed a small pericardial effusion and was continued on aspirin and colchicine. At a 3-month follow-up, the patient was doing well and the pericardial effusion had resolved completely.