A 46-year-old woman was admitted to a nearby clinic due to vomiting. She also had symptoms of epigastric and back pain noted after meals for 1-year duration. The patient further reported a 3-kg weight loss within 3 months prior to admission. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) revealed a solid tumor (4 cm in diameter) in the pancreatic head. She was then referred to our hospital for further management.
The patient had no past medical history or abdominal surgery. Her past medical history showed a previous abdominal US as part of a scheduled health check 5 years prior to admission, which revealed no abnormal findings at that time. Her family history revealed gastric cancer in her father.
Dynamic-CT study revealed a solid tumor, measuring 37 mm in its greatest diameter involving the pancreas head, showing dense enhancement in the arterial dominant phase that continued to the portal phase. The tumor vasculature was heterogeneous, and partial strong enhancement suggested the existence of developed vessels inside the tumor. An area of SMV encasement, measuring approximately 3 cm in axial length, indicated a massive direct tumor invasion of the SMV and possible tumor thrombus therein . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) demonstrated an intact main pancreatic duct (MPD). The tumor showed a high-signal-intensity area on T2-weighted MR images. MR images also exhibit well-circumscribed solid tumor invading the SMV . Radiological studies found no signs of distant metastasis. Complete blood count (CBC) parameters were within the reference range. Blood serological analysis of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and colorectal carcinoma antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) were also within the reference range. Serum aminotransferases, alkaline phosphatase, and total bilirubin levels were likewise, all normal. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed a well-circumscribed round tumor in the head of the pancreas. EUS also detected an intravenous high echoic mass in the SMV, suggesting the possibility of tumor thrombus or trans-luminal tumor penetration into the SMV wall . EUS-guided fine needle aspiration (EUS-FNA) yielded satisfactory biopsy sample containing small cells, round-to-oval tumor cells with round nuclei and scant cytoplasm . Ki-67 labeling index of the sample was 1.9%. Histological diagnosis was pancreatic neuroendocrine tumor (pan NET), G1 at that time. However, findings contradictory to the diagnosis of pan NET were also noted. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) of the biopsy sample revealed equivocal reactivity for synaptophysin and negative reactivity for chromogranin A expression. In addition, somatostatin receptor scintigraphy (Octreoscan®, Mallinckrodt Medical, Tokyo, Japan) revealed no radiotracer accumulation in the tumor.
Subtotal stomach-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy using Child-II reconstruction was performed. Intraoperative inspection revealed no signs of peritoneal dissemination or lymph node metastasis. Further intraoperative US examination demonstrated a well-circumscribed pancreatic tumor involving the SMV. The involved SMV was resected and reconstructed during surgery. Gross examination of the resected specimen revealed a well-circumscribed round soft tumor in the pancreatic head, 40 mm in diameter, penetrating the SMV wall with intraluminal tumor progression (37 mm in maximal length) . The surgical margins were negative and the harvested lymph nodes were likewise negative for metastases both macroscopically and histologically.
The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged from hospital 15 days after surgery.
Tumor division surface represented the solid tumor penetrating the SMV wall . Hematoxylin–eosin (HE) staining of the resected specimen revealed solid proliferation of tumor cells with oval-shaped nuclei and scanty cytoplasm around disorganized or slit-shaped vessels along with glomangiopericytomatous differentiation. Tubular–lobular architecture was not histologically apparent in the specimen examined, indicating that the tumor was not of pancreatic ductal/acinar cell origin . IHC demonstrated positive immunoreactivity for smooth muscle actin , vimentin , and CD34 . IHC also showed negative immunoreactivity for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and CD56 . These findings eliminated pan NETs from differential diagnosis. IHC of signal transducer and activator of transcription 6 (STAT6), which has been used to differentiate solitary fibrous tumors from other soft tissue tumors , yielded negative immunoreactivity . Therefore, this lesion was finally diagnosed as a primary pancreatic glomus tumor. The Ki-67 labeling index was 2% at hot spots.
Throughout the follow-up period, the patient was in good health with an annual CT study detecting no signs of recurrence for 4 years post-operatively.