The patient was a 15-month-old boy who was admitted to our hospital due to failure to growth and poor appetite. He was a full-term gestational child delivered at 40 + 3 weeks of pregnancy. His birth weight was 2.3 kg, head circumference was 31 cm, and body length was 50 cm. There was no history of neonatal asphyxia. He resistance to complementary foods. At 6 months of age, he underwent an operation for polydactylism. He had repeated eczema-like rashes and scattered bleeding points all over the body. He did not have repeated respiratory or digestive tract infections after birth. Moreover, he had no family history of malignant tumours. Regarding his vaccination, he completed the BCG dose, third dose of hepatitis B vaccine, third dose of polio vaccine, third dose of DPT vaccine, second dose of meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine (Group A), and first dose of measles vaccine. The patient had not received any vaccination in the last 5 months before admission.
His physical examination showed a weight of 7.4 kg (− 3 SD), height of 72 cm (− 2 SD), head circumference of 40.2 cm (− 3 SD, microcephaly), six primary teeth, and normal facies . The patient’s psychomotor development was normal. The liver and spleen were not enlarged. The full blood count revealed a low white blood cell count (WBC) (2.41 × 109), neutrophil count (NE) (1.40 × 109/L), haemoglobin (HGB) (87 g/L), and platelet (PLT) count (7 × 109/L).
His bone marrow smear showed active bone marrow hyperplasia, granulocyte hyperplasia and maturity disorder, and the proportion of lymphocytes decreased; Erythrocyte proliferation was active; Megakaryocytes proliferate actively, and the proportion of megakaryocytes producing plates was low.
Prior to gamma globulin infusion, immunoglobulin test results revealed an elevated IgG level (18.7 g/L, 4.7–12.3), but normal IgA and IgM values. Upon re-checking 2 months later, IgG was still elevated (22.1 g/L, 4.7–12.3), whereas IgG4 protein quantification was normal (0.477 g/L，0.08-1.4). Lymphocyte immunophenotyping was performed twice, which showed that the counts of T lymphocytes and especially CD4 + T cells were significantly diminished . The twice test was performed after corticosteroid treatment.
The aetiology antibody testing included testing for rubella virus, cytomegalovirus, toxoplasma, herpes simplex virus, human parvovirus B19, and Epstein-Barr virus. This patient was found to be positive for rubella virus antibody IgG and IgM and cytomegalovirus antibody CMV-IgG, whereas he was negative for the other viral IgG and IgM antibodies.
Based on the serological findings, rubella virus was diagnosed. We performed an ophthalmic fundus examination and found that rubella virus retinal vasculitis was visible in both eyes. The manifestations were as follows: no obvious opacity of the lens was observed, and the optic disc was clearly demarcated, orange in colour, without obvious bulge, and had a C/D ratio of approximately 0.3. The colour of retina was relatively dark; white punctate exudation foci were scattered at many places, and no obvious haemorrhage was observed. The retinal artery was small and slightly tonic, with a visible white sheath wrapping on the lateral side of some arteries and foveal reflex. The 30-cm red globe test was positive upon visual screening. Manifestations related to rubella virus infection of the patient included microcephaly, low body weight, and polydactyly, but his intellectual, behavioural, and motor development were normal.
Initial management consisted of intravenous infusion of gamma globulin (1 g/kg, three doses), PLT (2 U), dexamethasone (0.2 mg/kg for 4 days), and oral prednisone acetate (0.2 mg/kg for 3 days, and 0.1 mg/kg for 1 week) to suppress the autoimmune reaction. Despite this, the patient’s PLT count did not increase .
Autoimmune disease-related antibody tests, including the direct anti-human globulin test, were positive (4+). PLT-specific and histocompatibility (HLA) antibodies were also positive. Furthermore, his thyroid-stimulating hormone level was high, and thyroxine was normal.
Whole exome sequencing revealed two heterozygous variants of the LIG4 gene: c.833G > T (p.R278L) and c.1271_1275del (p.K424Rfs*20). Family verification results showed that these two variants were inherited from the mother and father respectively (both heterozygous) . According to the ACMG guidelines , the pathogenicity classification of these two mutations were likely pathogenic.
The child’s main clinical manifestations were full-term small for gestational age, microcephaly, polydactyly, growth retardation, immunodeficiency, and pancytopenia. Combined with gene sequencing results, the diagnosis of DNA ligase IV deficiency was established. Following the diagnosis of DNA LIG4 dificiency, we stopped all drug treatments for the patient. Notably, he still displayed poor appetite after being discharged from the hospital. Low WBC, NE, HGB, and PLT were also found at the 3-month and 6-month follow-ups, especially PLT, with a minimum value of 7 × 109/L.