A 70-year-old man was admitted to the Emergency Department in March 2020 with persistent severe chest pain (grade 8/10) which started 3 h before admission. The cardiovascular and respiratory examinations on admission were normal. He had an elevated blood pressure of 155/100 mmHg, a regular heart rate of 63 b.p.m., an oxygen saturation rate of 90% on room air, and no respiratory compromise or fever. The cardiovascular risk factors were: smoking, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes. His medical therapy on admission was: aspirin 100 mg/day, ramipril 1.25 mg/day, bisoprolol 1.25 mg/day, and metformin 850 mg t.i.d. From his past cardiac history, it emerged that he underwent prior percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with implantation of a drug-eluting stent (DES) on the mid left circumflex artery (LCx) in 2007 and proximal LCx-OM1 in 2017. His initial high sensitivity troponin I was 84.7 ng/L (normal range <34).
Blood count and inflammatory markers were in the normal range. Coagulation test demonstrated only an increased D-dimer of 736 ng/mL (normal range 0–710). The ECG demonstrated new ST-T abnormalities in the precordial leads not present in the last ECG performed 1 month before . The echocardiogram demonstrated a left ventricular ejection fraction of 40–45% with akinesia in the LCx territory (described since 2008) and a severe hypokinesis in the left anterior ascending (LAD) territory.
The patient was treated with i.v. heparin, sublingual nitroglycerin, and clopidogrel. The coronary angiogram, performed 10 h after admission, showed a moderate in-stent restenosis on LCx-OM and a moderate right coronary artery (RCA) stenosis. The culprit lesion was the proximal LAD that presented with a very complex and unusual plaque morphology, indicative of a coronary artery dissection: an abrupt change in arterial calibre both at the beginning and at the end (exactly at the origin of the first septal and diagonal branches), two lumina separated by a radiolucent flap evident in the proximal and mid portion of the dissection, a spiral pattern, no endoluminal thrombus, TIMI 3 flow, and a very small mid-distal intimal tear (, , Video S1). The angiographic characteristics were also in accordance with the aforementioned definition of SCAD. In our case, the IMH probably propagated antegrade and retrograde, compressing the arterial lumen and causing ischaemia. In addition, the very small mid-distal intimal tear that we observed was probably the site of intramural egress of blood. The diagnosis of A-SCAD was furtherly supported by the presence of a mild stenosis in the same coronary segment in the last angiogram performed in 2017 . The LAD lesion at the site of A-SCAD was then treated by PCI: easily crossed with a workhorse guidewire (, panel B and C) followed by direct implantation of a drug-eluting stent 4.0 × 23 mm (, panel D), that was post-dilated with an NC balloon 4.5 × 12 mm inflated at 22 atm (, panel F), with and excellent angiographic final result (, Panel G) and final TIMI 3 flow. The day after the procedure, the patient developed fever (temperature >38°C) which prompted the suspicion of COVID-19. The patient was immediately put in isolation in a dedicated room. The diagnosis of COVID-19 was confirmed by real-time PCR test and the patient was transferred in a dedicated COVID-19 hospital to continue the isolation and the pharmacological treatment for COVID-19 that was only supportive without use of antivirals.
The patient had a favourable clinical course of COVID-19 with no symptoms of pneumonia. In addition, he had no further episodes of chest pain. The echocardiogram demonstrated the disappearance of the left ventricular severe hypokinesis in the LAD territory present at admission that was associated with normalization of the electrocardiographic ST-T abnormalities in the precordial leads. He was finally discharged 12 days later, after two negative tests for SARS-CoV-2 at 24 h intervals, with the following medical therapy: aspirin 100 mg/day, clopidogrel 75 mg/day, pantoprazole 40 mg/day, atorvastatin 40 mg/day, bisoprolol 1.25 mg/day, and metformin 850 mg t.i.d.