A 51-year-old man with no significant medical history was admitted to our hospital with sudden onset epigastric pain. He did not take any regular medications. He had smoked a packet of cigarettes a day for 30 years and was a social drinker. On admission, his vital signs were within normal limits: body temperature of 37.0 °C, blood pressure of 113/65 mmHg, heart rate of 54 beats per minute, and oxygen saturation of 100% in room air. He complained of slight epigastric pain but there was no rebound tenderness. His hemoglobin level was 12.0 g/dL. Computed tomography (CT) with contrast enhancement showed a massive hematoma in the lesser omentum . Moreover, the root of the celiac artery was severely stenosed (3.5 mm in diameter) and a RGA aneurysm was present . A RGA aneurysm and an anomaly of the artery; common hepatic artery branches from the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) were also detected . The dorsal pancreatic artery (DPA) was dilated and clearly connecting the SMA and the splenic artery . His diagnosis was determined as median arcuate ligament syndrome (MALS) with a ruptured RGA aneurysm.
There were two treatment options, including endovascular treatment and open surgery. Endovascular treatment is less invasive. However, there is a risk of recanalization in endovascular treatment. On the other hand, we thought there were also some merits in performing open surgery. A RGA aneurysm can be treated easily by resecting the lesser omentum, and in the same operation, the MAL could also be transected. This may prevent the recurrence of the aneurysm in the future, though evidence is lacking. We informed him of the two treatment options, endovascular exclusion and open resection of the ruptured aneurysm; he chose open surgery. During emergency laparotomy, the lesser omentum with the RGA aneurysm was resected together with transection of the MAL. The intraoperative aortogram before transection of the MAL depicted the blood flow of the splenic artery coming from the SMA via the DPA . After transection of the MAL, the blood flowed from the celiac artery to the splenic artery instead of the DPA . His postoperative course was uneventful and he was discharged on postoperative day 9. Eighteen months after the operation, 3D volume rendered CT showed further enlargement of the celiac artery (5.0 mm in diameter), an obscured DPA, and no de-novo aneurysm formations . Informed consent was obtained from the patient prior to publication of this case report. And the CARE guidelines have been followed in this case report.