A 45-year-old man presented with acute respiratory failure, hypotension, rigid abdomen, and a hard, erythematous, and tender 14 cm right inguinoscrotal mass. Initial differential diagnoses included incarcerated hernia and testicular cancer. Further information regarding the mass could not be elicited due to the patient's altered mental status and critical condition requiring immediate intubation. Plain abdominal radiograph was unremarkable and chest radiograph revealed two large pulmonary nodules suspicious for malignancy. The patient's laboratory findings revealed elevated lactate of 7.7 mmol/liter (normal 0.5–2.2), amylase of 518 units/liter (normal 20–128), lipase of 157 units/liter (normal 6–32), a normal WBC of 5.5 with a slight left shift, and normal tumor markers (alpha-fetoprotein and beta-HCG). He underwent an emergency exploratory laparotomy due to suspicion of an incarcerated hernia and was found to have succus entericus throughout the peritoneal cavity and significant para-aortic lymphadenopathy invading the second and third portion of the duodenum.
The perforated duodenal defect could not be repaired due to the extent of tumor infiltration. A controlled fistula was created with two separate red rubber catheters which were placed proximally and distally to the duodenal defect. A wedge tissue biopsy taken from the mass proved consistent with classic seminoma . The right scrotal mass was not explored during the initial operation due to the patient's critical condition in the operating room requiring postponement of surgery. On postoperative day three, a computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained and revealed extensive disease above and below the diaphragm . The scrotal mass eventually began to invade through the scrotal skin and required resection 1 week after initial surgery . The final pathology revealed seminoma, classic type, and the final staging was consistent with T3, N3, M1b disease.
The patient remained on respiratory support throughout his hospitalization and eventually succumbed to his disease 4 weeks later when his family declined further medical therapy. Treatment with chemotherapy was considered but not commenced due to the presence of the duodenal perforation and respiratory failure.