A 27-year-old Chinese man with pituitary dysfunction presented with unclear speech and unstable walking for > 6 mo.
On February 21, 2019, the patient had oral ulcers and gradually developed anorexia, nausea, vomiting, constipation and limb weakness, pallor, and consciousness disorder. He went to the hospital for treatment, and was diagnosed with anterior pituitary hypofunction, pituitary crisis, and pituitary microadenoma. Serum sodium level was 102.7 mmol/L and he was treated with a high concentration of saline sodium. Over the next 3 d, serum sodium increased to 121.8, 134.5, and 137.7 mmol/L. Levels of sex hormones, growth hormone, and thyroid function were lower than normal. During hospitalization, the patient was treated with sodium, potassium, glucocorticoid, thyroid hormone and androgen supplementation, anti-infective agents, and gastric mucosal protective agents.
After discharge on March 2, 2019 the patient developed speech difficulties, nausea, retching, constipation, fatigue, involuntary limb shaking, poor eating, and reduced stool frequency. He was readmitted on March 12, 2019. Pituitary computed tomography (CT) showed suspicious nodular foci, and cerebral CT showed multiple low-density lesions in the bilateral basal ganglia. Cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and diffusion-weighted imaging showed abnormal signals in the bilateral caudate nucleus and globus symmetry abnormality, which suggested metabolic or toxic encephalopathy; vacuolar saddle signs; and left and upper sinus submucosal cysts. The diagnosis was anterior pituitary hypofunction, extramedullary myelinolysis, and pituitary microadenomas. During hospitalization, he was treated with glucocorticoids, thyroid hormone supplementation, and anti-infective agents, which improved neurological function and nutritional status. At the time of discharge on March 25, 2019, there was no obvious relief in the symptoms, his speech was defective, and he had involuntarily limb shaking and increased muscle tension in the limbs. After repeated hospitalization in the endocrinology and neurology departments, the above symptoms were not significantly relieved. On July 25, 2019, he was treated in the department of rehabilitation medicine.
Seventeen years ago, the patient showed no obvious incentive for growth and development, his growth rate slowed down compared with that of his peers, and his height was significantly shorter.
The patient had no significant past history or family history.
The patient was conscious, spirited, of short stature, and had a female face. His speech was defective, and he did not cough when drinking water. The pupils on both sides were about 3.0 mm in diameter, and directly and indirectly sensitive to light reflection; nystagmus was absent, and tongue tremor was present. He had normal facial muscle activity, soft neck, and weak neck shrug. Manual muscle testing (MMT) scores were as follows: bilateral supraspinatus muscle: 3 points (active movement against gravity); left biceps brachii and triceps brachii muscle: 4 points (active movement against gravity and resistance); right biceps brachii and triceps brachii muscle: 3 points; muscles associated with hand grip: 3 points; muscles of the left and right waists: 4 points; left and right hip flexors: 4 points; and left and right hip extensors: 3 points. Muscle tension in the limbs was normal. There were no obvious abnormalities in the bilateral deep and shallow sensation and complex sensation. He could maintain a dynamic balance while standing, and exercise was slow. Physiological reflexes were weakened and pathological reflexes were not elicited. Activities of daily living (ADL) score was 60 points .
Laboratory test results were within normal limits.
MRI craniocerebral plain scan on July 29, 2019 showed bilateral white globular abnormal signal, suspected hepatic encephalopathy, hepatocellular nuclear disease, and empty sella syndrome .