A 42-year-old Asian female presented with a rapidly enlarging right breast mass, which was originally noticed 1 year previously.
Over the past month, the breast mass had rapidly enlarged with symptoms of ulceration, bleeding and fever.
The patient had an unremarkable previous medical history.
On physical examination, the patient had a large right breast mass measuring 30 cm × 25 cm × 20 cm. It involved the whole right breast with a 20 cm × 15 cm area of ulceration complicated by necrosis located in the upper outer quadrant, which had a cauliflower-like neoplasm inside and was accompanied by an overpowering rotten stench. The skin of the right breast was stretched thin with superficial varicose veins, and the nipple was obviously enlarged .
The basic condition of the patient was poor with severe anaemia and hypoalbuminaemia at the time of admission. Blood analysis revealed red blood cells of 2.2 × 1012/L, hemoglobin of 59 g/L, and albumin of 19.9 g/L, with a normal platelet count.
Due to ulceration and the sheer size of the breast mass, the patient was unable to undergo mammography or mammary magnetic resonance imaging. Breast ultrasound revealed an enormous mass with solid components occupying the entire breast. A contrast-enhanced chest computed tomography (CT) scan displayed the giant breast mass , and a pulmonary nodule of 8 mm × 6 mm in the left lung, which was initially considered metastatic . The right pectoralis major was coarse locally, and the boundaries between the mass and the pectoralis major were unclear, which was thought to be due to tumour invasion . There were no suspicious findings in the left breast or axillary nodes, and other examinations were normal.
The patient was further evaluated with a core needle biopsy. The first core needle biopsy of the massive tumour suggested mammary adenosis. However, this did not rule out the possibility of malignancy. Dillon et al reported that approximately 39% of breast diseases may give false negative results. In addition, as the mass was large, the core needle biopsy was unable to cover the entire area. A second biopsy was then performed, which consequently revealed lymphadenitis with neoplastic cells. Both biopsies found no evidence of malignant tumour. Subsequently, a right mastectomy without resection of the axillary lymph nodes was recommended.