A 65-year-old woman with a long history of FAP and no other medical problem came to our attention because of many duodenal polyps found at surveillance esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD). The previous EGD was dated about 10 years ago, as she refused to be followed up for many years, and did not show any small bowel abnormalities. In 1970 she underwent colectomy with ileorectal anastomosis (IRA) and, in 2001, she further underwent restorative proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-anal anastomosis (IPAA).
The most recent surveillance EGD showed numerous adenomatous-looking duodenal polyps and the largest one was 40 mm in size. According to Spigelman staging system, she had a stage IV disease and, therefore, she was candidate for duodenal resection, in light of the risk of developing duodenal cancer. Despite the benefits of surgery were clearly explained to the patient, she refused to undergo duodenal resection. Therefore, we performed EMR of the largest polyp and histology revealed tubulovillous adenoma with high-grade dysplasia.
Since it was likely to find polyps beyond duodenum, as the patient had a Spigelman stage IV, she also underwent surveillance CE. The latter showed a 25 mm Paris 0-IIa polyp beyond Treitz ligament, in proximal jejunum. Again, patient was not willing to undergo surgical resection and, therefore, an EMR was planned. We were concerned about the risk of perforation, because jejunal wall is thin, polyp had a flat morphology and patient had adhesions from previous IRA and IPAA, which made the possibility of perforation even higher. Moreover, if jejunal perforation occurs, its endoscopic management may be challenging, as the placement of traditional through-the-scope clips in a narrow space like jejunum is usually difficult. Therefore, we had to carefully think in advance about a fast endoscopic treatment in case of perforation, in order to avoid emergency surgery, which was risky, due to the presence of adhesions from previous IRA and IPAA. We believed that OTSC system was a good option to deal with a possible jejunal perforation.
The cap of OTSC was mounted onto the distal tip of a DB enteroscope (EI-530B, Fuji, Tokyo, Japan). The DB enteroscope was introduced through the mouth and advanced down to proximal jejunum. The flat-elevated polyp was identified and en-bloc EMR was performed using a bipolar snare (DRAGONARE, Zeon Medical, Tokyo, Japan), after the injection of EMR solution (glycerol, indigo carmine and epinephrine). As expected, the procedure was difficult, for the reasons stated above. Once the polyp was resected, a full-thickness defect of about 5 mm was visible on the base of EMR polypectomy. After careful retraction of the edges into the cap, the OTSC device was directed towards the defect, the clip was deployed and the perforation was successfully closed . The resected polyp was grabbed with grasping forceps and pulled into the plastic cap for retrieval; in this way, the specimen was not damaged. The histology did not show any evidence of malignancy.
We monitored patient’s clinical condition after the procedure. Routine blood test and a plain X-ray of the abdomen did not show any abnormalities. She did not experience any GI symptoms; the blood pressure and temperature were within normal values. We only administered intravenous fluids; no antibiotics were used. The day after the procedure she was allowed to drink water and, since she remained asymptomatic, she was allowed a liquid diet two days after EMR polypectomy. She was discharged home four days after the procedure, able to tolerate a normal diet and with no complication. Two years later, patient underwent surveillance CE, which did not show any recurrence, and a plain X-ray of the abdomen, which showed the OTSC still in place .