A 23-year-old man was referred as an outpatient to our clinic 21 months after diagnosis of TB with neurological symptoms encompassing severe pain, paraesthesia and hypoesthesia following TB treatment.The patient’s history revealed that he developed severe productive coughing with yellow expectoration and haemoptysis after his return from a backpacking trip in Asia. The X-ray of his chest revealed infiltration of the superior part of the right lung including a cavernous structure. The sputum was positive for acid-fast rods, further diagnostics including HIV-testing resulted in normal findings.
The patient was initially treated with ethambutol, INH (with pyridoxine supplementation), rifampicin, pyraniazid and streptomycin. He developed elevated liver enzymes (gamma glutamyltransferase (GGT) 119 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 100 U/L, alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 314 U/L) as well as elevation of the retention parameters (creatinine 1.4 mg/dL). After 1 month, resistance testing revealed a multidrug-resistant infection; the treatment was amended to capreomycin, linezolid, and moxifloxacin, and treatment with ethambutol was continued. Two months after the initial diagnosis, the patient complained of paraesthesia of his feet.
During the following year, the symptoms worsened and the patient was referred to a regional hospital for further PNP diagnostics. Neither analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF indicated a total protein of 26 mg/dL, lactate 1.7 mmol/L, glucose 62 mg/dL, and no pleocytosis) nor serologic PNP screening revealed a pathological result. Since the patient’s condition worsened, symptomatic treatment with pregabalin was initiated, but symptoms hardly decreased.
One and a half years after diagnosis of TB, the patient was referred to our hospital; TB treatment was already successfully completed. Nerve conduction studies of the sural nerve revealed amplitudes that were severely reduced or absent, a pattern that improved in follow-up neurography over a time period of 2 years . Four years after the initial diagnosis of TB, the patient was free of neurological symptoms.
In order to explore the potential cause of the individual toxic effect of TB drugs, molecular genetic analyses of genes that are known to harbor variations relevant to drug effects were analyzed. Genotyping of ABCB1, CYP1A2, CYP3A4, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, SLCO1B1, and UGT1A1 revealed unremarkable results concerning a causative effect for adverse drug reactions.
A polymorphism c.590G>A was detected in heterozygous state in the NAT2 gene, resulting in the genotype NAT2*4/*6. This genotype is known to be associated with reduced activity (intermediate acetylator, IA) of the N-acetyltransferase 2 enzyme encoded by the gene. The enzyme is important for the metabolism and inactivation of active drug substances such as INH into inactive metabolites. Reduced enzyme activity leads to increased concentrations of INH and a higher risk of toxic effects such as injury of internal organs and PNP (Singla et al. ).
For the CYP2E1 gene, the c1/c2 genotype was detected and the*2-allele as well as the *1D-allele excluded. It was recently reported that the c1/c2 genotype contributes toward an elevated risk of tuberculosis drug-induced toxicity (Singla et al. ). In the East Asian population, the c1/c1 genotype (high activity) is associated with drug-induced liver damage. About 80% of Asians present the c1/c1 genotype.