A 40-year-old Caucasian male presented with a 10-year history of multiply recurrent, locally invasive, life-threatening ameloblastoma of the right maxillary sinus. The two initial surgeries had positive margins and included marsupialization of a maxillary sinus cyst with recurrence 2 years later and subsequent partial maxillectomy. Three years later, he was found to have recurrence in the maxillary sinus with extension into the pterygopalatine and infratemporal fossae . He underwent a right total maxillectomy with resection of the skull base disease with negative margins. Pathology demonstrated conventional ameloblastoma. His surveillance exam and imaging 1 year after surgery showed no evidence of disease. Six months later, the patient developed right temporal pain and trismus. Cross-sectional imaging showed multicentric recurrence in the right infratemporal fossa with extension into the lateral orbit, masticator space, and middle cranial fossa with invasion of the temporal lobe . Endoscopic biopsies from the right pterygopalatine fossa, skull base, and maxilla were consistent with conventional ameloblastoma without malignant transformation , confirming the third recurrence. Gross total resection was not possible due to extensive intracranial extension. The patient refused definitive or palliative radiation therapy. He was referred to medical oncology where tumor immune and genomic profiling using the FoundationOne CDx (Cambridge, MA, USA) revealed a PD-L1 combined positive score (CPS) of 2% by the 22c3 antibody as well as FGFR2 and smoothened homolog precursor (SMO) mutations. The patient was treated with the anti-PD1 immune checkpoint inhibitor, pembrolizumab, however progressed after 12 weeks with increasing proptosis, trismus, and pain . Due to FGFR2 mutation, the small molecule FGFR inhibitor erdafitinib was started at 8 mg daily. Within 4 weeks, the patient observed a decrease in right maxillary fullness, periorbital edema, and cancer-related pain such that he discontinued opioids. Computed tomography (CT) 1 and 4 months after erdafitinib initiation showed an excellent partial response , with essential resolution of intracranial disease. Erdafitinib side effects included hyperphosphatemia and dry eyes, which resolved with routine use of calcium carbonate and ocular lubricants. After 12 months, grade 2 myalgias and fatigue prompted a treatment holiday. The disease remained in radiologic partial response without treatment for 14 months, when the patient developed multicentric progression associated with recurrent pain, trismus, and proptosis. Erdafitinib was restarted at 8 mg daily; clinical response was again observed after 4 weeks with improvement in pain, and CT assessment demonstrated repeat near-complete response at 12 weeks.