We present the case of an 83-year-old man with a history of recurrent cholangitis and hepaticojejunal anastomosis due to iatrogenic damage to the bile duct after cholecystectomy 8 years before caustic ingestion. In addition to arterial hypertension and carotid artery disease, no other medical conditions or psychiatric disorders were known. In mid-summer 2022, the patient presented at the regional emergency center with newly onset chest pain. The patient self-reported that he ordered apple juice from a bar that was served by the bar staff. The liquid was actually an improperly stored drain cleaner near the bar counter. The product was later identified as an inorganic hydroxide. Immediately after taking a sip, he felt a sudden pain in the mouth, followed by a pain along the esophagus. The patient stated that within half an hour he left for the nearest emergency center. At the regional emergency center 1 h later, he received intravenous hydration, analgesia, antiemetic, and proton pump inhibitor. Due to a progressive worsening of pain and the need for a multidisciplinary approach, he was transferred to the University Medical Center of Ljubljana in the next 6 h.
Clinical examination revealed hoarse voice, edematous lips, tongue, and pharynx, and hemoptysis. Opioid analgesia was prescribed. Food intake by mouth was restricted. Seven hours after ingestion, an esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed extensive necrosis of the esophagus and stomach, classified as Zargar 3B injury (shown in ). Urgent CT showed no perforation but identified minor fluid around the lower part of the esophagus, prompting the administration of a broad-spectrum antibiotic. Clarity on contrast enhancement of the esophageal/gastric wall was inconclusive.
The second day, he was transferred to the Department of Gastroenterology. Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) was started with 1,500 mL of OLIMEL N9E® (27.5% glucose solution, 14.2% amino acid solution, 20% lipid emulsion; energy value 1,600 kcal) per day, with the addition of vitamins and trace elements. The fifth day after ingestion, he was transferred to the Center for Clinical Toxicology and Pharmacology. TPN with 1,477 mL of SmofKabiven® (12.7% glucose solution, 5.1% amino acid solution, 20% lipid emulsion; energy value 1,600 kcal) with micronutrients was continued daily. There was a transient delirious episode that required the temporary use of benzodiazepines. On the 10th day, a liquid diet was started in addition to parenteral feeding. Due to persistent dysphagia and odynophagia on day 13, a barium-contrast study was performed. It showed general esophageal dysmotility and diffuse stricture, with a residual lumen of 4–8 mm . During the study, an aspiration of the contrast agent occurred and antibiotic treatment was reintroduced. Two weeks after ingestion, parenteral nutrition was stopped and normal feeding was possible. The patient was discharged the 21st day after the event. Due to the esophageal stricture and dysphagia, he was referred to the thoracic surgeon for a planned surgical intervention.
One week after discharge, he was admitted to the regional hospital because the swallowing problems were getting worse and he also complained of new pain in the upper abdomen. Alternately, he received mixed food, which was well tolerated, and parenteral nutrition, which was gradually discontinued. After 5 days, he was discharged home with high-protein nutritional supplements. After an additional 5 days, he was hospitalized in the Department of Thoracic Surgery of the University Medical Center Ljubljana. Endoscopic dilation of esophageal stricture was attempted. Due to progressive dysphagia and persistent chest pain after the procedure, a CT scan was performed showing a perforation (shown in ). TPN and broad-spectrum antibiotics were introduced again. Two weeks later, a balloon gastrostomy with gastropexy was performed. A barium-contrast study of gastrostomy showed stalling of the contrast media in the gastric fundus and only after surgical jejunostomy enteral nutrition was resumed. Another attempt at endoscopic dilation was unsuccessful. Aspiration pneumonia and urinary tract infection co-occurred. Feeding-associated abdominal pain and nausea progressively worsened. CT results showed no apparent small intestine damage. Reoperation was performed with repair of the jejunostomy and Braun enteroenterostomy due to jejunal adhesions. Subsequently, the tube feed was well tolerated.
During these periods, no systematic nutritional evaluation was described. Feeding regimes were adjusted mainly to problems with the feeding route, not to his metabolic demands.
In the regional hospital, the control endoscopy was prematurely terminated due to severe esophageal stenosis and a successful endoscopic dilation of the esophagus was performed. In addition to jejunostomy feeding, parenteral feeding with SmofKabiven® 1,477 mL was introduced. The patient developed a depression adjustment disorder. Due to feeding-associated abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting, he was transferred to the Department of the Clinical Nutrition of Institute of Oncology Ljubljana. A detailed nutritional evaluation was performed, including measurements of body composition with bioimpedance (Quadscan 4000, Bodystat®) and densitometry (HologiC, Horizon W®). Resting energy expenditure was measured with an indirect calorimetry device (Cosmed Q-NRG®). The patient had lost 21 kg of body mass in the last 5 months. A loss of muscle mass and fat reserve was observed, and he was unable to walk. Due to food leakage through the gastrostomy and type 2 intestinal failure with cachexia, enteral nutrition was discontinued and TPN was introduced. Regular measurements of body composition with bioimpedance were used to monitor nutritional and fluid status. Body composition measurements with the bioimpedance analyzer are shown in .
The patient was diagnosed with COVID-19 and placed in isolation. Relatives were educated on how to administer parenteral nutrition. He was discharged on the 19th day of hospitalization and walking. His per oral intake was nil. An outpatient clinic checkup occurred 11 days after discharge. The patient had lost 1 kg of body mass since discharge, mainly due to a decrease in total body water of 1.2%. The water in the third compartment also decreased. It is important to understand that the fat-free mass index (FFMI), which represents the amount of lean mass, was on the higher side because the percentage of total body water was relatively high. On checkup in the outpatient clinic after 83 days, the percentage of total body water and fat-free mass index both decreased. In this case, it reflected low muscle mass, which is a marker of malnutrition [, ]. Taking into account the recent COVID-19 infection, the phase angle of 2.4° was a relatively good value. The second checkup was 83 days after COVID-19-positive results and after short hospitalization in a regional hospital due to urinary tract infection. Bioimpedance measurements revealed a reduction in body weight, mainly due to a decrease in total body water. The phase angle increased and remained relatively stable throughout the follow-up period. The patient was constantly improving his physical and psychological functioning. He received adequate support from family members who assisted him with daily physical activities.