A 69-year-old Caucasian male patient, with no significant medical history, was evaluated in the IJsselland hospital. Since 8 weeks he had been suffering from fatigue, intermittent fever and night sweats, weight loss (4 kg) and macroscopic haematuria. In addition, he complained of progressive muscle weakness in hands and legs as well as stiffness, numbness and tingling of both hands. He had gradually lost the ability to walk due to a lack of strength in his legs. Clinical symptoms started 2 weeks after influenza vaccination. Over the past 3 years he received influenza vaccinations twice without any complications.
Physical examination revealed weakness in both his upper legs and arms and a reduced sense of feeling in his right arm. Also, both hands showed signs of muscular atrophy of the thumb muscles with flattening of the ball. The tendon reflexes at his legs were normal.
Blood tests showed raised levels of erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), a mild normocytic anaemia, leukocytosis and normal renal function (creatinine 87 μmol/l) . At admission the urinalysis demonstrated no active urinary sediment. Three weeks after hospital admission, serology revealed a positive perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (pANCA) with positive myeloperoxidase (MPO)-ANCA at a titer of 46 E/ml (reference < 3.5 E/ml). It was unknown if the patient was MPO-ANCA positive in the past. Imaging studies with computed tomography scan (CT scan) of chest and abdomen, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of head and neck, and positron emission tomography with 2-deoxy-2[fluorine-18]fluoro-d-glucose with computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) revealed no abnormalities. No increase in cell count was seen during lumbar puncture. Cultures of cerebrospinal fluid, blood and urine as well as a tuberculin skin test and a quantiferon test were negative. Electromyography (EMG) showed decreased compound muscle action potentials (cmap) of the peroneal nerves of both legs and the tibial nerve of the right leg. All the additional research was done before administration of prednisolone. During hospitalization kidney function deteriorated, with a maximum serum creatinine level of 178 µmol/l (upper limit of reference value 104 μmol/l). Three weeks after hospital admission, the urinalysis became deviant with red blood cells (2+) and protein (2+), dysmorphic erythrocyes and/or red cell casts were not observed. Renal biopsy was conducted which revealed a small and medium-size vasculitis and tubulo-interstitial infiltration . Three out of ten glomeruli showed glomerulosclerosis. Additional immunofluorescence with IgA, IgG, IgM, C3 and C1q were negative.
Our patient was diagnosed having MPO-ANCA associated vasculitis with involvement of kidneys and peripheral nerves one month after admission to the hospital. Initial symptoms started two weeks after seasonal influenza vaccination. Because of rapidly progressive disease therapy was initiated with high dosages of intravenously administered prednisolone (1000 mg) for three consecutive days followed by oral prednisolone in tapering regimen, in combination with intravenous pulse cyclophosphamide (700 mg: 10 mg/kg adjusted for age and renal function) and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (480 mg daily) for Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia prophylaxis, according to the consensus regimen of the European vasculitis study group . The cyclophosphamide treatment was continued for three months, resulting in remission of the disease process. Levels of ESR and CRP dropped and renal function stabilized (serum creatinine levels 140–150 µmol/l). He was discharged from the hospital to a rehabilitation centre for further recovery. Patient continued on azathioprine for another 18 months. Remaining symptoms one year after initiation of treatment consist of distal sensory loss of hands and feet and loss of fine motor skills of the hands.