A 28-year-old Chinese primigravida presented at 29 weeks of gestation with an enlarging ovarian mass for four months and exacerbating pruritus for more than a month. She had been diagnosed with PCOS for two years because of oligomenorrhea and hyperandrogenaemia and finally conceived a singleton pregnancy via in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer (IVF-ET). At the 12th week, a routine sonographic examination accidentally observed a 3.5*2.6 cm cyst in her right ovary. From then, she noticed that acne gradually appeared on her face, upper chest and back, which did not concern her much. By the next follow-up at the 23rd week, her right ovary had grown to 14*11 cm, with multiple anechoic cysts inside. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) investigation two weeks later demonstrated the multilocular, solid-cystic nature of the mass, measuring 14*17*20 cm.
In the meantime, she developed pruritus at approximately 24 weeks, which was mainly confined to the extremities and worsened at night. The serum bile acids and transaminases were all normal at first. However, when the pruritus became more severe at the 28th week, a second test revealed a markedly elevated TBA level as high as 143 µmol/L, a mild elevation of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and abnormal tumour markers CA125 and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) . Primary liver and gallbladder diseases were excluded before ICP was diagnosed. Her pruritus was substantially relieved after initial treatment with 500 mg peroral ursodeoxycholic acid (UCDA) two times daily and 1500 mg intravenous S-adenosyl methionine (SAMe) once daily.
On admission, physical examination revealed excessive hair on the lower abdominal area and the extremities with a Ferriman–Gallwey score of 16 and extensive acne over her face and upper trunk, with no signs of virilization. Laboratory work-up found the following: serum testosterone > 52.0 nmol/L, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) 17.7 µmol/L, estradiol 2.8*105 pmol/L, progesterone > 191.0 nmol/L. While the levels of TBA and ALT were not much reduced, both the tumour markers were progressively increasing . Reevaluation by ultrasound showed continuous enlargement of the right ovarian cystic mass with medium blood flow , whereas the fetus appeared to be normal. However, her cervix was already 0.5 cm dilated with nearly complete effacement despite notable uterine contractions; hence, corticosteroids (4 doses of 6 mg intramuscular dexamethasone) were given in addition to UDCA and SAMe.
The patient was then reviewed by a multidisciplinary team. With full consent, she rejected immediate surgical intervention regardless of the possibility of an ovarian borderline or malignant tumour. Nevertheless, she had preterm premature rupture of membranes four days after admission, followed by the immediate onset of labour. A healthy female newborn was delivered uneventfully, weighing 1340 g at 30 weeks, with grade 3 meconium-stained amniotic fluid.
On the next day postpartum, the patient’s TBA peaked at 295 µmol/L, whereas her estradiol drastically plunged to 2.9*103 pmol/L. The pruritus soon disappeared as her TBA dropped to close to normal after a couple of days. Her serum progesterone and AFP also decreased quickly, but her DHEAS and CA125 were still increasing, when the testosterone level remained above the upper limit . Enhanced CT displayed a large oval-shaped, well-demarcated, multilocular cystic mass of 10*20*23 cm, with thickened walls and enhancement in the solid component. Also, a small number of ascites were seen, but there was no visible lymphadenopathy .
Laparotomy was performed one week after delivery. Apart from the extremely enlarged right ovary, her uterus and the left adnexa were otherwise normal, and she was negative for ascites. Thus, unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy was performed. The pathological and immunohistochemical examination of the tumour established the diagnosis of an intermediate differentiated Sertoli–Leydig cell tumour (SLCT), stage IC. Blood tests on the 4th postsurgical day showed regular levels of bile acids, transaminases and reproductive hormones. Her serum CA125 also decreased progressively and finally reached the normal range a month later . The patient had full resolution after adjuvant chemotherapy with four cycles of cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin. Her symptoms of hirsutism and acne gradually remitted within one year and there have been no signs of recurrence so far.