An 85-year-old man with apparent cornea arcus senilis underwent FLACS in the right eye. He had no systematic disease. The degree of nuclear hardness was IV, and his preoperative best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/1000. In the process of femtosecond laser-assisted cataract surgery (LenSx Laser; Alcon Laboratories, Inc., Fort Worth, TX, USA), the surgeon chose a biplanar model for the main incision; the outer turning point was located at the 40% layer of cornea, while the inner turning point was located at the endothelium layer . After the laser, the surgeon used a separator to separate the incision; however, it was somewhat difficult. Phacoemulsification was performed after separating the incision. A Stellaris phacoemulsificator (Bausch + Lomb Laboratories, Rochester, NY, USA) was used. The cumulative dissipated energy (CDE) was 35 s. DMD occurred at the end of phacoemulsification, which was located in the upper cornea and connected with the main incision. During aspiration, the range of DMD became larger . Unfortunately, the surgeon confused it with the transient swelling of corneal endothelium, which could have resulted from the phacoemulsification energy. Therefore, the DMD was not treated during the surgery. The patient experienced severe corneal edema postoperatively. His BCVA was hand motion at the first day postoperatively, and 20/200 at the one-week follow-up. Considering that the corneal edema resulting from the phacoemulsification energy would last for a long time postoperatively, the surgeon did not perform anterior segment optical coherence tomography (AS-OCT) on the patient at the early postoperative stage (1 day and 1 week). A topical steroid (dexamethasone) and a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) were prescribed for the patient, and each drug was given four times a day. However, after 1 month, limited corneal edema persisted in the central cornea, and her BCVA was 20/100. The AS-OCT (Carl Zeiss Meditec, Dublin, CA, USA) confirmed a typical DMD . Therefore, we did an intracameral perfluropropane (C3F8) gas (14%) injection for her. In the surgery, 0.3 mL C3F8 gas was injected into the anterior chamer through the inferior temporal incision (5 o’ clock), and the aqueous humor was drained out through the inferior nasal incision (8 o’ clock) at the same time. Both of incisions were located at the transparent cornea area. Finally, the normal intraocular pressure was ensured at the close of surgery. The patient was informed and signed his consent according to the institutional guidelines and in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration. After gas injection for 1 month, the cornea was transparent, and the BCVA increased to 20/40 . The patient achieved a BCVA of 20/30 by the time the 6 month follow-up visit occurred.