A left-handed, 87-year-old male unvaccinated for COVID-19 with a past medical history significant for a four-vessel coronary artery bypass graft in 2017, not on any anti-coagulation medications, and ischemic cardiomyopathy presented to our emergency department with acute-onset right upper forearm and right-hand pain. The patient reported severe, excruciating pain in his right upper extremity starting at the level of the elbow extending to his distal fingertips upon waking approximately two hours prior to presentation. He also reported paresthesias that were most prominent in his right hand. Prior to arrival, the patient took two full-strength aspirin tablets (325 milligrams), which did not provide any relief. The review of systems was otherwise unremarkable.
The patient’s initial vital signs were notable for temperature 36.6° Celsius, heart rate 89 beats per minute, respiratory rate 16 breaths per minute, blood pressure 189/82 millimeters of mercury, and oxygen saturation of 100% on room air. On physical exam, he appeared uncomfortable but was not toxic-appearing or diaphoretic. There was no palpable pulse in the right brachial artery, the right radial artery, or in the right ulnar artery. Examination of the right upper extremity demonstrated a cold and pale limb from the level of the elbow to the hand. All compartments were soft. Motor strength and sensation were intact.
Due to the concerning physical exam findings, a POCUS was performed by the emergency physician. The ultrasound findings demonstrated an arterial occlusion in the right brachial artery, with visible clot burden (, ). Color Doppler revealed no evidence of blood flow from the point of the occlusion in the antecubital fossa and distally . Vascular surgery was immediately consulted, and a heparin drip was ordered, along with analgesic medications and intravenous fluids. While laboratory studies were pending, vascular surgery evaluated the patient, and a decision was made to take the patient to the operating room for emergent repair with a right brachial artery thrombectomy. He also tested positive for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) but did not report any related symptoms.
Ultrasound was used intraoperatively to identify the proximal extent of the thrombus within the brachial artery. The brachial artery appeared clear of thrombus and embolus approximately three finger breadths proximal to the antecubital fossa. The clot was removed, and at the conclusion of the procedure the patient had palpable radial and ulnar pulses. Physical exam indicated the patient had Doppler signals in the right palmar arch after thrombectomy. Postoperatively, he reported that his pain and paresthesias had resolved.
The patient underwent further workup during hospitalization, which included a transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrating an apical left ventricular thrombus that was pedunculated and mobile. Ejection fraction was calculated to be 29%. A CT angiogram of the chest demonstrated no evidence of an ascending aortic or great vessel thrombus to explain embolization. The patient was continued on a heparin drip and subsequently transitioned to oral warfarin with a goal international normalized ratio (INR) of 2.0–3.0. He was discharged on post-operative day two with a 10-day course of therapeutic enoxaparin as a bridge until he reached a therapeutic INR. Chart review demonstrated no evidence of complications after discharge.