A 33-year-old female was admitted for suicidal ideations and acute psychosis. She had a past medical history of bipolar disorder, cocaine and amphetamine use disorder, hypertension, and GDM. She weighed 63.9 kg with a body mass index of 24 kg/m2, blood pressure of 141/94 mm Hg, and heart rate of 108 beats/min at admission. She had 2 random blood glucose levels of 146 mg/dL and 90 mg/dL on day 1 and 3, respectively. Urine drug screen was positive for amphetamines, marijuana, and cocaine. Her only home medication was hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg PO daily.
Upon admission to inpatient psychiatry, she required an emergency treatment order of chlorpromazine 100 mg intramuscular and lorazepam 3 mg intramuscular because of acute psychosis, severe agitation, and an attempt to elope and attack staff. Because of minimal improvement in severity of psychotic symptoms, on day 3 she was initiated on olanzapine 5 mg PO at bedtime and subsequently titrated to olanzapine 5 mg every morning and 20 mg PO at bedtime. Iron studies were completed on day 3 and ferrous sulfate 325 mg PO 3 times daily was initiated. Amlodipine 5 mg PO daily was initiated on day 6 and titrated to 10 mg daily on day 12 because of elevated blood pressure. On day 15, she complained of frequent urination and unquenchable thirst for the last 2 days. Blood glucose was checked, and she had 2 critical readings >500 mg/dL. No other blood glucose readings were taken after olanzapine was initiated; therefore, the onset of hyperglycemia was unknown. She was transferred to the emergency department and admitted to the inpatient hospital for further management. shows olanzapine total daily dose, blood glucose readings, and units of insulin administered throughout her admission.
On day 16, her hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) was 8% and insulin aspart sliding scale and insulin detemir 15 units subcutaneously twice daily were initiated. Olanzapine was continued by the hospitalist and psychiatry was consulted. Additionally, hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg PO daily was resumed, and ferrous sulfate was reduced to 325 mg PO daily. On day 17, the psychiatric pharmacist recommended to the psychiatrist to discontinue olanzapine as this may have contributed to her sudden onset of hyperglycemia and to initiate an alternative antipsychotic. The psychiatrist discontinued olanzapine; however, no alternative antipsychotic was initiated during the medical admission. There were no overt manic symptoms, psychosis, or suicidal or homicidal ideation documented in the psychiatry progress notes. Additional medication changes on day 17 included 1 dose of as needed hydroxyzine pamoate 25 mg, lisinopril 10 mg PO daily which was increased to 40 mg on day 19. Increasing amounts of insulin were required, despite discontinuing olanzapine and initiating a 45-gram consistent carbohydrate diet on day 18. Her blood glucose stabilized on insulin detemir 60 units subcutaneously twice daily and insulin aspart 15 units subcutaneously 3 times daily with meals in addition to sliding scale insulin aspart. On day 22, she was transferred back to inpatient psychiatry, and a 3 kg weight increase was noted from day 1.
Once she transferred back to inpatient psychiatry, she was largely at baseline and no longer experienced symptoms of acute psychosis, mania, or suicidal ideation. She agreed to begin ziprasidone 20 mg PO twice daily with meals for bipolar disorder maintenance therapy because of the lower metabolic risk compared to olanzapine. On day 24, her fasting blood glucose was 159 mg/dL, and she was discharged from inpatient psychiatry. Discharge diagnoses included bipolar disorder, amphetamine and cocaine use disorder, hypertension, microcytic anemia, and new onset diabetes mellitus. The discharge medication list included ziprasidone 20 mg PO twice daily with meals, insulin detemir 60 units subcutaneously twice daily, insulin aspart 15 units subcutaneously 3 times daily, lisinopril 40 mg PO daily, amlodipine 10 mg PO daily, hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg PO daily, and ferrous sulfate 325 mg PO daily. No follow up on blood glucose control could be obtained after discharge.