A 46-year old Italian female presented in June 2007 with 3 enlarged lymph nodes in her left groin without any systemic symptoms. She had no significant comorbidities and no underlying immunosuppression. An excisional biopsy showed diffuse proliferation of large lymphoid cells with several interspersed macrophages, which imparted a “starry-sky” appearance to the infiltrate . Immunohistochemical examination revealed that tumor cells were negative for CD20, CD79a, CD5, CD30, PAX5, Bcl-2 and Bcl-6, while showing positivity for CD138, MUM1 and λ light chain restriction . Anaplastic large-cell lymphoma kinase (ALK) and human herpes virus 8 (HHV-8) were also tested by immunohistochemistry, and were both negative. The Ki-67 proliferation index was 98%. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded RNA in situ hybridization (EBER) was negative. A diagnosis of PBL was made. A total body computed tomography (CT) scan showed at least five adenopathies in her left groin, the largest of which was 22 × 17 mm. A positron emission tomography (PET) scan confirmed several hypermetabolic lymph nodes in both groins and pelvis (SUVmax 11–14). Biopsy of the iliac crest showed no marrow involvement.
On admission, laboratory data were the following: white blood cells 9500/μL, hemoglobin 12.5 g/dL, platelets 313,000/μL; lactate dehydrogenase, calcium, serum proteins and immunoglobulin levels were all within normal ranges; protein electrophoresis and immunofixation showed no monoclonal component. Serology for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was negative.
From July to September 2007, the patient received 3 cycles of thalidomide and dexamethasone: thalidomide was given at the dose of 100 mg/day and dexamethasone at the dose of 40 mg/day on days 1–4 and 9–12 of each cycle. The rationale for the use of thalidomide in PBL relied upon the notion that increased angiogenesis plays a major role in aggressive lymphomas, as well as in MM . The post-induction PET scan showed no metabolically active lesions, thus being compatible with a complete response (CR).
Afterwards, the patient received maintenance therapy with thalidomide for 2 months, followed by peripheral blood stem cell (PBSC) mobilization achieved by the administration of high dose cyclophosphamide (7 g/m2) and granulocyte-colony stimulating factor (G-CSF): 7.2 × 106 CD34+/kg were harvested after a single apheresis. Following this procedure, the patient went back on thalidomide-dexamethasone for 3 more months, then she underwent an autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT), conditioned with melphalan, 200 mg/m2. 2.5 × 106 CD34+/kg PBSC were reinfused. The PET scan performed one month after ASCT confirmed a CR. In light of the good response achieved so far, it was decided to proceed with a second ASCT. The patient again received thalidomide-dexamethasone for 3 months, then 2.5 × 106 CD34+/kg PBSC were reinfused 2 days after melphalan conditioning. A CR was clinically and metabolically confirmed by PET scan after the second ASCT. The patient is now healthy and in durable CR after at least 10 years.
This retrospective study was approved by our institutional board and by our Ethical Committee (Comitato Etico Indipendente Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi di Bologna) and has been performed in accordance with the ethical standards of the Declaration of Helsinki. Patient provided a written informed consent to publish her data.