A 69-year-old woman was referred to our hospital for the investigation and treatment of elevated serum liver enzyme levels and obstructive jaundice. She also complained of tenderness in her right hypochondriac region. Laboratory tests revealed elevated levels of hepatobiliary enzymes (aspartate transaminase: 91 U/l, alanine transaminase: 249 U/l, alkaline phosphatase: 990 U/l, γ-glutamyl transpeptidase: 761 U/l, total bilirubin: 1.7 mg/dl) and jaundice. Carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, alpha fetoprotein, and protein levels induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist-II were within the normal range. The preoperative liver function test was classified as Child–Pugh grade A. Abdominal ultrasonography showed a cystic lesion in segment 4 (S4) of the liver . Computed tomography (CT) revealed a 4 cm multilocular cystic lesion with multiple septal formations showing a cyst-in-cyst appearance in S4 . In addition, a nodule extending from the left hepatic duct to the common bile duct was observed, which was suspected to have arisen from the cystic wall . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (ERC) showed a contrast defect from the left hepatic duct to the common bile duct, which was suspected to be a nodular lesion in the bile duct . Bile cytology and biopsy of the nodular lesion showed no malignant findings. Based on these findings, the differential diagnosis in this patient included IPNB and MCN-L which had malignant potential. In addition, because the tumor had a nodular part, the coexistence of a malignant neoplasm was suspected. The patient underwent left hemihepatectomy, including caudate lobe excision with bile duct resection and right hepatocholangiojejunostomy. The operative time was 574 min, and blood loss was 490 ml. Macroscopic findings of the resected tumor showed a 40 × 29 mm multilocular cystic lesion with a polypoid nodule prolapsing into the left intrahepatic bile duct and, confirming communication between the tumor and the bile duct . Microscopic findings revealed that the cyst wall was covered with columnar epithelium and OLS was observed extensively in the cyst wall stroma . Immunostaining showed that the cyst wall was positive for estrogen receptors (ER) . OLS was also observed in the polypoid lesion , and ER was positive in the polypoid lesion as well as cyst wall. Histopathological diagnosis was MCN-L and no malignancy was observed. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged 24 days after surgery. Follow-up imaging showed no evidence of recurrent disease 22 months postoperatively.