A 14-month-old previously healthy boy sought medical care at the fever clinic of our hospital with” fever for 2 days” as the chief complaint. The child developed fever on the evening of January 31, 2020. The child’s body temperature was 38.4 °C, and had dry cough, runny nose and decreased appetite. The child had a normal birth and growth history, and received vaccinations according to plan. Furthermore, the child was breastfed and ate age-appropriate food. The child tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) in the nasopharyngeal swab in the evening of February 1, 2020, and was admitted to the hospital with symptoms of fever, dry cough and running nose. The patient’s mother also tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR, and was admitted at the same time.
The physical examination at admission revealed the following: body temperature 37.6 °C (ear temperature), respiratory rate 23/min, pulse rate 105 beats/min, blood pressure 95/56 mmHg (1 mmHg = 0.133 kPa), and SPO2 99%. The child was fully conscious, and had a good response. The skin and mucosa were intact, with no signs of rash or bleeding points. The anterior fontanel was closed. The conjunctivae were clear without exudates or hemorrhage. The sclera was non-icteric. There was mild throat congestion, but no enlargement of tonsils. The patient presented no signs of respiratory distress. The breath sounds were clear bilaterally in all lobes, without rhonchi or crackles. The heart rate and rhythm were normal. No murmurs, gallops, or rubs are auscultated. The abdomen was soft and flat, with no signs of pain upon palpation. No masses, hepatomegaly, or splenomegaly were noted. The neurological examination was normal. The capillary refill was 2 seconds.
Laboratory examinations were performed on February 2 after admission. The results revealed the following. Nasopharyngeal swabs revealed negative results (colloidal gold-based immunochromatographic method) for influenza A and B virus, respiratory syncytial virus and adenovirus. In addition, the influenza A and B virus RNA (PCR method) was also found to be negative. Routine blood count: white blood cells 7 × 109/L (neutrophil 37.5%, lymphocyte 50.3% and monocyte 10.1%), hemoglobin 107 g/L, and platelets 353 × 109/L;C-reactive protein 7.6 mg/L; serum procalcitonin (PCT) 0.138 μg/L, serum aspartate aminotransferase 43 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 17 U/L, lactate dehydrogenase 223 U/L, creatine kinase isoenzyme 291.8 U/L, and creatinine 24 μmol/L; the coagulation analysis was normal and D-dimer 0.17 mg/L; immunoglobulin + complement: IgG 4.87 g/L, IgA 0.2 g/L, IgM 0.66 g/L, C3 0.69 g/L and C4 0.19 g/L; the T lymphocyte, B lymphocyte and NK lymphocyte subset analysis was normal; routine urine and stool analysis was normal. The chest computed tomography (CT) on February 5 revealed scattered ground glass opacities in the right lower lobe close to the pleura .
The possible route of transmission was investigated, and the following was revealed. The patient attended a family gathering event together with the patient’s mother and grandmother on January 20. One person who also attended the gathering recently went to Wuhan, but was asymptomatic at that time. The patient was subsequently diagnosed with COVID-19 on January 28. The child’s grandmother started to present symptoms of fever and minor cough at 3 days after the gathering. She tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR in the nasopharyngeal swab (negative results in urine and stool) on January 29, and was admitted to the hospital for treatment. Her chest CT presented signs of viral pneumonia. The patient’s mother presented with a symptom of nasal congestion without fever on January 31, and tested positive for SARS-CoV-2 by RT-PCR in the nasopharyngeal swab on February 1. The virus RNA in stool, urine, vaginal discharge and breast milk were all negative despite the repeated testing. The chest CT indicated viral pneumonia. The patient’s father tested negative for SARS-CoV-2 RNA on repeated tests.
After admission, the patient was treated with 1.5 million units of recombinant human interferon α-2b by aerosolization, twice daily, during a course of 7 days, and also received other symptomatic treatment. On the second day of admission, the patient’s body temperature returned to normal. The patient continued to have occasional dry cough, but the runny nose and appetite improved. The symptoms were completely relieved on February 8, with the disappearance of fever, cough and runny nose.
The test results for SARS-CoV-2 after admission: On February 5 (at 6 days after symptom onset), the virus RNA in urine was negative. On February 6, 7, 10, 14 and 25 (at 7, 8, 11, 15 and 26 days after symptom onset), the virus RNA in the nasopharyngeal swabs were positive. During the same period, virus RNA was also found to be positive in stool. On February 27 and 29 (at 28 and 30 days after symptom onset), the virus RNA tests were repeatedly negative in both the nasopharyngeal swabs and stool. The reevaluation of the chest CT on February 28 also revealed the resorption of ground glass opacities that were previously observed in the right lower lobe . The patient was discharged on February 29.