A 27-year-old woman of Arabic ethnicity, presented to the emergency department with a 24-hour history of central abdominal pain which she described as a tight band spanning from her right lumbar region to her left lumbar flank. The pain was of sudden onset, scored 10/10 and exacerbated by movement and eating. There was associated vomiting; clear vomitus and no haematemesis. Her bowels were opening regularly and there was no reported blood in her stools.
Prior to this, she presented to the emergency department four times within the last year, for a milder pain in her left iliac fossa radiating to her back, described as stabbing in nature. She did not have any lower urinary tract or any gynaecological symptoms. During these admissions she was treated for renal colic.
Her past medical history entailed oesophageal gastric reflux with no history of any connective tissue disorders.
On examination, she appeared in discomfort, was apyrexial but had a tachycardia of 117 beats per minute, with otherwise normal cardiorespiratory function.
Her abdomen was soft, with generalised tenderness, but specifically more in her right iliac fossa and left upper quadrant. Rovsing’s sign was negative and bowel sounds were sluggish.
On admission her haemoglobin was 11.7g/dL, white cell count 16.6×109/L, neutrophils 14.8×109/L, her renal, liver function, amylase and lactate were within normal limits.
An abdominal radiograph showed distended small and large bowel loops in the left upper quadrant and paucity of bowel gas in the rest of the image. A chest radiograph was normal.
She was resuscitated with intravenous fluids, given analgesia, antiemetics and started on antibiotics on the basis of an initial diagnosis of appendicitis, because the most tender point in her abdomen was in the right iliac fossa. However, further imaging was requested as the distribution of large bowel gas on the abdominal radiograph seemed abnormal.
An ultrasound (US) of her abdomen showed free fluid throughout her abdomen and pelvis. In the midline of her abdomen was a homogenous mass which resembled the spleen; no blood flow could be elicited on Doppler. The left upper quadrant contained no splenic tissue.
An urgent computed tomography (CT) was done which showed a grossly enlarged spleen at 17cm, with a long mesentery, located in her mid-abdomen. It was torted with resultant splenic infarction. In addition there was swirling of the splenic vessels as they passed inferiorly into her abdomen towards the spleen, which lay above her pelvis. The left upper quadrant showed no splenic tissue but multiple loops of thickened small bowel and free fluid throughout her abdomen and pelvis. Liver, gallbladder, kidneys and adrenals were reported as normal. Her appendix was identifiable and normal, with pelvic organs being unremarkable.
She was prepared for urgent laparotomy with findings of an infarcted wandering spleen in her mid-abdomen. Her spleen was enlarged to 20cm at its maximum diameter due to venous congestion and resultant infarction. There were no ligamentous attachments to her spleen and the tail of her pancreas was attached to the hilar vessels of her spleen which were on a long mesentery. The infarct was due to 360° twisting of the splenic hilum around the tail of her pancreas. Of note her caecum, right and transverse colon were dilated but there was no obstruction, and her small bowel and appendix were normal .
Her spleen was unrotated, her hilar vessels were divided close to her spleen with LigaSure™, taking care to preserve the tail of her pancreas, and a splenectomy was performed. The ends of her hilar vessels and pancreatic tail were closed with 1.0 Vicryl sutures. A saline washout was done, and a left Robinson drain was left at the pancreatic tail site, and a right Robinson drain left in her pelvis.
The histology report concluded that within her spleen there was extensive haemorrhagic tissue with a few small residual lymphoid aggregates. A few blood vessels with neutrophilic infiltration were present and the hilum showed blood vessels with minimal intraluminal neutrophilic exudate and neutrophilic infiltration of the vessel wall. In addition there was a surrounding small abscess formation within the hilar tissue. The features were consistent with splenic infarction of ischaemic origin. However, there was no evidence of granuloma or malignancy.
Her postoperative recovery was good; she was started on long-term penicillin V and was given Haemophilius influenza type B, meningococcal and pneumococcus vaccinations 2 weeks after her splenectomy. She was also commenced on long-term aspirin for postsplenectomy thrombocythaemia. The drains were removed after her amylase level was checked and found to be within normal serum levels.