A 12-year-old male with Crohn’s disease on prednisone, chronic granulomatous disease, as well as chronic Clostridium difficile infection on metronidazole presented to the emergency department (ED) with a chief complaint of dizziness. The patient and his mother reported that he had experienced several intermittent episodes of vertigo, sometimes associated with movement, as well as nausea and vomiting over the prior five days. Additionally, over the previous three days, the patient had become progressively more unstable with ambulation and required assistance to get to and from the bathroom. He otherwise denied headache, ear pain, recent infection, or other focal neurologic deficits. In consultation with his outpatient providers, the patient’s prednisone dose was increased from a baseline of 5 milligrams (mg) to 10 mg, and then up to 15 mg after one and two days of symptoms, respectively, due to concern for adrenal insufficiency.
Upon examination in the ED, the patient was noted to have normal vital signs for age, as well as normal cardiopulmonary and abdominal examinations. A detailed neurologic exam was notable for an unsteady, wide-based gait, at which time the patient reported a sensation of significant imbalance and intermittent vertigo. The remainder of his neurologic exam, including cranial nerves, sensation, motor strength, Romberg’s test, and heel-to-shin as well as finger-nose-finger testing, was normal. Given that these findings were concerning for a cerebellar pathology, neurology was consulted and the patient was admitted to the general pediatric floor for further workup.
An MRI of the brain obtained the following morning demonstrated T2/FLAIR hyperintensity in the dentate nuclei of the cerebellum. These findings were consistent with metronidazole toxicity as described above. The patient’s metronidazole was subsequently stopped in the afternoon. The following morning he had a significant improvement in symptoms. He had no further vertigo, vomiting, or gait unsteadiness and was discharged the following day.