A 76-year-old non-smoking Caucasian female presented to our hospital complaining of left-sided hemiparesis. She reported a long medical history of psoriasis, and she also reported being in a chronic HCV-carrier state. A brain CT scan showed a right-sided temporal lesion. The patient subsequently underwent neurosurgical excision of the lesion. A whole-body imaging study performed shortly thereafter revealed enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes and a lesion in the upper lobe of the left lung, indicative of malignancy. Additionally, the abdominal CT scan revealed multiple lesions in the liver and the spleen, while a post-surgery brain MRI revealed novel temporal and left occipital lesions. Histologic analysis of the tumor specimen surgically obtained from the brain revealed that the primary lesion was small cell lung carcinoma. The patient was therefore started on first-line chemotherapy with carboplatin AUC 6 plus etoposide 120 mg/m2 every 21 days for 6 cycles, which successfully led to a complete response of the disease. The patient also underwent cranial irradiation, receiving a total of 30 Gy. Two months after the completion of radiotherapy, the patient complained of visual impairment and was referred to an ophthalmologist. A diagnosis was made of secondary glaucoma caused by metastasis to the left iris . The patient declined to receive local radiotherapy to the eye. As a result, her visual acuity gradually declined. Additionally, permanent anisocoria was observed. Whole-body reclassification exams were subsequently performed, which showed significant disease progression in the chest. The patient was entered into a clinical trial and received oral pazopanib 800 mg once daily. However, after three months, while on the pazopanib therapy, the disease progressed and the patient was changed to oral topotecan 2.3 mg/m2 on days 1 to 5, every 21 days. However, three months later, the patient once again was diagnosed with disease progression. Additionally, she suffered severe clinical deterioration, with a significant decline in her performance status. Because of the severity of her condition and her poor performance status, the therapeutic approach was changed to best supportive care.