A 74-year-old man initially presented to our office with severe bilateral knee pain and radiographs revealing significant arthritic changes. The patient’s past medical history at that time included only asthma and benign prostatic hypertrophy for which he was receiving regular medical treatment. Standard preoperative medical evaluation and laboratory testing revealed no further abnormalities, and he subsequently underwent bilateral TKA. During the immediate post-operative period, the patient was diagnosed with non-insulin dependent diabetes, but otherwise progressed normally and was discharged to an in-patient rehabilitation unit without complication.
Two weeks post-operatively, the patient developed acute swelling, redness and pain of the left knee. Aspiration of the knee was sent for cell count and culture. The cell count demonstrated 39,000 white blood cells per cubic millimeter with 71% of white blood cells identified as neutrophils. Based on the local signs of infection and the significantly elevated synovial fluid white blood cell count, the patient was taken urgently to the operating room for an irrigation, synovectomy, debridement and polyethylene exchange. Cultures were sent from the operating room, and the patient was started on Vancomycin while cultures were pending. Synovial fluid cultures identified the presence of C. septicum, Enterobacter and coagulase negative Staphylococcus and blood cultures also revealed growth of C. septicum. C. septicum was found to be susceptible to Clindamycin and Penicillin. Given the presence of a clostridial species, consideration was given to proceeding with an urgent aggressive debridement with removal of implants, however the patient’s knee had appeared quite well since the debridement, and there were no signs of a worsening clinical picture. The intravenous antibiotic was changed to Penicillin G and was continued over a standard six week course. A future colonoscopy was scheduled by the department of infectious diseases, considering the presence of Clostridium septicum, and the patient was discharged back to an inpatient rehabilitation unit with an uncomplicated hospitalization.
Two weeks after irrigation and debridement, the patient had an episode of hematochezia and was subsequently hospitalized. During this hospitalization, the patient was diagnosed with an obstructive colon cancer, located at the hepatic flexure and distal transverse colon. The patient underwent a right transverse and partial left colectomy with nodal biopsy. Final pathology demonstrated both lesions to be adenocarcinomas, which were moderately differentiated and invasive, without nodal disease. There were no distant metastatic lesions seen on CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis. Given this patient’s histologic grade, lack of metastatic disease and gross pathologic findings, he was not deemed a candidate for post-operative chemotherapy. The patient’s post-operative course was complicated by the finding of bilateral popliteal deep venous thrombi, which were treated with a retrievable inferior vena cava filter and warfarin for six months. At six months follow-up from hemi-colectomy, blood work and CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated no evidence of recurrence or metastatic disease.
Nine months after the irrigation and debridement, the patient presented with a reinfected TKA, requiring a two-stage revision procedure for persistent chronic infection. C. septicum was not identified in the synovial fluid or tissue cultures at the time of antibiotic spacer block implantation. The patient underwent reimplantation of a revision knee arthroplasty, has now been off of antibiotics and asymptomatic for seventeen months.