An 82-year-old Italian-born Caucasian man was admitted to hospital because of heart failure and two falls without loss of consciousness the day before. On arrival, he was dyspneic with an oxygen saturation of 80% on room air. He had minor bruising on his chin and left elbow because of the falls.
He had a past history of myocardial infarction, hypertension, and chronic atrial fibrillation. His regular medications were diuretics, aspirin, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, and amiodarone. Physical examination showed that he was tachycardic and dyspneic at rest, with cyanotic lips. Coarse crackles were heard throughout both lung fields. A chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly and pulmonary edema. Arterial blood gas analysis showed pH 7.40, partial pressure of carbon dioxide 37.2mmHg, partial pressure of oxygen 45.9mmHg, and bicarbonate 23.4mmol/L. Electrocardiography showed atrial fibrillation and widespread ST depression. Laboratory tests showed elevated serum levels of CK (5308IU/L), myoglobin (3000ng/mL), and lactate dehydrogenase (81,955IU/L). Serum alanine and aspartate aminotransferase levels were also elevated, but MB-CK and troponin T levels were in the normal range. Echocardiography showed post-ischemic dilated cardiomyopathy resulting from his previous anteroseptal myocardial infarction. He was treated with intravenous furosemide, nitrates, and supplemental oxygen by simple face mask. His respiratory status improved slightly, his heart failure resolved, and his oxygen saturation slowly normalized. Five days later, his serum muscle enzyme levels were still elevated (CK >3000IU/L, myoglobin >3000ng/mL, and aldolase 47.2IU/L) and he complained of progressive muscle weakness (Medical Research Council grade 2-3/5), dysphonia, and eventually dysphagia. A neurological examination showed symmetrical severe proximal muscle weakness (grade 2/5 for hip flexion and extension, grade 2/5 for shoulder abduction and elbow flexion and extension). Electromyography showed fibrillations, positive sharp waves, and brief polyphasic motor unit potentials, mainly in the proximal muscles, associated with sensorimotor polyneuropathy. Slowed latency and reduced amplitude were detected in the tibial and sural nerves (1.8mV and 4.0μV, respectively). Motor nerve conduction velocity was 40.3m/s in the tibial nerves and 38.5m/s in the sural nerves. Because of these clinical and biochemical signs of myolysis, immunodiagnostic tests for inflammatory myopathies were performed. Antinuclear antibody was negative by indirect immunofluorescence but was positive on human epithelial cell type 2 cells (1:640), anti-extractable nuclear antigen antibody (immunoblotting) was positive for SSA and for two unknown bands (65 and 74kD), and anti-Jo1 was negative. Tumor markers were positive (carcinoembryonic antigen, alpha-fetoprotein, CA-125, and CA 15–3). Testing for viral antibodies was negative (cytomegalovirus, herpes virus, adenovirus, Coxsackie virus, echo virus, and hepatitis B and C virus). Complement and immunoglobulin levels were normal. Ten days later, a vastus lateralis muscle biopsy was performed. Immunohistological examination showed scattered necrotic and regenerating muscle fibers, minimal cellular infiltration, slightly increased endomysial connective tissue, no perifascicular atrophy, moderate upregulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-I with neoexpression on some non-necrotic fibers, multifocal MAC deposition in endomysial capillaries, and capillary loss . These features were consistent with necrotizing myopathy. Mild fiber type grouping, suggestive of a collateral reinnervation process, was also detected.
Total body computed tomography showed a nodular mass in the apex of the right lung (25mm in diameter), enlarged lymph nodes below the tracheal bifurcation, and left lower lobe pneumonia. No metastatic lesions were found, and there were no abdominal or cerebral abnormalities. The patient was diagnosed with paraneoplastic necrotizing myopathy, and corticosteroid treatment was started (prednisolone 1.5mg/kg/day) together with antibiotics for pneumonia. There was no significant clinical improvement. The steroids were continued and the CK level slowly decreased. However, his weakness did not resolve, and he died of progressive respiratory failure 40 days after admission. Subsequent examination of resin-embedded biopsy specimens using the transmission electron microscope showed typical pipestem changes in the endomysial capillaries (thickening of the basal membrane and deposition of amorphous material) and swollen endothelial cells . Morphometric analysis of cryostat sections stained for endothelial marker CD31 confirmed decreased capillary density (148.2/mm2; normal range 393±29/mm2) . Post-mortem examination provided histological confirmation of a neoplasm of the right lung (2.5cm diameter). The tumor was a partly necrotic, poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma that infiltrated the lung parenchyma, with lymph node metastases. The post-mortem examination also revealed bilateral bronchopneumonia and myocardial sclerosis. We did not treat our patient with chemotherapy or immunoglobulin because he had advanced cancer at the time of diagnosis and his prognosis was very poor. We did not test for anti-signal recognition particle (SRP).
We searched PubMed using the terms “necrotizing myopathy” and “paraneoplastic necrotizing myopathy”.