A 37-year-old man, who was otherwise healthy, suffered episodes of macroscopic hematuria. A solid polypoid tumor of 30 mm in diameter was evident in the bladder dome during the cystoscopy examination. A CT scan showed an exophytic tumor in the bladder dome infiltrating the perivesical fat . We performed diagnostic transurethral resection. Macroscopically, the tumor was mostly solid and rigid on resection with small areas of necrosis. The tumor did not have the macroscopic appearance typical of urothelial carcinoma.
Histologically, the specimen contained multiple, partially thermally bruised areas, most of which consisted of solid and in places papillary infiltrative tumor components. The tumor contained numerous areas with prominent nuclear atypia and distinct invasion into the subepithelial connective tissue and between the trapped bundles of detrusor smooth muscle. The tumor showed necrotic foci and some of the tumor cells showed clear cytoplasm, with conspicuous eosinophilic globules in places. A glandular tumor pattern was present in up to 5% of areas. Based on the microscopic appearance on HE sections we concidered so-called variant histology within the spectrum of urothelial carcinoma before receiving the immunohistochemistry results.
Immunohistochemically, the tumor expressed glypican-3 (GPC3), SALL4, broad-spectrum keratins (AE1/AE3) and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). The tumor showed localized expression of synaptophysin and CDX2 . The tumor was negative for epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), HepPar1, vimentin, keratin7, placental-like alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), CD117, CD30, OCT3/4, hCG, p63, and GATA-3.
The serum AFP level was 446 kU/L (normal range 0.7–7.3 kU/L), and the hCG and LD levels were within the normal ranges. The sonography findings on the testes showed no tumor changes or calcifications. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using locus-specific probes for NTF3 (12p13) and STAT6 (12q13) (SureFISH Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) showed no gains in chromosome 12p. The presence of isochromosome was not tested.
Due to atypical changes suggestive of diagnosis of urothelial carcinoma and foci of YST differentiation the tumor was histologically classified as high-grade urothelial carcinoma with YST differentiation.
The patient refused surgery and was treated with etoposide/cisplatin (EP) chemotherapy. After 2 cycles of EP, the AFP level rose to 2294 kU/L. The chemotherapy regimen was changed to the paclitaxel/ifosfamide/cisplatin (TIP) salvage regimen. After 4 cycles of TIP, the tumor size increased according to control CT. The AFP level plateaued at 2034 kU/L. Control cystoscopy showed an exulcerated lesion in the bladder dome bordered by a minimal circumscribed rim of reddened mucosa. Ultimately, resection of the bladder dome, urachus and umbilicus was performed 6 months after the diagnosis .
Tumor was localized in the distal part of the urachus and penetrated the bladder dome. A malignant epithelial tumor with a pattern typical of YST, mainly glandular and with a cystic arrangement, was noted. Satellite foci of the same tumor were observed outside the main tumor mass. The transition from the urothelium to the YST in an excised part of the bladder was very abrupt, without any dysplasia or in situ changes in the urothelium . We observed positive staining for SALL4 and GPC3. The tumor showed positive staining for keratins (AE1/AE3), and the intensity of the staining reaction was mostly strong within the cytoplasm of neoplastic cells; however, small foci of cells with weaker staining positivity were also detected within the tumor mass.
Immunostaining for GATA3, OCT3/4, KRT 7, chromogranin A and synaptophysins was negative. FISH did not detect any gain in the 12p region.
Based on these findings, we reclassified the tumors as EGYST penetrating into the bladder. Six months after treatment, the patient had no evidence of disease recurrence on CT and serum AFP levels were within the normal range.