A 15-year-old North African girl with no past medical history presented with fever and diffuse abdominal pain with vomiting for 3 days. A clinical examination found an altered general condition with 38 °C fever and peripheral signs of shock. Abdominal palpation revealed a diffuse guarding; there was no jaundice or other clinical signs of cholestasis.
Blood tests showed a total leukocyte count of 25,000 cells/mm3 with a predominance of neutrophils. Her hemoglobin level was 16 g/dl, C-reactive protein was 300 mg/ml, and creatinine was 1.69 mg/dl. There was cholestasis with high levels of conjugated bilirubin. Her amylase and lipase were respectively 423 U/l (normal 20 to 80) and 1152 U/l (normal 0 to 190).
An abdominal ultrasound (US) followed by an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a dilation of the biliary tree; her choledochus was 17 mm with no evidence of obstacle or gallstones. A free intraperitoneal fluid was also associated . Her pancreas was increased in size. She was diagnosed as having biliary peritonitis, even though imaging did not reveal lithiasis or hydatid cyst. She was admitted to the surgical intensive care unit. She was treated with antibiotic therapy (cefotaxime 1 g three times per day, gentamicin 160 mg daily) and metronidazole 500 mg three times per day. A fluid replacement was done until the onset of diuresis.
She underwent an emergency surgery with a midline laparotomy. There was a generalized biliary peritonitis related to a 1.5 cm perforation of the anterior face of her CBD . Cholangioscopy exploration of her choledochus did not find any lithiasis. Her pancreas was swollen and inflammatory. A plentiful peritoneal lavage, followed by a cholecystectomy and reparation of the biliary perforation on a T-tube drain, was performed.
After surgery, the T-tube average flow was 300 ml per day. On the 14th postoperative day, a cholangiography showed a normal aspect of the biliary tree and massive duodenal opacification . She was discharged on the 28th postoperative day. The T-tube was removed on the 42nd postoperative day. Postoperative magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP; Fig. ) showed an extrahepatic biliary stricture with moderated dilation of her intrahepatic bile ducts. There was no biological cholestasis. Regular follow up in the out-patient clinic did not reveal any clinical, biological, or radiological modifications.