A 39-year-old British Caucasian female in good general health with known history of rheumatoid arthritis presented to us complaining of recurrent bleeding from anterolateral arthroscopic portal of left ankle. She is known to have rheumatoid arthritis with no coagulation disorders. The patient had undergone arthroscopic synovectomy of left ankle done on 3 weeks previously, using 4.0-mm and 30 degree arthroscope under tourniquet control through anteromedial and anterolateral ports. There had been bleeding from the anterolateral port site post operatively but this had stopped quickly. The patient had been reviewed three times following the procedure by various doctors for similar problem who diagnosed as wound infection and discharged with assurance and oral antibiotics.
Clinical examination revealed tender, indurated, an expansile pulsatile mass of over the anterolateral port site on the left ankle and pain with range of motion of ankle. There was a 1 cm wound with a central necrotic area over a swollen area measuring 3 × 6 cm . The wound had a persistent slow ooze of bright red blood and on palpation the swelling was pulsatile. Both the dorsalis pedis and the posterior tibial arteries were palpable. Sensation and perfusion of foot was normal. A duplex scan was performed which demonstrated triphasic flow in the dorsalis pedis and a pseudoaneurysm of the anterior tibial artery. Normal flow was reported in the anterior tibial artery from the upper calf to the site of the aneurysm, in which no flow seen. The patient had two units of blood transfusion, as she was breathless, pale and haemoglobin level was found to be 8.2 g/dl. Plain radiographs of the ankle did not demonstrate any abnormality, unlike osseous erosion due to pulsatile pseudoaneurysm at central to lateral side of distal tibia (Jang et al 2008).
The patient was referred to the vascular team and underwent an urgent exploration. Intra-operatively, the findings were pulsatile mass with necrotic tissue, a moderately large cavity of pseudo aneurysm filled with fresh blood clots. The distal anterior tibial and dorsalis pedis arteries were isolated. The distal anterior tibial and proximal dorsalis pedis were found to be serrated and breached for 3 centimetres and in contact with sac. The damaged artery was identified proximally and distally and clamped . The clots from the sac were evacuated without compromising the blood supply to the foot. The patient made an uneventful recovery and was discharged to home after second look and closure of wound in 3 days. We reviewed her in outpatient clinic two weeks later, where she had made a good recovery with no residual symptoms.