We report a 39-year-old man who presented without specific symptoms at the general practitioner for a routine check-up due to an extranodal NK/T-cell lymphoma of the nasal type (ENKTL-NT) in clinical remission. During the physical examination, the general physician detected tachycardia. The ECG showed a rhythmic wide QRS complex tachycardia with a heart rate of 155 beats per minute that was interpreted as haemodynamically stable VT with an apical-anterior-lateral exit . An immediate transfer to our emergency department was organized. As the patient arrived with the still ongoing VT, the haemodynamic situation deteriorated towards cardiogenic shock with the need for electrical cardioversion. One synchronized shock (biphasic) with 100 J was not successful and induced VF that was followed by chest compressions for only a few seconds. Three defibrillations lead to an instable sinus rhythm that degenerated into a haemodynamically tolerated VT again. An endotracheal intubation could be avoided due to the short period of the resuscitation manoeuvres. An intravenous antiarrhythmic therapy regime consisting of continuous ajmaline, landiolol, and electrolyte substitution kept the ventricular rate at 120–150 beats per minute for 20 h with only short periods of sinus rhythm. TTE revealed a hyperechogenic zone of 3 × 2 cm in the apex of the left ventricle of unknown aetiology as well as a hypokinesia in this region and a small pericardial effusion (, see , ). An ischaemic cause of the rhythmic instability was ruled out by coronary angiography . Urgent electrophysiological examination with VT ablation was discussed but rejected due to the apical tumour. The VT could finally be terminated with a bolus of ajmaline 24 h after its onset. It was followed by a bradycardic sinus rhythm with short interruptions caused by VTs and VFs with the need of recurrent delivery of electrical shocks, addition of intravenous amiodarone as triple antiarrhythmic therapy, and intermittent overdrive pacing with a transvenous external pacer.
Blood tests showed slightly increased levels of NT-proBNP and high-sensitive cardiac troponin T . Diagnostic workup revealed a 5.5 × 2.5 × 3.5 cm–sized tumour with cardiac MRI (, see ) and PET-CT scan showed increased tracer uptake in the apical region , both highly suspicious of a metastatic relapse of the ENKTL-NT. Histological workup of an endomyocardial biopsy of the left-ventricular apical region confirmed this diagnosis . Of note, the biopsy forceps found little resistance in the tumorous tissue and perforated the apical region (see ). Luckily, transthoracic echocardiograms showed no increase of the pericardial effusion and the patient did not develop tamponade.
Seven days after the hospital admission a chemotherapy consisting of a 6-day run-in phase with dexamethasone followed by methotrexate and pegaspargase was initiated by our haematology department. Thereafter, no further arrhythmias were detectable, and the antiarrhythmic therapy regimen was stepwise deescalated to low-dose bisoprolol and amiodarone. The patient was supplied with a wearable defibrillator and was transferred to the haematology ward 18 days after admission and left our hospital in a good condition 3 days later. Antiarrhythmic medication to this time point included only amiodarone. Follow-ups at our department showed complete remission of the apical tumour and a normal systolic and diastolic function on TTE and cardiac MRI (see , ). To evaluate the indication for an ICD, we performed an EP examination. Prior to the EP examination, amiodarone was stopped, and no arrhythmias were inducible. Therefore, we did not re-instate amiodarone and removed the wearable ICD.