A 47-year-old man with a Model End-stage Liver Disease (MELD) score of 11 and liver cirrhosis associated with hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection underwent LDLT for HCC, with his 48-year-old elder brother as the living donor, in November 2004. He had received transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) 5 months before liver transplantation and was assessed as having a partial response according to the modified Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (mRECIST) . The patient had no history of other diseases, and there were also no diseases of note in his family history. The right lobe of the donor was harvested and weighed 710 g (graft-to-recipient weight ratio, 1.09). The donor and recipient had the same blood type. Preoperative abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed liver cirrhosis with three hypervascular nodules, diagnosed as HCC, which were 2.0, 2.5, and 2.8 cm in diameter and met the Milan criteria . Preoperative tumor marker levels were as follows: α-fetoprotein (AFP), 5 ng/ml; and des-ɤ-carboxy prothrombin (DCP), 327 mAU/ml. Pathological examination of the resected liver revealed one moderately differentiated HCC with necrotic change in a 2.4-cm area, and multiple well-differentiated HCC lesions measuring a few millimeters that appeared to indicate multicentric occurrence. Microvascular invasion was not seen . We used tacrolimus and mycophenolate mofetil (MMF) as posttransplant immunosuppressive agents; no steroids were employed. The early postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged 74 days postoperatively. He received epirubicin at a dose of 10 mg/m2 during surgery, but did not receive postoperative chemotherapy. He was followed up by abdominal ultrasonography (US) every 3 months and by abdominal CT at 1, 3, 6, and 12 months after surgery, and every 6 months thereafter. The AFP and DCP levels were checked monthly. Lamivudine was administered to control HBV virus, and HBV DNA was consistently negative after transplantation. In September 2006, 22 months after LDLT, he visited a nearby hospital with a chief complaint of discomfort on swallowing. A pedunculated polyp was found in the hypopharynx , and biopsy revealed HCC metastasis. Cervical CT revealed a pharyngeal polyp on the right side of the epiglottis; also, faint fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) accumulation was recognized, consistent with a pharyngeal polyp on FDG positron emission tomography (PET)-CT examination . Polypectomy was performed on October 2006. Histological examination revealed that the tumor cells were positive for anti-hepatocyte antigen staining and a diagnosis of metastasis of HCC was made . He was administered tegafur/gimeracil/oteracil (TS-1) after polypectomy. Two years after pharyngeal polypectomy, recurrence in neck lymph nodes was detected , and neck lymph node dissection was performed. Recurrence subsequently occurred three times in the graft liver, and local treatment with TACE and radiofrequency ablation therapy was performed. The patient was started on oral sorafenib 3 years ago, is still alive 12 years and 10 months after recurrence of pharyngeal metastasis, and is now a tumor-free outpatient in good health continuing to take a low dose of sorafenib .