A 47-year-old Indonesian male presented with double vision, especially when he stared at an object. The right eyelid had been drooping for a few months, and within 2 months, it had been getting worse and had now completely closed. His eye movements were restricted in all directions, and his right face felt tingling. The patient complained of a headache for 2 months. The headache felt like a knot, especially on the right side of the head, with a Numerical Rating Scale of 5–6.
Physical examination showed right eye ptosis, swelling, total ophthalmoplegia in the right eye, and hypoesthesia over the left V1 region . Laboratory investigations showed increased C-reactive protein of 5.2 mg/dl, increased D-dimer of 1100 ng/ml, increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 89 mm/h, and increased fibrinogen of 864.6 mg/dl. Other laboratory results were within the normal limit – international normalized ratio (INR): 1.03, partial prothrombin time (PPT): 11.7 s, activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT): 30.2 s, blood urea nitrogen (BUN): 13 mg/dl, creatinine (Cr): 0.6 mg/dl, blood sugar (BS): 127 mg/dl, sodium (Na): 131 mEq/l, potassium (K): 3.7 mEq/l, chloride (CL): 97 mEq/l, serum glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT): 17 U/l, serum glutamic-pyruvic transaminase (SGPT): 10 U/l, hemoglobin: 12.6 g/dl, hematocrit: 38.6, leukocytes: 9.39×103/μl, and thrombocyte: 409×103/μl.
MRI of the brain showed suitable cavernous thickening until the right orbital apex (on the right cranial nerves III, IV, and VI course), which in contrast showed enhancement suggestive of right Tolosa–Hunt syndrome. With magnetic resonance angiography of his brain, there were no pictures of stenosis, aneurysm, or vascular malformation . The patient was treated with a high-dose steroid IV and steroid topical in the right eye, but the complaints did not improve. After treatment, he complained of blurred vision and blindness in the right eye, as well as continuous correct eye-watering. The visual acuity was 1/60 in the right eye.
The patient received a digital subtraction angiography examination. Cerebral angiography revealed a partial thrombus in the right cavernous sinus . Optical coherence tomography showed subretinal fluid with pigment epithelial detachment in the right eye with a central retinal thickness reaching 625 μm . An oral and maxillofacial surgeon first saw the patient. His panoramic photo showed opacity at the tips of the right second and third maxillary molars . The extraction of the right maxillary molars was carried out immediately. The patient was treated with the antibiotic metronidazole (500 mg) two times per day and cefixime (200 mg) two times per day. An anticoagulant was added in the form of rivaroxaban 10 mg/day. The patient improved in 3 weeks, his visual acuity became 5/60 in the right eye, and the optical coherence tomography examination got better with the central retinal thickness reaching 436 μm.