A 50-year-old man was admitted to our cardiovascular surgery department with an 8-month history of dizziness and a discovery of IAFB for 4 months. He had a sudden dizziness 8 months ago and the computed tomography (CT) indicated cerebral stem infarction. Cerebral angiography was performed at the local hospital, and he was treated with aspirin and atorvastatin calcium. About 4 months ago, the symptom of dizziness reappeared with limited movement of left upper limb. CT revealed new multiple cerebral infarctions and IAFB. The patient was therefore prescribed with rivaroxaban 10 mg/d for 6 months. In order to retrieve the IAFB, the patient was transferred to our hospital.
The physical examination of the patient showed no obvious abnormalities. The neurological examination showed the left upper limb muscle strength score was level 2. Brain CT scan revealed multiple softening foci appeared in left frontal lobe, right parietal lobe and right cerebellar hemisphere . Echocardiography demonstrated strong echo foreign bodies in ascending aorta and aortic arch . A further three-dimension X-ray images revealed a linear, high-density shadow within the aorta, part of which was wrapped around the aortic arch, with one end entering the right common carotid artery and the other end located in the thoracic and abdominal aorta . He was diagnosed as IAFB and referred for emergent open surgery.
The patient was placed in the supine position, sternotomy was performed with a mid-sternal incision and fully exposed the heart, ascending aorta and aortic arch. After systemic heparinization, an arterial perfusion tube (18Fr) was inserted via the right subclavian artery and a venous bipolar drainage tube (32/34Fr) was inserted into the right atrium to establish extracorporeal circulation. At the same time, a left heart drain was left in place via the right superior pulmonary vein, and a coronary retrograde perfusion tube was inserted through the right atrium to retrogradely perfuse cardiac arrest fluid (DelNido) through the coronary sinus. After the body temperature dropped to 28 °C, paused the extracorporeal circulation, and the right subclavian artery was selected for selective unilateral cerebral perfusion (10 ml/kg/min). The root of the ascending aorta was incised, three segments of the guidewire could be seen in it, part of which was adhered to the proliferative aortic intima. The proliferative adhesion part was peeled off and the guidewire was removed. Further exploration of the descending part of the aortic arch discovered another section of the guidewire, which was carefully retrieved . All of the guidewires were successfully removed from the aorta , and the post-operative radiograph revealed no residual high-density shadows . Finally, thorough irrigation with physiological saline solution, the injured aorta was repaired with 3–0 prolene suture and spacer. The chest was closed and a drainage tube was placed in the mediastinum. The patient recovered well without complications, and he had no new cerebral infarction during the follow-up periods.