A 43-year-old man, a Nigerian of Yoruba ethnicity, presented with 6-year history of progressive abdominal swelling associated pain, weight loss and weakness on mild exertion. He had no facial or leg swelling, symptoms suggestive of impaired renal function, jaundice, vomiting and change in bowel habit.
He admitted to a recent history of early satiety. He had attended five different hospitals and had various investigations and treatments at different times for what was thought to be ascites of chronic liver disease before presenting at our centre. The rapid increase in the abdominal swelling and the increasing difficulty/inability to lie or sleeps in the supine position without dyspnoea a month prior to presentation were of great concern to the patient.
On examination, he was wasted, afebrile, anicteric, dyspnoeic and had finger-clubbing grade II but without other stigmata of chronic liver disease. He was well oriented, conscious and alert, and had globally intact cranial and motor functions.
Abdomen showed massive non-mobile cystic distension with positive fluid thrill but not shifting dullness. Liver and spleen were difficult to assess, so was balloting the kidneys. Hernia orifices, external genitalia and digital rectal examination were normal. Clinical differential diagnosis of omental cyst and mesenteric cyst (Probably haemorrhagic cyst) was made.
The patient full blood count, liver function test, fasting blood sugar, Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBs Ag), urinalysis, PT and PTTK were normal. He has had Fine needle aspiration of the liver for cytology in one of his previous hospital visits and it was normal. Abdominal ultrasonography showed intra thoracic displaced normal sized liver with no focal intra-parenchymal lesion, bilateral hydroureteronephrosis worse on the right and a huge multiseptated cystic mass having some scattered mobile bright internal echoes (presumed to be haemorrhages) and irregular solid components. There was neither ascites nor lymphadenopathy. Sonographic impression of mesenteric cyst or omental cyst with suspected malignant transformation was made. Plain abdominal radiograph attempted could not penetrate the mass for diagnostic image even at maximum output attainable due to the size of this mass having an anteroposterior diameter of about 74 cm.
Patient was planned for exploratory laparatomy but he defaulted to represent six months later in respiratory distress, whence he was cachetic, could no longer lay supine for a month, and anaemia had occurred (PCV = 22%.). Ultrasonographic findings this time was still similar to the former except for the increased and aggregating internal echoes presumed to be blood clots. Hence, an impression of haemorrhagic complex intra abdominal cyst (?mesenteric, ?omental) with probable malignant transformation was made.
He had two pints of blood transfused and emergency exploratory laparatomy under general anaesthesia with endotracheal intubation. Findings at surgery were huge distended abdomen with dilated, tortuous vessels on the anterior abdominal wall and on the parietal peritoneum, huge omental cyst, containing about 35 litres of brownish fluid, and some solid components with areas of necrosis. The mass displaced the stomach and liver upwards, the transverse colon inferiorly, spleen laterally to the left and was adherent to the anterior abdominal wall. There was minimal ascites. He had complete excision of the cyst, which contained 35 litres of brownish fluid and weighed 37 kg .
Anaesthesia was maintained with 100% 02 + Halothane, muscle paralysis with intravenous (IV) 100 mg suxamethonium for intubation then maintained with 6 mg bolus pancuronium followed by intermittent IV 2 mg pancuronium. Halothane was discontinued intraoperatively because of low blood pressure. Anaesthesia was reversed with IV 1.2 mg atrophine and IV 25 mg Neostigmine.
Intraoperatively patient had 10 litres of 0.9% (isotonic) Saline, 4 pints of blood and 10 mls of 10% calcium gluconate. Urine output was 500 mls over the 2 hours that surgery lasted. He was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for monitoring and elective mechanical ventilation. While at the ICU, he had increasing abdominal distension that yielded frank blood on abdominal tap.
He was re-explored and about 1.2 litres of free intra-peritoneal blood oozing from engorged parietal paritoneal vessels was evacuated. There was no area of active visceral bleeding seen. Haemostasis was secured with suture ligation of the oozing parietal peritoneum vessels, through and through apposition of the laxed anterior abdominal wall with sutures and application of abdominal pack and gauze on the anterior abdominal wall held with crepe bandage for tamponade effect. Further 8 litres of isotonic saline and 6 pints of fresh whole blood were given and intravenous calcium gluconate was repeated. Post-operative analgesics and antibiotics were commenced. Vital signs such as respiratory rate, pulse rate and blood pressure improved considerably within 6 hours. He was extubated 16 hours post re-exploratory surgery and continued on intranasal oxygen. By the second post-operative day, he was stable enough and he was commenced on oral intake. He was returned to the surgical ward on the third postoperative day.
Histopathology of the removed specimen showed omental fibrosarcoma. Patient has been follow-up for 8 months and he remains well (see postoperative photograph 6 month later in ) and had no evidence of recurrence.