A 59-year-old European male patient suffering from dilated cardiomyopathy with severely reduced left ventricular function and presenting with NYHA III underwent cardiac transplantation in 2004. Myocarditis turned out to be the main reason for subsequent dilated cardiomyopathy, which was a result of a tick bite and borreliosis infection 10 years prior. The patient remained stable with conservative therapy for approximately 5 years after the tick bite but needed an automatic implantable cardioverter defibrillator in 1999. Finally, he was sent to our department with worsening cardiomyopathy and increasing dyspnea. At that time, the patient had already received recurrent cycles of levosimendan therapy, and his clinical condition worsened. Comorbidities included arterial hypertension, noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus type II, diabetic polyneuropathy, moderate secondary pulmonary hypertension and hepatic steatosis.
In 2004, a blood group-, size- and weight-compatible donor organ was offered, and heart transplantation was performed. The patient received a donor heart from a 45-year-old male who died due to spontaneous subarachnoid bleeding. The donor had a history of smoking (less than 5 cigarettes per day). The electrocardiogram was normal, and X-rays showed minor basal dystelectasis. Echocardiography revealed mild mitral regurgitation without other pathological findings. An invasive left heart catheter was not performed at that time, although the patient was 45 years of age. No report of CAD or a previous PCI was evident at that time.
The patient successfully underwent heart transplantation without complications. The CDC crossmatch was negative. After induction therapy with anti-thymocyte globulin, the patient commenced an immunosuppression regimen of cyclosporine A in combination with mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone. He was transferred to the regular ward within 1 week and underwent the usual follow-up treatment, which included routine immunosuppressive target level controls, echocardiography, chest X-rays and endomyocardial biopsies. The patient was sent to rehabilitation after 23 days. Echocardiographic controls during the first 12 months showed normal systolic function. Our routine follow-up protocol to exclude CAV consisted of invasive coronary angiograms at 1, 3, 5, and 7 years at that time. Therefore, a coronary angiography was performed in another center for routine follow-up 1 year after transplant. Normal findings with only slight wall irregularities were reported. We analyzed the fluoroscopy data and identified the stents on this angiogram. In November 2007, a second left heart catheterization for routine control was performed. This examination revealed a post-PCI result with a stent in the circumflex coronary artery (CX) and in the right coronary artery (RCA) without relevant stenosis. Our transplant team could exclude any PCI occurring between transplantation and this finding. Therefore, the two preexisting stents had been transplanted in the donor heart . The next routine angiography, 7 years posttransplant in 2011, confirmed a sustained good result for the RCA stent, but the stent in the CX exhibited a 50% in-stent restenosis. The corresponding echocardiography results still showed good left ventricular function. A follow-up angiogram 6 months later revealed a progression towards 90% stenosis in the CX. Based on that finding, PCI was performed, and the stenosis was re-stented (Xience Prime 3.0 × 15 mm, Abbott, Chicago, IL, USA). No change in immunosuppressive therapy was performed, as the patient tolerated the current protocol well and refused a change in therapy. In 2015, the last angiography confirmed a good overall vessel status with a good PCI result and no further stenosis. The patient had his last visit in our outpatient department in April 2018 and is still doing well without any restrictions.