A 20-year-old female who presented with an intermittent fever for two years and double lower limb numbness and weakness for one month was admitted to hospital in January 2015. In April 2013, she underwent a right lung pneumonectomy for “lung cancer,” while the postoperative pathology referred to a “necrotizing granulomatous mass.” Seven months after the operation, a computed tomography (CT) scan showed an enclosed outstanding mass in the right chest wall . Thereafter, the patient was hospitalized three times due to a repeated fever and multiple bump biopsies from the enclosed outstanding mass; however, there was no clear diagnosis. One month before this admission, in addition to a fever, the patient suffered from worsened lower limb numbness and weakness, difficulty walking, and dysuria. In the past, she was healthy and had good nutrition.
A physical examination showed an abnormal and oncotic hard mass (10 cm × 5 cm) that protruded from the right chest wall. A 0.3-cm-diameter external fistula was seen in the central part of the pack , which oozed a nonodorous, yellowish turbid liquid. Coarse sounds without moist rales or rhonchi were heard with left lung auscultation. Superficial feeling of the abdominal wall was decreased from the T7 and T8 level, while a deep feeling was present. Muscle strength for both lower limbs was decreased: 1° right and 3° left. Muscle tension of both lower limbs was also diminished. The bilateral Babinski sign was positive, but concavity swelling of the lower limbs existed.
Laboratory tests showed a white blood cell count of 18.21 × 109/L, a hemoglobin level of 82 g/L, a platelet level of 509 × 109/L, a C-reactive protein concentration of 98.00 mg/L, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 98.00 mg/L, and negative 1-3-β-D glucan and glactomannan (GM) tests. Post right pneumonectomy, the thoracic CT scan revealed uneven density flake soft tissue shadows in the right chest cavity, multiple sizes of nodules in the left lung, a soft tissue mass (12.5 cm × 5.9 cm) around a small pneumatosis in the right chest wall, and a reduced density in the right liver lobe near the diaphragmatic top (January 2015, Fig. ). The thoracic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) results showed that a space-occupying lesion existed in the right pleural and chest wall with the T3-6 vertebral body and the right rib damaged, invading the spinal channel and spinal cord (January 2015, Fig. ).
A biopsy through the right chest wall mass and thoracic mass by fistula of chest wall showed broad nonseptate hyphae with right-angle branching, consistent with mucormycosis . The mucormycosis was widely disseminated, invading the lung, skin, liver, vertebrae, and spinal cord.
The patient quickly developed type II respiratory failure. A noninvasive ventilator assisted breathing, and intravenous amphotericin B (AmB) was administered. When the dose of AmB increased to 0.5 mg/kg/day, with the cumulative dose reaching 150 mg, mental disorders (agitation, fear, etc.) and cardiac arrhythmias occurred. The adverse events disappeared when AmB was changed to liposomal AmB.
After treatment for 28 days, the patient’s body temperature became normal and her respiratory function as well as lower limb sensory and motor function recovered. The size of the right chest wall mass became smaller, and the fistula dried. Laboratory and imaging examinations indicated that the lesions of the lung, liver, and thoracic vertebrae were significantly smaller. The patient was discharged back to the local hospital for further antifungal treatment and had recovered by the 3-month follow-up exam, and plastic surgery was suggested to repair the thoracic wall.