A 59-year-old female presented to the emergency department with altered mental status and blurred vision in February 2021. Her past medical history was significant for aortic valve replacement and ascending aortic aneurysm repair in 2017 complicated by periaortic abscess secondary to M. chimaera infection. She underwent repeat aortic valve replacement and ascending aortic aneurysm repair with placement of amikacin beads around the new graft in January 2021. She had been receiving azithromycin, ethambutol, rifampin, and amikacin as systemic anti-mycobacterium treatment. On initial presentation, her dilated fundus exam showed numerous yellow placoid circular lesions scattered throughout the macula and peripheral retina in both eyes with associated vitritis . She underwent extensive workup, including brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which showed no acute infectious lesions. Her infectious workup was unremarkable except for a positive toxoplasma IgM, for which she was started on sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim in addition to her M. chimaera treatment regimen. She was then discharged to a skilled nursing facility.
The patient sustained a fall 1 month later and was admitted to the hospital again. Her workup included head computed tomography (CT) which showed new numerous scattered round foci of hyperdensity throughout the cerebrum and brainstem thought to be foci of M. chimaera infection. Clofazimine was added per culture and sensitivity from her initial paraaortic abscess. Her cognition markedly improved 1 month later. MRI brain at that time showed mild decrease in conspicuity and number of these intensities while on anti-mycobacterium treatment. She was seen in retina clinic 2 months later where her exam showed similar retinal lesions with no associated vitritis or anterior chamber cell in bilateral eyes, suggesting lack of active infection. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) macula showed parafoveal cystoid macular edema (CME) bilaterally. She was started on non-steroidal anti-inflammatory eye drops and prednisolone acetate eye drops with improvement in CME 4 months later. She is currently on a monthly eye drop taper and will follow up in clinic again in 3 months. The patient demonstrated good adherence to this eyedrop regimen. She tolerated the treatment well without any concerns or complications.
On a follow up phone call with the patient’s partner, she has reflected that she is pleased with her evaluation and treatment at our institution. She feels her vision has improved, which has helped with her daily functions. She is very grateful that our assessment aided in guiding her systemic treatment of the M. chimaera infection and hopes the shared knowledge of her case aids the ophthalmology community in addressing this diagnosis in other patients.