A 56-year-old female patient presented with anorexia, a headache, and occipital swelling. The patient had lost 16 kg of body weight over the past 7 months due to anorexia. The neurosurgery department performed magnetic resonance imaging of the head, revealing multiple intracranial and epicranial tumors . Following this, the patient was referred to our hospital for further examination. The patient had a history of left ovarian cyst and no oral medications. A thoracoabdominal CT scan showed left renal cancer with multiple metastases to the right kidney, right adrenal gland, and lung . Blood tests indicated anemia (hemoglobin level: 8.7 mg/dL) and elevated corrected calcium (11.6 mg/dL), and C-reactive protein (15.4 mg/dL) levels. Platelet count exceeded 500 000/μL, but no blood coagulation abnormalities were observed. The pathology results of the CT-guided needle biopsy of the left renal tumor confirmed clear cell RCC, staged as cT3aN1M1, and the patient's risk status according to the International Metastatic RCC Database Consortium was poor.
Initially, SRT was performed for the metastatic brain tumors, and a prescription dose of 35 Gy was selected for all metastatic brain lesions. After 17 days, the patient began combination therapy with pembrolizumab (200 mg) and lenvatinib (20 mg). The next day, mildly elevated blood pressure (Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events v5.0 grade 1) was observed. On day 29, erythema on the face and trunk (grade 1) and oral hemorrhage (grade 1) were observed, which were considered side effects of lenvatinib, and the platelet count decreased to 87 000/μL (grade 1). On day 30, the patient suddenly lost consciousness, with a massive increase in blood pressure (grade 4). Emergency CT scans revealed a massive multifocal ICH, likely originating from the irradiated tumors, that caused a midline shift of the brain . Despite intensive treatment to reduce intracranial pressure, the cerebral hemorrhage worsened, and the patient died the following day .