In 2007, an otherwise healthy 75-year-old woman was admitted with progressive dysexecutive and behavioral syndrome, drowsiness, dysarthria and cerebellar signs, starting eight months earlier after severe bronchitis (Additional file ). Neurologic examination revealed a pseudobulbar syndrome resulting in dysarthria and mild dysphagia, gait instability, bradydiadochokinesia, dysmetric finger-to-nose-test and saccadic eye movements. No fasciculations or tongue fibrillations occurred, eutrophic muscles had normal tone, pyramidal signs were negative, masseter reflex and motor-evoked potentials (MEPs) normal, EEG without epileptiform discharges, the patient had no fever or epileptic seizures. Electromyography showed generalized acute denervation and chronic neurogenic changes, nerve conduction studies showed motor-dominant neuropathy. MRI showed global atrophy and multiple white matter lesions . Body CT with contrast and immunofixation was unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) had elevated protein (90.1 mg/dl), normal cell count (3/μl) and no antibodies against CV2, Hu, Yo, Ri, Amphiphysin or acetylcholine receptors.
Five months later, pseudobulbar symptoms and cerebellar ataxia worsened. Fasciculations appeared at the trunk and all extremities showing an asymmetric but generalized spreading pattern. Bulbar symptoms, paresis and atrophy of limbs, shoulder girdle and hand muscles evolved. There was an increased muscle tone without hyperreflexia. MEPs remained physiological. The diagnosis of ALS was made (probable ALS according to revised El Escorial criteria) and treatment with riluzole started. The patient had no family history of ALS. After three months, the patient received percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy and non-invasive ventilatory support. She died 18 months after symptom onset.
Given some early symptoms not characteristic for ALS such as cerebellar signs, archived CSF and serum were tested for neuronal surface autoantibodies and revealed high titers (1:3200 in serum, 1:320 in CSF; cell-based assay, Euroimmun, Lübeck, Germany) of GABABR IgG antibodies, while approximately 30 further antibodies (including LGI1, Caspr2, GABAA and AMPA receptor) were negative.