A 43-year-old Japanese woman was followed for AIH for 5 years and has been prescribed oral steroids. She had a medical history of cerebral hemorrhage. During her medical checkup, a hypoechoic nodule in segment 6 (S6) of the liver was detected by abdominal ultrasound (US). It was initially diagnosed as a simple cyst. The nodule gradually increased from 7 mm to 12 mm in diameter over a 4-year period. On physical examination, there were no abnormalities. A laboratory examination showed no remarkable abnormalities: aspartate aminotransferase 19 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 19 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 168 U/L, γ-glutamyltransferase 11 U/L, total bilirubin 0.5 mg/dl, albumin 3.90 g/dl, platelet counts 32.1 × 104/μl, and prothrombin time 113%. Serum IgG level was 2566 mg/dl. Tumor markers were within normal range: α-fetoprotein 1.2 ng/ml, protein-induced vitamin K absence-II 16.0 mAU/ml, carcinoembryonic antigen 0.3 ng/ml, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 8.1 U/ml. Hepatitis virus markers were all negative.
Abdominal US revealed a round hypoechoic homogeneous nodule, 12 mm in diameter . It was enhanced in the arterial dominant phase followed by defected in the post vascular phase by the contrast medium. Plain computed tomography (CT) showed low density in S6 of the liver and contrast-enhanced CT demonstrated that the nodule was slightly enhanced in the arterial dominant phase followed by perinodular enhancement in the portal and late phases . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed low signal intensity on the T1-weighted image (T1WI) and slightly high signal intensity on the T2-weighted image (T2WI). On the diffusion-weighted image (DWI), the lesion showed high signal intensity. Gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethlenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA)-enhanced MRI showed similar findings as contrast-enhanced CT and subsequently presented the defect in the hepatobiliary phase .
The preoperative diagnosis was HCC. Because there was a risk of intraabdominal seeding, we did not perform percutaneous needle biopsy of the nodule. The patient received laparoscopic right posterior sectionectomy. The cut section of the resected liver showed a well-demarcated, round, yellowish-white lesion measuring about 14 mm.
Pathological examination revealed a nodular lesion without fibrous capsule. The lesion was infiltrated by small lymphocytes and plasma cells, and germinal centers were present . Marked lymphoid cell infiltration was found in the portal tracts around the nodule . Although many small granulomas were found in the lesion, infectious pathogens were not found on periodic acid-Schiff, Gomori-Grocott, or Ziehl-Neelsen stainings. Immunohistochemical staining revealed that the follicles were CD20-positive. The lymphocytes in the germinal centers were CD10-positive and Bcl-2-negative. The interfollicular area was composed of CD3-positive small T cells. Infiltrating plasma cells showed a polyclonal expression of cellular immunoglobulin kappa and lambda chains . Some IgG4-positive plasma cells were present, but most were IgG-positive plasma cells. The final diagnosis was RLH of the liver.
The post-operative course was uneventful and she was discharged on post-operative day nine.