A 66 year-old Japanese male underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy by his practitioner for complaints of dysphagia, which revealed an esophageal submucosal tumor. He was referred to the National Hospital Organization Mito Medical Center in 2006 for treatment. He did not complain of fever, weight loss, or night sweating. On admission, physical examination revealed no remarkable features; the liver, spleen, and superficial nodes were not palpable. His laboratory data showed no abnormalities except a 10-year history of abnormal glucose tolerance treated by his primary physician. No elevated tumor markers or autoimmune antibodies were observed. A barium esophagogram, CT, and upper GI endoscope showed an esophageal submucosal polypoid lesion at the cervical esophagus . Its location close to the esophageal orifice and large size (4 × 2 cm) made an endoscopic resection technically difficult, and the patient was enrolled in the Department of Surgery. As the tumor was endoscopically diagnosed as benign leiomyoma or lipoma, we decided to perform a tumor resection because of the patient's complaints of dysphagia and because the cervical esophagus is relatively approachable compared with the thoracic esophagus, even without pathological diagnosis. The tumor was removed through a cervical esophagotomy under a cervical collar incision.
The tumor macroscopically showed a submucosal polypoid appearance . Resected tissue was fixed in 20% formalin, embedded in paraffin, and routinely stained with hematoxylin and eosin, followed by immunohistochemical analyses with monoclonal antibodies, as summarized in (supplement). The tumor was composed of multiple, vague nodules (,) that contained abortive CD10+Ki67+ germinal centers surrounded by a regular proliferation of CD3-CD20+CD79a+bcl2+ small lymphoid cells without immunoblastic large cells . These areas corresponded to the mantle zone, with no definite formation of the marginal zone observed. No lymphoepithelial lesions (intraepithelial infiltration of neoplastic B-cells with architectural distortion of epithelial structures) were observed, but it showed a typical mantle cell pattern, which was further supported by a sparse distribution of CD21+ follicular dendritic cells (FDCs) next to a dense distribution of FDC in the germinal centers and negativity for MUM1 protein (approximately 1%, data not shown) . We then examined the chromosomal rearrangement involving IgH and Bcl1 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. In brief, DNA was hybridized with Vysis® LSI® IGH/CCND1 Rearrangement probes (ABBOTT, Wiesbaden, Germany), as described previously . The IgH-BclI chimera was observed in only 1% of examined cells (2.8%, with 0.8% standard deviation, in 10 healthy volunteers). Proliferating cells stained for cyclin D1, D2, or D3 only sporadically (1-2%) without expressing IgD or IgM (data not shown). We noted infiltration by CD5+ T cells, but the majority of proliferating cells were negative for CD5 . This pattern was also similar to the mantle zone of the normal lymphoid tissue .
The patient experienced a good post-operative course, and was enrolled in the Department of Hematology. Lymphoma metastasis was evaluated by a whole body CT scan, PET-CT, bone marrow examination, Ga-scintigram, and total colonoscopy, but no other sites were involved. The diagnosis was stage IAE, and rituximab was given as adjuvant chemotherapy. This patient has been disease free for more than 28 months after surgery.