A 21-year-old Caucasian male presented to the office one week after an anaphylactic
reaction following a first-time ingestion of a small piece of dried jackfruit. Immediately
after ingestion, he noted eye pruritis and periorbital swelling. Fifteen minutes later he
developed chest tightness, shortness of breath, and hives all over his body. He
self-administered epinephrine, which he carried for his latex allergy, 30 minutes after the
start of his symptoms. En route to the hospital, he was given diphenhydramine, and in the
emergency room he was treated with methylprednisolone and famotidine. After three hours of
observation and resolution of his shortness of breath, he was discharged with five days of
prednisone. Complete resolution of his symptoms occurred a full 24 hours after
ingestion.
The patient was born premature at 31 weeks of gestation. His NICU course was complicated by
obstructive hydrocephalus for which he underwent a ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt placement
at three weeks old, and a revision surgery at 6 months old. His past medical history was
otherwise significant for latex allergy, allergic rhinitis, and anxiety. His daily
medications include azelastine nasal spray, fluoxetine, and topiramate. He was diagnosed
with a latex allergy at 6 years of age after he developed hives while playing with balloons.
In 2019 his latex specific IgE ImmunoCAP (Phadia, Uppsala, Sweden), was 5.68 KU/L. He had a
history of adverse reaction to raw bananas described as stomach bloating. In 2020, he tested
positive for dust mites (3 mm) and mixed grasses (3 mm) on skin prick testing (SPT), but was
negative for other aeroallergens including birch pollen.
SPT was conducted using canned jackfruit, latex, bananas, avocados, celery, potato, tomato,
melon, peach, hazelnut, cherry, and apple. Jackfruit was positive with wheal of 3 mm and
flare 5 × 6 mm, latex was positive with a wheal of 4 mm and flare of 9 × 13 mm, with a
histamine of 8 mm and negative control of 0 mm . The patient was instructed to strictly
avoid jackfruit and carry epinephrine for his jackfruit and latex allergy.