A 51-year-old, postmenopausal, gravida three, para three female presented to our emergency department (ED) with worsening left flank pain and new left-sided abdominal pain. She had been discharged from our hospital two days prior. During that admission, she underwent a left renal biopsy that was complicated by a perirenal and intraabdominal hematoma. Her medical history included systemic lupus erythematosus, chronic kidney disease, antiphospholipid syndrome, and hypertension. Her gynecologic history was significant for a prior cesarean section and a tubal ligation. She was on warfarin due to her hypercoagulable state.
Upon presentation to the ED, her vital signs were temperature 36.6° Celsius, heart rate 69 beats per minute, blood pressure 116/75 millimeters (mm) of mercury, respiratory rate 16 per minute, and oxygen level 96% on room air. Physical exam revealed a tired-looking female in mild distress. She exhibited left flank tenderness near her renal biopsy site with no external signs of bleeding or infection. Additionally, she had abdominal tenderness in the left upper quadrant (LUQ). There was no abdominal rigidity or signs of peritonitis. A point-of-care ultrasound was positive for free fluid in the LUQ .
Her laboratory values were hemoglobin 6.6 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range 12.1–15.1 g/dL), platelet count 374 × 109 per liter (×109/L) (150–450 × 109/L), blood urea nitrogen 63 milligrams per dL (mg/dL) (7–30 mg/dL), creatinine 3.7 mg/dL (0.7–1.2 mg/dL), prothrombin time 15.8 seconds (10–13 seconds), and international normalized ratio 1.3 (0.89–1.16). The patient’s hemoglobin level three days prior was 9 g/dL.
Interventional radiology (IR) was consulted due to the patient’s recent complicated biopsy, new laboratory derangements, and free fluid on ultrasound. Computed tomography (CT) angiography was recommended to assess for bleeding location and rule out abscess, perforation, or ischemia. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis revealed a new 10 mm enhancement within the intra-abdominal hemorrhage. This abnormality was identified as a ruptured, bleeding distal OAA . The patient was given one unit of packed red blood cells and taken to IR for definitive management. She underwent gelfoam and coil embolization of the left gonadal artery, resulting in cessation of bleeding . After an uncomplicated hospital course, she was discharged.