A 58-year-old man with known history of coronary artery disease was admitted to the emergency department on 14 May 2018 due to acute coronary syndrome. He had previous bypass surgery in 2003 with grafting of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) using the LIMA and two SVGs to right coronary artery (RCA) and the first diagonal branch (RD), respectively. On 12 lead electrocardiogram, there were no relevant pathologies, but serial laboratory testing found a significant rise of cardiac troponin I indicating non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (high-sensitive Troponin I (hsTnT I): 263 pg/mL; normal range: <26 pg/mL). Medical treatment was initiated with fondaparinux 2.5 mg o.d. subcutaneously and the patient continued to take aspirin. Additionally, ticagrelor was started on 15 May 2018 (180 mg loading dose). Coronary angiography was performed via left radial artery on 15 May 2018 (5-Fr diagnostic catheters; JR4, JL4, AL1 for SVC, BC for LIMA) and revealed a chronic occlusion of the mid LAD as well as of the proximal RCA with no significant lesion of the left circumflex artery. The LIMA graft as well as the SVG to RCA were found to be patent, whereas the SVG to RD was found occluded . According to risk-benefit evaluation and as the patient reported that his chest pain had resolved for several hours, no coronary intervention was performed. Transthoracic echocardiography showed mildly reduced left ventricular (LV)-ejection fraction (EF) (52%) with hypokinesia of the anterior and septal walls. The patient was treated at the chest pain unit for 48 h and finally discharged home on 22 May 2018 after an uneventful hospital stay.
On 18 August 2018, the patient was again admitted to the emergency department due to reoccurrence of unstable angina and progressive dyspnoea (blood pressure 129/79 mmHg, heart rate 88/min). Electrocardiogram was found normal, but there was a significant elevated troponin I on admission (hsTnT I: 82 pg/mL; normal range: <26 pg/mL) so that the patient was sent to the cath lab on the same day. Coronary angiography performed via the right femoral artery now showed an extensive dissection of the LIMA leading to impaired blood flow (TIMI I) (for video files see ) . During angiography, a slowly but progressive decline of blood pressure could be observed (RR 98/66, heart rate 94/min), while the patient reported worsening of his dyspnoea. Left ventricular angiography showed akinesia of the anterior and septal walls with a significantly impaired LV-EF (calculated to be 45%) . An Impella 2.5 (Abiomed Europe GmbH, Germany) was inserted via the left femoral artery and percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) of the LIMA was done using a 6-Fr IMA guiding catheter (Medtronic Launcher, Medtronic, USA) and an Asahi Sion blue wire (Asahi Intecc Co., Japan). After several balloon inflations with 2.0 and 3.0 mm balloons (Pantera Pro, Biotronik, Germany), an Orsiro-DES 3.5 × 30 mm (Biotronik, Germany) was implanted into the ostium of the graft (10 atm/20 s). At this stage, blood flow through the LIMA was restored, but there was still a visible stenosis of the medial and distal part of the vessel. OCT analysis (Abbott, USA), showed a proper stent placement with good restoration of the lumen of the proximal LIMA, while dissection could still be seen from the distal end of the implanted stent over a length of approximately 50 mm . Due to some malapposition of the implanted drug-eluting stent (DES) in the proximal part, post-dilatation was performed here with a 4.0 × 15 mm NC balloon (Pantera Leo, Biotronik, Germany). As blood flow in the LIMA graft had persistently normalized (TIMI III) and both haemodynamics and the patients well-being were stabilized, no further stents were implanted. After stepwise weaning, the Impella 2.5 was removed in the cath lab. The patient was transferred to intensive care unit for monitoring of vital signs until the next day when he was sent to a normal ward. Transthoracic echocardiogram before discharge showed a normalization of LV function (EF 59%) without regional wall motion abnormalities, and the patient was discharged home on 24 August 2018. Elective angiographic follow-up was performed on 22 October 2018 which showed a patent LIMA graft without signs of stenosis or persistent dissection .