A 12-year-old male presented with headache, ataxia, and vomiting of 3 months duration. The brain MRI with/without contrast revealed a heterogenous appearing lesion within the fourth ventricle measuring 3.18 × 3.26 × 3.90 cm. There was also a small cystic component noted along the right lateral aspect which was isointense on T1, iso to hyperintense on T2, and hyperintense on the FLAIR study. Anteriorly, the tumor was causing marked compression of the medulla oblongata, pons, and midbrain; this resulted in obstructive hydrocephalus.
The patient first underwent placement of a right-sided ventriculoperitoneal shunt. This was followed by a suboccipital craniotomy for subtotal excision of tumor. At surgery, the lesion was firm pseudo-encapsulated, and partially adherent to the brainstem on the left; due to the adhesions, a portion of the left-sided lesion was unresectable.
The microscopic features and the immunohistochemical profile revealed a heterogeneous tumor with hypercellular tissue that contained spindle-shaped cells that were vimentin positive. These findings confirmed the diagnosis of a cerebellar gliosarcoma . The patient was, therefore, referred to oncology for further management.
The patient did well post-surgery for 1 year. However, when the MRI was repeated, it documented a significant recurrent lesion now be measuring 4.1 × 3.3 × 3.7 cm [ and ]. However, there was no increase in hydrocephalus due to the presence of the VP shunt. In addition, the MR showed herniation of the cerebella tonsils through the foramen magnum with attendant syringohydromyelia involving the cervicodorsal cord. Although the patient’s family was offered further surgery, they declined, and the patient was lost to follow-up.
The patient next seen 2 years postoperatively. Over the prior 3 months, he had developed progressive quadriparesis and was wheelchair bound for 1 month. Although a follow-up MRI was requested, only a T2 sequence could be obtained due to financial constraints . Due to very significant brainstem compression, the patient underwent a repeated suboccipital resection of tumor. Despite the subsequent postoperative MRI showing maximum safe resection of tumor, the patient’s clinical condition did not improve in the early postoperative period (1 month of follow-up) .