A 56-year-old male patient with a history of type II diabetes mellitus was referred to the Hainan Eye Hospital (Haikou, China) for a red and painful right eye with poor vision. One month before admission, the patient underwent phacoemulsification and IOL implantation in a local hospital. Within 72 h of this surgery, he presented at a private clinic with irritation, redness and reduced vision in the right eye. The patient was treated with antibacterial medications (levofloxacin eye drops, six times per day) for 3 days, and it was suggested that he present for a subsequent visit 3 days later. However, the patient missed this follow-up visit, and he applied the levofloxacin eye drops for 1 month. At 1 month after his presentation at the private clinic, his signs and symptoms had not improved. It was at this time that the patient was referred to the Hainan Eye Hospital (Haikou, China). Upon arrival, his visual acuity was light perception in the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. A slit-lamp examination revealed conjunctival injection, a positive Tyndall effect (+) in the anterior chamber, and severe vitritis with no fundus view . Acute post-cataract endophthalmitis was suspected.
IOL explantation with capsular bag removal and a 23G pars plana vitrectomy combined with a silicone oil tamponade was performed. The intraocular irrigation solution used during surgery contained 1 mg/0.1 ml vancomycin to treat a possible bacterial infection. In addition, a vitreous biopsy was obtained for culture. Fortified tobramycin and levofloxacin eye drops were started after the vitrectomy and continued for 6 days. One week after surgery, the patient achieved a best-corrected visual acuity of 20/200. The intraocular silicon oil was removed after 6 months, and no recurrence was observed .
The vitreous fluid was cultured in Sabouraud dextrose agar (SDA). Seven days later, white colonies formed and were identified as Earliella scabrosa via internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequence analysis. In addition, the vitreous fluid was further cultured on an SGA incubator plate at 28 °C for 2 weeks. Figure presents the white filamentous mold colonies growing on this plate. The hyphae stained positive for acridine orange, exhibiting an extremely thick cell wall, sparse septae, and internal nuclei . The timeline for the patient’s hospital course and treatment is presented in Fig. .
The isolates were identified by sequencing the ITS region as previously described . Briefly, the genomic DNA was extracted from a mycelial mass using a Fungal Microbial DNA Isolation Kit (Solarbio Life Sciences Laboratories, Beijing, PRC) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. For this test, 2 μl of fungal DNA and 12.5 μl of the Taq Master Mix (Vazyme Biotech Co., Ltd., Nanjing, PRC) with fungal specific primers were added to a 25-μl total reaction. The thermal cycling parameters were as follows: initial denaturation at 95 °C for 5 min; 35 cycles of denaturation at 95 °C for 30 s, annealing at 60 °C for 30 s, extension at 72 °C for 30 s; and a final extension at 72 °C for 10 min. The sequence of the amplified ITS PCR product that as obtained from the strain isolated in this study was analyzed using the National Center for Biological Information (NCBI) GenBank database and identified as Earliella scabrosa (KR706165, identity 99%). A sequence alignment revealed that this sequence shared 91% similarity with Trametes sp. and 89% similarity with Ganoderma sp.