A 40-year-old female presented with suspicious increasing micro-calcifications in the right breast. A stereotactic biopsy of the most worrisome area in the right upper inner quadrant demonstrated ductal carcinoma in-situ with microinvasion. Because of the diffuse extent of the malignant appearing calcifications, a mastectomy was recommended. On the morning of surgery, a 0.4 mCi dose of filtered Tc-99 m sulfur colloid was injected subdermally at the biopsy site. Two sentinel lymph nodes were identified, one at level I and a second, that was very medial and interpreted as a possible internal mammary node . In the operating room, 5 ml of isosulfan blue dye was injected subdermally near the biopsy site, and the procedure was started after 5 minutes of skin massage. The first sentinel lymph node was found at level I and was blue and radioactive. Continued dissection at level I did not demonstrate any other radioactive or blue-stained lymph nodes. However, using the lymphoscintigraphy as our guide, we performed a more thorough search for the second sentinel node in the internal mammary chain and under the most medial part of the clavicle. Radioactivity was detected in the latter location, suggesting a level III sentinel lymph node, i.e., medial to the pectoralis minor. Since it was not easily accessible through the small axillary incision, we proceeded with the mastectomy then dissected the remaining sentinel node through a trans-pectoral approach. The medial aspect of the pectoralis major was divided in the direction of its fibers, thus allowing access to the level III space medial to the pectoralis minor, where a blue and radioactive lymph node was identified and removed . The patient had an unremarkable postoperative course and was discharged on the first post-operative day. Final pathology demonstrated multifocal micro-invasive comedo-DCIS in the upper inner, upper outer, and retro-areolar regions of the breast. Both sentinel lymph nodes were negative for metastatic disease based on routine histology as well as immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin.