A 35-year-old pregnant Japanese woman (spontaneously conceived), gravida 4, para 2, with no significant medical or family history, presented to our hospital. She had a spontaneous abortion during the first trimester of her first pregnancy. In the second pregnancy at 28 years of age, she delivered a healthy term female newborn with a birthweight of 2,908 grams. In the third pregnancy at 33 years of age, she was referred to our hospital at 23 + 5 weeks of gestation for perinatal management of hydrops fetalis. The fetus presented with remarkable systemic edema, ascites, and bilateral pleural effusion on transabdominal ultrasonography. Detailed fetal echocardiography revealed significant cardiomegaly (cardiothoracic area ratio, 56.7%) with severe tricuspid valve regurgitation (TR) and moderate mitral valve regurgitation (MR). Both ventricles were hypokinetic; the left and right myocardial performance indices were 0.92 and 0.85, respectively. Non-compacted layers in both ventricles and an extensive trabeculated layer with multiple deep intertrabecular recesses filled with blood directly from the left ventricular cavity were identified. Fetal echocardiography at 26 + 0 weeks of gestation is shown in . The fetus was diagnosed with cardiogenic hydrops fetalis caused by LVNC. At 30 + 6 weeks of gestation, regular uterine contractions with cervical dilation occurred spontaneously, indicating the onset of labor. We discussed the mode of delivery with the parents and decided on vaginal delivery because of the fatal prognosis of the fetus. At 31 + 0 weeks of gestation, the mother delivered a male neonate with a birth weight of 2,440 grams; Apgar scores of 1 and 1 at 1 and 5 min, respectively; and umbilical arterial pH of 7.310. The newborn died soon after birth, despite neonatal resuscitation. We offered the parents a pathological autopsy and genetic testing of the newborn to obtain important information for future pregnancies; however, they declined these examinations.
In the current pregnancy, we monitored the fetus every 2–3 weeks after 13 weeks of gestation, especially for the fetal hydropic sign and contractile dysfunction of the fetal heart on ultrasound. The mother did not take any precautions or interventions because there was no effective prevention of recurrence of hydrops fetalis. At 21 + 1 weeks of gestation, abnormal findings were not detected. However, at 23 + 1 weeks of gestation, we detected noticeably decreased ventricular contraction with moderate TR and MR. In addition, echocardiographic findings observed in the fetal myocardium were consistent with LVNC and were almost similar to those in the previous fetus. At 25 + 4 weeks of gestation, hydropic signs including systemic skin edema, pleural effusion, and ascites were noted. Fetal echocardiography is shown in . The fetal course was very similar to that of the previous fetus; therefore, we strongly suspected familial LVNC. The hydropic signs worsened during the course of the pregnancy . Based on the previous pregnancy, we discussed perinatal management (especially the timing and mode of delivery) with the parents and respecting the parents’ wishes, decided to perform cesarean section to prevent fetal death. There were no maternal cardiac signs suggestive of Mirror syndrome. At 31 weeks of gestation, transabdominal sonography revealed an edematous and thickened placenta, and pulse-wave Doppler revealed continuous absent or reversed blood flow in the umbilical artery. To avoid fetal death, a cesarean section was performed at 32 + 0 weeks of gestation. A male newborn with breech presentation was delivered. His birth weight was 2,680 grams; Apgar scores at 1 and 5 min were 1 and 1, respectively; and umbilical arterial pH was 7.194. The newborn died shortly after birth, despite neonatal resuscitation. The placenta was grossly edematous, weighing 760 grams. The mother's postoperative course was favorable, and she was discharged without complications. In contrast to the previous pregnancy, the parents requested a pathological autopsy and genetic testing of the neonate. Gross anatomical findings at autopsy included systemic skin edema, bilateral pleural effusion, ascites, markedly dilated right ventricle, and hypertrophic left ventricle. Histological examination of the left ventricle revealed a two-layered structure composed of a prominent trabeculated and compacted layer (, ), and endocardial elastic fibrous proliferation throughout the left ventricle . After obtaining informed consent from the parents, DNA was isolated from the neonatal whole blood. Genetic screening of 182 cardiac disorder-related genes associated with cardiomyopathies and channelopathies by NGS revealed a novel heterozygous missense MYH7 variant, NM_000257.3: c.2729A > T, p.Lys910Ile, which had not been reported in several genetic databases, including ClinVar, HGMD®, dbSNP, gnomAD, and Jmorp (Japanese Multi Omics Reference Panel) . The GADD score and PolyPhen-2, which predicted the effect of a variant on protein function, showed that this novel MYH7 variant was pathogenic. The pedigree is shown in . After genetic counseling, parental genetic analyses were performed. By Sanger sequencing, the MYH7 variant was not detected in the father (Ⅰ-1), while in the mother (Ⅰ-2) a slight change (c.2729A > T) of unclear significance was detected in the chromatogram . Therefore, targeted and deep sequencing was performed on the whole blood of both parents by NGS. The same MYH7 variant (NM_000257.3: c.2729A > T, p.Lys910Ile) was detected in 6% (807/14,266 coverages) of the variant allele fraction (VAF) in the maternal sequence but not in the paternal sequence [0% (0/1,658 coverages) of VAF]. Echocardiography revealed no abnormal findings in the myocardia of the parents. The parents did not present with generalized muscle weakness. Furthermore, there was no increase in the maternal serum creatine kinase. illustrates the workflow from the delivery of the previous fetus (II-3) to parental sequencing.