A healthy 29-year-old female, gravida two, para two (G2P2), her first child had died a few days after birth of respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). The present case was her second pregnancy. Prenatal ultrasonography was regularly scheduled, and she had no complicated pregnancy. She did not reveal polyhydramnios or hydrops fetalis. Ultrasound examination at 30 weeks of gestational age revealed a solid mass in the left lung, indicating CPAM. The neonate was delivered by cesarean section at the 34th week of gestation. The birth weight was 2.4 kg, and the newborn was 48 cm long. The Apgar scores were 10, 10, and 10 at 1, 5, and 10 min, respectively. She had no respiratory difficulty at birth. The infant was discharged home with stable vitals. The infant was suddenly cyanotic at 20 days after birth, and she was admitted to West China Hospital, Sichuan University. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed a large mass lesion in the left lower lobe, as shown in Fig. . The mass of the left lung was removed by lobectomy at the age of 22 days.
On gross examination, the lung showed a solid mass measuring 3.3 cm × 2.5 cm × 1.7 cm in size. Lung specimens were stained with hematoxylin and eosin for microscopic examination. Microscopically, the tumor surrounded the airway with peribronchial growth and connected to the pleura. No capsule was visualized. The tumor was composed of immature cartilage, highly cellular spindle cells and oval cells interlacing fascicles . The cytoplasm of the spindle cells was eosinophilic. Nucleoli were inconspicuous. There was no central necrosis, anaplasia or pleomorphism. Mitotic figures were rare, and one per ten high-power fields was present in the case.
For immunohistochemical staining, strong vimentin positivity was observed in the spindle cells and oval cells . Smooth muscle actin (SMA) was strongly positive in the spindle cells, but oval cells showed faint to negative reactivity . S100 was positive for cartilage and negative for spindle and oval cells . CD34 was negative for tumor cells . The Ki67 index was approximately 8% . Pan-cytokeratin, epithelial membrane antibody (EMA), anaplastic lymphoma kinase 1 (ALK-1), desmin and OCT3/4 were negative.
No ETV6-NTRK3 fusion or ALK rearrangement was detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in the present case. Fifty-six next-generation sequencing (NGS) analyses were performed, and JAK2 detected deletion mutations at sites ranging from 780 to 879 (c.780-879del), leading to a frameshift mutation in exon 7. SMO found a point mutation at the acceptor splicing site of exon 5 (c.1140 + 1G > A).
The final histological diagnosis was CPMT. No complications occurred in the postoperative period. The patient is now 8 years old, and she is doing well without further treatment after surgery. There was no clinical or radiologic evidence of recurrence or metastasis.