A 70-year-old male presented with complaints of pain and swelling at the medial end of right sternoclavicular region. The swelling was insidious in onset and gradually progressed in size over a period of 1 month. Patient gave history of fever on and off with no history of loss of appetite, recent weight loss, or night cries. There was no previous history of any drug abuse, tuberculosis, or trauma. Local examination revealed swelling at right sternoclavicular joint. On palpation, local rise of temperature and tenderness was present, with no difficulty in range of motion. Chest radiograph showed normal lung fields with no other pathological findings. Ultrasonography revealed 2.2 × 1.4 CMS collection with internal echoes . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed moderate fluid collection within the joint with mild synovial thickening and irregularity of the articular cartilage on the manubrium and clavicular aspect with articular and subarticular erosions. Diffuse subchondral erythema was also noted confirming right sternoclavicular joint arthritis, suggestive of Koch’s etiology.
Blood analysis revealed C-Reactive Protein: 55 (0–5), erythrocyte sedimentation rate:116 mm/h. Total and differential counts were within normal limits. Serology done for HIV was negative.
Provisional diagnosis of sternoclavicular joint TB was made and patient was posted for surgical debridement and diagnostic biopsy under general anesthesia. Ziehl Nielsen staining was negative for acid fast bacilli. Culture revealed occasional pus cells and Gram-positive cocci in pairs with no growth. Histopathological examination showed fibrocartilaginous and fibroadipose tissue along with mature bone tissue, stroma showed scattered chronic infiltrates, separately lying skeletal muscle tissue was identified. M. tuberculosis DNA PCR (GeneXpert) detected M. tuberculosis complex with no Rifampicin resistance.
Based on the above evidence, combined four drug antitubercular drug therapy was started consisting of rifampicin (450 mg daily), isoniazid (300 mg daily), ethambutol (800 mg daily), and pyrazinamide (1500 mg in divided doses) in the initial intensive phase. The four drugs were given for a period of 3 months followed by rifampicin and isoniazid for 9 months.