A 15-month-old 12.7 kg female presented with 1 week of fever, urinary retention, and subacute onset of paraplegia 1 day prior to admission. Her medical history was significant for birth at 36 weeks’ gestation and a 10-day hospitalization for treatment of congenital syphilis. Initial presentation was at another hospital where lumbar puncture showed leukocytosis, elevated protein, positive red blood cells, and no glucose. Blood and cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) cultures were negative, along with rapid CSF polymerase chain reaction. The patient was started on ceftriaxone, vancomycin, and acyclovir. MRI showed a lesion from T8-L1 . The patient was transferred to our hospital for further management. She was able to move her upper but not her lower extremities at presentation to emergency room.
The emergent angiogram was performed under general anesthesia. Patient received combined intravenous and inhalation induction with propofol and sevoflurane. Two large bore IVs were established in anticipation of blood loss. The patient was found to have a complex type IVc AVM and fistula from the Artery of Adamkiewicz at L1-L2. She also had perimedullary dilated veins and a pseudoaneurysm that measured 2.5 cm × 1.5 cm × 1.5 cm. The pseudoaneurysm compressed the spinal cord at T8-T10 , displacing it from right to left.
Interventional radiology felt at the time that the spinal AVM could not be embolized. The patient was transferred to the pediatric intensive care unit and was left intubated and sedated to reduce the risk of agitation induced rupture. Patient was optimized for surgical resection by raising hemoglobin to 14 g% and administering intravenous steroids. Two days later, she was brought to the operating room. The patient was prepared with establishment of central line, arterial line, and foley catheter. She was placed prone upon jelly roll bolsters below her sternum and iliac crests. Baseline spinal cord monitoring of somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs) and transcortical motor evoked potentials (MEPs) were clear only on the bilateral upper extremities. Bilateral lower extremities did not have recordable SSEPs or MEPs prior to surgery. Electromyography was quiet at baseline.
Osteoplastic laminotomies from T6-T12 were performed. The dura was opened and the intradural, intramesenchymal hematoma was evacuated. There were two episodes of brisk arterial bleeding with hypotension during resection of the hematoma. She was transfused with 500 cc of packed cells, 100 cc of fresh frozen plasma, 120 ml of albumin, and 750 ml of crystalloids. Total estimated blood loss was 600 ml. Patient required boluses of epinephrine during episodes of bleeding. Infusions of pressor medications was not needed intraoperatively. Hemoglobin was maintained at or above 10 g/dl. Hemostasis was obtained with aneurysm clip placement after bipolar coagulation, cottonoid application, and gentle pressure. Once hemostasis was achieved, the surgery was stopped because the arterial supply from the ventral side of the aneurysm could not be surgically secured. The dura was left open secondary to spinal cord swelling and prominent aneurysm clips were added. The spinal cord was covered with an artificial dural substitute. The fascia and skin of the thoracolumbar spine were closed. Postoperatively, the patient was administered antibiotics and steroids. She was kept sedated and ventilated until the osteoplastic laminotomies were replaced and the dorsal elements of the spine were reconstructed. The patient was taken to the angiography suite from the OR to coil the large aneurysm . A week later, the child was brought back to the OR for removal of aneurysm clips and reconstruction of posterior elements of the lamina. Intraoperative SSEPs and MEPs remained undetectable in lower extremities.
The patient remained paraplegic postoperatively. She received Botox injections to the gastrocnemius bilaterally and the left tibialis posterior about 6 months after surgery. The patient’s mother thought the Botox helped, and she is doing therapies with her at home but wishes to go back to formal therapy after COVID-19. Repeat spinal angiogram performed 1 year later showed no residual or recurrent arteriovenous malformation. Her current medications include baclofen 5 ml three times a day, sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim 200–40 mg/5 ml oral suspension daily, Miralax and Dulcolax PRN. The patient is currently followed up by a urologist. She has some sensation in the lower legs but remains paraplegic with neurogenic bowel and bladder syndrome. She currently undergoes bladder catheterization every 3 h.