The patient is a 15-day-old dizygotic twin girl born via uncomplicated vaginal delivery. She was referred to our institution as a result of findings of ventriculomegaly noted on prenatal screening ultrasonography. The cause of the hydrocephalus was unknown at that time. On examination, the patient had a soft but full anterior fontanelle, along with dilated scalp veins. The head circumference was greater than the 97th percentile for gestational age. No focal neurologic deficits were appreciated on examination. Postnatal cranial ultrasonography revealed progressive hydrocephalus as well as a midline echogenic mass in the posterior fossa with mass effect on the cerebellum. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was obtained, which revealed a very large dural-based extraaxial mass along the dorsal aspect of the posterior fossa . The mass was well-circumscribed and heterogeneous, but mostly T1 isointense and T2 hypointense with flow voids and evidence of previous hemorrhage within it. Avid contrast enhancement was seen. There was marked mass effect on the cerebellum, fourth ventricle, and brainstem with resultant obstructive hydrocephalus and evidence of transependymal flow. The differential diagnoses of an intracranial vascular lesion in this 15-day-old infant included hemangioma, hemangioblastoma, vascular malformation, and other neonatal tumor types, such as soft-tissue sarcoma. In addition, meningioma could not initially be definitively excluded because of the dural attachment.
Owing to the compressive nature of the lesion and the progressive hydrocephalus, the infant was taken to the operating room for resection of the posterior fossa lesion. Prior to the resection, an external ventricular drain (EVD) was placed in the occipital horn of the right lateral ventricle with care to avoid the egress of cerebral spinal fluid until the tumor was resected. A suboccipital craniectomy and C1 laminectomy were performed. The lesion appeared extremely vascular and clearly emanated from the dura without intraaxial involvement. Because of the patient's size and the low circulating blood volume, minimizing blood loss was imperative. Blood products were on standby. Care was taken not to breach the venous system as the mass was circumferentially dissected away from the surrounding tentorium and brain parenchyma. Cavitron ultrasonic aspiration and bipolar cautery were used to reduce the blood supply to the tumor externally while it was debulked internally. Following resection of the lesion, a large dural defect remained. A dural graft was used to close the defect with the additional support of a large piece of non-suturable DuraGen (Integra Life Sciences, Plainsboro, New Jersey) and Tisseel (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, Illinois) because the paper thin nature of the patient's dura made watertight closure challenging.
Because of our patient's small body habitus (2.7 kg), minimizing hemorrhage and maintaining intravascular volume were of utmost importance. In sum, throughout the duration of the case, our patient received 160 ml of lactated Ringer's solution, 90 ml of packed red blood cells, 50 cc of fresh frozen plasma, 40 ml of platelets, and 10 ml of cryoprecipitate. Despite efforts taken to reduce volume loss, the estimated blood loss was 150 ml, whereas the patient's estimated total circulating blood volume was only 230 ml and urine output was 50 ml.
Postoperative imaging revealed gross total resection of the mass and significant decompression of the brainstem and cerebellum . The immediate postoperative course was complicated by seizures and thrombosis of the right transverse sinus, for which therapy with levetiracetam and Lovenox (Sanofi-Aventis, Bridgewater, New Jersey) was started. Initially, intracranial pressures were normal and a several-day trial of EVD clamping was successful, allowing the removal of the EVD. Unfortunately, during the follow-up period, the patient developed a persistent cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leak, enlarging head circumference, and enlarging ventricular size. Infection was excluded by CSF sampling. Ultimately, spinal fluid diversion with ventriculoperitoneal shunt placement was required.
The pathology report of the lesion showed positive staining of 20% for MIB-1, a marker for actively proliferating cells. Stains for glucose transporter 1 (GLUT1) and CD31 were also positive, indicating that the lesion was an infantile hemangioma.
At the time of the most recent office evaluation 4 months since her operation and 6 weeks from shunt placement, the patient had completed her course of anticoagulation therapy with follow-up imaging demonstrating patency of all venous sinuses. There has been no recurrence of the mass. She remains on antiepileptic medications for seizure prophylaxis but has not had seizure activity. The patient continues to meet her developmental milestones in subsequent outpatient follow up visits.