A gastric submucosal tumor was detected in a 65-year-old man 1 year ago.
One year previously, the patient attended a local hospital for a physical check-up, and underwent gastroscopy. He had no evidence of GI bleeding, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting or weight loss. At gastroscopy, a solitary discoid-shaped submucosal tumor in the gastric fundus was detected. The preliminary diagnosis by EUS was possible ectopic pancreas, and close follow-up was suggested by the doctor in the local hospital. One year later, there was a gradual onset of abdominal discomfort in the subxiphoid, which was more noticeable after eating; therefore, the patient visited our hospital, and underwent EUS follow-up examination. Surprisingly, the endoscopic findings of the lesion showed multiple changes. A large protruding lesion was found in the same location. In addition, two small similar submucosal lesions were detected. EUS showed that the large lesion involved the mucosa and submucosal layer. The EUS diagnosis was not ectopic pancreas. Accordingly, the patient was hospitalized and endoscopic management was suggested.
The patient had undergone nephrectomy for RCC 5 years previously. The targeted agent sunitinib was administered to prevent recurrence for 3 years and treatment was discontinued 2 years ago.
There was no significant family history.
No obvious abnormalities were observed.
Laboratory data showed no abnormalities except mildly elevated serum creatinine (133 mmol/L).
Gastroscopy at the local hospital detected a solitary submucosal tumor in the gastric fundus with central depression and surface mucosal congestion 1 year ago. The lesion was slightly elevated and discoid, and no ulcer or other mass was found in the stomach. EUS showed that the lesion originated from the deeper mucosal layers with partially discontinuous submucosa, with medium and hypoechoic changes and was 1.12 cm × 0.38 cm in size . One year later, a large protruding lesion was found in the fundus in the same location, congestion and erosion were presented on the mucosal surface. The basal layer lesion remained discoid in shape. Two similar small submucosal lesions 0.4-0.6 cm in size were also found; one in the middle section of the stomach body, and the other in the fundus adjacent to the large lesion. Central depression, surface mucosal congestion and thickened vessels were observed in the two small lesions. EUS showed a heterogeneous mass that involved the mucosa and submucosal layer with hypoechoic changes. The lesion had increased in size (2.5 cm × 2 cm) . No significant lymphadenopathy was observed in the periphery.
In addition to the 3 lesions observed during gastroscopy, another 2 small lesions were found in the stomach body by Computed Tomography (CT). Apart from multiple lesions in the stomach, CT revealed hypervascular lesions with abnormal enhancement in the arterial and venous phases in the gallbladder, pancreas, and subcutaneous soft tissue of the right buttock . The left kidney was absent, and no mass was detected in the vicinity of the kidney. Thus, multiple metastases were the preliminary diagnosis. Abdominal CT showed no abnormalities 1 year previously at the local hospital. No additional lesions were visible on further evaluation by chest and head CT, Doppler echocardiography, and ultrasound examination of the thyroid gland and adrenal gland.