A 3-year-old boy, born out of nonconsanguineous marriage, presented with high grade intermittent fever for about 1.5 months. He was repeatedly treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics, but continued to have progressive headache without improvement for 8 days.
The patient was then transferred to our hospital with decreased mental status, appetite and physical strength. The patient was noted to have silvery-grey hair of the scalp, eyebrows, and eyelashes, which had been present since birth . All his limbs showed multiple, well-defined, dot-like hypopigmented patches with a generalized dark, dry and coarse skin . He had no developmental delays, and received vaccinations on time without abnormalities. He has an older half-sister and his mother has no history of abortion. All his parents and half-sister are in good health, and have no family history of genetic diseases.
At admission, blood routine test was generally normal except for decreased hemoglobin (82 g/L). Meanwhile, his serum iron (4.5 µmol/L) was lower than normal, and he had been diagnosed as iron deficiency anemia prior to his admission. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was slightly elevated at 20 mm/h. The level of C-reative protein (CRP), procalcitonin, coagulation function, ferritin, serum electrolytes, uric acid, kidney and liver function tests were within normal limits. Tests to rule out common infections like hepatitis A/B/C, HIV-1, EBV, CMV, tuberculosis, salmonella typhosa and mycoplasma pneumoniae, didn’t reveal any abnormalities. Immunoglobulin IgE was at high level of 1040 IU/ml. Autoimmune work-up, such as anti-dsDNA and antinuclear antibody (ANA), were negative. Cervical ultrasound revealed multiple lymph nodes enlargement on both sides, the largest of which was 2.2 × 0.9 cm. Besides, ultrasound of the abdomen showed hepatosplenomegaly (liver, 2 cm below costal margin; spleen, 4 cm below costal margin). The CT scan of chest showed emphysema in the left lobe, but no obvious abnormalities in abdomen and head. Bone marrow aspiration smear and biopsy examination were normal without hemophagocytosis. The cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination revealed increased CSF pressure (230mmH2O), white blood cell (WBC, 30106/L, 44 % monocytes) and protein (743 mg/L) but the infection and tumor tests were negative. His first brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) one month before hospitalization was normal, but MRI ten days after admission showed tonsillar hernia and extensive areas of increased signal involving the bilateral cerebrum, cerebellum, brainstem, basal ganglia, thalamus and corpus callosum, with dot-like and nodular enhancement . At this point, the laboratory findings were not consistent with infection, malignancy or autoimmune disease. Unifying diagnosis could not be made.
Based on the CSF findings and neurological manifestations, the patient was treated with mannitol (5ml/kg, q8h) and glycerin fructose (5ml/kg, q12h) to decrease intracranial pressure. However, the intracranial pressure remained above 330 mmH2O with WBC, protein and glucose elevation. His clinical status progressively deteriorated after 10 days of therapy, including daily fevers, persistent headache, worsening drowsiness, growing irritability, nuchal rigidity and insensitive pupilary light reflex. Repeat MRI demonstrated cerebral oedema. Therefore, he was administered pulse methylprednisolone (10 mg/kg/day) for 3 days to control inflammation. A possibility of central nervous system (CNS) HLH was considered. Subsequently, he presented cytopenias affecting 2 cell lineages (hemoglobin, 76 g/L; platelets, 89106/L), hypertriglyceridemia (3.51 mmol/L) and hypofibrinogenemia (1.24 g/L). Soluble CD25 (sCD25) was elevated (131,840 pg/ml vs. 6400 pg/ml in control). Immunological work-up showed low NK cell activity (12.81 % vs. 15.44 % in control) and defective CD107a degranulation (1.01 % vs. 10 % in control). Serum cytokines demonstrated very high levels of IFN-γ(213.6 pg/ml) and IL-10 (50.42 pg/ml). The collective results were consistent with a diagnosis of CNS HLH. All of his laboratory and clinical findings before and at the time of diagnosis were summarized in Table .
As the patient was noted to have a hypopigmented skin with silvery-grey hair, hair shaft examination and skin biopsy were done. Under the light microscopy, the patient’s hair showed irregular melanosome clumping along the shaft . The skin biopsy was generally normal , and EBER in situ hybridization was negative. Simultaneously, whole exome sequencing (WES) for genetic analysis was performed, which identified a novel homozygous mutation in RAB27A gene c.1 A > G (p.Met1Val, exon 2). Parents and his half-sister were found to be heterogynous for the same mutation.
Hence, the patient was diagnosed as GS2 with HLH, characterizing by CNS involvement at the onset. Therefore, etoposide-based HLH-1994 protocol for HLH were given. Recently, ruxolitinib (RUX), an oral selective JAK1/2 inhibitor, has shown great promise in mouse models of both primary and secondary HLH, including the improvements in central nervous system involvement [–]. RUX as a bridge to allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (allo-HSCT) for refractory primary HLH is also reported . Meanwhile, several clinical trials of RUX for HLH treatment are ongoing and the preliminary data suggest that RUX is active and safe in their settings. One of the enrolled patients was later diagnosed as primary HLH and achieved complete remission . Therefore, we combined HLH-1994 regimen and RUX (5 mg, q12h) for this patient, which resulted in substantial resolution of all clinical symptoms and laboratory parameters. Within 3 days after HLH treatment, the patient became afebrile, and mental status recovered with fluid and neurological imaging abnormalities progressively improved. Repeat head CT showed his tonsillar hernia resolved by approximately 2 weeks of treatment, thus mannitol and glycerin fructose were weaned off. Furthermore, follow-up brain MRI at the 4th week showed most of the extensive hyperintense lesions were attenuated . Hemoglobin and platelet count were progressively improved without further transfusion requirement by day 6. Inflammatory markers, including sCD25 and IFN-γ, had fallen rapidly to the normal levels. Repeat abdominal ultrasound showed complete recovery of hepatosplenomegaly. Then, he underwent haploidentical HSCT after 8 weeks of treatment with HLH activity in complete remission. At the time of writing, he has been discharged from the hospital and in good condition over three months.