A 71-year-old man was referred from the clinic due to abdominal distention. His condition was diagnosed as colon obstruction due to circumferential sigmoid colon cancer . He then underwent an emergent transverse colostomy, followed by sigmoid colon resection with D3 lymph node dissection. Three liver metastases were observed in S5, S7, and S8 . Thus, folinic acid, fluorouracil, and oxaliplatin, with bevacizumab therapy, had been given for six months before curative liver resection was performed. The chemotherapy resulted in the shrinkage of all metastatic tumors, and curative liver resection was proposed. The ICG clearance rate (ICGK) and ICGR15 were 0.12 and 21%, respectively. Meanwhile, the estimated remnant liver volume was only 39%, with a remnant ICGK value (ICGKrem) of 0.047. Therefore, a PVE of the right portal vein was suggested. Portography showed that the preserved right caudate lobe branch of the portal vein (PV1R) originated from the root of the right portal vein . Thus, PVE with PV1R preservation was performed . Eighteen days after PVE, liver function was reevaluated. The patient's ICGR15 (21–28%) and ICGK (0.12–0.10) were deteriorating. Moreover, computed tomography (CT) volumetry showed that the routine right hepatectomy would have resulted in a remnant liver volume (%) of 48% only (Left lobe: 493 ml/ Total liver volume: 1029 ml). Thus, it was difficult to perform a right hepatectomy due to the deteriorating liver function (ICGKrem: 0.048). The right caudate lobe was significantly enlarged (72 mL estimated by CT volumetry) because of PV1R preservation during PVE. The estimated remnant liver volume significantly increased to 55% (Left lobe with right caudate lobe: 565 ml/ total liver volume: 1029 ml) if the caudate lobe was completely preserved . Thus, a right hepatectomy with total caudate lobe preservation and concomitant colostomy closure was planned 21 days after PVE. Intraoperatively, the abdominal wall adhesions were carefully dissected. Then, the transverse colostomy was temporarily closed. The right hepatic lobe was mobilized, and the right inferior hepatic vein, which should be preserved, was exposed. Cholecystectomy and intraoperative cholangiography were performed. The right caudate branch of the bile duct diverged from the right hepatic duct . In the middle of the liver resection, the anterior and posterior Glisson’s pedicles were divided using an Endo-GIA purple cartridge. The right caudate Glisson’s pedicle was carefully preserved. The right hepatic vein was divided, and the right hepatic lobe was retrieved. After the liver resection, cholangiography was performed again to confirm the preservation of the right caudate biliary branch . The intra-abdominal findings are shown in Fig. C. Thereafter, the transverse colon was reconstructed using stapled functional end-to-end anastomosis. The operation time and blood loss were 424 min and 594 mL, respectively. There were no symptoms of postoperative liver failure (maximum total bilirubin level: 2.0 mg/dL on postoperative day 2) and biliary fistula. Enhanced CT scans performed on postoperative day 7 and one month after surgery revealed no findings suggestive of ischemic change, congestion, or biliary dilatation in the preserved caudate lobe, as shown in Fig. D and E. A surgical site infection, which was likely related to colostomy closure, occurred on postoperative day 22. However, the patient was discharged without complications one month after surgery.