A 65-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our hospital in April 2007 for abdominal pain after drinking alcohol. The patient details are as follows: Occupation: company employee; Ethnicity: Japanese; Weight: 45 kg; Height: 157 cm; Medical history: no appreciable disease ; Family history: unremarkable ; Habits: 900 ml of Japanese Sake (corresponding to 1,200 ml of wine) per day for 45 years and 20 cigarettes per day for 45 years. Abdominal examination carried out on the 1st consultation showed mild tenderness on the epigastric region without significant rebound and a palpable mass. The reminder of his examination was unremarkable. Laboratory tests showed the following values: amylase, 811 IU/L (reference level, 40-120); lipase, 732 IU/L (reference level, 17-57); Elastase-1, 2811 ng/ml (reference level 72-432); C-reactive protein, 3.24 (reference level 0.00-0.30). Values of other blood chemistry and hematology were unremarkable. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed many stones in the main pancreatic duct and a cystic lesion, 4 cm diameter, located in the pancreatic tail, that was diagnosed as pancreatic pseudocyst with pancreatolithiasis accompanied with chronic pancreatitis .
Initially the patient was treated conservatively but 6 weeks later abdominal pain had become severe and the cyst increased in size upto 6 cm diameter on CT scan. We recommended surgery, but the patient refused to undergo an operation and hoped medical management. Treatment using gabexate mesilate diminished his symptom but did not decrease the serum amylase level. 4 months after his first consultation abdominal pain became severe again and the cyst increased in size .
Once his symptom was relieved, after several days he complained a sudden and more severe left upper quadrant pain. Ultrasonography examination revealed heterogeneous mass in the cyst, which suggested intracystic hemorrhage .
CT scan also demonstrated high density structure in the cyst, which had not been found out on the previous CT scan, but showed no aneurysm or extravasation apparently .
Although the patient showed no sighs of shock, we diagnosed it as an intracystic hemorrhage and immediately selective angiography examination (SAG) was performed. SAG from celiac trunk or splenic artery demonstrated no aneurysm or extravasation but showed complete obstruction of the splenic vein and a collateral formation in the greater curvature side of the stomach .
Then we performed an urgent operation, which disclosed that the cyst of diameter 7 cm size involving the pancreatic tail and the spleen adhered firmly to the stomach and the colon, and the lower part of the cyst wall was united with a circumference fascia of the left kidney. A distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy was performed to remove all the stones in the pancreas and the cyst wall was removed partially to preserve the stomach, the colon and the left kidney .
The content of the cyst was dark reddish-brown bloody liquid and blood coagula. The value of amylase and CA19-9 of the liquid was 48,520 U/L and 7,880 U/ml, respectively. Histopathological finding revealed that no epithelium was observed in the inner lining and fibrosis and infiltration of inflammatory cells in the surrounding pancreatic tissue with atrophy was observed, then it was diagnosed as a chronic pancreatitis with a pseudocyst without any malignant portion. Postoperative course was uneventful and the serum amylase value decreased to the normal range, then the patient was discharged on postoperative day 18.