A 39-year-old Iranian woman presented with minimal bright red blood per rectum at Emam Reza Hospital in Mashhad, the referral university hospital in north-eastern Iran. The patient was married, unemployed, had nine siblings and denied any history of alcohol, tobacco or medication. The patient presented with multiple skin tags on her neck, which were determined to be non-PHTS-related. An intraoral examination revealed no significant findings. However, early-stage breast cancer had been detected during mammography screening.
Notably, the patient had a significant family history of cancer. At the age of 52, her father was diagnosed with cancer of the stomach, which subsequently metastasized to the liver and ultimately led to his death, and a cousin had been diagnosed with breast cancer. There was no reported history of radiation exposure or goitre in her family. The patient’s family tree represents all close relatives, both affected and unaffected by disease.
Upper endoscopy and colonoscopy were recommended due to resistant dyspepsia, rectal bleeding, family history of stomach cancer and mild anaemia. Oesophago-gastro-duodenoscopy (EGD) revealed 20–50 small sessile polyps in the stomach and duodenum. Microscopic examination of a biopsy from the gastric mucosa showed non-dysplastic, polypoid tissue. Notably, colonoscopy revealed over 50 diminutive sessile polyps in the rectosigmoid area, while other parts of the colon were normal. Subsequent histological examination confirmed these polyps as hyperplastic, hamartomatous polyps.
Since the guidelines issued by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) recommend genetic testing for patients with more than 20 colon polyps, the patient was enrolled in the IHCCR programme for genetic consultation. Its charge is to identify individuals at high risk of hereditary colorectal cancer or polyposis in Iran confirming their findings by WES.
DNA was extracted from whole blood using standard procedures. Human whole exome enrichment was performed using ‘Agilent SureSelect V6 Target Enrichment Kit’ according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, genomic DNA was captured using biotinylated RNA probes, which target all exonic regions and 10 flanking base-pairs (bp). After amplification and sequencing using the Illumina HiSeq4000 platform , the data were analysed using standard bioinformatics tools. Variant calling was performed using the genome analysis toolkit (GATK) software that detects variations, such as single point mutations and small Indels (within 20 bp). The DNA sequence was mapped and analyzed in comparison with the published human genome build (UCSC hg19 reference sequence). Variants with a minor allele frequency (MAF) ≥ 0.1% (heterozygous variants) or ≥ 1% (homozygous variants) were excluded using 1000 Genomes (Asian), Iranom and the Genome Aggregation Database (gnomAD) . Sorting intolerant from tolerant (SIFT) , Polymorphism Phenotyping, version 2 (PolyPhen2) combined with HumVar, a dataset that provides pre-computed predictions of the functional impact of human non-synonymous (change of amino acids) variants and combined annotation-dependent depletion (CADD) with Phred score ≥ 20 were used for prediction of missense variants. The raw data used in the genetic evaluation of this case are provided as a supplementary file .
The WES analysis of the patient’s DNA revealed a heterozygous pathogenic variant on the PTEN gene, specifically a pathogenic non-sense variant (c.697C > T, p.Arg233Ter) with a CADD score of 37 and a Deep Neural Network (DANN) score of 0.997 . The PTEN gene is associated with autosomal dominant PHTS , but in this case, the patient did not exhibit any skin or clinical symptoms of the condition. According to guidelines of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) and the European Reference Network on Genetic Tumour Risk Syndromes (ERN GENTURIS), PHTS-suspected cases should undergo gene panel testing [, ].
The International Cowden Syndrome Consortium (ICSC) [, ] recommends surveillance for additional manifestations of PHTS and potentially related malignancies, as outlined in Table . Patients suspected of having PHTS are at increased risk of cancers of the breast, thyroid, colon and rectum necessitating further investigation . Furthermore, the American Gastroenterology Association recommends annual comprehensive physical examination, thyroid ultrasound screening beginning at the time of diagnosis, endometrial suction biopsy starting at the age 30–35 and colonoscopy screening beginning at 35 years of age or 5–10 years before the initial documented case of colon cancer in the family .
The patient in question presented with a solid mass measuring 22 × 17 mm in the lower outer quadrant of the right breast, which was detected by mammography. Ultrasonography confirmed the presence of dense, oval nodules with well-defined margins measuring approximately 20 × 15 mm located at the 6 o’clock position of the right breast, 5 cm from the nipple. Based on the Breast Imaging Reporting and Data System (BIRADS), these nodules were categorized as BIRADS IV, indicating a suspicious abnormality that necessitates further workup to ascertain whether or not likelihood of malignancy.
In addition, thyroid ultrasonography revealed multiple, well-defined, isoechoic and hyperechoic nodules in both thyroid lobes. Further evaluation through fine-needle aspiration (FNA) biopsy showed a follicular lesion with undetermined significance classified as BETHESDA III. This category denotes that the specimen obtained is non-diagnostically relevant but does not exclude the possibility of malignancy, with and clinical correlation, repeat FNA and/or surgical excision recommended.
The patient underwent further evaluation as recommended but a biopsy of the endometrium revealed no abnormalities. Biochemical assessments of renal, liver and thyroid function were within the normal range, and the patient did not exhibit macrocephaly, which is a common PHTS feature.
Multiple foci of intraductal hyperplasia with mild to moderate nuclear grade and an area of invasive pattern suspicious for cribriform carcinoma were observed in the breast core needle biopsy . Immunohistochemistry (IHC) staining according to the 2013 ASCO/CAP HER2 guidelines was performed and revealed positivity for p63 and actin, indicating a solid nest of ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). The tumour cells also tested positive for estrogen and progesterone receptors in 90% of the cells. The HER2 status of the tumour was initially equivocal (2 +), with weak membranous staining in 30% of tumoural cells. To clarify the result, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) testing was performed and it revealed a negative HER2/neu gene status in the tumoural cells. As a result, the final HER2 status of the tumour was negative. A Ki-67 index was found in 5% of the tumour cells, indicating a low proliferation rate. Following partial mastectomy, a 2.2 cm invasive cribriform carcinoma with a Bloom-Richardson grade of 1(2 + 1 + 1) was observed. Notably, there was no evidence of vascular or perineural invasion and the surgical margins were free of tumour involvement.
A literature review was conducted using the PubMed database to identify cases of PHTS reported between March 2010 and March 2022. The search strategy used the terms “Hamartoma Syndrome, Multiple” [Mesh] AND “case report” OR “case series”. A comprehensive reference list search of related literature was performed, with the review limited to articles in the English language, excluding letters to the editor and review articles.
We identified 43 cases of PHTS, the characteristics of whom are summarised in Table . The median age of the cases was 39 years (IQR: 31–52; min–max: 14–75) and we noted that the disease predominantly affected women. Of the 43 cases, 23 had a family history of PHTS with complications, such as breast, thyroidal and endometrial neoplasms along with pathogenic variants in the PTEN/MMAC1 gene. Pathognomonic characteristics of PHTS, including acral keratosis, trichilemmomas, and mucocutaneous papillomas were reported in about 70% of the cases. Figure depicts the clinical criteria used to diagnose PHTS patients and their medical history, as reported in the literature review. Gastrointestinal polyps were frequently reported as clinical manifestations. Figure visualizes the mutated sites of the PTEN pathogenic variants indicating that pathogenic variants in exon 5 were frequent.