A 40 year-old male presented to our institution with a 20-year history of mild left-sided lower back and flank pain, secondary to an osteochondroma. His pain was activity related and was gradually increasing over 2 years. He occasionally complained of nocturnal symptoms.
Radiological imaging included serial CT and MRI of the lumbar spine . The CT data was obtained using a GE Lightspeed VCT 64 slice CT Scanner with 0.625 mm slice thickness. The MRI data was obtained using a GE Healthcare 3 T Discovery MR750 scanner. The scan parameters for each modality are outlined in Tables and . The most recent scans revealed a lesion originating from the posteromedial aspect of the left iliac crest lesion, adjacent to and surrounding the left L5 transverse process. It had a stable appearance since the patient’s puberty and had no aggressive radiological features of chondrosarcoma. The MRI revealed the proximity of the L3, L4 and L5 nerve roots as they exited the intervertebral foraminae and before they passed into the psoas muscle.
The patient was conservatively managed however after 5 months he represented with progression of his symptoms reporting depressive symptoms and cessation of work because of the pain. He started to complain of pain and numbness in his thigh and knee, due to L3 and L4 radiculopathies. He responded well to selective nerve root injections, however his symptoms recurred and operative management was decided upon.
3D-printing of the pelvis CT and lumbar spine MRI were used for preoperative planning . The CT digital imaging and communication in medicine (DICOM) was imported into 3D Slicer version 4.10.2. A region of interest was created around the left ilium, sacrum, L4 and L5 vertebrae, with a crop scale of 1.0 and isotropic spacing. The model was created by the ‘grow from seeds’ extension in the Segment Editor of 3D Slicer. Segmentation defects were corrected by modifying seeds and manual editing to ensure accuracy of the models. Closing (fill holes) and opening (remove extrusions) smoothing effects at a kernel size of 2 mm were used to obtain a final model. The model was made hollow with a shell thickness of 2 mm, and was exported as a standard tessellation language (STL) file. The MRI DICOM was imported into 3D Slicer. The axial T2 weighted sequences were used to identify the nerve roots. The ‘draw tube’ extension in the Segment Editor of 3D Slicer was used to trace the L3, L4 and L5 nerve roots using a 2 mm radius. The nerve roots were combined into one model and exported as an STL file. The bone and nerve models were aligned to allow for closer assessment of the nerve roots relationship to the tumour. The L3 nerve was found to be traversing directly anterior to the lesion and actually form a groove on the anterior and cranial surface . The L4 nerve root was found to be traversing directly medial to the lesion.
The bone model STL file was imported into Formlabs Preform software (Version 3.0.2). Layer thickness was set to 0.1 mm, supports were autogenerated and printed in Grey resin using a Formlabs Form 2 (Formlabs Inc. Somerville, MA) desktop 3D printer. The print time was 13 h and 15 min, and print volume was 176 mls.
The nerve root model STL file was imported into Formlabs Preform software. Layer thickness was set to 0.1 mm, supports were autogenerated and printed in Elastic 50A resin, using a Formlabs Form 2 desktop 3D printer. The print time was 3 h and 45 min, and print volume was 18 mls. After printing, post-processing of the models included soaking in 99% isopropyl alcohol for 20 min, and then UV curing for 30 min at 60-degrees Celsius in the Form Cure machine (Formlabs Inc. Somerville, MA). After removal of supports, the models were inspected to exclude printing failures or errors. No additional postprocessing was required.
The patient was positioned prone on a Jackson table after administration of a general anaesthetic. The tumour was approach via a posterior, longitudinal, paramedian incision (Wiltse approach). The posterior aspect of the tumour was dissected in a subperiosteal manner. A bone scalpel (Misonix, Farmingdale, NY) was used to make one osteotomy at the base of the lesion, adjacent to the superomedial aspect of the ilium. The lesion was removed en-bloc. Complete resection of the lesion was confirmed by comparing the resected lesion to the 3D-printed model. Operative resection of the tumour took 58 mins, and was confirmed an osteochondroma on histology with negative surgical margins . There were no intra- or postoperative complications, with complete resolution of symptoms at 2 weeks and 3 months postoperatively.