A 63-year-old female presented to the emergency department (ED) following an accidental subtotal amputation of her right hand with a circular saw while working on a craft project with her husband. She initially presented to an outside hospital who arranged transfer to a tertiary care center by air for plastic surgery consultation and possible re-implantation. En route she had an episode of nausea and vomiting accompanied by bradycardia to the 20s. She became briefly pulseless and underwent one round of Advanced Cardiac Life Support including chest compressions, intravenous epinephrine, and intubation. She was diverted to the closest ED for stabilization where she received one unit of packed red cells for a hemoglobin of 8 grams per deciliter (g/dL) (reference range: 11.3–15.2 g/dL). She was subsequently transported to our tertiary care center by ambulance.
Physical examination revealed subtotal amputation through the base of all five metacarpals extending from radial to ulnar aspect with a small remaining tissue bridge along the ulnar border. An intermittent monophasic Doppler signal was present near the ulnar artery. All five fingers were cold and pale without capillary refill .
On arrival, laboratory evaluation revealed a hemoglobin of 10.7 g/dL, lactic acid of 3.7 millimoles per liter (mmol/L) (reference range: 0.5–2.2 mmol/L), and troponin of 0.183 nanograms per milliliter (ng/mL) (0.000–0.029 ng/mL). An ECG demonstrated one millimeter ST elevations in the anterior precordial leads without reciprocal depression. Point-of-care echocardiogram in the ED revealed severely reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 25–30% with apical hypokinesis, basal hyperkinesis, mild mitral regurgitation, and preserved right heart function. This presentation and echocardiographic findings were highly concerning for takotsubo cardiomyopathy (, ).
Following completion of the patient’s amputation at the bedside by plastic surgery, the patient was admitted to the medical intensive care unit for further management. Formal echocardiography approximately 24 hours after presentation revealed moderately reduced left ventricular systolic function with an ejection fraction of 35–40%. The mid to distal septal, anterior, and lateral walls were severely hypokinetic to akinetic with akinetic apex. The right ventricle remained normal in size and function. Troponin peaked at 1.589 ng/mL and B-type natriuretic peptide uptrended from 39 picograms per milliter (pg/mL) on arrival to 536 pg/mL (reference range: 0.0–100.0 pg/ml).
Left heart catheterization was performed on hospital day one and revealed minimal non-obstructive coronary artery disease with luminal irregularities and elevated left ventricular end diastolic pressure of 19 millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) (<12 mm Hg), essentially ruling out coronary artery disease as a cause for her cardiomyopathy. She underwent formalization of her right hand amputation with plastic surgery and was subsequently extubated. She was discharged from the hospital after a 10-day admission. Eight months following the accident the patient was fitted with a bioelectric hand prosthesis. Unfortunately, no further information was available regarding her cardiovascular recovery.