A female truck driver of 34 years old came to the Eye Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine on January 24, 2021, due to a loss of right vision for 1 year. She was diagnosed with “cataracts” in the local hospital 2 years ago and received left cataract surgery there without special treatment for her right eye. She had poor vision in the left eye since childhood and denied a history of hypertension, diabetes, and a family history of glaucoma or hereditary disease. The general examinations showed fasting blood glucose and glycosylated hemoglobin levels of 13.2 mmol/L and 9.8% respectively, without any other significant abnormality. For eye examinations, the right visual acuity was 20/40 (+3.75/−0.25 × 110) without any improvement following correction, the left visual acuity was 20/125 and 20/100 (+1.25/−0.25 × 133) following correction, and the intraocular pressures were 19 mm Hg in both eyes. Slit-lamp examination revealed the conjunctiva was not hyperemic, a curved white line (posterior embryotoxon) was shown behind the corneal limbal at bitamporal, peripheral anterior synechia, the dispersion of pigment granules was observed behind the cornea , the anterior chamber of the eye was deep, the mid-peripheral part of the iris was sunken backward, the uvea around the pupil edge was turned over , and the pupil was slightly shifted upwards the nose, the cortex of right eye was opaque and of the artificial lens in the left eye was right positioned. Both pupil diameters were about 4 mm following mydriasis. Gonioscopy was conducted for both eyes with results showing that the anterior chamber angle was closed at bitamporal and was open at other sides, the pigment granules were heavily dispersed over the trabecular meshwork with color like soy sauce , and ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) showed that the iris was fine and sunken backward, closely adhering to the lens . The axis oculi of right eye and left eye were 23.6 mm and 24.49 mm, and the average corneal curvatures of right eye and left eye were 39.78D and 40.24D, and the results of the rest of exploration including fundoscopy and visual field were strictly normal. The results of ophthalmologic diagnosis included complicated cataract (right eye), PDS (both eyes), Axenfeld–Rieger syndrome (both eyes), congenital EU (both eyes), intraocular lens implantation (left eye), and amblyopia (left eye). The medical consultation recommended regulation of blood glucose for 1 week and then we performed cataract surgery on her right eye, during which, flaky pigmentation around the posterior capsule was observed. On day 1 after the operation, the intraocular pressure of the right eye was 31.7 mm Hg, Timolol was dropped, and the intraocular pressure was dropped to normal 2 days later. The visual acuity was 20/20 and the intraocular pressure was normal on week 1 after the operation.