A 28-year-old white woman presented to our emergency department with dyspnea, edema of the lower limbs, and weight gain of 11 kg in the last 2 weeks. Her respiratory frequency was 20 breaths/minute, her heart rate was 82 beats/minute, her blood pressure was 98/65 mmHg, and her oxygen saturation was 100% on room air. Her body temperature was 36.7 °C.
The patient was alert and cooperative; in no acute distress; and orientated to person, place, and time. An examination of her lungs revealed clear auscultation and percussion without rales, wheezing, or diminished breath sounds. A cardiac examination revealed normal S1 and S2 and no S3, S4, or murmurs; the rhythm was regular. She had no cyanosis or pallor. Her extremities were warm and well perfused with distinctive edema of the lower limbs. Her strength and sensation were symmetric and intact throughout. Her abdomen had positive bowel sounds and was soft, nondistended, and nontender.
The patient’s white blood cell count was 9600/μl, and her C-reactive protein level was 0.3 mg/dl. Her serum creatinine was within the normal range (0.9 mg/dl). On further evaluation, her serum albumin was decreased to 8.4 g/L, and urinalysis revealed proteinuria of 16 g/g creatinine.
The patient was not taking any medication at the time of presentation. She was a housewife and had one son.
For further evaluation, echocardiography was performed, revealing a 3×3-cm mass in the right ventricle, which was suspected to be a myxoma . Therefore, cardiac surgeons extracted the mass on the same day by using a minimally invasive technique. Histological examination yielded a relatively fresh thrombus and no signs of atypical cells or malignancy. Deep vein thrombosis of the legs could be excluded by color Doppler sonography. The patient had no clinical or echocardiographic signs of pulmonary embolism.
After discussing the urine findings with the patient, she reported an episode of proteinuria at the age of 7 years and again at 13 years, both of which were treated with steroids and chlorambucil. A kidney biopsy was not performed in childhood.
Because we suspected a very late recurrence of minimal change glomerulonephritis, and owing to the patient’s concomitant anticoagulation therapy, which was started after the surgery because of nephrotic syndrome, a kidney biopsy was again not performed. Treatment with oral steroids (1 mg/kg body weight) was immediately initiated. The patient’s proteinuria disappeared within 4 weeks, her weight went back to normal, and her serum albumin level 6 weeks later was also normal (35.9 g/L).