A 25-year-old right-handed Ethiopian man presented with a 2-year history of generalized weakness and wasting of his face, hands and feet. He often complained of stiffness and had difficulty in releasing his grip, as following a hand shake. He also has slow and difficult swallowing, and excessive daytime sleepiness. There was no history of fever, neck stiffness, ear discharge, or trauma. He had been on treatment for idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) for over 15 years, and was admitted for an episode of severe pneumonia in the preceding month. His family history is positive for DM in his mother and younger brother, and IGE in his elder brother. There was no past history of diabetes, hypertension, pulmonary tuberculosis, syphilis, alcohol or tobacco intake, or other substance abuse.
He was thin built and without anemia, jaundice, or cyanosis. His cortical functions were normal. His speech was nasal. His face was long and narrow with hollowed cheeks and sagging jaw, and frontal baldness. His masseter, pterygoid and temporalis muscles were weak bilaterally. He had no cataract. Intrinsic muscles of his hand, muscles of his distal forearm, and ankle dorsiflexors were moderately weak and atrophied on both sides. There were clinical hand grip and percussion myotonia. His superficial and muscle stretch reflexes were normal. His primary and cortical sensations were normal. His gait was high stepping. The result of examination of his other system organs was normal.
The results of his routine hematologic and chemistry laboratory tests were normal. His serum fasting blood glucose, follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone levels were normal. His serum muscle enzymes and a routine electroencephalogram were normal. A needle electromyography showed insertional classic myotonic discharges. A nerve conduction study showed mild axonal sensorimotor polyneuropathy.
A muscle biopsy showed marked increase of internalized nuclei (arrayed in chains in longitudinal section), severely atrophic muscle fibers with pyknotic nuclear clumps, muscle fiber necrosis and regeneration of isolated muscle fibers, architectural changes such as sarcoplasmic masses and ring fibers, and a preferential atrophy of type I fibers .
He was subsequently discharged after he improved after pneumonia and his seizures were controlled with 300mg of phenytoin per day.