A-61-year-old male of Han ancestry was admitted to our hospital on July 15, 2020 due to a 4-yr history of progressive swollen soft masses at multiple sites.
The patient presented with progressive soft masses over the abdomen for more than four years, swellings in the mandible, back of the neck and elbows also gradually enlarged during these four years.
The patient was a heavy drinker with an average of 500 mL liquor per day for 45 years. He had a smoking history of approximately 20 cigarettes/day for 45 years,. The patient was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes more than 20 years previously, with poorly controlled glucose for many years. He had a history of hypertension for 18 years and did not take any antihypertensive drugs.
He had no family history of similar diseases and denied previous special drug use.
Physical examination upon admission revealed the following: The patient was conscious; a body mass index of 21.0 kg/m2; subcutaneous masses in the mandible, back of the neck, abdomen and elbows ; no signs of moon face, paper skin, hirsutism, or purple stria.
Laboratory tests showed a total cholesterol level of 92.16 mg/dL, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level of 35.28 mg/dL, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level of 37.44 mg/dL, triglyceride level of 20.7 mg/dL, hemoglobin A1c of 5.4% and 24 h urinary albumin was 343.5 mg/d. Thyroid function was in the normal range. His basal cortisol level as well as his 1 mg dexamethasone suppression test were normal. Hepatitis B, hepatitis C, human immunodeficiency virus and syphilis were all negative.
Ultrasonography showed diffuse lipomatosis and lymph node echo in the neck in January 2018. The thickest part of the mass in the neck was about 28 mm. In July 2020, ultrasonography showed that the thickest part of the mass in the neck was about 44 mm. Ultrasonography of the elbow suggested that there was a hypoechoic mass between the palmaris muscles on both sides of the elbow, with a range of about 51 mm × 15 mm × 34 mm on the left and 46 mm × 14 mm × 35 mm on the right. The boundary was clear and the internal echo was not uniform, with strong echoes of several fiber spacers, similar to the echoes of adipose tissue. Simultaneously, excessive fat deposition was suggested on the mandible and the abdominal area of the patient by ultrasonic examination. Computed tomography showed diffuse and marked fatty deposits in the subcutaneous superficial fascia space of the neck without internal lesions . A breast ultrasound examination showed that both sides of the breast had excessive fat deposition and a flaky strong echo was seen in the deep side of the areola. The left side was about 33 mm × 3 mm × 25 mm and the right side was about 44 mm × 8 mm × 31 mm. The internal lobular structure was disordered, and small hypoechoic areas were seen, but no obvious mass echo and mammary duct expansion was found.