A 53-year-old man presented in the emergency department with sudden chest pain lasting for 30 min. He was a 40-pack-year current smoker with high blood pressure on no medication. Blood pressure was 160/110 mmHg and pulse rate 60 beats/min. Electrocardiography showed ST-segment elevations in leads II, III, and aVF . Serum creatinine was 0.8 mg/dl and serum troponin I 0.01 ng/ml. Killip classification was class I. Aspirin 300 mg and ticagrelor 180 mg were administered, and coronary angiography (CAG) was performed immediately under temporary ventricular pacing. CAG revealed an ectatic right coronary artery (RCA) completely occluded by a large amount of thrombus in the mid-portion . A bolus of unfractionated heparin (8000 IU) and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonist (abciximab, 0.25 mg/kg) was administered intravenously and MAT was performed three times using a 6-Fr aspiration catheter (Rebirth, Goodman Co. Ltd., Nagoya, Japan). After red thrombi were aspirated, thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) grade 2 flow was achieved but a large filling defect persisted in the mid portion of the RCA, with distal embolization in the posterior descending artery (PDA) . Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) (Atlantis, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) revealed a ruptured plaque containing a large necrotic core and a large amount of thrombus remaining in the lesion. The external elastic membrane (EEM) diameter and the luminal diameter of the normal adjacent proximal segment of the occlusion were 7.5 mm and 6.5 mm, respectively . The culprit lesion was 7.7 mm in EEM diameter and 4.8 mm2 in minimal luminal area (MLA) . Because stent apposition might be difficult in such a large vessel, we decided to perform catheter-directed intracoronary thrombolysis using alteplase. The tip of a 2.7 Fr microcatheter (Progreat®, Terumo, Somerset, NJ, USA) was placed on the culprit lesion, and 5 mg of alteplase (Actilyse, Boehringer Ingelheim, Germany) in 5 mL normal saline was slowly administered over five minutes through the microcatheter. After 10 min, CAG showed improved coronary blood flow from the TIMI grade 2 to 3 in the mid portion of the RCA and from the TIMI grade 0 to 1 in the PDA, with remaining thrombi in the mid portion . Because significant stenosis persisted, a 4.5 × 8 mm non-compliant balloon (Quantum, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) was inflated up to 16 atm in the mid portion of the RCA to disrupt the partially lysed thrombi. The lesion was dilated after the balloon angioplasty; however TIMI flow of the RCA appeared to be worsened . Intracoronary thrombolysis was repeated in the same manner. Blood flow improved to TIMI grade 3 and IVUS showed increased MLA with remaining thrombi . The chest pain was completely relieved and the ST-segment elevation was resolved .
Intravenous infusion of the glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitor was maintained for 12 h after PCI. Oral administration of aspirin (100 mg/day), ticagrelor (180 mg/day), rosuvastatin (20 mg/day), bisoprolol (1.25 mg/day), and candesartan (8 mg/day) was continued. Low molecular weight heparin (dalteparin 100 IU/kg every 12 h; Fragmin®, Pfizer Inc., New York, NY) was administered subcutaneously after the femoral sheath was removed. No significant bleeding complications occurred after PCI. CAG repeated 9 days after the PCI revealed TIMI grade 3 blood flow in the RCA and PDA, and insignificant focal stenosis with a small amount of remaining thrombus in the lesion . IVUS showed that the MLA was 9.7 mm2 in the lesion and the fractional flow reserve measured under maximal hyperemia was 0.98. Based on these assessments, we decided not to perform any additional intervention. The patient was discharged 12 days after PCI. CAG repeated 6 months after PCI showed complete dissolution of the thrombi and minimal remaining stenosis in the lesion with TIMI 3 blood flow in the RCA .