A 63-year-old Hispanic female (height 1.5 m, weight 76.1 kg, BMI 33.8 kg/m2) and lifetime non-smoker who was admitted to the ER with 3 days of shortness of breath and chest pain that worsened on ambulation. Her medical history included obesity and type 2 diabetes for which she was on metformin. She also reported a 5-month history of M. oleifera leaf extract supplement use. Her vitals were normal except for tachypnea and low oxygen saturation (93%) on room air. She spoke in complete sentences and there was no use of accessory muscles. Chest was clear bilaterally with no abnormal heart sounds. She had a slightly larger right lower extremity calf diameter when compared to the left lower extremity. Arterial blood gas showed increased A-a gradient, hypocapnia, and hypoxemia. CXR and EKG were normal. PoCUS revealed right ventricle (RV) dilation and moderately reduced cardiac contractility. An emergent CTPA showed bilateral PE with RV strain . She was started on initial anticoagulation (AC) and admitted to the ICU for hemodynamic monitoring. Venous Duplex US lower extremity bilateral was negative for DVT. We did not proceed with catheter-directed thrombolysis since she was hemodynamically stable, improved with supplemental oxygen, and had no contraindication to systemic fibrinolysis. Upon further evaluation, her history was negative for any major transient risk factor for VTE. Similarly, her up-to-date mammogram, colonoscopy, pap smear, and intravaginal ultrasound were negative for malignancy. Since she had a negative personal and family history of VTE and no obvious risk factors for the event, we determined that the sub-massive PE was likely induced by Moringa Oleifera leaf extract that was documented by two studies as having procoagulant effect in human plasma. So, she was advised to discontinue use of the supplement. After 72 hours, she was discharged on maintenance AC for 3 months with primary care follow-up given. At the 3-month follow-up, we did not evaluate for hypercoagulable disorders, since thrombophilia disorders are less likely given her age (> 40 years), a negative personal and family history of VTE, and inadequacy of thrombophilia screening in identifying inherited risks of VTE.