A 65-year-old woman was admitted to our department following a 2-week history of rapidly progressive visual reduction, drowsiness, polyuria, and polydipsia. Her medical history included a temporal arachnoid cyst, symptomatic with seizures, and VIII cranial nerve schwannoma treated with gamma-knife radiosurgery 2 years before. Her clinical examination revealed no neurological deficit other than bitemporal hemianopsia; there was no diarrhea or flushing. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a sellar/suprasellar mass (diameter of 2 cm) with a heterogeneous signal compressing the optic chiasm and extending laterally toward the left cavernous sinus. The lesion was predominantly isointense to the gray matter on T1-weighted images (WI) and hyperintense on T2-WI . The images showed diffuse homogeneous enhancement following contrast administration [Figure and ]. Interestingly, an MRI examination performed 2 years before, for follow-up after radiosurgery for vestibular schwannoma and frontal arachnoid cyst, demonstrated a normal pituitary gland [Figure –]. Differential diagnosis based on imaging included pituitary macroadenoma or metastasis. Endocrinological evaluation showed the following levels – thyroid-stimulating hormone 1.31 mU/ml, free thyroxine 3.9 pg/ml, free triiodothyronine 2.4 pg/ml, and prolactin (PRL) 77 ng/ml. The patient underwent endoscopic endonasal transsphenoidal surgery with the aid of neuronavigation. On initial inspection, the tumor resembled a pituitary adenoma. However, on entering the lesion, it had a firm and solid consistency and was not removable with suction. Therefore, the main part was dissected with curettes and removed with punch forceps. Moreover, the upper part of the lesion presented clear infiltration of the optic chiasm without a safe plane of cleavage . Because the intraoperative histological diagnosis was consistent with malignant epithelial neoplasm, and the lesion was firmly adherent to the optic chiasm, total removal was not possible, and after decompression of the optic chiasm, a small residual mass of tumor was left in place.
Histological and immunohistochemical analysis of the pituitary biopsy showed a neuroendocrine neoplasm of at least intermediate grade. The pituitary mass was characterized by cells with scant cytoplasm and nuclei with speckled chromatin. Mitotic activity was present and vigorous (up to 9–10 mitoses per high power field). There was no evidence of necrosis . In the background, multiple fragments of anterior pituitary tissue were noted. Immunohistochemical stains were performed on paraffin-embedded tissue using antibodies to synaptophysin, cytokeratin Cam 5.2, chromogranin, thyroid transcription factor (TTF-1), CDX2, Ki-67, p53 protein, and pituitary hormones. Tumor cells stained with antibodies to cytokeratin Cam 5.2. , synaptophysin , and chromogranin. The results for staining with TTF-1 and CDX2 were negative, and p53 protein was overexpressed in over 5% of tumor cells. The Ki-67 labeling index was approximately 25%. These findings support the diagnosis of neuroendocrine neoplasm.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and neurological examination revealed a complete visual recovery. Before the patient was discharged, an extensive search for a primary carcinoid tumor or other metastases was undertaken. Images from CT of the thorax and abdomen were normal. Both 11C-5- hydroxytryptophan PET and Somatostatin Receptor scintigraphy using Indium 111Pentetreotide [111In-DTPA-D-Phe-] (Octreoscan) showed no additional area of abnormal uptake; therefore, primary pituitary NET was confirmed.
Subsequent postoperative CT and MRI demonstrated the presence of an abnormal signal toward the cavernous sinus and suprasellar area, which was consistent with residual disease. Then, after consultation with the neuro-oncology group, the patient was successfully treated with fractioned stereotactic radiotherapy and polychemotherapy, (using a combination of cisplatinum, ifosfamide, and etoposide) with good tolerance.
Fractioned stereotactic radiotherapy (SRT), employing image integration techniques and a frame that could be relocated to facilitate a fractioned dosing scheme, was carried out under a plan for reducing the treatment risk of the optic apparatus. Postoperative CT and MRI imaging were employed for greater precision in identifying the target. The relevant anatomy and tumor residual volume were then outlined. Because the tumor was close to critical normal tissue such as the optic chiasm, optic nerves, and cavernous sinus, the rotational angles were planned to reduce the doses to these critical regions. The treatment consisted of 8 daily fractions of 3.5 Gy to the 65% isodose line and a total dose of 43.1 Gy. Thus, the optic chiasm was exposed to a mean total dose of 208.6 cGy. No deterioration of visual acuity or pituitary function occurred after SRT.
Follow-up MRI studies at 12, 24, and 48 months were performed [Figure –] showing the stability of the residual mass in the sellar region. Results from the neurological examination were negative.