The patient was a 6-year-old girl retrognathic maxilla in early mixed dentition. The facial analysis reflected mesocephalic whose chief complaint was “upper front teeth is behind the lower teeth”. Clinical examination reported with an angle class III molar relationship with skeletal pattern of retrognathic maxilla, orthognathic mandible, mesoprosopic facial form, and anterior facial divergence. The patient had mild concave profile with short upper lip length and normal lower lip length producing incompetent lip. The mentolabial sulcus is normal and obtuse nasolabial angle with high clinical Frankfurt mandibular angle (FMA). There is reverse overjet of 1 mm .
Teeth present:
Maxillary arch is symmetrical, U shaped, spacing in anterior region.
Mandibular arch is symmetrical, U shaped with good alignment in anterior region .
Cephalometric analysis suggests a class III skeletal pattern with a combination of retrognathic maxilla and prognathic mandible with increase in lower facial height and increase in gonial angle with normal length of ramus height and body of mandible. The upper incisors are proclined and lower incisors have normal inclination.
Bjork, Grave, Brown: stage 3
Fishman skeletal maturity indicator: S.M.I-3
Singer method: prepubertal stage
Handwrist radiograph suggests initial ossification of hook of the hamate, initial ossification of the pisiform, and proximal finger of second phalanx of second being equal to its epiphysis. Patient is in the prepubertal growth stage.
Cervical vertebra evaluation: inferior border of C2, C3, and C4 were flat at this stage. This suggests patients are in initial stage wherein 80–100% adolescent growth is expected.
Correction of anterior crossbite.
Functional class I molar relationship.
Establishing a class I skeletal relationship.
Creating an ideal overbite and overjet.
Correction of soft tissue profile.
The treatment alternatives such as chin cup appliances could be used during early treatment, but many studies suggest patients treated early with chin cup alone have latent catchup of mandibular in forward and downward directions. Another option was not to provide any treatment in growing phase. The final treatment was opted based on the severity of malocclusion. Camouflage treatment is provided for milder malocclusion and surgical option for severe dentofacial deformity. Most patients hope to begin their treatment early to avoid negative psychological effect on their personality development.
The third treatment option was early palatal expansion in mixed dentition with face mask to correct the anterior crossbite and maxillary protraction as the patient is in growing phase. When patients are presented in early growth period, we advise face mask therapy with palatal expansion.
The intraoral rapid palatal expansion appliance with bonded acrylic splint-type expander was placed. An RME screw (liberal) was adapted anteriorly mesial to deciduous first molar and posteriorly distal to the permanent first molar. The intraoral hook was made of 19 gauge stainless steel wire to hold elastic. The hooks were placed on the buccal surface between the first and the second deciduous molars. The splint was cemented onto the posterior tooth with the glass ionomer cement. The screw was activated once a day, before the patient goes to bed. The screw was activated up to 6 weeks .
After 1 week of activation of rapid palatal screw for maxillary expansion and reverse pull-face mask was advised on the forehead and the chin of patient. Initially 7 oz elastics were worn for 2 weeks and later increased to 14 oz. Maxillary protraction require 300–600 g force per side. Elastics were placed on the buccal surface of first deciduous molar hook with a downward pull from 30° to 40° to occlusal plane, which produces the most translatory effect. Patient is instructed to wear elastic all the time except during school period and outdoor sports (16-hour/day) for 6 months.