A healthy, engaged 28-year-old East Asian man presented at our hospital with a two-week history of right-side scrotal swelling and a three-month history of left-side scrotal enlargement. He had complained of temporary dull pain in his right scrotum, but the pain had disappeared within a day. He had no history of prior scrotal surgery, cryptorchidism or infections. On physical examination, his right scrotum was slightly swollen, whereas his left scrotum had marked swelling and a hard mass was detectable. A scrotal ultrasound showed heterogeneous bilateral scrotal masses that were hypoechoic on the right but hyperechoic on the left. Doppler ultrasonography indicated a diffuse hypovascular area in the right scrotal mass but iso- and hypervascular on the left. Pelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) demonstrated that his right testis was normal in size with decreased enhancement, whereas his left testis was much larger with heterogeneous enhancement .
These findings seemed to suggest bilateral TGCTs as a differential diagnosis, but his right testis did not have typical features of a TGCT; therefore, we examined his bilateral testes with MRI. His right testis had a serpiginous vessel and the intratesticular lesion showed high intensity on the T2-weighted image , but lack of contrast enhancement . His left testis had a large multinodular tumor with high intensity on the T2-weighted image . According to the MRI findings, his right and left testes were diagnosed with hemorrhagic infarction and a testicular tumor, respectively. Before further treatment, we performed a sperm test. Sperm were present (8 million/mL) and were cryopreserved for use in an assisted reproductive technique, although his levels of luteotropic hormone (15.6mIU/mL) and follicle-stimulating hormone (49.0mIU/mL) were high.
Based on the preoperative diagnosis, a transverse scrotal incision was made to allow right scrotal exploration. Since inspection of his right testis revealed a necrotic testis with 270° intravaginal torsion of the spermatic cord, his right testis was removed. Left radical orchiectomy was then carried out.
Pathological examination demonstrated hemorrhagic infarction and dilated vessels in his right testis , and typical seminoma cells and atrophy of seminiferous tubules in his left testis . Preoperative laboratory examination showed a high lactic dehydrogenase level of 580IU/L and normal alpha-fetoprotein and human chorionic gonadotropin levels in his serum. Because an abdominal CT showed para-aortic retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy, 9mm in size, we diagnosed seminoma stage IIA, which has a good prognosis according to the definition of the International Germ Cell Cancer Consensus Group. Therefore, our patient was promptly given chemotherapy in three cycles of bleomycin, etoposide and cisplatin . At the end of the three cycles, a follow-up CT scan showed complete resolution of the previous retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy and the tumor marker level was undetectable. After bilateral castration his serum level of testosterone was markedly decreased, so we started supplemental therapy of testosterone for his erectile function.