The patient was a 35-year-old unmarried female who denied a sexual history and presented with an intact hymen. Menophania occurred at 14 years of age, with a menstrual cycle of 30 d and a 7-10 d duration for each cycle. Breast swelling occurred prior to each period with no significant changes in leukorrhea. Positive results for polymenorrhea and dysmenorrhea were obtained, but the symptoms worsened over the prior four months, mostly at the beginning of each period. The previous menstrual period was on May 4, 2020, and the last menstrual period was on June 11, 2020, with the dysmenorrhea slightly improved over that of the previous month.
Beginning in February 2020, the patient started to experience recurrent left lower abdominal pain 2 d prior to and during the first 3 d of the period, which was associated with persistent anal distension but no nausea or vomiting or radiating pain. She did not seek medical advice, as the pain was tolerable for her at the beginning. This lasted until May 9, 2020, when the patient presented to our clinic with recurrent perimenstrual left lower quadrant pain that worsened over a day.
At 1 pm on June 16, the patient started to experience intermittent upper abdominal pain without inducement, associated with anal distension and fever of 38.3°C. There was no constipation, diarrhea, cold sweat, dizziness, or syncope.
Coronavirus disease 2019 was ruled out at the fever clinic.
Ultrasound examination revealed a dark cystic area measuring 4.9 cm × 4.6 cm on the left side with poor light transmittance, which suggested a left endometriotic cyst. Accordingly, the patient was given pain medications (four capsules t.i.d., p.o.). She returned to our clinic on June 10, 2020, and her period started the next day with significant relief of dysmenorrhea. The ultrasound results on June 15 again showed a cystic lesion, now measuring 5.66 cm × 6.58 cm × 5.79 cm, without an obvious fluid sonolucent area in the pelvic cavity. The patient refused the recommendation for surgical treatment. At 1 pm on June 16, she presented to our emergency clinic at approximately 11 pm, and abdominopelvic computed tomography (CT) confirmed a low-density focus measuring approximately 38 mm in diameter, a blurred mesentery fat plane in the pelvic cavity, and pelvic effusion. Ultrasound showed a complex echo density measuring 5.2 cm × 3.0 cm × 4.2 cm in the left ovarian area and a fluid sonolucent area with a depth of 2.0 cm in the pelvic cavity.