A 68-year-old female patient with past medical history of, two previous coronary artery bypass grafts, hypertension, chronic kidney disease, and diabetes mellitus, presented to a local hospital with chest pain and shortness of breath following an ST-elevation myocardial infarction. The patient was placed on an IABP and underwent a cardiac catheterization with the placement of five stents in the left anterior descending artery and saphenous vein graft. However she developed postoperative cardiogenic shock and multi-organ hypoperfusion despite her IABP and increased pressor requirements. She was then transferred to our institution for possible ventricular assist device placement.
Preoperative transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) demonstrated EF of 10% with apical akinesis, mild aortic insufficiency, moderate mitral and tricuspid valve regurgitation. Right heart was functional prompting for a CentriMag LVAD placement as Bridge-to-Decision/Recovery.
The patient was placed supine position. The position of Left ventricular (LV) apex was confirmed by transthoracic echocardiography. A 5 cm mini-thoracotomy at 5th intercostal space was made. A pericardial well was created and A Thoratec 34 Fr inflow cannula (Thoratec Corp, Pleasanton, CA) was brought to the field. The Thoratec cuff was sewn into the left ventricular apex using plegetted 3–0 Ethibond sutures followed by a running 3–0 Prolene suture. The right axillary artery was exposed. Activated clotting time guided heparin was confirmed to be more than 200 s. An 8 mm Dacron graft was sewn into the axillary artery in end-to-side fashion using a 4–0 Prolene running suture. A 20 Fr EOPA cannula was passed through the graft with the tip extending to the level of the anastomosis. Silk ties were used to secure the cannula to the graft. The distal axillary artery was banded with a vessel loop. Banding prevented arterial and right axillary artery distal from over perfusion and ensured adequate cerebral perfusion. Remaining off-pump, the 34 Fr Thoratec inflow cannula was passed into the left ventricle. The position was confirmed by TEE. The cannula was secured to the cuff and was de-aired and connected to the CentriMag device . The CentriMag was started and flow was established at 4.5 L/min. Human allograft and liquid matrix was inserted into the subclavian vein (2 times of 1cm3 of PalinGen Kardia Flow, Amnio Technology, Phoenix, AZ, USA) and into the anterior, lateral, and inferior walls of the LV (1cm3 of PalinGen Kardia Flow each).
Her end organ function recovered during the support. Transthoracic Echocardiography (TTE) was conducted which showed LV recovery, EF 30% with 1.5 LPM of LVAD flow at post op day 13. At post op day 20, fibrin clots developed in both the inflow and outflow cannula connectors prompting for an urgent decannulation at post op day 21. Upon off-pump LVAD removal, a subsequent IABP was placed and inotropic support was started in an effort to increase coronary perfusion. A head CT scan showed evidence of a small right sided ischemic cerebral infarct possibly due to clots dislodgement from the support/plumbing system or thrombotic occlusion of the right brachiocephalic trunk, right common carotid, right internal, and right vertebral arteries resulting in left sided hemiplegia. Extubation, IABP removal, and BiPAP administration was performed on post-explant day three. The patient was discharge to rehabilitation facility.