A 29-year-old male presented for evaluation of a GSW to his right lower extremity that he had sustained 1 month prior. The patient was at work, and while taking off his vest, his service weapon discharged spontaneously into his right lower extremity at the level of the fibular head, tracking to the lateral malleolus. He was immediately evaluated at an outside emergency department, and X-rays showed no bony injuries. Surgical intervention was not recommended at the time, and he was given supportive care. He reported sensitivity and an intermittent burning sensation located at his right lateral calf, rated a 2/10. He also endorsed paresthesias in his right ankle and first three toes, as well as a right-sided drop.
On physical examination, no gait abnormalities were seen. However, his right ankle plantar flexors were a 3/5 and long toe extensors were a 2/5. Sensation was diminished in the right leg in the common peroneal nerve distribution. Reflex examination was normal and dorsalis pedis pulses were 2+/4 bilaterally. 1+ edema of the right ankle was seen, and he had a good capillary refill of his right toes. Computed tomography performed at our institution demonstrated a bullet fragment in the distal right lower extremity , and ultrasound revealed partial thickness injuries in the right common peroneal nerve, just distal to the level of the fibular head , and deep peroneal nerve. Exploration of the right common, deep, and superficial peroneal nerve was recommended, as well as bullet fragment removal.
After proper patient positioning and preoperative protocols, an incision was made at the right fibular head following the trajectory of the common peroneal nerve. The fascia was further dissected and the common peroneal nerve was identified proximally to the popliteal fossa. No abnormalities were seen at this segment of the nerve, and dissection continued distally until dense scar tissue was encountered at the fibular tunnel. The common peroneal nerve was then decompressed distally, and the deep and superficial branches of the peroneal nerve were identified. Circumferential dissection of the nerves occurred, and dense scar tissue was seen at the point of bifurcation. The operating microscope was then used for further dissection, taking great care not to disrupt intact nerve fascicles. Neurolysis continued with the assistance of the microscope, and the wound was irrigated and closed in a layered fashion. Throughout the case, a monopolar stimulator was frequently used to confirm stimulation of both the right lower extremity lateral and anterior muscular compartments.
A separate incision was made in the distal right leg near the lateral malleolus. After dissection of the fascia and musculature of the lateral compartment of the leg, the bullet fragment was identified. The bullet fragment was removed in one piece , and an intraoperative X-ray confirmed that no other large bullet fragments were remaining. The wound was then irrigated and closed in a layered fashion. The patient awoke at his neurologic baseline and was taken to the post-anesthesia care unit. He ambulated shortly after with assistance and was discharged home the same day. At his follow-up visit 3 weeks later, the patient was doing well, with no difficulty walking. There was minimal pain and tenderness at this incision site, and he was referred to physical therapy for right leg strengthening. At his 1.5-month follow-up visit, he continued to do well, demonstrating right ankle dorsiflexion and plantar flexion with minimal discomfort. The motor examination of his right tibialis anterior and extensor hallucis longus was 4/5.