A 42-year-old Chinese man with 1-year history of hypertension (the highest pressure was 160/100 mmHg) was admitted into a local hospital for renal dysfunction in June 2016. He had a pain in right foot sole and the first metatarsophalangeal joint for one week. Past medical history includes sleep apnea hypopnea syndrome for five years, which was treated by continuous positive airway pressure. He denied tobacco use and cardiac disease history. The patient was from a family of Chinese ancestry . His father and grandfather both died of uremia. His mother had no symptoms of renal or other organs. His father had five siblings, two of whom were reported to have renal disease. Physical exam of the patient was unremarkable, without skin petechiae, macroglossia, hepatosplenomegaly, or peripheral neuropathy which are common signs of amyloidosis. He did not have peripheral edema or other signs of volume overload. Laboratory values demonstrated mild anemia with a hemoglobin concentration of 122 g/L. The sedimentation rate was 68 mm/h and the C-reactive protein level was 8.09 mg/ L. His renal function was impaired with an increased serum creatinine of 172 μmol/L and decreased eGFR of 41.33 mL/min/1.73 m2 (estimate by CKD-EPI equation in adults). He had a mild proteinuria with the urine protein of 530 mg/24 h. Immunofixation electrophoresis of serum and urine were both negative for monoclonal immunoglobulin. Liver function and myocardial enzyme examination were normal. CT scan of the lung, ultrasound of the heart and abdominal organs were normal. One month later, he was transferred to Peking University First Hospital in July 2016 for further diagnosis.
Renal biopsy was performed and a strip of renal cortex containing 36 glomeruli were seen under light microscope. Extensive homogeneous and PAS positive stained material was present in glomerular mesangium and subendothelium, also deposited in arteriolar walls [Fig. ]. These deposits produced apple green birefringence when stained with Congo red and viewed under polarized light. Focal tubular atrophy with interstitial fibrosis and mild infiltration of lymphocytes and monocytes were seen. Routine immunofluorescence showed negative staining for immunoglobulins, complements and light chains (κ and λ).
IHC of the specimen of the patient was strong positive in the renal glomeruli and vessels for lysozyme [Fig. ]. IHC with antibodies against λ-light chain, κ-light chain, AA amyloid, fibrinogen, transthyretin and gelsolin, apolipoprotein A-I and LECT2 were negative.
Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis confirms the deposits of the patient were lysozyme [Fig. ].
Genetic analysis of the lysozyme gene of the patient revealed a single base transversion from T to C at the first position of codon 82 (TGG/ CGG) of exon 2 , leading to the replacement of tryptophan by arginine in the mature protein (p.Trp82Arg, Fig. . b). No other base transversions were identified in exon 1 to 4 of lysozyme gene.
The patient was diagnosed as lysozyme amyloidosis. As there is no radical method for this disease, the patient was just given symptomatic treatment such as RAAS blockade, β blocker and CCB to lower blood pressure. After discharge, the patient was in relatively stable condition and took antihypertensive drugs regularly. His serum creatinine was 201 μmol/L and the the urine protein was 3.99 g/24 h in April 2019.
One of the patient’s uncles , was admitted into another local hospital for cough, expectoration, haemoptysis, pharyngalgia, dyspnea and a fever (the highest temperature was 38.5 °C) in April 2016. He presented with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) for 10 years, renal dysfunction for 7 years and edema of both lower limbs for 2 years. He was a smoker for forty years. He had a urine protein of 12.5 g/24 h with increased serum creatinine of 146 μmol/L. Serum albumin was 24.2 g/L. Urine Bence-Jones protein was negative. Immunofixation electrophoresis of serum and urine was both negative for monoclonal immunoglobulin. Liver function was normal. BNP was 7754Pg/ml. An echocardiogram showed a thicker heart wall of the left ventricular and the ejection fraction was 53%. Chest CT scan revealed emphysema, inflammation of both lower lungs, pleural effusion and mild pericardial effusion. He visited the outpatient of Peking University First Hospital in August 2016 for further diagnosis. His renal biopsy revealed large amyloid deposits in glomeruli and arteriolar walls, which was similar to the proband’s renal biopsy findings. His IHC (pathology pictures were not shown) also showed similar results to the proband’s. Mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis confirms the deposits were lysozyme, too. He also carried the p.Trp82Arg lysozyme variant. He was treated with antibiotics and oxygen therapy, his fever was gone and the respiratory symptoms relieved.