A 46-year-old male patient was admitted to our hospital with repeated melena for the past month. The clinical abdominal examination on admission revealed a soft abdomen. The Murphy sign and shifting dullness were negative. Percussive examination in spleen area showed that the lower margin of the dullness boundary was located 3 cm below the costal margin. The patient had had hepatitis B cirrhosis for more than 10 years and took oral entecavir (0.5 mg, Squibb, Shanghai, China) daily as antiviral therapy. One month ago, the patient was treated by endoscopy at the local hospital due to melena caused by GEVs bleeding, but the effect was limited because of severe and extensive GEVs, and the patient had repeated melena again. After admission, routine blood examination revealed leukopenia 1.7 × 109/L, mild low hemoglobin 112 g/L and thrombocytopenia 30 × 109/L. The blood biochemistry tests showed a slightly elevated total bilirubin of 25.1 μmol/L (normal range < 21 μmol/L). The prothrombin time was slightly increased at 14.9 s. HBsAg and HBcAb results were positive. Hepatitis B virus DNA was increased at 1.81 × 102 IU/mL. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen indicated hepatic cirrhosis, portal hypertension (the main portal vein was dilated with a diameter of 18 mm), splenomegaly and gastroesophageal varices. The final diagnosis of the presented case were GEVs bleeding secondary to portal hypertension, hepatic cirrhosis and splenomegaly.
The patient underwent TIPS placement for uncontrolled bleeding following a multidisciplinary expert consultation in August 2018. The portal venogram displayed a large drainage into the GEVs from the splenic vein . After identification of the GEVs, a soft detachable coil (Boston Scientific, Natick, USA) and NBCA (Histoacryl, Braun, Germany) were deployed for safe and complete embolization during TIPS . Subsequently, an intrahepatic shunt tract was created with an 8-mm-diameter covered stent (Gore, Newark, USA) and an 8-mm-diameter bare stent (Boston Scientific, Natick, USA) between the right hepatic and portal veins. The TIPS was performed successfully. The pre-TIPS portosystemic pressure gradient (PSG) was 20 mmHg, and the final PSG was 8 mmHg. The postinterventional venogram showed complete occlusion of the GEVs . The patient tolerated the procedure well, and no immediate complications occurred. Hemostasis was also achieved.
One year after TIPS creation, a follow-up computed tomography (CT) scan showed that a portion of the variceal coil had migrated into the gastric lumen through the site of the previously embolized gastric varix , and the NBCA was not seen in the position of the former GEVs on the scout images . Subsequent esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed coil erosion through the stomach wall with no active bleeding . However, the patient remained asymptomatic. In March 2021, the patient was again admitted to our hospital because of melena. An EGD was performed, which showed the endovascular coil extending through the gastric wall with multiple incarcerated ulcers . During the EGD, attempts to remove the coil using biopsy forceps failed. The patient refused intervention on the coil to prevent further complications since his melena symptoms improved after conservative treatment. Our plan is to repeat EGD after 3–6 months for surveillance of the coil and varices.
This study was approved by the ethics committee of The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images.