On 4 June 2008, a 37-year-old man was referred to our department due to a 1-month history of sore throat and blood in the phlegm. He also complained of dysphagia. He denied hoarseness and respiratory dyspnoea. His medical history was unremarkable. Laryngoscopy showed a 2 × 2.5 cm wine-coloured tumour in the right aryepiglottic fold that involved the inner wall of the right piriform sinus. The surface was covered with blood clots. The motion of the bilateral vocal cords and the remainder of the larynx appeared normal. Cervical lymphadenopathy was absent. CT revealed a 3.5 × 2.2 cm irregular soft-tissue mass in the right aryepiglottic fold extending to the right piriform sinus, with low to moderate heterogeneous enhancement after the injection of contrast medium. No enlarged node was present. Under general anaesthesia (a tracheotomy was performed), biopsy was performed by suspension laryngoscopy. The frozen section results suggested that the tumour was a spindle cell tumour. The tumour was removed completely via lateral cervical incision and partial laryngectomy. The laryngeal function was preserved. During the operation, we found that the tumour was located in the right supraglottic area, with a pedicle in the right aryepiglottic fold extending to the right piriform sinus. Mass was tan-red and irregular and had an ulcer covered by blood clots and a fleshy cut surface .
The postoperative pathological results showed that the tumour consisted of small, uniform spindle cells invading the surrounding muscles. The immunohistochemical examination for vimentin and CD99 was positive. Epithelial membrane antigen was focal positive. These results led to a diagnosis of monophasic synovial sarcoma. The resection margins were tumour free .
Postoperative radiotherapy was given; the total dose was 66 Gy. On 26 October 2009, MRI of the head and neck revealed a 1 × 2 cm mass in the region of the right hypopharynx and laryngeal inlet. On 4 November 2009, FDG-PET/CT demonstrated high FDG uptake coincident with MRI findings (standardised uptake value [SUV]max = 4.1) and no distant metastases . A partial laryngopharyngectomy was performed. After surgery, the patient was followed regularly at 2-month intervals with CT or MRI examination of the head and neck.
In August 2010, CT of the head and neck revealed a 3.6 × 2.6 cm mass in the right submaxillary region. Further CT of the lungs revealed bilateral lung metastases. PET/CT revealed high FDG uptake in the right submaxillary lymph node (SUVmax = 3.2), right oropharynx (SUVmax = 5.4), and multiple nodules in the bilateral lungs (SUVmax = 4.6; ). These results suggested local recurrence and cervical lymph node and lung metastases. The patient received chemotherapy and concurrent targeted treatment comprising adriamycin (40 mg/m2, days 1–2), ifosfamide (2 g/m2, days 1–4), dacarbazine (300 mg/m2, days 1–4), and anti-epidermal growth factor receptor monoclonal antibody (nimotuzumab, 200 mg/m2, days 1–4). The patient underwent three cycles of chemotherapy at 3-week intervals. On 18 November 2010, the first-line therapy package was completed. The cervical mass was treated with intratumoural injection of recombinant adenovirus p53 agent injection once a week for 4 weeks and another four cycles of nimotuzumab (200 mg) at 1-week intervals. CT demonstrated no regression of the metastatic cervical lymph node and lung lesions. In February 2011, the patient underwent additional chemotherapy comprising docetaxel (110 mg, day 1), cisplatin (40 mg, days 1–3), and rh-endostatin (Endostar) (15 mg, days 1–14) every 21 days for up to five cycles. The lesions were not controlled. In July 2011, the chemotherapy was changed to cetuximab (600 mg, day 1) every week for up to three cycles. CT of the lungs and MRI of the head and neck showed that the lesions were larger. On 22 September 2011, PET/CT revealed a 7.5 × 9 cm mass in the right submaxillary region with high FDG uptake (SUVmax = 5.2) involving the right parotid gland, right tongue base, right mandible, jugular vein, carotid artery, and surrounding muscles, and multiple nodules in the bilateral lungs (largest = 6.68 cm in diameter; SUVmax = 6.02; ). The cervical mass was treated by local cryoablation, but did not regress. In 11 November 2011, the patient died of brain metastases.