A 42-year-old Hispanic male with a ten-year history of HIV with CD4 count of 600 cells per microliter (45.2%) (CD4 nadir was 34 cells per microliter at the time of diagnosis ten years prior) and a negative viral load on long-term ART therapy presented to our tertiary care dermatologic surgery clinic with a chief complaint of an asymptomatic bump on his occipital scalp. He was diagnosed with HIV in 2013 and has no other medical conditions. His HIV has been well-controlled with ART since his initial diagnosis. This patient had been on emtricitabine/tenofovir disoproxil fumarate during the initial five years of his HIV diagnosis and was subsequently switched to bictegravir/emtricitabine/tenofovir alafenamide, which he had been on for the past five years. The patient was on no other medications. This lesion was first noticed eight years ago in 2015 and gradually grew. There were no other lesions elsewhere on his body.
Five years prior to presentation in our clinic in 2018, an outside dermatologist attempted tumescent liposuction on this lesion with the assumption that it was a lipoma. During the procedure, the dermatologist had difficulty breaking up the lesion and was unable to remove the entirety of the lesion. No pathological tests were completed on the partially removed lesion. Following liposuction, the lesion was initially flatter but gradually grew again until he presented to our clinic.
The patient does not smoke cigarettes nor use recreational drugs. He drinks four to six alcoholic drinks per week and works as a disc jockey at a local night club.
On the occipital scalp, the patient had an asymptomatic seven by four-centimeter skin-colored, subcutaneous, oval-shaped, indurated, rubbery, and slightly mobile nodule with a smooth, ill-defined edge and no overlying epidermal changes. There were no cutaneous signs of tuberous sclerosis on the patient such as angiofibromas, ash-leaf spots, or ungual fibromas. Our initial differential diagnoses included HIV-associated lipodystrophy and less likely lipoma. HIV-lipodystrophy can present similarly with a large subcutaneous rubbery indurated nodule in the posterior neck/upper back area in a phenomenon known as “buffalo hump” . However, presentation of a lesion more superior on the occipital scalp is less typical of a buffalo hump.
Laboratory evaluation showed an unremarkable complete blood count with a hemoglobin of 14.6 g per deciliter, white blood cell count of 5,200 per microliter, and platelet count of 263,000 per microliter. Metabolic panel was within normal limits. The patient’s viral load at the time of HIV diagnosis is unknown.
Our patient underwent surgical excision of the lesion in clinic under local anesthesia. During the procedure, tan-pink scar-like tissue was excised in pieces with no evidence of subcutaneous fat. Histopathology of this tissue showed thick and randomly arranged collagen bundles, consistent with an isolated collagenoma . No histopathological stains were used.