A 47-year-old cocaine-addicted man with a history of severe headache following falling was referred to the emergency department with a complaint of decreased level of consciousness and intubated with a Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) score of 4. No lateralizing signs were observed, and the pupils were symmetrical and midsize. Brain computed tomography (CT) scan showed diffuse SAH with a Hunt and Hess score of 5 and the World Federation of Neurosurgical Societies (WFNS) score of 5. On further workup, the patient’s ECG showed ST elevation in V1-4 and ST depression in inferior leads. Cardiac troponin also raised significantly along with the evidence of wall motion abnormality on echocardiography. According to the patient’s neurologic condition, the treatment of possible MI was started with the dual oral antiplatelet drug.
Brain CT angiogram that performed after admission of the patient to the neurosurgical intensive unit, revealed a 6 mm AComA aneurysm. Single antiplatelet therapy was started on the 1st day after the ictus with no new episode of rebleeding from the AComA aneurysm. Given the evidence of SAH and aneurysm on CT, the administration of dual antiplatelet drugs and anticoagulants imposed a high risk of rebleeding and deteriorating neurologic condition on our patient. Therefore, considering the stability of our patient’s hemodynamic, we decided to close the aneurysm first. Cerebral angiography was performed to obtain anatomical data required for endovascular treatment [ and ]. The endovascular intervention was done, and complete occlusion was achieved .
After successful endovascular closure of brain aneurysm, dual antiplatelet therapy was started with no evidence of rebleeding on follow-up brain CT. The patient underwent coronary angiography that revealed normal epicardial coronary arteries that result in discontinuing antiplatelet therapy. Five days later, the patient was discharged with a GCS score of 15 and was visited 2 months after discharge without any new episodes of intracranial hemorrhage and modified Rankin scale score of 2.