A sixty-two year-old female presented to the Emergency Room at Georgetown Public Hospital Corporation, Georgetown, Guyana, with complaints of diplopia accompanied by a progressively worsening headache localized to the left lateral aspect of her head. There was no present or past history of cough, cold or sinus problem, fever, or vomiting. The patient was otherwise healthy with no significant past medical or surgical history.
A complete head and neck examination was unremarkable aside from a lateral rectus palsy present in the right eye. Computerized tomography scanning (CT) of the paranasal sinuses revealed opacification with hypertrophic mucosa and secretions in the left sphenoid sinus .
A course of broad spectrum antibiotics (amoxicillin-clavulanate 125 mg PO BID and gentamicin 80 mg IM BID) was administered in addition to nasal decongestants, and analgesics. The patient’s symptoms persisted despite 48 hours of medical therapy. The decision was made to perform a trans-nasal sphenoidotomy in order to avoid progression and complications of the disease.
The surgery was performed with the patient in semi-recumbent position under local anesthesia with diazepam 2 mg IV used for mild sedation. The right nostril was sprayed with 10% xylocaine. A nasal speculum and headlight were used for the procedure as functional endoscopic equipment was not available. The middle turbinate was displaced laterally and the inferior aspect of the superior turbinate was removed. A probe was used to identify and landmark the anterior wall of the sphenoid sinus and ostium. A trocar and cannula were used to open the ostium and straight punch forceps were used to widen the anterior sphenoidal wall. Immediate aspiration revealed purulent discharge which was sent for culture and sensitivity. The sinus was irrigated through the cannula with normal saline with the patient sitting up and bent forward. The patient tolerated the procedure well and there were no perioperative complications. The microbiology report showed Streptococcus pneumonia and Staphylococcus aureus, consistent with respiratory flora. The same course of preoperative antibiotics were continued during the hospital stay and the patient was given a 2 week course of amoxicillin-clavulanate 625 mg PO BID at discharge.
At the 6 week follow-up appointment, the patient was asymptomatic with complete resolution of the lateral rectus palsy, headache, and diplopia . No disease sequelae were detected at the subsequent 6 month follow up visit.