A 48-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of tuberculous abscesses. The patient had been diagnosed as dermatomyositis in another hospital since one year ago and had taken low dose prednisolone (15 mg/d) continuously. One month before hospitalization, he unconsciously noticed two swellings in his limbs without pain and redness. The patient was suspected of TB infection in another hospital and transferred to our hospital, which is the designated hospital for infectious diseases in Nanjing district. At admission, the patient had no other symptoms, such as tenderness, redness, fever, cough or night sweats. In addition, his medical history showed that he had neither underlying disease, like diabetes, hypertension, or coronary heart disease, nor trauma and intramuscular injection recently. Neither he nor his family had previous history of TB ever.
Physical examinations revealed two soft tissue swellings on the left lower humeru and the tront of left femur, approximately 4.0 × 5.0 cm and 5.0 × 12.0 cm, respectively. The overlying skins presented with normal temperature, scars, rash or sinuses . A systematic laboratory examination of the patient did not find any abnormities for blood routine test, liver and renal function tests, common neoplasms, the cardiovascular and neurological functions. The level of NT-proBNP, neoplastic markers, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, C3, C4 and IgG4 were negative or normal. C-reactive protein was 12.9 mg/dL, and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate value was 80 mm/h. Computed tomography (CT) scans did not find any active TB lesion in the lung . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the left humerus and the left femoral showed two different fluid collection extension along the path of subcutaneous connective tissue. The abscess on the left femoral penetrated the posterior abdominal wall musculature and formed a sinus tract .
The pus isolated from the subcutaneous abscesses by needle aspiration was positive for Ziehl-Neelsen staining (2+). qPCR confirmed the presence of MTB DNA. GeneXpert MTB/RIF assay showed that the MTB strain was susceptible to rifampicin. Drug susceptibility test further revealed that the cultured MTB strain was susceptible to all the first-line anti-TB drugs. Once upon confirming the tuberculous lesions, anti-TB regimen was initiated, including isoniazid (600 mg qd), rifampicin (600 mg qd), ethambutol (750 mg qd), pyrazinamide (1000 mg qd). Meanwhile, pus drainage was conducted once every other day. 50 ml and 200 ml of yellow pus were extracted per puncture from the abscess of the left humerus and the left femoral, respectively, followed by direct injection of 0.5 g and 1.0 g streptomycin. No complications occurred during the process of puncture, drainage and drug injection. After two months of treatment, the two abscesses faded obviously .
Unfortunately, another subcutaneous lump emerged at the back of the right thigh, 6.0 × 8.0 cm in size, without warm, redness or pain . Different from the previous two abscesses, there was no fluid fluctuation within this lump when touched. A needle aspiration only got little pus, which was remarkably MTB-positive. Since the hard lump did not suppurate, it was excised by surgical operation. Histopathological examinations of the lump tissue revealed caseous necrosis and tuberculous granulomas inflammation. One week after surgery, the patient with wound healing well was discharged and accepted postoperative anti-TB medication for 12 months. At one-year follow-up, MRI did not find any lump or abscess recurrence.