The 28-year-old male patient was admitted to the Department of Urology of the Second Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University on December 24, 2020 due to "hemospermia for 1 month and testicular pain for 2 days". The patient began to ejaculate with occasional bloody semen 1 month before admission. Right testicular pain started two days before admission. The patient underwent open splenectomy due to rupture of the spleen 20 years ago, and no other past medical history was found. Color ultrasonography of prostate, seminal vesicle, spermatic cord, testis and epididymis indicated enlargement of right seminal vesicle and enhanced echo. The left seminal vesicle gland was normal, and the bilateral ejaculatory duct was not significantly dilated. There was a 74 * 53 mm cystic mass with poor echo posterior to the right side of the prostate. The right epididymis was enlarged and the echo was decreased. There was a dense speckled echo in the right epididymis with abundant blood flow. Pelvic MRI plain scan + DWI + enhancement indicated abnormal signal above the posterior to the seminal vesicle, which was closely related to the seminal vesicle, considering the origin of the seminal vesicle and the possibility of neoplastic lesions. The right seminal vesicle gland was slightly enlarged and the T2W1 signal decreased .
Although the blood supply of most implanted spleen is limited, the pelvic mass of this patient was large, which did not rule out the possibility of abundant blood supply. Preoperative blood preparation was actively conducted. The patient had a history of open surgery, but considering that it has been 20 years since the last operation, the intraperitoneal adhesions have been absorbed and the operation was mainly performed on the upper abdomen at that time, and the adhesions in the lower abdominal organs may not be serious. In addition, laparoscopic technique has the advantages of clear surgical field, less bleeding, less trauma to patients, less postoperative complications and quick postoperative recovery, so we choose to perform this operation under laparoscopy . It was under general anesthesia that the operation was performed. Before laparoscopic surgery, transurethral seminal vesiculoscopy was performed to further clarify the relevant situation. Verumontanum was identified using a small-diameter ureteroscope (6/7.5-Fr, Wolf, Germany), and the bilateral ejaculatory ducts were then examined. In addition to chronic inflammatory changes in the right seminal vesicle, microscopic examination demonstrated no tumor and calculi, and bilateral ejaculatory ducts were unobstructed . Laparoscopic pelvic exploration was performed. During the operation, multiple grayish-brown nodular tissues which was about 1.5 cm in diameter were observed in the pelvic cavity , and a lobulated grayish-brown mass with a diameter of about 9 cm was observed in the posterior upper part of the prostate gland and seminal vesicle at the pelvic floor . Two nodular tissues were removed intraoperatively and sent for quick frozen pathology, which was reported as spleen tissue . Further resection of the huge mass was performed , and the postoperative pathological results were consistent with the diagnosis of splenosis .