A 60-year-old Caucasian man of British origin was admitted to our hospital in September 2007 following acute onset of dysarthria and dysphagia. He was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus and hyperlipidaemia three months prior to presentation.
He had no visual disturbance or sensorimotor symptoms in his limbs or torso on presentation. He was commenced on gliclazide, ramipril and aspirin when he was diagnosed with diabetes and hyperlipidemia 3 months earlier. He was also started on simvastatin at that time, but this was stopped following the development of proximal muscle weakness, myalgia, and an elevated creatine kinase (CK) of 2599 (normal: <200), which all resolved upon the termination of this medication. Gliclazide, ramipril and aspirin, however, were continued.
Aside from the finding of mild dysarthria, examination revealed that our patient had no remarkable conditions. Results of routine haematology, biochemistry, thyroid function tests, and creatine kinase were also unremarkable. His serum cholesterol was 6.1 mmol/L and his random blood glucose was 11.2 mmol/L.
An initial diagnosis of a brain stem stroke was considered, so dipyridamole and atorvastatin were added to his medication four days after his admission to our hospital. Meanwhile, a computed tomography (CT) brain scan showed that he had no obvious infarct.
Our patient remained stable over the next few days with a mild dysarthria and dysphagia (tolerating soft food), but no other symptoms or signs were noted.
One week after his admission to our hospital, his dysarthria and dysphagia worsened. Bilateral fatigable ptosis, diplopia, fatigable weakness of his neck flexion, and shoulder abduction were noted for the first time. A previously planned cranial magnetic resonance brain scan was thus cancelled.
Edrophonium testing demonstrated a dramatic transient improvement in his dysarthria, and a diagnosis of myasthenia gravis with high titre anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies was confirmed. A serum immunoglobulin assay revealed an IgA level of <0.05 g/L. He was noted to have normal IgG and IgM, and no paraprotein band.
Our patient was then commenced on treatment with pyridostigmine. He was also started on incrementally increasing prednisolone every other day. Regular monitoring of his respiratory function was also initiated.
His respiratory function worsened over the next 3 days. His spirometry also deteriorated. He developed a new fatigable diplopia and an inability to stand from a low squat position, together with increasing neck and proximal limb weakness.
In view of his deteriorating state, intravenous immunoglobulin therapy (IVIg) was commenced. Following immunological advice regarding his low IgA titre, it was decided to use Vigam Immunoglobulin (2 g/kg over the next 4 days), which did not result in any adverse effect.
No objective gains were noted over the subsequent week, and a repeat CK yielded a result of 842 mmol/L. His atorvastatin medication was then stopped two weeks after it had been introduced. Following this, our patient showed significant improvement in ptosis, a resolution of diplopia, and improved neck, shoulder, and elbow power. His ability to stand from a low squat position returned, and significant spirometric improvements were also seen.
His CK readings fell over this period and returned to normal levels one week after the cessation of his statin medication .
Our patient remained stable until two weeks later when, just prior to a planned discharge, a further deterioration and unresponsiveness to a second course of IVIg necessitated respiratory and nutritional support, intensive care, and plasma exchange.
Following prolonged treatment, his muscle strength improved and he returned to independent living at home four months after his admission to our hospital. His gastrostomy feeding tube and tracheostomy were removed 10 months after he was discharged from our hospital.