A 13-year-old Japanese girl was admitted to our hospital due to fever, fatigue and abnormal blood test results. She had a history of chronic constipation and repeated (once or twice a year) intermittent hepatic impairment associated with acute febrile illnesses, but she had not received any detailed examination for these symptoms. Her latest medical record showed that she presented to her family doctor 15 months prior to admission to our hospital, following a febrile episode. Her laboratory results for aspartate transaminase (AST), alanine transaminase (ALT), total bilirubin (T-Bil), and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) showed levels of 406 IU/L (reference range 14–29 IU/L), 227 IU/L (reference range 9–28 IU/L), 0.5 mg/dL (reference range 0.25–1.20 mg/dL), and 798 IU/L (reference range 220–1250 IU/L), respectively. Her hepatic impairment resolved spontaneously after the fever subsided. Other medical and family histories were unremarkable. The day before her admission, she had visited her family doctor complaining of fever for 2 days and weariness. On the following day she remained febrile and vomited three times; following this, she consulted the emergency pediatric service at night, where blood analysis was performed. It revealed abnormal liver function test results, with AST levels of 681 IU/L and ALT levels of 547 IU/L; therefore, she was referred to our hospital for a thorough investigation. On admission, she had an axillary temperature of 37.9 °C and tachypnea of 30 per minute. Other physical examination findings were normal. Although she had no apparent respiratory symptoms other than tachypnea, we performed a chest X-ray and mycoplasma loop-mediated isothermal amplification (LAMP) assay because Mycoplasma pneumoniae pneumonia was locally prevalent. Chest X-ray revealed slight bilateral reticular opacity, which is a clinical feature suggestive of viral or atypical pneumonia.
Following a positive result in the LAMP assay, we diagnosed her with Mycoplasma pneumoniae pneumonia, and oral azithromycin was initiated. The fever and weariness of the patient completely subsided with medication and resting; she was discharged after 4 days of admission.
To elucidate the etiology of her hepatic impairment, we performed blood analysis on admission, which revealed AST levels of 394 IU/L, ALT levels of 401 IU/L, T-Bil levels of 0.77 mg/dL, ALP levels of 885 IU/L, and gamma glutamyl transferase (γ-GTP) levels of 146 IU/L (reference range 8–36 IU/L) .
Complete blood cell counts, coagulation test results, antinuclear antibody titer, and viral tests for hepatitis viruses, Epstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus were all normal. Serum levels of copper, ceruloplasmin, and alpha-fetoprotein are unremarkable.
With respect to imaging studies, initial abdominal ultrasonography revealed a normal liver; however, the gallbladder could not be visualized. A second abdominal ultrasonography was performed following fasting; however, visualization of the gallbladder was impossible. MRCP was carried out on the fourth day of admission, which revealed no major abnormality except for the absence of the gallbladder .
We performed further studies on an outpatient basis, which revealed no anomaly other than the absence of the gallbladder. Six weeks after discharge, her laboratory tests showed normal levels of AST, 29 IU/L; ALT, 9 IU/L; T-Bil, 0.90 mg/dL; ALP, 415 IU/L; and γ-GTP, 13 IU/L . To confirm the absence of the gallbladder, we performed drip infusion cholecystocholangiography with computed tomography (DIC–CT); this imaging study uses a radiopaque dye that preferentially accumulates in the tissue of the gallbladder or bile ducts. The DIC-CT study could not reveal the gallbladder in the usual nor aberrant position .
Based on these results, the patient was diagnosed with gallbladder agenesis. During outpatient follow-up, she gradually manifests nausea after eating fatty foods; therefore, we prescribed smooth muscle relaxant and ursodeoxycholic acid. The outpatient follow-up is still ongoing, and febrile episodes have not been observed after discharge.