A 19-year-old woman was referred to our department because of a cystic lesion in the right mandible incidentally found on a radiograph obtain during oral examination without symptoms. The right face showed no swelling. Oral examination revealed a slight swelling of the mandibular body, missing mandibular right second premolar, inclination of the mandibular right first premolar and first molar, and no numbness in the lower lip. The associated oral mucosa was not swollen. An oval radiolucent lesion was developing along the long axis of the right mandibular body involving the roots of the mandibular right first and second molars with an impacted mandibular right second premolar at the anterior end of the lesion . The preliminary radiographic diagnosis was OKC . Curettage of the lesion was performed after root canal therapy of the mandibular right first and second molars in January 2016 . Histopathologic findings were consistent with OKC. Postoperative reexamination revealed new bone formation at the posterior end of the cyst in the right mandible with a reduced cystic cavity at 7 and 21 months after the curettage . However, the anterior end of the lesion extended into the mandibular left lateral incisor and was enlarged. Subsequently, repeat curettage of the lesions was performed. The lesions reduced in size at 4 months and 1 year postoperatively . Subsequently, the patient was lost to follow-up for approximately 2 years owing to pregnancy and childbirth but visited again because of right mandibular expansion in August 2020. The cystic lesion in the right mandibular body had enlarged with visible buccolingual bone plate defects . No recurrence was seen at the anterior end of the lesion. The patient was advised to undergo repeat curettage or complete surgical excision with repair. The patient requested complete surgical excision with planned immediate reconstruction owing to the concern of recurrence after curettage. After fully informing the patient about the extent of bone resection and advantages and disadvantages of autogenous bone grafting and DO, consent was obtained for DO for mandibular reconstruction.
Simulated surgeries were performed on 3D-printed mandible models based on computed tomography data to determine the extent of surgical resection and distance and direction of distraction . The distractor was bent preoperatively according to the model. Under general anesthesia, a mucoperiosteal flap was raised with the intraoral vestibular sulcus approach to expose the right mandible. An osteotomy line was marked at the boundary of the mass according to the preoperative design, and the pre-bent distractor was fit onto the bone surface with two titanium nails spotted on each of the anterior and posterior arms of the distractor . The titanium nails and distractor were then removed, and the lingual periosteum was carefully preserved during removal of the mandible. The distractor was repositioned at the designated position and rotated such that the anterior and posterior segments of the mandible were close . The incision was sutured. An endotracheal tube was placed for 3 days to avoid upper airway obstruction possibly caused by retropulsion of the mandible and postoperative swelling. The patient was fed via intravenous nutrition and a gastric tube for 4 days postoperatively, followed by a liquid diet. After a 7-day latent period, the distraction was activated at a rate of 1 mm/day for 32 consecutive days . At three weeks of fixation period, sudden mandibular midline deviation and tooth malposition presented. Cone-bone computed tomography showed the breakage of the distractor . Subsequently, the distractor was exposed and removed via an incision with the right submandibular approach under general anesthesia . The distraction area had not completely ossified. The boundary between the distraction area and the mandible was clear, and the width of the distraction area was approximately 25 mm . The wound was closed after placing the molding titanium plate . Postoperative cone beam computed tomography showed Incomplete ossification during the distraction area . The patient was followed-up for 21 months after placing the molding titanium plate with no evidence of recurrence. No gross facial asymmetry or deformation was observed . The patient reported of no complaints regarding eating or articulation. The mouth opening and occlusal relationship showed no abnormalities . New bone formation could be seen in the distraction area, and the height and width of the reconstructed mandible were acceptable . The right condyle appeared anteriorly displaced . Examination of the bilateral temporomandibular joints revealed no clicking or pain. Table depicts the timeline of the present case.