A 58-year-old (gravida 2, para 2) woman presented the nearby hospital complaining of persistent defecation disorder and vomiting. Although her family history was notable for pancreatic cancer in her father, there was no other familial history of cancer, including breast and ovarian cancer. Her past medical history is unremarkable. Her past surgical history includes right ovarian cystectomy for a dermoid cyst at the age of 30. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed a large pelvic tumor adjacent to the rectum. Laboratory findings showed that her serum level of cancer antigen (CA) 125 increased to 315.2 IU/ml. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated that a 93 × 65 × 62 mm-solid tumor with cystic parts was located immediately dorsal to the rectum . CT and MRI showed no evidence of dissemination, lymph node metastasis, nor distant metastasis. Colonoscopy showed strong extrinsic compression at the rectum with intact mucosa; however, biopsy of the rectum and the tumor site was not performed during colonoscopy. Based on the MRI finding that a perirectal cystic tumor was present without peritoneal dissemination, stage IA ovarian cancer was suspected, and she was referred to our hospital for treatment. At laparotomy, the tumor was located dorsal to the rectum and existed entirely in the retroperitoneal space . There were no apparent lesions in the peritoneal cavity including bilateral adnexa, uterus, and peritoneum. Peritoneal washing cytology was negative. After bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and total abdominal hysterectomy, en bloc resection of the retroperitoneal tumor together with lower anterior resection of the rectum was performed . Whereas the tumor was adhered to the rectal wall, the tumor itself was relatively well-capsulated and easily separated from surrounding fat tissues. Based on pathological diagnosis of the retroperitoneal tumor: high-grade serous carcinoma, she received 6 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy with carboplatin, paclitaxel and bevacizumab according to the standard treatment strategy for ovarian cancer. After the combination therapy, bevacizumab was administered for 3 cycles of tri-weekly maintenance therapy but was discontinued because of general fatigue. She has been alive without evidence of recurrence for 20 months since her initial surgery.
Macroscopically, the retroperitoneal tumor measured 80 × 55 × 35 mm in size and was divided into solid and cystic parts. The rectum and the peritoneum separated the tumor from the peritoneal cavity . The cyst part covered with a thick wall included bloody serous fluid. Removed genital organs (e.g. uterus, fallopian tubes, and ovaries) presented no abnormal gross findings except for uterine fibroids. Microscopically, a cyst wall which was composed of fibrous tissue contained hemosiderin-laden macrophages. A solid part of the tumor, characterized by extensive atypical nuclei and lace-like pattern by coalescence of papillae, revealed high-grade serous carcinoma . Although the tumor was invasive into rectal mascularis propria and adjacent fat tissues, the surgical margin, peritoneal invasion, and lymphovascular involvement were negative. In addition, neither cancer metastasis nor endosalpingiosis were identified in the lymph nodes in the adjacent fat tissue. There were no invasive lesions in genital organs but STIC lesion was detected at the right fallopian tube .
The cells of the retroperitoneal tumor and STIC were immunohistochemically positive for p53 . Ki-67 was diffusely and partially positive in the tumor and STIC lesions, respectively .
The retroperitoneal tumor sample was immediately separated from surgical specimen, embedded in Tissue-Tek O.C.T. compound (Sakura Finetek) in a Tissue-Tek Cryomold (Sakura Finetek), and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Serial 8-μm-thick frozen sections were mounted on MMI Membrane Slides (Molecular Machines & Industries), fixed with 100% methanol, and stained with toluidine blue. We performed laser-microdissection (LMD) using the MMI CellCut system (Molecular Machines & Industries) to isolate tumor cells , followed by DNA extraction.
Somatic mutations were investigated by target gene sequencing in the retroperitoneal tumor. We selected 120 genes that were frequently mutated in ovarian and endometrial cancers from the TumorPortal website [, ] and involved in the homologous recombination repair pathway. We performed target sequencing of the 120 genes with a pool and capture method described in our previous study [, ]. The DNA libraries from the retroperitoneal tumor and the peripheral blood samples were sequenced via Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform in a rapid run mode with a 2 × 100 bp paired-end module. Referring to sequencing data from peripheral blood as a control, we called somatic mutations using Strelka software .
Somatic mutations detected in retroperitoneal tumor were listed in Table . Among six non-silent somatic mutations, a mutation of TP53 (c.536A > G, p.179H > R) showed the highest mutant allele frequency (MAF) of 0.94. A nonsense mutation of BRCA2 (c.6385G > T, p.2129E > X) also showed high MAF of 0.84. The MAFs of these two mutations were significantly higher than 0.5 (binomial test, P < 0.0001), suggesting the presence of either loss-of-heterozygosity events or homozygous mutations at these sites. We detected no obviously pathogenic mutations in the patient’s germline data obtained by sequencing for her blood cells.
To explore the genetic relevance between the retroperitoneal tumor and STIC lesion, deep sequencing was performed focusing on the two variant sites (TP53: c.536A and BRCA2: c.6385G) which were the most dominant in the retroperitoneal tumor. To obtain the STIC lesion, LMD was also performed using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue sections of 10-μm thickness. For LMD experiment, one per ten serial slides (n = 1, n = 11, etc.) was immunostained for P53. DNA samples derived from the retroperitoneal tumor and STIC were amplified by PCR reactions using the following oligonucleotide primers. Forward and reverse primers for TP53 c.536A > G [p.179H > R] were 5’-CTGCTCACCATCGCTATCTG-3′ and 5’-CACATGACGGAGGTTGTGAG-3′, respectively. For BRCA2 c.6385G > T [p.2129E > X], forward and reverse primers were 5′- CTGCTCACCATCGCTATCTG-3′ and 5’-CACATGACGGAGGTTGTGAG-3′, respectively. The PCR products were subjected to a deep sequencing via Illumina MiSeq v2 platform with a 2 × 150 bp paired-end module. The tag counts of paired-end sequences supporting the reference and mutant alleles were measured by using only high confidence base calls (base quality > 20) at the mutation sites.
As a result, the somatic mutations of TP53 and BRCA2 were shared between the retroperitoneal tumor and STIC lesion . The MAFs of these two mutations were lower in STIC lesion. There is a possibility that STIC lesion was inadequately isolated from surrounding normal tubal epithelium, stroma and infiltrating immune cells through LMD, because the area of STIC lesion was limited.