A 44-year-old female patient with severe intradialytic hypotension, (the mean BP were 60/30 mmHg, the lowest BP 48/28 mmHg) was qualified for renal transplantation by a team from the Department of Nephrology, University Hospital after an in-depth diagnostic management.
The cause of the patient’s end-stage renal failure was rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis with anti-GBM treated in the past by plasmapheresis and Solu-Medrol pulses. In addition, since the age of 20 years, she had bilateral nephrolithiasis with recurrent urinary tract infections and hypertension. The patient was on hemodialysis for three years. One year after the commencement of dialysis, the patient underwent bilateral laparoscopic nephrectomy due to bilateral nephrolithiasis and recurrent urinary tract infections - which are an obstacle in qualifying patient for renal transplantation. Since that time, the patient has been severely hypotensive. She denied fainting, reported a significant weakness. In the course of hypotension, ischemic neuropathy with loss of vision in the right eye occurred. In addition, eye pain worsened during dialysis. Collaboration with the patient while renal replacement therapy was carried out was good, and her weight gain between dialysis sessions did not exceed 2000 ml. HD sessions were carried out in accordance with the standards for the IDH (the lowered temperature of the dialysis fluid, profiled sodium concentration, short-term infusion of colloids with declined BP). Additionally, the adrenal CT (computed tomography) scan was normal, as well as cortisol and ACTH (adrenocorticotropic hormone) levels. Histological examination of the rectal mucosa sample excluded amyloidosis. The results of cardiac studies (echocardiogram and electrocardiography) were also normal. The orthostatic stress test and Ewing’s battery tests showed no abnormalities of the autonomic nervous system, the heart rate variability was normal during the all the tests. Treatment with mineralocorticoids and midodrin did not result in the improvement of BP, but after the dopamine infusion, her blood pressure increased to satisfactory values (120/60 mmHg). The results of most relevant laboratory and diagnostic tests performed in patient are showed in Table . The patient was referred for renal transplantation and placed on the waiting list. The waiting time for kidney transplantation was 6 months.
The kidney for transplantation was harvested from a deceased donor (33 years old male with overweight, after intracranial injury, without arterial hypertension and other diseases). The number of non-conforming HLA 2 A, 1 B and 1 DR, PRA max and the last was 0. The total time of ischemia was 22 h, and warm ischemia - 50 min. The patient used the following immunosuppression regimen: TAC + MMF + GS. Immediately prior to the transplantation procedure, her BP was 60/40 mmHg. Before the surgery, dopamine infusion at a dose of 5.3–7.4 μg/kg/min resulted in an increase of BP to 100–120 mmHg. The kidney transplantation procedure was performed without complications. In the second day after surgery, the patient was transferred to the Department of Nephrology. Due to the low value of BP < 100 mmHg, dopamine infusion and additionally dobutamine infusion at a dose of 2.4–3.6 μg/kg/min was ordered . Initially, heart rate value was in range between 100 and 120 per minute, and during the reduction of aminopressor doses it decreased to normal values (80/min.). A delayed function of the transplanted kidney was observed, so 4 HD sessions were performed. During the post-operative period, the dosage of pressor amines was gradually reduced and stopped 18 days after transplantation. The patient was discharged from the hospital on day 22nd after transplantation in a good condition, with BP of 105/60 mmHg, the level of serum creatinine 117 μmol/L and eGFR 46 ml/min. One year after transplantation procedure, the graft function is stable, with the level of serum creatinine of 80 μmol/l and eGFR >60 ml/min, BP values ​​are approx. 105–120/60–70 mmHg . The patient was well rehabilitated and returned to work.