An 81-year-old Japanese man was admitted to our institution with a 1-month history of vomiting. Although the patient did not complain of any obvious weight loss, he experienced daily persistent vomiting and always felt full. Past medical history was positive for chronic atrial fibrillation, chronic heart failure, Graves’ disease, hyperlipidemia, and benign prostatic hyperplasia. The patient had no previous surgical history. Serum tumor markers, such as carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19–9, CA 125, α-fetoprotein (AFP), and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), were all within normal ranges. An esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) revealed a submucosal tumor-like lesion with a smooth surface involving the entire circumference of the first part of the duodenum. The demarcation line of the lesion was unclear . We could not pass the endoscope beyond the first part of the duodenum because of duodenal stenosis. An endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) was not performed; enhanced multi-detector row computed tomography (enhanced MDCT) revealed increased wall thickness in the first part of the duodenum . No swollen lymph nodes were detected. The forceps biopsy specimen from the submucosal tumor-like lesion did not show evidence of malignancy. As the possibility of a malignant tumor could not be ruled out clinically, a surgical resection was planned for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes.
The patient subsequently underwent an open surgery. A hard mass was palpable in the duodenal bulb, which extended dorsally to the second part of the duodenum. After Kocherization of the duodenum, the area proximal to the pylorus ring to the end of the second part of the duodenum, where the tumor was not palpated, was resected .
A distal gastrectomy was performed. The tumor was 30 × 10 mm and located in the first part of the duodenum . It was not continuous with the normal pancreas as revealed first by imaging and later confirmed during surgery. Microscopically, the tumor was diagnosed as a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma that extended from the submucosal layer to the muscularis propria of the duodenum. Normal pancreatic tissue was observed adjacent to the tumor, suggesting the presence of an ectopic pancreas . Surgical margins were negative for the presence of tumor cells. Moderate lymphatic invasion, moderate venous invasion, marked neural invasion, and metastases to both superior and inferior pyloric lymph nodes were observed. The adjacent ectopic pancreatic tissue had a microscopic appearance consistent with Heinrich’s type 1 [, ] and was characterized by the presence of ducts, islets, and acini. On immunohistochemical staining, the islets of the ectopic pancreas and the normal pancreas showed positive staining for chromogranin A, synaptophysin, neural cell adhesion molecule (NCAM), insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin. Based on these findings, our final diagnosis was of a ductal adenocarcinoma arising from an ectopic pancreas in the first part of the duodenum.
The patient was discharged 18 days after surgery, with no complications. Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was not administered. We performed a follow-up blood exam including tumor markers (CEA, CA 19–9) every 3 months and CT images every 6 months. The patient is alive without relapse, at 18 months of follow-up.