68-year old female patient was admitted to the Department of Lung Disease with signs of severe cardio-respiratory failure. One month prior to being admitted, the patient’s breathing was getting heavier, she was tired, weak, had poor appetite and increasing pain in the right hemithorax. She also had arterial hypertension and atrial fibrillation. She has never smoked.
Written informed consent of patient was obtained for the treatments and for the scientific use of clinical data, according to Declaration of Helsinki and Slovenian law requirements.
At examination the patient was cyanotic, tachypnoic with the breathing frequency 22/min. With the administration of oxygen by a nasal catheter a peripheral capillary oxygen saturation (SpO2) was 91%, the patient had signs of heart failure with atrial fibrillation. Breathing was weakened and audible only apically on the right side. Pulmonary function test showed a significant decrease in values of the forced vital capacity (FVC, 42% of the norm), the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1, 35% of the norm), and the FEV1/FVC ratio or Tiffeneau index (TI, 68% of the norm). Gas analysis of arterial blood showed signs of chronic hypercapnic respiratory failure.
Chest X-ray showed a large tumour mass in the right part of the thorax with mediastinal shift to the left . CT scan of the chest showed an extensive expansive process, larger than 20 cm. The tumour was heterogeneous, lobulated and practically extended over the entire right pleural cavity and shifted mediastinal structures to the left . An MRI examination did not confirm tumour infiltration of the surrounding mediastinal structures .
Bronchoscopy showed a visibly compressed trachea from the right side, shift of the carina and the main right bronchus into the left and closed bronchus for the right lower lung lobe. Transbronchial tumour biopsy was negative; the material collected by means of transthoracic needle biopsy did not suffice for histological tumour confirmation.
For purposes of further diagnosis and surgical treatment the patient was transferred to the Department of Thoracic Surgery. In the preoperative phase we performed an ultrasound (US) of the heart and angiography of the tumour. Heart US showed a compressed right atrium and lower vena cava as well as increased pressure in the right atrium and ventricle. Angiography displayed an extensive blood circulation of the tumour from the intercostal arteries 8, 9, 11, and 12 and inferior phrenic arteries from the right side .
Because of the clinical status of the patient with the signs of respiratory failure, cardiac inflow obstruction and the possibility of massive bleeding, all together representing a high-risk surgery, a detailed plan was designed. A wide approach for safe and radical tumour removal was enabled with the right thoracosternotomy (hemiclamshell). By continuous ligation of blood vessels nourishing the tumour, the blood loss during surgery was only 1.5 l of blood, which was recycled by a cell-saver. Surgical preparation in the mediastinal area was difficult because of compressed structures and numerous postinflammatory adhesions. A fully removed tumour was sent for pathohistological examination .
Macroscopic examination of the resected specimen showed firm lobulated and bosselated white-grey tumour measuring 25 cm x 16 cm x 13 cm. The surface of the tumour was covered with thin, shiny, smooth capsule. The cut surface was rubbery, vaguely nodular, grey-white, focally glassy and haemorrhagic. On the edges tiny calcifications were present. Macroscopically no necrotic areas were identified.
Microscopically the bland appearing tumour cells were arranged in a “patternless pattern” (storiform and fascicular pattern), the hypercellular regions were mixed with hypocellular areas with hyalinised stroma. In some areas stromal myxoid change and degeneration of collagen was present, too. Stroma was highly vascularized with angiofibromatous and haemangiopericytic vascular pattern. The tumour cells were spindle and oval with scant cytoplasm and nuclei with dense chromatin. Focally spindle cells showed wavy nuclei, resembling schwanian cells and also there were some areas with pleomorphic and giant cells population. The nuclei of the pleomorphic cells were larger, hyperchromatic, and different in shape. Very rare mitotic figures (<2/10 high-power fields [HPF]) were present and there was no necrosis .
Immunochistochemically tumour cells were reactive for CD34, CD99 and bcl2 and typically no immunoreactivity was observed with S-100, WT-1, Desmin, CEA, CK AE1/AE3, CK5/6 and calretinin .
According to the morphology and cellular immunophenotype the diagnosis of benign giant pleural SFT was signed out.
The patient was placed for seven days into a room with perioperative intensive care and extubated after two days. Longer intubation was required to ventilate a long time collapsed right intermediate and lower lung lobe. She left the hospital on day 22 after surgery. At the follow-up after a year, no recurrence of the disease was present.