The patient is an 81-year-old sterile, non-consanguineous Caucasian male who is a retired army engineer with a history of macrocytic anemia. The patient also had fatigue, paleness of the skin, shortness of breath, lightheadedness and occasional dizziness. The base line hemoglobin was 10.5 g/dl. After being placed on Vitamin B12 supplementation, hemoglobin increased and MCV decreased, but neither returned to normal range. To rule out MDS, a bone marrow biopsy was performed.
BM morphometric and flow cytometric analysis revealed proportionally normal myeloid, monocytic and lymphoid elements with no increased blasts, plasma cells and no aberrant myeloid or lymphoid maturation . Both conventional and FISH metaphase analysis proved the presence of 44 chromosomes containing (13;14) and (14;15) Robertsonian translocations . Figure shows the ISCN karyotype: 44,XY,rob(13;14)(q10;q10),rob(14;15)(q10;q10). No normal chromosome 14 was present in the karyotype.
No MDS/AML specific chromosome aberration was observed in the karyotype analysis or interphase and metaphase MDS FISH panel studies . A double heterozygous RT consisting of rob(13q;14q) and rob (14q;15q) was further confirmed by metaphase FISH analysis using multiple FISH probes encompassing various regions of chromosome 13, 14 and 15 . Both RTs were present in 100% of bone marrow, peripheral blood, and cultured fibroblast cells; therefore they were found to be constitutional and not mosaic in nature.
Bone marrow aspirate smears from the patient were stained with Wright- Giemsa Stain 1000X . The patient’s blood cells are larger than normal, with nuclei that appear to be immature relative to cellular cytoplasm. The five-color flow cytometric assay utilized the Cytomics FC500 with CXP software and fluorescent monoclonal antibodies (data not shown). Conventional G-banded metaphase chromosome analysis was performed on an unstimulated overnight bone marrow culture, a 72 h PHA-stimulated peripheral blood culture and bone marrow fibroblast cultures . Bone marrow fibroblast cells were obtained by repeated culturing of bone marrow samples in a T25 flask for 3–4 weeks with weekly replacement of fresh media. Fibroblast cells were incubated overnight with Colcemid and metaphase chromosomes were prepared for analysis by standard methods. FISH analysis was performed on bone marrow metaphase chromosomes preparations. All fluorescently labeled DNA probes were purchased from Abbott Molecular and hybridizations done according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
In humans, the NORs are located on the secondary constrictions of the five pairs of acrocentric chromosomes. Active NORs can be stained by silver nitrate and visualized with the use of the silver staining technique. This technique selectively stains active NORs but does not detect the presence of rRNA genes. To determine the number of active nucleolar organizing regions (NORs) on five pairs of acrocentric chromosomes, silver (NOR) staining was performed. Briefly, fresh bone marrow or peripheral blood metaphases were prepared on clean glass slides and incubated with 50% AgNO3 solution plus formic acid-gelatin developer sandwiched between glass cover slips. The slides are heated to 70 °C for 3 to 4 min until the mixture turned yellow-brown and then they were rinsed with running water. Dark silver dots were deposited on the p arms of acrocentric chromosomes from the DRT patient and from normal controls. The silver deposits of 30 metaphases were scored and the mean number of Ag-NORs were calculated.