A 35-year-old patient, G4P2012, presented to our outpatient clinic in Sacramento, California, at 9 weeks 0 days gestation by last menstrual period, confirmed by two-dimensional (2D) transvaginal ultrasound that day, for a medication abortion. Other than a single prior miscarriage, she had no prior history of pregnancy complications including hemorrhage or cesarean section. Medical and surgical history were otherwise noncontributory.
Patient underwent a medication abortion that day with mifepristone 200 mcg and misoprostol 800 mcg. She reported heavy bleeding for the following day, which then slowed down considerably. Follow up office-based 2D transvaginal ultrasound one week later revealed a medication abortion, which was complete with a thickened endometrial complex, but no obvious retained products of conception .
Bleeding stopped shortly thereafter and then restarted six weeks later. After five days of heavy bleeding, she presented to the emergency department of a different medical institution where she was found to have a normal hemoglobin (12.0 g/dL) and negative quantitative hCG. 2D Transvaginal ultrasound revealed a new hypervascular mass in the endometrial cavity measuring 3 cm . Because the hemoglobin was within normal limits, the patient was discharged home with 800 mcg of misoprostol to take orally and was instructed to follow up with her outpatient physician for further management.
In the days following misoprostol use, the patient reported passage of clots without tissue, and the bleeding persisted. Five days following the emergency department encounter, the patient was seen again in our office. 2D transvaginal ultrasound redemonstrated the large hypervascular mass in the endometrial cavity, at which point a placental polyp was suspected. In two passes, the mass was evacuated with electric vacuum aspiration with post-procedure imaging demonstrating an empty uterus . Post-procedure bleeding was minimal, and the patient was discharged home without further events.
The specimen was sent to pathology, which showed “degenerating and inflamed decidua and fibrinous debris. A few degenerating chorionic villi are also noted.” This confirmed the suspected diagnosis of placental polyp. The patient’s normal menstrual cycles resumed the following month. Three months later, a repeat office-based 2D transvaginal ultrasound showed a continued thin endometrial stripe of the uterus and confirmed the full resolution of the placental polypoid mass.