A 31-year-old man without previous medical history presented to the emergency department with acute back pain that had started suddenly during weightlifting. Initially, spinal disc herniation was suspected by the orthopedic surgeon and the patient was discharged. He returned four hours later with pain and a sense of numbness in the right leg and an absence of femoral pulses bilaterally. A thoracoabdominal computed tomography (CT) angiography showed embolism to the left renal artery, splenic artery, and a massive thrombus in the aortoiliac arteries. Then the CT scan was elongated to include the lower limbs, which revealed embolism in the right superficial femoral artery. The vascular surgeon decided to perform an acute embolectomy.
Laboratory tests for C-reactive protein, hemoglobin, and thrombocytes were normal, but leukocytes were slightly elevated at 13.3 × 109/L. The coagulation samples showed PK INR level of 1.1, APTT 32 s, fibrinogen 2.5 g/L, D-dimer 1.55 mg/L, and antithrombin 1.08 kIU/L. Because this occurred during the coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic, polymerase chain reaction for SARS-CoV-2 was performed and was negative.
The surgical procedure confirmed embolism of both acute and chronic appearance; soft black thrombi suggesting acute formation and white hard cylindrical (shape of the iliaca vessels) suggesting chronic forms. During surgery, a medial and lateral lower leg fasciotomy was also performed on the right side in order to prevent post-operative compartment syndrome.
Following surgery an echocardiography (Additional files –: Videos S1–S4) demonstrated left ventricular inferior hypokinesia, an ejection fraction of 30–40%, and two large thrombi in the left ventricle . The ECG showed sinus rhythm with minor intraventricular conduction delay but was otherwise unremarkable. During a four day stay at the intensive care unit the patient was initially treated with low molecular weight heparin with a dose of 5000 IU twice daily (because of recent surgery) and this was slowly increased to full dose. The hormone T4 was 15.5 pmol/L, T3 2.6 pmol/L, thyroid stimulating-hormone 0.65 mIU/L, and testosterone 6.1 nmol/L. Troponin T was elevated at 75 ng/L, N-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic peptide was 310 ng/L, and anti-SARS-CoV-2(ECLIA) was negative.
At the second day after admission a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging assessed reduced ejection fraction (44%), it also showed a thrombus in the left ventricle and late gadolinium enhancement of the inferolateral and septal regions , which indicated recent myocarditis. Two large thrombi, previously seen on echocardiogram, were visualized in the midventricular-apical region. A more detailed patient history was taken, and the patient reported an episode of fever, chest pain, and shortness of breath two months earlier but never sought medical attention for this. This was interpreted as myocarditis likely due to viral infection.
Successful suture of the fasciotomy was performed six days after the primary surgery. The patient was transferred to an internal medicine ward. Tests for coagulopathies were taken and included haptoglobin which had a level of 1.45 g/L and homocysteine with a level of 28 µmol/L (slightly elevated). Moreover, S-anti-GBM, S-anti-myeloperoxidas, and S-anti-proteinase 3 were normal.
The patient was negative for mutations in JAK2, CALR, MPL, factor II, and V test for paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria was negative and so were the tests for protein C, protein S, antiphospholipid antibodies (anticardiolipin, anti-beta2-glycoprotein I, and lupus anticoagulant).
Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain demonstrated a non-acute infarct in the left parietal lobe. Ultrasound of the carotid and vertebral arteries were normal. A second echocardiography, performed 11 days after the first, showed slight improvement of left ventricular systolic function, but two thrombi were still present. Apixaban 5 mg twice daily was initiated, but subsequently replaced with warfarin because the thrombi remained at follow-up. ECG showed premature ventricular complex. Bisoprolol and candesartan were titrated, prescribed and the patient scheduled for further follow-up in the cardiology department. Six months after hospital discharge an echocardiogram showed improvement of left ventricular function with an ejection fraction of about 45% and resolution of the thrombi.