An 81-year-old female presented to the Emergency Department with left hip closed injury following an alleged history of fall at her residence after which she was unable to bear weight over her injured hip. The patient had not sustained any other musculoskeletal injury or head injury at the time of the fall. After the initial clinical and radiological evaluation, she was diagnosed with left neck of femur fracture ( and ). A computed tomography with 3D reconstruction of the pelvis was done to delineate the fracture pattern .
Her past medical history was significant for being a diagnosed case of bulbar MND with a possible overlap syndrome of MND and MG 2 years ago and has since been on treatment for the same. The patient is known to be hypertensive for the past 20 years on regular medications.
The following details the sequence of events: 2 years back, the patient had complaints of drooling saliva, history of slurring of speech and progressive dysarthria, drooping of eyelids, breathlessness and unsteadiness while walking and progressive difficulty in swallowing, and liquids more than solid food. A neurologist was consulted for further evaluation. Physical examination revealed small muscle wasting (left more than right), and deep tendon reflexes were well elicited. A mild degree of fibrillations was noted over the tongue, with no significant atrophy. Fatigability was noted with drooping of eyelids on sustained elevation. There were brisk reflexes and mild impairment of left palatal movements with increased tone of lower limbs (left more than right) on examination and the patient was mobilizing with the help of walker support. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain with contrast revealed an ectatic left vertebral artery indenting upon and compressing the left anterolateral aspect of the medulla. Constructive interference in steady state-three-dimensional protocol images showed that the medullary by vertebral artery is minimal only. Nerve conduction velocity suggested of axonal type of sensory-motor neuropathy involving bilateral lower limb nerves – reduced compound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude from bilateral peroneal nerves (extensor digitorum brevis pickup) with Achilles tendon pick up normal. Lower limb sensory conduction showed absent sensory nerve action potentials (SNAP) amplitude from bilateral superficial peroneal nerves. Responsive neurostimulation was normal. Needle electromyography revealed a neurogenic pattern from bulbar and cervical segments – fasciculations from right flexor digitorum indices (1+), biceps (1+), and tongue muscles. AChR antibodies and MuSK antibodies were negative. The Karnofsky Performance Index was assessed and the patient was evaluated to be able to carry on normal activity and to work; no special care was required. The Karnofsky Performance Index is an assessment tool that helps clinicians to assess the level of functional impairment of the patient and the ability of the patient to carry out day–day activities. It may indirectly signify the prognosis and the likelihood of survival.
The patient on admission underwent the regular pre-operative workup with a routine evaluation of the blood parameters and serology. The patient was assessed with hyponatremia and corrective measures were instituted pre-operatively with advice from the general physician. The patient required oxygen support using nasal prongs in view of desaturation at room air.
Pre-operative neurological assessment by neurologists was done for surgical risk assessment and anesthesia requirements in view MND and overlap with myasthenia.
On the day of surgery, the patient had appropriately fasted for 8 h, and the patient’s vitals 15 min before anesthesia induction were heart rate of 82/min, blood pressure of 150/80 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 20/min with 96% SpO2 with 3L oxygen support with nasal prongs. After a multidisciplinary approach involving the surgical and anesthesia team, the patient elected to have spinal anesthesia in view of potential complications including post-operative respiratory failure associated with MND.
In the operating theater, a 20-gauge intravenous (IV) was secured and the standard anesthetic monitoring was applied with 5-lead electrocardiogram, pulse oximeter, blood pressure monitoring, temperature, and capnography. The patient was administered spinal anesthesia in a sitting midline approach with a 27-gauge Pencan spinal needle in L3-L4 space. 2 ml of 0.5% bupivacaine was given which attained a sensory level of T10 and a complete motor blockade of both lower limbs (modified Bromage scale of IV). Appropriate antibiotics were administered before surgical incision according to the institutional protocol. The surgeon proceeded with left hip bipolar arthroplasty, by direct lateral Hardinge approach. Surgery was uneventful with a total procedure time of 1 h, from the time of incision to completion of surgery. The patient remained hemodynamically stable (heart rate 80–85, respiratory rate 18–22 with 100% SpO2 saturation, skin temperature of 36.3, and blood pressure mean 75–104) during the intraoperative period. While spinal anesthesia is usually preferred in hip surgeries, it is relatively contraindicated in patients having MND. However, since our patient also had MG overlapped on ALS, administration of general anesthesia using a muscle relaxant was more dangerous due to the associated respiratory complications. Hence, after careful consideration of all the associated risks, subarachnoid block was chosen after proper documentation of lower limb weakness before administration.
In the post-anesthesia care unit, the patient had minimal pain at the surgical site and no nausea or vomiting. Patient vitals were observed to be stable in the post-operative period and the patient was shifted out from the post-anesthesia care unit to the ward for further care. Post-operatively, the patient was able to slowly ambulate using walker support and was provided further rehabilitation and regular wound care. Post-operative X-rays were taken for assessment . The patient was discharged on the 5th post-operative day after reassessment and evaluation by a neurologist for advice regarding management and continuation of medication on discharge. No neurological complications were noted during this hospitalization. The patient was subsequently followed up to assess the recovery and rehabilitation following the surgery. The patient continued to receive treatment from the neurologist for the pre-existing conditions of MND and MG. Three months following the surgery, the patient was recovering very well and was ambulant independently with the aid of a walker support.