A 45-year-old Japanese woman, gravida 2, para 2, with no remarkable medical history, presented to our hospital for evaluation of a cervical lesion. At her first visit, a gynecologist was not able to detect a mass, but 3 weeks later, the gynecologist found a large polypoid mass on the cervix . The patient’s laboratory data, including serum tumor markers (carbohydrate antigen 125, alpha-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotropin, carbohydrate antigen 19–9, and carcinoembryonic antigen), were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a mass on the cervix measuring 28 × 27 × 20 mm , with no contrast enhancement. 18F-fluorodeoxy-D-glucosepositron emission tomography revealed an abnormal uptake in the polyp and no significant findings on the uterine corpus, bilateral adnexa, and other organs. The polypectomy specimen histologically suggested a malignant germ cell tumor. Subsequently, the patient underwent total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. Following surgery, she received radiotherapy and has been free of disease for 13 months.
The cervical polyp was dark in color and pedunculated, measuring 33 × 30 × 25 mm, with a red-tan cut surface due to massive hemorrhage . The hysterectomy specimen revealed the cervix almost entirely occupied by a yellow-white solid tumor, measuring 45 × 40 × 17 mm .
The cervical tumor showed both epithelial and mesenchymal tissues consisting of immature glandular cells , neuroepithelial tissue , small blue cells with neuroendocrine differentiation , hyaline cartilage , and rhabdomyosarcoma . Among these tissues, the most prominent component was neuroepithelium, and the tumor contained no immature squamous epithelium, which is common in sinonasal TCS. The tumor had invaded more than half the cervical stroma, but with no involvement of the parametrium or vagina. The tumor had prominent lymphovascular infiltration and extended to the endometrium. Bilateral fallopian tubes and ovaries were free of the tumor.
Table shows a summary of the immunohistochemical staining. Immature glandular epithelium stained positive for Sal-like protein 4 (SALL4) , glypican-3, caudal-type homeobox transcription factor 2 (CDX-2) (focally), and CD99, but negative for octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (Oct-4) and estrogen receptor. The neuroepithelium stained positive for neuron-specific enolase, synaptophysin , and CD99, but negative for cytokeratin and Oct-4.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) infection was not detected by in situ hybridization (GenPoint HPV; Dako), and no evidence of ESWR1 gene rearrangement was detected by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (VysisLSIESWR1 Dual Color Break Apart Probe). Furthermore, neither isochromosome 12p (i(12p)) nor 12p amplification was observed by FISH (Cytocell 12pter Subtelomere Specific Probe / Cytocell Chromosome 12 Alfa Satellite Probe) . Based on these findings, the tumor was diagnosed as TCS of the uterine cervix, FIGO stage IB2 (pT1b2 pNX cM0).