A 63-year-old right-handed man, with underlying well controlled arterial hypertension and hyperlipidemia, presented with verbal expression difficulty and non-fluent speech that had been progressing for 3 years. He also had difficulty with word finding and naming, stuttering, and verbal hesitancy. Several months later, he found that he was unable to use chopsticks well and could not perform delicate movements using his right hand. Neurological examinations indicated the presence of mask face, right-hand apraxia, bradykinesia, and rigidity, as well as stimulus-sensitive myoclonus on his right hand and forearm. No personality changes, behavioral disturbances, psychiatric symptoms, limited eye movement, bulbar symptoms, retrocollis or antecollis, respiratory distress, focal weakness, focal numbness, or gait disturbances were observed. The deep tendon reflex and cerebellar and sensory systems were all normal. He scored 23/30 on the mini-mental state examination, with impairments in the attention, short-term memory, language, and visuospatial domains . A complete neuropsychological and cognition examination revealed impaired attention, transcortical motor aphasia, impaired verbal memory, impaired visuospatial abilities, and executive dysfunction. Laboratory tests for secondary dementia found negative results of syphilis screening, and the results of serum vitamin B12, folic acid, and thyroid function were all within normal limits. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed asymmetric atrophy of the left frontal and temporal lobes , and single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) revealed decreased metabolism in the left temporal and low parietal cortices . These findings indicated a clinical diagnosis of the PPA variant of FTD, combined with CBD features over his right limbs. We prescribed donepezil, and the patient’s cognition stabilized over the following year. We were unable to assess levels of total and phospho-tau proteins in the cerebrospinal fluid due to the patient’s unwillingness to receive a lumbar puncture examination.
The patient’s family history showed that his deceased mother and younger sister both had neuropsychiatric disorders . The patient’s mother had been diagnosed with ALS at age 60 , and the patient’s sister was known to have PDD, although she declined additional detailed cognition examinations . Neurological examinations of other family members, including additional siblings and the younger generation, were all normal.
Next generation sequencing (NGS) allows for the comprehensive genetic analysis of familial neurodegenerative syndromes, as seen in FTD with parkinsonism . Since the clinical picture in this case indicated an autosomal dominant inheritance form of FTD with neuropsychiatric disorder, we applied genetic analysis using targeted NGS and covering candidate genes known to cause familial forms of FTD and ALS to the proband . We extracted variants within the genes of interest for further analysis, including MAPT (NM_001123066.3), GRN (NM_002087.2), FUS (NM_001170937), TARDBP (NM_007375), VCP (NM_007126) and CHMP2B (NM_014043). Abnormal GGGGCC hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the C9Orf72 (NM_018325) gene was determined by repeat-primed PCR, which was carried out as previously described . Fragment length analysis and Sanger sequencing were performed using an ABI 3730xl genetic analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The frequency of the identified variants in the general population were checked using the dbSNP, Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC), 1000 Genomes Project, and Taiwan Biobank , a whole genome sequencing (WGS) database enrolling 997 Taiwanese people. The functional annotation of the variants was determined by the prediction software to obtain a prediction of pathogenicity. We considered variants potentially pathogenic if they had a minor allele frequency (MAF) < = 0.05%, or were predicted to change the amino acid sequence or the splicing junction. Mutations were defined as pathogenic if they had been previously reported in the literature as a causative variant, or if the pathogenicity was confirmed by segregation analysis.
We identified a heterozygous missense substitution in exon 1 of the MAPT gene in this patient, c.14G > A (p.R5H) . In silico, PolyPhen2 predicted that this substitution was likely damaging. This genetic variation had also been reported in previous studies as the genetic cause of two familial FTD cases, and was absent in more than 100 Japanese control subjects [, , ]. This genetic substitution co-segregated with the disease phenotype in the patient’s family and is a rare variant in both the general and the Taiwanese populations, found in less than 1/10000 in the ExAC and absent from the WGS database of the Taiwan Biobank. This study was approved by the institutional ethics committee of National Taiwan University Hospital, and written informed consent was obtained from all subjects from whom blood samples were obtained for genetic testing.