A 76-year-old Chinese man was admitted to our hospital due to pain during swallowing for 1 wk that was caused by accidental swallowing of a “fishbone”.
The patient had mistakenly swallowed a “fish bone” 26 d prior. However, no foreign body was found during the laryngoscopy examination, and the pain gradually eased. One week prior, the pain in the right throat was aggravated, and it was accompanied by difficulty swallowing. After removing the “epiglottis abscess” and after a course of anti-infection treatment, the patient still had pain during swallowing and dysphagia and had pain in his right neck and shoulder. After the outpatient CT review of the esophagus, the patient was admitted to the hospital and was diagnosed with “foreign bodies in the throat”.
The patient had no history of hypertension, diabetes, viral hepatitis or tuberculosis. He had no known drug or food allergies. He also denied any history of surgery, trauma, or blood transfusions.
The patient denied any history of smoking or drinking or any abnormal family history.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.4 °C; blood pressure, 126/79 mmHg; heart rate, 69 beats per min; and respiratory rate, 19 breaths per min. He was well developed and moderately nourished. He had an active position. The skin was not jaundiced. There are no special general appearances. The patient had no pitting edema. The patient’s superficial lymph nodes in his neck were not found to be enlarged.
No abnormalities were found in coagulation function, blood biochemical parameters, routine blood, or urine analysis.
Laryngoscopy examination showed that the pharynx was slightly congested, the bilateral tonsils were not enlarged, and a raised mass of approximately 1.0 cm × 1.0 cm was seen on the right side of the lingual surface of the epiglottis. The surgical site had recovered well with no obvious pus exudation. Both vocal cords were smooth and showed good movement capacity. The right piriform fossa was obviously swollen, and there was no obvious foreign body in the laryngopharynx. Ultrasonography revealed a band of hyperechoic echoes on the right side of the neck . The sagittal plane of the CT scan showed a high-density strip in the right of the neck .