A 77-year-old man presented with swallowing difficulty and 10-kg weight loss for the past 3 months and therefore was referred to our hospital. Past medical history included hypertension and bilateral inguinal hernias. The patient’s height and weight were 175 cm and 58 kg, respectively, with a body mass index of 18.9 kg/m2 and performance status of 0. Preoperative blood tests revealed low levels of serum albumin (3.5 g/dl) and a slight elevation of squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen (4.9 ng/mL). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed a type 1 tumor in the lower thoracic esophagus, and pathological analysis of the tumor biopsy demonstrated SCC. Barium esophagography showed a bulging lesion, 6-cm long, in the lower esophagus with mild dilatation of the upper esophagus. A complete esophageal obstruction was not observed. Contrast-enhanced multidetector-row computed tomography (MDCT) scans showed a space-occupying lesion with contrast enhancement, measuring 6 × 3 cm, in the lower thoracic esophagus . An enlarged lymph node, 13 mm in size, was observed along the left gastric artery. Moreover, 3D-CT images clearly depicted an aberrant V2 passing behind the right intermediate bronchus (a), penetrating the subcarinal nodal packet (b), and merging with RSPV (a). The 3D-CT images were obtained using the Aquilion Prime SP CT Scanner (Canon Medical Systems Corporation, Tochigi, Japan) and were reconstructed using a 3D workstation (Ziostation2®, Ziosoft Inc., Tokyo, Japan). Distant metastases were not observed.
The patient was finally diagnosed with lower thoracic esophageal cancer (cT2cN1cM0 cStage II) according to the Japanese Classification of Esophageal Cancer . Although neoadjuvant chemotherapy is strongly recommended for esophageal cancer patients with lymph node metastasis , the patient wanted to undergo a surgery-first approach followed by adjuvant chemotherapy with prior informed consent.
The patient underwent VATS-E with three-field lymphadenectomy using 4 ports under artificial CO2 pneumothorax (CO2 pressure: 6–10 mmHg) in the prone position. As depicted on the preoperative 3D-CT images, a relatively large aberrant V2 involving the subcarinal nodal packet was recognized behind the right intermediate bronchus (a). When dissecting the subcarinal lymph nodes, we usually expose the surface of the pericardial membrane in the caudal-to-cranial direction to reach the caudal aspect of the right bronchus in the first step. In this patient, we exposed the pericardium up to the lower bulge of RSPV, i.e., near the area where the aberrant V2 merged with RSPV, and then switched the dissection plane to the membranous portion of the right bronchus. After that, the aberrant V2 was carefully exposed from the distal side. The dissection continued along the aberrant V2 to the proximal direction and proceeded ventrally. After reaching near the root of RSPV, the nodal dissection on the pericardium was advanced cranially, and subcarinal lymphadenectomy was completed without injury to this anomalous vein (b).
After completing thoracoscopic subtotal esophagectomy with three-field lymph node dissection, laparoscopy-assisted reconstruction of the esophagus was performed with elevation of the gastric conduit to the neck through the posterior mediastinal approach. The operation time was 620 min, and the estimated intraoperative blood loss was 150 mL.
The postoperative course was uneventful. The next day after surgery, the patient was extubated. Recurrent laryngeal nerve palsy was not observed. He started to receive rehabilitation for swallowing on the third day and resumed oral intake on the tenth day after surgery. The final pathological diagnosis was squamous cell carcinoma of the esophagus, pT3N1M0 pStageIII, according to the Japanese Classification of Esophageal Cancer . Total number of dissected lymph nodes was 38, and the subcarinal group of lymph nodes specifically was 7. There was no subcarinal lymph node metastasis. The work has been reported in line with the SCARE 2018 criteria .