We present the case of a 12-year-old boy with a complex congenital malformation (double outlet right ventricle with interventricular septal defect, transposed great arteries, pulmonary stenosis, and straddling AV valve) palliated through a fenestrated TCPC (18 mm Gore-Tex extracardiac conduit) ; clinical history was positive for documented intermittent phases of JR ; due to excessive cyanosis, the fenestration had been occluded interventionally with a plug device (Amplatzer Occluder 4 mm).
On the last outpatient evaluation, the boy was found in good general status and eupnoic. Vital parameters were normal with no cyanosis. On inspection, chest was symmetric with sternotomy scar. On palpation, the precordium was quiet with no heaves, lifts, or thrills. Heart auscultation revealed normal S1, single and slightly augmented S2, and no murmurs. Chest auscultation was normal as well as abdominal examination with no hepatomegaly. There was no jugular distension, and peripheral pulses were symmetric and valid. Echocardiography showed good systolic and diastolic function of the single ventricle, minimal regurgitation of the right and left AV valve, unobstructed systemic outflow with no aortic regurgitation, unobstructed left aortic arch, laminar flow in the TCPC tunnel and superior vena cava with normal respiratory variation, and wide inferior vena cava with absent respiratory excursion. Previous laboratory findings were normal, except a very slight and non-significant increase in total Bilirubin and NT-pro-BNP.
There was no history of arrhythmia or syncope and no chest pain or dyspnoea; general quality of life was satisfactory, but the boy complained of mild asthenia and hint of reduced physical performance; he was therefore scheduled for elective cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) for general assessment of anatomy, ventricular function, and flows.
Cardiac magnetic resonance findings included a moderately reduced combined ventricular function (morphological right and left ventricles) with an ejection fraction of 40%. Mild insufficiency of the AV valve and a small residual shunt through the occluded fenestration were present. No significant collateral flow could be assumed from flow calculations. Interestingly, flow profiles showed a small amount of flow reversal both in the superior and inferior vena cava as well as in the two branch PAs ( and ); a 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) was not performed on the day of the CMR examination, but standard four-chamber cine sequence clearly showed contraction of the atria against closed AV valve suggesting retro-conducted JR [or, as possible differential diagnosis, JR with isorhythmic sinus rhythm (SR) dissociation] (, ). Cine sequence of a cut of the TCPC system also gives a visual suggestion of retrograde flow in the caval veins and PAs (, S). Considering the possible impact of JR in our patient, we carefully reviewed the ECG and Holter ECG of the patient: SR was prevalent with only short and intermittent phases of JR; therefore, we did not consider our findings sufficient to pose indication for pacing, bearing also in mind that the only feasible approach in such an anatomical substrate would have been surgical implantation of a pacemaker with epicardial leads. A conservative strategy was chosen considering also the patient’s objective functional capacity by cardiopulmonary exercise test (CPET) that was satisfactory for a Fontan circulation (peak VO2 31 mL/kg/min; no previous CPET available for comparison) and the presence of good chronotropic competence during the test.