A 26-year-old male presented with a 20-year history of elevated creatine kinase levels, and he had been diagnosed with fatigue in both lower limbs 4 years ago.
The patient visited the local hospital due to poor performance in his physical education class and was found to have an increase in creatine kinase levels (12270 U/L) 20 years ago when he was 6-years-old). At that time, there were no obvious symptoms of physical weakness in ordinary life, only the poor performance in physical education. No deletion of the DMD gene (encoding dystrophin) was detected using 25 pairs of primers. The patient accepted treatment with Chinese herbal medicine; however, the level of creatine kinase did not decrease significantly. Four years ago (at 22-years-old), the patient began to experience weakness in both lower extremities, manifested as strenuous standing up from a squatting position and strenuous stepping up the stairs, which gradually worsened to the point that standing up from squatting required hand support on the knees.
The patient was healthy before.
The patient denied consanguineous marriage and any special medical history and personal history. The parents had no symptoms of muscle weakness and had a normal creatine kinase level.
Physical examinations showed a 4/5 muscle strength when lying down while holding the head up; 5/5 muscle strength for the double upper extremity deltoid muscles, triceps, flexor and extensor carpal muscles, and short flexor extensor; 4/5 muscle strength for the biceps; 3/5 muscle strength for the double lower limb iliac muscles, gluteus maximus, and quadriceps; 1/5 muscle strength for the thigh adductor; 4/5 muscle strength for the gluteal middle muscle and hamstring muscle; and 5/5 muscle strength for tibialis anterior muscle and gastrocnemius muscle. The muscle tone was normal, and the upper tendon reflex and ankle reflex were normal. However, there was no reflex of both knees. Bilateral Babinski sign was negative.
Enzyme tests showed creatine kinase of 11082 U/L and creatine kinase myocardial band of 126 U/L.
A routine electrocardiogram showed sinus arrhythmia and left ventricular high voltage. Pulmonary function test showed nonspecific ventilation dysfunction. Chest computed tomography showed left interlobar pleura and local pleura nodular thickening, suggesting an inflammation. Heart Doppler ultrasound and liver, gallbladder, pancreas, spleen, and urinary tract ultrasound showed no obvious abnormalities. Neuromyography showed no obvious abnormalities in motor nerve and sensory nerve conduction velocity. Quantitative electromyography measurement showed some myogenic changes in the right medial femoral muscle, gastrocnemius muscle, and tibialis anterior muscle. Magnetic resonance imaging of the right calf showed that the gastrocnemius muscle and soleus muscle were experiencing atrophy to different degrees, mainly in the medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle .
The proband and his parents were enrolled after providing informed written consent. Genomic DNA was extracted from white blood cells using a Genomic DNA extraction kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). All exons of the CRPPA gene were sequenced using whole exome sequencing (Yulong Biomedical Group, Shanghai, China).
A homozygous deletion, c. 1114-1116del (p.V372del), was identified in exon 8 of the CRPPA gene (NM_001101426.3) in the proband , while a heterozygous deletion was identified in the proband’s father and mother . This variant was not included in the 1000 Genomes Project database or the ESP6500 data set of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute exome sequencing project.