A 33-year-old Dutch Caucasian woman was referred to our clinic with signs of painful bony impingement of the left patellofemoral joint. One year before presentation, she underwent a trochlear osteotomy of the left knee for recurrent patellofemoral instability with signs of trochlear dysplasia . There was no patella alta. Conservative treatment with physical therapy, activity modification, and taping had failed to relieve the patellofemoral instability. There was no history of any previous surgical procedures or trauma. In reviewing the operative records no complications during or directly after trochlear osteotomy were noted. Trochlear osteotomy was performed through a lateral parapatellar approach with the knee in full extension, allowing the patella to be retracted medially. After incomplete subchondral osteotomy of the anterior aspect of the lateral condyle with curved osteotomes, the articular cartilage of the anterior aspect of the lateral condyle was elevated in one piece to a height of 8 mm. Height was maintained by inserting a wedge shaped bone graft from the iliac crest and osteosynthesis with 2 screws. Patellofemoral stability was assessed through a full range of motion, and considered adequate. The synovial lining and lateral retinaculum were closed. No additional medial soft tissue surgery was performed. Direct postoperative partial weight bearing was advised with crutches, after 6 weeks full weight bearing was allowed.
Five months later she still had persistent pain on the anterior aspect of the left knee without a history of trauma or patellar dislocation since the procedure. Radiographic examination demonstrated nonunion of the trochlear osteotomy with dislocation of subchondral bone resulting in an irregular patellofemoral joint . Arthroscopy was performed with removal of the screws. Since patellofemoral joint preserving surgery was considered inadequate, she was referred to our hospital for further treatment.
On physical examination there was painful limited range of motion with 90 degrees of flexion. No signs of infection were observed. There was obvious quadriceps muscle wasting. Palpation of lateral retinaculum and lateral condyle was painful. Moving from flexion to maximal extension, the patella was found to wobble at approximately 30 degrees of flexion. A Computed Tomography (CT) scan of the left knee demonstrated the irregular condyle .
Because of incapacitating pain, patellofemoral joint replacement was advised. Using a medial parapatellar incision, the knee joint was inspected. The anterior aspect of the lateral condyle was deformed with grade 4 cartilage degeneration. The remaining trochlea was dysplastic . Inspection of the patella showed no clear medial and lateral facets, with only the odd facet readily visible. On the lateral side a 1 × 1 cm grade 4 lesion was present. The femorotibial compartments showed no degenerative changes. Patellofemoral arthroplasty was performed using the Journey PFJ (Smith&Nephew, Memphis, Tennessee) . The irregular anterior femur was resected using the standard cutting blocks. Condylar support for the prosthesis was adequate. Postoperative rehabilitation was uneventful, and at last follow-up at 6 months the patient demonstrated good function of the left knee with 140 degrees of flexion. There were no signs of patellofemoral instability and she experienced only slight anterior knee pain.