A 63-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a two month history of general weakness, intermittent left lower quadrant abdominal pain, weight loss, constipation and signs of partial bowel obstruction. Physical examination revealed a palpable tender mass in the left abdomen. There was no history of melena or mucus. The overlying skin and subcutaneous tissue were unremarkable. A barium enema showed narrowing of the distal sigmoid colon. Colonoscopy revealed inflammatory changes of the sigmoid colon – the mucosa was erythematous and edematous, but there were no colonoscopic features of Crohn's colitis or ulcerative colitis. Computed tomography was negative except for a small amount of free fluid present in the abdomen. Laboratory findings were normal. The pre-operative impression was of a possible cancer of the sigmoid colon although the pre-operative investigations were not conclusive, particularly because no mucosal mass was identified. Laparotomy was performed through a midline incision. The mesentery of the sigmoid colon was markedly thickened, constricted and puckered. The color varied from yellow to red-brown suggestive of fat necrosis. The normal architecture of the adipose tissue was lost and was replaced with an irregular nodular mass involving appendices epiploicae of the colon. There was a moderate amount of serous effusion in the peritoneal cavity. No enlarged lymph nodes were identified. On macroscopic pathological evaluation the mesenteric mass was composed of areas of pale yellow and reddish-brown color with focal hemorrhage. The blood vessel walls were thickened and congested. The bowel wall adjacent to the mesenteric mass was thickened, edematous and markedly congested .
Microscopic pathologic sections from the involved mesentery demonstrated a chronic reactive inflammatory process with exuberant proliferation of fibroblasts, fibrocytes and fibrosis . Scattered areas of steatonecrosis and lipid-laden macrophages, lymphocytes and plasma cells were present. On microscopic examination of the sigmoid mucosa there were no inflammatory changes.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was discharged ten days after the operation in good condition. The patient's state of health was followed up for two years during which time he remained asymptomatic.