A 16-month-old Hispanic girl presented to a genetics clinic with developmental delay and abnormal facial features. She was born at term to unrelated parents. Her mother and father’s ages were 29 and 30 years respectively. Her two older sisters are both healthy with normal development. There is no family history of a child with intellectual disability or similar findings. The maternal grandmother had a baby who died at 1 week of age with multiple birth defects.
Developmental delay was first noticed at 4 months of age and she was referred for early interventional therapy. When she was first seen in the genetics clinic at 16 months, she only made whining noises, did not make eye contact, and could not sit upright, crawl, or rollover. She made poor eye contact and had episodes of inconsolable agitation with self-mutilation. She had constipation, abdominal bloating, and only tolerated pureed food. She developed a periorbital urticarial rash and tested positive for multiple food allergies.
Her head circumference was at the fifth percentile compared to her length at the 25th percentile. Her ears were large at the 95th percentile. She had two skin papules directly above her nipples bilaterally (supernumerary nipples) and one lateral to her right palpebral fissure. She had mild midface hypoplasia, anteverted nares, short thick upper lip, broad philtrum, protuberant lower lip, high palate, and widely spaced teeth. She had an abnormal hair whorl offset to the side. She had prominent digit pads on her middle three fingers bilaterally . She had excess skin on the plantar surface of her feet, sole creases were few in number, and there was a palpable soft fat pad anteromedial to the heel of both her feet . Dr Pierpont reviewed her photos and confirmed that her features were compatible with PS.
She had a normal karyotype (46,XX). A chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) using the Affymetrix Genome-wide Human Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) Array 6.0 revealed 118 independent regions of homozygosity. These ranged from 1 Mb to 5.8 Mb and encompassed 8 % of her genome. She was enrolled in a whole exome study run by Baylor College of Medicine, USA.