A 68-year-old man was admitted due to syncope and weakness. His past medical history included hypertension and dyslipidaemia. Two weeks before the admission, he had been hospitalized for a SARS-CoV2 pneumonia complicated with a cephalic vein phlebitis. No blood cultures were performed, and it was treated with levofloxacin and linezolid for five days. On admission, blood pressure was 158/77 mmHg and heart rate was 126 beats per minute. Temperature was 39.5 Celsius and oxygen saturation was 96% on 2 L of supplementary oxygen. Neurological examination revealed left hemianopsia, anosognosia, and left hemiparesis and hemisensory loss. Cardiopulmonary auscultation showed a third heart sound associated with a sistodiastolic murmur and signs of pulmonary oedema. Violaceous nodules were also found on the pads of the fingers.
A 12-lead electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia, PR interval of 200 ms, narrow QRS complex with no signs of acute ischaemia . Laboratory exams demonstrated normocytic anaemia, absolute neutrophil count of 7700 mm3, C-reactive protein of 29 mg/dL (normal 0–0.5 mg/dL), normal renal function, and normal lactate levels (<2 mmol/L). Two sets of blood cultures were collected. A cerebral computed tomography (CT) showed hypodense areas in the right occipital lobe, medial temporal lobe, and thalamus consistent with a recent right posterior cerebral artery (PCA) stroke. Supportive care was started.
On the second day of admission, the patient had sudden onset global aphasia with decreased consciousness level, requiring urgent intubation and mechanical ventilation. A new cranial CT revealed an acute ischaemic infarct in the left middle cerebral artery, as well as a left frontal lobe haemorrhage and a haemorrhagic transformation of the established PCA stroke . Respiratory status deteriorated dramatically due to severe pulmonary oedema. Methicillin-susceptible S. aureus was isolated from blood cultures, and a transoesophageal echocardiogram (TEE) revealed thickened and phlegmonous aortic valve leaflets with a central perforation causing an acute severe regurgitation, and a perivalvular abscess (, , ). Left ventricular ejection fraction was preserved. Definite IE was diagnosed according to modified Duke criteria, and 2 g of cefazoline/8 h was started, which cleared the bacteraemia within two days. However, the patient presented an unfavourable course with haemodynamic instability, worsening renal function and refractory pulmonary oedema despite inotropic drugs and continuous renal replacement therapy. The case was discussed in the endocarditis team meeting. Neurological status was difficult to assess since the patient was intubated and haemodynamically unstable. Cardiac surgery was considered contraindicated for at least four weeks because of intracranial haemorrhage. However, after starting cefazoline, the patient remained without fever and blood cultures were repeatedly negative. Then, although the persistence of a perivalvular abscess, a TAVR MyValve of 32 mm was implanted two weeks after admission to improve haemodynamic situation and as a bridge to open-heart surgery if neurological status allowed it. After TAVR, no conduction disturbance or paravalvular leaks were documented and the patient could be successfully weaned from ventilation and inotrope drugs. Unfortunately, after sedation withdrawal, neurological sequelae became apparent, especially behavioural disturbances, and cardiac surgery was ruled out.
Subsequently, antibiotic treatment was maintained, and the patient did not present new episodes of fever. Likewise, TEE monitoring was performed to guide duration of antibiotic treatment. Sixteen weeks after TAVR, a TEE showed a normal bioprosthetic aortic valve (, ) and a significant reduction of the perivalvular thickening compared to initial exploration , and cefazoline was stopped. However, despite the persistence of a periprosthetic thickening, follow-up blood cultures a week, a month, and four months after completing antibiotic remained negative. Currently, at nine months follow-up, he persists with no signs of relapse.