An 81-year-old woman presented with a mass that had grown rapidly over a few days at the Kyushu Central Hospital of the Mutual Aid Association of Public School Teachers.
Computed tomography (CT) revealed a mass in the thyroid gland invading the muscles in the anterior region of the neck . Paratracheal lymph nodes metastasis was also detected. However, no lateral cervical lymph node metastasis or distant metastasis was detected on CT and positron emission tomography. On the basis of cytology findings, poorly differentiated carcinoma was suspected. Additional systematic laboratory tests indicated normal thyroid function (thyroid-stimulating hormone [TSH] 4.0 IU/mL, F-T4 0.77 ng/dL), calcium levels (9.8 mg/dL), carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) levels (0.5 ng/mL), and calcitonin levels (25 pg/mL); none of the findings indicated medullary carcinoma. However, the thyroglobulin (TG) level was slightly elevated at 98.4 ng/mL (normal range: <30 ng/mL). A poorly differentiated thyroid carcinoma was diagnosed, and hemithyroidectomy with central cervical lymphadenectomy was performed.
Pathological examination of the surgical specimen revealed abundant mucus as a characteristic finding . Agglomerations of large atypical cells were also detected . The large tumor cells had large atypical nuclei and a relatively high frequency of mitotic figures. Of note, rhabdoid cells with cytoplasmic inclusion bodies were detected scattered among the tumor cells. There were no nuclear grooves or intranuclear inclusions characteristic of papillary carcinoma, no papillary or follicular structure, and no necrosis or calcification. The extracellular mucus stained diffusely with Alcian blue staining , mucicarmine staining , and periodic acid–Schiff (PAS) staining, and these findings confirmed the epithelial origin of the mucin. In addition, the tumor cells stained positive for AE1/AE3, confirming the epithelial nature of the tumor. Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and TG staining was also positive, confirming the tumor’s ability to differentiate into thyroid tissue . To confirm whether the tumor was a medullary carcinoma, staining for calcitonin and CEA was also performed, but the results were negative. MIB-1 expression was moderately positive (40 %). The cytoplasmic inclusion bodies of some of the tumor cells were positive for vimentin, indicating that the cells were rhabdoid cells . On the basis of the above-mentioned findings, a primary mucinous carcinoma of the thyroid gland with rhabdoid cells was diagnosed.
Ten months after the surgery, recurrence was detected in the contralateral paratracheal lymph node . Accordingly, total resection of the residual thyroid gland and paratracheal lymphadenectomy were performed. TSH suppression therapy was initiated as adjuvant therapy. Six years after treatment for the relapse, the patient is alive and disease-free. The TG levels decreased to <5.0 ng/mL after the surgery and have not increased subsequently, not even at the time of the relapse.