A 27-year-old female with metastatic melanoma presented to the Emergency Department with diarrhea, rectal bleeding, abdominal pain and nausea 1 d after the fourth cycle of combined immunotherapy with nivolumab and ipilimumab.
The patient presented to the Emergency Department 24 h after cycle 4 with an acute onset of grade 3 diarrhea, per rectal (PR) bleeding, abdominal cramping, nausea and vomiting. She was already receiving oral prednisolone 50 mg daily for resolving grade 2 dermatitis and grade 2 hepatitis.
She was diagnosed with a superficial spreading melanoma of her forehead. This was excised in August 2017 and showed a Breslow thickness of 0.5 mm, Clark level III, without ulceration or lymphovascular invasion but positive margins requiring re-excision, achieving clear resection on reattempt.
The patient presented to the emergency department the following month with right upper quadrant pain, headache and mild generalized abdominal discomfort. Computed tomography (CT) chest and abdomen showed bilateral lung nodules and cystic-like structures in the pancreas and positron emission tomography (PET) showed uptake in bone, soft tissue, lung, pancreas, peritoneum, mesentery, left gluteal region and upper abdominal lymph nodes. Fine needle aspirate of the palpable gluteal soft tissue mass was consistent with metastatic melanoma (BRAF wild type). At time of diagnosis, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) was mildly elevated at 296 IU/L and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain showed a T1 enhancing lesion measuring 13 mm × 12 mm in the left anterior temporal lobe without surrounding vasogenic oedema.
Given her age, BRAF status, high disease burden and good performance status, she was commenced on combined immunotherapy with nivolumab and ipilimumab. Post cycle 1, the patient presented with grade 2 dermatitis over the torso, face and limbs and was commenced on 50 mg prednisolone with prompt resolution. Over the following fortnight, steroids were tapered, LDH normalized and the left gluteal lesion was no longer palpable. After the second cycle, she complained of dizziness, nausea and anorexia. Liver function tests (LFTs) were deranged from a normal baseline with aspartate transaminase (AST) of 265 IU/L, alanine transaminase (ALT) of 233 IU/L, gamma glutamyl transferase of 185 IU/L and alkaline phosphatase of 203 IU/L. She was recommenced on 50mg prednisolone for grade 2 hepatitis. Cycle 3 proceeded while receiving 10 mg prednisolone given the patient was symptom free and LFTs were improving. This was however increased to 50 mg as the ALT again increased from 51 to 144. MRI brain performed at this time, showed a partial decrease in volume of the single brain metastasis. A decision was made by the neurosurgical team to continue surveillance MRI imaging given this early response. On day 65 (1 d after the 4th cycle), the patient presented with grade 3 colitis with diarrhea, PR bleeding, worsening abdominal cramps, nausea and vomiting.
Her co-morbidities included asthma and an inflammatory arthropathy with previous steroid use (last acute flare 7 years prior). There was no significant family history.
Vital signs were within normal limits. There was generalized tenderness on abdominal palpation but no signs of peritonism. Rectal examination was normal.
Baseline laboratory results on the day of presentation to the Emergency Department were as follows: Fasting blood glucose 154 g/L; WCC 18.3 × 109/L; Plt 287 × 109/L; Neutrophils 14.84 × 109/L; Bilirubin 7 μmol/L; ALT 97 U/L; LDH 215 U/L; Albumin 39 g/L; Sodium 138 mmol/L; potassium 3.9 mmol/L; Creatinine 66 μmol/L; Urea 5.7 mmol/L; eGFR > 90; TSH 1.90 mu/L; fT3 3.4 pmol/L; fT4 12.2 pmol/L.
CT showed features of colitis and a reduction in the intra-abdominal metastases. Intravenous methylprednisolone was administered (1 g daily for 5 d, subsequently 1 mg/kg prednisolone maintenance) and despite this, an increase in frequency and severity of symptoms to grade IV was seen. Stool culture was negative and colonoscopy showed features consistent with acute colitis with patchy inflammation and ulceration macroscopically to the splenic flexure with no evidence of cytomegalovirus inclusion bodies on histopathology. Nine days after symptom onset, the first dose of infliximab was administered followed by a second dose 3 d later. Initially a reduction in frequency to 5 motions/d was seen, however symptoms worsened 3 d later. On day 20 after symptom onset, she commenced MMF 500 mg bd. Three days later, MMF was increased to 1 g bd with no improvement. A flexible sigmoidoscopy was performed, given concerns of perforation. Macroscopically, she had a high van der Heide score, on histology, increased cellularity of the lamina propria, apoptotic debris, neutrophilic infiltration and crypt abscesses were shown, with an absence of intraepithelial lymphocytes and eosinophils .