The case describes a 15-year-old male with situs inversus, dextrocardia, bilateral superior caval veins, atrioventricular discordance with a single outlet, large perimembranous ventricular septal defect, aortic override, pulmonary atresia, and right aortic arch. The complex anatomy with a VSD distant from the aorta (unsuitable for intracardiac baffling) meant biventricular repair was not possible and he proceeded down a univentricular palliation pathway.
Eleven years after a TCPC, cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) demonstrated incidental, severe stenosis of the Gore-Tex ECC, secondary to thrombus formation and subsequent dissection.
The patient previously underwent modified right and left Blalock-Taussig (BT) shunt in the neonatal period, bilateral bidirectional cavopulmonary anastomosis, augmentation of central pulmonary arteries and a TCPC with an extracardiac, non-fenestrated, 18 mm Gore-Tex conduit, and a pulmonary artery plasty at the level of the left Glenn. The cardiac anatomy required the anastomosis of the Gore-Tex conduit obliquely at the pulmonary artery end. An accessory right hepatic vein draining directly to the atrium was left (to function as a small fenestration). He was maintained on aspirin.
At the age of 5, he developed fatigability with desaturation. Cardiac computed tomography (CT) suggested veno-venous shunting was causative. The accessory hepatic vein was banded. This improved exercise tolerance and saturation.
At the age of 15, the patient was generally asymptomatic, with mild effort intolerance and lower but acceptable saturations (91%). His clinical examination, electrocardiogram, chest X-ray, and echocardiogram were unremarkable. His liver function was normal (see ). Cardiovascular magnetic resonance was performed to investigate this and as part of his workup for transition to adult services. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance demonstrated a dissection of the extracardiac tunnel starting ∼17 mm above the liver reaching above the level of the pulmonary arteries (see ). The narrowest dimension of the tunnel measured 7 mm × 9 mm just before joining the pulmonary branches and was additionally compressed by suspected thrombus. There was a large tortuous vein noted to the left of the extracardiac tunnel. This was thought to decompress the inferior vena cava (IVC) and draining into left pulmonary veins. Although the exact entry could not be identified, the suggestion that it has arisen was due to a calculated increased flow in the left pulmonary veins when compared to left pulmonary artery (net forward flow 38 vs. 22 mL/beat). The patient refused cannulation therefore contrast angiography showing the anatomy in more detail was not possible.
An urgent CT (see ) confirmed eccentric thrombus narrowing the conduit, but more significantly, organized thrombus outside of the conduit lumen, confined to the shape of the conduit as demonstrated on the previous CT. This was presumed to represent prior rupture of the Gore-Tex conduit lining with containment via its thin outer membrane with subsequent thrombosis. The lumen of the TCPC conduit was reduced to 4 mm × 3 mm and an enlarged phrenic vein demonstrated in keeping with collateralization. There was no enhancement of the ‘false lumen’ to suggest active leak and the appearance was considered long standing (with collateralization noted).
He was discussed in our cardiothoracic meeting with consensus to proceed to cardiac catheter and stenting of the stenotic region.
At cardiac catheter, haemodynamic assessment showed acceptable Fontan pressures (see ), likely due to the large decompressing collateral. The angiogram (see ) demonstrated a tight distal stenosis (4 mm × 6 mm) at the junction of the conduit with pulmonary arteries. In anterior–posterior and lateral projections, the conduit measured 12 and 19 mm, respectively. There was significant dilation of the hepatic veins. There was one right hepatic vein draining into the right-sided atrium. There was a large haemodynamically significant collateral emerging from the IVC that divided into a paravertebral collateral and a large, long, and tortuous collateral draining into the left pulmonary veins. The distal Fontan conduit stenosis was progressively dilated with 8 and 10 mm × 20 mm Conquest Balloon and 12 mm × 40 mm Atlas Gold Balloons. The conduit was stented with a 34 mm-long Cheatham Platinum stent over a 14 mm × 40 mm BIB balloon. The stent was then further dilated with a 16 mm × 40 mm Atlas Gold balloon. The subsequent angiogram showed no gradient between the IVC and pulmonary arteries. The large haemodynamically significant collateral from the IVC was successfully occluded with a 12 mm Amplatzer Vascular Plug 2 and two 15 mm × 15 mm MReye coils.
The patient was discharged the next day on aspirin and clopidogrel. At clinic follow-up, 2 months later, the patient was well with improved exercise tolerance and saturations of 92%.