A 25-year-old man with a height of 168 cm and weight of 68 kg underwent arthroscopic surgery to treat a rotator cuff tear caused by recurrent shoulder dislocation. He had no remarkable medical history. General anesthesia was induced with propofol (100 mg), remifentanil (0.3 μg/kg/min), and rocuronium (40 mg), while an 8.0-mm endotracheal tube was inserted for airway management. Additionally, a brachial plexus block was administered with 0.25% levobupivacaine (30 mL) through an interscalene approach under ultrasonographic guidance, and an indwelling catheter was placed. While the patient was placed in the beach-chair position during surgery, anesthesia was maintained with oxygen 1 L/min, air 2 L/min, 1.5% sevoflurane, and remifentanil 0.2-0.3 μg/kg/min. The patient was monitored using five-lead electrocardiography, pulse oximetry, and capnometry. The total dose of rocuronium administered was 90 mg, and the last dose of 10 mg was given 15 min before the end of the surgery. The operative time was 3 h and 21 min. Continuous infusion of remifentanil was discontinued simultaneous with the end of surgery. Administration of sevoflurane was discontinued 5 min later. Sugammadex was intravenously administered at 100 mg to reverse rocuronium. Since the patient regained clear consciousness and spontaneous breathing at 10 mL/kg, the intubation tube was removed. Immediately after extubation, he presented with retractive breathing and stridor. According to the capnometer readings, the end-tidal carbon dioxide (EtCO2) concentration was undetectable. Although 100% oxygen was administered at 10 L/min via a facemask, oxygen saturation (SpO2) decreased to approximately 70%. Onset of laryngospasm was suspected, and thus, 100% oxygen was started at 10 L/min with continuous positive airway pressure (30 cm H2O). The patient’s airway was reopened after a while. Consequently, both stridor and retractive breathing resolved. The EtCO2 waveforms became detectable with a capnometer, and SpO2 also improved to 100% . The patient was monitored in the operating room for 30 min. After a stable level of consciousness and stable respiratory patterns were confirmed, he was discharged from the operating room. No recurrence of laryngospasm was observed throughout the postoperative course.