We report a case of a 62-year-old ethnic Moroccan woman, who has cardiovascular risk factors such as type 2 diabetes, arterial hypertension, and dyslipidemia. The patient presented with a symptomatology made of vertigo and tremor, associated with a malaise when getting up in the morning. Her symptomatology was aggravated in warm atmospheres, with a feeling of well-being in cold climates. In addition, the patient presented palpitations with intolerance to the effort.
The clinical examination found a blood pressure of 159/101 mmHg in the right arm and 157/99 mmHg in the left arm, and a heart rate of 94 beats/minute. The cardiovascular examination was without special features, and the patient’s echocardiography was normal. The electrocardiogram showed a regular sinus rhythm at 94 beats/minute, and a fixed PR (PR is time between onset of atrial activation (P wave) and onset of ventricular myocardial activation (onset of QRS complex)) at 0.18 seconds without secondary repolarization disorders.
Given her symptomatology, the patient benefited from an exploration of the autonomic nervous system through cardiovascular reactivity tests (Ewing tests).
During this exploration, the patient was first placed in a calm atmosphere, in dorsal decubitus position on an examination table. Blood pressure and heart rate was measured every 5 minutes for 30 minutes, then the patient performed five tests of the autonomic nervous system, interspersed with periods of rest.
During this test, the patient performed six deep breaths for 1 minute. The patient’s calculated vagal response was 7% [normal (N): 30%], indicating a vagal deficiency.
This test is a manual contraction effort performed to determine changes in blood pressure and heart rate at the static effort. In the patient, the vagal response was 6.5% (N: 10%), indicating a vagal deficiency
The peripheral sympathetic alpha response was 11% (N: 10%), reflecting peripheral sympathetic alpha hyperactivity.
This test corresponds to the patient performing shallow breathing for 15 seconds. The heart rate increased from 91 beats/minute to 97 beats/minute during this test. Blood pressure decreased from 171/100 mmHg to 144/86 mmHg.
This test consists of successive mental calculations leading to an increase in heart rate and blood pressure by increasing central sympathetic activity. The central alpha sympathetic response in the patient was 22% (N: 10%), indicating alpha sympathetic hyperactivity.
This test consisted of measuring the variation in heart rate and blood pressure in response to active lifting for at least 5 seconds after a period of rest in a supine position.
The patient’s blood pressure decreased from 159/99 mmHg to 128/80 mmHg, indicating the existence of orthostatic hypotension.
After the end of the orthostatic test, the shift to the supine position was associated with an increase in blood pressure to 173/110 mmHg in relation to supine hypertension .
Table summarizes the cardiovascular autonomic profile obtained from the cardiovascular reactivity tests (Ewing test):
We note high blood pressure and heart rate in the basic state, a vagus deficiency in deep breathing and orthostatic test, sympathetic central and peripheral hyperactivity, and orthostatic hypotension associated with supine high blood pressure.
This autonomic profile is in favor of an autonomic cardiac neuropathy syndrome combining vagal deficiency and sympathetic hyperactivity.