A 26-year-old man was diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder in childhood and had been walking on tiptoes. At the age of 18, he started holding on to something when he stood, and 12 months ago, he began to drag his feet, gradually becoming unable to stand up straight, and developed frequent urination. Although MR imaging revealed a cervical cord enlargement, it was judged to have no pathological significance, and the patient was followed up by MR imaging at that time. Three months ago, he was referred to our hospital, complaining of urinary retention and progressive right upper limb movement disorder. Steroid pulse therapy was applied as a demyelinating disease was suspected. However, 1 month ago, the upper limb paralysis worsened. Due to the rapid progression of the symptoms, he was referred to our department. At the examination, the patient’s consciousness level was JCS I-3, and both upper and lower extremities showed severe paresis. Cervical T2-weighted MR imaging showed diffuse spinal cord swelling from the C2 to the Th2 level, and gadolinium-enhanced T1 images showed heterogeneous enhancement of the swollen spinal cord . The patient’s symptoms rapidly progressed just before surgery, resulting in abdominal breathing. Therefore, the patient underwent tumor biopsy, C2 domotomy, and C3–C7 decompressive laminectomy with expansive duroplasty to verify the final diagnosis and decide further therapy options. The pathological diagnosis was DMG, H3K27-altered. On the day after surgery, contrast-enhanced head-and-neck computed tomography (CT) showed no obvious abnormalities. Still, on the same day, consciousness disorder and complete paralysis of both lower limbs developed, and spontaneous breathing deteriorated, requiring tracheal intubation. At that time, there was no low attenuation in the cervical spinal cord on imaging. On postoperative day 7, when the patient’s overall condition stabilized, head-and-neck CT revealed acute hydrocephalus and diffuse hypodensity in the cervical spinal cord , and an emergency third ventriculostomy was performed. However, his spontaneous breathing disappeared the day after the ventriculostomy. Contrast-enhanced MR imaging of the whole spine 2 months after the surgery revealed diffuse heterogeneous enhancement of the atrophic spinal cord in suspicion of the disseminated lesion or residual tumors with multiple syrinxes . The patient died after his transfer to a convalescent care facility.