A 55-year-old male patient with hypertension presented to our hospital with a complaint of chest pain that began 90 min earlier. The electrocardiogram (ECG) at admission showed sinus rhythm and ST-elevation in the inferior leads. All laboratory values were within normal ranges. Physical examination revealed regular cardiac rhythm without murmurs, and bibasilar pulmonary rales. The patient was administered acetylsalicylic acid 250 mg i.v. and ticagrelor 180 mg before urgent cardiac catheterization. Coronary angiography revealed a critical stenotic lesion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and a severe CAA and thrombotic occlusion of the proximal right coronary artery (RCA) (; Videos 1 and 2). Reperfusion was achieved by means of manual thrombus aspiration and balloon dilation with 2.5 × 20 mm non-compliant balloon [NC Emerge (Boston Scientific, Marlborough, MA, USA)] . Examination with intravascular ultrasonography showed severe CAA measuring 9 mm in diameter and a residual large thrombus burden in the proximal segment of the RCA, as well as a critical stenosis with massive thrombus apposition in the mid-segment of the vessel. Distal reference vessel diameter (RVD) was approximately 6.5 mm (; ; and Video 3). Final coronary angiography showed Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) 2–3 blood flow ( and ). At this stage, the patient was asymptomatic and haemodynamically stable, and the ECG showed ST-segment resolution. No further PCI was performed and adjunctive pharmacotherapy with low molecular weight heparin and tirofiban infusion was administered, aiming to reduce thrombus burden. An angiographic control was scheduled—not as per standard practice—few days later to evaluate the efficacy of anticoagulant and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors therapy.
Twenty-four hours after the procedure, the patient suddenly experienced recurrence of chest pain and dynamic ST-wave changes. Repeat urgent coronary angiography revealed nearly complete occlusion of the mid-RCA ( and ). Percutaneous coronary intervention was performed from right femoral artery using an 8-Fr AL 1.0 guiding catheter (Cordis, Miami Lakes, FL, USA). After the lesion was easily crossed with a workhorse coronary guidewire, a nitinol self-apposing, sirolimus-eluting Xposition S 3.5–4.5 × 27 mm stent (Stentys, Paris, France, UE) was deployed distally first at the mid-RCA segment ( and ). Then, a self-expanding nitinol CGuard 8.0 × 40 mm carotid stent (InspireMD, Tel Aviv, Israel) was positioned with its distal marker inside of the proximal stent edge of the already deployed distal Xposition S ( and , Videos S4 and S5). The CGuard stent was implanted after the release of the Stentys, in order to avoid late CGuard overexpansion and subsequent Stentys malapposition. Stents were both post-dilated with a Boston NC Emerge 6.0 × 12 mm balloon inflated at high pressures. Final angiography showed no residual stenosis and TIMI 3 flow ( and , Videos S6 and S7). Intravascular ultrasonography examination confirmed good stent expansion as well as complete apposition to the vessel wall . Complete revascularization was achieved in the same procedural session, by drug-eluting stent implantation [Resolute Onyx 3.0 × 26 mm (Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA)] in the mid-LAD ( and ). The post-operative course in the cardiac intensive care unit was uneventful, and ECG continuous monitoring showed no significant arrhythmias during the hospital stay. The patient was discharged in good physical condition, with an oral treatment including aspirin 100 mg/day and ticagrelor 90 mg b.i.d., and with indication to consider transition to long-term dual antiplatelet therapy after clinical re-evaluation at 12 months. At 6-month follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic. Cycle ergometer (25 Watts more every 3 minutes) stress test, terminated due to fatigue at a heart rate of 142 b.p.m. (86% of the age-adjusted expected maximum heart rate), showed no ECG changes suggestive of ischaemia and no significant exercise-induced arrhythmias. Transthoracic echocardiogram showed preserved left ventricular ejection fraction and inferior hypokinesia.