A 9-year-old ethnically Lao boy was referred from a private clinic to a central hospital's emergency department (ED) in Vientiane, the capital city of Lao PDR, on December 20th, 2021, with a typical presentation of MIS-C. He had an 8-day-history of fever and a 5-day-history of abdominal pain in the setting of having family members recently test positive by PCR for COVID-19 on November 23rd, 2021.
His first symptom (day 0) was an intermittent “high grade” fever (the mother did not measure his temperature) associated with chills and daily intermittent mild sore throat, relieved with paracetamol. On days 2–4, he developed mild intermittent periumbilical cramping pain and yellow watery stools without melena/hematochezia which progressed to vomiting with anorexia. He was found to have a 1–2 cm swollen area on his left posterior neck that spread to the right side over 2–3 days. This area was not red nor warm nor tender. His parent brought him to a private clinic (PC1) where he was diagnosed with tonsillitis and given amoxicillin without improvement. On day 5, he was more fatigued and developed bilateral nonexudative conjunctival injections, red lips, and increased anorexia. On day 6, the fever became persistent despite antipyretics. His abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea worsened. His family brought him to an emergency department (ED) at a central hospital (CH1). He was diagnosed with acute gastroenteritis without dehydration and was discharged with oral rehydration solution and analgesia/antipyretics. On day 7, he returned to PC1, with no change in diagnosis nor treatment (timeline in ).
On the day of admission (day 8), his symptoms had not improved, and his family brought him to a new private clinic (PC2) where he was diagnosed with suspected severe sepsis with concerns for typhoid fever. At PC2, he had lymphopenia of 0.6 × 109/L–5%, granulocytosis of 11.8 × 109/L–91.8%, slightly raised CRP, negative dengue, and scrub typhus antigen testing, as well as a normal abdominal ultrasound. Subsequently, he was referred to the ED. His fever, fatigue, anorexia, and decreased urination continued, but the diarrhea decreased to once a day. He developed an occasional dry cough.
He did not have any flank pain, urinary symptoms, other upper respiratory tract infection symptoms, chest pain, shortness of breath, hypogeusia/ageusia, change in senses of smell/anosmia, altered level of consciousness, headache, dizziness, visual disturbances, focal neurological symptoms, joint/muscle/bone pain or swelling, rash/eschar.
His mother and youngest sister had positive PCR results for COVID-19 three weeks prior. During that time, he had a low-grade fever and mild respiratory symptoms (runny nose and cough), but he was not tested for COVID-19. Two weeks prior to his illness, he travelled to Vang Vieng, a vacation area, where he swam in a shallow river. The family denied other recent travel.
The patient was previously healthy with normal development. He had completed the basic Lao national immunization schedule but had no COVID-19 immunization. He did not take any regular medications and had no known allergies, nor surgical history. There was no family history of allergy and auto-immune diseases. Based on his family's report of the average nominal monthly consumption per capita (KIP) , the child's family wealth quintile was reported to be at the 5th quintile (most wealthy).
At admission his vital signs were: temperature = 39.4 °C; respiratory rate = 50 bpm, heart rate = 150 bpm (regular), SpO2 = 95% on room air. His blood pressure was not recorded. His weight was 28.3 kg (weight for age = −0.4 SD) and height was 124 cm (height for age = −1.9 SD). The patient was fatigued, but alert, orientated and cooperative. He had warm pink skin, capillary refill of < 2 s, and normal skin turgor. He had non-exudative conjunctival injection, red full lips, a white coating on his tongue, and itchy pink blanching maculopapular rashes at his palms, soles, and left knee . Non-tender smooth mobile enlarged lymph nodes were present in the bilateral posterior cervical chain (1.5–2 cm) and bilateral posterior triangles (left: 2 × 3 cm, right: 1.5–2 cm). There were no eschars, bruises, petechiae, desquamations, calf/muscle/joint/bone pain nor edema.
He had mild intercostal retractions. His apical impulse was palpated at the 4–5th intercostal space in the midclavicular line. He had normal S1 and S2, but with reduced heart sounds. We heard no murmur nor additional heart sounds. His lung sounds were normal. He had mild abdominal distension with generalized tenderness on palpation, especially in the right upper quadrant with mild to moderate guarding. There was no rebound, percussion, nor flank tenderness. Bowel sounds were normal with no hepatosplenomegaly. The genital examination was not remarkable. He had no meningismus and the neurological examination was grossly normal.
Based on the history and findings on the physical examination, MIS-C was thought to be the likely diagnosis. Cultures (blood, throat swab, urine, and stool) were sent (see ) and returned negative. COVID-19 rapid test and COVID-19 GeneXpert were also negative. Within three hours of admission, the patient's mental status changed from “A (alert)” to “V (responsive to voice)”. He maintained his blood pressure at 90/60 and was able to walk to the toilet to pass urine with minimal assistance. He had a high fever (39–40 °C), tachycardia (150s), tachypnea (50–58), and desaturated (93% on room air) requiring oxygen (1-liter per minute) by nasal cannula to maintain his SpO2 at 97%. The patient was admitted late in the evening therefore, inflammatory markers (CRP, ESR, ferritin, LDH, albumin), liver and renal function tests, chest x-ray (CXR), electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram were unavailable and planned to be carried out after transfer and consultation with the pediatric cardiologist at CH2. Upon admission to CH2, COVID-19 RT-PCR was again negative. CXR showed mild cardiomegaly with normal lung fields. The initial echocardiography revealed mild impaired left ventricular function (ejection fraction of 45%–51%) with no dilatation of coronary arteries. His electrocardiogram was normal. In our region, dengue and scrub typhus are common and antigen testing for these illnesses were done and were negative. His urine analysis was unremarkable. The COVID-19 IgG was tested later as an outpatient in follow up and was found to be positive .
The patient had previously received five days of amoxicillin without improvement. On day 9 of illness, he clinically worsened and the following were started: intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG at 2 g/kg in a single infusion over 12 h), methylprednisolone (2 mg/kg/day for 3 consecutive days), aspirin (3.5 mg/kg/day) ceftriaxone (100 mg/kg/day) for four total doses and cloxacillin (50 mg/kg/dose) for one dose. Cloxacillin was started for concern for toxic shock syndrome and stopped as patient stabilized. Rest, oral nutrition, and oral hydration were also encouraged.
Twenty-four to 48 h after initiating IVIG and methylprednisolone, his clinical symptoms and fever improved. His heart and respiratory rates normalized, and oxygen therapy was no longer required . The lymphopenia and mild impaired cardiac function resolved . He was discharged from the hospital after 5 days with aspirin. He reported mild bilateral knee pain without swelling, warmth nor redness on the date of discharge, lasting for approximately one week. He later developed bilateral feet swelling for one week, which also spontaneously resolved. On the second follow-up visit, complete blood counts (CBC) and CRP had completely normalized, while ESR significantly improved from ten times upper normal limit to five times the upper normal limit. During these visits, he had repeated echocardiograms which were normal .
The patient's family did not have health insurance, which is available in Lao PDR. The family paid around US$ 1,185 for the management of the patient during hospital admissions and the follow-up visits (July 6, 2022: US$ 1 = 17,750 Lao kips), which consisted of services/equipment (6%), medications (86%), and investigations (8%). The IVIG and methylprednisolone costs were around US$ 949 (∼US$15 per gram) and US$ 42 respectively, which constituted about 80% and 3.6% of the total treatment cost. The price the family paid at the government hospital is equivalent to the cost of the service, however, the price at the private clinics is higher. At the time of his hospitalization the test for IgG for SARS-CoV-2 was not available in the public hospital and this needed to be sent to a private laboratory which was the most expensive investigation costing US$29 (2% of total treatment cost).