An otherwise healthy 64 year old male presented in 2/2015 with a suspicious lesion on his back. Biopsy and subsequent wide local excision revealed a 1.2 mm deep, non-ulcerated cutaneous melanoma. A sentinel lymph node biopsy involving his right groin in 4/2015 revealed one lymph node involved with micrometastatic (<1 mm) melanoma. According to the 7th edition of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) staging system, he had stage IIIA melanoma (pT2AN1A). A computerized tomography (CT) scan in 5/2015 was unremarkable for metastatic disease, and he elected to not proceed with a completion lymph node dissection. The patient considered adjuvant systemic treatment options, and he chose to proceed with radiographic surveillance alone. Basic laboratory testing including a complete blood count (white blood cell count, hemoglobin, and platelets) was normal.
Three months later, in 8/2015, the patient developed flu-like symptoms and fatigue with an accompanying low grade fever. He presented to the emergency room where blood work revealed new pancytopenia with a low white blood cell count of 3.1 (K/mcL) with a normal differential (Neutrophils 58%, Lymphocytes 23.5%, Monocytes 4.2%, Eosinophils 2.5%, Basophils 0%) and no immature cells. Hemoglobin was slightly low at 12.3 (g/dL), and platelets were low at 67 (K/mcL). He had no evidence of abnormal bleeding or bruising. A CT scan on 8/19/15 showed multiple lesions in liver, spleen, and some small pulmonary nodules consistent with metastatic disease. A liver biopsy confirmed metastatic melanoma, BRAF wildtype. Due to his pancytopenia, a bone marrow biopsy was additionally performed. Hematoxylin and eosin staining revealed extensive metastatic melanoma with decreased number of myeloid, erythroid and megakaryocyte lineages along with prominent melanophages . The melanoma cells stained positive for S100, HMB45, and SOX10. Although immunohistochemical staining for the programmed cell death ligand 1 (PD-L1) protein on melanoma cells is not a standard test in melanoma, for research purposes to better characterize the immunologic aspects of the metastatic melanoma involving the bone marrow, immunohistochemical staining was performed. PD-L1 staining results using the antibody E1L3N (Vendor: Cell signal, Dilution: 1:500) were positive .
He started systemic therapy with pembrolizumab on 9/10/15. Within 3 weeks of starting pembrolizumab, he began to feel better with improvements in fatigue and functional status. Laboratory results from 12/10/15 showed improvements in his pancytopenia , and a CT scan showed decreasing size of his liver lesions with persistent splenic lesions. By 7/2016, his splenic lesions had completely disappeared, and his hepatic lesions had continued to slowly shrink. He has remained on pembrolizumab and received a total of 19 treatments, which he has tolerated well aside from mild treatment-related vitiligo. His favorable outcome is ongoing, most recently documented on scans from 12/2016 showing stability of small liver lesions and no splenic lesions. His complete blood count remains normal.