A 47-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital complaining of a mass in her face for 2 months. She had mild pain in her left face when chewing, without any limitation in mouth opening movement. She did not experience any fever or weight loss. On examination, there was a 2-cm mass in the left pre-auricular region . The lesion was hard, tender and covered by normal skin. No palpable cervical lymph nodes were found and no facial nerve paralysis was noticed.
Head and neck magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a tumor in the left pre-auricular region with size of 16 × 19 mm, continuing with the left parotid gland. This tumor appeared as a mild decreased signal lesion in T2 and a mild increased signal lesion in T2 fatsat, comparing to the parotid gland. The tumor had clear and regular border, did not invade to surrounding tissue, and was associated with heterogeneous and widespread contrast enhancement. These characteristics suggested a parotid gland tumor . A fine-needle aspiration of the mass was done with result of suspicious malignant cells.
Pre-operative diagnosis was suspicious left parotid gland cancer and the original treatment plan was total parotidectomy. In operation, after removing the superficial lobe of the left parotid gland, the lesion was found as a mass originating from the left TMJ with size of 2 × 2 cm, and without involvement in adjacent muscles or facial nerve . As a result, intra-operative diagnosis was sarcoma of the left TMJ. Thus, tumor resection was performed with close margin. The final pathological result was low-grade chondrosarcoma, which was described as a hyaline cartilaginous proliferation, with stroma containing stellate, spindle-shaped and rounded cells, without mitosis and cellularity characteristics. Patient fully recovered after 1 month without any complications .
Because the patient was evaluated as high risk of recurrence, she was indicated post-operative radiation therapy with total irradiated dose of 60 Gy in 30 fractions (5 days a week) with 3D conformal radiation technique. No severe radiation-related complications were reported during treatment. This patient was closely followed up afterwards. No adverse events were recorded and MRI performed a year after treatment showed no recurrence.