A 16-year-old male patient was diagnosed with MPS II in infancy. Five years prior to presentation, when he was 11 years old, tracheostomy was performed to treat an airway obstruction caused by laryngeal stenosis secondary to his primary mucopolysaccharide storage disease. His tracheostomy hole gradually narrowed along with his physical growth, and granulation tissue developed around the tracheostomy hole. One week prior to presentation, at the age of 16 years, he was admitted to another hospital on an emergency basis for major dyspnea. He was diagnosed with tracheostenosis due to granulation at the tracheostomy site and treated with ventilation upon admission. Slight deviation of the position of the tracheal tube obstructed his airway. His previous doctor determined that it was difficult to continue treatment at their institute because no chest surgeon was available. Therefore, the patient presented to our institute by ambulance while undergoing ventilation therapy. We performed a computed tomography scan, which showed obstruction of the airway. The distance from the tip of the tracheal tube to the carina was about 2 cm because the tracheal tube was kept on the distal side of the granulation. Moreover, the patient had pneumonia of the right upper lobe due to the airway obstruction. We performed a bronchoscopic examination through the nasal cavity in the operating room under general anesthesia with the tracheal tube in place because of the risk of suffocation . However, obtaining a peripheral view of the airway was difficult because of macroglossia, swelling of the tonsils, and MPS II-induced tracheomalacia. An image of the patient's airway is shown in . We also considered stent placement and laser treatment for airway management but selected the construction of a mediastinal tracheostoma. The mediastinal tracheostoma was created with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. First, we created a U-shaped flap. The manubrium, clavicle heads, and first and second ventral ribs were resected to facilitate the approach to the anterior mediastinal space. We observed the mediastinum, which exhibited severe adhesion. Second, the innominate vein and artery were sectioned for safe exposure. We exposed the trachea on the head side of the innominate artery and vein. A Metzenbaum scissors was used to cut the trachea at the minimum required length for construction of the mediastinal tracheostoma. After we confirmed that no granuloma was present in the tracheal lumen on the peripheral side , we intubated the trachea on the surgical field side. Third, we marked the mediastinal tracheal hole on the U-shaped flap. To maintain blood flow, the skin incision for the mediastinal tracheal hole was cut using a sharp scalpel and Metzenbaum scissors, without an electrotome . The skin and trachea were closed with 4-0 polypropylene interrupted sutures. Mediastinal tracheostomy was performed with an inlay thymus graft between the innominate vein and trachea . The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was weaned from the ventilator on postoperative day 19. He was discharged at 1.5 months postoperatively. Although he was referred to another institution for respiratory failure associated with his primary disease 6 months postoperatively, his airway management was successful for 1.5 years postoperatively .