A 54-year-old black South African woman was admitted to a local hospital in Scotland following several months of episodic night sweats, feverishness, and unexplained weight loss. She then developed frequent episodes of right-sided facial and arm “twitching” with preserved consciousness. These episodes progressively became constant and were exacerbated when she tried to talk. They persisted through sleep. She also complained of progressive breathlessness at rest. She recalled being treated for TB over 20 years previously, in the late 1980s, when she had been living in South Africa. Further details of this were unavailable. Her past medical history also included autoimmune neutropenia and mild anemia that had required no intervention. She had no significant family history. She worked in healthcare and did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol. Although she lived in the United Kingdom, she visited South Africa each year.
Clinical examination revealed a persistent, low-grade pyrexia and a purpuric rash. She was hemodynamically stable, alert, and able to follow commands. She was tachypneic, and on occasion she required inhaled oxygen support to maintain oxygen saturation at 92–94%. She had continuous, semirhythmic contractions in the muscles on the right side of her face. These movements extended from her mouth to her eyebrows (Additional file 1: Video S1). She had no other neurological deficits, and the remainder of her general examination was unremarkable. A summary of various investigations carried out and the differential diagnoses that were considered is shown in Table .
An in-depth timeline of the patient’s inpatient course is provided in Additional file : Table S1. She was initially suspected of having meningococcal septicemia, owing to her purpuric rash and pyrexia, and she was commenced on 2 g daily of intravenous (IV) ceftriaxone. Her condition then deteriorated rapidly into acute respiratory failure with new bilateral perihilar opacification evident on chest imaging , requiring a short period of intensive care for noninvasive ventilation. Ceftriaxone was stopped following negative blood culture results and suspicion that marked thrombocytopenia (lowest platelet count 3 × 109/L) explained her purpura. IV co-trimoxazole 120 mg/kg daily was commenced to treat Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP), and she also received 2 g of meropenem four times daily for 7 days for ongoing pyrexia. She had blood, urine, sputum, and cerebrospinal fluid cultures for mycobacteria. These each isolated Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Her pancytopenia and hyperferritinemia prompted bone marrow investigation. A marrow aspirate revealed macrophage activation and hemophagocytosis, supporting a diagnosis of HLH . A trephine biopsy identified numerous caseating epithelioid granulomata, supporting a diagnosis of TB. Her twitching was investigated with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain (with and without contrast). This revealed four small contrast-enhancing foci within the parenchyma of the brain. These were interpreted as likely tuberculomas. One of the lesions was located on the motor strip of her left hemisphere . This location corresponds somatotopically with her right-sided abnormal facial movements. A clinical diagnosis of EPC was made. Electroencephalography (EEG) revealed muscle artefact but was otherwise normal . Given the widespread evidence of tuberculous disease, a diagnosis of disseminated TB was made.
10 mg boluses of IV diazepam were initially given and failed to reduce her continuous focal seizure activity. IV levetiracetam 750 mg daily was then added but demonstrated minimal effect. She was therefore given 10 mg boluses of buccal midazolam and loaded with IV phenytoin at a dose of 17 mg/kg/day. When these were unsuccessful in stopping the seizures, IV levetiracetam was uptitrated to 2500 mg daily, and the IV phenytoin was uptitrated to 550 mg daily. She was also commenced on 1 mg of regular oral clonazepam daily. Her seizures stopped while she was receiving these three medications. She had experienced 7 days of unbroken focal seizure activity in total. A residual right-sided Todd’s paresis was noted, which soon resolved. She required high doses of oral antiepileptic drug (AED) polytherapy to maintain seizure freedom (clobazam 10 mg twice daily, levetiracetam 1500 mg twice daily, and phenytoin 350 mg once daily). Reducing or changing her AEDs proved difficult, with attempts to do so resulting in the reemergence of EPC seizures. Interval MRI of the brain with contrast demonstrated an increased number of enhancing parenchymal foci in keeping with tuberculomata scattered throughout her brain .
The patient was commenced on a 12-month regimen of oral anti-TB therapy as 6 months of once-daily isoniazid 300 mg, rifampicin 600 mg, pyrazinamide 2 mg, and ethambutol 1000 mg, then 10 months of the isoniazid and rifampicin. Eight weeks of IV etoposide 150 mg/m2 were given for HLH (twice weekly for the first 2 weeks, then once weekly for weeks 3–8). Long-term oral steroids were given alongside etoposide as a dexamethasone taper from 18 mg once daily over 8 weeks. Following this, prednisolone was commenced at a 20-mg-daily dose for the duration of anti-TB therapy. Overall, the patient had remained hospitalized for 6 months due to ongoing episodes of unwellness with fevers, respiratory distress (requiring a second brief admission to intensive care, for invasive ventilation), physical mobility problems, and difficulties with memory and speech. During this period, repeated sets of cultures, including blood, urine, sputum, viral throat swabs, blood-borne viruses, and repeat imaging, including of the chest, abdomen, pelvis, and brain, failed to identify a cause of her ongoing pyrexia. A repeat bone marrow aspiration, however, demonstrated ongoing hemophagocytosis, and her ferritin levels remained markedly elevated. Her pyrexia was therefore believed to be a result of ongoing active HLH. She was commenced on long-term oral cyclosporine 250 mg twice daily with a target of normalization of the ferritin levels, which took 12 months. Prednisolone was tapered slowly during this period. The result of her immunologic screening for primary HLH with a granule release assay and perforin expression studies was negative, and she therefore did not undergo further HLH genetic study in light of these results and the increased likelihood that she had HLH secondary to TB. To investigate the possibility of an underlying susceptibility to disseminated TB, the patient had a cytokine profile (including interferon-γ, interleukin 12, and tumor necrosis factor) and GATA2 gene mutation screening, which returned normal results. A biopsy of the lesions in the brain was considered in order to help further characterize the pathological etiology of her seizures, but the risks were believed to outweigh the benefits because she had responded to AEDs and was receiving treatment for both TB and HLH.
Upon discharge, she was seizure-free and experienced a gradual improvement in function, although she remained unable to work and required intensive outpatient functional rehabilitation. She had negative repeat fluid culture results for M. tuberculosis, and she was no longer pyrexic or pancytopenic, although her ferritin remained elevated. Her first 12 months of outpatient recovery, during which she completed oral anti-TB treatment, were complicated by five brief readmissions to the hospital with relapses of EPC seizures. Interval MRI scans of the brain during this period demonstrated a gradual reduction and resolution in the number of tuberculomata and progressive atrophy of the left temporal, parietal, and occipital lobes. Her seizure frequency gradually improved over the subsequent 3 years to one or two events per year, and she tolerated stopping phenytoin and remaining on clobazam 10 mg twice daily and levetiracetam 1500 mg twice daily. The patient’s care required frequent collaboration between neurology, infectious disease, and hematology specialists.