A 42-year-old Asian man was referred to our Thoracic Surgery Unit for recurrent haemoptysis and exertional dyspnoea over the past 4 years and a recent finding of left PV occlusion. He suffered from relapsing AF, which was first diagnosed at the age of 34 as a symptomatic tachycardia-related cardiomyopathy. He had a recent diagnosis of type 2 insulin-dependent diabetes, had a history of smoking (18 pack-years), and worked as a cook. He was on medications, including apixaban, bisoprolol, low-dose digoxin, and amiodarone. At AF diagnosis, in 2015, he received electrical cardioversion. He then experienced AF recurrence in 2016, 2017, 2019, and 2021, requiring cardioversion (both electrical and pharmacological). A catheter cryoablation was performed in 2016 (details unavailable), followed by another ablation in 2019 using radiofrequency. During the latter one, PV mapping indicated right PV disconnection and electrical conductance in the left PVs. Entering the mapping catheter in the left PVs was reported to be technically challenging due to anatomical reasons. The procedure concluded without complications and with a successful electrical cardioversion. In 2020, he was hospitalized for dyspnoea, fever, and haemoptysis. The chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed multifocal pneumonia of the left upper lobe and pleural effusion ; a stenosis of the left upper PV was not recognized due to the absence of contrast agent. At bronchoscopy, marked hyperaemia of the left upper lobe bronchus was found. He received antibiotics and was discharged after clinical improvement. In 2021, due to AF recurrence, a third catheter ablation was initiated but abandoned due to the presence of haemoptysis. The patient therefore underwent a contrast-enhanced CT scan showing complete stenosis of both left PVs . A percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) was attempted but given the impossibility of passing the guidewire through the left PVs and the complete absence of venous flow at transoesophageal echocardiography, the procedure was aborted. In 2023, he underwent another PTA attempt, which was again unsuccessful. During this procedure, the left pulmonary artery was catheterized, confirming an absence of contrast enhancement of the distal third of the artery (; , ). The patient was then referred to our centre for surgical evaluation.
The electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm, and echocardiography showed an ejection fraction (EF) of 64% with an estimated pulmonary artery pressure of 56 mmHg. Lung perfusion scan showed absence of perfusion of the left lung . Respiratory function test reported a forced expiratory volume in one second of 82%, a forced vital capacity of 90%, a diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) of 67%, and a DLCO/alveolar volume of 100%, and the blood oxygen saturation was 98% at rest at room air. The CT scan displayed a significant hypoplasia of the left lung, a completely closed left inferior PV, and a truncated upper left PV (at 1.6 cm from the atrial origin, ). In this condition, the left lung represented only a source of bleeding and infection and did not contribute to gas exchange. Given the severity and the duration of PV occlusion and the previous PTA failure, the surgical option was the only available. The patient’s age and his symptoms favoured an invasive treatment. A restoration of the vein patency was believed to be highly unlikely. After multidisciplinary discussion, a left pneumonectomy was proposed.
Digoxin and apixaban were discontinued before the operation.