Our patient was an 11-year-old Japanese boy who was hit by an automobile while walking. He was admitted to our hospital by a rescue team approximately 30 minutes after injury. Physical examination revealed exposure of the right femoral head from the inside of the thigh , presence of ipsilateral dorsalis artery pulsation, and no signs of neurological impairment. Initial radiographs revealed anterior dislocation of the right hip .
The patient was sent to the operating room within 2 hours after admission. Soft tissue injury was found in the ligamentum teres, gluteus medius, gluteus minimus, iliopsoas, quadratus femoris, short external rotators, and capsule with avulsion fractures of the greater and lesser trochanters, indicating complete disruption of artery of ligamentum teres . Reduction of the hip joint was performed after thorough irrigation and debridement of the wound. Postoperative radiographs showed a concentrically reduced femoral head .
Bone scintigraphy (Symbia T6; Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen, Germany) at 1 week after injury, and immediate surgical reduction demonstrated less accumulation on the metaphysis of the injured femoral head than on the contralateral side, suggesting the existence of reduced bone turnover . T1-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) (ACHIEVA 1.5 T; Philips Healthcare, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) images (repetition time/echo time = 500 ms/ 18 ms, field of view = 320 mm, thickness = 5.0 mm) at 2 weeks after injury showed a diffuse area of low signal intensity on the proximal part of the femur compared with the contralateral side . Bone scintigraphy at 2 months showed increased accumulation over the epiphyseal plate that was similar to that on the contralateral side . T1-weighted MR images at 2 months after injury showed two bands with low signal intensity (bandlike pattern) on both coronal and oblique axial views and gadolinium enhancement in the area between the two low bands, suggesting the partial disruption of branches of superior and inferior retinacular arteries [, ] and existence of partial necrosis [, ] of the femoral capital epiphysis . Three-dimensional proximal femur models including the epiphyseal plate, intact region, and necrotic lesion were reconstructed using Mimics software (Materialise NV, Leuven, Belgium) and demonstrated a ring-shaped necrotic lesion adjacent to the growth plate . Serial gadolinium-enhanced MRI at 6 months and 1 year showed a gradually enhanced area spreading from the center of the epiphysis toward the periphery, which indicated revascularization of the necrotic lesion with slight collapse of anterior articular surface of the femoral head . Bone scintigraphy at 1.5 years showed decreased accumulation over the epiphyseal plate and accompanying premature physeal closure .
Conservative non-weight-bearing treatment was applied on the affected right hip using a brace [, ] for 1.5 years after injury. Radiographs at 4 years after injury showed some resultant deformity of the femoral head and shortening of the femoral neck without narrowing of the joint space . Although growth arrest resulted in a limb length discrepancy of 2 cm, the patient did not have any hip joint dysfunction or any signs of early osteoarthritis; he had a Harris Hip Scale score of 100 points at 4.5 years after injury. He could return to light sports activity without any pain or limited range of motion.