A 38-year-old male was involved in an all-terrain vehicle crash and sustained a C6–C7 spinal cord injury with locked facets and underwent anterior/posterior cervical decompression and fusion. At the time of his initial injury, he had complete loss of motor function in his lower extremities as well as distal upper extremities. Strength was preserved in his biceps and deltoids, and a high thoracic sensory level was present.
Six months postinjury, the patient reported neck pain and loss of strength and sensation in the right arm for 3 weeks in duration. There was new right-sided weakness involving most notably his biceps and triceps muscles. Sensory function was diminished in the right arm with a C6 level on the left.
Magnetic resonance imaging of the cervical spine was performed and showed the appearance of a new large posttraumatic syrinx extending from C2 through the visualized upper thoracic spine . The patient elected to proceed with surgery once conservative management including physical therapy and analgesics had failed.
Fluoroscopy was used to mark the planned incision site at the point where the syrinx was most prominent. Dissection was then carried down the midline to the inferior aspect of the targeted lamina. A small laminectomy was then performed, and the ligament was removed. The microscope was then brought into the operated field. Under high magnification, a midline durotomy was performed with the dura then tacked backward and retracted with 4-0 nylon sutures. With increasing magnification, we then identified an area of the spinal cord that was noted to be thinned out and white color and devoid of arteriovenous blood vessels. This was then opened with an 11 blade scalpel, and a gush of fluid suggested that the syrinx had been entered. A small spool-shaped myringotomy tube was then positioned within the opening maintaining the newly created communication now present from the intrasyrinx compartment to the subarachnoid space. Pulsatility in the spinal cord was restored indicating successful drainage and decompression of the syrinx and spinal cord. Valsalva maneuver was employed to verify that there was continued drainage through the newly placed syringosubarachnoid shunt. Subsequently, the dura was closed with a locked 4-0 nylon stitch, and Valsalva maneuvers were repeated to ensure there was no further CSF leak from the dural closure site. There was no change in intraoperative somatosensory evoked potentials and motor evoked potentials at this point. The operative site was then closed in a standard fashion.
Postoperatively, the patient strength examination was stable compared to his preoperative exam. At 2 months and 6 months follow-up visits, his strength and sensation continued to improve progressively. Strength in his biceps, triceps, and wrists was full on the left with only small weakness comparatively on the right–which was much improved from his preoperative exam. Finger flexors had regained movement as well. At 1 year follow-up, symptoms were stable, and no imaging was indicated. He was instructed to follow-up as needed, and no repeat imaging was performed.