A 58-year-old male was involved in a frontal impact motor vehicle accident as a restrained driver. Patient had no history of loss of consciousness and was brought by ambulance to the emergency department. Primary survey was found to be normal, while on secondary survey patient was found to have tenderness over the right clavicle with obvious deformity. In addition, patient had limited right shoulder range of motion in all planes due to severe pain. Plain radiographs diagnosed multiple right sided rib fractures (which were managed conservatively) and a right mid-shaft comminuted clavicle fracture. Neurological and vascular exam was found to be normal at the time of the initial assessment and there was no sign of skin tenting or skin breakage over the clavicle fracture.
Patient was immobilized in a sling and discharged with a follow up in the orthopaedic clinic in 2 wk. At the time of the follow up 2 wk post-injury, plain radiographs were performed again and re-documented a displaced mid-shaft comminuted clavicle fracture . Patient again was found to have tenderness over a deformed right clavicle with pain and limited right shoulder range of motion. The neurological and vascular exam of the right upper extremity was still found to be normal. Patient was offered open reduction and internal fixation of the clavicle fracture, but patient declined surgery and opted for conservative management and was given follow up in 4 wk.
At the time of the 4 wk follow up, patients’ tenderness over the right clavicle improved and follow up imaging showed progression of callus formation at the fracture site . Interestingly, patient was complaining to intermittent right upper extremity mild to moderate shooting pain but was found to have a normal motor and sensory exam of the extremity.
There was no significant past medical illness.
There was no significant personal and family history.
At the following office visit at 3 mo post-injury, the patient’s shoulder and clavicle pain resolved, but patient was complaining of significant right upper extremity weakness, with inability to hold a cup in his hand and decreased grip strength. On further history, patient also gave history of loss of sensation in the hand and forearm region (C7, C8 and T1 distribution). On physical exam there was resolution of the localized right clavicle tenderness with a large bony deformity in the region. Motor power showed weakness in right upper extremity muscle power globally, but more pronounced in finger flexion, adduction and abduction, in addition to weakness in thumb flexion and adduction. On sensory exam, there was loss of sensation over the ulnar aspect of the hand and medial forearm. Distal pulses were present, including radial and ulnar pulses at the wrist.
There were no significant laboratory examinations.
Plain radiograph of the clavicle showed large formation of callus at the fracture site . A computed tomography (CT) scan was performed which confirmed the midshaft comminuted fracture with hypertrophic callus formation around the fracture site . Due to the patient’s neurological deficit, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the region was performed and showed that the hypertrophic callus formation was causing compression of the brachial plexus trunks in the infraclavicular region .
A nerve conduction study was arranged for the patient. But as the patient was exhibiting significant neurological deficits due to brachial plexus compression from the hypertrophic callus formation, an urgent surgical decompression and clavicle open reduction internal fixation was planned.