A 72-year-old Thai woman was admitted to Siriraj Hospital (Bangkok, Thailand) in August 2020 with gradually decreasing consciousness over the preceding 1 day. During the preceding 3 days, she had fever, myalgia, pain, and swelling involving both knees and all joints of both hands. Her medical history was unremarkable except for cervical degenerative disc disease with spine surgery 15 years earlier.
The patient was febrile and drowsy on admission, and physical examination revealed neck stiffness without focal neurological deficits. Arthritis was noted at both knees, both wrists, and all joints of both hands. She had no rashes, and other examinations were unremarkable.
Laboratory investigation is shown in Table . Computed tomography of brain was normal. Lumbar puncture was performed and the CSF results are demonstrated in Table . Synovial fluid of both knees drawn by arthrocentesis was slightly turbid with a nucleated cell count of 12,900/uL with 94% neutrophils, and nucleated cell count of 69,300/uL with 95% neutrophils from the left knee and right knee, respectively. The patient was initially diagnosed with acute bacterial meningitis and polyarticular bacterial septic arthritis. After taking blood culture, high-dose intravenous ceftriaxone was administered for empirical treatment.
After 1 week of ceftriaxone treatment, the patient started to regain consciousness, but her fever and polyarthritis were not improved. The aerobic and anerobic cultures of blood, CSF, initial synovial fluid, and four-repeated synovial fluid were all negative. FilmArray® Meningitis/Encephalitis Panel test (The BioFire®, BioMérieux) of CSF was negative. PCR amplification of a part of the 16S rRNA gene followed by sequencing of initial synovial fluid was unable to detect bacterial DNA. However, PCR amplification of 16S rRNA of CSF was not performed. Since autoimmune disease was a differential diagnosis, a rheumatologist was consulted. Dexamethasone was prescribed for treatment of suspected rheumatoid arthritis in the elderly. PCR amplification of a part of the 16S rRNA gene and sequencing of repeated synovial fluid from right knee was performed allowing the detection and identification of Streptobacillus notomytis. Singleplex PCR assay was undertaken in a final volume of 50 μL using Taq PCR Master Mix (Qiagen) with a final concentration of 0.2 μM for each primer. The two pairs of primers used in the assay were 16S-F1 5-AGAGTTTGATCMTGGCTCAG-3ʹ, 16S-R5 5ʹ-GCGTGGACTACCAGGGTATC-3ʹ and 16S-F3 5ʹ-CGGCTAACTCCGTGCCAGCA-3ʹ, 16S-R1 5ʹ-ACGGYTACCTTGTTACGACT-3ʹ. The amplification conditions were 94 °C for 5 min, followed by 30 cycles of 94 °C for 30 s, 56 °C for 45 s and 72 °C for 1 min 30 s, and final extension for 7 min. PCR products were sequenced in both directions by Sanger sequencing and submitted to GenBank under Accession number MZ676036. Rat bite fever due to S. notomytis was diagnosed and dexamethasone was discontinued. From retrospective history-taking, the patient denied any recent travel or animal bite, but she stated that there was group of rats living in her living area.
During the second week of hospitalization, the patient complained of low back pain. Magnetic resonance imaging of the LS spine revealed findings compatible with T11–T12, L2–L3, and L4–L5 spondylodiscitis and epidural abscess . Open debridement and biopsy were then performed. The pathologic findings showed acute suppurative inflammation. Tissue culture for bacteria, mycobacteria and fungi showed negative results; however, PCR amplification and sequencing detected S. notomytis. Therefore, rat bite fever in this patient manifested as meningitis, septic polyarthritis, and spondylodiscitis. The diagnosis of meningitis in this patient was made by only clinical presentations of alteration of consciousness with meningeal irritation sign; however, this could be overinterpreted since the CSF findings that showed mild elevation of cell count and decrease of glucose ratio could be from parameningeal inflammation from spondylodiscitis and epidural abscess. Abnormal liver tests at presentation were also then suspected as reflecting hepatitis due to rat bite fever.
The patient was treated with intravenous ceftriaxone for 35 days with partial recovery with a subsequent switch to oral amoxicillin 2 g/day for an additional 12 weeks. Arthritis affecting both hands and knees improved, C-reactive protein and liver enzymes decreased to within normal range, and the patient completely recovered.