A 23-year-old previously healthy woman presented to the emergency department (ED) with nausea and vomiting, weight loss, headache, tinnitus, diplopia, photophobia, dizziness, and paresthesia. Six weeks prior to presentation, the patient started having light-headedness, tinnitus and zigzags in her vision. She then developed nausea, vomiting, and headaches, and over several weeks had multiple visits with her primary care provider, a neurologist, and an outside hospital ED. Outpatient labs and a non-contrast computed tomography (CT) of the head were reportedly negative. She was prescribed a succession of antibiotics for presumed sinusitis, migraine prophylaxis and abortive medications, and received botulinum toxin injections to her forehead, temples, and neck.
On arrival to our ED, the patient reported progressive headache and emotional lability, as well as new numbness and tingling in her left fourth and fifth fingers and right foot. She denied alcohol, smoking, or drug use. Her only reported travel was to Singapore and Taiwan approximately three months prior to symptoms onset. She denied any preceding illnesses. Intake vital signs were as follows: heart rate of 84 beats per minute, blood pressure 107/83 millimeters of mercury, respiratory rate of 20 breaths per minute, temperature of 36.8° Celsius, and pulse oximetry 99% on room air. Physical exam was notable for a supple neck with a full range of motion without pain. Her neurologic exam was notable for a sixth (VI) cranial nerve palsy of the left eye, and subjective decrease in sensation in her left fourth and fifth digits and in her right ankle and foot. While the patient was alert and oriented, her affect fluctuated between animated and flat. On fundoscopic exam, she had pale optic discs bilaterally and papilledema.
Blood tests, including a complete blood count and comprehensive metabolic panel, were notable only for a mildly elevated ammonia (39 micromoles per liter [umol/L] [reference range 11–32 umol/L]). A non-contrast CT of the head was obtained, which was negative for any acute intracranial process . A lumbar puncture demonstrated elevated opening pressures of greater than 55 centimeters of water (cm H20) (normal range 5–25 cm H2O). Cerebrospinal fluid studies showed 70 white blood cells (normal range 0–5 microliters [uL]); 75% lymphocytes (40–80%); protein 62 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (15–45 mg/dL); glucose 34 mg/dL (40–70 mg/dL), and Gram stain with evidence of fungal elements consistent with C gattii . Cultures later also grew C gattii. The patient was admitted to the neurology service.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 5.6 mm ring-enhancing lesion in the left anterior frontal lobe consistent with a cryptococcoma . Additional tiny punctate enhancing lesions in the left caudate head and basal ganglia were also felt to represent cryptococcal disease.
The patient’s symptoms of headache, diplopia, nausea, vomiting and tinnitus gradually improved after induction therapy with amphotericin and flucytosine and multiple lumbar punctures per week, followed by a lumbar drain. After a one-month admission she was discharged to another facility that specializes in immune modulation and steroids. After treatment at the specialty facility, her headache, nausea, and vomiting resolved. Her exam upon discharge was significant only for mild bilateral cranial nerve VI palsies, and her cerebrospinal fluid cultures remained negative for over two weeks. The patient was ultimately discharged from the specialty facility on indefinite fluconazole prophylaxis.