A 26-year-old man was born via normal vaginal delivery at full term. He was obese during infancy, and his body weight was as large as 19 kg at the age of 8 months. His body weight was similar to his peers since he reached the age of four. All his milestones were normal except a relatively retarded growth in stature. He was admitted to Peking University First Hospital with recurrent seizures, loss of consciousness, limb and facial rigidity for several seconds to half an hour. He presented mild fatigue between the seizures. There was no significant past medical illness and family history. His father’s height was 1.65 m, and his mother’s height was 1.56 m.
On physical examination, his body weight was 55.0 kg and height 1.62 m, and his body mass index was 21.0 kg/m2. He appeared AHO features of short stature, round face, stocky build and notably brachydactyly in bilateral 1st, 3rd, 4th and 5th fingers . Tanner stage for his genital development was 4, with a penis length of 4 cm and bilateral testis volume of 20 ml.
During routine examinations, he was noted to have hypocalcaemia with a total serum calcium level of 1.30 mmol/L (normal range, 2.11–2.52 mmol/L) and a serum phosphate level of 1.66 mmol/L (normal range, 0.85–1.51 mmol/L), while the serum PTH level was 705 pg/ml (normal range, 15-65 pg/ml). Pituitary MRI discovered heterotopic calcification in basal ganglia and cerebellum , which explained his main complaint of recurrent seizures. Thyroid function showed low T3, T4 and elevated TSH . He was negative for anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPOAb) and thyroglobulin antibody (TgAb), with an atrophic thyroid gland in ultrasound scan. Also, he had normal serum testosterone whereas a raised follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) level . Routine test for seminal fluid revealed azoosperia, indicating the diagnosis of primary infertility. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) stimulating test was performed to confirm his testis Leydig cell function, and his serum testosterone elevated from 4.24 ng/ml to 9.45 ng/ml when hCG 2000 IU was intramuscular injected after 72 h, indicating an normal Leydig cell function. Glucose, cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) levels were within normal range.
The patient was clinically diagnosed as PHP. A mutation analysis on the GNAS gene was performed for the patients and his parents and a brother using exon sequencing from peripheral blood leukocytes. His families were found negative, whereas a heterozygous frameshift mutation, NM_080425 (GNAS): c.2787_2788del (p.Val930AspfsTer12), in exon 11 of the GNAS gene was identified in the patient. This was a novel mutation for PHP-1a, in which the frameshift mutation encoding number 2787_2788 nucleotide led to an evolutionary amino acid change from the valine located 930 to the next 12 amino acids .
The patient was diagnosed as PHP 1a or 1c with PTH, TSH and FSH resistance. He was started on calcium and calcitriol replacement as well as thyroxin replacement. His electrolytes, T3, T4 and TSH levels were normal during follow-ups, and PTH reduced to 561.4 pg/ml due to parathyroid glands hyperplasia in accordance with ultrasound scan.
To date, he experienced a mild seizure during 1 year of follow-up, and the symptom of fatigue disappeared. No adverse events happened during treatment. For his infertility, the patients was recommended for genetic counseling for 50% possibility for a child with PPTH, and could be put on intramuscular HMG when serum testosterone was above 3–5 ng/ml for azoosperia. The treatment of calcium and calcitriol supplement partially relieved his recurrent seizures. He no longer felt fatigue with the regular replacement of L-T4 (50μg/d).