An 82 year old white female underwent elective craniotomy for resection of a recently discovered craniopharyngioma that had presented as diplopia. Her medical history included mild dyslipidemia, hypothyroidism and osteoporosis. Preoperative evaluation revealed an active lifestyle with no history of cardiac symptoms. A baseline ECG showed a left bundle branch block; no previous ECG was available for comparison. An endocrinological profile was carried out one week before surgery. The serum prolactin was elevated at 60 ng/mL (reference values: 5–24). The following were normal: serum IGF-1 64 ng/mL (33–185), serum TSH 1.86 mIU/L (0.3-4.2), FSH/LH ratio 4/0.8, serum cortisol 385 nmol/mol creatinine (289–35105). The serum sodium was 140 mmol/L (135–145). Other preoperative baseline laboratory values were normal.
The surgery was uneventful. Intravenous hydrocortisone was begun according to post-craniotomy protocol. The initial postoperative course featured diabetes insipidus and delirium. The sodium level rose to 148 accompanied by diuresis reaching 1 L per hour. Desmopressin was commenced; the sodium leveled descended to 139 on the second postoperative day. Of note, neither cardiac arrhythmia nor hemodynamic instability was documented.
On the third postoperative day she was found unresponsive in bed with agonal breathing. Prolonged cardiopulmonary resuscitation following standard ACLS protocol was promptly started. The patient was stabilized; an emergency head CT scan was performed which showed a small subdural hematoma. Then, approximately ninety minutes after the first episode, a second cardiac arrest occurred in the form of sudden pulseless ventricular tachycardia. The initial cardiac shock provided successful defibrillation. Point-of-care cardiac ultrasound showed a small pericardial effusion (less than 1 cm), normal left ventricular function, and a dilated and diffusely hypokinetic right ventricle. Shortly thereafter, sudden bradycardia with loss of cardiac output developed. During the following third resuscitation attempt cardiac massage and an external pacemaker resulted in no return of cardiac output. At this point the family requested that all maneuvers be stopped. Permission was granted to perform an autopsy.
A complete autopsy was performed. Hemopericardium (approximately one liter) was present. The heart weighed 360 g (predicted: 295 g, 95% confidence limits: 200–435 g) . A slit-like rupture of the myocardium at the base of the right ventricule associated with epicardial hemorrhage was identified . Of note, no external cause for rupture such as a fractured rib was identified; the macroscopic features typical of a recent transmural myocardial infarction surrounding or near the rupture site were absent. Meticulous examination of the coronary arteries revealed absence of atheroma or acute thrombus. The cardiac valves were normal. The other organs were entirely normal. Adrenal and extra-adrenal pheochromocytoma were absent.
Microscopic examination of sections from the rupture site showed epicardial hemorrhage and contraction band necrosis with heavy polymorphonuclear leukocyte infiltrates typical of a recent acute myocardial infarction, approximately 48–72 h . The unusual site of the rupture, the absence of macroscopic features of an associated myocardial infarction, and the entire absence of coronary artery vascular disease, provoked a thorough examination of the rest of the myocardium. All thirty-four sections of grossly normal myocardium from the left and right ventricules revealed the following microscopic changes: areas of interstitial edema with patchy mononuclear cell infiltrates of lymphocytes and macrophages, and rare polymorphonuclear leukocytes, mast cells and eosinophils. These were found within the myocardium and also around intra-myocardial blood vessels . There was no evidence of myocardial fibrosis. As these modifications involved the left and right ventricules diffusely, there was no correlation with the territory of an individual coronary artery. The findings were considered compatible with cathecholamine cardiomyopathy. The final autopsy diagnosis was of takotsubo cardiomyopathy with secondary myocardial rupture.