A 16-year-old male patient was admitted to the Department of Infectious Disease, Southwest Hospital for defining the nature of his space-occupying lesions in liver on November, 2016. He was diagnosed as hepatitis B around 1-year-old (his mother had hepatitis B, and did not do any mother to child blocking during pregnancy. So we deduced that his hepatitis B came from vertical transmission). The patient had not received any treatments due to the poor local medical condition, but he had regular visits in several hospitals. On June, 2015, he was found to have hepatomegaly and multiple space-occupying lesions in liver by ultrasonography, and was considered the possibility to suffer hepatocellular carcinoma.
Physical examinations showed this 16-year-old boy was 135 cm in height and 29 kg in weight, below the average values of peers. And his secondary sex characteristic was undeveloped. His liver could be palpable 2 cm below the right rib and 4 cm below the xiphoid, with rigidity and blunt edge. The marked percussion tenderness over liver region was present.
Imaging studies showed some evidence supporting hepatocellular carcinoma, as well as some evidence didn’t support it. Upper abdominal enhancement CT scan showed chronic liver disease performance and nodular low-density shadows in the left and right posterior lobe of the liver. Contrast-enhanced ultrasonography of the abdomen showed the space-occupying lesions with high central density and low density rings around. Significant enhancement of high central density was seen in arterial phase, persisting in portal phase and equilibrium phase. While low density rings enhancement was insignificant.
Laboratory examinations showed decreased blood testosterone (T, 0.12 ng/ml, reference range: 1.75–7.81 ng/ml), blood estradiol (E2, 2.00 pg/ml, reference range: 20–75 pg/ml), insulin-like growth factor-1(97.39 ng/ml, reference range: 224–592 ng/ml) and increased 8:00 cortisol (616.23 ng/ml, reference range: 66–286 ng/ml).
Tracing the clinical history of the patient, we found that he was admitted to hospital (the detail is unreachable) for growth retardation on July, 2015. The Bone age test indicated that the left hand development maturity score was 714, which equals to a 11.6-year-old male’s bone age. And the lab examinations were showed in Table . Then he began to receive intramuscular injection of growth hormone and oral lamivudine treatment. During the treatment, the liver function continued to be abnormal, and the growth hormone injection treatment was not effective.
According to these evidences, he was suspected of suffering from glycogen storage disease type I instead of hepatocellular carcinoma.
To confirming the doubt of GSD I, the patient underwent the Gd-EOB-DTPA tumor specific examination and liver biopsy.
The Gd-EOB-DTPA tumor specific examination suggested glycogen accumulation . As shown in Fig. , the pathological examination results of the patient showed that the liver cells were marked swollen with fatty changes, and a small number of neutrophils infiltrated with fibroblasts. HBsAg staining of several cells was positive , HBcAg staining was negative, and PAS staining suggested a large deposition of glycogen in hepatocytes . The diagnosis was mild chronic hepatitis (G2S1) combined with glycogen accumulation.
There are 12 subtypes of glycogen storage disease, and their genetic variation, treatment, prognosis, diet intervention are different. So it’s necessary to confirm the subtype of glycogen storage disease.
After informing the patient and family, and obtaining the signed informed consent, we collected the peripheral blood of the patient and his father, mother and two sisters (one elder sister cannot be collected for marrying to other province), and extracted DNA from white blood cells. Due to various types of glycogen storage disease involving many genes, and nonspecific symptoms easily confused with other liver metabolic disease, so we first sequenced the entire exome of the patient to find the mutant gene, and then used first generation of sequencing to verify the mutation in the patient and his families. The exome sequencing applied Illumina Hi-seq using Agilent Surelect Kit, and the platform for Sanger sequencing is Applied Biosystems® 3730 DNA Analyzer by using BigDyeTM Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit.
The result of exome sequencing suggests that there was a homozygous mutation c.G648 T (p.L216 L, NM_000151) on exon 5 of G6PC gene (rs80356484), which causes CTG changing to CTT at protein 216 and creates a new splicing site 91 bp downstream of the authentic splice site, though both codons encode leucine . In order to confirm the sites and homozygosity of the mutations, we designed sequencing primers near mutation sites (the sequences of primers are shown in Table ) and performed PCR for genome amplification of the patient and his families. The result of the first generation of sequencing of the patient is in accordance with exome sequencing, and the mutation c.G648 T was heterozygous identified in his father and mother. . The mutation found on the G6PC gene is a mutation site of the glycogen storage disease type Ia, which has a high frequency in the population of Chinese and Japanese patients with glycogen storage disease type Ia [, ].
According to clinical manifestations, auxiliary examinations, tissue pathology and genetic testing, this patient was diagnosed as a GSD type Ia complicated with hepatic adenoma, and combined with chronic hepatitis B.
The patient was treated by corn starch treatment (Corn starch 50~100 g, 4 times a day) and practiced low fat diet immediately after GSD was suspected. Since then, he was followed up regularly in Department of Infectious Department of Southwest Hospital. The examination data of the patient were shown in Table .
During follow-up, the patient stopped corn starch diet for about three months, and the laboratory measures showed deterioration in July, 2017.
Unexpectedly, we found that the size and the number of hepatic adenomas were increasing during the follow-up. In November, 2017, the patient had an indication for surgery as MRI imaging showed the largest one of hepatic adenomas had reached 3.1 × 3.4 cm, he was therefore admitted to the Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital for radiofrequency ablation and liver biopsy. The postoperative pathological result confirmed as hepatic adenoma.