A 13-year-old female spayed Abyssinian cat (3.5 kg) was evaluated for incompletely excised grade II thoracic wall fibrosarcoma caudal to the right scapula, presumed to be vaccine-associated. Results of complete blood count, serum biochemistry and urinalysis were within normal limits. Feline immunodeficiency virus and feline leukemia virus test results were negative (SNAP FeLV/FIV Combo; IDEXX). Evidence of tumor metastasis was not detected on thoracic radiographs or abdominal ultrasound. Complete amputation of the right forelimb was performed, followed by radiotherapy (54 Gy fractionated over 18 sessions of 3 Gy within 3 weeks) and doxorubicin chemotherapy (four doses of 18–20 mg/m2 given IV 3 weeks apart). Other than localized alopecia at the radiation site, adverse effects were not noted.
One year later (day 0), the cat was re-presented for evaluation of a 1 week history of corneal opacity in the left eye (OS). Medications at that time included L-lysine (500 mg PO q12h); terbutaline (0.625 mg PO q12h) and prednisolone (2.5 mg PO q48h) for asthma; tramadol (12.5 mg PO as needed) for arthritis; and ondansetron (2 mg PO q24h as needed) for inappetence. Menace response was intact in both eyes (OU). Dazzle and palpebral reflexes, oculocephalic reflex, and direct and consensual pupillary light reflexes were all normal OU. Both eyes were open with subtle crusted discharge at the medial canthi. The eyelids and meibomian gland profiles and orifices were normal OU. The surface of the right eye (OD) had a lackluster appearance with a 4 mm diameter region of mild superficial fibrosis in the axial cornea, which did not retain fluorescein. There was mild nuclear sclerosis OD. The ocular surface OS had a lackluster appearance and mild diffuse conjunctival hyperemia. There was a 5 mm diameter, vascularized, poorly demarcated circular ulcer with approximately 30% stromal loss in the temporal region of the left cornea, with mild perilesional edema but no malacia or stromal white blood cells. Remaining ophthalmic examination findings OS were normal other than mild nuclear sclerosis. Intraocular pressures (TonoVet; Jorgensen Laboratories) were 15 mmHg OU, and Schirmer tear test-1 results (STT-1; Merck Animal Health) were 0 mm/min OU. Clinical diagnoses were corneal scar OD, corneal stromal ulceration OS and reduced aqueous tear production OU. Treatment was started with 0.3% ofloxacin ophthalmic solution (1 drop OS q8h [Ocuflox; Akorn]) and hyaluronate (1 drop OU q8h [i-drop-Vet Plus; I-MED Pharma]).
On day 11 the ulcer OS had mostly re-epithelialized, although stromal loss persisted. However, there were numerous punctate areas of fluorescein retention in the interpalpebral cornea OS, and an ill-defined area of stippled fluorescein retention in the dorsal cornea OU (,). Results of STT-1 (mm/min) were 7 OD and 0 OS. Central corneal touch threshold (CTT [Cochet-Bonnet aesthesiometer; Luneau Ophtalmologie]; 0.12 mm nylon filament) was 1.0 cm OD (equivalent to 12.8 g/mm2) and 0 cm OS. Mean values for ophthalmically normal non-brachycephalic cats are 3.5 cm (equivalent to 2.4 g/mm2). Approximately 10 mins following assessment of STT-1, the cat’s nasolacrimal reflex was evaluated using a technique modified from that described in humans. Briefly, a standard STT strip was placed in the ventrotemporal conjunctival fornix OU, followed immediately by placement of a cotton ball soaked with 70% alcohol close to but not touching the cat’s nostrils. After 30 s, the alcohol-soaked cotton-ball was removed, but the STT strips were left in position for another 30 s. Results (mm/min) were 7 OD and 5 OS. Tear film breakup time (TFBUT [DET; Akorn]) was 4.0 s OU (reference interval [RI] 9.1–17.7 s). The clinical diagnosis was qualitative and quantitative tear film dysfunction OU, likely neurogenic in origin. Ofloxacin frequency was reduced to 1 drop OS q12h, and hyaluronate was replaced with heterologous feline serum (1 drop OU q4h) based upon reports in humans with severe dry eye disease.
Re-examination on day 35 revealed resolution of the corneal ulcer OS with resultant focal fibrosis . The STT-1 values (mm/min) were 5 OD and 4 OS. shows the lacrimostimulant and lacrimomimetic therapies used, as well as STT-1 values over the ensuing 81 days. Despite improved STT-1 values when 1% pilocarpine (Falcon Pharmaceuticals) was administered topically (days 35–50; 1 drop OU q24h) or orally using an escalating dose protocol described for dogs with neurogenic DES (days 50–69), its use was discontinued owing to perceived adverse events. Superficial punctate corneal defects were noted with topical pilocarpine, and decreased appetite and a single episode of vomiting and excessive salivation were noted when the cat received three drops of pilocarpine orally, twice daily. The cat tolerated one or two drops orally twice daily. From days 69 to 116, tacrolimus 0.03% ointment (1/4” strip OU q12h; Stokes Pharmacy), heterologous feline serum (1 drop OU q4h) and cidofovir 0.5% (1 drop OU q12h) were used. No adverse effects were noted and the corneal ulcers healed; however, on day 116 the tear film appeared lackluster OU and STT-1 values had declined to levels similar to those prior to pilocarpine administration (5 mm/min OD, 4 mm/min OS). Beginning on day 93, the cat became weak and developed upper respiratory signs. Re-evaluation by an oncologist revealed left thoracic limb lameness and cervical pain; caudal brachial plexus dysfunction possibly due to sarcoma regrowth or a late effect from radiation was suspected. Serum thyroxine concentration (total T4) was markedly reduced (<0.5 µg/dl; RI 1.1–3.3 µg/dl).
The cat’s systemic health continued to decline and on day 119 the owners elected euthanasia and consented to post-mortem examination. Non-ocular post-mortem findings included monophasic myocardial fibrosis (presumed to be due to previous infarction), generalized thyroid gland atrophy (presumed secondary to radiation therapy), and necrotic mucous and plant material within bronchioles (presumed to be due to ante-mortem aspiration). Corneal confocal microscopy performed immediately post-mortem using full-thickness scans set at 3 μm increments (Confoscan 4; Nidek) revealed attenuated and disorganized corneal epithelium and a diminished to regionally absent sub-basal nerve plexus but normal corneal stroma and endothelium OU . Histologic examination revealed that both corneas had mild neutrophilic inflammation, neovascularization, anterior stromal fibrosis, epithelial attenuation with segmental erosion and detachment . There also was multifocal lymphoplasmacytic blepharoconjunctivitis OU and mild lipogranulomatous blepharitis OS. Conjunctival goblet cell density (GCD) was 0% on the anterior and 3% on the posterior surfaces of the third eyelid; mean reference values for these locations are 48.8% and 12.6%, respectively. Small numbers of lymphocytes and plasma cells were scattered around individual tubuloalveolar structures in the orbital lacrimal and third eyelid glands OU . Presence of feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1) DNA in both trigeminal ganglia, orbital lacrimal glands and conjunctiva was assessed using quantitative PCR (Real-time PCR Research and Diagnostics Core Facility, University of California-Davis) performed on three 20 µm scrolls cut from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded blocks of each tissue. A new microtome blade was used for each tissue. Herpetic DNA was not detected in any tissue.