The patient is a 37-year-old right-hand dominant woman who first presented at an outside facility for examination of a radial, volar right wrist mass. She initially noted the hard mass in 2016. She experienced nerve-like pain, numbness, and tingling from her wrist to thumb with exercise. She denied any prior trauma. Electromyography did not reveal nerve damage. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) suggested a peripheral nerve sheath tumor. At the time, the patient declined surgical intervention as her symptoms did not greatly impede her daily life. She presented to us 3 years later, reporting interval growth of the mass and pain with hyperextension loading and minor accidental collisions.
Focused examination of her right hand and wrist revealed a 3.0 × 2.0-cm mobile mass at the volar aspect of the right wrist, just beneath the palmaris longus tendon in the distal forearm, which was mildly tender to palpation. No subjective sensory deficits were noted to light touch. The patient had full strength, and no thenar atrophy was appreciated. There was a negative Tinel sign over the mass.
Multiplanar multisequence MRI of the right wrist was obtained before and after 4.5 mL of an intravenous gadolinium-based contrast. This showed a lobulated, predominantly T2 hyperintense, heterogeneously enhancing mass measuring 2.0 cm transverse × 1.2 cm dorsal-volar × 3.1 cm in length along the volar-radial aspect of the distal forearm/wrist. T1-weighted sequences demonstrated the “split fat” and “tail sign” indicating the neural origin of the mass . T2-weighted sequences revealed small, rounded areas of intermediate to low signal with the mass noted . The mass was located along the course of the median nerve, deep to the palmaris longus and flexor carpi radialis tendons with nodular areas of internal enhancement and was reported to be consistent with a peripheral nerve sheath tumor.
The patient elected to undergo elective surgical removal of the symptomatic, enlarging mass. On the day of surgery, she was induced under general anesthesia, prepped, and draped in a typical sterile fashion. An extensive carpal tunnel approach was drawn, and an incision was made in the distal forearm ulnar to palmaris longus. After careful dissection of the superficial soft tissue to the volar forearm fascia with loupe magnification, the palmaris longus was radially retracted to expose the median nerve. A large, fragile, seemingly vascular mass was examined with the median nerve . Under microscopic magnification, a meticulous dissection of the fragile mass from the fascicles of the median nerve was performed. The tumor appeared to have a “bag of worms” network of infiltrative vascular channels interdigitated among the fascicles of the median nerves . A carpal tunnel release was performed to prevent nerve compression from the inflammatory response secondary to extensive fascicular manipulation. The wound was then copiously irrigated and reapproximated.
Histopathology of the specimen revealed multiple irregularly contoured vascular caverns lined by endothelial cells with dense fibrous connective tissue septae, features suggestive of a cavernous hemangioma . Additionally noted within the vascular spaces were multiple small organizing thrombi and focally prominent papillary endothelial hyperplasia typical of IVPH.
The patient recovered well after her right median nerve release and extensive internal neurolysis with removal of the IVPH. At her 2-month follow-up, her wound was healing well and non-tender to touch. She had full range of motion of her fingers and wrist, and sensation in the median nerve distribution was subjectively normal.