The patient was a 14-year-old female who was admitted to our hospital mainly due to “periodic lower abdominal pain for one year”. The patient was delivered normally at full term, and her mother had no history of exposure to drugs, toxic substances during pregnancy, or radioactive substances. The patient started developing breasts at the age of 12 and had not had a menstrual cycle to date. One year ago, she started to have lower abdominal pain, which was recurrent (around every 28–30 days) and relieved spontaneously after about a week. At this time, she visited another hospital and underwent a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination, which showed a “bilateral primordial uterus, with the left side being larger (containing a little endometrium); an undeveloped cervix and middle and upper vaginal segments; a left ovarian cyst, with chocolate cyst unable to be excluded”.
Findings of the physical examination on admission: abdominal examination showed no significant abnormality, and no obvious mass was palpated. The gynecological examination showed a young female vulva with normal development and a small amount of pubes. The hymen was normal, and the swab could enter about 2 cm from the hymen. The cervix and uterus were not palpated on rectal abdominal examination. A cystic solid mass with a diameter of about 5 cm was palpated in the left adnexal region with pain on mild pressing, while no obvious mass was palpated in the right adnexal region.
MR scanning suggested a left pelvic node with a mixed shadow of short T1 and long T2 signals, with a length of about 5 cm and a high signal in the diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI). A uterus-like mass was seen on the upper left side of the node, with a length of about 3 cm and an irregular endometrium-like structure inside. The right adnexal region showed a quasi-circular mixed signal node with high signal on the internal DWI sequence and a length of about 2.8 cm. The cervix and the upper vaginal segment were not clearly shown, while the lower vaginal segment was seen with a slit-like vaginal cavity. The diagnostic imaging indicated a primordial uterus on the upper left side of the pelvic cavity, chocolate cyst on the left side of the pelvic cavity, chocolate cyst in the right adnexal region, and an undeveloped cervix and upper vaginal segment. The karyotpe was XX, 46 of the patient. There were no abnormities in heart, renal, vertebral and other organs [, ]. Preoperative preliminary diagnosis: (1) type I MRKH syndrome with functional primordial uterus; (2) bilateral ovarian cysts.