A 50-year-old man visited our clinic complaining of an redness with a foreign body sensation in his left eye that lasted for 1 month. He had a medical history of NPM1-mutated AML, and was in complete remission after receiving chemotherapy (CT) 2 years ago. Slit lamp examination revealed diffuse conjunctival thickening with injection in the left superior conjunctiva extending for approximately 5 clock hours (from 9 to 2 o’clock), with no abnormal findings in the cornea, anterior chamber, iris, and lens . No remarkable lesions were observed on fundus examination. Topical 0.5% levofloxacin and 1% prednisolone acetate were administered empirically; orbit MRI and ultrasound biomicroscopy were planned. After 1 week, the conjunctival lesions did not show any improvement.
Orbital MRI demonstrated linear thickening and enhancement of the left conjunctival area, suggestive of conjunctival lymphoma or inflammation. Ultrasound biomicroscopy also revealed linear thickening of the conjunctiva along with firm adhesion . Incisional biopsy of the conjunctival mass was performed considering the medical history and appearance of the lesion. During the incisional biopsy, the subconjunctival tissue was strongly attached to the sclera, and the medial rectus showed ill-defined margins. A cautious biopsy was performed to preserve the normal anatomical structure against insults caused by surgery. The immunohistochemical profile was positive for Ki-67, CD33, CD117, and myeloperoxidase, suggesting MS .
The patient was referred to the hemato-oncology department for further systemic evaluation. BM biopsy was performed immediately; cellularity of 21–30%, hypocellular for age, and an increase in CD117 immature cells were observed. It also showed an increase in blasts (6.4% of total nucleated cells), and the relapse of AML with concurrent conjunctival MS was confirmed.
The patient was treated with anti-leukemic reinduction CT (mitoxantrone, etoposide, and cytarabine), concomitant allogeneic peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (PBSCT) for the systemic relapse of AML, and salvage radiotherapy (RT) for 3 weeks (24 Gy/12 cycles) for the conjunctival MS.
After 3 months, the previous conjunctival mass in the left eye had resolved and was maintained after 3 years. However, he complained of dry eye symptoms in his left eye. Slit lamp examination revealed obstruction of the meibomian gland orifices, and moderate punctate epithelial erosions were seen. The LipiView II interferometer (TearScience Inc., Morrisville, North Carolina, USA) has demonstrated severe meibomian gland dropout in the left eye compared to the right eye . After 3 years of follow-up, the conjunctiva remained clear and did not show any recurrence, and the patient remained in a favorable general condition.