A 44-year-old female patient presented with a history of palpitations for over a year following a cold. Echocardiography revealed severe aortic valve regurgitation and left ventricular systolic dysfunction. An ECG showed left ventricular hypertrophy and strain. A routine chest X-ray was performed, and the preoperative diagnoses were aortic valve insufficiency and Takayasu’s arteritis (TAK). The patient underwent AVR with cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) under general anesthesia with endotracheal intubation (ETI) on April 25, 2021. The surgery lasted 285 min, with a CPB time of 110 min and an aortic cross-clamp time of 74 min. The procedure was completed with relatively stable vital signs, and the patient with ETI was transferred to the CICU after surgery.
After successfully implementing tracheal extubation strategies, the patient’s endotracheal tube was removed two hours following AVR. These strategies included routine fiberoptic bronchoscopy, closed endotracheal suction, and successful weaning criteria and spontaneous breathing trial (SBT). The patient experienced an irritating cough and mild wheezing immediately after the first extubation, but without dyspnea or cyanosis. Arterial blood gas examination revealed a pH of 7.43, PaCO2 of 48 mmHg, and PaO2 of 86 mmHg. However, on postoperative day (POD) 1, the patient developed persistent coughing and severe hypoxemia. The patient underwent orotracheal intubation using a video laryngoscope, but resistance was encountered after the tracheal tube cuff passed through the glottis. Instant parameters after reintubation revealed SpO2 of 90%, pH of 7.48, PaCO2 of 53 mmHg, and PaO2 of 65 mmHg. On POD 2, the patient received invasive ventilatory support with supplemental sedation and analgesia, and SpO2 was monitored at 98–100% (FiO2 rates of 30–50%). Due to poor cardiac function, a bedside chest X-ray was performed instead of a chest CT. The X-ray revealed post-cardiac surgical changes, cardiac enlargement, pneumonia, left pleural effusion after closed thoracic drainage, left lower lung lobe partial transudation, and fibrosis with atelectasis.
On POD 3, we planned a second extubation and used FOB to assess the respiratory tract during the peri-extubation period to prevent extubation failure. During this examination, we incidentally discovered a crust-like sputum protrusion firmly attached to the tip of the endotracheal tube, which could not be suctioned out. Therefore, we scheduled the patient for “Tracheobronchial Sputum Crust Removal”.
After the discovery of the sputum crust-like protrusion attached to the endotracheal tube, a respiratory physician used FOB to examine the patient’s respiratory tract. The tracheal catheter was replaced with a laryngeal mask intraoperatively. FOB revealed that the sputum crust was almost entirely covered by the tracheal catheter and extended from the subglottic area 2.0 cm towards the superior 2.5 cm of the carina, occupying approximately 50% of the normal tracheal lumen . Flexible foreign body forceps were used under FOB guidance to remove the large obstructing crusts , after which the lumen was unobstructed . The laryngeal mask was replaced by an endotracheal tube under FOB guidance, and the patient was transferred to the CICU for further treatment. Intraoperative vital signs were stable, and the total operation time was 25 min. Pathological examination of the crust showed acute inflammatory secretions, primarily fibrin-like exudates.
She was extubated on April 30, 2021, the second day after the “Tracheobronchial Sputum Crust Removal” procedure. On the 14th day, a high-resolution thin-Sect. (0.8 mm) chest CT was performed and showed that there was little transudation in the bilateral lower lungs compared to the chest radiograph findings on April 26, 2021. The CT images demonstrated that the sputum crust had completely disappeared, with unobstructed bronchus and smooth wall, and left lower lobe recruitment maneuvers were observed . The patient’s condition improved, and she was discharged on the 28th day after admission, as shown in Fig. . Overall, the patient had a favorable outcome.