A 49-year-old British man presented to our hospital with an acute flare of UC, describing a 2-week history of bloody diarrhea. He was initially prescribed both oral and topical 5-ASA therapy and responded well to therapy, reporting an improvement in his abdominal symptoms. However, 10 days after commencing 5-ASA therapy, he was readmitted with central chest pain, pleuritic in nature and associated with severe dyspnea. The patient’s cardiovascular and respiratory examinations were unremarkable, and he was normotensive and apyrexial. His electrocardiogram demonstrated sinus tachycardia, and his cardiac enzymes were elevated, with a troponin T level of 146 ng/ML. He was treated for an acute coronary syndrome with dual-antiplatelet therapy, and an urgent inpatient angiogram was scheduled.
The coronary angiogram revealed smooth, unobstructed coronary arteries, and no cause was identified to account for the patient’s chest pain and troponin rise. Subsequently, cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) was performed, which showed subepicardial delayed gadolinium enhancement in the basal to middle inferior and inferolateral segments of the heart , with matching high signal intensity seen on T2-weighted images of the same area. The left ventricle was nondilated with preserved systolic function. On the basis of these CMR findings, the patient was diagnosed with acute myocarditis, and the etiology for this was considered, including viral myocarditis, extraintestinal manifestation of IBD, a vasculitic or autoimmune process, or a drug-induced myocarditis. The patient had no history of a prodromal illness to suggest an underlying infection, and he was systemically well, making a vasculitic or autoimmune process less likely. Extraintestinal symptoms of IBD usually occur years following diagnosis, whereas our patient’s symptoms developed soon after starting a new drug therapy, which suggested that 5-ASA was the culprit.
The patient was treated conservatively with analgesia, and 5-ASA was promptly stopped. A working diagnosis of 5-ASA-induced myocarditis was supported by the gradual improvement in the patient’s condition following cessation of the drug, and he was discharged to home 3 days later. Follow-up CMR was performed after 2 months, and this showed no myocardial edema as well as reduced gadolinium enhancement of the epicardium and myocardium. This scan was compatible with a resolving myocarditis episode, and the patient subsequently made a full recovery.