A 19-year-old female patient presented with a complaint of a tender epigastric mass for 5 d.
Five days ago, the patient was admitted for a complaint of a tender epigastric mass. There was no prior history of gastroesophageal reflux symptoms or black stools, and she recently reported upper abdominal fullness after intake of little food.
The patient had no history of past illness.
No personal or family history was available.
On clinical examination, slight tenderness and an immovable mass in the right upper abdomen were identified.
Serum fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen, squamous cell carcinoma antigen, neuron-specific enolase, carbohydrate antigen 125, carbohydrate antigen 153, and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 were all normal.
The abdominal contrast-enhanced ultrasound revealed a hypoechoic mass with a diameter of 8.5 cm between the liver and stomach. It had poorly defined boundaries and an irregular shape and mutual continuity with the gastric antrum. The pancreas was compressed by the mass, and a branch of the celiac trunk was seen to extend into the center of the mass. The ultrasound contrast agent SonoVue (12 mL) was injected through the cubital vein, and the mass and liver parenchyma showed synchronous homogeneous enhancement in the arterial phase; conversely, the mass showed non-homogeneous enhancement in the portal vein phase and slightly non-homogeneous enhancement in the hepatic delay phase. Contrast-enhanced ultrasound indicated a gastric stromal tumor . Contrast-enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed a soft-tissue-density mass measuring 8.5 cm in diameter between the liver and stomach. The mass had uneven internal density, mild continuous enhancement in the arterial phase, and blood supply from a small branch of the gastroduodenal artery. Furthermore, the mass was connected with the gastric antrum. There were no clearly enlarged lymph nodes in the abdominal cavity or retroperitoneum. Contrast-enhanced abdominal CT indicates a gastric antrum tumor . Subsequent esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed that the gastric antrum mucosa was intact and smooth . Chest CT and bone scan emission CT showed no abnormal findings.