A 30-year-old woman with congenital heart disease consisting of PA/VSD with major aortopulmonary collateral arteries presented with worsening dyspnoea and progressive exercise intolerance. In infancy, she underwent surgical repair consisting of unifocalization of the right- and left-sided AP collaterals utilizing an 18 and 16 mm Gore-Tex graft, respectively. At age 7, she underwent surgical repair with VSD patch closure and placement of a 20 mm RVPA homograft connected to a 20 mm Gore-Tex graft with linkage to the previously placed right and left unifocalization grafts. On presentation, she was normotensive and slightly tachycardic (heart rate: 110 b.p.m.). There was a normal first heart sound followed by a high-pitched ejection systolic murmur (4/6) at the left parasternal border. The second heart sound was normal. Elevated neck veins with estimated central venous pressure at 15 cm H2O were also noted. Laboratory evaluation revealed slight monocytosis at 12.2% (reference: 2–10%) and elevated prohormone of brain natriuretic peptide at 4843 pg/mL (reference: 30–125 pg/mL).
A variety of imaging modalities were utilized to further investigate the clinical presentation. A transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) demonstrated a severely dilated RV with severe hypertrophy and moderately reduced systolic function. Left ventricular systolic function was normal with an estimated ejection fraction of 55–60%. The RV systolic pressure was severely elevated near systemic pressures, estimating ∼90–100 mmHg based on tricuspid regurgitation Doppler signal. The RVPA conduit was severely calcified with severe RVOT stenosis (peak outflow velocity of 4.2 m/s and peak outflow gradient of 70–80 mmHg) . Cardiac computed tomography (CT) was performed and revealed a stenotic RVPA conduit by a calcified mural mass with subsegmental pulmonary emboli . Given the presentation of RV failure caused by the dysfunctional RVPA conduit, surgical repair was pursued. Intraoperatively, extensive calcification was noted of the RVPA conduit with severe stenosis and erosion into the sternum and left lung. The Gore-Tex tube used to connect the RVPA homograft to the right and left pulmonary artery was full of clots, organized calcium deposits, and atheromas . The patient underwent surgical RVPA conduit revision with thromboendarterectomy of bilateral PAs . Pathology of the removed conduit revealed fibrin-associated Epstein–Barr virus (EBV)-positive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (FA DLBCL) with similar cytological findings in the distal PA thrombus . Positron emission tomography scan showed increased activity in the lymph nodes and left upper lobe of the lung. With the increased concern for haematogenous and lymphomatous emboli in the presence of subsegmental pulmonary emboli, systemic chemotherapy was initiated. Seven rounds of R-CVP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, vincristine sulfate, and prednisone) chemotherapy were successfully completed with repeat imaging showing resolution of the previously noted increased metabolic activity in the cervical lymph nodes. Follow-up TTE at 3 months revealed favourable RV reverse remodelling with improvement in RV systolic function and normal RVOT haemodynamics without significant stenosis (peak velocity < 1.5 m/s).