A 63-year-old male was admitted to our hospital in December 2015 for recurrent cough and gradually progressive dyspnea over the past 3 mo. The condition had become aggravated during the 2 wk prior to admission.
The patient first presented 5 years ago with a cough and dyspnea with exercise that improved with rest. He returned to the clinic for follow-up care at regular intervals. He was admitted to the emergency department due to the gradual aggravation of these symptoms 2 wk ago. Chest computed tomography (CT) scans revealed a pattern of acute bilateral interstitial pneumonia, and as such the patient required hospitalization.
The patient had a 20-year history of hypertension and had been taking amlodipine regularly.
The patient was free of any known congenital disease.
Vital signs were within normal limits at the time of admission, with a heart rate of 106 bpm, blood pressure of 178/71 mmHg, a respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min and a temperature of 37.1 °C. His height was 175 cm, and his weight was 76 kg. Physical examination revealed audible bilateral crackling in the lungs.
Hematological examination revealed a white blood cell count of 11.1 × 109/L, a hemoglobin level of 9.5 g/dL, a platelet count of 769 × 109/L, an absolute monocyte count of 3.8 × 109/L and an absolute eosinophil count of 0.3 × 109/L.
Bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) appeared light and milky, and differential BALF cell counts revealed the presence of 82% lymphocytes, 11% monocytes and 7% neutrophils. Arterial blood gas analyses under ambient air were performed in an effort to identify the causes of cough and dyspnea, revealing both hypoxemia and hypocapnia. Histological analyses exhibited the thickening of the alveolar septum with fiber hyperplasia, vasodilation, congestion and the infiltration of histiocytes and inflammatory cells. Samples were positive for periodic acid-Schiff staining, and flow cytometry analyses were performed as previously described, revealing an elevated frequency of monocytes in the BALF samples (12.4%) with CD33+ CD14+ CD300e+ mature monocytes accounting for 4% of nucleated cells and CD33+ CD14- CD300e+ partially immature monocytes accounting for 8.4% of nucleated cells .
To better understand the complete blood count abnormalities observed in this patient, we additionally conducted bone marrow aspiration and biopsy. Marked monocytic (30%) hyperplasia was detected with 7.4% monocytic blasts, while myeloid blasts were within the normal range (0.5%). Flow cytometry analyses of bone marrow samples additionally revealed elevated frequencies of monocytes (44% of nucleated cells) and of CD33bright CD14- CD300e+ immature monocytes (7.4% of nucleated cells) . Samples were negative for BCR/ABL, PDGFRA or PDGFRB cytogenetic aberrations but were positive for JAK2-V617F. CMML molecular studies revealed the presence of synonymous ASXL and SRSF mutations without any corresponding TET2 mutations. These examinations were performed as previously described. Karyotyping revealed the inversion of chromosome 6.
Ultrasonographic analyses revealed mild splenomegaly. High creatinine levels were also detected. CT scans identified bilateral regions of ground-glass opacity (GGO) in the lungs of this patient . Lung function tests revealed moderate reductions in the diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide.