A 45-year-old male with no particular past medical history was transferred to our department by ambulance after the sudden onset of nausea, aphasia, and right hemiparesis. The patient's family reported that he had been complaining of neck pain for several days prior to admission. Neurological examination revealed right hemiparesis, aphasia, and slight disturbance of consciousness. The National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale score was 10 points. Computed tomography revealed a high-density signal along the left MCA from the M1 portion up to the distal M2 portion, suggesting long and extensive emboli . MR angiography (MRA) demonstrated tandem occlusion of the left cervical ICA and intracranial MCA. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) showed an ischemic lesion by the left parasylvian area. Magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition gradient echo showed a high signal intensity along the cervical ICA. Considering the patient's young age and lack of atherosclerotic risk factors, such as diabetes mellitus or dyslipidemia, we interpreted this finding as suggestive of intramural blood rather than lipid-rich plaque component. Arterial spin labeling (ASL) demonstrated decreased cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the entire left MCA area . Axial T1-weighted imaging (T1WI) suggested intravascular or intramural hematoma up to the left petrous ICA. We suspected left cervical ICA occlusion due to dissection with huge secondary embolic occlusion into the intracranial M1–M2 portion. Considering long extensive intracranial M1–M2 emboli and tandem occlusion, and considering the unavailability of endovascular service in the acute setting in our district, we proceeded with surgical embolectomy to retrieve the intracranial emboli and to restore cross-flow, followed by possible cervical ICA dissection repair by cervical exposure. In case, cervical ICA repair proved unsuccessful, STA-MCA bypass was planned to avoid hemodynamic impairment. Informed consent was obtained from the patient's family to proceed with this treatment plan.
Under general anesthesia, a standard frontotemporal craniotomy was performed. After introduction of the microscope, the Sylvian fissure was opened to expose the M1–M2 portion of the MCA . Then, the emboli were retrieved through a transverse arteriotomy made near the distal end of the M1 and through two other arteriotomies at the superior trunk. Emboli extended far into the inferior trunk, and two additional arteriotomies were required to retrieve the entire clot. Thus, a total of five transverse arteriotomies were performed. All arteriotomies were sutured with 9-0 nylon by intermittent stitches. Restoration of collateral flow was observed via the anterior communicating artery, and a microvascular Doppler assessment confirmed that C2 portion of the ICA was still occluded. Next, the cervical carotid artery was exposed. The cervical ICA showed discoloration suggestive of dissection . The cervical ICA was opened via a longitudinal arteriotomy. Although the true lumen was identified for shunt insertion, no substantial backflow was aspirated. Rather, copious continuous bleeding from the pseudolumen was observed, indicating that dissection was extensive and restoring anterograde flow would not be possible. The cervical ICA was ligated. Then, the STA was exposed from a skin flap. Two STA branches were prepared, and STA-MCA double anastomosis was performed. Good bypass flow was confirmed by microvascular Doppler assessment .
Immediate postoperative as well as postoperative day 1 MRI studies showed a slightly increased DWI lesion in the basal ganglia, patent whole left MCA branches, and patent STA-MCA bypass. ASL showed slightly increased CBF in the left MCA area when compared with that on the contralateral side . The patient experienced marked recovery from his right hemiparesis, although he remained aphasic, which necessitated in-house rehabilitation for several months. At the 6th postoperative month, follow-up MRI studies demonstrated a robustly patent STA-MCA bypass on MRA, symmetrical CBF on ASL, and no additional ischemic lesions on T2WI . The patient subsequently experienced marked recovery from his aphasia and was able to resume his previous occupation.