Diffuse abdominal pain.
We present the case of a 54-year-old Caucasian female, who presented in the emergency department of our hospital with diffuse abdominal pain for one week, which had become severe in the last day.
She initially presented in October 2019 with hyperbilirubinemia. At the time she had an ultrasound that showed gallstones as well as a dilated common bile duct of 10 mm. She underwent an magnetic resonance cholangiopacreatography (MRCP) which showed an 8mm duct, but no definite filling defects. Following this she underwent a diagnostic ERCP, at which time a distal stricture was noted, and a plastic stent [7 French (Fr) 7 cm single external and single internal flap] was placed. A second ERCP was done in February 2020, at which time choledocholithiasis was identified and felt to be the cause of the stricture. At that time a new plastic stent was placed (8.5 Fr 7 cm). The original stent was not seen at that time. In August 2020 she went for another ERCP at which time she had a normal cholangiogram, and the stent was not seen at that time. She presented to our Emergency Department in November 2020.
Her past medical history was significant for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, alcoholic liver cirrhosis, and portal vein thrombosis. Her past surgical history was significant for colectomy with end ileostomy for toxic megacolon from Clostridium difficile, followed later by a re-exploration and ileorectal anastomosis with proximal diverting loop ileostomy, which was still in place.
On initial evaluation the patient had temperature 98.2 °F (36.7 °C), pulse 87 per minute, blood pressure 115/83 mmHg. Her clinical examination revealed diffuse abdominal tenderness and focal peritonitis in the left lower quadrant of the abdomen.
From laboratory evaluation the patient had WBC 6.1 k/μL and total bilirubin 0.7 mg/dL.
Computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast showed two migrated biliary stents. The first was in an ileal loop and was perforating through the bowel wall into the mesentery and a second stent within a mid-jejunal loop . The CT scan showed significant surrounding inflammatory phlegmon, but no free air or focal abscess was noted. After discussion with the patient, it was decided to proceed with surgical treatment of the bowel perforation and removal of both biliary stents.