The female patient was 26 years old at the time of PGD-SR. Karyotype was 46,XX. Basal FSH, LH on day 3 and AMH value were respectively 8.0 IU/l, 6.5 IU/l and 6.3 ng/ml. She had a 30 days ovarian cycle. Uterine cavity and fallopian tubes resulted regular from diagnostic examination. The ovaries had a polycystic ovarian aspect. The patient had no previous pregnancy.
The male patient was 30 years old at the time of PGD-SR. After QFQ-banding karyotype analysis, he was found to have a karyotype with balanced translocation involving X chromosome and autosome 3: 46,Y,t(X;3)(p11.2;p14)mat .
The X-3 reciprocal translocation was transmitted from the mother that had the karyotype 46,X,t(X;3)(p11.2;p14) in the blood cells. In the family of male patient, the first sibling had a 46,XX normal karyotype (II-1). The third of three siblings (II-5) showed the same karyotype 46,Y,t(X;3)(p11.2;p14)mat of the patient. The parents of the patient were not consanguineous . His mother and siblings had a normal phenotype.
The male patient had a normal phenotype with normal genital tract.
Semen was characterized by severe oligoasthenoteratozoospermia (Semen concentration: 20.000 sperm /ml; 5% sperm with progressive motility, 2% of normal sperm). From blood cells analysis, the male patient resulted negative for microdeletions of AZFa, AZFb and AZFc regions . The male endocrine was normal for FSH, LH, total Testosterone, Free Testosterone, 17bE2, Prolactin, HCG, aFP. The couple consulted for the first time an infertility center for primary infertility and asked to know 'the state of health' of the embryos as allowed by the Italian law on Medically Assisted Procreation .
The following protocols of ovarian stimulation, oocyte and embryo vitrification, ICSI and embryos culture, embryo biopsy and NGS have been described elsewhere and are resumed as follow . Each part of the protocol has been approved by the Institutional Review Board Unità di Medicina della Riproduzione - Centro HERA. The patients signed informed consent forms on all procedures prior application.
The female patient underwent two cycles of ovarian stimulation. In the first cycle, the metaphase II oocytes were vitrified. In the second cycle the metaphase II oocytes were used as fresh together with the previously vitrified/warmed oocytes.
The first ovarian stimulation was performed by the administration of recombinant FSH and LH (Puregon, MSD, Franklin Lakes, USA and Luveris: Merck-Serono, London, UK) from cycle day 2 in a luteal gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonist flexible schema (Orgalutran : MDS). Initial doses were 200 IU/day for FSH and 75 IU/day for LH. Luteal gonadotrophin-releasing hormone antagonist was given when the leader follicle reached 14 mm in diameter with a dosage of 0.25 mg/day. The second ovarian stimulation started on day 2 of the following cycle.
One ICSI session was performed using the accumulated vitrified/warmed oocytes together with the lately produced fresh oocytes and fresh male patient semen.
Vaginal ultrasound-guided aspiration of oocyte−cumulus complex (OPU) was performed 35 hours after human chorionic gonadotrophin administration (HCG 10,000 IU, Gonasi: AMSA, Rome, Italy). ICSI was performed on fresh oocytes 3h after OPU and on cryopreserved oocytes 1 hour after warming and in vitro culture with the same patient's fresh ejaculated spermatozoa sample.
After ICSI, in vitro culture was carried out in Continuous single culture complete medium with human serum albumin (Irvine Scientific, Santa Ana, USA) under mineral oil and in automated incubators with 5% CO2, 5% O2 at 37°C, fitted with time-lapse imaging acquisition (Embryoscope, Unisense, Aarhus, Denmark).
Embryo biopsies were performed on day 5 on expanded or hatching blastocysts. Few trophectoderm cells [5 to 10] were removed from a zona pellucida hole using a 1.48 um diode laser (OCTAX, Bruckberg, Germany) and a 20 um inner diameter biopsy pipette. After the biopsy procedure, each embryo was incubated until embryo vitrification and before blastocyst re-expension. The biopsied trophectoderm cells were washed in sterile phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution and transferred into a 0.2 ml Eppendorf tube containing 4 ul of sterile PBS solution.
The vitrification and warming protocols for oocyte and embryos were previously described.
The biopsied trophectoderm cells were submitted to alkaline lyses and whole genome amplification according to Repli-g Single Cell protocol (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). After quantification of amplified DNA, libraries were prepared from 100 ng of each sample and barcoded with IonXpressPlus Fragment and IonXpress Barcode Adapter kits (Life Technologies-Thermo Fisher (Carlsbad, USA). After quantification of the libraries, normalization to 100 pM and mix-up to obtain a final concentration of 8 pM, the eleven enriched libraries were loaded on Chip 16 V2. DNA sequencing was performed on ION PGM HiQ View Sequencing in Ion Personal Genome Machine. The updated Torrent Suite Software was used for base calling and mapping on human genome reference sequence Hg19. For each chromosome read coverage was corrected by guanine-cytosine calculation. Aneuploidy was diagnosed comparing data to baseline values multiple male samples. In all the process, a positive control with normal male DNA and a negative control from biopsy culture media were processed together with the samples to diagnose. Genetic analysis was validated when median absolute pair wise difference (MAPD) was inferior to 0.3. Chromosomal segments as short as 7 Mb could be detected. The protocol was previously validated on single cells from amniocytes with different karyotypes .
Warming and single embryo transfer was performed on natural cycle at 7 days after LH surge.
The results of oocyte vitrification, ICSI, embryo culture and embryo biopsy analysis from vitrified/warmed and fresh oocytes are presented in Table .
The patient produced 8 metaphase II oocytes that were vitrified during the first ovarian cycles and 16 metaphase II oocytes in the second ovarian cycle that were used as fresh. Seven of the 8 vitrified oocytes survived to warming and were micro-injected together with the 16 fresh oocytes with the male patient’ semen sample and in the same ICSI procedure. The fertilization rates were 71.4% for vitrified/warmed oocytes (5 zygotes/7 micro-injected oocytes) and 75.0% for fresh oocytes (12 zygotes/16 micro-injected oocytes). On day V, 3 expanded or hatching blastocysts from vitrified/warmed oocytes (3 blastocysts/5 zygotes, 60.0%) and 8 expanded or hatching blastocysts from fresh oocytes (8 blastocysts/12 zygotes, 67.0%) were biopsied and vitrified.
The genetic analysis were validated and completed respectively in 100% of the biopsied blastocysts from vitrified/warmed and fresh oocytes. Chromosome contents of each blastocyst after PGD-SR are reported in Table .
According to the karyograms generated by IGV (Integrative Genomics Viewer), it was found that two embryos were diagnosed 46,XY, two embryos were diagnosed 46,XX; four embryos were diagnosed with unbalanced translocations and showed the trisomy 3p14→cen→3qter and monosomy Xp11.2→cen→Xqter, from 2:2 segregation and adjacent-2 disjunction. Three embryos were diagnosed aneuploid (45,X0 ; 45,XY,del [2] ;46,XY,del [8](qter →q22.1). Even if balanced translocation could be detected by NGS analysis, the 2 embryos diagnosed as 46,XX were known to have the balanced translocation inherited by the father and their true karyotype was: 46,X,t(X;3)(Xqter→Xp11.2::3p14→3pter;3qter➔3p14::Xp11.2➔Xpter)pat. On the same way, the 2 embryos diagnosed as 46,XY had a normal karyotype. Karyograms are shown in Fig. .
Prior to PGT-SR, a genetic counselling was performed and the couple was informed on the possible karyotypes due to father reciprocal translocation: embryo(s) with normal 46,XY, female(s) with balanced translocation and unpredictable phenotype, embryo(s) with unpredictable complete or partial aneuploidies.
After PGT-SR, the patients were informed on the result of the present PGD-SR. It was explained that among the viable embryos, the 2 male embryos had the true kayotype 46,XY, 2 female embryos had the reciprocal translocation 46,X,t(X;3)(Xqter→Xp11.2::3p14→3pter;3qter➔3p14::Xp11.2➔Xpter)pat.
Regarding the 2 female embryos with balanced translocation, it was explained that the phenotype should be normal, due to the preferable silencing of normal X as it seems to have happened in the patient’s mother. Consequently, deciding not to transfer balanced translocated female means taking the risk of eliminating from transfer and pregnancy a viable embryo with a normal phenotype.
On the other side, genetic disorders with different degree of gravity (from gonadal digenesis and premature ovarian failure to major genetic disorders and mental retardation) were reported in female patients with balanced reciprocal X-autosome translocations. This risk exists and remains unpredictable. The probability of occurring cannot be calculated.
Finally, one embryo had 45,X0 karyotype. It was explained that Turner Syndrome has a large expressivity and a very high in uterus lethality within the first trimester of pregnancy [, ].
It was reminded that de novo balanced translocation could not be detected by the present protocol of NGS.
After counselling, the couple asked to have one 46,XY embryo thawed and transferred.
The embryo n. 13 obtained from fresh oocyte, was thawed and transferred. The β-HCG test performed 12 days after embryo transfer was positive. Two weeks later the clinical pregnancy was ascertained by scan of embryonic sac and one foetal heart beat was observed. Non invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) for all autosome and gonosome chromosomes was performed on the 15th week of pregnancy and confirmed PGD-SR result.