A 63-year-old female patient was admitted for chest pain, dyspnea on exertion in the previous 8 months, and aggravation for 1 week (NYHA grades III). She reported uncontrolled hypertension despite taking antihypertensive medications such as amlodipine 5 mg and valsartan 80 mg once daily. The physical examination showed a blood pressure of 160/110 mmHg, a rhythmic pulse of 83 beats/min, and a harsh grade 4/6 systolic ejection murmur in the right second intercostal space, which led to the carotids. A blood pressure difference of 10mmHg was observed in both lower extremities when compared to that of an arm. The blood pressure of both lower limbs is 10 mmHg lower than the arm. There were no other significant clinical findings and family history of cardiovascular disease. Blood tests showed elevated N-terminal pro brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) levels of 2,580 pg/ml (normal range 300–900 pg/ml). There were no significant abnormalities in routine blood test, liver and kidney function, and Troponin I.
The Electrocardiography (EKG) demonstrated a sinus rhythm of 80 beats per minute, a normal axis, and left ventricular hypertrophy. Echocardiogram showed severe aortic stenosis (aortic valve area, 0.2 cm2; mean pressure gradient, 78 mmHg; peak velocity, 5.8 m/s) and a reduced left ventricular ejection fraction of 35% . Computed tomography (CT) angiography of aorta imaging evaluation revealed severe stenotic calcified eccentric aortic coarctation located 20 mm distal to the LSA. The diameter of the narrowest part was approximately 3 mm with significant thoracic collaterals. The descending aorta is observed to be significantly twisted and angled due to eccentric stenosis. Severe asymmetric diffuse leaflet calcifications were observed in bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) type 0, as well as marked calcifications of the ascending aorta and aortic arch . A pre-operative left heart catheterization revealed no evidence of coronary artery disease.
Based on the association of a bicuspid aortic valve and a coarctation of the aorta, the patient was diagnosed with a complex aortic coarctation and severe aortic valve stenosis. After consulting with the cardiac team and obtaining the patient's consent, we decided to perform a one-stop interventional procedure for repairing both defects. The operation was performed in the cardiac catheter lab under general anesthesia. Firstly, we implanted a 45 mm enlarged Cheatham-Platinum (CP) stent installed on a 22*45 mm BIB (balloon in balloon) catheter via the right femoral access, immediately distal to the LSA , and achieved complete pressure gradient resolution across the CoA (from 35 mmHg to 3 mmHg) . To avoid possible damage or displacement of the implanted CP stent during the delivery of the artificial valve due to the markedly twisted and angled descending aortic arch, alternate access for TAVR was considered appropriate through the left carotid artery, which was straight, wide, and free of obvious plaque.
The carotid incision was sutured with purse string to prevent bleeding. First, a 6F sheath was implanted, and the straight guide wire was inserted into the left ventricle through an Amplatze 1.0 catheter and exchanged with a 6F pigtail catheter. The 20F sheath was then replaced for balloon pre-expansion and prosthetic valve implantation. We used a 20 mm balloon to dilate the aortic valve while performing an angiographic evaluation. The findings revealed that there was no obvious balloon lumbar sign and aortic regurgitation, and that the left and right coronary arteries were well-developed . A 24 mm prosthetic valve (Vitaflow Aortic Valve System, Shanghai Microport medical group) was smoothly implanted through the left carotid artery. Due to the concise and direct approach, the feedback of delivery manipulation is excellent, and the final valve deployment was in the optimal position . The aortic transvalvular pressure difference decreased from 100mmHg pre-TAVR to 18 mmHg post-TAVR (, ). Trans-esophageal echocardiography (TEE) revealed no significant aortic regurgitation and auscultation indicated a markedly reduced murmur . The patient was discharged on postoperative day 9. At 11 months follow-up, the patient was asymptomatic with well-controlled blood pressure, and echocardiography showed a well-seated prosthetic valve with a mean gradient of 7 mmHg and no valve leakage, as well as no gradient across the coarctation stent. A radiological follow-up revealed that both devices were correctly positioned .