A 34 year-old Caucasian woman with Crohn’s disease presented to the eye emergency department at our institution with bilateral red eyes and discomfort. She had been wearing soft daily-wear contact lenses with monthly replacement schedule for the past 10 years. She had stopped wearing them 3 months before her visit as a consequence of fluctuating dry eye symptoms. She also reported a recent episode of interface dermatitis on her right ankle, confirmed by internal medicine specialists. She developed HLA-B27-negative ileal Crohn's disease at age 18, and required two intestinal resections at age 20 and 25 for stricturing disease. Thereafter, inflammation had been satisfactorily controlled by oral azathioprine. At the age of 30, 4 years before her visit to our emergency department, recurrence of clinical symptoms led to a switch from oral azathioprine to subcutaneous adalimumab. She had since been receiving 40 mg of subcutaneous adalimumab every 2 weeks.
Prior to the current episode, the patient had been evaluated biennially for 10 years by her attending ophthalmologist in the context of contact lens use. At each visit, she had been screened for ocular signs related to her inflammatory bowel disease. Her corneal status was unremarkable at all examinations. In particular, the patient did not have any history of meibomian gland disease or marginal keratitis.
Ocular symptoms occurred 36 hours following the last adalimumab administration and were more intense in her left eye. The patient did not report any loss of vision. In addition to diffuse conjunctival hyperemia and peri-limbal injection, slit-lamp examination of her left eye revealed a white-grayish anterior stromal infiltrate near the inferior corneal margin, with a diameter of 0.3 mm , and a string of smaller lesions along the superior margin . We observed a single small lesion in her right eye, located along the superior nasal limbus. All signs shared characteristics of immune infiltrates: a hazy fluorescein stain with intact epithelium, a clear margin between infiltrate and limbus, and subtle corneal neovascularization. The anterior stromal localization of the lesions was visible on slit-lamp biomicroscopy (Additional file : Figure S1). Symptoms improved and infiltrates cleared with topical dexamethasone T.I.D . Two weeks later, 24 hours after the next injection of adalimumab, the patient returned with recurrent symptoms. Clinical findings were identical to the first examination in both eyes and again disappeared with topical dexamethasone (Additional file : Figure S2 and Additional file : Figure S3). After a third episode that was managed in the same way, and at the patient’s request, sporadic ocular symptoms were considered acceptable with regard to the control of bowel inflammation, and adalimumab therapy was not discontinued. For the treatment of the few recurrences that occurred over the following months, dexamethasone was successfully replaced by rimexolone to reduce the risk of ocular hypertension. Two months after the first visit, trough serum adalimumab was 7.4 μg/mL, within therapeutic range (1.9 to 8.3 μg/mL) .