A 46-year-old woman with no comorbidities was admitted to the intensive care unit (ICU) with acute TBI after she was struck, while jogging, by a motor vehicle traveling at 5 mph. Computed Tomography (CT) imaging revealed bifrontal small subdural hematomas with underlying hemorrhagic contusions, along with small subarachnoid hemorrhage . She was intubated upon arrival to the hospital and her Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) quickly improved to 10 T. She was started on hypertonic saline 3% to achieve a target sodium goal of > 145 mmol/L, and a repeat head CT within 6 h showed stable hemorrhagic injuries and a small amount of PHE. The patient's sodium was maintained above 145 mmol/L and her condition appeared stable. Over the following two days she was extubated, and her GCS improved to 15. Her admission labs revealed microcytic (mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 60.1 fL.) anemia with a hemoglobin of 7.8 g/dL (Ref range: 11.5–14.9 g/dL) which dropped to 5.7 g/dL on day 3 of hospital stay. She was transfused 2 units of packed red blood cells and extensive work up revealed no source of acute blood loss. Iron studies showed low serum iron of 15 mcg/dL (Ref range: 30–160 mcg/dL), and in the evening of day 3, she was given IV iron sucrose to replete her iron storages. Shortly after iron administration, her mental status deteriorated, and her left pupil became dilated and sluggish, indicating increased intracranial pressure (ICP). A head CT demonstrated significantly worsening bifrontal PHE , and she was given boluses of hypertonic saline and mannitol to which she initially responded clinically. However, 12 h later, her clinical condition deteriorated again with precipitous decline in GSC to 10, along with now bilaterally sluggish pupils. Follow-up head CT scans demonstrated increased PHE, with effacement of the ambient cistern prompting intubation, maximizing hyperosmolar therapy and placement of an external ventricular drain (EVD) with a recorded ICP of 20 cm H2O after placement. EVD output was recorded to be 92 ml in the first 12 h following its placement. The patient received 3 doses of IV iron sucrose, but no further doses of iron were administered after it was suggested that iron administration might have been responsible for the worsening brain edema.
Between days 6 and 10 of hospital stay, initial attempts to wean hyperosmolar therapy demonstrated rebounding increase in ICP with correlating change in mental status warranting a slower wean. She was extubated on day 11 as her exam improved steadily, the EVD was removed on day 15, and her GCS remained stable at 14–15. The patient was discharged to a rehabilitation center after a 25-day hospital stay. She followed up with physical therapy and rehabilitation medicine where she continued to make progress in her recovery.