A 60-year-old Caucasian woman, living alone and previously in good health, was found unconscious at home and fortunately helped by her friends and the emergency medical team. One week before this incident, she had infrequent episodes of watery nasal discharge that increased with forced sneezing and cough. On her arrival to our clinic, she was confused and febrile. A cranial nerve examination was normal. A computed tomography (CT) scan (Figure ) of her brain and paranasal sinuses showed pneumocephalus in the ventricles, hydrocephalus and an air-fluid level in the right sphenoid sinus indicating a CSF leak. There was a bony defect of the clivus with sclerotic edges. A lumbar puncture and analysis of her CSF confirmed bacterial meningitis and our patient was immediately started on ceftazidime 2g three times a day. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Figures and
) showed an osteolytic, irregular lesion occupying the upper clivus and measuring 13×12×16mm. It was hyperintense on T2-weighted images and hypointense on T1-weighted images. The lesion showed no enhancement with administration of gadolinium. An endonasal transsphenoidal endoscopic exploration of the skull base defect and closure of the CSF fistula was planned. A bony defect and CSF leak was visualized on the postero-inferior wall of her right sphenoid sinus at the posterior cortical margin of her clivus. Further exploration revealed suspicious tissue adjacent to the dural defect that was just anterior to her basilar artery. This tissue was carefully dissected and sent for histopathological examination. The skull base defect was repaired using fascia lata and the sphenoid sinus was obliterated with fat and fibrin glue TISSEEL®. Histopathologic analysis of the biopsied tissue showed dark giant oval nuclei, with vacuolated or granular eosinophilic cytoplasm. The cells were arranged in epithelial cords, and on immunohistochemistry were strongly positive for S-100 protein and epithelial membrane antigen, thereby confirming diagnosis of a chordoma in the clival region.
Three months later, our patient underwent an MRI (Figures and
) to re-define the presence and extent of the clival chordoma. In the intervening period she was asymptomatic and did not have any CSF leak. A transnasal endoscopic resection of the chordoma aided by neuronavigation was planned. Surgery began with a complete right-side ethmoidectomy. Posterior septectomy allowed a 'two nostrils - four hands’ technique for tumor removal. A radical vomerectomy was performed. The entire anterior wall of her sphenoid sinus and her sphenoidal septum were excised. During a revision endoscopic exploration it is extremely important to identify the bony edges circumferentially around the earlier defect and gradually define the bone and soft tissue junction, which necessitated removal of the upper two-thirds of her clivus. The next step was to identify the sella, optic nerve and the carotid impressions bilaterally within her sphenoid sinus. Subsequently, the normal dura and fibrocicatricial tissue surrounding the chordoma were identified. An en bloc excision of the chordoma was done, anticipating her basilar artery to be just posterior to the tumor. Reconstruction of the defect was performed using fascia lata, fat and fibrin glue. A lumbar drain was inserted preoperatively and used to drain CSF in the postoperative period. It was removed on the fifth postoperative day. Broad spectrum antibiotics (ceftazidime 2g three times a day) were given for 10 days. Our patient had an excellent recovery with no complications. The follow-up scans showed complete excision of the tumor and no other adjuvant therapy was instituted. Our patient was discharged on the 12th postoperative day and a systematic clinico-radiological follow-up is planned. She was totally asymptomatic at the latest follow-up (three months after surgery) with an MRI (Figures and
) showing complete excision of the tumor.