A 62-year-old man with ESRD secondary to diabetes presented to Toronto General Hospital with shortness of breath on exertion for 3 years. His co-morbidities include type 2 diabetes, coronary artery disease, gout, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, hypothyroidism, asthma, and obstructive sleep apnea treated by continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP). His mobility was limited by dyspnea (especially with stairs). Given his poor functionality, he was unable to complete any formal exercise program. He denied any chest pain, orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.
He was diagnosed with asthma 10 years ago with pulmonary function testing (PFTs). His pulmonary obstruction was not substantiated by a methacholine challenge. At that time, he presented with shortness of breath on exertion, chest tightness, and occasional cough. He had a remote history of smoking and occasional alcohol use. He was regularly seen in our chronic kidney disease program 3 years prior to the initiation of renal replacement therapy. At that time, PFTs showed a decrease in lung volumes and airflow obstruction with normal diffusive capacity. Based on symptom severity, his inhaler regime included salbutamol (100 mcg) 2 puffs twice daily, ipratropium (17 mcg) 2 puffs twice daily, salmeterol – fluticasone (50/500) 2 puffs twice daily, montelukast 10 mg once daily, ciclesonide (160 mcg) 2 puffs once daily and tiotropium (1.25 mcg) 2 puffs once daily .
At the time of hemodialysis initiation, his vital signs were stable, body weight was 99 kg, and there was pronounced bilateral edema. His cardiac examination revealed normal heart sounds with no audible murmurs. There were no abnormal pulmonary findings.
His initial laboratory testing were consistent with ESRD (urea 40 mmol/L, creatinine 775 μmol/L, hemoglobin 107 g/L, ferritin 280 ng/mL, potassium 4.4 mmol/L, bicarbonate 22 mmol/L, calcium 2.27 mmol/L, phosphate 1.93 mmol/L, albumin 36 g/L, intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) 28 pmol/L and an urine protein creatinine ratio 704 mg/mmol).
He was initiated on conventional hemodialysis (4 h per session, 3 times a week) in February 2018 due to volume overload. He adhered to his dialysis treatment schedule, and his weight gradually decreased by 7 kg in 3 months. His respiratory symptoms improved, and he was able to exercise using a stationary bicycle without exertional dyspnea. However, he remained dependent on bronchodilators . PFTs were repeated in April 2018 (see Table ). Of note, there was no evidence of airflow limitation. Additional diagnostic tests included a normal electrocardiogram and chest X-ray . Transthoracic echocardiogram showed an ejection fraction of 55%. Ventricular and atrial assessments showed normal geometry and function bilaterally. CT scan of thorax demonstrated no evidence of interstitial thickening, air trapping, pulmonary edema, or bronchiectasis.
During 8 weeks of home hemodialysis training, his weight decreased by another 5 kg. The patient’s symptom gradually improved, he denied dyspnea on exertion, or asthmatic attack. His asthmatic medication was tapered as shown in Table . He was converted to nocturnal home hemodialysis in June 2018. His hemodialysis prescription was 8 h per session, 4 times a week via left radio-cephalic AV fistula with bicarbonate base dialysate. The remaining dialysis treatment parameters were noted below: Revaclear®; Polyethersulfone membrane, surface area of 1.8 m2, urea mass transfer area coefficient (KoA) 1439 mL/min, ultrafiltration coefficient (UFC) 54 ml/hr./mmHg, Blood flow rate (Qb) 350 ml/min and dialysate flow rate (Qd) 500 ml/min.
Within 3 months of home hemodialysis, our patient reported further improvement of dyspnea. He indicated that his activities were no longer limited by his respiratory symptoms, and he was able to climb 2 flights of stairs.
His asthma medications were subsequently tapered completely as shown in Table .
Routine hemodialysis laboratory data were collected after 3 months of home hemodialysis initiation. His results reflected his intensive hemodialysis prescription (urea 18 mmol/L, creatinine 554 mmol/L, hemoglobin 123 g/L, bicarbonate 23 mmol/L, albumin 41 g/L, calcium 2.29 mmol/L, phosphate 1.35 mmol/L and PTH 37.9 pmol/L.) His urea reduction ratio was 85% with a single-Pool Kt/V of 2.53. Moreover, the patient had a diagnostic methacholine test, and excluded any pulmonary obstruction. His pulmonary function is shown in Table .