A 7-year-old boy was admitted to our hospital in April 2019 due to whitening of the pupil area in the right eye after a fall, which was accompanied by eye pain, headache, and vomiting for 3 days. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 1.0 in the left eye. However, only the perception of light was possible in the right eye. The right eye also exhibited mixed conjunctival hyperemia (+++), mild corneal edema, an absence of wrinkles in the endothelium, a shallow anterior chamber, an irregular pupil shape (diameter: 2 mm), an absence of the light reflex, a rough lens surface, and pigment adhesion . Intraocular pressure in the right eye was 42.3 mmHg, while that in the left eye was normal. Upon admission to our hospital, he was given a preliminary diagnosis of traumatic cataract with secondary glaucoma of the right eye. However, during his hospitalization, we learned that he had been diagnosed with congenital cataract of the right eye at a local hospital 7 years earlier. Therefore, the diagnosis was revised to glaucoma secondary to congenital cataract of the right eye. Treatment with intraocular pressure-lowering drugs proved effective. However, B-mode ultrasound examination revealed a wide echogenic band extending from the back of the lens to the front of the optic disc in the right vitreous cavity . Axis length for the right eye was 26.32 mm, while that for the left eye was 22.30 mm. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) revealed an anterior chamber depth of 1.05 mm in the right eye. UBM also indicated upward bulging of the right iris at 3–7 points. The angle had closed, the posterior chamber was no longer visible, and the anterior capsule echo of the lens was irregular. Analysis of flash visual-evoked potentials (F-VEP) revealed delayed P2 and P3 peaks in the right eye, relative to those in the left eye. Given that B-mode ultrasonography also revealed fibrous vascular membranes around the lens, the diagnosis was again revised to congenital cataract, PHPV, and secondary glaucoma of the right eye.
Surgery was indicated due to the presence of acute glaucoma and abnormal lens morphology. Cataract extraction and anterior vitrectomy were thus performed under general anesthesia. Prior to the operation, the diameter of the dilated pupil was 5 mm, and the pupil was irregular in shape. In addition, we observed posterior synechia of the iris and massive vascular tissue integration within the lens . During surgery, after detaching the posterior synechia of the iris, we noticed deficiencies in the anterior capsule of the lens. The lens appeared wrinkled and had a diameter of approximately 3 mm . Substantial integration of vascular tissue was observed in the posterior capsule of the cataractous lens. Following posterior capsulotomy, the red light reflex disappeared. We then performed anterior vitrectomy.
Pathological examination revealed that the right lens and capsule contained little connective tissue. We also observed fibrous tissue hyperplasia, hyaline degeneration, calcification, and follicular cystic changes, in addition to active proliferation of fibrocytes .
BCVA remained unchanged in either eye following surgery. Postoperative examination further revealed a transparent right cornea. The right anterior chamber was deep, the pupil was round, pupil diameter was 3 mm, the lens was absent, and mild vitreous opacity was observed. Fundus examination revealed blurring of the boundary with the right optic disc. The cup-to-disk (C/D) ratio was approximately 0.1, and the retina exhibited applanation. The blood vessels were well-shaped, and the macular structure was generally normal . Optic OCT indicated that the thickness of the retinal nerve fiber layer (RNFL) was 0 μm, although the macular structure of the right eye was normal. Intraocular pressure was 17.3 mmHg in the right eye.
Neither intraoperative nor postoperative examinations revealed characteristics of PHPV such as connection of the vitreous fibrous vascular membrane to the optic disc, shrinkage of the eyeball, or retinal dysplasia. Furthermore, the lens and capsule were severely fibrotic, with an abundance of surrounding vascular tissue. The final diagnosis was anterior PHPV with secondary glaucoma in the right eye. Although further visual rehabilitation training was recommended, his parents declined. At the 6-month follow-up, visual acuity in the right eye had not improved, and findings in the remaining anterior and posterior segments were identical to those of the postoperative examination.