A 59-year-old female was admitted to our Department of Vascular and Endovascular Surgery from her general practitioner who suspected an RAVF in Doppler ultrasonography.
The patient reported suffering from mild shortness of breath during normal everyday activities (NYHA II). The patient did not suffer from any relevant co-morbidity or allergies and had no former pregnancies or previous surgeries. Notably, the patient reported a blunt chest trauma from physical contact during a karate class more than 30 years ago. At that time, X-ray examination revealed multiple rib-fractures in the left upper thorax which were treated conservatively.
On physical examination the patient was normotensive while the electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed a resting sinus tachycardia . While obvious signs of right heart strain such as murmur, accentuated second heart sound, diaphoresis, lower extremity edema or cyanosis were absent, we observed elevated jugular vein pulse (JVP) indicating significant venous hypertension (Supplementary ). The abdomen was soft during deep palpation with no abdominal masses detected. Intestinal peristalsis was normal. Interestingly, we found a palpable thrill and an auscultable bruit at the patient's left flank. The assessment of peripheral pulses revealed normal intensity rate with no palpable tenderness at any location.
Abdominal Doppler ultrasonography revealed multiple RVAs and the typical broadening of spectral waveform suggested a RAVF with arterial flow . Renal scintigraphy revealed split residual renal function of 33% vs. 67% (left vs. right kidney) . Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) findings suggested a RAVF along with an enlargement in the diameter of the LRA, left renal vein (LRV) and multiple RVAs at a maximum diameter of 5.5 × 7.2 cm. Notably, the high-flow RAVF also caused an enlargement of the maximum diameter of the Inferior Vena Cava (IVC) (41 mm). Further, compression of the left ureter and subsequent urinary retention was diagnosed. The diameter-enlarged LRA mimicked the aortic bifurcation with a similar take-off angle and a straight proximal segment .
The pre-interventional echocardiography demonstrated signs of substantial right heart strain with functional tricuspid regurgitation and right atrium enlargement due to increased volume load .
Taking the above into consideration, there was interdisciplinary consultation with the radiology department. Following a rigorous risk-benefit assessment of different therapeutic approaches, an endovascular occlusion of the LRA to treat the RAVF was preferred.
After informed consent was obtained, we performed the complete endovascular occlusion of the LRA via transbrachial access route since the risk for cerebral events was considered acceptable in absence of atherosclerotic lesions. To measure the target vessel, the authors utilized the open-source imaging software OsiriX, version 7.5 for AVP deployment.
Surgery was performed in a hybrid operation room, considering the moderate risk of accidental aneurysm rupture during guide wire advancing and AVP II placement.
In short, after advancing a pigtail catheter into the aorta the LRA was marked using aortography. The LRA was cannulated with a right-modified catheter after carefully advancing a rosen wire. Following correct positioning, the first AVP II device (20 mm) was released, however, control angiography showed secondary dispositioning as the device travelled with the blood stream into the distal part of the LRA. Since the authors considered maldeployment being the most likely reason for secondary mispositioning, a second AVP II device of the same dimension was placed correctly into the proximal part of the LRA close to its origin from the aorta. The subsequent control angiography confirmed the complete occlusion of the LRA with no residual perfusion, demonstrating successful blocking of arterial perfusion of the RVA .
Absence of blood flow in the LRA and in the left kidney was confirmed two days after intervention with Doppler sonography. Maximum elevation of serum LDH levels (peak: 900 U/l) corroborated the ultrasound findings.
A three-day post-intervention echocardiography found a reduced cardiac volume load along with a normalization of the cardiac output and heart rate (Supplementary ). In comparison to pre-intervention findings, there was no residual tricuspid regurgitation and the right atrium dimensions were reduced (, Figures and ). No procedural or post-interventional complications occurred. The patient was discharged 7-days post-intervention in stable condition.
A follow-up CT scan after one month revealed appropriate positioning of the proximal AVP II without residual side perfusion. Notably, a small proximal side-branch sustained an insignificant residual cortical renal perfusion . Further, the CT scan confirmed subtotal infarction of the left kidney and marked reduction of IVC diameter . On clinical examination, the patient reported a significantly improved physical capacity (NYHA I). Serum creatinine levels were normal suggesting sufficient compensation by the right kidney with sustained normal diuresis volume.
On three-month follow-up examination the patient presented in a good general condition and reported arterial hypertension, for which she was treated with amlodipine. The Doppler ultrasound detected no residual perfusion of the left kidney and revealed a modest size reduction. Further, a second follow-up echocardiography revealed normal right atrial dimensions as well as normalization of cardiac strain parameters (Supplementary ).