A 66-year-old Japanese man was referred to the orthopedic department of our hospital because of progressive weakness of his legs, difficulty in walking, and frequent falls. He also had bilateral weakness of upper extremities. Myelography performed 3 years before had already revealed severe cervical spinal canal stenosis. His symptoms and signs were considered to be caused by the deterioration of the cervical myelopathy. He was admitted for the surgical treatment of cervical spinal canal stenosis.
He had end-stage renal disease dependent on hemodialysis caused by lupus nephritis for 32 years. He had received laminoplasty of lumbar spine from L2 to L5 8 years before and laminectomy and posterior fixation of lower lumbar spine and sacrum from L4 to S2 2 years before. Seven years before he had also received pacemaker implantation and catheter ablation of atrioventricular node against refractory atrial fibrillation, which had persisted despite multiple catheter ablations of left atrium. Two years before he had received upper gastrointestinal endoscopy for routine screening, which showed ectopic gastric mucosa at cervical esophagus and nonspecific erosive gastritis. These findings looked the same as findings from previous examinations and a biopsy was not performed. His other medical history included peripheral arterial disease, secondary hyperparathyroidism, and hypothyroidism. His other surgical history included coronary artery bypass graft for severe left anterior descending artery stenosis, right total nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma, multiple surgeries for bilateral carpal tunnel syndromes and amyloid arthropathies, and bilateral cataract surgeries. He had no remarkable history of dental and periodontal diseases. His medications were lanthanum carbonate, lansoprazole, warfarin, bisoprolol, cinacalcet, calcitriol, cilostazol, levothyroxine, sennoside, and vitamin E supplementation.
He received laminectomy of cervical spine from C4 to C6 and laminoplasty of C3 and C7 under general anesthesia on admission day 5. During the operation, a tracheal tube and a nasogastric tube were inserted. Cefazolin was administered intravenously as a perioperative prophylaxis. Weakness in his bilateral arms and legs was somewhat improved. However, his postoperative course was complicated with back pain and elevated C-reactive protein. On postoperative day (POD) 10, his back pain deteriorated, and ceftriaxone was administered. His back pain improved, and ceftriaxone was continued for 5 days. He was discharged on POD 34.
After discharge, his back pain gradually increased and he was unable to walk up stairs. He was readmitted to our hospital 12 days after discharge. Tramadol, acetaminophen, and loxoprofen were prescribed in the same manner as before the discharge. On day 4, his back pain worsened further, and a blood test showed white blood cell count of 22,400/μL, with neutrophils 85.5%, lymphocytes 9.5%, monocytes 4.0%, eosinophils 1.0%, and basophils 0.0%, and C-reactive protein 29.52 mg/dL. Computed tomography (CT) without contrast material revealed osteolysis of the lumbar endplates of L2 and L3, swelling of the intervertebral disk of L2/L3, and swelling of the left psoas major muscle , without any finding indicative of surgical site infection of cervical spine. There was no sign of the involvement of the lower lumbar spine instruments. Magnetic resonance imaging was not performed since he had a cardiac pacemaker. Meropenem and vancomycin were initiated.
On day 6, percutaneous drainage of the intervertebral disk of L2/L3 was performed. A Gram stain of the aspirate revealed thin filamentous Gram-positive rods, and an anaerobic culture showed Actinomyces species . Our university laboratory was consulted for further identification, and 16S ribosomal ribonucleic acid (rRNA) gene sequence analysis identified this bacterium as A. israelii. The antibiotics susceptibilities of the strain are shown in Table . Meropenem and vancomycin were de-escalated to intravenously administered ampicillin based on a susceptibility test of A. israelii on day 16.
However, his back pain persisted, and a thin bloody exudate spilled over from his back on day 29. The culture of the exudate did not grow any organism. We thought that the causative organisms of his symptoms and signs were a mixture of oral bacterial flora, which could not be identified because of the antibiotic exposure before the aspiration. Intravenously administered ampicillin-sulbactam was substituted for ampicillin for coverage of beta lactamase-producing bacteria. Thereafter his back pain improved and the exudate diminished. Follow-up CT scans showed gradual reduction of the left psoas abscess . On day 63, ampicillin-sulbactam was switched to orally administered amoxicillin-clavulanate. There was no recurrence of back pain and exudate. Three weeks later, he was transferred to a long-term care hospital, while amoxicillin-clavulanate was continued. He reportedly died of aspiration pneumonia 8 months after the transfer.