A 10-year-old Chinese boy was referred to our Orthodontic Department at Hong Kong University with the chief complaint of delayed eruption of the upper left central incisor. The child was in good health and had no relevant medical history or previous dental trauma. Intra-oral examination showed that he had a mixed dentition, reverse anterior overjet with complete deep bite and clinically missing upper left central incisor .
Radiography showed all the permanent teeth were present and the possibility of root resorption of the upper lateral incisors (12, 22), caused by mesially erupting position canines could not be ruled out .
A cone-beam CT scan was taken to assess the extent of resorption, if any, and to aid in the creation of a suitable treatment plan. The three-dimensional view from the CT scan revealed that the crown of the upper right canine was in close proximity to the upper right lateral incisors. The crown tip of the upper left canine was touching the root of the upper left lateral incisors, causing some root resorption, which was confirmed in the sequential transaxial views of the CT scan .
The treatment objective was to prevent and eliminate any root resorption of the lateral incisors that might be caused by the erupting canines. The treatment plan was extraction of the upper primary first molars and palatal root torque of the lateral incisors by using a specially designed upper fixed lingual appliance .
Because our patient had a reverse overjet and 100% complete overbite, the conventional labial bracket system could not be used. Therefore, a specially designed upper fixed appliance with a torquing spring was constructed to apply torque to the upper lateral incisors from the palatal side. Tip-edge brackets were bonded to the palatal surface of the upper lateral incisors for tying the palatal arch-wire into the teeth.
A 19 × 25 stainless steel (ss) wire was soldered to the fixed palatal arch and extended anteriorly to the palatal surface of the lateral incisors. Two torquing springs were attached to the wire to rest on the palatal surface of the lateral incisors.
The appliance was cemented onto the upper first molars, and fitted anteriorly into the bracket slot and secured in place by using ligature ties through the vertical slot of the bracket. Prior to cementation the torquing spring was activated to apply a palatal root torque to the upper lateral incisors.
Then, three months after the treatment, radiography showed that the lateral incisors were in a more upright position and the upper canines were erupting in a more favorable distal direction away from the root of lateral incisors, and no further resorption was evident . Our patient was further reviewed and a subsequent radiograph showed that the both canines had erupted further down from the roots of the lateral incisors, and there were no signs of root resorption. Later photographs show the successful eruption of both canines.