A 28-year-old healthy male patient was referred by his primary dentist to the Clinic of Operative Dentistry, Periodontology and Preventive Dentistry, Saarland University in Homburg, Germany with apical periodontitis on teeth 36 and 46. Endodontic treatment had already been initiated, but apical osteolysis was increasing on both teeth. Within the last six months, several changes of medication had taken place. The cause of apical periodontitis could not be determined by the primary dentist. The teeth had no fillings or caries, no trauma or accident had occurred, the patient did not have any periodontal problems, and also had no pain. Clinical examination of both teeth revealed an increased tooth mobility and bifurcation at a probing depth of 4 mm. The periodontal screening index was unremarkable, with no signs of periodontal disease. Teeth 36 and 46 each showed a 10 mm pocket, with bleeding on probing the vestibular-central. Furthermore, a slight bulging elastic swelling could be observed in the vestibulum. The percussion test was negative. Clinically and radiologically no anomalies, pulp calcifications, or formation defects of the hard tooth tissue could be detected. No external resorption, root canal or pulp chamber perforation was apparent. During anamnesis, the patient reported that complaints first appeared 1.5 years ago on the right side (tooth 46). The pain was pulling, diffuse, radiating, difficult to localise and, before going to sleep, pulsating. Simultaneous earache and temporomandibular joint pain occurred. The patient described a short period (2 days) of percussion pain, which then disappeared. The percussion test done by the primary dentist was negative and the sensibility test reduced. The patient did not have any pain on release of pressure. The primary dentist was unable to identify an odontogenic cause for the complaints. Referral to an otolaryngologist prescribing an antibiotic (Amoxicillin 1000 mg, 3 times a day for 7 days) without diagnosis followed, resulting in complete remission of the pain. About 1.5 months later, the same pain started again on both teeth (36 and 46). A short period of percussion pain (2 days) occurred and, once again, disappeared. An emergency service dentist took 2 x-rays and gave antibiotics (Clindasaar, 600 mg, 1–1-1), but did not start any treatment, being unable to establish a diagnosis. Remission of pain followed, but 2.5 months later the pain started again. A new x-ray was made by the primary dentist, a diagnosis of apical periodontitis on teeth 36 and 46 was finally established, and endodontic treatment was initiated. At that time, the teeth already appeared avital. When explicitly asked by the attending dentist of the university hospital, the patient confirmed having had a lot of stress during the phase of the pain development due to the completion of his studies, as well as having pressed a lot at night . For a brief period (1.5 years after the first onslaught of pain and 2 weeks before endodontic treatment), he wore a bite splint. However, his primary dentist could not connect the existing bruxism to the patient’s complaints about teeth 36 and 46. The diagnosis of apical periodontitis indicated by occlusal trauma was established by the attending dentist at the university hospital (for a patient history chart please see Additional file ). Before the endodontic procedure, and after informed consent was obtained, the patient was requested to rinse his mouth with 12 ml of 0.1% Chlorhexamed Fluid (GlaxoSmithKline, München, Germany). Infiltration anaesthesia was not necessary. The teeth were isolated under a rubber dam (Flexi Dam, Coltene-Whaledent, Alstätten, Switzerland) and the temporary filling removed by ultrasonic device. Working length was established using an electronic apex locater (Raypex 6, VDW Dental, München, Germany) and reconfirmed with an intraoral periapical radiograph. The root canals were prepared using Reciproc instruments (VDW Dental, München, Germany) in a torque control endodontic motor (VDW Silver, VDW Dental, München, Germany). During instrumentation, bleeding occurred from the distal canals (teeth 36 and 46) and the patient complained of slight pain. The preparation was carried out with a Reciproc red file (0.25 mm tip diameter, 0,08 taper). Root canal irrigation was carried out with 3% sodium hypochlorite (Hedinger, Stuttgart, Germany), with the rinsing needle placed 1 mm from the working length. Calcium hydroxide powder (Ca(OH)2) (Calxyl, Oko Präparate, Dirmstein, Germany) mixed with distilled water was placed as an intracanal medication. The pocket lesions on teeth 36 and 46 were irrigated with 20 ml of 2% of Chlorhexamed Fluid (GlaxoSmithKline, München, Germany). The patient was recalled after 2 weeks for evaluation and did not present with any pain. At the two-week evaluation tooth 36 showed only minimal mobility and tooth 46 none at all. Swelling was no longer detected. The 10 mm pockets on teeth 36 and 46 showed no bleeding on probing. Again, the temporary filling was removed and root canal irrigation with 3% sodium hypochlorite was carried out. During instrumentation, bleeding occurred again from the distal canals, but was reduced (teeth 36 and 46). Calcium hydroxide powder mixed with distilled water was placed once again as an intracanal medication. 4 weeks later, a root canal filling was carried out with gutta-percha (roeko Guttapercha, Coltene-Whaledent, Alstätten, Switzerland; Reciproc Gutta-Percha, VDW Dental, München, Germany) and AH plus (Dentsply Sirona, York, USA) using lateral compaction. After obturation, a radiographic control was performed , showing a clearly reduced apical osteolysis on both teeth. The access cavity was restored with a nano-hybrid composite restorative material (Herculite, Kerr GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Since then, the patient has remained asymptomatic. The patient has reported no further complaints, and was very satisfied with the treatment.
The next radiographic control will be done 1 year after the root canal filling, and the bite splint will be controlled regularly.