A 40-year-old premenopausal Caucasian woman without comorbidities underwent surgical treatment seven years before the presentation of this case report for a clinical diagnosis of uterine myoma. The postoperative histological examination revealed the presence of a LMS and a hysterectomy with lymphadenectomy was thus performed. The tumor was estrogen and progesterone receptor positive. A staging computed tomography scan detected bilateral, multiple lung metastases of about four to six mm. Six years before the presentation of this case report the patient underwent first-line chemotherapy with Adriamycin® (doxorubicin) and ifosfamide but after six cycles of therapy the lung metastases had increased in size and a new lesion had appeared in the abdomen near the right psoas muscle. It was decided to perform a partial resection of the lung metastases (with histological confirmation) and an ovariectomy.
Second-line treatment with sorafenib was begun but was rapidly discontinued because of toxicity and treatment with dacarbazine was started as third-line. After three cycles, progression in the lung metastases was detected and continuous infusion of ifosfamide was administered as fourth-line therapy for the following two months. Then the patient was discharged from a National Oncologic Centre to be treated with palliative care.
When the patient arrived in our Department, further progression in the abdomen and chest caused an inability to walk due to nerve impingement and pain and a fifth-line of treatment was begun with docetaxel and gemcitabine. In these 11 months the patient showed a partial response and regained the ability to walk. Disease stabilization in the following six months was achieved with anastrozole (sixth line) and at the next progression the patient was treated with paclitaxel and liposomal doxorubicin (seventh line) for 19 cycles and then with trabectedin (eighth line) for eight cycles, until May of two years before the presentation of this case report. It is noteworthy that more than four years had passed since the initial diagnosis and the patient continued to feel well (with only right leg pain, and three points on visual analogue scale, VAS). After eight cycles of trabectedin the lung metastases and pelvic lesion increased to three cm and 18cm, respectively, causing bilateral ureteral compression and an increase in leg pain (VAS eight to nine).
In July of two years before the presentation of this case report the patient’s performance status (PS) was two on the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) scale and a bilateral nephrostomy was performed. A ninth-line of treatment was started with temozolomide at a dose of 150mg/m2/day for five days every four weeks. Despite the negative status of O6-methylguanine-deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)-methyltransferase promoter methylation (this kind of test is performed for patients with glioblastoma multiforme to predict response to temozolomide ), a rapid response to therapy was observed with a reduction in the pelvic lesion, resolution of pain and removal of the nephrostomies . The patient returned to her normal life and was able to use her bicycle and to perform activities without leg pain or fatigue (ECOG PS 0) that would previously have been unthinkable. Treatment with temozolomide was completed after 24 months, with very good tolerance, but further progression was detected. The patient recently began a new line of therapy (the tenth) with pazopanib and is currently doing well, six years after the start of treatment.