A 27-year-old male was admitted to our hospital due to elevated IOP of both eyes for nearly 3 months.
There was no relevant ocular or medical history.
The patient was previously diagnosed with myopia, and he was allergic to cefradine. No history of systemic hypertension, diabetes mellitus, coronary heart disease, stroke, smoking or obesity was reported.
There was no remarkable personal and family history.
His myopic refractive error at -3.00 diopter of both eyes was detected. The IOPs without prescription medications at the initial visit in Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center were 28.7 mmHg in the right eye and 31.4 mmHg in the left eye, which was recorded as the peak IOP. Best corrected visual acuity was 1.0 in each eye measured by the standard Snellen chart.
Routine blood examination, liver and kidney function and electrolyte test indicators were normal.
Fundus examination with color photos was accomplished with particular attention paid to make sure that image focus was exactly on the optic disk margins. The result showed vertical cup disc ratio of his right eye was 0.7 and his left eye was 0.8 with localized cupping in both eyes. A localized retinal nerve fiber layer thinning corresponding to the optic disc cupping was detected by Heidelberg Spectralis optical coherence tomography (Heidelberg Engineering, Heidelberg, Germany) in each eye, with an average retinal nerve fiber layer thickness significantly reduced at 69 µm oculus dexter and 67 µm oculus sinister. Visual field defects were detected by Humphrey Visual Field Analyzer (Zeiss Meditech, Jena, Germany) in both eyes with the visual field mean deviation of -6.75 dB oculus dexter and -5.30 dB oculus sinister .
WGS: WGS followed the same protocol as previously reported. The sequencing depth among participants ranged from 54.23X to 60.27X, with the percentage of coverage more than 10X at 91.53% to 92.20%. Mutations identified were analyzed using an autosomal recessive model as well as de novo dominant model. We have excluded mutations with a minor allele frequency more than 0.1% in either the Genome Aggregation Database or the Exome Aggregation Consortium. According to the data from the Human Phenotype Ontology, the names of the reference genes screened are listed in the . The screening criteria for deleterious mutations were based on the American College of Medical Genetics guidelines. In trio-based WGS, the single nucleotide polymorphism in some of the major gene loci that were previously reported to affect JOAG phenotype, such as MYOC and LTBP2[,] as well as de novo dominant mutations were not detected. Importantly, it was found that the proband (II1) had coinherited mutations. The proband has a c.281G>A, p.Arg94His in OLFM2 (NM_058164.3) inherited from his father (I1) and a c.177C>G, p.Ile59Met in SIX6 (NM_007374.2) inherited from his mother (I2), which cosegregates with the phenotype in a recessive pattern . Interestingly, the OLFM2 mutation from the father is also transmitted to another sibling (II2), who is exempt from any glaucoma phenotypes. The OLFM2 mutation (c.281G>A, p.Arg94His) had a minor allele frequency of 0.005% in the Exome Aggregation Consortium and 0.004% in the Genome Aggregation Database, while the specific mutation was classified as deleterious in MutationTaster, mCAP and CADD. The SIX6 mutation (c.177C>G, p.Ile59Met) was absent in the Exome Aggregation Consortium and had a minor allele frequency of 0.0004% in the Genome Aggregation Database, which was classified as deleterious in MutationTaster, Fathmm and mCAP. Importantly, these mutations were found to be highly conserved across various species .
Sanger sequencing: Amplification using PCR followed by Sanger sequencing was used to confirm the identified mutations of OLFM2 and SIX6 in each family member. Sequencing was performed on an ABI 3730xl DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States). The reference genes were obtained from the Ensembl genome browser (in the public domain, ). The primers used for PCR amplification are listed in Table .