The patient was a 51-year old man with CD. He was initially diagnosed with CD at 23 years old. He had undergone ileocecal resection, owing to a stricture of the terminal ileum, at 36 years old, and the residual small intestine was 230 cm long. After the initial operation, he was prescribed 5-aminosalicylic acid and home parenteral nutrition. He did not accept a recommended colonoscopy examination, owing to anal pain.
In August 2008, the patient complained of difficulty in defecation and consulted a physician at our hospital. A colonoscopy examination showed a pedunculated rectal polyp, 4 cm in diameter and an anal stricture due to proctitis. Histological examination of the biopsy from the lesion showed an adenoma; no dysplasia was detected around the polyp. A transanal resection of the polyp was performed for treatment and final diagnosis . The pathological findings revealed that the polyp was an adenoma with well-differentiated adenocarcinoma without lymphatic or vascular invasion with negative margin of cut end, and that no dysplasia or inflammation was present around the polyp; thus, the polyp was diagnosed as a sporadic adenocarcinoma in an adenoma, rather than a colitis-associated adenocarcinoma . Consistent with the results of the biopsy, an endoscopic exploration showed no dysplasia in the rectal mucosa, and immunohistochemistry showed no p53-staining of the crypt base. These findings were not consistent with colitis-associated CRC . In July 2010, follow-up colonoscopy showed a longitudinal ulcer scar from the descending colon to the ascending colon and stenosis of the ileocolic anastomosis. We did not find any apparent lesion in the rectum.
Three years after the second surgery, in August 2011, colonoscopy examination revealed a reddish, elevated lesion in the rectum . This lesion was located at a different site from the initial lesion. A colonoscopic biopsy revealed a signet ring cell carcinoma. We performed an abdominoperineal resection of the rectum and a bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection . Postoperative histological examination showed a mucinous adenocarcinoma with signet ring cell carcinoma and lymph node metastasis . Dysplasia was detected in the rectal mucosa, and the crypt base was immunohistochemically stained with p53. These findings were consistent with colitis-associated CRC .
Postoperatively, the patient received adjuvant chemotherapy with 224 mg oral uracil combined with100 mg tegafur plus leucovorin for 6 months. The patient has continued with regular follow-ups over the last 18 months after the third surgery and over the last 60 months after the second surgery. He has also undergone regular examinations. A regular colonoscopy examination was performed every 6 months, and no relapse of colonic inflammation or dysplasia was detected.