The present case report is of a 32-week- and 4-day-old female fetus through cesarean section at Mahzad Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Urmia, Iran. The mother had a history of miscarriage and a normal delivery at the age of 32. She was also from a family with a good socioeconomic status resided in Urmia city. During this pregnancy, she had regularly visited a gynecologist for receiving health examinations, in which the fetus was shown to be completely healthy on a color Doppler ultrasound. The mother did not mention any particular drug history and also denied a history of substance or alcohol use. However, she mentioned a history of smoking (one cigarette a day for 10 years).
After the onset of labor signs and contractions, the mother went to the hospital and gave birth to a 32-week-and 4-day-old female fetus with a birth weight of 1800 g, height of 42 cm, and head circumference of 32 cm. Vital signs of the infant at birth were as follows: Temperature: 36.7, Heart Rate: 163 bpm, Respiration Rate: 66 bpm, Blood Pressure: 63/24 mmHg, Oxygen Saturation: 98%. The infant's Apgar score was 7 and 8 at birth and 5 min after birth, respectively. Concerning the preterm birth and respiratory distress, the infant was transferred to the NICU and placed in an incubator at an appropriate temperature. On the first day after birth, the infant underwent a chest radiograph, the results of which showed no health problem . After sterile pre-procedural prepping and draping, a trained nurse first inserted the PICC into the basilic vein using a special angiocatheter and directed it into the vein using an angiocatheter guide . Then the catheter (the Arrowg+ard Blue Advance™ PICC made in United States country), was pushed from the catheter insertion site to the middle of the clavicle bone and then to the mid-sternal region. Finally, the catheter was fixed with an IV fixing bandage (sterile disposable cannula catheter fixing IV Non-woven dressing made in China). After the PICC placement, the infant underwent an anterior-posterior chest X-ray again and a neonatologist confirmed the correct placement of the PICC tip in the SVC. In addition, the catheter insertion site was dressed with a sterile transparent dressing based on the medical protocol to make the catheter insertion site visible and timely diagnose local complications. Two hours after the PICC placement, the infant's oxygen saturation decreased and her vital signs changed as follows: Temperature: 36.9, Heart Rate: 199 bpm, Respiration Rate: 76 bpm, Blood Pressure: 60/25 mmHg, Oxygen Saturation: 45%. Despite 8-liter-per-minute oxygen therapy using an oxygen tent, oxygen saturation did not increase so that the patient received Continuous Positive Airway Pressure (CPAP) ventilation with the Fraction of Inspired Oxygen (FiO2) = 80% and the Positive End-Expiratory Pressure = 5 cm H2O. The infant underwent a chest radiograph again, in which the presence of a complete white-out of the right hemithorax indicated pneumothorax and right lung collapse . Moreover, the reduction of right lung sounds indicated a collapse of the right lung, because of which a chest tube (disposable medical closed chest drainage bottle made in china) was immediately placed in this region.