A 20-year-old Japanese woman had a history of cutaneous malignant melanoma on the left supraorbital area. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed no bone and intracranial involvement . Macroscopically, pigmentation was not obvious on the skin covering the cutaneous tumor. Simple resection was carried out to establish the histological diagnosis. The epidermis was left intact for cosmetic reason. Histopathological examination revealed that the tumor was composed of sheet-like proliferation of small round cells which had pleomorphic nuclei and prominent nucleoli . Occasionally, melanin pigment, which was confirmed by Fontana-Masson staining, was found in the tumor cells. Mitotic figures were frequently found (5/10 HPF), but necrotic foci were not detected. Immunohistochemistry revealed that these tumor cells were moderately positive for S100 protein and focally positive for HMB45, but negative for Melan-A and epithelial membrane antigen (EMA) . Details of these cell-specific markers are shown in . MIB1 index was 25.9%. These findings were characteristic of malignant melanoma.
Postoperative gallium scintigraphy scanning did not reveal any recurrence or metastasis. No chemotherapy or radiotherapy was performed, because informed consent could not be obtained. One year later, she was referred to our service because of exophthalmic left eye and diplopia. She had no family history of melanoma or other malignancies. Visual acuities were normal, external eye movement of the left eye was slightly reduced and other neurological findings were normal.
CT scan showed an enhanced mass on the left supraorbital area with bone involvement . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) clearly showed a 3.5 cm × 2.5 cm enhanced mass with marked border to its surrounding brain structures. The mass also caused bone destruction and bulged to subcutaneous tissue . Thus, our preoperative diagnosis was intracranial invasion of melanoma. No other metastatic lesion was found on examination.
Left frontotemporal craniotomy was performed. During the surgery, the tumor was found to be black, soft, easy to bleed and was tightly adhered to the dura. Total resection of the tumor was achieved. No surgery-related complication was found postoperatively. No adjuvant therapy was given to the patient postoperatively. Histology of the intracranial tumor indicated the close proliferation of short spindle tumor cells focally, showing a vague wheel-like formation . Mitotic figures were frequently found (4/10 HPF), but tumor necrosis was absent. Iron staining demonstrated focal hemosiderin deposition in the tumor, suggestive of hemorrhage. Immunohistochemistry of the tumor cells revealed that they were strongly positive for S100 protein and moderately positive for EMA, but negative for HMB45 and Melan-A . MIB1 index was 24.5%. These results established that the intracranial tumor was atypical meningioma.
Postoperative condition was uneventful with normal neurological findings. External eye movement was improved. One year later, the patient was admitted to hospital because of liver metastases of melanoma. Histology showed characteristics of malignant melanoma. She died in the same year.