A 52-year-old male presented with history of headaches and blurring of vision since 1 month and right sided weakness since 2 weeks. Clinical examination revealed normal higher mental functions, vision of 6/12 in both eyes without papilledema being present. Motor examination revealed mild right sided weakness-power 4/5 in both upper and lower limb. There was no prior medical history. The remainder of the physical examination was normal. Computed tomography (CT) scan of brain showed a tumor of size 3.5 × 3.2 × 2.9 cm in the left parieto-occipital region extending up to the trigone . The tumor was isodense and had punctuate calcifications. It appeared to be well defined with perilesional edema. Based on CT brain images, meningioma and choroid plexus tumor were considered as the differential diagnosis before surgery. Preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) brain with contrast imaging could not be done.
A standard left parieto-occipital craniotomy was performed and the tumor was approached transcortically. Tumor was firm in consistency and total excision of the tumor was done. The tumor was gray-reddish in color, margins were well defined and a definitive plane between the tumor and surrounding brain was present. There was no infiltration into the adjacent brain parenchyma and the tumor was moderately vascular. There was no excess bleeding during the surgery. The histopathological examination of the tumor showed varied cellular morphology consisting of uniform oval to polygonal cells with moderate amount of eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in nests, cords, and focally with adenoid configuration. The intervening stroma was fibrous and showed chondromyxoid areas with foci of osseous metaplasia [Figure and ]. Immunohistochemistry: Tumor cells were positive for Pancytokeratin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), Vimentin, and S-100 and were negative for smooth muscle actin (SMA), Calponin, glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), Thyroid transcription factor (TTF), Cytokeratin 7 and 20, P63, and CD99 . The Ki 67 labeling index was 2%. The microscopic findings along with the immunohistochemistry favored a diagnosis of parachordoma. Karyotype analysis of chromosomes did not reveal any abnormality . Whole exome genetic analysis was not done in this patient.
Postoperative course of the patient was uneventful. Since total excision of the tumor was done and the tumor having low proliferative index, no adjuvant therapy was given. Chest X-ray, ultrasound examination of the abdomen and screening MRI of the whole spine done 10 days after surgery did not reveal any abnormality. Follow-up contrast enhanced MRI scan of brain at one year follow-up, showed no recurrence of the tumor with adjacent gliotic changes . A whole-body positron emission tomography (PET) CT scan at one year follow-up did not show any other lesion . On follow-up at 16 months, his examination revealed 4+/5 power on right side and vision 6/12 in both eyes.