A 38-year-old married female housewife by occupation presented with the chief complaint of reddish-raised, fluid-filled, and painful, nonpruritic lesions, along with swelling of the bilateral hand and feet. She started developing reddish-raised lesions over the dorsum of her right hand 3 days ago, which gradually spread to involve the bilateral dorsum of her hand and foot. A few similar lesions also appeared on her upper back and face within 2 days of the onset of hand lesions. She had a history of amoxicillin consumption for a sore throat. She also had a history of taking ayurvedic medication for abdominal pain and bloating on and off, which she took a few days after starting antibiotic medication, and that is when she started developing symptoms. There was no history of fever, cough, burning micturition, or insect bite. She did not provide a history of the application of topical herbal or cosmetic products. There is no history of similar illnesses in the past.
On admission, her general condition was fair [Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 13/15]. She was alert, conscious, cooperative, and well-oriented to time, place, and person. Her vital signs were stable and within normal limits except for low blood pressure (value: 90/60 mmHg). There was no pallor, icterus, lymphadenopathy, edema, dehydration, cyanosis, or clubbing. Her breathing sounds were normal with no added sounds. Her heart sounds S1/S2 were normal with no murmur. A soft tenderness over the left lumbar region was present with no organomegaly. Her higher mental functions, sensations, cranial nerves, and coordination were normal. The tone, power, and reflexes of her upper and lower limbs were normal. The rest of the systemic examination findings were regular. On cutaneous examination findings, there were multiple violaceous bullae over the erythematous base, the largest measuring ~3×4 cm and the smallest ~1×1 cm, with acral distribution mainly over the dorsum of bilateral hands and feet. A few papules and vesicles were scattered over the bilateral forearms, along with few erythematous plaques over the upper back. Her oral and genital mucosa were intact.
Investigations such as serology, urine culture and sensitivity (c/s), pus c/s, swab c/s, urine routine examination (RE), stool routine examination/microscopic examination, hematology, random blood sugar, renal function tests (RFTs), and liver function tests (LFTs) were performed. Hematology showed 13.3 g% hemoglobin with a packed cell volume of 38% and 311 000 platelet count. The total leukocyte count was 1140 cells/μl. The differential leukocyte count showed 80% neutrophils, 13% lymphocytes, 2% eosinophils, 5% monocytes, and nil basophils. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 90 with 2+ C-reactive protein. Urine RE showed trace albumin, 1–2 WBC (white blood cells), packed epithelial cells, and RBC (red blood cells) was nil. Urine c/s showed no growth. Serology was nonreactive. Pus c/s showed sterile pus. Swab c/s revealed Coagulase-negative Staphylococci sensitive to cloxacillin. RFTs showed 3.1 mmol/l urea, 45 μmol/l creatinine, 140 mEq/l sodium, 4 mEq/l potassium, 67 g/l protein, 36 g/l albumin, and total direct bilirubins of 7 and 1 μmol/l respectively. LFTs revealed that AST (aspartate aminotransferase), ALT (alanine aminotransferase), and ALP (alkaline phosphatase) were 13, 16, and 43 U/l, respectively. A diagnosis of BEM was made.
She was treated with ampicillin and cloxacillin, acyclovir and prednisolone. Daily dressing of the lesions was performed. Her lesions gradually started and improved, and she was clinically stable at the time of discharge. She was put on ampicillin and cloxacillin, acyclovir and mupirocin, and called up for follow-up after 2 weeks. The patient was completely well during her follow-up. She did not experience any side effects of the drugs, and the symptoms gradually disappeared.