Patient: A 49-year-old male.
Chief complaints: Epistaxis and pain in the left eye.
Past medical history: Colonic polyps.
Life history: Smoking history: 30 cigarettes/d × 20 y (quit smoking at age 39); Alcohol consumption: 350 ml of beer/d.
Allergy history: Unremarkable.
Family history: Unremarkable.
History of the present illness:
The man developed epistaxis and pain in the left eye starting in December 20XX, and he was seen by a nearby physician in January 20XX + 1. A tumor was noted in the left nasal cavity, and needle aspiration cytology was performed. The tumor was initially diagnosed as class V (round cells suggesting malignant lymphoma), so the man’s previous physician referred him to Otolaryngology on January 18. CT and MRI revealed a mass and bone destruction in the left maxillary sinus, the left ethmoid sinus, the left frontal sinus, and the right frontal sinus. On January 21, the man was referred to Otolaryngology at this Hospital. The left nasal cavity tumor was biopsied . Based on a histopathological examination, the man was diagnosed with an ESFT, and he was referred to Internal Medicine on February 1. Laboratory investigations revealed normal levels of the tumor markers SCC (1.2 ng/ml reference range 0–2.5 U/L), and soluble IL2 receptor (434 U/ml reference range 145–519 U/L) . In this hospital, contrast-enhances MRI and PET/CT reveals a mass invading the left maxillary sinus and the left frontal sinus . A contrast-enhanced nodule in the left ilium was considered as bone metastasis.
Height of 173. 3 cm, weight of 81. 4 kg, body temperature of 36. 8 °C, heart rate of 68 beats/min (regular), blood pressure of 122/65 mmHg, SpO2 of 98% (room air), and alert.
Mild reddening of the left cheek was present. Blepharoptosis of the left eye was present. The left eye was pushed upward and protruded forward. Pupils were 3.0/3.0 mm in size and the pupillary light reflex was absent in the left eye. There were no visual field defects. The eye was in primary position. The left eye was unable to adduct, diplopia was absent, and sensory loss in V1 was present on the left. There was no assymetry of the orbicularis oris. Closing the left eye was difficult. Wrinkling of the forehead was not possible. Dysarthria was absent and a curtain sign was present (the uvula deviated to the right).
Biopsy specimen of tumor tissue revealed a proliferation of undifferentiated round cells that were CD99-positive on immunohistochemistry, so the patient was diagnosed initially with an ESFT . A vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and doxorubicin (VDC) regimen (vincristine at a dose of 1. 5 mg/m2 on day 1, cyclophosphamide at a dose of 1200 mg/m2 on day 1, and doxorubicin at a dose of 75 mg/m2 on day 1, q3w) for ESFT with distant metastasis was started on February 5 . Results of a chromosomal analysis were received during the first course therapy. Instead of revealing chromosome 22 abnormalities as are characteristic of an ESFT, results revealed a translocation involving the long arm of chromosome 15 and the short arm of chromosome 19. Additional immunostaining was positive for anti-NUT antibody positive . Ultimately, the patient was definitively diagnosed with NC. After the conclusion of the first course of therapy, MRI revealed that the tumor had shrunk. Macroscopically, swelling of the left cheek had subsided. A study reported that administering a therapeutic regimen for ESFT prolonged survival in patients with NC , so the same strategy was continued in the current case. In total, 5 courses of therapy were administered, and the primary cancer shrank. PET/CT revealed that abnormal accumulation of contrast agent in bone metastases disappeared , so Otolaryngology was consulted, and the decision was made to perform surgery for local control. Surgery was to be performed for local control after the sixth course of therapy (ADR was left out in light of its cardiotoxicity), but abrupt swelling of the forehead was noted after the conclusion of the sixth course of therapy. The primary cancer was deemed to have progressed. Circumstances required radical excision in the form of resection of the dura mater and skull base reconstruction, but abruptly modifying that surgery would have been difficult. Given the speed of tumor enlargement, radical excision was not indicated. A strategy to treat locally advanced cancer of the head and neck through standard cytoreduction plus radical chemotherapy and radiation therapy (cisplatin at a dose of 100 mg/m2 on day 1, q3w, radiation of 70 Gy/35 Fr) was adopted, and total excision of the left ethmoid sinus+partial excision of the maxillary sinus were performed on June 21. The lesion was removed to the extent possible, but the tumor had invaded the ethmoid sinus, so the tumor remained. Postoperative histopathology also indicated that most of the tumor tissue consisted of viable cells. On June 27, chemotherapy including cisplatin and radiation therapy were started, and the tumor tended to shrink. Starting on about August 1 (with irradiation of about 50 Gy), however, swelling of the left forehead and the right neck was noted. MRI revealed enlargement of the residual lesion and new lymph node metastases. Radiation was discontinued, and various forms of chemotherapy (therapy with ifosfamide/etoposide, therapy with gemcitabine/docetaxel, and pazopanib) were subsequently initiated, but the tumor grew rapidly, and the patient passed away in October 20XX + 1, 9 months after being diagnosed.