A 52-year-old man presented with exertional severe dyspnoea and syncope. He had underwent surgical myectomy 12 years ago. Echocardiography revealed normal left ventricular systolic function; interventricular septum diameter, 25 mm; left ventricular outflow gradient is 75 mmHg at rest, and 105 mmHg at provocation with systolic anterior movement of mitral valve. So we decided to perform ASA. Coronary angiography showed normal LAD and suitable first septal branch for intervention . A temporary pacemaker was placed into right ventricle. Left coronary ostium was engaged with a 6-Fr JL4 guiding catheter and a 0.014-inch floppy guidewire (Asahi Soft) was advanced to distal first septal artery. A 2.5 × 20 mm over-the-wire balloon (OTW) (Milvus, Conic Vascular, Switzerland) was advanced and inflated . The guidewire was removed from the balloon; subsequently, contrast material (nearly 2 ml) was injected into the septal artery from the distal part of the balloon (, Video S3). After echocardiographic and angiographic control, we decided that the first septal artery was supplying the septal segment causing occlusion in the left outflow tract. Two cubic centimetre of 99% ethanol was slowly injected and 10 min later balloon was withdrawn. Then the patient felt severe chest pain; his systolic blood pressure went down quickly and fibrillated. We defibrillated the patient but the rhythm was not achieved; and we started the cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Then the patient was intubated. After cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), the rhythm was achieved total 4 min later cardiac arrest but blood pressure was low. Emergent coronary angiography showed that coronary spasm caused severe occlusion in the LAD segment just after the first septal artery and impaired coronary flow nearly totally in the LAD just after septal artery . At that time, we decided to implant a stent due to the patient's serious condition. A 0.014-inch floppy guidewire was advanced to the distal LAD then 3.5 × 18 mm (Xience Pro, Abbott Vascular, Belgium) drug-eluting stent was advanced to the severe spasm segment without dissection and inflated at a nominal pressure at 10 atm . Then cine angiogram showed us that LAD flow was still nearly TIMI 2 probably due to the vasospasm after stenting . After intervention, we checked coronary balloon for any break because of any probability causing alcohol leakage into the LAD. And again, we controlled cineangiograms for any dissection; there was no coronary dissection image in the angiograms during viewing retrogradely.
Subsequently, the patient was monitored in coronary care unit. His peak CK-MB was 189 ng/mL and troponin I was 26 ng/mL. Left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) gradient decreased to a maximum of 15 mmHg at provocation. We performed control angiography to patient 3 days later of the procedure and LAD flow was TIMI 3 (, Video S8). Complete atrioventricular block occurred 3 days later ASA and became permanent so we implanted a DDD-R implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) 5 days later after ASA. The patient was discharged 5 days later procedure. In his 1-month follow-up, he was asymptomatic and LVOT gradient was 15 mmHg at provocation.