A 78-year-old Caucasian man with a history of myocardial infarction (MI) presented to a peripheral hospital with atypical chest pain and sudden onset of dyspnea one week after an elective inguinal hernia repair. Clinical examination revealed dual heart sounds with no murmurs and reduced air-entry bilaterally. Initial investigations revealed a modest elevation in cardiac enzymes (troponin I 0.8 ng/mL, normal value < 0.01 ng/mL). An electrocardiogram at admission showed sinus rhythm with no evidence of right heart strain or new ischemic changes. His initial chest radiograph showed no clear cause for his symptoms. A computed tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA) excluded a postoperative pulmonary embolism. He was treated empirically for an acute coronary syndrome with a loading dose of aspirin (150 mg) and therapeutic anticoagulation with daily subcutaneous enoxaparin (80 mg).
Although CTPA excluded a pulmonary embolism, it did identify an aneurysm, 4 cm in diameter, extending from the dominant right coronary artery. The artery itself appeared to remain patent. The aneurysm was further demarcated with cardiac computed tomography (CT) , transesophageal echocardiography and coronary angiography .
The echocardiogram revealed a 4 cm aneurysm of his right coronary artery, a dilated left ventricle with severe segmental dysfunction, biatrial enlargement and severe mitral regurgitation . The mechanism of the mitral regurgitation was secondary to ischemia from the acute MI. Although the mitral valve leaflets and subvalvular apparatus appeared relatively normal there were also minor degenerative changes of the mitral valve itself. The coronary angiogram illustrated the aneurysm, whose lumen appeared clear with no evidence of thrombus, in addition to left main disease. It was decided that our patient would undergo coronary artery bypass surgery, with exclusion of the aneurysm and mitral valve annuloplasty.
Median sternotomy was performed with subsequent pericardiotomy. The conduits (left internal mammary artery, left radial artery and right radial artery) were then harvested. After cardiopulmonary bypass was established, and cardioplegia administered, the conduits were grafted in place with the following configuration: left internal mammary artery to the first diagonal branch of his left anterior descending artery; left radial artery to his posterior descending artery; right radial artery to his left anterior descending artery. His left atrium was then opened to expose the mitral valve. Mitral valve annuloplasty was performed using a saddle ring. After testing to show no further mitral regurgitation, his left atrium was closed. Finally the right coronary artery aneurysm was opened and excluded with closure of the coronary ostium within. After mitral valve repair and revascularization, transesophageal echocardiographic assessment determined that the mitral valve was competent with no insufficiency or stenosis. There was no systolic anterior motion or left ventricular outlet tract obstruction from the anterior mitral valve leaflet, and no new regional wall motion abnormalities in the lateral wall or inferoposterior regions to suggest a circumflex artery injury following repair. Following re-establishment and stabilization of our patient's normal circulation and closure of his chest, he was transferred to our intensive care unit. He was discharged to rehabilitation nine days later.