A 57-year-old white man presented to our institution with chief complaints of leg pain and a “rash” on his legs that he believed was a flare of his chronic and recurrent gout. He described severe leg pain, drainage of fluid from his leg wounds , and difficulty walking. He could not recall trauma or injury to his legs. He denied any fever, but complained of some chills. The worsening of the drainage of his leg wound was what prompted him to seek help in an emergency room. His only known past medical history was gout. His social history was significant for at least six alcoholic drinks per day. He denied illicit drug use.
On physical examination, he was awake and oriented to time, place, and self. He was, however, in distress from his leg pain. His vital signs revealed a temperature of 36.6 °C (97.9 °F), heart rate of 90/minute, blood pressure of 172/96 mmHg, and respiratory rate of 16/minute with an oxygen saturation of 100 % on room air. The other remarkable physical findings included a gallop heart rhythm without heart murmurs, and jugular venous distention. There were two large cutaneous ulcerations over both his lower legs. On his right shin, the lesion measured approximately 25×8 cm. The wound on his left ankle was oval in shape and measured 8 cm in diameter . Foul-smelling purulent drainage was noted on his right shin ulcer. Laboratory studies showed a marked leukocytosis of 24,000/mm3. X-rays of his tibia and fibula showed soft tissue edema, but no discreet osseous abnormalities. Blood cultures were drawn on admission due to leukocytosis and the extensive nature of the leg ulcerations. It was followed by empiric therapy with intravenous vancomycin and piperacillin-tazobactam.
During admission, he became febrile with a temperature of 38.5 °C (101.3 °F). A new systolic heart murmur (3/6 intensity) at the cardiac apex was noted on auscultation. Both sets of blood cultures grew P. mendocina. An antibiotic resistance profile was performed by a VITEK® analyzer (bioMérieux, France). The antibiotic susceptibilities of the P. mendocina isolate from our patient are summarized in Table . His antimicrobial therapy was modified to monotherapy with intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam in order to cover both P. mendocina and anaerobes in the leg ulcers due to putrid discharge and odor. On day 3 of hospitalization, a dermatology consult was requested for skin ulcer biopsy and culture to identify the source of P. mendocina septicemia. Two skin punch biopsies of his leg ulcers were obtained. His leg wounds were then debrided and dressed by our plastic surgery team.
Cultures of these skin biopsies grew Stenotrophomonas maltophilia, but failed to isolate P. mendocina which may be secondary to the prior antibiotic therapy. Stenotrophomonas maltophilia was susceptible to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and resistant to ceftazidime. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was added to his antibiotic regimen. Histopathology of his skin biopsy reported nonspecific acanthotic spongiotic parakeratosis with mixed lymphocytes and neutrophil infiltrates. The special stains of the skin tissues were negative for mycobacteria and fungi. The mycobacteria and fungal cultures of the biopsied cutaneous tissues remained negative for 8 weeks. A literature review showed there is an association of P. mendocina septicemia with infective endocarditis. Given a new cardiac murmur, a transesophageal echocardiogram was performed. The echocardiogram demonstrated two small mobile echo-densities (<1 cm) attached to his anterior mitral valve leaflet, suggestive of vegetations, with mild mitral regurgitation . A diagnosis of P. mendocina native mitral valve infective endocarditis was made. Our cardiothoracic surgery team was consulted and recommended medical therapy given the small vegetations with trivial valvular insufficiency. Intravenous piperacillin-tazobactam therapy was continued, and he was discharged to a nursing facility to complete a 6-week course of antibiotic therapy. He returned for a 1-month follow-up and he had clinically improved and was able to ambulate with minimal assistance.