A 54-year-old Japanese man presented to a Department of Internal Medicine with chief complaints of dry mouth and weight loss that he had been experiencing for two months. He had type 1 diabetes mellitus, which was being treated with insulin. Computed tomography (CT) scans showed the presence of bilateral renal and pulmonary masses, and swelling of his pancreatic parenchyma. He was referred to our hospital with suspected bilateral renal cancer, multiple lung metastases and autoimmune pancreatitis. He had bronchial asthma, but no habitual contributory factors. Blood tests revealed high IgG (1775 mg/dL) and IgG4 levels (351 mg/dL). Lactate dehydrogenase and C-reactive protein levels, which are prognostic factors for renal cancer, were normal (162U/L and 0. mg/dL, respectively). No other abnormal values were noted, including urine analysis results. Contrast-enhanced CT scans showed multiple nodular opacities of various sizes with irregular margins in both lung fields. In his abdomen, there were slight poorly enhanced mass lesions (left, 10 × 10 mm; right, 18 × 14 mm) in the upper pole of both kidneys . Magnetic resonance imaging showed a mass in each kidney with a low signal intensity on the T1- and T2-weighted images, and poorly enhanced areas inside each mass. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography were performed, and our patient was diagnosed with autoimmune pancreatitis. The bilateral renal and pulmonary masses were suspected of being multiple lung metastases stemming from bilateral renal cancer, but inflammatory pseudotumors associated with autoimmune pancreatitis could not be ruled out. Based on these findings, a CT-guided biopsy was performed on the right pulmonary mass and right renal mass. Histopathological examination of the biopsy specimens showed extensive fibrous tissue around the glomeruli in his kidney and alveoli in his lung. Infiltration of lymphocytes and plasma cells was also observed. A malignant tumor was considered unlikely because no atypical cells were observed. However, immunohistochemical staining revealed the presence of IgG- and IgG4-positive plasma cells; the number of IgG4-positive plasma cells was 44 cells per high power field (HPF) as shown in Figure . Based on these findings, we diagnosed the tumor as IgG4-related bilateral renal and multiple pulmonary masses.
Following diagnosis, treatment with oral prednisolone (40 mg/day) was initiated. A CT scan performed on the ninth day of treatment showed a reduction in the size of the masses, so the dose was decreased to 30 mg. Subsequent CT scans showed a further reduction in the size of the masses so treatment with prednisolone was tapered. After one month of treatment, contrast-enhanced CT revealed new, small pulmonary lesions, but also demonstrated a general improvement, with a reduction in size of the right renal mass, and disappearance of the left renal mass . Serum IgG levels decreased to values within the normal range after initiation of treatment with prednisolone. Our patient continued receiving 10 mg prednisolone per day to prevent a recurrence, which to date, has not occurred.