A 67-year-old man was admitted to the hospital with a slowly enlarging right cheek mass for 12 years. At first, the mass was about the size of a peanut without any discomfort; the mass grew slowly and began to change in size over 2 mo before he was admitted to our hospital. Over time, the patient felt mild local pain and right cheek discomfort.
The patient had no history of the present illness.
His medical history included a hepatitis B virus infection for 20 years and 30 years of smoking.
His family histories and previous clinical and genetic disease histories were unremarkable.
A solitary, hard mass approximately 10.0 cm × 10.0 cm × 8.0 cm in size at the tail of the right parotid gland was examined, and there were no swollen lymph nodes in the adjacent region.
There were no special laboratory examination results.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scans of the neck and parotid gland demonstrated a heterogeneous echo-textured mass in the right parotid gland measuring 10 cm × 10 cm × 8 cm without pathologic cervical adenopathy. The facial nerve function was intact.
Gross examination of the excised specimen showed a gray-red and gray-white appearance, and a soft-textured, lobulated external surface neoplasm that measured 9 cm × 8 cm × 7 cm was surrounded by relative normal parotid gland tissue. In cross section, the cut surfaces of the neoplasm were multicystic and had a homogeneous scaly appearance, and a small amount of fluid was discovered in the cyst. Microscopically, bilayered oxyphilic, cuboidal or polygonal epithelium cells and lymphoid intraparenchymal components were observed, which are typical WT histological characteristics . Simultaneously, many medium- to large-sized lymphoid cells were observed diffusely in other parts of the neoplasm, and a few secondary lymphoid follicles were observed at the center or edge of the neoplasm . The lymphoid cells had irregular nuclear contours, indistinct nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm with atypia contours and nucleus. At the border of the epithelium, lymphoepithelial lesions were identified . Necrosis was observed locally, and mitoses were approximately 3-4/10 high-power fields.
At the same time, immunohistochemical staining was performed according to the reported literature. Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded sample blocks were cut into 3 μm-thick sections and used for immunohistochemical staining. High-pressure heating was performed for antigen retrieval in 10 mmol citrate buffer (pH 6.0). The primary antibodies were added and incubated overnight at 4 °C or 37 °C for 3 h according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The secondary antibodies were added and incubated on the next day and then visualized with DAB.
Immunohistochemical staining showed that the columnar oncocytic cells were positive for AE1/AE3 and CK18; neoplastic cells located in coarctate follicles were positive for CD20 , Pax-5 , bcl-2 and bcl-6, weakly positive for CD3, CD5 and CD45RO, and negative for CD5, CD21, CD10 , CyclinD1, CD15, CD30, CD1a, ALK, CD4, CD123, CD56, S-100, and human melanoma black 45. The adjacent diffusely medium- to large-sized lymphoid cells were positive for Pax-5, bcl-6, CD20 , MUM-1 , bcl-2, Foxp1, andCD79a and negative for CD5, CD21, CD10, CyclinD1, CD3, and CD45RO. The Ki-67 proliferation index was estimated at approximately 80% .
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis with the dual-color dual fusion MYC (8q24), bcl-2 break-apart rearrangement (18q21), bcl2/IGH fusion translocation t(14; 18), bcl-6 break-apart rearrangement (3q27) and MYC/IGH fusion translocation t(14;18) probes were performed on the tissue mass. The results showed that there were no fusion genes or break-apart rearrangements, except for bcl-6 (3q27) .