A 74-year-old male, with a past medical history of SCA diagnosed 5 years prior to presentation, hypertension, nephrolithiasis, and childhood polio with consequent bilateral lower extremity atrophy, presented to the emergency department with epigastric pain associated with persistent, non-bilious vomiting. Patient mentioned a history of a pancreatic cyst, which he had been told was harmless. A CT scan from 5 years prior to his presentation demonstrated a 10 × 8 cm septated cystic lesion in the head of the pancreas . In the intervening 5 years, no additional diagnostic work-up or surveillance had been performed.
Upon arrival at the emergency department, the patient was tachypneic, but his blood pressure and heart rate were normal. His abdomen was soft, mildly distended, with generalized abdominal tenderness worse in the upper quadrants bilaterally. Laboratory results were significant for a leukocytosis of 17,000/μL, and a hemoglobin of 8.3 g/dL. A CT scan of the abdomen demonstrated a complex, septated cystic mass in the pancreatic head measuring 10 cm, with a new solid component and an adjacent hematoma measuring 14 × 6 cm, with apparent focus of active hemorrhage centrally. The combined mass-effect of the solid/cystic lesion and the associated hematoma led to a severe compression of the duodenum .
Embolization was first considered given the contrast blush seen on CT. However, close interval hemoglobin measurements remained stable and the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for continued observation.
Several factors and the patient’s clinical status were taken into consideration in determining the next steps in management. The large size of the cystic lesion and the new solid component raised concerns for malignant degeneration . Spontaneous hemorrhage from this lesion and the possibility of a recurrent episode in the near future also imposed a sense of urgency. The presence of persistent symptoms from duodenal compression was also concerning. Thus, the combination of the malignant potential, bleeding risk, and duodenal obstruction led to the recommendation for surgical resection.
The patient was taken to the OR by the hepatopancreatobiliary (HPB) surgery team for a Whipple procedure on hospital day 3. Intraoperatively, a large hematoma was found adjacent to the lesion, extending posterolaterally from the second portion of the duodenum compressing the duodenal lumen. There was no evidence of vascular invasion.
Pathology from the specimen demonstrated chronically inflamed pancreatic tissue and three separate neoplasms. A main duct IMPN was seen arising in the background of macrocystic SCA, which measured 13 × 8 cm . The lesion also contained a well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumor (0.4 cm) , which was synaptophysin and chromogranin positive and with Ki67 < 3% . Pathologists also noted the presence of marked secondary inflammatory and degenerative changes, with prominent necrotizing pancreatitis, fat necrosis, hemorrhage, and fibrosis, accompanying all three lesions. 18 lymph nodes were evaluated, all of which were negative for metastatic disease. The distal pancreatic margin was associated with focally exuberant inflammatory and degenerative changes, including ductal dilation and focal pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN 1).
The postoperative course was uneventful. Patient was discharged on postoperative day 11, delayed due to the patient’s need for extensive physical therapy given pre-existing conditions. The patient has since recovered from the procedure and is doing well. Given the absence of invasive carcinoma, no adjuvant therapy was offered. Surveillance imaging is scheduled 6 months postoperatively.