A 65-year-old man with no history of trauma developed a headache and presented to the outpatient neurosurgery clinic. He was referred to our department because of a dissecting cerebral aneurysm in the right M1 segment of the MCA [ and ]. He was alert and fully conscious, and he exhibited no neurological deficits. However, we noted dilation of M1 in and , had a headache and decided to follow-up for a short period of time given the possibility of dissection. Magnetic resonance imaging performed 10 days after headache onset revealed enlargement of the dissecting cerebral aneurysm within a short time [ and ]. T1-weighted black-blood imaging showed a double lumen of the MCA [ and ], suggesting a dissecting aneurysm. Digital subtraction angiography (DSA) performed 13 days after onset showed a 12-mm × 8-mm dissecting cerebral aneurysm in the right M1 segment of the MCA [-]. The dissection was located in the caudal aspect of the MCA and did not involve the LSA; therefore, we planned endovascular treatment.
The endovascular therapy was performed 17 days after onset. Dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin 100 mg and clopidogrel 75 mg) was started 4 days preoperatively. With the patient under general anesthesia, a 9-French (Fr) introducer was placed in the right femoral artery. After systemic heparization, a 9-Fr guiding catheter (Optimo; Tokai Medical Products, Aichi, Japan) was placed in the right common carotid artery, and a 6-Fr distal access catheter (Cerulean DD6 Plus; Medikit, Tokyo, Japan) was placed in the ICA. An ICA angiogram confirmed the increase in the size of the dissecting cerebral aneurysm. A stent delivery microcatheter (Prowler Select Plus; Johnson and Johnson, New Brunswick, NJ, USA) was advanced distally to the dissecting lesion M2 segment, and a coil delivery microcatheter (SL-10; Stryker Neurovascular, Fremont, CA, USA) was then placed in the aneurysm. A 4-mm × 39-mm stent (Enterprise 2 VRD; Codman, Raynham, MA, USA) was deployed from the distal end of the M1 segment to the ICA. Two detachable coils (iED ∞3–5 mm × 20 cm, i-ED ∞3–5 mm × 15 cm; Kaneka Corp., Osaka, Japan) were inserted into the aneurysm [-]. The patient developed no neurological deficits after the procedure.
On the 1st postoperative day, diffusion-weighted imaging revealed sporadic high-intensity signals in the right cerebral hemisphere [ and ]. However, the patient had no neurological deficits. DSA performed 3 days after the procedure showed no in-stent thrombosis and good remodeling of the M1 segment without blood flow into the aneurysm [. On the 11th postoperative day, the patient was discharged home and was able to conduct his daily life without any assistance (modified Rankin scale score of 1). Four months later, DSA showed good patency of the M1 segment with no recurrence of the dissecting aneurysm [ and ].