The patient was a 78-year-old woman who presented with bloody stool. Colonoscopy and computed tomography revealed T3 low rectal cancer without lymph node or distant metastasis. Low anterior resection with conventional DST or a transanal hand-sewn anastomosis was initially planned but would have been difficult to perform because of anal stenosis and fibrosis caused by a Milligan-Morgan hemorrhoidectomy performed 20 years earlier. The patient had never experienced any defecation problems and declined a stoma. Therefore, we planned to insert an anvil into the rectal stump intracorporeally and perform side-to-end anastomosis. However, fixing the anvil using laparoscopic instruments seemed to be difficult, so we used a purse-string suture to fix the anvil with the aid of a da Vinci Xi surgical system (Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA). We did not choose neoadjuvant radiotherapy to avoid exacerbation of anal stenosis due to radiation.
Robotic low anterior resection was performed as in a previous report . The patient was placed right side down in the Trendelenburg position. One 12-mm camera port, three 8-mm robotic ports, and one laparoscopic assistant port were placed. Medial-to-lateral dissection of the sigmoidal mesocolon with high ligation of the inferior mesenteric artery was performed, and the sigmoid colon was separated from the lateral attachment. Total mesorectal excision with a nerve-preserving technique was achieved. After clamping of the rectum distal to the tumor for irrigation with 2.0 L of saline to prevent implantation of exfoliated cancer cells (ECCs), the lower rectum was transected more than 3 cm distal to the tumor using a robotic linear stapler (SureForm 60 Blue, Intuitive Surgical Inc.). After the staple line of the rectal stump was resected, a purse-string suture was hand-sewn robotically using 2-0 PROLENE. The anvil was then inserted into the rectal stump and fixed with robotic assistance . Robotic assistance was very helpful for suturing in the narrow pelvis. Next, more than 10 cm of the sigmoid colon proximal to the tumor was transected extracorporeally. The shaft of the circular stapler (ECS25A; Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, USA) was introduced through the sigmoidal stump and inserted via the umbilical wound. A surgical glove was attached to the wound retractor and the shaft of the circular stapler to maintain pneumoperitoneum . The camera was inserted via another port, after which a side-to-end anastomosis was performed laparoscopically . The sigmoidal stump was resected robotically using a linear stapler to construct a 3-cm blind end . The distance from the anus to the anastomosis was 5 cm. Intraoperative air leak test was negative, and a Penrose drain was inserted into the anus for the prevention of anastomotic leakage. The operating time was 459 min, and the blood loss was 12 mL. Pathological examination revealed pT3, pN0, cM0, and pStage IIA disease and confirmed an R0 resection. The patient was discharged from the hospital with no anastomotic leakage or other complications. Neither recurrence nor problems with defecation including “low anterior resection syndrome” have been noted in the 5 months since surgery.