A 75-year-old man with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis who had been on home oxygen therapy was referred to our department for the treatment of right spontaneous pneumothorax. Chest computed tomography showed cystic lesions in the fissure between the right middle and lower lobes . Chest tube drainage was immediately performed. Although he underwent pleurodesis with autologous blood, moderate air leakage persisted and lung expansion was incomplete . His oxygenation deteriorated due to pneumothorax. Percutaneous oxygen saturation was 96% with an oxygen conserving device, Oxymizer F-224 (CHAD Therapeutics, California, USA), with oxygen at 6 L/min. Non-intubated VATS under local anesthesia was performed 8 days after the onset of pneumothorax. He was placed in the supine position while breathing spontaneously. Oxygen was administered via an HFNC (Optiflow, Fisher & Paykel Healthcare, Auckland, New Zealand) with 60% inspired oxygen at a flow rate of 60 L/min. Fentanyl and midazolam were administered intravenously for analgesia and mild sedation, respectively. After local anesthesia using 1% lidocaine, an air-locking port for single-incision surgery, GelPOINT Mini (Applied Medical, California, USA), was positioned in a 3-cm incision in the fifth intercostal space at the anterior axillary line. Three 10-mm sleeves were attached to the port. The chest tube was not removed, and intrapleural air was continuously suctioned with a negative pressure of 5 cmH2O during the operation. A 5-mm 30-degree rigid video thoracoscope was introduced into the pleural cavity. The adhesive tissue between the middle and lower lobes fluttered up and down as the patient breathed. Dissection of the adhesive tissue revealed a small pore on the cyst in the lower lobe . The saline drip confirmed that air leaked from the pore. The diameter of the pore was below 1 mm. The pore was closed by ligation and covered with a polyglycolic acid sheet and fibrin glue. The operating time was 40 min. Percutaneous oxygen saturation level was 95–96% during surgery with constant flow through the HFNC. Surgical manipulation was not interrupted to wait for oxygenation recovery. The pleural suction pressure was maintained at 5 cmH2O during surgery. The HFNC was withdrawn immediately after closure of the surgical wound. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful. The chest tube was removed on postoperative day 3. After rehabilitation, the patient was discharged on postoperative day 17. Performance status at discharge was 2 according to the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status, which was the same as that before the onset of pneumothorax. Although the patient continues to require oxygen therapy, no recurrence of pneumothorax was observed for 7 months after surgery.