A 65-year-old male with a history of drug-resistant temporal epilepsy for 25 years underwent a right temporal lobectomy. Postoperatively, although the patient was seizure-free (e.g. with the addition of antiepileptic drugs), he developed a left-sided hemiplegia attributed to an infarct of the right internal capsule [documented on computed tomography (CT)]. Within 5 postoperative days, left-sided function began to return, and he was discharged 15 days later without further complications. Nevertheless, he developed a progressive pyramidal syndrome characterized by high-grade spasticity in the left upper and lower extremities that did not respond to anti-spasmodic medications (tizanidine 2 mg/day and baclofen 30 mg/day). He also received botulinic toxin injections at following three sites to treat spasticity: (1) lower extremity, a spastic claw foot with plantar pain; (2) upper extremity, a flexed hand; (3) high grade spastic “winged scapula” . Electromyography clearly demonstrated elevated amplitudes of the muscle units with hyperexcitability of the motor neurons, consistent with spasticity in the muscle groups involved – left posterior neck, forearm, and foot muscles.
Every procedure was indicated after a nerve test block with lidocaine (1%) was considered as positive. The patient ultimately underwent three neurotomies. Aneurotomy of the angle elevator of the scapula muscle was performed . A longitudinal incision of the spinal nerve was performed; ultimately extracting two-thirds of it with a microscalpel.
For the median nerve, each branch was exposed [pronator teres, palmar mayor, palmar minor, and the trunk of the muscular flexors (superficial and profound) of the hand ], and the same neurotomy technique was performed.
For the claw foot/toes spasticity, a tibial posterior neurotomy through a trans-popliteal incision was utilized. The tibial trunk and its immediate branches (soleus, posterior tibial, popliteal nerve) were localized in addition to the flexors of the foot. The superficial and profound common nerves were observed .
All neurotomies were performed on the left side using the same stimulation parameters to differentiate motor from sensitive nerves (5 Hz, 2–3 V with square pulses). The degree of spasticity was monitored intraoperatively, postoperatively, and at the following intervals; 1, 3, 6, 9, and 12 months, and up to 9 years postoperatively depending on the site of the surgery (for the spinal nerve 6 years, for the median nerve 7 years, and for the claw foot/toes 9 years). During this time, the patient's spasticity improved considerably according to the Ashworth and Tardieu scales .