A 57-year-old male patient was transferred to the emergency department after a road traffic accident. He had a fall from his bike and his right arm was crashed by the following car. On clinical examination, he had pain and obvious deformity in the shoulder while he was unable to move his arm in any direction, especially in external rotation. He had numbness in the regimental badge region of the axillary nerve and normal radial pulse at the wrist. Radiological examination showed an anterior shoulder dislocation with impaction of the humeral head underneath glenoid and associated fracture of the greater tuberosity . He had no other skeletal or visceral injuries. After conscious sedation, an effort for closed reduction (3 attempts) was performed in the emergency room but was unsuccessful. For reasons unrelated to the patient or the disease a CT-scan of the shoulder was not possible to be performed at that time. The patient was transferred immediately to the operative theatre for closed manipulation under general anaesthesia in order to reduce the dislocation and avoid further neurological compromise; a CT-scan and/or MRI has been scheduled for the next morning. Despite prompt sedation and muscle relaxation the shoulder was still unable to interpose. Open reduction was accomplished thereafter using the deltopectoral approach; the biceps tendon was found entrapped posterolateral between the humeral head and the tuberosity fragment preventing once again reduction of the glenohumeral joint. . Tenotomy and tenodesis of the frayed biceps at the level of pectoralis major was performed using a bone anchor; the transverse ligament at the bicipital groove had been torned. Next, the subscapularis was incised, 1 cm medial to its insertion at the lesser tubercle, and retracted medially after separated from the capsule. The latter was incised and the labrum was clearly visualized and was found to be intact inferomedially. Using longitudinal traction and finger manipulation in an anterior direction the humeral head was finally reduced revealing a large triangular Hill-Sachs lesion at its posterior part. The greater tuberosity was fixed back to its bed using heavy transosseous sutures . The capsule and subscapularis tendon were repaired anatomically with sutures and the shoulder joint was found stable through a full range of motion of internal rotation and external rotation with the arm in adduction and at 90° of abduction. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery without neurovascular compromise. Pendulum exercises initiated from the second postoperative day followed by passive assisted forward flexion and limitation of active internal rotation for 4 weeks. At the last follow up, one year postoperatively he had a stable joint, full range of motion and a Constant score of 90 .