A 59-year-old Italian man was admitted on July 2006 to the Hepatology Unit of the University Hospital “Campus Bio-Medico” of Rome, for investigations concerning CHB. He had not been vaccinated against HBV, he had no known risk factors for contracting viral hepatitis, and all his households were negative for HBsAg. At the time of admission, the virological tests revealed a genotype D hepatitis B envelope antigen (HBeAg) positive CHB with a high viremia (HBV-DNA), mild elevation of ALT (50 IU/ml) and an unexpected low titer of HBsAb (26 mIU/ml, with a protective value above 100 mIU/ml). Anti-hepatitis D and C virus antibodies were negative.
A serological testing performed three years before was diagnostic for HBeAg negative CHB with moderate elevation of ALT (520 IU/ml), medium-low level of HBV-DNA, and absence of HBsAb, suggesting a subsequent seroreversion from HBeAg-negativity/anti-HBe positivity to HBeAg positivity. Till that time, the patient had neither received antiviral drugs nor indication for repeating virological or liver tests.
A liver biopsy was performed showing moderate necroinflammatory activity and bridging fibrosis (Stage 4/6 according to Ishak’s Score)
. Because the fibrotic evolution, in spite of the genotype D of HBV and the immune-tolerance phase of CHB, antiviral treatment with recombinant IFN-alpha-2b (IntronA®) was began at the dose of 10 MU three times a week. This option was also supported by clinical guidelines at that time, with an expected anti-HBe seroconversion rate of about 37%
. During treatment, the patient was monitored by three-monthly blood tests and clinical visits (in Figure six-monthly blood tests are reported).
After six months of interferon treatment, neither a biochemical response nor a virological response were observed, while HBsAb titer raised to 235 mIU/ml (Figure ). Since consistent data about adefovir dipivoxil (ADV) were already available, the patient was started with ADV (10 mg/day)
. Although, after six months, a partial virological response was observed (decrease in HBV DNA of more than 1 log10/ml), after twelve months, a virological breakthrough was detected (increase in HBV DNA level of more than 1 log10/ml). We were at the beginning of 2007 and the novel carbocyclic analogue of 2' deoxyguanosine Entecavir (ETV) had been just licensed, showing outstanding results
. Moreover, due to the persistence of HBsAb with high viremia, mutations in the HBsAg region were investigated. Conventional sequencing and UDPS of the polymerase (pol) region of HBV to identify the presence of mutations in the HBsAg ORF associated to mutations on the overlapping rt ORF, possibly present in minor components of viral quasispecies, were performed. The methods for UDPS and elaboration of sequence data have been previously described
. Some mutations in both rt and HBsAg ORFs were detected (with frequency varying from 10 to 96%), but none of these are known to be associated with resistance to current HBV-specific NAs or to be involved in immunological escape (Additional file
: Table S1).
Based on these results, ETV (0.5 mg/day) was added to ADV and, three months later, HBV-DNA levels became undetectable. On July 2009, after twelve months of ADV and ETV combination therapy, due to an apparent new virological breakthrough (Figure ), ADV was replaced with the novel nucleotide analogue tenofovir (TDF). After three months of TDF (245 mg/day) plus ETV (0.5 mg/day) combination, virological suppression was achieved. Surprisingly, on January 2011, i.e. six months later, anti-HBe seroconversion and HBsAg loss were observed, while the titer of HBsAb persisted. Anti-HBe seroconversion and HBsAg loss were confirmed after six months, when antiviral agents were discontinued. Unfortunately, the patient died on September 2011 because of a ruptured thoracic aortic aneurysm, so further follow-up visits are not available to verify the sustained off-treatment virological response.