A 79-year-old woman was an ambulatory patient of our institution because of postoperative surveillance for thyroid cancer and sigmoid colon cancer. She had a medical history of hypertension, chronic hepatitis C, and Parkinson’s disease, and a surgical history of subtotal cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis at 69 years of age (this surgery was performed at another institution), total thyroidectomy for thyroid cancer at 69 years of age, and laparoscopic sigmoidectomy for sigmoid colon cancer at 78 years of age. The patient had no other comorbidities, such as diabetes, and she did not have a history of drinking alcohol and smoking. In regard to her activities of daily living, she walked with a cane and traveled middle to long distances using a wheelchair because of Parkinson’s disease. Abdominal ultrasonography (AUS) and contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CECT) were performed 6 months after the sigmoid colon surgery. Images revealed a small nodule in the cystic remnant gallbladder, which was a suspected gallstone or polyp. However, AUS and CECT performed 9 months after the colon surgery revealed an increase in the size of the nodule.
AUS performed 6 months after the colon surgery revealed a highly echoic structure in the cystic remnant gallbladder that was a suspected gallstone . AUS performed 9 months after the colon surgery revealed a 13-mm isoechoic solid lesion in the remnant gallbladder . Preoperative CECT for sigmoid colon cancer revealed a cystic remnant gallbladder without a nodule ; however, CECT performed 6 months after the colon surgery revealed a 5-mm nodule in the remnant gallbladder that was a suspected gallstone or polyp . CECT performed 9 months after the colon surgery revealed a 10-mm enhanced nodule in the remnant gallbladder . According to these temporal changes in the AUS and CECT findings, the lesion was a suspected remnant gallbladder tumor. Therefore, additional investigations were performed.
The patient had no subjective symptoms. Laboratory data indicated a decreased hemoglobin concentration of 10.3 g/dL. The remaining laboratory data, including tumor marker concentrations, were within normal limits. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 10-mm enhanced nodule without evidence of extramural invasion . Diffusion-weighted MRI revealed restricted diffusion of the lesion , and 18-fluoro-2-deoxy-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (FDG-PET/CT) revealed FDG accumulation in the lesion . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography revealed the cystic duct diverging from the left side of the middle bile duct . No findings suspicious for invasion to the bile duct and pancreatobiliary maljunction were observed. Contrast medium did not flow into the remnant gallbladder via the cystic duct. The length of intact cystic duct was approximately 15 mm. Bile cytology did not reveal malignant cells. According to these findings, the lesion was diagnosed as suspicious for remnant gallbladder cancer. Therefore, we performed remnant cholecystectomy, remnant gallbladder bed resection, and regional lymph node dissection .
An upper abdominal midline incision was made. Upper intraabdominal severe adhesions because of the previous surgery for acute cholecystitis were observed, and adhesiolysis was performed. A soft mass without evidence of extramural invasion was palpable at the remnant gallbladder. During lymph node dissection around the hepatic portal region, the hepatic and duodenal side bile duct where the cystic duct diverged was taped. Using these tapes, approximately 20 mm of the cystic duct located behind the bile duct could be safely exposed. The cystic duct was ligated and cut, and the cystic ductal margin was negative on frozen section; therefore, extrahepatic bile duct resection was omitted. Next, remnant cholecystectomy with remnant gallbladder bed resection was performed. Frozen section revealed negative surgical margins. The surgical duration was 202 min and blood loss was 35 g.
The macroscopic findings of the resected specimen revealed a 12-mm yellowish papillary exophytic mass distinct from the adjacent gallbladder mucosa . Microscopically, the tumor consisted of atypical glandular epithelium with mild-to-severe dysplasia with cells arranged in a highly papillary architecture along with fibrovascular stalks . Most tumor cells had biliary morphological features with cuboidal cells showing clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm, enlarged nuclei, and prominent nucleoli . Although the tumor was mostly non-invasive, focal stromal invasion in the muscle layer was observed. Thus, the lesion was diagnosed as ICPN with associated invasive carcinoma. Lymph node metastases were not observed.
Postoperatively, the patient recovered uneventfully and was discharged on postoperative day 10. At the time of this report, 8 months have passed, and the patient has experienced no recurrence.