A 25 year old G2P1001 sub-Saharan African married seamstress at 8 weeks amenorrhea, presented to a primary level hospital in Cameroon with 4 days history of lower abdominal pains and vaginal bleeding. She had no known chronic illness and denied having any past history of pelvic inflammatory disease or assisted reproduction.
She reported being well till 4 days prior to presentation when she started experiencing abdominal pain; the pain was mainly in her lower abdomen, dull in nature, non-radiating, mild in intensity and was initially intermittent then became constant. It was associated with mild per vagina loss of bright red blood. She had no other symptoms. This prompted her to consult at a drug store, where she was prescribed phloroglucinol tablets 80 mg/day in 2 divided doses which she took for 3 days but had no regression of the symptoms. The persistent lower abdominal pain and mild vagina bleeding prompted a second consultation at our health facility. Upon presentation she was haemodynamically stable and vaginal examination was relevant for a closed cervix. A presumptive diagnosis of threatened abortion with possible aetiology of a urinary tract infection was made. Urinalysis showed leucocyturia while obstetric echography revealed an empty gestational sac measuring 29.9 mm. Diagnoses of blighted ovum and urinary tract infection were made. She was given a short course of antibiotics and programmed for manual vacuum aspiration. Vacuum aspiration was done and the patient served a single intramuscular dose of 10 units of oxytocin. The bleeding and lower abdominal pain stopped and she was discharged the next day.
Two weeks following discharge lower abdominal pain reoccurred. This time, the abdominal pain was constant and localized to the left lower quadrant. It was associated with intermittent episodes of bright red vaginal bleeding. These symptoms persisted for 3 days and prompted another consultation.
On arrival she had a good general state. Her blood pressure was 102/64 mmHg, heart rate 88 beats/min, respiratory rate of 20 breaths/min, temperature 37.2 °C, O2 saturation at 97% and weight 58 kg. Her conjunctivae were pink and no scleral icterus, heart sounds were normal and lung fields clear. Her abdomen was flat, moved with respiration and there were no scars. There was no tenderness on superficial palpation but left iliac fossa tenderness on deep palpation. The liver and spleen were not palpable. A speculum examination was unremarkable but for bright red blood oozing out of the cervical os. Vaginal examination revealed a firm closed posterior cervix with left adnexal tenderness on bimanual palpation. The limbs were without particularity.
Based on these findings a tentative diagnosis of an associated ectopic pregnancy was made. A repeat pelvic ultrasound revealed: a homogenous uterus; left adnexal mass measuring 58 mls; pouch of Douglass collection. A repeat positive pregnancy test and sonographic findings confirmed a diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy.
The patient was immediately planned for an emergency exploratory laparotomy indicated for a possible ectopic pregnancy. Preoperative work up included: normal haemoglobin of 11.7 g/dl; normal white cell count of 8100/µl; normal platelet count of 320,000/µl, normal kidney function test (serum creatinine of 0.64 mg/dl and urea of 12.7 mg/dl), glycaemia of 85.9 mg/dl and normal serum electrolytes of: (sodium 134 mmol/l, potassium of 4.17 mmol/l and chloride of 103 mmol/l).
An emergency laparotomy was performed under general anaesthesia. Intra-operative findings revealed unruptured left tubal pregnancy in the ampulla. A left salpingectomy was performed with excision of the unruptured fetus. The right tube was inspected and found to be normal. The abdomen was then closed layer by layer. The patient was monitored in the recovery room for 1 h during which she was haemodynamically stable. She was sent to the ward where close monitoring continued.
Postoperatively, the patient was maintained on nil per os, intravenous infusions of dextrose–saline, intravenous prophylactic antibiotics and analgaesics. Early ambulation was encouraged upon recovery from general anaesthesia. Routine postoperative care in the ward continued and was uneventful. She was discharged on post operation day 7. Evolution thereafter was favourable.