A 33-year-old man was diagnosed with colon cancer after melena and was scheduled to undergo laparoscopic colectomy. His height was 166 cm and his weight was 57 kg. At the age of 17 years, a scaly erythema rash appeared on the front of his lower leg and gradually spread throughout his body. He visited a dermatologist at the age of 19 years and was diagnosed with psoriasis vulgaris. He received topical therapy (He could not remember what drugs were used.) and systemic therapy with betamethasone at 1 mg/day for treatment of psoriasis vulgaris. However, the treatment was discontinued at his discretion several months ago. He has been aware of right knee pain for 3 years, but he had not been diagnosed or treated for joint symptoms. On admission, he had exacerbation of knee pain and was examined by an orthopedist. Preoperative laboratory data showed elevations of C-reactive protein (10.05 mg/dL) and matrix metalloproteinase-3 (1996.5 ng/mL), but there were no other abnormal data including rheumatoid factor. Because he had pain and swelling in his right knee and his rheumatoid factor was negative, he was diagnosed with PsA by the CASPAR (ClASsification criteria for Psoriatic ARthritis) criteria . To meet the CASPAR criteria , a patient must have inflammatory articular disease with ≥ 3 points from the 5 categories. He had 3 points by current psoriasis (2 points) and negative rheumatoid factor (1 point). He was also aware that it had gradually become more difficult to open his mouth in the past a few years. Drinking water was possible with no problem, but he had to eat his food in small portions. However, he did not visit a hospital and his TMJ had not been evaluated by a dentist. Preoperative airway evaluation by an anesthesiologist included multiple difficult airway predictors: limited mouth opening (1.5 transverse fingers), presence of teeth, limited thyromental distance (thyroid incision distance of 4.5 cm), limited neck extension, Mallampati III, limited mandibular elevation (upper lip bite test III degree), and micrognathia .
No premedication was administered. Because of extensive psoriasis lesions on his back, epidural anesthesia was not performed to avoid infection at the puncture site. We considered that mask ventilation might be possible. After oxygenation with oxygen at 6 L/min, rapid induction of general anesthesia was performed using 100 mg propofol and 50 mg rocuronium. Although it was somewhat difficult, mask ventilation was possible by using an oral airway. The mouth opening disorder did not improve after administration of rocuronium. First, we attempted intubation using Pentax Airway Scope® (AWS) (Pentax, Tokyo, Japan) with a thin intlock blade. Although the tip of the intlock blade could be inserted into the oral cavity, it was impossible to insert it up to the glottis because of the limited oral space and the presence of teeth. Next, we attempted oral intubation using a bronchoscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). However, it was impossible even by multiple anesthesiologists because mandibular elevation was difficult and the visual field was poor. As the procedure was repeated, mask ventilation gradually became more difficult, and we were concerned about the risk of becoming “cannot intubate cannot ventilate (CICV).” Therefore, we decided to antagonize the neuromuscular block using 600 mg sugammadex and we awoke him. After confirming his arousal and spontaneous respiration, we succeeded in awake intubation via the nasal cavity using a bronchoscope. We used a cuffed 6.5-mm tracheal tube (Parker Medical, Bridgewater, MA) and inserted it 27 cm from his nose. Because he was given 150 μg of fentanyl and he did not seem to suffer, he did not complain of recall during tracheal intubation. During the airway management, oxygen saturation did not drop below 90%. General anesthesia was maintained with fentanyl, remifentanil, and desflurane. After the operation had been completed, we confirmed that he could follow our instructions and that he had steady spontaneous respiration and adequate neuromuscular block reversal. Then extubation was carefully performed. After extubation, his breathing remained stable and he was able to breathe deeply and cough. There were no breathing or airway-related problems or complications in his postoperative course.