A 30-year-old adult male presented to the trauma ward with a history of accidental fall followed by stampede over his left elbow and had pain, swelling, and deformity over his left elbow region.
On clinical examination, his elbow was in 20° flexed attitude, forearm in supination and a hollow depression present on posterior aspect of forearm , with loss of olecranon prominence. The left upper limb was swollen with blisters over the forearm region . Stretch pain was present; radial pulse was not palpable. There were finger and thumb drop. The dorsiflexion of wrist was possible.
Plain radiography showed anterior dislocation of the elbow . Preoperatively, brachial and ulnar arterial flow was not recordable with Doppler, but monophasic response was present in radial artery.
Closed reduction was done under intravenous sedation in the minor operating room, and the elbow joint was found to be stable post reduction. The reduction maneuver being traction at wrist and counter traction at the arm, mild flexion and posterior displacement of forearm. The postreduction radiograph and computed tomography showed congruent reduction. This was done immediately following closed reduction. As there was severe swelling and the distal vascularity insufficient, an attempt of closed reduction was done before the vascular surgeon assessed the limb vascularity, in the idea to reduce the ischemia time and that the compression of the neurovascular structures by the dislocated bony parts, could be temporarily relieved by closed reduction of the elbow joint before contemplating over open reduction or any vascular procedure.
After reduction, radial pulse was still absent and vascular surgeon assessment revealed clinically absent distal pulses but monophasic flow in radial artery on a hand-held Doppler probe showing no significant improvement in the vascularity of the limb even after closed reduction.
A primary exploration of the brachial artery was planned. Intraoperatively, the brachial artery was found to be lacerated . Long saphenous vein was harvested from the ipsilateral leg and used as a bypass graft at the injured level of brachial artery. The posterior interosseous nerve was found to be intact but with a minimal contusion. In addition, a prophylactic fasciotomy of the forearm was done.
The limb was immobilized in an above elbow slab with 90° flexion and forearm in mid-prone position. Split skin graft was done for the fasciotomy wound 1 week later. Limb was immobilized for 3 weeks and active mobilization started thereafter. At 3 months follow-up, there was complete recovery of wrist and finger movements. The elbow range of movement was from 0° to 100° ( and ).