A 37-year-old male right hand dominant person presented with pain, swelling, and difficulty in performing hand movements of the right hand after punching a wall. The patient presented to us immediately on the day of injury.
There was a diffuse swelling and tenderness over the ulnar aspect of the right hand. Active movements of the ring and little fingers were restricted and associated with severe pain. Radiographs taken at the time of presentation showed a dorsally displaced partial articular fracture of the fourth and fifth metacarpal base shown in . Computed tomography (CT) scan and lateral radiographs were not taken at the time of presentation.
After obtaining informed consent, the patient was taken up for an emergency, closed reduction, and percutaneous Kirshner wire fixation. On a hand table under C-arm guidance, closed reduction of the fracture was attempted. As CT scans were not taken intraoperatively, the fracture was visualized under C-arm in multiple views to ensure, there was no dislocation of the Carpometacarpal (CMC) joints. The fracture was reduced by longitudinal traction of the ring and little finger and applying pressure over the metacarpal shaft followed by slightly extending the wrist and hyper pronating the forearm. There was difficulty in maintaining the reduction as the fracture displaced on releasing the axial traction. A total of three 1.5 mm Kirshner wires were used to stabilize the fractures. Initially, the fourth metacarpal was stabilized by passing a Kirschner wire directed from dorsomedial catching the proximal and distal fragments and the wire was anchored in the hamate with three cortical purchases .
The fifth metacarpal reduction and stabilization was challenging as the reduction was not maintained in a single Kirschner wire and there was soft-tissue interposition making the reduction more difficult. This was an oblique type of fracture hence decided to do a divergent mono lateral Kirschner wire fixation . The entry point was chosen in such a way that they are far apart as possible where they cross the fracture line. A stab incision was made over the dorsoulnar aspect of the fifth metacarpal and an artery forceps was introduced to release the soft tissue then a Kirschner wire was entered as shown in the clinical picture ( and ) from the dorsoulnar aspect of the fifth metacarpal with the trajectory directed toward the capitate and bony resistance was felt throughout the K-wire insertion, ensuring the rotation of the little finger was maintained. The wire was inserted transfixing the shaft and base to the capitate and another Kirschner wire was passed from the dorsoulnar aspect slightly lateral to the first wire in the fifth metacarpal proximal and distal fragment transfixing the capitate shown in ( and ).
The upper limb was put in a below elbow pop slab for 3 weeks. The Kirshner wires were removed at 3 weeks and the splint was maintained for a total of 4 weeks. Following which the rehabilitation was started like active grip strengthening exercises (foam ball pinch, Towel squeeze exercise, finger lift, and stretch exercises) were commenced under supervision. Radiographs were taken at 2 weeks ( and ), 6 weeks (-), and 10th month ( and ) showed no loss of reduction and the fracture was completely healed without any rotational deformity and he was able to perform pain free hand movements ( and ) and his grip strength was completely restored equal to the opposite hand measured by a Jamar dynamometer at 10-month follow-up.