The patient was a 42-year-old man (height, 168 cm; weight, 68 kg).
At the age of 37 years, the patient collided with a utility pole while riding a bicycle and experienced left femoral neck fracture. He underwent an open reduction and internal fixation procedure under general anesthesia, and both the surgery and postoperative course were uneventful. However, he experienced back pain immediately after the surgery. He later gradually began to experience increasingly severe pain in all body muscles, pain in his joints, and discomfort in the laryngopharyngeal area. Despite multiple hospital visits, the cause of his pain remained unknown, and in April 2013, at the age of 39 years, he was diagnosed with fibromyalgia according to the diagnostic criteria of the American College of Rheumatology (Wolfe et al. ) at the outpatient fibromyalgia department of our hospital, which specializes in fibromyalgia treatment. It is sometimes difficult to discriminate fibromyalgia from psychiatry illnesses; however, he was not diagnosed with any psychiatric disorders by the psychiatrist at our hospital. After diagnosis, he received medication (pregabalin 125 mg/day per os, rebamipide 300 mg/day per os, milnacipran hydrochloride 7.5 mg/day per os, and etizolam 0.5 mg/day per os) and underwent rehabilitation. For improved symptomatic relief, he visited the outpatient pain department of our hospital in September 2014, followed by combined treatments at the outpatient fibromyalgia and pain departments of our hospital.
At the first visit to the outpatient pain department, the patient had a Widespread Pain Index and Symptom Severity (WPISS) score (Fitzcharles et al. ) of 23 points (WPI, 15 points; SS, 8 points), and a score of 750 in assessments with PainVision (Nipro Co., Osaka, Japan) (Kato ), a quantitative pain analysis device.
At the first visit to the outpatient pain department, the patient complained of severe pain throughout the body. His answer to the question “Where does it hurt most?” was “The worst discomforts are the abnormal sensation in my laryngopharyngeal area and the back pain.” He experienced very severe back pain in the region from Th3 to Th7. Therefore, he was administered trigger point injections (1 mL of 0.5 % lidocaine at each tender point) at the painful areas on his back. At each visit, approximately ten tender locations were treated. He was administered one set of trigger point injections monthly for 4 months, and each time, the pain subsided for several days after treatment but returned unabated after several days. Five months after his first visit to the outpatient pain department, we explained the methodologies, actions, effects, and complications of stellate ganglion block, thoracolumbar epidural block, and caudal epidural block. He selected caudal epidural block, as it has a low risk of complications such as subarachnoid puncture. He underwent caudal epidural block (3 mL of 0.2 % ropivacaine + 6 mL of saline + 1.65 mg of dexamethasone) for his lumbar pain during an outpatient visit. Immediately following the caudal epidural block, not only his lumbar pain, but also his upper back pain was alleviated for approximately 2 weeks. Therefore, he underwent another caudal epidural block at his own request in the sixth month during an outpatient visit. His back pain and the abnormal sensation in the laryngopharyngeal area were alleviated for approximately 3 weeks after the second block. He continued receiving caudal epidural blocks once a month, and after a total of four blocks, his back pain was alleviated for approximately 3 weeks after the block, and the abnormal sensation in the laryngopharyngeal area almost disappeared. After approximately 3 weeks, the pain returned; however, the intensity was much lower than that at the first visit. On assessing his pain using PainVision (Kato ), we found that his PainVision score of 750 at the first visit reduced to 139 at the ninth month (1 month after the fourth epidural block). Medication was used as an adjunct therapy at the outpatient fibromyalgia clinic. The patient’s mental condition might have contributed to his symptoms associated with fibromyalgia; however, there was no change in his prescription drug regimen and his mental condition during the period presented in this report.