A 38-year-old Caucasian woman presented to our hospital with two months of epigastric abdominal pain associated with bloating. She denied nausea or vomiting, history of acid reflux, constipation, or diarrhea. She had no known trauma. She affirmed complaints of fatigue and decreased appetite but denied fevers, chills, night sweats, or weight loss. She denied a history of liver or blood disorders.
The initial evaluation revealed a jaundiced young woman with abdominal ascites and trace lower-extremity edema. Laboratory studies revealed elevated levels of gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT), total bilirubin, and CA-125. A computed tomography (CT) scan with oral and intravenous contrast of the abdomen and pelvis was performed, demonstrating a heterogeneous appearance of the liver and caudate lobe hypertrophy, ascites, and a cystic mass in the right ovary. The liver abnormalities described were thought to be consistent with diffuse metastatic involvement of the liver, and the ovaries were thought to be a possible primary source. Our patient then underwent laparoscopic oopherectomy and liver biopsy to evaluate for underlying malignancy. No evidence of either ovarian or hepatic malignancy was found, but the liver biopsy revealed fibrous obliteration of the central hepatic veins and patchy areas of sinusoidal dilatation diagnostic of hepatic vein obstruction, or BCS. A triphasic CT scan of the liver with three-dimensional reconstruction confirmed occlusion of the hepatic veins and associated ascites, splenomegaly, and abdominal varices.
Our patient's medical history was notable for one episode of unexplained syncope one year prior and migraine with aura. Medications included warfarin and aspirin. Our patient was married and lived with her husband. She worked as a busy executive, frequently taking international flights. She had never smoked and she drank one or two glasses of wine per week. The only family history of a thrombosis was in a paternal aunt with a deep vein thrombosis in the setting of a long car ride. Our patient had no family history of cancer or other blood disorders.
Laboratory findings revealed a white blood cell count of 3640 K/μL, hemoglobin of 11.1 g/dL, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of 80fL, and a platelet count of 252,000 K/μL. Erythropoietin level was 22 mIU/mL (normal is 4.1 to 19.5), international normalized ratio was 1.4 on warfarin therapy, ammonia 45 Umol/L (10 to 47 Umol/L), total bilirubin 3.1 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 0.6, albumin 3.7 g/dL, and alkaline phosphate 158 IU/L. Alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase were normal. GGT was elevated to 120 U/L (12 to 48 U/L). CA-125 was 55 U/mL (normal is less than 35 U/mL). Liver biopsy results showed central hepatic veins with pericentral fibrosis and mild portal fibrosis and patchy areas of moderate sinusoidal dilatation consistent with chronic BCS.
Our patient was evaluated for a hypercoaguable state, including tests for lupus anticoagulant and anti-phospholipid antibodies, factor V Leiden, and prothombin 20210 mutation. The results of these tests were negative. Levels of anti-thrombin and protein C and S were normal. The result of one test was found from the hypercoaguable workup to be positive: JAK2 V617F mutation with an allele percentage of 36%. Complete blood counts obtained in the five years prior to her diagnosis were notable for thrombocytosis .