An 85 years old female patient was referred to our hospital with complaints of decreased vision, ocular pain, redness, and lacrimation in her right eye. Her complaints had begun 5 days after leech therapy applied for the facial and periocular eczematous dermatitis. While MLT should be performed by a certified physician with sterile medicinal leeches, the application had been performed by one of her relatives at home. She had no history of trauma or ocular surface disorder. She had presented to another hospital for her ocular complaints and moxifloxacin (Vigamox®, Alcon Laboratories, Fort Worth, TX) was commenced before coming to us. She had been referred to our hospital, as there was no improvement in her clinical signs. Institutional Review Board approval was not required for this case report, because according to the national guidelines, the article is exempt from ethical committee approval as it is a case report of a patient previously seen.
The patient’s best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was hand motion in the right, and 0.4 in the left eye. Slit-lamp examination revealed a large corneal epithelial defect sized 8 × 10 mm, with irregular margins, dying by fluorescein and involving more than the inferior half of the cornea in her right eye (shown in Fig. ). Conjunctiva was also hyperemic in the right eye. The left eye’s biomicroscopic examination revealed a nuclear cataract. The patient was hospitalized with the diagnosis of infective keratitis and corneal scrapings were sent for microbiological investigation. Topical fortified vancomycin (Edicin®, Lek Pharmaceutical, Slovenia) and ceftazidime (Fortum®, GlaxoSmithKlein, Italy), cyclopentolate (Sikloplejin®, İdol Drug, İstanbul), cross-linked hyaluronic acid (Visu XL®, VISUfarma, Italy) without preservatives and dexpanthenol (Recugel®, Bausch Lomb, Canada) were commenced. The microbiological investigation did not identify any pathogen as she had been using topical moxifloxacin (Vigamox®, Alcon Laboratories, Fort Worth, TX) for 5 days before applying to us. The size of epithelial defect started to decrease slightly in 4-5 days. Topical loteprednol etabonate (Lotemax®, Bausch Lomb, Canada) was added following epithelial closure. After ceasing the fortified antibiotics, the patient was continued on 0.6% besifloxacin (Besivance®, Bausch & Lomb Incorporated, Tampa, Florida). Complete re-epithelization of the lesion took 3 weeks and the final BCVA was 0.05 in the right eye. Neovascularization and opacity involving more than the inferior half of the cornea were observed at the last examination (shown in Fig. ).