A 34-year-old male patient, university mathematics lecturer, with BMI 21,5 was admitted to the emergency department due to pain located on the surface of the penis that had been ongoing for the last 3–4 days. He did not report fever, infection symptoms, dysuria, or pain in other localization. He denied prior vigorous sexual intercourse last week and took medications from the phosphodiesterase-5 enzyme inhibitors group, prothrombotic drugs, or any other drugs. He classified his smoking status as never-smoker and declined allergies or autoimmune diseases such as Buerger's disease, Behçet's disease, lupus erythematosus, and polyarteritis nodosa. When asked about recent infections, the patient said that a month ago he recovered from an outpatient treated 7-day lasting COVID-19 infection confirmed by the PCR test. He suffered from sore throat, headache located around the frontal and maxillary sinuses, runny nose, cough, general weakness, and denied symptoms such as fever, dyspnea, taste, or smell loss. The disease developed without serious complications; therefore, it can be classified as mild. The patient did not notice any previous episodes of thrombosis in his life. The history of thrombotic, oncological, and autoimmune diseases in the family was negative.
Examination revealed a thick, thick cord that extends from the base to the corona in the course of the superficial dorsal penile vein with signs of skin inflammation, such as a slight swelling erythema. Ultrasound of the penis was performed. It revealed that there was no flow through the vessel in the middle of the superficial dorsal penile vein . Furthermore, the deep dorsal penile vein was invisible without flow in both sections, probably due to the vessel clot above compression. The results of the laboratory tests did not reveal any significant signs of prothrombotic state .
Due to the absence of other symptoms or diagnosis of autoimmune diseases in the patient's life, a negative family history, and no evidence of the presence of antibodies for autoimmune diseases in laboratory tests, Buerger's disease, Behçet's disease, lupus erythematosus, and polyarteritis nodosa were ruled out. In this case, the previous COVID-19 was only a risk factor and could substantially lead to PMD. Knowledge of the topography of the penis vessels by ultrasound allowed us to differentiate the location of the thrombosis in the superficial dorsal penile vein from the thrombosis in the deep superficial penile vein that had been compressed by clots in the vessel above. Based on clinical symptoms, possible risk factors such as SARS-Cov-2 infection, and performed lab tests and ultrasound, the PMD diagnosis was made.
Pharmacological treatment was implemented. The patient received a therapeutic dose of high molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin 1 mg per kilogram body weight twice daily subcutaneously) and analgesics (100 mg diclofenac p.o.) for pain relief. Additionally, 20 g of heparin in cream was applied to the surface of the penis along the widened vein. After 2 days, swelling decreased and the superficial dorsal penile vein area softened, indicating the beginning of clot dissolution and the start of recovery. The patient was sent home with appropriate recommendations, such as continued use of high molecular weight heparin, heparin cream, and analgesics for 4 weeks, preventive instruction to stop sexual activity until symptoms disappeared and to return to the clinic immediately if symptoms worsen or do not improve within the next few days. The control visit was planned in 4 weeks. The patient did not report any complications. He came for a control visit, during which a Doppler ultrasound was performed. It revealed almost complete disintegration of the clots and correct flow through both the superficial and deep penile veins. Flow through other vessels was also not hampered.