A 75-year-old woman presented to the outpatient clinic with complaints of low back pain (visual analog scale [VAS] 8/10) and progressive weakness in both lower limbs – left more than right since 3 weeks. She also had urinary complaints of difficulty initiating micturition and incontinence. On clinical examination, she had axial tenderness in the lumbar spine with paraspinal muscle spasm. On neurological evaluation, the patient had bilateral tibialis anterior power ⅗ and extensor hallucis longus ⅗ with hypoesthesia in the saddle and perineal area. Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral (Lat) roentgenogram (X-rays) of the lumbar spine and pelvis with hips (pelvis and both hips [PBH]) X-ray revealed a sacralized L5 along with loss of height, expansion, and sclerosis of L2 vertebral body with increased interpedicular distance. PBH AP view with femur showed multiple lucencies and sclerosis with cortical thickening involving the right hemipelvis and the left proximal femur (-). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed hypointense signal on T1-weighted and hyperintense signal in the T2 and short tau inversion recovery weighted sagittal films with an enlarged L2 vertebral body and posterior elements. Axial cuts showed enlargement of the L2 body with hypointense signal in T1 and hyperintense signal in T2 in L2 body and posterior elements with severe cauda equina compression. The preservation of intraosseous fat reduced the likelihood of a neoplastic lesion (-). Laboratory investigations showed a tenfold increase in the Serum Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) (1094) IU/L, Normal range: 44 to 147 IU/L) while the rest of the blood parameters including other liver enzymes and tumor markers were within normal limits. These findings were suggestive of a bony abnormality either metabolic or neoplastic for which positron emission tomography computed tomography (PET-CT) was done which revealed cortical thickening and sclerosis in almost entire right iliac bone, left proximal femur, and L2 vertebra with increased FDG activity (-). All these investigations led to a probable diagnosis of a polyostotic Paget’s disease of the bone with severe cauda compression causing the neurological deficit. Since the patient had radicular symptoms, neurodeficit in the form of weakness of ankle dorsiflexion, and bladder involvement surgical intervention was planned. Clinico-radiological diagnosis of polyostotic Paget’s disease was made for which the patient underwent L2 laminectomy, decompression, and transpedicular biopsy from the L2 vertebral body, which was sent for histopathological examination. Intraoperatively blood loss of approximately 300 ml was adequately replenished by crystalloids.
Postoperatively patient had symptomatic improvement with VAS 3/10. Histopathology report revealed woven bone with thick trabeculae, lamellar bone showing mosaic pattern, prominent irregular cement lines, and osteoclastic rimming. Stroma showed hypervascularity with congested blood vessels (-). These features confirmed the diagnosis of PDB. Postoperatively bisphosphonate therapy in the form of alendronate 80 mg daily was given for 6 months. The patient was followed up with serial monitoring of serum ALP levels which showed declining trends. At 1-year follow-up patient symptomatically and neurologically improved with normal power in both lower limbs and serum ALP within normal limits (, ).