Our patient was a 27-year-old Japanese woman, gravida 1 para 0 (G1P0010). Her obstetric history was not significant except for a spontaneous abortion requiring curettage 10 years previously. There was no history of any other pelvic or abdominal surgical intervention.
She was admitted to our hospital with premature rupture of the membranes and had undergone induction of labor at 39 gestational weeks. Two days later, she had an uncomplicated vaginal delivery of a 3244-g male infant with a good Apgar score. However, her placenta was not delivered. We tried manual removal of the placenta, but felt resistance during traction of the umbilical cord. Subsequent Doppler ultrasonography (US) examinations showed a progressive vascular flow to the placental mass in her uterus. We suspected placenta accreta, so we left the whole placenta in her uterus. Fortunately, postpartum bleeding was not severe and the total amount of bleeding was 850mL, even though the umbilical cord was torn during delivery.
We cared for the bleeding and possible infections. At 7 days post-partum, her serum human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) level was 12,656IU/L. Gadolinium-enhanced MRI also indicated deep myometrial invasion by placental tissues, and the whole placenta was strongly enhanced . A general physical examination revealed no abnormalities. Her medical and gynecological histories were unremarkable.
Our patient hoped to preserve her uterus for a future pregnancy so we decided to administer 50mg MTX by intravenous injection after obtaining informed consent relevant to surgical and other treatment strategies. Hematological, hepatic, and renal functions were evaluated and found to be normal before the MTX injections. Our patient experienced no untoward effects following MTX administration, and her vaginal bleeding diminished gradually over four weeks. To avoid intrauterine manipulation with surgical equipment and subsequent infection (that is, diagnostic hysteroscopy), follow-up MRI using an identical technique was performed every four weeks to assess the treatment response. MTX therapy (50mg/week) was administered 13 times. During the course of this therapy, our patient had an intrauterine infection and took three separate course of antibiotics. Complete resolution of the uterine lesion was confirmed by MRI scans . Her serum hCG level was undetectable (<5IU/L) 97 days after the first MTX injection . At 117 days post-partum, she had a labor-like pain every three minutes and delivered the remnant of the placenta with a little bleeding. The vestigial mass weighed 80g (10×6×4cm) and histopathology indicated placental tissue with necrosis. Her menses resumed 181 days after the first MTX injection, and a follow-up hysteroscopy showed no abnormal findings .
Two years later, our patient (G2P1011) became pregnant spontaneously. We did not detect any placental lacunae or clear spaces on transabdominal US, nor did we see any depletion of decidua in her uterus on MRI. She underwent an uncomplicated vaginal delivery of a 3304-g female infant with a good Apgar score. Postpartum bleeding was not active and the total bleeding was 910mL. We did not find any thinning of the posterior uterine muscular layer on transabdominal US, and there was no bleeding with the dislodging of the placenta. The placenta had histopathological features of marginal infarction and chorioamnionitis stage 2 by the Blanc category. Two independent pathologists did not note any deficiency in the decidua.