A 26-year-old Moroccan woman was born of a consanguineous marriage (first degree). One of four siblings, she was diagnosed with XP at the age of 3 months.
The diagnosis of XP was made based on the family history, because the patient had a brother who died at the age of 4 years and a sister who died at the age of 27 years, by metastases of melanomas secondary to XP.
Since childhood, she presented dermatological symptoms, photosensitivity, itching over the face, and hyperpigmentation that progressed with age.
Therefore, erythematous scaly plaques with pigmented macules were seen over the areas exposed to the sun. She never developed neurological manifestations.
The patient was admitted to our service because of bone marrow failure syndrome with anemic symptoms including paleness, vertigo, tachycardia, and exercise dyspnea, as well as hemorrhagic symptoms including gingivorrhages of low abundance and fever for a 1 month.
Physical examination showed that the patient had bad general condition, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) at 1, stable hemodynamically and in terms of respiration, tachycardia at 120 beats/minute, afebrile with ectropion of the right eye and skin lesions including multiple lentigines and papular/ulcerated lesions suggestive of cutaneous malignancies , poor oral condition without gingival hypertrophy, and no adenopathy or organomegaly. Cardiac auscultation and neurological examination were normal.
Complete blood count showed pancytopenia (white blood cell count 2.26 g/L, hemoglobin 4.2 g/dL, and platelets 10 g/L).
Peripheral smear revealed the presence of 70% blast cells.
On bone marrow aspiration, infiltration by 25–30% morphologically undifferentiated blasts was seen with positive myeloperoxidase (MPO) , without any dysplastic features.
Flow cytometry revealed expression of a low CD45 blast population (34%) HLA DR+ CD33+, CD117+, CD13+, CD34+, and lymphoid markers were negative, compatible with the diagnosis of acute myeloblastic leukemia.
Chromosome banding analysis showed a complex karyotype with numerous numerical and structural chromosomal aberrations : initial clone with derivative of chromosome 10, a derivative of chromosome 13, a deletion of (3) (p13?); a first subclone with a trisomy 2 and monosomy 21; a second subclone with monosomy 7; a third hyperdiploid subclone with a deletion of (3) (p13) in double and a clone without abnormalities. Due to lack of resources, fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) studies were not performed.
Viral serologies (viral hepatitis B and C, and HIV) were normal as well as cardiac ultrasound with good ejection fraction.
Due to the adverse risk of the XP association with AML and the profile of AML with complex karyotype and monosomy 7, which constitute factors of poor prognosis, as well as the absence of the studies conceding the tolerance of the chemotherapy by patients suffering from XP, our patient was put under low-dose cytarabine protocol with cytarabine 10 mg/m2/day (d1–d10) and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF): 5 μg/kg/day (d1–d10).
On the tenth day of chemotherapy, the patient exhibited deep pancytopenia with a white blood cell count of 1 g/L, hemoglobin 4 g/dL, and platelets < 10 g/L. On clinical examination, the patient was dyspneic with auscultation of crepitant rales at the level of both lung fields. During the previous 24 hours, she had only received one platelet transfusion since the request for red blood cells was still being processed by the transfusion center of Casablanca.
Chest X-ray revealed diffuse confluent opacity, electrocardiogram indicated supraventricular tachycardia, and echocardiography showed pericardial effusion of low abundance. The patient was placed under water restriction and diuretic bolus; the evolution was marked by the persistence of the dyspnea. A second echocardiography was realized objectifying the exaggeration of the pericardial effusion; an evacuating puncture was indicated, but the situation was aggravated by the occurrence of desaturation when wearing high-concentration mask, hypotension, and cardiorespiratory arrest. The patient died following acute pulmonary edema of cardiogenic pace complicated by tamponade.