A 33-year-old female patient was admitted to our Clinic with severe heart failure. She was referred for the first time 2 years earlier, as an emergency, for atrial flutter, frequency 215/min. An immediate cardioversion was performed, followed by electrophysiology and radiofrequency ablation and anticoagulant therapy with NOACs was introduced for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation (AF).
The young woman is an adult congenital heart disease patient, after surgical correction of TOF at the age of 4 years. She underwent ventricular septal defect (VSD) closure, right ventricle outflow tract resection, and PV repair with a Dacron annular patch. She has regularly been followed by an adult cardiologist without expertise in congenital heart disease.
At her first presentation in our hospital, echocardiographic (ECHO) examination revealed a dilated RV with already reduced systolic function and volume overload, dilated tricuspid annulus, and intermediate tricuspid regurgitation, with no evidence of residual VSD, obstruction of PV and pulmonary hypertension. A significant PR was observed, confirmed by cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, with regurgitation fraction of 41% and diastolic volume of the RV of 233 mL (116 mL/m2), with RV ejection fraction of 48%.
A surgical procedure was proposed. Pulmonary valve prosthesis implantation (SJM Biocor A 25 mm), tricuspid anuloplasty (Edwards MC 3 Tricuspid Ring 34 mm) and patch reconstruction of pulmonary artery (BioIntergral Surgical Patch) was successfully performed. Clinical recovery was fast, and postoperative ECHO indicated good function of biological prosthesis on PV position, and reduction of RV volume.
One year and a half after the surgery, the clinical course was uneventful. The patient was treated by anticoagulation therapy with warfarin 3 months after surgery, followed by rivaroxaban 20 mg daily, for paroxysmal AF.
She arrived again 18 months later, with right heart failure, after a month of progressive effort intolerance. The ECHO revealed again the dilatation of RV, this time with signs of pressure overload, and pulmonary pressure gradient of 110 mmHg . Transoesophageal ECHO (TOE) established an organized thrombus formation on the prosthesis, measuring 25 × 10 mm with an additional floating formation of 8 × 5 mm and a residual valve ‘tunnel’ of ∼8 mm . The findings of electrocardiogram-triggered pulmonary computed tomography (CT) angiography were similar . We did not found thrombophilia, or a mechanical reason for valve thrombosis.
Reoperation was proposed and performed: excision of a thrombosed tissue valve and re-implantation of St. Jude Biocor valve A 25 mm, in pulmonary position. The patient made a good postoperative recovery. A long-term anticoagulation therapy with warfarin was induced. Postoperative ECHO showed reduction of RV volume and an improvement in systolic function. The PV gradient was 25 mmHg. The 9-month follow-up was uneventful.