A 6-year-old neutered female European Shorthair cat with free outdoor access and only
casual contact with other pets was referred for a 1-year history of intermittent
pruritus and fur loss. Prior to referral and because the cat’s coat contained adult
fleas, it had received a systemic ectoparasitic treatment (spinosad [Comfortis;
Elanco]), which mildly improved the pruritus but not the alopecia. The cat had also
received short courses (unknown dosage) of subcutaneous amoxicillin/clavulanic acid
(Duphamox; Zoetis) and oral prednisolone (Dermipred, Boehringer Ingelheim) without
any improvement. The cat was otherwise healthy and was fed a high-quality dry
commercial feed.
Physical examination revealed no abnormalities other than dermatological signs. The
cat presented with generalised alopecia with fur loss and broken hairs . The entire skin
was covered with small whitish adherent scales , which were especially numerous on
the face and muzzle. Follicular casts were observed on the caudal abdomen and
extremities, and were associated with comedones on the ventral abdomen. The owners
reported only mild licking which, after the dermatological examination, was not
considered to be the sole cause of the alopecia.
The differential diagnoses included sebaceous adenitis, epitheliotropic T-cell
lymphoma, dermatophytosis, demodicosis, exfoliative dermatitis associated or not
with thymoma, drug reaction, feline immunodeficiency virus- or feline leukaemia
virus-associated dermatosis, and Malassezia yeasts and/or bacterial
overgrowth.
The complete biochemistry panel and blood count did not reveal any abnormalities, and
the cat tested negative for both retroviruses. Trichograms, skin scrapings and
brushing product examination and fungal culture were negative. Skin cytology using
coloured tape stripping did not reveal any signs of microorganism overgrowth and
thoracic radiographs did not show any evidence of thymus neoplasia.
Multiple biopsies were obtained from the skin lesions under general anaesthesia for
histological examination. Samples were processed, cut into 4 µm sections and stained
with haematoxylin and eosin following standard procedures. Histological examination
revealed a diffusely acanthotic epidermis with orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis. A
rich, mainly lymphocytic, infiltrate at the dermo-epidermal junction, including the
follicular wall ,
was observed. This infiltrate appeared to be more dense around the isthmus region of
the hair follicles and was associated with hydropic degeneration of the basal
keratinocytes (,). No
sebaceous glands were observed. Occasional apoptotic bodies were observed in the
different epidermal layers. CD3 immunostaining revealed that the lymphocytes were
mainly T-type cells .
The cat was treated with ciclosporin A (CsA) at a dosage of 6.75 mg/kg every 24 h
(Atopica 25 mg, one capsule per day; Elanco). A marked improvement was observed 3
weeks after beginning the treatment. The pruritus had ceased, the adherent scales
had disappeared and fur regrowth was evident. CsA administration was reduced to 2/3
days at the same dosage (2 days on, 1 day off). Five weeks later, the cat was still
improving and presented a thick coat with no follicular casts or comedones. The only
region that remained mildly alopecic was the dorsal aspect of the tail base at the
level of the supracaudal gland. CsA administration was reduced to once every 2 days
and then to twice a week, 1 month later . Four months after the initial
consultation, the owner reported a very good general condition and normal skin
aspect. However, close dermatological examination revealed the presence of some
follicular casts, comedones and scales on the back. Administration was increased to
once every 2 days, again with remission of the dermatological signs. Three months
later, the cat was anaesthetised for unrelated reasons, and skin biopsies were taken
from a previously affected skin region. Histological examination showed resolution
of the hyperkeratosis and only very mild focal perivascular lymphoplasmacytic
dermatitis .
Sebaceous glands were present and presented no signs of inflammatory infiltrate
. Haematology
and biochemistry blood panel were performed 6 and 24 months after starting CsA
treatment and were within normal limits.