In 2002, a 54 year old man presented with mild heart-burn. Incidental "hepatomegaly" was found on examination accompanied by a slightly elevated bilirubin but otherwise normal liver function. A computerized tomography (CT) scan reported a well defined cyst arising from the right lower pole of the liver, measuring 14 × 12 × 10 cm . Hydatid was excluded and the cyst was thought to be simple and benign, due to the absence of calcification. It was decided to treat this conservatively and the patient was discharged.
Four years later, he re-presented with a 5-month history of intermittent dull right sided abdominal pain and a right sided palpable abdominal mass was palpated. Liver function tests revealed a bilirubin of 29 but no other abnormalities. His α-feto-protein was 3 and CA 19.9 was 22129.
The repeat CT scan concurred with the previous scan, reporting a large benign cyst, with a maximum diameter of 16 cm. Figure demonstrates the CT with the cyst, and the marker is the measure of the maximum diameter. Endoscopic ultrasound demonstrated a frond-like mucosal prominence within the cyst wall lining.
At laparotomy, the cyst was found to be retroperitoneal lateral to the right psoas muscle, displacing the pancreas and duodenum medially, the liver superiorly and the right kidney and ureter inferiorly. It did not appear to be arising from any particular organ. An attempt at complete excision was successful but there was some spillage of viscous cyst fluid. The abdominal cavity was thoroughly lavaged with water, followed by saline.
Histology reported an invasive mucinous cystadenocarcinoma with clear circumferential margins and due to the nature of stratified columnar epithelium and high CA 19.9, it was considered to be of pancreatic or biliary origin.
This conclusion was not entirely satisfactory due to the lack of specificity of CA 19-9 as a mucinous tumour marker. Also, the CT scans and operative findings were reviewed retrospectively and it was confirmed that the cyst was not involved with the pancreatic or biliary tree. It was thus concluded that this was adenocarcinomatous change within an enterogenous cyst as there was smooth muscle lining the walls with cytokeratins CK20 and CK7 both positive, suggesting a fore-gut origin. Figure is a picture of the histological slide. Also, there was clear carcinomatous change in a plaque within the cyst wall with no penetration from the outer lining described, suggesting no external origin of the malignancy. The patient was to be given Fluoropyrimidine and oxaliplatin following recovery from surgery.
With such a rare condition there is no evidence base for the role of adjuvant chemotherapy. A discussion was had with the patient regarding the possible benefits and risks of adjuvant chemotherapy. In view of the immunohistochemical findings the use of a regimen containing a fluoropyrimidine and oxaliplatin was recommended. Within 3 weeks of surgical excision, the patient developed back pain radiating down the right lower limb. He also had an intermittent fever. He was admitted to hospital and commenced on intravenous antibiotic therapy with a working diagnosis of an infected psoas abscess. However, serial blood cultures grew no organisms. A CT scan demonstrated multiple lesions in the right psoas muscle . Two sequential CT guided fine needle aspirations of these lesions were performed and both revealed cellular appearances suspicious of metastatic adenocarcinoma. The immunohistochemical profile performed on these aspirates was not conclusive. Consequently a laparotomy and open biopsy of these lesions was performed. Unfortunately, multiple peritoneal deposits were apparent at laparotomy. The biopsy demonstrated metastatic adenocarcinoma similar to the original enterogenous cyst with the same differential cytokeratin profile. The Ki67 proliferation fraction was over 80%. His performance status deteriorated greatly, thus preventing the administration of palliative chemotherapy. He died of metastatic disease, 6 weeks following resection of the cyst.