A 26-year-old, pregnant, Caucasian female presented with hoarseness. Laryngoscopy demonstrated left vocal cord paralysis. After successful delivery of her baby via caesarian section, computed tomography (CT) revealed a mediastinal mass further characterized by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) as 2.2 × 1.9 cm, abutting the left common carotid and subclavian arteries just superior to the aortopulmonary window. Positron emission tomography (PET) demonstrated a maximum standardized uptake value (SUV) of 11.8 without evidence of metastatic disease. She underwent left anterior thoracotomy to resect the mediastinal mass with negative margins.
Pathology revealed a malignant neoplasm composed of cells arranged in nests with abundant mitoses, including some with clear or vacuolated cytoplasm. Immunostains were positivity for S100, synaptophysin, SOX10, and MITF. Cytogenetics revealed a complex abnormal karyotype including t(12;22)(q13;q12) and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) demonstrated an EWSR1 gene rearrangement, collectively diagnostic of CCS.
She received adjuvant radiotherapy to the post-operative bed and regional mediastinal lymph nodes to 50 Gy in 25 fractions. Three months later, she reported rapid onset of tender enlarging masses in the left breast, and core biopsy revealed recurrent CCS. Genomic profiling with a 405 gene panel (Foundation Medicine, Inc., Cambridge, MA) demonstrated an EWSR1–ATF1 fusion characteristic of CCS; a frameshift mutation of ARID1A, a tumor suppressor gene frequently mutated in desmoplastic melanoma; and a low estimated tumor mutation burden of 2 mutations per megabase. MRI demonstrated a surgically unresectable left chest wall mass 6.7 × 2.6 cm extending into the left breast and two enhancing subcutaneous nodules just inferior to the left breast. PET/CT scan demonstrated hypermetabolic activity in these lesions with SUV max of 9.5 and no additional metastases .
Given the poor response of CCS to chemotherapy and its similarities to melanoma, immune checkpoint blockade was considered a reasonable treatment approach. Radiation therapy was proposed as an adjunctive local treatment with the goal of synergistically activating the patient’s immune system. The patient’s prior radiation, targeting the upper mediastinum, had minimal overlap with her current extent of disease. Pembrolizumab was administered at the standard dose of 2 mg/kg every 3 weeks beginning 1 week before radiotherapy. She received 50 Gy in 25 fractions to the entire left breast and involved chest wall with a 16 Gy boost in 8 fractions to the pretreatment extent of disease. Physical examination on day 10 of radiation treatment demonstrated an excellent response with a left breast index lesion decreasing from 5 to 1 cm, and a subcutaneous nodule decreasing from 1.5 to 0.5 cm. On day 18 of radiation there was no residual malignancy evident by physical exam. A re-simulation CT scan during week 5 of radiation, performed for a cone down boost to residual gross disease, revealed no evidence of residual disease. She tolerated treatment well with mild arthralgias, grade 1 esophagitis and grade 2 skin toxicity only. PET/CT 1 month after completion of radiation showed no clear evidence of malignancy, including resolution of all masses and only minimal residual hypermetabolism with SUV max of 3.0, consistent with treatment-related inflammation . At the time of this report, the patient was continuing pembrolizumab having received 6 doses without significant toxicity and remained disease-free after a complete radiographic response to the combination of pembrolizumab and radiation.