A 59-year-old male sustained an open right supra-intercondylar fracture of the distal femur with extensive comminution after an accident car . After 3 days, the patient underwent an open reduction and internal fixation of the fracture with irrigation and debridement at another hospital . Post-operatively the patient underwent assisted continuous passive motion and muscular strengthening for 6 months (4 h per day). Weight bearing was allowed 3 months after surgery.
Seven months postoperatively the patient was able to walk with crutches and a knee brace with intensive knee pain. Range of motion of the knee (extension/flexion) was 0-40°. Radiographs of the right knee showed a delayed union of the right supra-intercondylar distal femoral fracture. The patient underwent a knee arthroscopy to perform a release of the adhesions and to gain range of motion. Post-operatively the patient underwent assisted continuous passive motion and muscular strengthening for a 5-month period. Weight bearing was allowed the day after the procedure. Range of motion after 5 months of exhausting physiotherapy was 0-60 ° (extension/flexion).
Despite of continuous physiotherapy, at 2 year follow up, the patient was not able to walk without crutches and knee brace, and he had intensive knee pain.
Radiographs of the right knee showed a non complete union of the right supra-intercondylar distal femoral fracture and a varus deformity of the femur . The patient underwent a labeled leukocyte imaging showing increased uptake in correspondence of the distal femur. Laboratory tests were normal. The infected non-union was classified in type A1 according to Jain AK et al. .
The patient underwent hardware removal and bone allograft implantation. Samples for microorganism cultures were obtained at surgery from surgical wound, non-union fibrous tissue, curetted bone and canal marrow cavity, but no pathogens were identified. Culture was performed also on the bone allograft, but no pathogens were identified. After surgery, the patient started antibiotic therapy for the management of the suspected osteomyelitis with teicoplanin 800 mg/die i.v. and levofloxacin 750 mg/die per os.
24 h postoperatively, the patient developed emphysema of the right lower limb. A CT scan showed the subcutaneous emphysema of the leg , with extension to the toes . The patient underwent exploration and debridement of the surgical wound, and multiple fasciotomies. Samples from surgical wound and soft tissues for microorganism cultures were obtained at surgery, but no pathogens were identified. Post-operatively a VAC (vacuum-assisted closure) system was applied. The patient underwent maximum dosage of broad spectrum antibiotic therapy for 14 days, consisting of ampicillin 18 g/die i.v., clindamicin 2.4 g/die i.v. and teicoplanin 800 mg/die i.v. Because increased values of the hepatic enzymes were observed after 3 days, teicoplanin was substituted with vancomycin 2 g/ die i.v.. The patient had complete resolution of subcutaneous emphysema of the leg in the postoperative period. 14 days postoperatively the VAC system was removed, and surgical wounds were closed.
The patient underwent a progressive rehabilitation programme. Weight bearing was allowed since the first day after removal of the VAC. The patient started again a continuous passive motion for 4 months post-operatively. The range of motion was 0°-60°. The patient underwent antibiotic therapy with levofloxacin 500 mg/die and rifampicin 900 mg/die for 3 months.
At 4 year follow-up, the patient underwent radiographs and a labeled leukocyte imaging showing absence of uptake in correspondence of the distal femur. The patient’s limb was saved.