A 65 year old white male presented with signs of increasingly severe dysphagia of four months duration. He stated that foods become impacted in his throat shortly after eating, with resultant vomiting and regurgitation. This is worse with solids as opposed to liquids and resulted in the loss of 10–15 pounds over the last several months. He noted these symptoms only in association with meals and not with any changes in position. The patient denied having odynophagia, chest pain, abdominal pain, or constitutional symptoms. He was transferred from an outside hospital with an additional diagnosis of aspiration pneumonia, his third episode in recent months. The patient's past medical history was significant for small cell carcinoma of the right lung, treated with 4 cycles Cisplatin, Etoposide and radiation therapy in 2004 and 2005, and GERD. His list of medications included moxifloxacin, omeprazole, simvastatin, loratadine, and albuterol and flunisolide inhalers. The patient also had a 60 pack year history of smoking.
On admission, the patient's vital signs were a temperature of 97.8, a pulse of 98, a respiratory rate of 16, a blood pressure of 90/50, and 95% hemoglobin saturation on 3 L of oxygen. Physical examination was completely unremarkable, with a non-tender, non-swollen neck, an intact gag reflex, and no epigastric tenderness. Laboratory data revealed an elevated WBC of 12.07 k/cmm with an increased ANC of 10.54 k/cmm and 87.3% bands, a decreased hemoglobin of 10.9 g/dL and a hematocrit of 33.4%. The patient's calcium was slightly lowered at 8.1 mg/dL. Urine specific gravity was 1.006. Other labs were within normal limits. An MBS was performed which was nondiagnostic. Chest x-ray revealed a left apical mass-like consolidation with a mild perihilar infiltrate. Although these findings could simply be due to the patient's pneumonia, the history of dysphagia and weight loss prompted further investigation with a CT scan. While no malignancy was detected, there was evidence of chronic aspiration pneumonitis. The patient was placed on ceftriaxone (1 gm IV) and azithromycin (500 mg IV) and was switched to PO Augmentin at 875 mg/day after 3 days on improvement of his pulmonary symptoms. Because it was known that esophageal dysfunction predisposes patients to repeated episodes of aspiration pneumonia, an EGD was performed for further workup. The EGD demonstrated a tortuous esophagus with pooling of secretions. There was mild increased resistance of LES on passage of the scope. This stricture did not appear inflammatory or malignant and was located adjacent to the area previously irradiated four years ago during treatment for the patient's small cell lung carcinoma.