A 36-year-old Caucasian woman presented to her primary care physician's office to receive a DTaP-IP booster vaccination (diphtheria and tetanus toxoids and acellular pertussis adsorbed and inactivated poliovirus). Her physical examination and medical history were unremarkable. In the past, she received all recommended vaccinations in accordance with the national immunization schedule developed by the German “Ständige Impfkommission”. The patient was a non-smoker and did not receive any regular medication. Vital parameters were normal and the woman denied any signs of infection. She received the vaccination (“Boostrix Polio”, AC39B145AA, Glaxo Smith Kline, manufactured in Rixensart, Belgium) and was discharged home shortly after.
A few hours later, the woman developed chills, malaise and discomfort. Moreover, she also suffered from agonizing myalgias.
At first, she did not consult a medical professional, but symptoms gradually worsened and 4 days later, she presented again to her doctor’s office after noticing red stains in her mouth and after experiencing epistaxis. The patient denied any signs of blood in urine or stools.
Medical examination revealed multiple oral petechiae (1–2 mm in size) and ecchymoses (approximately 1–2 cm in diameter) as well as multiple flat, non-palpable petechiae on both legs (particularly at the front of both shins). Vital parameters were within the normal range, however, after measuring blood pressure multiple new petechiae appeared on the right arm. Examination of the lungs revealed normal resonance and vesicular breath sounds bilaterally. Heart sounds were normal, without pathological murmurs. Examination of the abdomen revealed the anterior wall to be soft and flat. Bowel sounds were normal and there was no tenderness or palpable mass. Finally, there were no focal neurological deficits.
With signs for severe hemorrhage, the patient was immediately referred to a local hospital with an established hematology unit. Laboratory findings demonstrated severe thrombocytopenia (1000 platelets per microliter of blood; normal range 140,000–440,000/µl) and a normal hemoglobin count (13.4 g/dl; normal range, 11.7–15.7 g/dl). Pseudothrombocytopenia was ruled out using a sodium citrate tube.
Table shows other laboratory hematological parameters that were obtained on admission. The standard biochemistry profile and other laboratory parameters may be obtained from Table .
An electrocardiogram revealed a regular heart rhythm at a rate of 97 beats per minute. Abdominal sonography revealed ascites and a slightly enlarged spleen (12 × 3.5 cm). There were no signs of liver cirrhosis or portal hypertension.
The patient also underwent bone marrow aspiration . Bone marrow cytology displayed lymphocytes, granulocytes and erythrocytes in normal quantity and morphology. However, megakaryocyte count was significantly elevated with 6–7 /field of view at tenfold magnification (normal range 1–2 megakaryocytes) . Bone marrow immunophenotyping revealed no evidence of lymphoma or significant blast population. Peripheral blood smear showed peripheral depletion of platelets.
Additional blood tests revealed non-elevated antinuclear antibodies (ANA titer < 1:80) and a negative HIV-screening. Furthermore, laboratory tests for Hepatitis B virus, Hepatitis C virus, Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and parvovirus B19 were negative. Screening for HIT (heparin-induced thrombocytopenia) antibodies (targeting the complex of platelet factor 4 and heparin) was negative, as well. Serum vitamin B12 levels and folate were within normal range (Additional file ).
The patient was diagnosed with immune thrombocytopenia and received oral corticosteroids (dexamethasone, 40 mg p.o. daily) in accordance with the 2019 international consensus report on the management of immune thrombocytopenia . As shown in Fig. , platelets initially remained low, although dexamethasone (40 mg) was given for 4 days.
Within the next 2 days, the patient developed hematuria. On day 2, she also reported melena and abdominal discomfort. Hemoglobin values dropped from baseline (13.4 g/dl) to 9.1 g/dl and 7.1 g/dl on the third and fourth day, respectively.
Despite a critically low hemoglobin count (5.1 g/dl) in the evening on day 4, the patient refused endoscopy. In light of the substantial clinical bleeding tendency and the low platelet count, the patient was given additional intravenous immunoglobulins (0.5 g/kg per day, see Fig. ). Furthermore, several platelet concentrates and erythrocyte concentrates were administered.
Under a therapy regimen that included both oral corticosteroids and intravenous immunoglobulins, platelets finally increased on day 5 . Subsequently, the therapy was changed to prednisolone (p.o., 100 mg daily) on day 5 from admission. Intravenous immunoglobulins were given for 5 days in total. Platelet count increased gradually and the patient was discharged after another 4 days. The patient recovered well without any sequelae.