A 57-year-old woman presented to us in May 2023 for having difficulty in passing stools. She had undergone laparoscopic rectal cancer surgery 16 months ago (January 2022) and had started facing difficulty defecating 4 months after the surgery.
The patient had undergone laparoscopic radical rectum resection (Dixon) for rectal cancer at a local hospital 16 months ago and had recovered well after surgery. This patient did not undergo chemo-radio therapy before or after surgery. However, she started facing difficulties in defecation 1 year ago (May 2022). As a result, a colonoscopy was performed on her at a local hospital, which indicated stenosis of the rectal anastomosis. She underwent endoscopic balloon dilation treatment six times for the condition. However, the results were not satisfactory. For further treatment, the patient was admitted to the Magnetic Surgery Clinic of the First Affiliated Hospital of Xi’an Jiaotong University.
The patient had no history of acute or chronic infectious diseases, heart disease, hypertension or diabetes, or surgery other than laparoscopic radical rectum resection.
The patient did not have any relevant family medical history.
The patient’s vital signs were stable, with no obvious abnormalities in the physical examination of both her lungs and heart. Her abdomen was flat and soft, with no abdominal tenderness. Shifting dullness in the abdomen was negative, and bowel sounds were also normal.
The patient’s hematology results were normal.
After admission to our hospital, the patient underwent further colonoscopy. The result indicated that the rectal anastomosis was severely narrowed (5 cm) from the anus. In addition, no obvious lumen was observed. Hence, an attempt was made to insert a 14 Fr nasogastric tube through the anus to pass through the stenosis. Colography was performed by injecting approximately 100 mL of iohexol through the nasogastric tube. The results showed that the stenosis of the rectum was 0.4 mm in diameter and 1 cm in length .