An 82-year-old man complained of a gradual increase in his abdominal girth over the past two years and of abdominal distension and intermittent nausea for the past six months. He was admitted to the hospital for repeated intractable hiccups having lasted two months. The patient had a history of intestinal necrosis due to an intestinal obstruction 25 years earlier and of occlusion of the inferior vena cava filter and left common iliac vein stent placement due to left common venous thrombosis five years earlier. Physical examination showed the patient was of average build with a thin, anemic appearance, and his vital signs were stable. Cardiopulmonary examination produced normal results. An abdominal examination revealed a longitudinal surgical scar in the middle of the upper abdomen. The swelling of the mass was evident on the left side of the abdomen . Palpation showed the abdomen to be soft but not tender, and bowel sounds were normal. Ultrasonography and computerized tomography (CT) showed the presence of a massive hypoechoic lesion occupying almost the entire abdomen. This lesion exerted pressure on the stomach, liver, pancreas, and spleen. There was a high-density shadow visible about 1.5 cm from the middle pole of the medial edge of the mass (, ). An isotope kidney scan showed poor kidney function and only 5% normal renal function in the left kidney.
After administration of two units of homologous red blood cells, the patient underwent what was initially laparoscopy and then open simple nephrectomy. Adhesion between the kidney and surrounding organs was evident during the procedure. About 7.5 liters of hydronephrosis fluid were drained. The left kidney and upper ureter were successfully removed . The patient was diagnosed with GH caused by obstruction from a kidney stone at the junction of the ureter and renal pelvis, accompanied by renal cell transitional cell carcinoma (T2N0M0) . The patient's intractable hiccup symptoms disappeared, and his condition and appetite recovered after the operation. During the six-month follow-up, the patient did not experience hiccups.