An 82-year-old woman, affected by hypertension and with a history of previous right occipital ischaemic stroke, developed acute left-leg mild weakness starting 24 hours before the admission to the emergency ward. CT-Angiography (CTA) of intra- and extracranial cerebral arteries showed subocclusive stenosis (99%) of the right internal carotid artery (ICA) . Brain MRI showed rosary-like watershed infarcts involving the junction between middle cerebral artery (MCA) and anterior cerebral artery (ACA) cortical territories . The patient was referred for right CEA within two weeks after the event . Neurological examination performed the day before surgery was normal. Right CEA was performed without recognized complications. On postoperative day four, she developed severe headache non-responsive to intravenous Paracetamol. On examination, she presented elevated blood pressure (200/100 mmHg) which required treatment with Furosemide iv.
Afterward, she presented clonic jerks of her left arm and leg followed by focal to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures . Lorazepam 4 mg iv was administered which successfully terminated the seizures. The following day, she was found non-responsive, with impaired awareness and inability to perform simple motor tasks. On neurological examination, complete left hemiplegia was noted. A CT scan of the head revealed massive cerebral edema of the right hemisphere with a 5 mm midline shift . The EEG showed diffuse background slowing and subcontinous, periodic lateralized epileptiform discharges (PLDs), with a frequency >3,5 Hz, over the right hemisphere, configuring an electroclinical diagnosis of NCSE . Despite intravenous treatment with Phenytoin 300mg/day, Lacosamide 400mg/day, Levetiracetam 2000mg/day and antiedemigen therapy with Mannitol, NCSE persistent for over 24h configuring a state of refractory status epilepticus. A therapeutic switch from Levetiracetam to BRV 200mg/day administered via NGT was tried, which ultimately resulted in the resolution of the NCSE and improved neurological status over the next 5 days.