A 33-year old Caucasian woman was diagnosed with adenocarcinoma of the right breast in 1976 following the discovery of a breast lump. She underwent a right-sided mastectomy without adjuvant therapy. Two years later at age 35, back pain prompted a bone scan which revealed a 'hot spot' in the region of the lumbar spine. This was thought to represent spinal metastases and the patient received local radiotherapy. After counselling for risk-reducing surgery, the patient chose to undergo a bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, but declined a proposed hysterectomy.
There was a strong family history of breast disease with both her mother and maternal grandmother diagnosed with breast cancer at 34 years and 41 years, respectively. There were no other known cancers in her family. In 2004, aged 62 years, the patient underwent genetic testing, which uncovered a BRCA1 mutation (185delAG). A prophylactic left-sided mastectomy was subsequently performed.
Aged 64 years, the patient presented complaining of change in bowel habit, faecal leakage, urgency and left-sided abdominal discomfort. Examination revealed a tender, palpable fullness in the left iliac fossa. Initial routine blood tests showed haemoglobin of 11.7 g/dl with a normal mean cell volume and no abnormalities of electrolytes, liver or kidney function. Tumour markers revealed carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 3 ug/L and CA125 3 Ku/L (both within normal limits). At colonoscopy, a necrotic lesion was seen in the proximal sigmoid colon. Biopsies confirmed a very poorly differentiated papillary adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid, the immunoprofile of which favoured ovarian origin rather than colonic; being highly positive to CK7, while negative to CK20 . In addition, there was some faint staining for ER but PR staining was negative. A staging CT scan excluded macroscopic metastases and reported a large bowel-related mass measuring 68 mm by 67 mm, contiguous with the left lateral aspect of the bladder with no associated pathological lymphadenopathy. The radiological appearance suggested a malignancy of colonic origin.
Laparotomy findings included a bulky tumour adherent to the left pelvic brim and pelvic side-wall, as well as two separate peritoneal deposits, one within the pelvis and one at the terminal ileum. There was no further pathology noted. The patient underwent an en bloc resection of sigmoid colon, bladder, omentum, left pelvic side wall and uterus. The histology of the surgical specimens revealed peritoneal nodules of poorly differentiated papillary adenocarcinoma , a normal atrophic uterus with no evidence of tumour nor Fallopian tube remnants, and a poorly differentiated papillary adenocarcinoma of the large bowel which penetrated the bowel wall and had invaded adherent bladder . There was associated extramural venous invasion but no metastatic lymph nodes (total of 3 found). When the specimens were reviewed in a multidisciplinary setting, incorporating colorectal surgeons and gynaecologists, it was concluded that they represented a primary peritoneal carcinoma of high grade. A post-operative CA125 titre performed within 2 weeks of the operation was 3 Ku/L and subsequent titres over the following 4 months were between 3 and 4 Ku/L. She is currently receiving chemotherapy treatment.