The patient was an 82-year-old woman who had a history of non-ruptured brain aneurysm, mitral valve regurgitation, which was replaced with a biological valve, atrial fibrillation (Af), and right cerebellar infarction. Her son found her lying unconscious by her bed in the morning and called an ambulance. Her Glasgow Coma Scale score was 3 on arrival at the emergency department of our hospital. Her vital signs showed a blood pressure of 139/85 mmHg, heart rate of 100 b.p.m., body temperature of 36.4°C, and respiratory rate of 30 breaths/min. Her oxygen saturation was 85% on receiving 10 L/min and assisted ventilation with a bag valve mask. Her pupils were 2 mm in diameter, equally rounded, and reactive to light bilaterally. There was a subcutaneous hemorrhage in her forehead. Breathing sounds were clear bilaterally and systolic murmur was heard at the apex. Even though her right arm was warm, her left arm and both feet were cold. Pulses of the right carotid artery and right radial artery were normal, but pulses of the left radial artery and bilateral femoral arteries were weak. Muscle tonus was weak in all of the extremities. The patient's prescribed medications included warfarin 2.5 mg, aspirin 100 mg, spironolactone 25 mg, tolvaptan 7.5 mg, furosemide 80 mg, rabeprazole 10 mg, and iron sulfate 105 mg.
An electrocardiogram carried out on arrival showed Af, an inverted T wave in V1 to V3, an abnormal Q wave in V1 to V4, and ST elevation in V3 and V4 . A chest X-ray showed prominent cardiomegaly, pulmonary congestion, and dilation of the upper mediastinum. Cardiac ultrasound, performed by an ultrasound technician, showed decreased wall contraction in the anterior wall, septum, and apex. Color Doppler ultrasound imaging did not detect blood flow in the abdominal aorta.
Laboratory data showed the following: creatine kinase (CK), 133 IU/L; CK-MB, 17 IU/L; aspartate aminotransferase, 37 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 19 IU/L; blood urea nitrogen, 37.3 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.93 mg/dL; sodium, 141 mEq/L; potassium, 5.1 mEq/L; chloride, 109 mEq/L; glucose, 145 mg/dL; troponin I, 0.65 ng/mL; brain natriuretic peptide, 291.8 pg/mL; and prothrombin international normalized ratio, 1.29.
We undertook head computed tomography (CT) to rule out intracranial hemorrhage, but there were no abnormalities, besides a previous right cerebellar infarction. Therefore, we performed contrast CT to examine dissection of the aorta. Contrast CT did not show dissection of the aorta, but we found emboli in bilateral common carotid arteries, the left subclavian artery, the celiac artery, and the distal abdominal aorta. Poor contrast in the left ventricle, spleen, and both kidneys was also observed. Some clots were recognized in the left atrium . Brain magnetic resonance imaging was carried out and showed a diffuse high-intensity area . This finding suggested acute ischemic stroke in almost all of the patient's brain.
The patient's prognosis was so poor that cerebrovascular catheter intervention or any other embolectomy could not be undertaken. Intravenous heparin was given, but she died within 24 h.