A 60-year-old woman was found to have abnormal shadows near both pulmonary apices on routine chest radiography at a local hospital. Chest computed tomography (CT) showed multiple nodules in her right cervical neck and bilateral chest cavity tops. The findings were diagnosed as multiple neurogenic tumors, and the patient was placed under observation. The thoracic masses grew slowly over 9 years, and she was referred to our hospital for resection.
The patient had no cutaneous lesions, and her family history was negative for neurofibromatosis. Chest radiography revealed abnormal shadows near both pulmonary apices . CT showed multiple well-defined masses of up to 3.5 cm in bilateral chest cavity tops. The thoracic masses were located in a row and contacted the 1st to 5th ribs and vertebral body . Magnetic resonance imaging revealed multiple well circumscribed T2-weighted hyperintense and T1-weghted isointense masses in her neck and bilateral chest cavity tops. F18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed abnormal FDG uptake in the tumors, with a maximum standardized uptake value of 3.15 . These imaging findings suggested multiple neurogenic tumors. Because of worry about the malignant potential of the masses and expansion of the masses into intervertebral foramina, we proceeded with surgical resection of the thoracic masses for therapeutic diagnosis.
Since this case had multiple tumors and it was unclear whether safe and complete resection was possible, we decided to perform surgery from one side first. A two-stage resection was performed starting on the left, followed 8 months later by resection on the right to reduce the risk of the development of Horner syndrome after surgery. Bilateral tumors were removed completely via video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). A 3-port approach was used as follows: incisions for 12-mm ports were made in the 7th intercostal space at the middle axillary line, and in the 4th intercostal space at the anterior and posterior axillary lines . On the patient’s left side there were 3 soft and well-defined capsuled tumors extending from the 1st to 5th intercostal spaces . One tumor arose from the sympathetic trunk and the others from intercostal nerves. The intercostal nerves associated with the tumors were dissected, and the sympathetic trunk was preserved by enucleating the tumor. The tumor capsule was thickened and the dissection was relatively easy. The masses were completely resected without involving the spinal cord . On the patient’s right side, there were 3 similar tumors arising from the intercostal nerves in the 1st to 2th intercostal space , and complete resection was obtained . The resected tumors had an elastic consistency, and the cut surface appeared as a homogeneous yellowish-white tissue . The histopathological diagnosis of the tumors was neurofibroma with spindle-shaped cells and narrow nuclei without atypia . Immunohistochemical analysis revealed S-100 protein expression by the tumor cells . The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, without development of postoperative Horner syndrome. She has remained free of recurrence of thoracic lesions and symptoms for 3 years after the first surgery.