A 66-year-old man presented with continuous fever with the highest temperature of 38.6°C and left upper abdominal pain for 1 month. The laboratory examination showed a progressive decrease of blood platelets, with a minimum of 32 × 109/L. Ultrasound examination showed splenomegaly and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in bilateral supraclavicular regions, bilateral axillas, and bilateral groins. Contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed massive splenomegaly with an abnormal signal lesion in the spleen (–), and multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the hepatic hilum and around the pancreas. Combining the patient’s progressive thrombocytopenia and massive splenomegaly, hypersplenism was considered, and splenectomy was performed subsequently. Hematoxylin and eosin (HE)-stained specimens of the splenic lesion revealed diffuse distribution of small to medium monomorphic round cells with moderate cytoplasm and inconspicuous nucleoli, and the result of immunohistochemistry (IHC) showed CD56 (++), CD123 (+), CD4 (++), CD43 (++), which was consistent with BPDCN involving the spleen (–).
Further physical examination revealed a brown rash on the patient’s left cheek , and 18F-FDG PET/CT was performed for evaluating the systemic involvement of BPDCN. The patient fasted for at least 6 h before PET/CT examination, and his blood sugar concentration on the day of examination was 6.2 mmol/L. PET/CT (Philips Gemini GXL, Philips Medical Systems, United States) scan was performed 60 min after the intravenous administration of 18F-FDG (3.7 MBq/kg body weight, provided by Atom high-tech Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). Image acquisition began with CT for attenuation correction and anatomical reference, using a standardized protocol with a tube voltage of 120 kV, a tube current of 100 mA/s, and a matrix of 512 × 512. Then PET scan was performed with a matrix of 144 × 144, 1.5 min per bed position, 8 bed positions. Pulmonary breath-holding CT was carried out with a tube voltage of 120 kV, a tube current of 100 mA/s. All images were reconstructed by Fusion Viewer software in the Extended Brilliance Workstation (EBW, Philips Medical Systems, United States).
The images revealed slightly skin thickening in the left cheek with mild 18F-FDG avidity with maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) of 1.1 (–), diffuse uptake in the bone marrow with SUVmax of 4.0, and multiple metabolic enlarged lymph nodes with SUVmax of 4.2 (–). The SUVmax of liver and blood pool was 3.3 and 2.1, respectively. The pathological findings of the left cheek rash, bone marrow, and cervical lymph node were all consistent with BPDCN.
Subsequently, the patient received chemotherapy with one cycle of VDLP (vincristine, daunorubicin, L-asparaginase and prednisone) and three cycles of CHOPE (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone, and etoposide). Follow-up ultrasound showed that the previously enlarged lymph nodes disappeared, and bone marrow biopsy showed no abnormal cells. For maintaining a sustained remission, the patient underwent allogeneic HSCT and immunosuppressive therapy.
Four months after HSCT, the patient developed intermittent fever with the highest temperature of 39.0°C. The EBV-DNA both in serum and lymphocytes was gradually increased. All these clues leaded the clinicians to the suspicion of PTLD, but more evidences were required to exclude the acute infection, graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), graft rejection or malignancy relapse. Hence, the patient was referred to a second 18F-FDG PET/CT examination. On the examination day, the patient’s fasting blood sugar concentration was 7.5 mmol/L. The images showed multiple new 18F-FDG-avid enlarged lymph nodes in the chest and abdomen with SUVmax of 13.9, while the previous hypermetabolic lesions all disappeared . The SUVmax of liver and blood pool was 4.1 and 2.7, respectively.
Based on the 18F-FDG PET/CT results, a core needle biopsy was performed on the 18F-FDG-avid mesenteric lymph node. The HE result showed diffuse medium-large cell infiltration with nuclear irregularity, and the IHC results showed CD20 (+++), CD3 (−), CD56 (−), CD10 (−), Bcl-6 (−), MUM1 (+), Bcl-2 (80%+), CD123 (−), with EBV-positive in the in-situ hybridization for EBV-encoded RNA . The pathology of the mesenteric lymph node proved a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, indicating the diagnosis of monomorphic PTLD.
Then the immunosuppressive medications were stopped and two cycles of Rituximab were given. One month after the treatment, the EBV DNA in the patient’s serum and lymphocytes was undetectable. The follow-up CT showed the lesions disappeared completely, characterized as complete response.