A 32-year-old Chinese man presented to the department of stomatology with a 2-month history of gingival swelling and pain on his upper right posterior tooth.
Symptoms began 2 months prior to the visit with a swollen gingiva on the upper right posterior tooth that continued to worsen and become painful, interfering with eating and bleeding badly from brushing.
The patient denied to take antiepileptic drugs and cyclosporine. The patient has no history of hypertension, cardiovascular disease, denied a history of diabetes mellitus, epilepsy, and other systemic diseases. The patient was born with a grape-colored discoloration on the right side of the face, which gradually increased with growth and development and remained essentially unchanged in adulthood . The patient denied surgery, trauma, blood transfusions, and a history of tetanus allergy.
The patient denied any family history of gingival enlargement.
On physical examination, the vital signs were as follows: Body temperature, 36.4°C; blood pressure, 113/71 mm Hg; heart rate, 79 beats per min; respiratory rate, 17 breaths per min. The patient’s face was symmetrical with no obvious defective deformity. The patient had flaky skin erythema on the right side of the face, irregular, well-defined, up to the forehead, down to the upper edge of the red lip, out to the front of the ear, and in to the nose, with thickening and no tenderness. There were no enlarged lymph nodes in the neck and submandibular region bilaterally. The patient’s aperture and opening pattern were normal, there was no popping and pain in the temporomandibular joints, and the mobility of the condyles on both sides was normal, with no compression pain. The teeth 13 to 17 buccal palatal gingival papillae showed bulbous enlargement, gingival papillae enlargement to about 10*3*5 mm3, soft texture, dark red color, spreading to attached gingiva, membranous gingival coalition, and covering 2/3 to all of the buccal and palatal surfaces of the teeth. The teeth 45 to 47 buccal lateral gingival papillae are bulbous with gingival papillae enlargement to about 5*3*4 mm3, loose texture, bright red color, spreading to the attached gingiva and covering about 1/3 of the buccal surfaces of the teeth . The probing depth is about 5 to 10 mm, and the looseness of teeth 12 to 22, 31 to 42, and 45 is I degree .
No abnormality was found in routine blood, coagulation and liver and renal function tests.
A panoramic photograph of the patient at the time of the initial consultation showed horizontal resorption of the alveolar bone throughout the mouth, with the alveolar bone of teeth 31, 36, 41, and 46 resorbing up to 1/3 of the length of the roots .