A previously healthy, premenarchal 12 year-old female presented to a local emergency department with altered mental status in the morning. She was back to baseline upon arrival except for recall deficit. Her initial point-of-care plasma glucose was 44 mg/dL. Serum glucose was confirmed low at 49 mg/dL. Family denied history of any hypoglycemic symptoms, except for occasional sluggishness in the morning. She had no signs/symptoms of infection and there were no medications in the home that could cause hypoglycemia. Family history was also negative for hypoglycemia or seizures. We recommended 24-h observation with frequent plasma glucose monitoring and additional laboratory evaluation. She continued to have hypoglycemia by point-of-care testing, requiring dextrose containing IV fluids overnight. Despite the fluids, AM plasma glucose was 58 mg/dL. Her 8 am cortisol was 2.2 mcg/dL, ACTH 30 pg/mL. TSH was normal at 2.169 mIU/mL, no free T4 resulted. Infectious workup and toxicology screen were negative, including oral hypoglycemic agents. Given the persistent hypoglycemia after 24 h and non-reassuring morning cortisol, we recommended transfer for additional evaluation.
Her initial physical exam was normal (height 144.5 cm, 17th percentile for age; weight 39.5 kg, 38th percentile for age), visual fields intact, no signs of hyperpigmentation, Tanner II breasts (B2) with Tanner I pubic hair (PH1). Review of growth charts from her pediatrician did not demonstrate much change in height percentiles, growing around the 25th percentile for the last few years. ACTH stimulation test revealed cortisol of 1.3, 12, and 14.9 mcg/dL pre-, 30- and 60-min post-cosyntropin, respectively. Other pituitary hormones demonstrated a low free T4 of 0.5 ng/dL, normal FSH and LH and elevated prolactin level of 842.2 ng/mL . Brain and pituitary MRI showed a 2.0 × 1.5 × 1.9 cm enhancing mass expanding the sella turcica . She was initiated on hydrocortisone 6 mg/m2/day, increased to 12 mg/m2/day secondary to persistent hypoglycemia, levothyroxine 50 mcg daily, and cabergoline 0.25 mg twice weekly. Family was instructed on glucometer usage and advised to monitor blood sugars every morning and for concerning symptoms.
After discharge, she continued to have fasting hypoglycemia. Review of additional critical labs from the referral institution demonstrated an insulin level of 13.6 uIU/mL when serum glucose was 52 mg/dL. Two days after discharge, a second set of fasting critical labs were repeated at a local laboratory and were remarkable for an inappropriately elevated insulin concentration in the setting of hypoglycemia. When serum glucose was 48 mg/dL, insulin level was 11.1 uIU/mL, c-peptide was 2.7 ng/mL (normal range 1.1–4.4), proinsulin was 18.1 pmol/L (normal range 0–10), beta-hydroxybutyrate was 0.6 mg/dL (normal range 0.2–2.8), and urine was negative for ketones. Other pertinent labs included normal calcium levels, ranging from 9.2–9.3 mg/dL. Additional clinical interventions were recommended, including continuous glucose monitor, small frequent meals, cornstarch, and glucagon for emergency use. Imaging studies were pursued to localize the suspected insulinoma. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of abdomen and pelvis with contrast was negative for any lesion or lymph node enlargement . Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) identified a circumscribed 12 × 11 mm hypoechoic mass in the pancreatic body/tail . Immunostaining of a fine needle aspirate of the suspicious lesion was positive for chromogranin, synaptophysin, and insulinoma-associated-1 gene (INSM1) with 2–3% Ki-67 proliferation, confirming low-grade insulinoma . Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen was pursued for additional surgical planning, confirming presence of a 1.2 × 0.9 cm hyperenhancing mass in the distal pancreatic body with no evidence of metastatic disease . She underwent successful laparoscopic enucleation of the pancreatic lesion and has had no further hypoglycemia. Prolonged fasting revealed normoglycemia in the setting of ketonuria, confirming resolution of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. She underwent genetic testing of MEN1 to confirm the diagnosis. She was found to have a novel mutation, heterozygous for a single nucleotide duplication, c.1247dupT (Tyr417LeuX32). The duplication causes a frameshift with a premature stop codon at position 32 of the new reading frame. The truncation is expected to result in loss of nuclear localization signals and several modified residues and thus is considered to be pathogenic.
On follow-up, she recovered adrenal function as demonstrated by morning cortisol of 19.1 mcg/dL (527 nmol/L) 4 months after presentation. By 10 months after treatment of the prolactinoma, puberty had progressed slowly to Tanner B2PH2. Height initially declined to the 11th percentile at 4-month follow-up, but was back to the 19th percentile by 10 months, with a growth velocity of 11 cm/year. Repeat MRI 10 months after initiation of cabergoline demonstrated near-normalization of pituitary size (1.3 × 1.4 × 0.9 cm).