This is the case of a 57 year old female who presented to the surgical clinic with a one month history of attacks of right upper quadrant abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. An abdominal ultrasound demonstrated the presence of cholelithiasis and biliary sludge. The patient was diagnosed with symptomatic cholelithiasis and laparoscopic cholecystectomy was recommended to the patient on an elective basis. At the beginning of the procedure the peritoneal cavity was inspected with no masses, scar tissue or other abnormal pathology noted. During dissection of the gallbladder there were chronic omental adhesions noted but the gallbladder was not acutely inflamed. The cholecystectomy was able to be performed without complication and the gallbladder was sent for histopathological assessment. The pathology report was consistent with metastatic adenocarcinoma with signet ring features consistent with metastatic lobular carcinoma as well as chronic cholecystitis and cholelithiasis (see , ). Breast biomarker studies performed on the gallbladder were significant for PASD positive staining, antibodies that were positive included CK88, CK7, BRST2, and GATA3 (see ). Estrogen and progesterone receptors were both strongly positive, HER2 was negative.
At her follow-up appointment in the office a focused breast history and physical exam was performed. The patient denied family history of breast cancer. Full risk stratification and oncologic workup was pursued. Her BMI was 32.4, age of menarche was 13, her first pregnancy was at age 35, menopause began at 37 years old at which time she briefly was placed on estrogen therapy. She denied family history of cancer. She had a right breast lumpectomy in 2012 with benign pathology. Her last mammogram was in 2018 with no concerning findings at that time. A Gail score was calculated revealing a 12.5 % lifetime risk of breast cancer.
Breast MRI revealed several spiculated masses in her right and left breasts as well as suspicious bilateral axillary lymph nodes. Potential areas of osseous metastasis were noted in her sternum and several ribs (see ). The study was deemed as BI-RADS 5 and she was sent for ultrasound guided biopsy.
Ultrasound guided biopsies of these masses revealed:Left breast: 11:00 spiculated mass, invasive ductal carcinoma with components of high grade ductal carcinoma in situ Left axillary lymph node: metastatic lobular carcinoma Right breast: 9:00 11 cm from nipple, lobular carcinoma Right axillary lymph node: metastatic lobular carcinoma
All locations showed immunohistochemistry that consisted of estrogen receptor positive, progesterone receptor positive, and HER 2 negative. The samples were CK88 positive; CD3, CD20 and CD21 were all normal (see , ).
Whole body bone scan demonstrated multiple foci of increased radiotracer activity within the calvarium and posterior ninth rib (see ). This imaging grossly under detected the extent of osseous metastases that was detected on MRI of her brain which showed significant diffuse bony metastasis including the calvaria. There were no metastatic brain lesions noted.
The patient was initially treated with a CDK4/6 inhibitor (Palbociclib) which is a category 1 preferred first line treatment option for hormone receptor positive, HER2 negative metastatic breast cancer per the NCCN guidelines. She was also treated with zoledronic acid to reduce skeletal related events given the extensive osseous metastases as well as letrozole given her hormone receptor status. There are plans for restaging every 3 months.