In May 2023, a 25-year-old female researcher living in Montreal presented to the emergency department following an accident, as per her workplace requirements for all work-related accidents involving body fluids. While she was injecting LCMV Armstrong into the peritoneal cavity of mice to study antiviral T cell response, she accidentally injected her finger. This percutaneous accident with a needle containing a solution of LCMV Armstrong was her first exposure to the virus. Other than a cerebral venous sinus thrombosis, which occurred in 2015, her past medical history was unremarkable, with no medical condition causing potential immunosuppression.
At this first visit, two days (D2) post-exposure, physical examination was unremarkable. The LCMV RNA PCR and serology (IgM and IgG by ELISA ), performed at the National Microbiology Laboratory (NML; Winnipeg, Canada), were negative. As detailed in Fig. , symptoms started on D7. On D10, she went to the ophthalmology department complaining of very intense eye pain, headaches, dizziness, and nausea. No lesions were observed on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, other than the previously mentioned cerebral venous sinus thrombosis sequelae. Due to the mildness of symptoms, a lumbar puncture was not performed. On D11, following the recommendation of the ophthalmologist, the worker returned to the hospital for a follow-up. She had numbness in her left leg, bilateral eye pain with movement, headache, fatigue, dizziness, and nausea, but no vomiting . Physical examination was unremarkable. A second blood sample was drawn for both LCMV RNA PCR and serology; the results were again negative . Additional blood tests were performed at D28 and D66. IgM antibodies to LCMV were detected at D28, with a titer of 1:1600. At D66, LCMV-specific IgM antibodies were still present and IgG seroconversion was observed, with a titer of 1:400 for both antibodies. Three months after the incident, full recovery was confirmed, with no residual symptom.