A 59-year-old woman was admitted because of blurred vision, dysarthria, myoclonic movement of bilateral upper and lower limbs, and rapidly progressive dementia. The symptoms had started approximately 1 month prior and progression was so rapid that she became akinetic and occasionally showed just a slight smile as a response to questioning over the last 2 weeks.
Her CSF was acellular with no evidence of bacterial or viral infection, but her 14-3-3 protein was positive. EEG showed periodic sharp waves (1.5 Hz) at the bilateral frontal or occipital areas with predominance in the left side. Contrast-enhanced MRI showed high signal intensities at the bilateral cerebral cortex, caudate nucleus, and putamen with left predominance . She was diagnosed with probable CJD according to the World Health Organization diagnostic criteria for sporadic CJD . Sodium valproate (1200 mg/day) and clonazepam (0.5 mg/day) were used for intermittent myoclonic jerk. Laboratory analysis showed high titers of anti-thyroid peroxidase antibody (TPO-Ab) (1370 IU/mL; normal value <60 IU/mL) and anti-thyroglobulin antibody (Tg-Ab) (167 IU/mL; normal value <60 IU/mL). However, the levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (2.24 IU/mL; normal value 0.4–4.0 IU/mL) and FT4 (1.23; normal value 0.89–1.79) were normal. Follow-up laboratory study shows persistent high titers of TPO-Ab, while the titer of Tg-Ab was fluctuating around the normal upper limit. Thyroid sonography showed no gross abnormality.
Although she was diagnosed as probable CJD, corticosteroid pulse therapy with methylprednisolone (1 g per day) was started on the 6th day of admission for differential diagnosis with Hashimoto’s encephalopathy, which is known to show excellent response to corticosteroid therapy. We observed alertness and myoclonic movement after careful initiation of corticosteroid therapy. Over the 2 days after starting corticosteroid treatment, she was in a akinetic mute state with no response to pain or visual response. We also observed two episodes of generalized clonic movement with eyeball deviation. We elevated the dose of sodium valproate, titrated to 1800 mg/day, without subsequent improvement of myoclonic jerk. Her alertness kept worsening with aggravation of myoclonus, and she had a first generalized tonic-clonic seizure on the 4th day of corticosteroid therapy. We added levetiracetam (1000 mg/day) and elevated the dose of sodium valproate (2400 mg/day). However, the frequency of seizures was increased and the EEG showed more periodic sharp waves in the bilateral hemispheres with background slowing compared with the previous EEG. Generalized myoclonic movement was observed almost continuously when she was awake. Thus, we elevated the dose and frequency of clonazepam, which effectively alleviated the myoclonic jerk, although she subsequently exhibited decreased mentality. As the five days of corticosteroid pulse therapy were suspected to aggravate the seizures, we performed a brain biopsy with family consent to confirm a diagnosis of CJD. Brain biopsy revealed neuronal loss, vacuolation and gliosis . Western blot demonstrated a protease-resistant pathogenic form of prion protein in the brain tissue. Genetic analysis demonstrated no known mutation in the PRNP gene. A diagnosis of definite CJD was made based on the above findings.