A 53-year-old Caucasian female presented to the Emergency Department (ED) with acute onset of dyspnoea, chest tightness, dizziness, palpitations, nausea, and vomiting a few hours after an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) during which she developed transient hypoglycaemia (P-glucose 3.4, 2.9, and 2.5 mmol/L). She improved after intake of sweetened juice and had been sent home after the OGTT performed at the primary care centre.
She was referred for the OGTT due to impaired fasting glucose (6.9 mmol/L) and borderline haemoglobin A1c (47 mmol/L; 6.4%). She had a history of hypertension, dyslipidaemia, and secondary hyperparathyroidism. She was on treatment with simvastatin 20 mg o.d., calcium carbonate/cholecalciferol 500 mg/800 IE b.i.d., metoprolol 50 mg o.d., and losartan 50 mg o.d. She did not smoke, denied excessive drinking, and exercised regularly.
On admission, she was mentally lucid, had pale skin, dyspnoea, cool extremities with weak radial pulses, and prolonged capillary refilling time. Her respiratory rate was 40 breaths/min and oxygen saturation by pulse oximetry was 80%. The pulse was regular with a heart rate of 114 b.p.m. and the blood pressure was 111/75 mmHg after administration of Ringer's acetate. Clinical examination revealed bilateral inspiratory crackles. The abdomen was soft without tenderness or palpable mass. There were no focal neurological deficits and body temperature was 37.7°C.
Blood gas analysis showed hypoxaemia (PaO2 5.3 kPa; arterial oxygen saturation 65% with 10 L/min supplementary oxygen), metabolic acidosis (pH 7.26; PaCO2 5.0 kPa; bicarbonate 16 mmol/L; lactate 5.9 mmol/L; and base deficit −10 mmol/L), and hyperglycaemia (P-glucose 31 or 54 mg/dL). Further laboratory analyses revealed elevated cardiac troponin T (1250 ng/L, normal range 0–15 ng/L), normal C-reactive protein (<1 mg/L), leucocytosis (16 × 109/L) and acute kidney injury stage 1 (creatinine, 93 µmol/L; Glomerular filtration rate 39 mL/min/1.73 m2).
The initial electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia without specific signs of ischaemia . A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed hypokinesia in the mid-inferior and apical segments and a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of 15%. A pulmonary ultrasound showed multiple B-lines over more than 50% of the scanning site, i.e. indicated interstitial oedema.
The primary suspected diagnosis was acute myocardial infarction causing pulmonary oedema. However, coronary angiography disclosed normal coronaries while the left ventriculogram revealed a midventricular takotsubo-type contraction pattern (, ). An acute chest X-ray showed considerable amount of basal opacities suggestive of pulmonary oedema and pulmonary congestion in which consolidation could not be excluded.
She was transferred to the intensive care unit where she developed fever (38.5°C), lactate increased, and urinary output decreased. Her heart rate was 122 b.p.m., systolic blood pressure 85 mmHg, cardiac index 2.1 L/min/m2, mean pulmonary artery pressure 23 mmHg. Norepinephrine and levosimendan were initiated as well as with non-invasive ventilatory support, antipyretics (paracetamol), and anxiolytics (morphine/midazolam). The condition improved and 24 h post-admission cardiac index was 3 L/min/m2 and LVEF was 20–25% (, ), improving to 40–45% the following day (, ). She was weaned from norepinephrine while levosimendan was continued until 24 h. Insulin therapy was initiated early due to severe hyperglycaemia. Empiric broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy (cefotaxim and later meropenem) initiated due to suspicion of sepsis was terminated upon negative cultures.
On Day 7, she underwent cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) which on Modified Look-Locker Inversion Recovery T1 maps showed mildly increased activity and increased extracellular volume in the midventricular regions , together indicating mild oedema. There was hypokinesia/akinesia in the midventricular region . No focal ischaemic or non-ischaemic scar was found . Hence, the findings confirmed the diagnosis of a midventricular takotsubo cardiomyopathy.
S-cortisol was elevated (290 nmol/L, reference range for morning value <100) but S-renin, S-aldosterone, S-thyroid stimulating hormone, S-T3, and S-T4 were normal. Serum catecholamines were measured but the test results did not arrive until after the patient was discharged home on Day 7. Elevated levels of metanephrine (10 nmol/L, reference range <0.3 nmol/L) and normetanephrine (190 nmol/L, reference range <0.9 nmol/L) indicated phaeochromocytoma. Plasma methoxytyramine (2.4 nmol/L, reference range <0.2) and chromogranin A (37 nmol/L, reference range <6.0 nmol/L) were also increased.
The patient was immediately rehospitalized and computer tomography revealed a 10 × 9 × 7 cm sized mass indicative of a left adrenal phaeochromocytoma , which was also, in retrospect, visible on the cardiac MRI. Pharmacological adrenergic blockade (doxazosin) was instituted and left adrenalectomy was performed 60 days after initial admission. Histological and immune-histochemical examination revealed a phaeochromocytoma with vascular and capsular invasion and fat infiltration with a Phaeochromocytoma of the Adrenal gland Scaled Score (PASS) of 8. Post-operative recovery was uneventful and the patient was discharged home. She was doing well on follow-up visit 6 weeks later and has been scheduled for follow-up computed tomography and lab testing since a tumour with a PASS ≥4 has the potential of recurrence or metastasizing.