A 52-year-old man was admitted to our hospital with a history of intermittent cough for 27 months and repeated wheezing for 17 months. The patient developed cough and cold 27 months back. The cough aggravated at night and was accompanied by snuffling and a sore throat. After treatment with antibiotics, all symptoms but cough improved, and the cough worsened over time. In the last 17 months, the patient also complained of wheezing accompanied by jelly-like sputum, usually after exposure to cold air. He was then admitted to a local hospital. Lung computed tomography (CT) performed at the local hospital showed infiltration in the left lower lung , indicating left lower lobe pneumonia. A complete blood count yielded the following results: white blood cells, 5.5 × 109/L; neutrophils, 46.7%, and eosinophils, 5.3%. Pulmonary function tests showed normal ventilation function. Bronchoscopy revealed tracheal and bronchial mucosal hyperemia and edema and miliary nodules. Histopathology revealed chronic inflammation of the bronchial mucosa with focal lymphocytic infiltration. The patient was treated with antibiotics, expectorants, and bronchodilators; however, his cough symptoms showed no significant improvement. After 1 month, he caught a cold again and developed cough and wheezing. He was then diagnosed with asthma and treated with prednisone (30 mg/day orally, with gradual tapering) for 1.5 months. His coughing and wheezing symptoms ameliorated, although they recurred when prednisone was stopped. Bronchoscopy performed 7 months prior to admission showed multiple white nodular protuberances in the trachea and bronchus, with mucosal hyperemia and edema. Furthermore, mucosal pathology showed chronic inflammation with focal squamous metaplasia. A large number of eosinophils were found in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid smear. Prednisone (30 mg/day) was restarted, but his condition relapsed when the dose was tapered to 5 mg/day. The proportion of eosinophils in the peripheral blood increased to 31% (absolute blood eosinophil count: 3.21 × 109/l), with a serum IgE level of 4220 IU/ml. On admission to our hospital, his routine physical examination findings were unremarkable. His serum IgG4 level had increased to 7.35 g/L. Lung CT showed no abnormality. The pulmonary function test results were as follows: TLC %: 99.2%, RV %: 96.6%, RV/TLC: 93%, FVC%: 77.8%, VT%:154.1%, FEV1/FVC: 88.71%, FEV1%: 83.8%, DLCO-SB%: 67.8%, DLCO/VA:100.3%, and the bronchial dilation test was positive. His symptoms and pulmonary function test results were consistent with the diagnosis of asthma. However, the inhalation treatment (Symbicort turbuhaler, 160/4.5 micrograms/inhalation, 1 inhalation twice a day) cannot improve his symptoms. We give him a repeated bronchoscopy which suggested scattered alleviated nodules under the tracheobronchial wall without obvious mucosal hyperemia and edema, which improved a lot compared with the bronchoscopy 7 months ago. . Considering that he is very sensitive to the prednisone, the tissue biopsy obtained at our hospital was stained to identify IgG4 expression and revealed low expression of IgG4 , with the presence of phlebitis and fibrosis. We detected IgG4 expression in the mucosal tissues from the bronchoscopy performed 7 months earlier. The biopsy showed chronic inflammation with significantly increased plasm cell infiltration and IgG4+ plasma cell infiltration, along with elevated eosinophils. The IgG4+/IgG+ cell ratio was over 40%, and there were more than 10 IgG4+ plasma cells per high power field (HPF) . The biopsy excluded malignancy and other diseases involving IgG4+ plasma cell infiltration, including sarcoidosis, Wegener’s granulomatosis, Churg–Strauss syndrome, and multicentric Castleman’s disease. Other laboratory tests of the patient including anti-PR3, anti-MPO ANCA, myositis specific antibody, Anti-nuclear Antibody, ACE, serum G-test, serum GM-test, bacterial and fungal culture of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) were all normal. We excluded other organ involvement, including pancreas dysfunction and retroperitoneal fibrosis. As recommend by the guideline , the patient was diagnosed with IgG4-RD and prednisone treatment was continued (24 mg/day, orally, gradually tapered). He took cyclophosphamide (100 mg/day) while the prednisone dose was gradually tapered. Currently, he is receiving prednisone 12 mg and azathioprine 100 mg/day with good drug adherence by self-reported, and he has not developed recurrence after hospital discharge. Six months later, his serum IgG4 level and blood eosinophil count decreased to the normal level (serum IgG4: 164 mg/d, blood eosinophil count: 0.12*10^9/l). A repeat low dose lung CT scan didn’t find new lesions.