A 52-year-old gentleman presented to us with New York heart association (NYHA) functional class II dyspnea on exertion (DOE). On physical examination, he was found to have wide pulse pressure, cardiomegaly, left Ventricular third heart sound (LVS3), loud pulmonary heart sound (P2), and continuous murmur in the pulmonary area. Electrocardiography (ECG) and chest X-ray (CXR) showed cardiomegaly and features of increased pulmonary blood flow. Echocardiography (Echo) showed 11 mm large PDA with dilated Left atrium & left ventricle. The right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) was 60 plus the right atrial mean. Cardiac cath showed operable hemodynamics with moderate pulmonary arterial hypertension{(Saturation (Superior vena cava 70%, Inferior vena cava 72%, Pulmonary artery (PA) 94%, Ascending aorta and femoral artery (FA) 100%) &Pressure (PA = 55/30 m42, FA = 210/60)}. The calculated Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) was 3.5 woods units and Systemic Vascular Resistance (SVR) was 14.85 woods units. Calculated Pulmonary blood flow /systemic blood flow ratio (Qp/Qs) was > 2.1. Descending thoracic aorta (DTA) Angio showed a large 11 mm PDA. Transcatheter device closure was done in the same sitting with a 16 × 14 Amplatzer Ductal Occluder I (ADO)device. After device deployment, though the device was stable the aortic end of the device was not fully formed and there was residual ductal flow. Multiple attempts were done to retrieve the device back into the sheath but each time we redeployed it, it took the same shape. Since the device looked stable it was decided to release the device, assuming that once released, the tug of the cable would go and the device will assume the proper shape and residual flow would come down. We also did not consider using another device before releasing as we thought 14 × 16 size to be appropriate since the PDA measured 11 mm at the Pulmonary end. Downsizing would have carried the risk of embolization while increasing the size may not have helped as the device was stable despite giving a good tug to the device. Although the device did not form, we assumed that it will get formed properly once we release it; however, it did not happen and after release, the aortic end of the device was still not fully formed. The residual flow also persisted. The next morning patient started with gross hematuria. Examination showed continuous murmur. Echo revealed significant residual ductal flow. Initially, we tried to manage with conservative means including hydration, and blood transfusion; however, the residual flow persisted for 10 days and his hemoglobin dropped from 13 gm/dl preprocedural to 7 gm/dl after 10 days, and creatinine increased from 0.5 mg/dl to 1.9 mg/dl, bilirubin increased to 3.5 mg/dl & urine showed hemoglobinuria. We discussed the case with our surgical team. As the patient had severe anemia with renal failure and the surgeons had to go on cardiopulmonary bypass, it was considered high risk, so it was planned to attempt transcatheter retrieval of the device failing which, the patient would be taken for surgery. After informed consent, the patient was again taken for procedure and 10 French amplatzer sheath was parked in the pulmonary artery near the ductus. Initially, we tried to screw with the device cable, however, it failed. Then combination of multiple catheters and a Gooseneck snare (10 mm) was used and finally, we successfully retrieved with a combination of a Multipurpose (MP) catheter and 10 mm Gooseneck snare . After that, we closed the defect successfully with a double disk device (muscular Ventricular septal device (VSD) 14 mm Amplatzer) . The patient’s hematuria settled and was discharged after 2 days with normal hemoglobin and creatinine.