A 52-year-old lady was referred to our clinic for uncontrolled intraocular pressure (IOP) in her right eye. Her family history and personal medical history were not significant. Uncorrected visual acuity was 10/10 in both eyes. Refraction was +0.50−0.50 × 90° and Plano -0.50 × 165° in the right and left eyes, respectively. IOP was 38 mmHg with full topical antiglaucoam medications in the right eye and 16 mmHg without any medication in the left eye. Slit lamp biomicroscopy of the right eye showed a clear cornea and mild corectopia. High peripheral anterior synechiae extending 360 degrees was noted on gonioscopy of the right eye. Fundus examination showed cup to disc ratio of about 0.8 in this eye. Examination of the left eye was completely normal. Standard automated perimetry of both eyes is presented in . The diagnosis of iridocorneal endothelial (ICE) syndrome for the right eye was made. She underwent standard trabeculectomy with mitomycin C (MMC) in the right eye using two releasable sutures for closure of the scleral flap. IOP was less than 15 mmHg with diffuse functioning bleb and without medication or globe massage for 1.5 years post-operatively. After this period, IOP started to rise, and the bleb was anteriorly localized. She was instructed to massage her right globe with her fingertip from the inferior aspect 10 times a day, 10 seconds each time. IOP was relatively controlled thereafter. IOP-lowering agents were also administered in follow-up visits due to gradually IOP rising. Three years after globe massage, the patient complained of vision loss in her right eye which was due to high astigmatism. Retinoscopic refraction was +1.25−4.50 × 20° with a scissor motion and slit lamp examination revealed Vogt's striae in the right cornea . Pentacam corneal images of the two eyes at this time are shown in Figures and ; which is compatible with KCN in the right eye. Corneal imaging of the left eye was within normal limits. Needle bleb revision with adjunctive MMC was performed at that time and IOP reminded controlled for about 4 months. Finally, our patient underwent a shunting procedure with Ahmed glaucoma valve insertion.